



THE
“ PACTFIC. SLOPE”
SONG AND JOKE
book:,
CONTAINING ALL THE HUMOEOUS EIGHTY EIAYOEED
SONGS AND JOKES,
AS SAID AND SUNG BY THAT X’OrtJLAE AND TALENTED AETISTE,
WM. HORACE BENT,
Lecturer to “ JBachelder s Pantascope of America .”
s!elboutine t
PRINTED BY AZZOPPARDI, HILDRETH & CO.,
10, 12 & 14 POST-OFFICE PLACE.
1873.


I Want to go Homo to Mamma ...
PAGE
3
Dat dar Call flat Winked at Me ...
4
Brown the Tragedian .. ... •••
5
Brig lam Young
6
Lament of Kansmcyer ...
8
After Me
9
Dreadfully Shy
9
Love Among Big Noses ...
10
On the Parade...
13
Bom, Bora, Bora!
13
Here Stands a Young Man
14
Mother Says I Mustn’t ...
15
Walking in the Starlight
16
I’m a Twin
17
Kaisar Don’t you Want to Buy a Dog
18
My Nancy Fair ... ...
19
C iptain Smidth
21
Beef, Pork, Mutton
21
Moneyless Man
23
Be’inda Gardener’s Daughter
21
New Jerusalem
26
My Darling Mignonette....
27
Wery Pecooliar
28
Heath en Chinee
29
T int’s Where You Make a Mistake
31
I Wish My Sally Could See Me Now
33
Good Evening ...
34
Jokes commencing
36
INDEX TO SONGS


I WANT TO GO HOME TO MAMA.
I once had a sweetheart—tho’ her name was Brown,
She was most decidedly green ,
But when you have seen her, you’ll say she s as nice
A young lady as ever was seen ;
And then she’s so funny, she’s just like a child,
She loved me, but much better far
She lov’d her dear parents, for always she cried,
“ I want to go home to Mama! ”
Chorus —“ I want to go home to Mama, I want to go home
to Mama;
“ It’s naughty, I say, to keep me away, when I
want to go home to Mama.”
When first I beheld her, I thought what a dear,
With joy, oh I nearly went wild,
But when t began to boo and to coo.
Why she snivelled out like a child ;
I thought she was ill, I could not make her
When she jumped up and said “ Oh, tat-ta,
I said “ Pray don’t go,” when she cried out “ Oh,
I want to go home to Mama.” — Chorus.
With lots of persuasion, and coaxing, and fuss,
The worst job I’ve had in my life,
I contrived to assure her I lov’d her so much,
Till she said that she’d be my wife ; ”
We drove to the church, when oh, what a scene,!
She would have the door left ajar,
The clergyman said, “Will you wed ? ” she shrieked out
“ No! I want to go home to Mama.”— Chorus.
A 2
THE PACIFIC SLOPE
SONG AND JOKE BOOK.


At last we were married, oh my, what a job,
To the Continent then olf we went,
I’m happy to say, she her nervousness lost,
W hen the honeymoon cosy we spent;
So now she’s so different to what she once was;
We’re happy by night and by day,
Her marriage, she says, she will never repent,
And never do I hear her say— Chorus.
DAT DEITCH HAL VAT YINKED AT ME.
Yust listen unto me a leetle vile,
Und a Deitcher song I sing you,
It’s apout a leetle Deitcher gal I met yen I was Talking,
Und she drew such a glance at me;
She vas handsome as a leetle cauliflower,
Such eyes you never did see,
She’d a handsome leetle bonnet, mit some huckleberries on it,
Had dis Deitcher gal vat vinked at me.
Chorus.
Oh, my, she looked so sly,
A pig boliceman standing by, six foot he seemed to be,
But I never shall forget de day dat I vas out a Talking
Mit dat Deitcher gal vat vinked at me.
Yust so quick ash I asked her her name
She suit it vas Miss Bimbler,
She vas vorking for some fellars a making ijmberrellas,
Und she lived in de second avenue;
Den I tole her I vould come by her house,
Of she vould tell de number,
Says she, “ Of you lore me much, write to Station D in
Dutch,
Und I’ll meet you ven I sell my boodle dog.”
Oh, my, she looked, &c.
Yust so quick as I come by her house,
Her farder was standing by,
He vas a bully leetle Dutchman, mit a healthy gorporation,
Und double breasted in de left eye ;
a 3


Den he asked me to dake a little vine,
Und a leetle lager bier,
I could ead yust vat I blease, noodle soup and Limburg
cheese,
Mit some sauer kraut, and bologne puddings, too.
Oh, my, she looked, &c.
Ve are married und ve’re hunky now for life,
On a farm vay down in Yersey ;
But her farder lives still up on Nanigoter’s hill,
Yere his Deitcher frients dey meet him every day.
Young gals, if you want to catch a beau,
I vill tole you how to do it,
Yust write to Station D, and tole him vere you 11 be,
Und he’ll meet you, olf de veder doesn’t snow.
Oh, my, she looked, &c.
BROWN, THE TRAGEDIAN.
I’m an actor who’s seen better days,
c 1 For I once was a star, I’ve a notion ;
y A ,y We, lnarl about all sorts of ways,
\jP Upon~Hj|m;s theatrical ocean.
BirTjealousy, spite, and all that,
Has brought me down to hut a seedy’un;
> Its been all caused jkcaaflh envy, that’s flat,
ijuj TTor I once was a heavy tragedian.
Chorus.
I’ve been a bright star in my time, though now I m reduced
to a seedy ’un,
In me you may please to behold, Antonins Brown, the
tragedian! A
You have all seen my name in the bills,
Which it Junius Antonius Brown, sirs ;
And I flatter myself I have caused
Great excitement in many a town, sirs;
My last “ shop ” was the Garrick, Whitechapel,
In a “ part ” that I could above any fit;
My “ screw,” sirs, for only six nights,
Was two pounds and half a clear benefit.
Spoken —That -was money, but what do they offer talent now!
I was actually offered the other day twenty-five “ bob ” per week to


play Othello, the Clown in the Pantomime, and do bill-sticking in the
morning. Did I accept it ? Blood and blue fire ! Never! never I
But no matter, a time may come when they will be glad to secure the
services of Brown, the tragedian.— Chorus.
Since Kemble none like me’s been seen,
Tet nought but bad luck is my portion;
My friends say I’m better than Kean,
That my “ Richard ” and *• Hamlet ” ’s a caution.
They say my declaiming’s a treat,
In the speech over Caesar by Antony;
I can do the soft parts low and sweet,
Likewise I can pile up the agony.”
Spoken —For two consecutive weeks was I the leading attraction
at the Royal Bower, and should have startled the world at Drury
Lane, but for professional malice. I am kept off the boards out of
fear. They know I should render Shakespeare’s great characters as
they have never been rendered before. My reading of his plays is
entirely different to Macready, Kean, Phelps, T. C. King, and all these
fellows. They know that; but no matter, a time may come when they
will cringe to Brown, the tragedian.— Chorus.
I search through the “ Era ” each week,
And I •* write in ” when talent’s required,
But they say they don’t know me (there’s cheek,
Of such insults and envy I’m tired) ;
They offer me terms for a “ super,”
Or ask if I’m up to “ utility,”
But I’ll starve and remain as I am,
An artiste of wondrous ability.
Spoken— Me, me ! Junius Antonius Brown descend to do the
cock in Hamlet, or Bobby in the Pantomime. Ye Q-ods and small
fishes ! Rather would I descend from my pedestal of fame and
become a comic vocalist. But no matter! no matter ! The time may
come when they will be glad to pile gold at the feet of Brown, the
tragedian.— Chorus.
BRIGHAM YOUNG.
Old Brigham Young is a Mormon bold,
And leader of the roaming rams;
And shepherd of a heap
Of pretty little sheep,
And a nice fold of pretty little lambs.
And he lives with his five-and-forty wives,


In the city of the Great Salt Lake ;
Where they woo and they coo,
As little doves do,
And cackle like ducks to a drake.
Chorus —Oh, Brigham, Brigham Young,
It’s a miracle how he survives ;
With his roaming rams,
And his pretty little lambs,
And his five-and-forty wives.
( Id Brigham Ye ung was a stout man once,
Th mgh now he is thin and old ;
And I grieve to slate
He is bald on his pate,
Which once had a covering of gold.
For his youngest wives don’t like wh'te wool,
And his old ones won’t have red;
So with tearing it out,
Taking turn and turn about,
They have torn all the hair from his head.— Chorus,
Now his girls sing psalms all day,
And his hoys they all sing songs;
And among such a crowd,
He has it pretty loud,
For they are as musical as Chinese gongs.
But when they advance, for a Mormon dance,
He is filled with the greatest surprise;
For they’re sure to end the night
With a Tabernacle fight,
And scratch out one another’s eyes. — Chorus.
There never was a home like Brigham Young’s,
So curious and so queer;
If his joys are double,
He’s a treble lots of trouble,
And it gains on him year by year.
Yet he sits in state, and bears his fate,
In a serve-me-very-right sort of way ;
If there’s one wife to bury —
There’s another one to marry,
And there’s something goes wrong every day.—
Chorus.


Now if anybody envies Brigham Young,
Let them go to the Great Salt Lake;
And if they have leisure
To examine their pleasure,
They will find it’s a great mistake.
One wife at a time, so says my rhyme,
Is enough for the proudest Don ;
So ere yon shrive,
To be lord of forty-five,
Live happy, —if you can, —with one. — Chorus.
LAMENT OF KANSMEYER.
Air— Constantinople.
Off you vill listen to my song, I’ll sing to you a ditty,
Of a growd of poys 1 got among ven I come to dis city;
I had of me a boodle dog, feeling happy, light and free,
Und every street that I vent py, dose poys would hollar
after me —
Who stole that boodle ? Who stole that boodle ?
Who stole that boodle ? dey all vould shoud.
Chorus.
W, H, 0, mid a who, S, T, 0, L, E, mid a stole,
Mid a who stole, D, H, E, mid a who stole de,
B, U, LL, mid a pull, mid a who stole de pull,
D, O, GK mit a dog, who stole de boodle ?
A beenut stand dat I vent py, de boodle vent for like a
cutter,
Upset it, und avay it vent sky-high, de beenuts rolled
into de gutter ;
At dis de poys set up a yell, as it knocked de vomans in
some glay,
Dey all fell right on top of her, but somehow managed
for to say — W, H, O, mid a who, &c.
Dey took me py a station-house und put me in a brison,
Und dook my boodle dog from me und gave him lots of
pison;
Next day dey dook me fore a shudge, says he, “ Vat is dis
muss about ? ”
Und before I had a vord to say de peoples in de gourt
did shoud— W, H, O, mid a who, &c.


AFTR ME.
I am a jovial customer, all miseries I shun,
And as the proverb tells us, I take care of number unc I
I’m not at all a selfish man, my maxim, don’t you see,
Is to lot other folks go first! Yes, after me.
Chorus —After me, after me, for greediness don’t thirst.
After me, yes, after me, and then you shall bo. first.
"Whilst walking out the other day, 1 think ’twas near the
iS t rand,
In my coat pocket soon i felt a. rather clumsy hand ;
Homo rough was Just about to take my handkerchief away,
But 1 was quick, 1 collar’d him, and thus to him du! say —
After me, Ac.
1 had a dance one night last week, ’twas at a Tradesman’.,
hall,
With such a charming pari mu’, too, the han-hu.mci of ail ;
At my pease she drank champagne, when sonic swell aid
“ My dear,
When, the ball is done i’ll me you home/' I whispered in
his car —
After me, Ac.
1 know a sponging follow', who somehow' will not act square,
And when the settling time comes round, will never pay Ids
share;
He did the usual greedy at a wdne-party to-day,
He seiz'd a bottle, but 1 snatch’d it from him, and did say —
After me, Ac.
SHE, SHY, DREADFULLY SHY
Had 1 been a monk or a hermit that dwelt
In a cave where the world could not see ,
I then might be quiet, collected and cool--
But fate has not will’d it to be.
I'm thrown on the world with its troubles and trials,
To avoid them I every day try ;
I’m nervous, iidgetty, very reserved,
In fact I’m most awfully shy.


I can’t look a girl in the face but I blush,
Dor I feel most awfully shy.
Shy, shy, shy, shy,
Oh, I am so shy —dreadfully shy ;
Shy, shy, shy, shy,
I can’t pass a stay shop, because I’m so shy
Some people go to the Theatre each night,
To see actresses dress’d comme ll faut.
But I never will cast my eyes on the stage,
Unless tlie footlights they put low.
There’s the ballet girls, too, so graceful to view,
To see them is stretch’d every eye ;
To some this is good, but ’tis not so to me,
For I feel most awfully shy.
Ballet girls’ movements are all very well,
But I feel so dreadfully shy,
Shy, shy, shy, shy,
I would if I could—hut I can’t, 1m so shy.
For all I’m so shy, I once fell in love,
To my sweetheart no question could pop,
For hours I would sit by my lov’d one and say -
Nothing! and then I would stop.
She put the question, I blushing said “ Yes ! ”
Got married—felt I should die
To think of the future, tears came to my eyes,
For I felt so uncommonly shy,
Shy, shy, shy, shy,
When I put on the ring I was awfully shy.
LOVE AMONG BIG NOSES.
’Twas on a winter evening,
I dink ’dwas de afdernoon,
I saw a man and woman,
In a lager pier saloon ;
Dey vas eading Krout and Sweitzer-kase,
IJnd ash I passed them pye,
De man durned rount, und looked of me,
Mit a dark, plue, bully glass eye ;


11 i- nose vas apout dwelve inches long,
Und red shust like de rozes ;
Und hers vas shust apout de same,
’Dwas love among big noses.
Chorus —I don’t like to tole yer, but I dink I vill,
Of lager pier dey tdrank dere fill ;
Dey vas zittiug near a foundain,
Yere de Muskeedleer reboses,
Dey sat und valked, und kissed und dalked,
’Dwas love among pig nozes.
I saw a noze next evening,
T looked und it vas hers,
She vas standing on de sidevalk,
A zelling shoe lazers ;
She laughed ash I vent py her,
Und at her I did stare,
Yen a man game up, hit me on my mout,
Und gommenced to bull my hair ;
Yen he led go, my mad got up,
Ash you may veil subboses,
I durued apout, hit dem both of de mout,
By tarn, I broke dose nozes.
I don’t like to tole yer, &c.
A boliceman game up quickly,
Und dook us to der jail,
He put dem in der brison,
But led me out on bail;
Next tay dey took us fore de shudge,
Und I dold him de gase;
He said dat he led us go dat dime,
Of ve vould geep de peace.
Yen den mate üb, dey marriet now,
Ond he’s zelling olt glotheses,
But I gan’t forget, ven firsd I met,
Dose overcrone pig nozes.
Spoken —Yah, my tear friends, dose vas de verst horns dat I ever
have zeen, und as my friend Oofty Grooft says ;—Of I had such a pig
f°°t ash dat hanging from my forehead, I dink I vould die, dey ought
1° go to sea und have de Deceleradion of Undebonnence bricked in der
rozes with Inchuning, so dat ven dey game ashore, de beoble vould
rrrt dat dey vas de Nited Shades und nosed everyding ; but den I
gnu t f ol .g e[ ] q e qi, ne ven I firsd zaw dem, und,
I don’t like to tole yer, Ac,
B 2


ON THE PARADE.
When London is dull and all folks out of 1 own,
To Hastings or Brighton of course 1 run down;
In proper swell hours you'll set 1 me arrayed,
Doing a gentle crawl on the Parade.
On the Parade—on the Parade,
I “ do the Parade,” midst the beauties arrayed,
On the Parade, ya’s, on the Parade,
Yon may have all the town, but give me the parade.
Now some like the J-erfriwe, and some like the Piers,
Infested by nurse-maids and infants— sweet dears ;
And some climb the heights, but as I am afraid
Of too much exertion, I keep the parade.
Spoken —lf a fellow goes up a hill he has to come down again
some lime or other. If a felUnr does the Beach, it’s all “ Now for
rowing ! —now for sailing ! —ffesh baked shrimps—and fresh boiled
buns 1 ” and such like confounded bores, so I keep—
On the Parade, etc.
Now some like the Sands—some rude fellcass there be,
Who quiz the fair charmers who bathe in tlfe sea ;
Some go in for sailing, but of that I’m afraid,
1 feel so much safer when on the Parade.
Spoken —A sail in a pleasure boat, pleasure ! oh, excuse me, when
a fe/la’s on shore he knows ‘where he is, but when a fella’s in a pleasure (?)
boat he don’t know where he is — and feels as if he didn’t care where he
went, to ; so I feel more “at home ” —•
On the Parade, tte.
’Tis upon the Parade, when the sun’s going down,
One meets with the fairest elite of the town ;
There’s one charmer I’d “pop” to, hut feel most afraid,
She’s the fairest and jn chest gn the Parade,
Spoken —Beautiful creature, daughter of an Indian banker —band-
some girl—with an ugly old Governor ; the old buffer has a gambooge
complexion and a voice like a cracked trombone—does the Bath-chair
business. Should “the Gods smile” upon my wooing, by Jove, I’ll
live and die—
On the Parade, &c.


BOM ! BOM! BOM!
Oe, Peetty Polly Peikgle.
I’ll sing a tale and tell a song,
About a party who went wrong;
And all through naughty Cupid’s dart,
Which shot her bang clean through the heart.
She had been courted by a bobby,
But gave him up for a chap more nobby ;
Who’s gorgeous appearance struck her dumb,
As he marched and kept banging of a great big drum
Bor his bom ! bom ! bom ! and tingle, tingle, tingle,
Bom ! bom ! bom! and jingle, jingle, jingle,
Won the heart of pretty Polly Pringle;
Pretty Polly Pringle liked the bom ! bom ! bom !
She saw this Drummer in the Park,
She often met him after dark ;
Her Bobby love, witli his carrotty hair,
She gave him turnips then and there.
She scorned his bull’s-eye and his stall',
Preferred her soldier love by half,
The Bobby looked always hlue and glum,
Besides —he hadn’t got a bom ! bom ! bom !
’Tvvas the bom ! &c.
One day while walking arm in arm,
The Bobby saw them with alarm ;
He felt as he never felt before,
And a horrible revenge he swore.
“ As she for me cares not a rap,”
Said he, “I’ll settle her bom, bom chap,”
So he collared the soldier on the march,
And charged him with stealing a railway arch,
Porhisbom! &c.
The soldier got seven years for life,
So Polly never became his wife;
The Bobby made sure she’d be his bride,
But she preferred “ sweet suicide.”
And now that Bobby walks his beat
In sadness —-not even cold meat
Delights his gaze —he feels so glum,
And nightly he dreams of the bom! bom ! bom 1
ItAvasbom! &c.


HERE STANDS A YOUNG MAN WHO WANTS
A SWEETHEART.
Here stands a young man who wants a sweetheart,
1 should like one good looking, good tempered and smart,
Towards the dear girls I’ve had a soft heart,
Ever since by the nurse I was carried ;
Come next Monday week I’m twenty one,
1 shall then he of age, O won’t it be fun,
vSome of have plenty of sweethearts but I havn’t one,
Besides Ma says it’s time I was married.
Chorus.
Here stands a young man who wants a sweetheart,
Who wants a sweetheart, who wants a sweetheart,
Here stands a young man who wants a sweetheart,
But doesn’t know where to find one!
I’ve made love to all the nice girls in our street,
Jemima so charming, and Susan so sweet,
But they turn up their noses and all of’em treat,
Me somehow remarkably cool ;
When I speak to Miss Jenny she always looks black
While Jane often gives me an unpleasant whack,
While Caroline calls me a fool.
Spoken —Never mind it takes a clever man to be a fool, my Pa was
a clever man, and Ma says I’m just like him so here’s a chance for the
ladies —
Here stands a young man, &c.
When Christmas comes round O that’s the go,
Then I kiss the girls under the misletoe,
I last time fell in love with a dozen or so,
And told them I wanted a wife ;
I asked one fair creature if she’d fly away, —-
With me and be married next day,
She told her Papa, and, I’m sorry to say,
He near frightened me out of my life.
Spoken —The enraged old Buffer threatened to throw me out of the
window, and her brother had the audacity to pull my nose, and to add
insult to injury ho called me a nincompoop, but I don’t care —
IT ere stands a young man, &c.
It any young woman should want a young man,
O please send her to me as fast as you can,


If she thinks I’ll suit her I’ll put up the banns,
So that Ave can be married off soon ;
She shall have all my money, go on a tour,
We’ll go to the church in a carriage and four,
She shall do as she pleases —I cannot say more,
How I long for the sweet honeymoon.
Spoken—Yes and after we’re married if she don’t like me she can
go home to her mother again I can’t say fairer than that can 1 ? —so —•
Here stands a young man, &c
MOTHER SAYS I MUSN’T.
I fell in love with a pretty girl,
A few short years ago,
All sorts of weather, hail or rain,
To court her I would go ;
I’d long and sigh with love until
’Twas time to be away,
And when I asked a parting kiss,
She always used to say —
“ O Mother says I musn’t
Mother says I musn’t,
O George, please George,
Not just yet awhile ;
Mother says I musn’t,
Mother says I musn’t,
Not just yet.”
I “ waiting” kept at last one day
I thought I’d know my fate,
I sunk upon my knees in quite
An agonising state,
“ Selina say you’ll have your George,
And when shall we be wed ?”
I longed to hear my love’s reply,
And this is what she said—
Spoken—Well George, dear, you’re very kind, but we could never
live on two hundred a-year, so until you are worth at least five hundred
per annum, darling—
Mother says, &c.
From then I went to work, by Jove !
I left no stone unturned,


Until five hundred pounds a year,
At last I really earned ;
•Selina heard, how things had changed,
And when wo met one day,
She seem'd so pleasant- -and at last;
She lovingly said -
S cokes’ —You remember, George, dear, what 1 said when you
asked mo some time ago ; well George, dear, as you leave so improved
in circumstances, suppose you ask me now, Gcorgey Porgcy, darling ■'
“ Well,” said I, “upon eonsidoration, you’re very kind, but—”
Mother says I musn’l,
Mother says I musn’t,
O dear, please dear,
Not just yet awhile ;
Mother says I musn’t,
Mother says I musn’t,
No, dear, 1 can’t, dear,
Not just yet.
Give me the girl who loves a man,
And loves him for himself;
Who’s first consideration is not
What he’s worth in pelf.
All sordid-minded damsels who
May worship golden dross ;
May they he old maids till they die,
And we’ll never feel their loss.
Spoken— So ladies who don’t, want to bo old maids, mind you don’t
once too often say —
Mother says 1 nrusn’i,
Mother says I musn’t,
O George, please George,
Don't ask yet awhile ;
Mother says I musn’t,
Mother says ! musn’t,
O George, dear George,
Not just yet.
WALKING IN THE STARLIGHT.
"Walking in the starlight, someone hy my side,
While that someone’s arm was linked in mine ;
No one heard us talking, we were all alone,
When my darling said—“ For ever tins®.”
OrvuixC


Walking not m. Broadway, nor in City Park,
I yt We wandered thoughtless far away from home ;
c/ui£'> Ont among the forest trees, beside a running brook,
<W$, OTBI about the happy days to come.
J Clwnis, —OhWpes, I was in ecstacy !
She was all the world to me.
f She said she loved me more than once,
Which did my heart inspire ;
I called her Kose, the pink of beaus,
She’s all that 1 desire.
AVhile in conversation, Eosy, with a sigh,
* Asked mo if I ever was in love ;
I answered “ No, my darling, never until now,
“I swear it by the little stars above.”
.tart- like one awaking from a happy dream,
ff . While her cheeks were blushing rosy red, "
($Jx, f*May your love growstrouger to equal mine for youififf
that was all b£jb little darling said.— Chorus.
.niTiiTTi- on tlie door lamb,
/ Bidding sweet good night, *
Never felt so ha])py in my life ;
Happy not at parting,
/ fJcld ) Ihil: what my darling said
/inif H4 When 1 asked her, he my wife.
g —gj Yos, "with all my heart, love, when lam of age,
' lYi- sgVCTTI-eeil to-morrow, *fen ? ll "| mi knowg^V^/
a little longer, just another year ”
v. 'Next Sunday makes it just a year ago. — Chorus.
I’M A TWIN.
In form and feature, face and limb,
T grew so like my brother,
That folks got taking me for him.
And each for one another ;
It puzzled all our kith and kin,
It reached a fearful pitch,
Por one of us was born a twin,
And not a soul knew which !
por one of us was bom a twin,
And not a soul knew which !
17


One day (to make the matter worse)
Before our names were fixed,
As we were being washed by nurse,
We got completely mixed;
And thus you see, by fate’s decree,
Or rather nurse’s whim,
My brother John got christened me,
And I got christened him.
My brother John got christened me,
And I got christened him.
This fatal likeness even dogged,
My footsteps when at school;
And I was always getting flogged,
Por John turned out a fool.
I put this question fruitlessly,
To every one I kneW;
What would you do ifiyou were me,
To prove that you were you !
What would you do if you were me,
To prove that you were you !
Our close resemblance turned the tide,
Of my domestic life ;
Por, somehow, my intended bride,
Became my brother’s wife.
In fact, year after year,
The same absurd mistakes went on ;
And when I died the neighbors came
And buried brother John.
And when I died the neighbors came
And buried brother John.
KAISER, DON’T YOU WANT TO BUY A DORG
Paeody on “Nell, the Belle.”
Ash I dock a lemonade de oder day,
At a blaee dat’s ober de vay,
Yen a veller ceme in and called for a glass of gin,
Den to me he did say—■


You Kaiser, don’t you want to buy a dorg P
He’ll make good sausage meats ;
He’s light ash a fairy, dough not very hairy,
And he has only god dree feets.
Chorus. —Oh ! didn’t dat dog look sweet,
Mid his stumpy tail and only dree teets ;
I told him to go out mit dat dog, he said he vould ven he
got an egg-nogg;
But ash he vent drough de door, he loutly did roar,
Kaiser, don’t you want to buy a dorg P
I followed him I cannot tole you yare,
TJnd I hit him of his mout and in de eye ;
Veil a boliceman made a start, and dock dat feller s hart,
Saying for dat I should die.
He didn’t take me home of de door,
But to de jail, do you see 5
tJnd mit his 'leetle club he hit me a rub,
Mit a vicked rough laugh at me. Oh ! did nt, Ac.
tfoon after dat I met him at a ball,
knd on his nose was a bile;
He’d de boodle on his arm, vicly looked like a charm,
Cnd his stumpy dail vas vagging all der vile.
( vent and dook my oath dat very night,
TJnd sait dat boodle I vould kill;
Yen it came of mine side, und laid down and died,
TJnd I sent him to de sausage mill. Oh! didn’t, &c
THE FANCY FAIR.
Oh ! if you visit fancy fairs,
Just mind what you’re about;
For girls who serve at fancy fairs,
"Will surely serve you out.
Some people washed to clothe the blacks
Of Timbuctoo or Cariboo ;
And so they held a fancy fair —
And very unfair too.
Spoken—And so to benefit these interesting creatures, they got up
a fancy fair, where I met —
Chorus.
Nancy fair! My Nancy fair! My Nancy had a stall; f
My Nancy ! My Nancy fair ! Why did we meet at all ?


1 went there dressed in all my best,
As folks are bound to do ;
A bright blue coat, an orange vest,
And rose of crimson hue.
My income isn't large, you know,
e'o at the fair I’d none to spare ;
But still I got on nicely till
I saw my Nancy there.
SPOKEN—Yes?, there was the dear girl •••
My Nancy fair, Ac.
1 loved my Nancy more than life,
Bui. if she loved me too,
Too min me at fancy fairs,
"Was not the thing to do.
She made mo purchase at her stall
A guinea doll—-a parasol,
A ml wooden parrot that you squeezed
To croak out !i Pretty Poll ”
My Nancy fair, Ac.
She talked about t he naked blacks.
And infant niggers boys,
And bow they ran about the streets
Without their corderoys.
But when she cleared my pockets out,
With face of gloom I heard my doom ;
She said quite fiercely, “ Pray, move on,
And don’t take up the room.”
Spoken.— Didn’t I bless the horrid little niggers at Carriboo I
Aint there enough blacks in London Hying about! Oh ;
My Nancy fair, Ac.
A ruined man, 1 blessed the blacks,
And loft the wretched place,
And never since that day have I
beheld my Nancy’s face ;
Although they call them fancy fairs,
They’re not ideal, but very real ;
Then when you visit fancy fairs,
Bo careful how you deal.
My Nancy fair, &c,


CAPTAIN SMIDTH.
rAiiom on “ Captain Jinks.”
I’m Captain Smidth of the Doitch huzzara
My droo]> dey all keep groeory stores.
I made my money peddling cigars.
Und I am in de array.
Yon T leaved home my fai-der cvyod,
Mine sister erved, mine hroder cryod,
Yen ! leave liomr mine moder cryed
V on must not go in ihe army
y l‘t,>k ex- -Und i miil dear luodrr, i vill ol d<- uriuy, nnd i! dcro
ib minder riot i will date my vo horse uml get him Meddled, den !
vill Hiwimt, a keg of siunir kivmt, mid vere Mm shot is do thicker!-, here
you \ ill find me, (t mean at some shot lower) mid it there eome> no
'light J vill ride at tiro head of mine regiment, nnd Ihe ladies vill say
who isli dat nice captain den I will say, ryot course.
U horns. —Urn Cap! ain Bmi< i 1 h of do. ihatch huz/.ars,
Mv droop dey ;dl keep grocery stores,
i made Miy money soiling o;gnr.<,
Und r-ai oanl is ill in iho army.
Bid, now 1 have boon mustered ott
Because I get so very stout,
Uml veil 1 drill, d(- boys will shoul,
Tust look at dal hog In the army,
Und dou my droopers all vill yell,
All vill yell, rightout pell in oil.
Let’s giek him out, lie is a sell,
Und ist too fat for the army.
■Spoken. — Und I say, gentlemens, gick me outer— dai’s played outer,
of you gick me outer, 1 vill make mine fist mit your nose, and give you
a blue eye all over your face : if dore comes on a light mil do Xlux-
Klau-Iviux, den you may dalk about kicking me outer, but t ill den I
vill keep mine soldier clothes, for —
I’m Captain Smidtli, &c.
BEEF, PORK, MUTTON, WILL YOU BUY.
There was a butcher hoy, hoy, hoy,
Who a girl did much annoy-noy-noy,
By winking; at her his eye,


And whenever she came to his shop,
To purchase a steak or a nice lean chop.
Clio. —He cried—beef, pork, mutton, will you buy, buy, buy,
Beef, pork, mutton, will you buy.
He love for her did feel, feel, feel,
Which love he did re-veal, veal, veal,
And heaved full many a sigh ;
Then falling down upon his knees,
Her hand with rapture he did seize,
And cried”beef, pork, &c.
Now a smart young brother had she, she, she,
Who had latloy come from sea, sea, sea,
Where he did the waves defy;
He his sister embraced without delay,
Unto the butcher’s great dismay,
Who cried—beef, pork, &c.
Ho did not know 'l w as her brother, brother, brother,
But thought of lovers 'twas anothnrmothef-nothor,
So fate he did defy,
And he walked up to the sailor —-who gave him a frown,
But instead of directly knocking him down-
lie cried—beef, pork, &c.
Then the butcher whetted his knife, knife, knife,
Eesolved to take the life, life, life,
Of the treacherous girl so sly ;
So by the hair he caught the maid,
And after flourishing the blade,
He cried —beef, pork, &c.
The sailor coming in like a brick, brick, brick,
Saluted the butcher with a kick, kick, kick,
Which lifted him three feet high ;
And when recovering from the shock,
He directly ran behind his block,
And cried —beef, pork, &c.
Thus being bereft of hope, hopej hope,
He went and bought a rope, rope, rope,
Eesolved that he would die ;
But all explained—became his wife,
And in Washington market he still sharps his knife
Crying —beef, pork, &c.


THE MONEYLESS MAN.
Is there no secret place on the face of the earth
Where charity dwelleth, where virtue hath birth?
Where bosoms in mercy and kindness will heave.
And the poor and wretched shall ask and receive.
Is there no place on earth where a knock from the poor,
Will bring a kind angel to open the door ?
Ah! search the wide world wherever yon can,
There is no open door for a moneyless man!
Go look in your hall where the chandelier’s light
Drives off with its splendour the darkness of night,
Where the rich hanging velvet in shadowy folds
Sweeps gracefully down in its trimming of gold.
And the mirrors of silver take up and renew,
In long lighted vistas the wildering view ;
Go there in your patches, and find if you can,
A welcoming smile for a moneyless man !
Go look in your church with the cloud reaching spire,
Which gives back to the sun his same look of red fire ;
Where the arches and columns are gorgeous within,
And the walls seem as pure as a soul without sin!
Go down the long aisle, see the rich and the great
In pomp and the pride of their worldly estate
Walk down in your patches and find if you can,
Who opens a pew to a moneyless man !
Go look to yon judge in his dark flowing gown,
With the scales wherein law weigheth equity down,
Where he frowns on the weak and smiles on the strong,
And punishes right, while he justifies wrong.
Where jurors their lips on the Bible have laid,
To render a verdict they’ve already made—•
Go there in the court room, and find if you can,
Any law for the cause of a moneyless man !
Go look in the banks, where Mammon has told
His hundreds and thousands of silver and gold,
Where safe from the hands of the starving poor,
Lies pile upon pile of the glittering ore.
Walk up to the counter, ah ! there you may stay
Till your limbs grow old, and your hairs turn gray,
And you’ll find at the banks not one of the clan
With money to lend to a moneyless man!


Then go to your hovel no raven has fed.
The wife who has suifered too long for her bread,
Kneel down by her pallet and hiss the death frost
Prom the lips of the angel your poverty lost I
Then turn in your agony upward to god,
And bless while it smites you with the chastening rod ;
And you’ll find at the end of your life’s little span
There’s a welcome above for a moneyless man.
BELINDA, THE GARDENER'S DAUGHTER.
Come, listen, lovers, young and old,
And I’ll relate to you ;
My troubles with my first love,
She was my last love, too.. m
A market gardener’s sprout was she,
A lovely flowery shrub,
Oh, bother her father! for he was
A knotted warp’d old scrub.
Chorus. —I used to serenade a very pretty maid
I saw her at the window ;
From her bonnet to her boot,
I thought this chap she'd suit,
And her name it was Berlinda.
They lived up in a cottage inn
The Market garden ground,
And a paling of sharp spikes and rails,
The garden did surround ;
The guv’nor guarded it by day—
A savage dog at night,
So of the girl I dearly loved
I never caught a sight.
Spoken,—Ha, didn’t I detest her father, the old market
gardener. Shouldn’t I like to hare a turnip (up) with him and
knock him out of thyme by a well planted blow on his (cartoid)
artery, and put him to bed in his own parsley,
T used to, &c.
I used to dodge my angel when
She went for “ father's beer.’'


And get a kiss on the sly
When nobody was near :
I serenaded her each night —
With “Love not” and “The Cure.”
Oh, lor ! hove ihund’ring wild it made
The old chap, to he sure !
Spoken.—lie used (o come ami order mo off, but as I was on
the other side of the high [milbigs I invariably refused. Yes,
oven when lie offered me a bad sixpence to move on I replied sternly,
a la Shakespeare :
“The market gardener that has not music in his soul,
Must be a reg’lar bad’un on the whole.”
I used to, Ac.
One night I found her JAi was out,
(She told me on the sly,)
I sneaked into the cottage, and
What man so blessed as 1!
But who was so unhappy, and ah !
Who w T as frightened more, wdien
The guv’nor wdth his big dog came
A knocking at the door.
Spoken.—You might have knocked mo down with a feather.
“ Fly ! ’ says my sweetheart, “ Do I look like a party that could
fly,” said I, “ Then conceal yourself,” she shrieked “ or ray reputa-
tion is lost!” and she pointed to a cupboard, that wouldn’t hold half of
me, “ I can’t get in, ” I said, “ then get out, ” she said, and I bolted
through the window.
1 used to, Ac.
1 flew to gain the garden pale,
The big dog, wmrst of tykes ;
Seiz’d hold of what I sit upon,
Likewise the paling spikes.
I reached my home wdth trousers torn,
Down-hearted, wxak and ill,
I have lost my dear Belinda, but
I’ve got a doctor’s bill.
Spoken.—Likewise a tailor’s bill, ah, well, I come to such grief
that in future I shall he very careful whenever
1 try to serenade, Ac.


NEW JERUSALEM, OR, CRUEL JANE JEMIMA.
A bill hung in my window once,
“ A furnish’d room to let,”
A party came and took that room,
Whom I shall ne’er forget.
A sanctimonious sort of chap,
Whose name w T as Brother Flam ;
He was a saint from Salt Lake City
Or, New Jerusalam.
Chorus.
Cruel Jane Jemima,
Left her Darling Sam ;
She’s gone to be a Mormonite,
In New Jerusalam —oh, dear me !
He’d hold forth on the joys of being
A blissful Mormonite ;
While Jane Jemima listen’d to
His words Avith great delight.
He told us, 0 such glorious things.
Did pious Brother Flam ;
That we thought no place could ever equal
New Jerusalam.
Cruel Jane &c.
He told us how each happy Saint,
Had lots of happy wives ;
I thought they’d fight, but, oh, dear no!
They led such happy lives.
They liv’d on turtle, duck and green peas,
Fricassed fruit and “ Cham ; ”
For the saints they liv’d like fighting cocks,
In this New Jerusalam.
Cruel Jane, &c.
My wife was always at me,
To become a Mormon saint;
Said I, “ Don’t take me for a fool,
Jemima, ’cause I ain’t,”
Alas! one night I miss’d her,
And was told that Brother Flam,
Had taken my Jemima off
To New Jerusalam.
Cruel Jane, &c.


She’s gone to be a Sain tress,
With that blessed Mormonite ;
And if he’s got another wife,
There’s sure to be a light.
1 hope she’ll get the worst of it,
And as for Brother Flam,
He ought to be shot with all of the lot
In New Jerusalam.
Good-bye Jane Jemima,
Brieve no more will Sam,
I don’t believe in Mormonites,
Nor New Jerusalam —no, not me.
MY DARLING MIGNOINETTE.
They may talk about their fascinating beauties,
Their fashionable blondes, and pretty belles.
But the subject of the song I’m going to sing you,
Is par excellence the queen of all the swells.
“ We met, ’twas in a crowd,” and then we parted :
The beauty of her face I’ll ne’er forget,
As she never told her name I cannot tell it,
But I have christened her my darling Mignionette.
Chorus. —-She’s sweeter than the flow’r I’ve nam’d her after,
The mem’ry of her beauty haunts me yet,
There’s a band of opera music in her laughter,
So you’ll know her, she’s my darling Mignionette.
She looked at me—a glance was all I wanted:
As I followed her along the crowded street.
And my mem’ry with her loveliness was haunted,
As she tripp’d so lightly with those fairy feet.
A second time she cast her eye upon me,
She smil'd on me and then a moment more,
She rang the bell and vanished from my vision,
And all w-is dull for she was there no more.
She’s sweeter, &c.
Next day in hopes to sec my little darling,
I sought the house ’twas No. 91;


When the poodle in the house commenced a snarling,
And barking loudly, chased me from the door.
I ran along the street, and he ran after,
And with his teeth lie seiz’d ray pantaloons:
He hung on me, while the mob convuls'd with laughter,
Cried, “Unit’s the chap who stole the silver spoons.”
My Mignionctte then holler'd for her poodle
The music of her voice I’ll ne’er forget,
But the chap who goes a whistling “Yankee Doodle."
Was the husband of my darling Mignionctte.
WERY PECOOLIAR.
Have you ever been in love, if you haven't 1 have,
To the mighty god Koopid, I’ve been a great thlave;
He thot in my buthom a quiver of harrows,
Like naughty buoys thoot at cock robins and tli p arrows.
My heart was as pure as the white albathter.
Till Koopid my buthom weak did over mather;
Then ye Gods only know how I lov’d one Math Julia,
There was thomething about her tho wery pecooliar!
Spoken. —-Wery, wery pekooliar, wery pekooliar, indeed! There was
thomething about her tho wery pekooliar.
We met first at a ball where our hands did entwine,
And I did thqueedge her finger and she did thqueedge mine;
To be her next partner, I ventured to preth her,
And I found that she iithp’d when she anther’d me “ yelh
thir.”
How, in lithping, I think there is thomething uncommon,
I love in pertiklar, a lithp in a ooman ;
I’m thurc you’d have liked the lithp of Mith Julia,
There was shoracthing about it tho wery pecooliar !
Spoken. —Wery pecooliar, wery pecooliar indeed! There was thouie*
thing about it tho wery pecooliar!
Like a beautiful poach was the check of my Julia,
And thou In her eye there was thomething pekooliar;
Speaking wolumes, it darted each glance to one’s marrow,
As thwift and as keen as the wicked boy’s harrow,


A thlight catht in her eve to her looks added wiggor,
A catht in the eye often tends to disfigure ;
But not the the catht in the eye of Mith Julia,
There was thomething about it tho’ vvery pekooliar 1
Spokes’. —Wery pekooliar! wery pekooliar indeed! There was thome-
tliing about it tho wery pekooliar !
C ood friends were wc thoon and midst fhmiles and midst
tears,
I courted her nearly for three or four years ;
I took her to plays and to halls —oh ye powers !
How thweetly a thwiftly did then path my hours!
But once, oh e’en now, I my feelingths can’t thin other ;
She danced all the evening along with another,
I didn’t thay nothing that night to Mith Julia,
But I couldn’t help thinking ’twas wery pekooliar !
Spoeex. —Wery pekooliar! wery pekooliar indeed, thir. Yeth, I
couldn’t help thinking ’twais wery pekooliar!
I went next day to thcold, when she to my heart’s core,
Cut me up by rccjuothtiug I’d come there no more;
And I thould be affronted if longer 1 tarried.
For next week to another she was to be married.
“ Gods! Julia,” thaid I, “ why you do not thay tho.”
“ Yeth, but I do thir, tho you’d better go.”
“ Well, I thall go, but surely you’ll own it, Mith Julia,
Your behavior to me has been wery pekooliar! ”
Spoeen. —Wei’y pekooliar ! wery pekooliar indeed, Mith ! wery pe-
kooliar ! Tho from that day to this, I have never thcen Julia.
Her behavior to me was tho wery pekooliar.
“ THE HEATHEN CHINEE.”
OH, PLAIN LANGUAGE FROM THUTHFUL .TAMES.
Words by Bret Harte. Music by Henry Tucker.
Which I wish to remark—
And my language is plain —
That for ways that are dark,
And for tricks that are vain.
The heathen Chinee is peculiar,
Which the same I would rise to explain.


Ah Sin was his name ;
And I shall not deny
In regard to the same,
What that name might imply,
But his smile it was pensive and ehild-like,
As I frequent remarked to Hill Nye.
It was August the third,
And quite soft was the skies,
Which it might he inferred,
That Ah Sin was likewise.
Yet he played it that day upon William,
And me in a way I despise.
Which we had a small game,
And Ah Sin took a hand ;
It was Euchre. The same
He did not understand.
But he smiled as he sat by the table,
With the smile that was child-like and bland
Yet the cards they were stocked
In a way that I grieve,
And my feelings were shocked
At the state of Nye’s sleeve;
Which was stuffed full of aces and bowers,
And the same with intent to deceive.
But the hands that were played
By that heathen Chinee,
And the points that he made
Were quite frightful to see ;
Till at last he put down a right bower,
Which the same Nye had dealt unto me.
Then I looked up at Nye,
And he gazed upon me
And he rose with a sigh,
And said, “ Can this be ?
We are ruined by Chinese cheap labor ; ”
And he went for that heathen Chinee.
In the scene that ensued,
1 did not take a hand,
But the floor it was strewed
Like the loaves on the strand,


With the cards that Ah Sin had been hiding,
In the game “ he did not understand.”
In his sleeves, which were long
He had twenty-four packs,
Which was coming it strong,
Yet I state but the facts ;
And we found on his nails, which were taper,
What is frequent in tapers —that’s wax.
Which is why I remark,—
And my language is plain,—
That for ways that are dark,
And for tricks that are vain.
The heathen Chinee is peculiar,
Which the same X am free to maintain.
THAT’S WHERE YOU MAKE A MISTAKE,
Some folks think they’re awfully clever,
That all other folks are but fools,
Some people will often endeavour
To make other people their tools :
Some people will boast of their knowledge,
And fancy they’re well wide-a wake,
That none are so deep and so cute as themselves,
That’s were they make a mistake
There’s just as good fish in the sea —bear in mind—
As those we have managed to take,
So don’t be too proud, and don’t crow too loud,
Tor that’s where you make the mistake.
Don’t imagine you’ll meet with a “ bobby,”
Whene’er there’s a row in the street,
Don’t imagine you’ll find a fishmonger,
Declare that his fish are not sweet;
Do not fancy you’ll meet with a Cabby,
Who more than his fare will not take,
May as well think an oyster could crawl up a tree —
And there you would make a mistake.


If you fancy a girl dislikes a .small kiss,
Ton must be —'wbat some folks call—a cake!
If you think your collector of Taxes won’t call I
That’s where you make the mistake.
Don't imagine a man has no coin in his purse,
Because he’s not dress’d as a swell!
A book with a cover that’s olden and worn,
Has often a good tale to tell.
You'll often sec a toll', all collar and culls
To lus finger tips, win to as snowflake,
Bui if yon believe he's all over alike— •
That's where yon make the mistake.
I be ladies still wear an abundance of hair,
’Tis a wonder their dear necks don’t break,
But if you imagine they grow it themselves,
That’s where you make the mistake.
WTuVu courting don’t write spoony letters
To your fair one, for love nor for sport,
Bor should you but break any promise,
They are sure io he read out in court.
'When you wed, do not marry the fam'ly as well,
Bor that will not a Paradise make,
Above all, close the door to your Mother-in-law
O —that’s where you’ll make the mistake.
But talking of marriage, reminds me
We’ve given the German s a shake,
They fancied Donise and her cash was for them,
That’s where they made the mistake.
Don’t imagine your milk is not “ Simspon’d! ”
Nor quite pure is your turn shilling tea ;
Don’t imagine it’s “ awfully jolly,’
The first time you go on the sea.
Don’t reckon your chicks before hatched, or
Your duck p’rhaps may turn out a drake.
Don’t go and eat mustard and fancy its jam,
Or —that’s where you’ll make the mistake.
With all the advice I have given,
Yon ought to be well wide awake,
And should you imagine I'll slug any more,
That’s where you make the mistake.


I WISH MY SALLY COULD SEE ME NOW.
Ive been up to Lunnon a week,
And I’m up to each move in the town,
Now mind when I say I am up,
I mean that on them I am down ;
My name’s Tony Lumpkin of York,
My profession’s to follow the plough,
Oh, wouldn’t my Sally be riled,
If she could but'look on me now.
Oh! I wish my Sally could see me now,
See me now, see me now,
I’ve learnt how to dress, and to talk and to bow,
Oh, I wish my Sally could sec me now,
My Sally’s an infamous jilt,
To her I was going to be wed,
But I wasn’t oh no ! she went off,
And married another instead.
She called me a lumbering lout,
And treated me just anyhow,
I think that she’d alter her time,
If she could but look oil me now,
StoJCEN—Vine yeathm makes vino birds. Oh, Sally, Bally ; if tho«
wanted to marry a suit of clothes, why didn’t thee tell I so ; I’d a’ come
down and married thee drest like am now, in a suit of clothes fit fur
a duke! but thee went off and married that Skulemaster as ain’t got
money enow’ to dress like this ; but thee shall see me Sally ; thee shalt
see that Tony can look like a swell! I wish, oh! dang it—
I wish my Sally, Ac.
Directly to Lunnon I got,
I’d scare jump’d out o’ the train
"When I found out the place to buy clothes,
In a street call’d Petticoat lane ;
The tailors they were so polite,
They suited me after a bit.
And they every one of ’em said
These clothes were a beautiful fit.
Spoken —They ought to know r thee knows, I’d bought the clothes —
they cost me four pun ten and the hat in. I said to tailor chap ‘Aint
this rather loose here,’ ’ Loose !’ said he, ‘ now s’e’p-mc-pon my-yord !
loose, no, my boy it’s beautiful —worth double the monish too!” I
said ’I ought to be taken in just here, Moses and Sou!’ said he,


‘Moses and Son, ve’ve taken you in quiteenougli! its beautiful,
its the fashion !” And so it is. Sally, thee might s me
and all. But I wish she were here to see I—l d rile her
I wish my Sally, Ac.
I know that all ways I’m a swell,
For everyone I meet,
No nial ter'if female or male—
Stops and stares at me in the street ;
So Sally may goto the—well,
It’s no use to kick a row.
She’d he dying of envy if she
Could only look on me just now.
Ki’okev —Eh, lads, thee doesn’t oft see volks come out so extensive
• T imnon It hain’t only the clothes, it be the figure as well; even
the L noor little boys in the 7 street ha’ bin a noticin’ I heered one say,
< Bill P d’ye see that blooming svell vith the Grecian bend on i
sho dder ’ 1 Yes'’ says the other, ‘ he’s got the Roman Fall m von
£* and ram me iulJa ride if he ain’t got ihe Ah3xa.nlra hmp m hr*
body !’ ‘ Aes ’ says a. Cabman, < he’s bmp all over. I did tool piom.
and began to sing- }
GOOD EVENING
I had been dining rather late—
My miseries X wish to state
I took a stroll without a mate
One pleasant summer’s evening.
My fancy’s bent, I homeward went;
As westward through the streets I sped
I saw a charmer raise her head,
Pass bye, I said, “ Good evening.’
Hy' I felt a disappointed dunce,
I received no answer in response ;
So I repeated more than once, _
“ Good evening Miss, Good evening.
But when she turn’d her head this way,
Judge, if you can, of my dismay ;
She was fifty-five if she was a day.
“ Oh ! lor,’ ” said I, “ Good-e veiling.


Mj disappointment made me queer,
I turned into a public near,
Address’d the barmaid thus —“ My dear,
Some bitter beer; good evening ;
With sparkling eyes the beer was served
"What was it made me so unnerved ?
Standing by me I observed
My tailor ; “ Oh ! Goodfevening.”
His presence spoiled my wish to stay;
1 drank my (beer and turn’d away.
The barmaid said, “ Sixpence to pay,”
And then, kind sir, “ good evening.”
a Oh, pardon me, I pray of you ;
I quite forget” (and that was true).
My tailor said “ You oft times do
Forget to pay : Good evening !”
1 hired a cab myself to save,
Avd handsome too I did behave \
A sovereign for a shilling gave
On that unlucky evening.
'When I found out what I had done,
1 turn’d around but the cab was gone ;
j ’ll ne’er forgot that cabby’s tone
In which ho said, H Good evening !”
But all things happened for the best,
I hope that you will waive the rest,
And with cabby enjoy the jest
Of that unlucky evening.
But luckily he brought me here,
A place where I have nought to fear.
With kind regards to all friends here
I beg to say, “ Good evening.”


SUNBEAMS
A Dutchman being advised to rub his limbs well with
brandy for the rheumatism, said he had heard of the remedy,
but added,“ I dosh better as that drinks de prandy, and
then I rubs my leg with te pottle.”
“ You know, madame, that lam quite a lion. _ Sir, if
not the king of the beasts, you are undoubtedly a very
great beast.”
Why are ladies like churches ?—Because there is no
living without them.
“Is this your house and home P” asked a pedlar of a
farmer, as he saw him boarding up a pig-stye. ‘ No,
replied the farmer, “ I’m only boarding here.”
Muggins was one day with a friend, when he observed 3
poor dog that had been killed lying in the gutter. Muggins
paused, gassed intently at the dead animal, and at last said,
i‘ Htji'e is another shipwreck. Shipwreck, where P “
“There’s a bark that’s lost for ever.” His companion
growled, and passed on.
One of the physicians of Burlington, Vermont, driving
into town on election morning, was met by a friend, who
hailed him with the question,“ Have you voted P” “ Not
yet,” replied the doctor, “ but I have been out all night
after a voter. I got him safe, too.”—“ When will he vote ?”
—“ Oh, about twenty-one years from now.”
An American editor thus describes in rhyme the patience
of a husband with whom he was acquainted: —
* “He never said a word,
But with a look of deepest melancholy,
He sat like patience on an ottoman,
Waiting for his wife to put her bonnet on.”
The Pittsfield and North Adams Eailroad, in Massachu-
setts, is not remarkable for speed. As a train on it
recently came to a dead bait, a passenger exclaimed:
“ Well, I wonder wbat we’ve stopped for now ?” “ Why,”
explained a fellow traveller, “ it’s to take the cow-catcher
off the engine, and put it on behind, to keep the cows
from running over us.”
Josh Billings says that opera music don’t have any more
effect on him than castor oil would on a graven image.


Oliver Wendell Holmes calls a kiss a lisping consonant,
He should have added that it usually follows a-vowcl.
“ ONLY.”
Only a face at the ■window,
Only a face—nothing more ;
Yet the look in the eyes as they met mine,
Still comes to me o’er and o’er.
Only a word of greeting,
Only a word—that was all;
Yet all day in my heart it echoed
Like the sound of an angel’s call.
Only a smile of welcome,
Only a smile as I passed;
But that smile will still be remembered
As long as my life shall last.
Only a woman you tell me !
Only a woman to thee !
But there’s naught that this mere earth contaiueth,
Half so dear as this woman to me.
Only her love I ask for,
Only her love, and yet
The sweet boon I cannot hope for,
And so I must strive to forget.
Only a word lowly spoken,
Only a “ yes,” naught to say ;
But it gives the sweet face at the window
To be mine for ever and aye.
Virvinia Qabriel
A Yankee editor’s vindication of a friend is thus recorded
in the New York Vaccination Office, in vindicating the
character of an old friend, who had been nailed for the
crime of sheep stealing : —“ We have known Mr. Thomas
for twelve years. Our acquaintance commenced with the
great equinoctial storm which blew down our grandfather’s
barn. At that time he was a young man in the prime of
life, and, we think, raised the best marrow-fat peas we ever
ate. He was a good mathematician, kind to the poor, and
troubled with fits. In all the relations of a husband, father,
uncle, and trustee of common lands, he has followed the
direct standard of duty. Mr. Thomas is at this time forty-
three years of age, slightly marked with the small-pox, an
estimable citizen, a church member, and a man of known
integrity for ten years. And as to sheep stealing, that he
03


would have done during ten years if he could get an oppor-
tunity. Mr. Thomas could have stolen our lead pencils
several times. During those years we have been myste-
riously short of pencils. He would decorate a tree with
the addition of a pretty coloured rope.”
An Alabama slave preacher named “ Old Scarecrow,”
says : —“ When I can’t ’swade ’em, I frittens ’em —dat is
great art, and white preacher don’t always understand the
nature ob colored folks. Now, Pompey, dere is one natur
of nigger, and one natur of Massa Buckra. You can’t
scare our people by telling ’em dey’ll go to berry hot place
if dey is sinners, for no place is too hot for dem dat sleep
on pillow of hot roasted sand in de boilin’ hot ob day, wid
der faces turned up to it like a sunflower. I scare ’em by
cold; 1 talk ob frozen ribbers dat dey must walk on bare-
foot, and ob snow-drifts, and ob carryin’ great chunks ob
ice on dare bare heads for ebber, like discharging cargoes
ob Yankee ice from Boston vessels, which kills more ob
dem dan yaller fever. I can’t talk book lamin’, ’cause I
can’t read; nor ebberlastin’ long words, ’cause I can’t
pronaunce ’em. But I frighten dem to death almost, so do
dey call me Old Scarecrow.”
A young wife in Troy cured her husband of a disposi-
tion to absent himself from home at night by providing him
with an excellent dinner, and saying to him afterwards,
“ George, if you find a sweeter spot than our home,
describe it to me and I will rival it if I die in the attempt.”
A kiss and a few tears completed the victory.
We are told by a tourist that the following sharp lines
are written on the sash of a window at Lodore :
“ When I see a man’s name
Scratched upon the glass,
I know he owns a diamond
And his father owns an ass.”
Lots of Them! —An American journal observes that
Brigham Young lacks originality. The catastrophe of
Lot’s wife near one salt lake has evidently suggested the
position of the husband of a lot near another Salt Lake.
Well, if Brigham Young is given to imitation, the sooner
he begins to copy civilized people the better, for the only
chance of perpetuating Mormonism is by making it more-
monogamous.


Yankee Similes. —As big as all out of doors; as dry
as a clerk in a lime-kiln ; as long as a thanksgiving sermon ;
as crooked as a Virginian fence ; as straight as a loon’s leg ;
as straight as a shingle; as sharp as the little end of
nothing; as slick as the greased lightning ; as swelling as a
basket of chips; as happy as a clam in high water; as
tight as the bark of a tree; as crazy as a bed-bug; as mad
as all wrath; as wrathy as a militia officer on a training
day; as proud as a tame turkey; as melancholy as a
Quaker’s meeting-house by moonlight; as useless as whist-
ling psalms to a dead horse ; like all nature ; like all fury ;
like all possessed ; thrashing round, like a short tailed bull
in fly-time; head and tail up like chicken cocks in laying-
time.
Thibty-Seyen' Twins in One Family. —The New York
correspondent of a contemporary writes as follows: “ A
remarkable family of twins ! such a sentence I heard a
gentleman utter in one of our city omnibuses. On inquiry
I found it was indeed a remarkable, in fact the most re-
markable of families. The father, Mr. James Jeffries, who
lately attended the United States Court in Louisville as a
juror, tells the story. Tie says that ho was married before
he Avas 17 years old, his wife being only live days younger
than himself. They lived together seven years without
children, Avhen his Avife gave birth to twins, a boy and a
girl. In the 15 years Avhich folloAved 10 children Avere
born to the happy couple, each of the first three births
being twins, and each subsequent birth alternatively between
twins and -single births until 15 years Avere accomplished
and 19 children composed the family circle, seven pairs of
twins being born during the time. Mr. Jeffries, if accounts
be true, is only 15 years old, and is still youthful in appear-
ance, and very stout. His Avife never had better health in
all her life than at present, though she Avill not weigh 100
pounds ; her greatest Aveight at any time Avas 110 pounds.
The boy of the first twins now Avcighs 1(55 pounds, the girl
125 pounds. All the boys Avho are groAvn have made large
men ; the girls are of good size and all the children healthy.
But five out of the 19 have died. Mr. Jeffries has 10
brothers, all of whom are large men, and within the families
of these 11 brothers there arc 37 pairs of tAvins, making 74
twin children, to say nothing of the host of single births.
Five of Mr. Jeffries’ children are married, and added to the


above singular facts, notwithstanding the absence of silver
locks on bis bead, be is the grandfather of five children.
This may seem an American ‘ fib,’ but I will vouch for the
truth of it.”
Captain Noah, His Crew ajs t d Cargo. —Don’t yer
suppose, Sir, that there was uncoxnfortability of temper
enough, in Noah’s ark, with all them odds and ends of
creation, creatures that Avasn’t noways agreeable to one
another’s feelings all messed in together there ?—-dogs and
cats, sheep and wolves, foxes and geese, chickens and
weasels (and skunks, I’ll bet) —and mighty small stable-
room accommodations, I tell you ? How was it ’bout un-
comfortability of temper there, do you s’pose ? Why, don’t
you see; they had to ’commodate all of ’um P ‘jest luff and
bear away,’ as the sailors say ; the lion, I s’pose he roared
kinder soft like, so as not to skeer the turtle-doves ; and
the hyena, she did not laugh out so loud as she wanted to,
I dare say ; the big bear, ho kinder shut up growling ; and
the kag’roo took care not to leap on other folkses toes ; the
horse was keerful not to kick up his heels ; and if the dog
felt as mad as lire, he didn’t bite nobody. That was the
Avay they done it, no doubt on’t; stands to reason they
did ; ’cause, don’t you see, Sir, if they had all of um given
Avay to their oncomfortability of temper, and each on um
acted out their own onregenerate natur, why in course
they’d hev stove the bottom out of that thundering old tub
of his in less than no time, and she’d a’ foundered, and
they’d all gone to the bottom, and there Avouldn’t hev been
no call for any more wedding rings, that’s sartin; and
where you and I would be now, it’s a mighty hard thing to
say. But, as I was saying, they didn’t ; they behaved
beautiful! I don’t see how it was—seems it couldn’t hev
been Noah’s doings—for betAveen you and I, I guess he
wasn’t much ; an onsteady, drinking man he allers Avas, you
know; wasn’t he, Sir P and not used to naAugating, by no
means. But I will say for’t, he managed that cruise re-
markably well, considering what his cargo was, and that his
creAV Avas half womankind; ho sartinly made a saving
voyage of it, which was a good thing, all things con-
sidered.
The Stark County (Ind.) Ledger Avelcomes a new-comer
to the toAvn of Knox after this fashion : “ Miss Betsy
Opplebach intends locating in this place soon. She is


intelligent and handsome, and don’t smoke and chew
tobacco,, drink whisky, paint, £ play sweet ’ wear false
‘ dumplings ’ or chignons—is opposed to woman suffrage,
free love and things that squeeze her out of shape. She is
not on to marry, and will entertain no propositions. Her
card announcing her biz will appear in our columns when
she arrives.”
To his beloved said a bard,
“ If I by you should be rejected,
Your future will thus be affected,
You will not married be but marred.
Replied the maid, “ Suppose I do
Prefer the willow, sir, to you.
Why marry! —many swains there be
Who gladly give an eye to me.”
U & I.
In a letter to his doctor on “ vaxination ” a Cincinnati
man wrote; “If vaxinnation orvaxinnatingwas to Prevent
a person from getting this decease & can convince me of it
You would have got my two sisters—&—vaxinnated before
this time. But Ido not believe in this Meraccul, & have
no confidence in it. If Providence whiches to lay a Person
Sick in bed no matter what decease it is—l trust in him
and have confidence in him that he can Believe them and
also Prevent the decease.
The Louisville Courier-Journal thus cruelly satirizes the
trashy poetical effusions the Grand Duke suffered under
when in this city :
All hail bully, bully boy ! The undersigned ass
And the rest of the asses here, solid as one,
Would lick your Imperial boots as we pass,
O child of your mother ! O son of a gun !
Why Not ?—A contemporary seems surprised at this:
A Tennessee girl broke an arm on the eve of her wedding
day, hut went through the ceremony with her arm in a
sling at the appointed hour. What daughter of Eve—
especially the eve of her marriage—would suppose for an
instant that the fracture of an arm implies the breaking
of an engagement! Why should not her affianced become
“ bone of her bone,” though it was splintered !
Too muck light. — When Daniel Webster and his
brother Ezekiel were together, they had frequent literary
disputes ; and on one occasion, after they had retired to bed
they entered into a squabble about a certain passage in one
of their school books, and having risen to examine the
authorities in their possession, they sat the bed-clothes on


fire, and nearly burnt their father's dwelling. On being
questioned the next morning respecting the accident,
Daniel remarked “ that they wore in. pursuit of light, but
get more than they they wanted.”
AMUSERS.
“ Mothee,” said Jemima, “ Sam wants to come to court
me to-night.” “Well, what did you tell him?” “Oh I
told him he might come. I felt anxious to see how ho
would act.”
Not Lightly. —“ I have not loved lightly,” as the man
said, when ho married a widow weighing three hundred
pounds.
Sawdust pills would effectually cure many of the diseases
with which mankind are afflicted, if every individual would
make his own sawdust.
Not much difference between the very rich and the very
jmor after all. The former dread the gout, and the latter
live in fear of starvation.
Teetotalism. —Miss Martineau relates an ; necdote, in
her Western Travels of a clergyman who was so strict a
temperance member that he refused to drink water out of
the Brandywine Eiver, but he enjoyed the wine sauce
eaten with plum pudding.
The Peequeht Ply. —The fly iz not only a domestik
critter, hut a friendly one. How they git born I don’t
kno ; but I have thought they didn’t wait to be born, but
come just as they am. Many of them are cut off in the
flower of their youth and usefulness. Some loze their lives
by lighting too near the rim of a toad’s mouth, and falling
in when the toad gaps, Thousands find a watery grave, bi
getting drowned —in milkeans. Flys, morally considered
are lik other human beings; they won’t light on a good
hel thy spot in a man, not if they can find a place that iz
a little raw. I beleave they are ov temperate habits ; and
altho they hang around grocerys a good deal, i never see a
fly the wuss for liquor ; but I hav often seen liquor that
waz a good deal wuss for flys.
It was Mr. Justice Littleton, of Massachussetts, who
made the following remark about a certain hotel, after he
had been there on circuit. Some one asked how he found


the table. “ How ?” growled the judge. Everything cold
but the water, and everything sour except the pickles !”
A Yankee reporter is terrifically “ graphic” in describing
the recent collision of railroad trains in Missouri. Hear
him :—“ The two engines rushed at each other like malign
and enraged monsters, grapped with a tremendous crash,
reared from the track in a mortal wrestle and fell into help-
less and disappointed fragments on the ground.
An American in Paris wished to make some purchases,
he found all the stores closed. He enquired the reason,
he was told it was Ascension Day. “ You don’t say ?’ said
he, “ What time does the balloon go up?”
The following dialogue on “sharp-shooting” quietly took
place between a Virginia and a Yankee picket:—“ I say,
can you fellows shoot?” “Well, I reckon we can, some.
Down in Mississippi we can knock a bumble-bee of a
thistle-bough at three hundred yards.” “ Oh, that ain’t
nothing to the way we shows up in Vermont. I belonged
to a Militia company ther’ with a hundred men in each
company, and we went out for practice every week. The
cap’n draws ns up single file, and sets a cider barrel rollin’
down the hill, and each man takes his shot at the bung-hole
as it turns up. It is afterwards examined, and if there is
a shot that didn’t go into the bung-hole the number who
missed it is expelled. I belonged to the company ten
years, and there aiu’ been nobody expelled yet.’*
JOSH BILLINGS ON FREE LOVE.
I beleaf in free fights, especially aiming cats and dogs.
I beleaf in free rides on a gate.
I beleaf in freedom of every slave on arth.
Bnt free love is one ov these kinds of freedum that it
don’t do to limber with.
If this world was a gardin of Eden and full ov Adam
and Eve, as they was when they was fust launched, then I
kan imagine it might do for some other Adam to hold my
Eve on his lap, and talk about his affiniteeh and spiritual
essence and play lamb.


In them daze, there was no humin natur, it was all God
natur.
Humin natur has been soaked so much sinse, it is tew
weak to be trusted in a lot whar the seed is poor, next to a
meddo, without much fence between nor enny poke on.
Free love wants more poke than enny other animal,
I don’t believe in total depravity—unless a man has a
good chance.
Free love is a good deal like drinking a 6 shilling gin oi
a bevridge. Bevridge is a Chinese word, and means fussid-
ness.
Aul the free love I witnessed thus far, has existed be-
tween a villainous letcher on one side, and lunatic virtue on
the other side, that has been deodorized out of its truth,
and had lost aul of its modesty and shame, in huntin after
a condishun whare sin ceased to be a crime.
The fust free lover we have enny akount ov was the
devil.
Lovers are singular people—when they meet, they stand
sidling about as if they came together without any definite
object in view; they exchange sundry sighs and glances,
it is true, but scarcely utter any articulate. When absent
from each other, they think of nothing more but the
deliciousness of their interview, and indulge in imaginary
conversations, and all sorts of fine things they intended to
have said. “ Your true lovers run into strange crpers,”
says the bard of Avon; no sooner met, but they looked ;
no sooner looked, but they loved; no sooner loved, but
they sighed; no sooner sighed, but they asked one another
the reason; no sooner knew the reason, than they sought
the remedy ; and on these degrees have they made a pair
of stairs to marriage.” Your true lover is not demonstra-
tive ; on the contrary, he seeks to conceal from the vulgar
gaze all avowal of his passion. So scrupulous, indeed, is
he in this that he often betrays himself by his very anxiety
at concealment. Such a suitor is likely to prove true and
faithful, while others of greater daring too often fail of the
test. So, in woman, delicacy is her point of honour ;it is
alike her defence and her crowning charm. Gentleness,
modesty, and true taste are the triple graces of woman;
and these, even without the attractions of external beauty,
possess a talismanic power that none can resist,


VENUS OF THE NEEDLE.
BY WM. ALXIKGHAM.
O Maryanne, you pretty girl,
Intent on silky labour,
Of sempstresses the pink and pearl,
Excuse a peeping neighbour !
Those eyes, forever drooping, give
The long brown lashes rarely ;
But violets in the shadows live, —
For once unveil them fairly.
Hast thou not lent that flounce enough
Of looks so long and earnest ?
Lo, here’s more “ penetrable stuff,"
To which thon never turnest.
Ye graceful fingers, deftly sped !
How slender, and how nimble !
Oh, might I wind their skeins of thread,
Or but pick up their thimble!
How blest the youth whom love shall bring,
And happy stars embolden,
To change the dome into a ring,
The silver into golden!
Who’ll steal some morning to her side
To take her finger’s measure,
While Maryanne pretends to chide,
And blushes deep with pleasure!
Who’ll watch her sew her wedding gown,
Well conscious that it is hers ;
Who’ll glean a tress, without a frown,
With those so ready scissors !
Who’ll taste these ripenings of the south
The fragrant and delicious —
Don’t put the pins into your mouth,
O Maryanne, my precious !
I almost wish it were my trust
To teach how shocking that is ;
I wish I had not, as I must,
To quit this tempting lattice.
Sure aim takes Cupid, fluttering foe,
Across a street so narrow ;
A thread of silk to string his bow,
A needle for his arrow!
The following is Aunt Betsey’s description of her milk-
man: —“He is the meanest man in the world,” she ex-
claimed. “He skims his milk on the top, and then he
turns it over and skims the bottom.


“ Mammy! ” said a precious little boy, who, against his
will, was made to rock the cradle of his baby brother, “ if
the Lord has any more babies to give away don’t you take
’em.”
HUMAN LIFE.
A little child, with her bright blue eyes,
And hair like golden spray,
Sat on the rock by the steep cliff’s foot
As the oeean ebbed away.
And she longed for the milk-white shining foam,
As it danced to the shingles’ hum,
And stretched out her hand, and tottered fast.
To bring the white feathers home.
And still as she strayed the tide ebbed fast,
And the gleaming foam laughed on,
And the white fluff shrank from the tiny feet,
And the little fat hands caught none.
She sat wearily down by the steep cliff’s foot,
Till the waves seemed to change their mind,
And the white foara flowed to her as she sat,
As though ’twould at last be kind.
And the fluff played over her soft white feet,
And the feathers flew up to her chin,
And the soft loving water kissed her lips.
And I carried my dead child in.
An editor “ far West ” describes a communication which
ho has received as a heterogenous collection of marks,
which seem like the unsuccessful endeavours of a maniac
to imitate the Arabic characters.
“ Do you suppose there is any doubt about my baggage
going to Canaan ?” inquired an old lady of the famous wag
E., while he was “ seeing some friends oif ” at the Albany
depot, a few days since. “My dear woman,” answered E.,
soberly, “it will depend entirely upon the moral instruc-
tion it has received. Was it brought up orthodox ?” “No,”
answered the uncomprehending woman, “it was brought
up on a hand-cart.” “ Doubtful case, ma’am, very.”
In the suburbs, south of the bridge, resides William
Smith, who is noted for his jolity, and also for keeping
late honrs, as he usually goes home at one o’clock in the
morning. Well, one stormy night, when it rained cats and
dogs, William decided on going home early, and accordingly
he arrived at his house just at eleven o’clock. In answer
to his knock, his mother opened a window and inquired,


“Who is there?” —“William,” was the reply. “No,”
said she, “ You can’t come that over me; my William won’t
he home for two hours yet ” Poor Bill had to wait in the
drenching rain till his usual time.
Laugh at no man for his pug nose ; you can never tell
what may turn up.
We heard a good joke once of a party of young fellows
Avho found fault with the butter on the hoarding house
table. “ What is the matter with it ?” inquired the mis-
tress.-—“ Just you ask it,” said one, “it is old enough to
speak for itself.”
While Mrs. Butler was once playing Juliet, and just
when she had exclaimed, “ Oh, cruel poison 1” a tall, lean,
gaunt, sandy-haired medical student in the stage box,
deeply absorbed in the scene, thrust down his hat on his
head with a convulsive effort, crying out in a voice of thun-
der at the same time, “ Keep him up, Juliet,—l’ll run and
fetch the stomach pump.
A Pike Old Ma.k.— =The following description of “ a lino
old man,” by Mark Twain Is worth reading:—“ John Wag-
ner, the oldest and wisest man in Buffalo—one hundred and
four years old—-recently walked a mile and a half in two
weeks. He is cheerful and bright as any of those other
old men that charge around us in newspapers, and in every
way as remarkable. Last November he walked five blocks
in a rainstorm, without any shelter but an umbrella, and
cast his vote for Grant, remarking, That he had voted for
forty-seven Presidents—which was a lie. His ‘ second
crop ’ of rich brown hair arrived from New York yester-
day, and he has a set of new teeth coming —from Philadel-
phia. He is to be married next week to a girl one hundred
and two years old. who still takes in washing. They have
been engaged eighty years, hut their parents persistently
refused their consent until three days ago. John Wagner
is two years older than the Rhode Island veteran, and yet
has never tasted a drop of liquor in his life, unless you
count whisky.”
—— A child tied crape on the door to see if the carriages
would come and take them out riding, as they did the
family across the street. — Exchange. [Permit us to explain
that the head of the family returned and saw the sable sig-


nal fluttering from the door-knob. He[ entered. “ Jane,”
said he to his wife, “who’s dead! ” “Nobody,” replied the
woman ; “it’s some of Johnny’s nonsense.’, The gentleman
pondered deeply for a few minutes, and then asked : “Jane,
how long has that thing been hanging out P ” “ Ever since
eight o’clock this morning, I believe. I thought that, it was
a good joke and left it there.” Gravely and thoughtfully
the gentleman continued: “Jane, there has been a wrong-
wrought upon this community. The neighbors will he ex-
pecting a funeral from this house, and it will be dishonora-
ble to disappoint them. Never shall it be said that Jonas
Napoleon Smith repudiated an obligation, Johnny, come
to your father—approach ! ” The child toddled confiden-
tially into the paternal presence. The paternal hand lifted
its ancestral walking-stick, and the same fell in thuudcrovs
vengeance upon the youthful head—fell as falls the dead
branch of a giant oak. And the carriages came and took,
them all out riding,
Azzoppardi, Hildreth & Co., Printers, Melbourne.




