

919 4.1
TU'iU-'b
0 oL p Ayvv- p
b#x 3,
HISTORY, RESOURCES, AND
FUTURE PROSPECTS OF
QUEENSLAND
For the Information of Intending Emigrants
PUBLISHED BY
S. W. SILVER & CO.
Sun Court
67 CORNHILL




HISTORY. RESOURCES, AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
QUEENSLAND
THOMAS ARCHER
FOB THE INFORMATION of INTENDING EMIGRANTS
LONDON
S. W. SILVER & CO., SUN COURT, 67 CORNHILL
1881


LONDON - :
PRINTED BY BEAN, WEBLEY AND CO.,
ST. MARY-AT-HILL, IEASTCHEAP.


Extracts from a Paper read by Mr. Thomas Archer, of
Queensland, on the History, Resources, and Future
Prospects of that Colony—at a Meeting of the Royal
Colonial Institute on April 12,1881.
[REPRINTED FROM “THE COLONIES AND INDIA.”]
. . . . Queensland, though she is the youngest of the Australian group of Colonies,
bids fair to rival the most prosperous of her elder sisters. Her seaboard of 2,000
miles, studded at frequent intervals with fine harbours, her rivers (though not
navigable for any great distance from the sea) depositing large tracts of the finest
alluvial soil, much of it fit in the southern parts of the Colony for producing all
the fruits and cereals usually grown in temperate climates, and in the central
and northern districts for most tropical products; her apparently inexhaustible
deposits of minerals ranging from gold to coal, and including very rich deposits of
tin and copper ; her natural pastures extending over the larger proportion of her
surface, and rivalling in fattening and wool producing qualities any pasturage
of the same extent in any part of the world yet discovered; all these advantages
combine to make Queensland one of our most promising Colonies. Already her
progress has been very rapid. I can well remember when, in 1841, the commerce
of Brisbane (which then meant the whole Colony) was carried on by a small cutter
trading to Sydney; when a schooner was added to the fleet a great stride was
thought to have been made; and when, a year or two later, a couple of small
steamers took up the trade, there was no end to the jubilation of the inhabitants.
As a contrast, I find that in 1879 the entrances inwards were 1,261 vessels, of the
aggregate tonnage of 637,695 tons, with crews of 42,206 men, and the clearances
were about the same ; there were registered 28 ocean steamers, with 3,500 horse
power, and 14,000 tonnage, and 38 river-going steamers, of 1,300 tons aggregate
measurement. The population in these old times consisted of a few squatters, as
the pastoral tenants of the Crown were called, and their men, scattered over the
districts of Darling Downs and Moreton, perhaps a dozen storekeepers and publicans
in Brisbane and Ipswich, and half a dozen Government officials. These were the
times when the “cormorant” squatter ranged at will over the face of the land,
turning into profit for the community, and occasionally for himself, vast tracts of
country that had lain waste and desolate since creation, and would, but for him,
probably have continued so for centuries to come ; for it is an axiom in the history
of Australian settlement, to which there has yet been no single exception, that in
the interior the squatter or pastoralist must precede the settler or agriculturist;
nor are the reasons for this far to seek. Agricultural produce is so bulky and
heavy in proportion to its value that it cannot be grown profitably when it has to
be sent over long and often difficult roads to market. When there is no population
on or near the place of production to consume it, and no navigable rivers or rail-


ways to carry the produce to market, the cost of carriage must inevitably prove
fatal to any chance of profitable farming; and these conditions unfortunately obtain
in the far interior of Australia. The principal articles produced on a grazing station
are, on the contrary, comparatively easily brought to market. Wool can be com-
pressed into small bulk in proportion to its value and weight, and is easily handled
and carried; while beef, mutton, hides, tallow, have the advantage of walking to
market on their own legs at a comparatively trifling cost to the producer. When
the country is opened up by railway and becomes more populous, these conditions
are to a great extent altered, as I hope to show farther on, when treating of
settlement. .........
There was at the time I am now speaking of no paternal Government to open
the way for the squatter, to direct his steps through the wilderness, and to tax him
Crown Lands Commissioners reigned over districts as large as three or four English
counties, and a 10 1, licence fee and an almost nominal assessment was all the direct
taxation to which he was liable. Now we have changed all that. Cultivation,
civilisation, taxes, matrimony, and intense respectability reign supreme in regions
where they were little known in the good old days of which I speak. The exports
—which then, and long after, consisted almost entirely of wool, tallow, and hides—
were so insignificant that no record, as far as I can discover, were kept of their
value; everything was shipped over to Sydney, which was the capital and seat of
government. Not until 1859, when separation from New South Wales was obtained,
can I find any record of the value of our imports and exports; for the following
year (1860) the imports amounted to 742,023/., and the exports to 523,476/., and
from this time the progress of the Colony has been rapid and nearly uninterrupted.
In 1868, the value of imports amounted to 1,890,119/., and exports to 2,107,437/.,
while in 1878 the imports had risen to 3,436,077/., and the exports to 3,190,419/.
The revenue, which in 1863 was only 295,215/., had, in 1873, increased to
1,124,000/., and 1879 to 1,461,828/.; while the production of sugar increased in
the ten years from 1868 to 1878, from 12,380 owt. to 270,510 owt., or more than
twenty-fold. In 1879-1880 the production had risen to 374,280 cwt., and there
were also in that year 641,486 gallons of molasses, and 238,710 gallons of rum
manufactured; of the sugar, 240,000 cwt. was exported principally to the other
Colonies, where Queensland sugar is rapidly taking the place of many kinds for-
merly imported from the Mauritius, Java, and other settlements in the Indian
Ocean. Of the rum, 926,000 gallons were exported: the remainder is possibly
ripening in the vaults of the producers, acquiring the mellow flavour so highly
appreciated by connoisseurs; it took seventy sugar-mills and nine distilleries to
produce this outturn of sugar and rum. This very large increase in the cultiva-
tion of sugar occurred principally in one district, that of Port Mackay, where the
rich alluvial deposits on the banks of the Pioneer Biver have been found extremely
well adapted for its production. The industry is, however, rapidly spreading north-
wards, where great tracts of land have been recently discovered that are eminently
suited for sugar planting; it is also known that an immense extent of land round
the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria is well adapted for sugar and other tropical
cultivation. Sugar-planting bids fair to become at no distant date one of the lead-
ing industries of Queensland.
When it is remembered that at the time of the separation from New South
Wales, and indeed up to 1870, railways were in their infancy, while the richest
districts in the interior of the Colony were undiscovered, it must be conceded that
her progress has been rapid, solid, and satisfactory. But that progress has been
but tardy when compared with what may be expected in the future when railways
shall have pierced the remote interior, and developed the immense resources lying
buried there for lack of easy and certain communication with the seaboard.
Queensland may be compared to a fruit with a hard and thick rind enclosing a vast
amount of the richest and most nutritious aliment; and railways may be regarded
as instruments for piercing that rind, and making the rich interior available for
the support of civilised humanity. The coast districts, though abounding in large
tracts of good country fit for cultivation and the rearing of cattle, must be con-


sidered insignificant when compared with the almost boundless extent of rich
country in the interior, where the traveller journeys on, day after day, and week
after week, over an ahnost unbroken expanse of open down and plain country,
covered with covert and herbage that for richness and fattening qualities has
seldom been equalled, and never excelled, by anything yet discovered in Aus-
tralia.
From the main dividing range in the east of the border of South Australia, and
from Roma in the south of the Gulf of Carpentaria, an area measuring upwards
of 500 miles square, there is an almost unbroken continuance of country, such as
I have described, extending with fatiguing monotony before the weary traveller,
who, after the first week or so, begins to long for greater variety of scenery than
these seemingly endless plains and undulating downs afford; and yet to the eye of
the practised pastoralist the monotony of the scene is largely compensated by the
anticipation of a rich reward for all his toils and troubles, in securing the right to
lease a few hundred square miles of the grazier’s paradise he sees spread out before
and around him mile upon mile on all sides. Nor need the farmer turn away dis-
appointed. Though grass, the great staple of Australia, seems to monopolise the
whole country, many a mile of rich alluvial land stretches along the banks of the
watercourses and in the valleys, where some day, when these districts are made
accessible by railways, a population of agriculturists will find ample scope for their
industry : for the theory that farming cannot be carried on profitably in the inland
districts of Australia has long since been exploded by the teachings of experience,
as the following extracts from local papers will show :
A contributor to the Western Star describes as follows a Roma vineyard and
orangery :—“ Mr. Bassett is now reaping the fruit from his vineyard (Roma Yilla),
which covers over twenty acres of ground and contains 22,000 vines, all bearing
and looking as healthy as it is possible for them to look. We were unable to learn
the names of the different kinds of grapes grown by Mr. Bassett. The names by
which they are generally known are, the black ones—black prince, black cluster,
and black wine grapes; white ones —Sweetwater, white table grape, and white
wine _ grape. Then there is the red muscatel, undoubtedly the best grape in
the vineyard, and one which produces an excellent wine. At present, however,
there is not much chance of testing the red muscatel wine, as Mr. Bassett can com-
mand a ready sale for all the grapes of that kind he has growing. The black prince
is a beautiful large grape of an oblong shape, the largest grown in this district; it
has a pleasant taste, and produces a very good wine. The black clusters and the
black wines, although smaller than the black prince, are equally as profitable, if
not more so, especially the black wine grape, which produces a really excellent
wine. Of the white grapes, the white wine grape is the best. A stranger to the
vineyard would probably take this grape to be diseased, as it is slightly speckled
with brown—which is, of course, its nature. It is a good yielding grape, and pro-
duces a very good wine. The Sweetwater and the white table grape are very good
for eating, and although they yield a larger quantity of wine, it is of an inferior
quality. Mr. Bassett has now in his cellars at Roma Yilla about 600 gallons of
wine, the produce of 1879-80 ; in a few more weeks he will have added materially
to his stock, having just completed the erection of a large press for the crushing of
this year’s produce. We have said how many vines Mr. Bassett has in the ground.
As a further proof that it is a lucrative industry, we might just mention that, the
season permitting, they intend putting in at Roma Yilla other 15,000 vines, which
will cover about fourteen acres of ground, making a total of about 37,000 vines, and
covering an area of about thirty-four or thirty-five acres of ground. This is not
amiss for Roma. Besides the twenty acres of vines, Mr. Bassett has three acres of
fruit trees, oranges, lemons, figs, peaches, &o. There are about 150 orange trees,
a sight of which (to use a vulgar and much hackneyed phrase) is good for ‘ sore
eyes.’ The oranges are all of very good classes, being the navel, St. Michael, and
mandarins. The trees are literally loaded; on two small topmost branches of one
St. Michael tree we counted no less than thirty-five oranges. This was not the
pick of the orangery either, but a fair specimen. There are about two dozen fig


trees bearing fruit, also a large quantity of peach trees. There are also several
lemon trees; but the severe frosts at the spring of the year out them up in such a
manner as to prevent most of them bearing this season, one only having any fruit
on; that one is a peculiar fruit, commonly called the ribbed lemon. They are all,
however, looking very healthy now, and in all probability will bear fruit next
season.
“ ROMA WHEAT AND FRUIT GROWING.”
“ It will be recollected (says the Western Star of January 22), that some weeks
since, Mr. Joseph Carter, Secretary to the Western Queensland Pastoral and Agri-
cultural Association, received a letter from gentlemen connected with the agri-
cultural show to be held in Melbourne, requesting him to forward for exhibition a
few samples of Eoma grown wheat. In response to Mr. Carter’s requisition for
half-bushel samples to be sent in, Messrs. Irwin and Lines have just supplied each
one sample of wheat harvested in November last. There are other contri-
butions promised, which have not yet been received, but it is hoped they will come
to hand in time to be forwarded with those under notice. The wheat grown by
Mr. Lines is a red grain, of the purple straw variety, and will make a very good
exhibit; but that grown by Mr. Irwin, we think, it will be very difficult to beat.
It is a wliite lammas, fine and plump in the grain, and very even. It is a wheat
that any district may be proud of, and was raised under somewhat unfavourable
conditions —one of which was rather late sowing, and another the absence of rain
from the time of sowing to the end of September. Previous to that rain, hopes of
a successful yield were despaired of; but, after the fall of a shower or two, the
plants shot up wonderfully, and the result w r as a fairly good yield, although nothing
like so good as would have been secured under more favourable circumstances. The
sample to be forwarded to Melbourne is a measured half-bushel, and weighs 88 lb.,
and everybody knows that any wheat that weighs 66 lb. to the bushel, must be of
excellent quality.
“ Mr. Kates, miller, of Allora, has been visiting the Eoma farmers and fruit
growers, and, according to the Western Star, says that what he saw has surprised
him, although he expected to find something to admire in Eoma. The grapes
which are now rapidly ripening are not surpassed anywhere, while of the samples
of wheat grown here he speaks in the highest terms. That sample grown by Mr.
Irwin is first-class, and the weight is not often surpassed on the Downs, although
at Allora a farmer has grown wheat weighing 67-y lb. to the bushel; but this is
not often accomplished. Mr. Kates has great faith in the Californian wheat, which
has yielded in some places as high as sixty bushels to the acre, or rather at that
rate, because the quantity received was distributed in small parcels to the growers,
and very few of them had sufficient to sow an acre. It is reported to be so good,
however, that it will be extensively cultivated on the Downs next season, and we
are glad to learn that a portion will be forwarded to this district. The Downs
farmers will lay down three times as much land under wheat this season as com-
pared with last, and in a short time —not many years—the Adelaide product will
not be required in Queensland. But the Downs farmers are going to make an
alteration in the time of sowing. They will this season sow from the 16th to the
end of April, and take the chance of the crop being slightly injured by frosts rather
than that of having it destroyed altogether by rust, and an early harvest will
anticipate the rust.”
The Warwick Examiner supplies the following most gratifying information: —
“ From P. Kates, Esq., M.L.A., we have learnt that the wheat harvest in the Allora
and Spring Creek districts has not only turned out well, but has exceeded the
highest anticipations of the growers. In some paddocks the yield has been very
heavy. Forty bushels to the acre will be reached in several instances, while in
some few oases as high as fifty bushels per acre will be realised. One farmer con-
sidered he would have a heavy crop if he filled 150 bags; on threshing he found
his expectations greatly exceeded, and the yield required 220 bags to hold it.
This is only one instance of many which could be quoted. In another case, on two


adjoining farms belong to Mr. H. Black, ninety-four acres gave 700 bags of wheat,
or nearly 8,000 bushels. Gristing at the Allora mills commenced last week, and,
good as the wheat is in appearance, it is making equally as good flour. We have
a sample of the silk dressed before us, and it is stated by those who are good
judges to be a beautiful flour, and equal to Adelaide. As a proof of this, we may
mention that the local baker at Allora (Mr. Meyer) made some of it into loaves,
and at the same time made some of the finest Adelaide flour. On the bread being
taken from the oven and tested, that made from the local flour was found to be
fully as good as that of the Adelaide flour —in fact, those who were not aware of
it could not distinguish the one from the other. We mention this to show that
the local wheat will make as good flour as that which is imported. It is calcu-
lated that in the Allora district alone the yield will be about 7,000 bags, or nearly
30,000 bushels. This, as we have said, is for the Allora district alone, and there
is besides, the Warwick, Emu Creek, and Toowoomba districts. It is calculated
that there will be a total yield of between sixty and seventy thousand bags, or
somewhere near a quarter of a million bushels. This is a proof of what the wheat
lands will yield in a fair season.”
Allora is a town about the centre of the finest agricultural lands in the district
of Darling Downs, now the granary of the southern districts, and Roma is in the
Moranoa district, at present the terminus of the railway from Brisbane to the
West, and is on the threshold of a very great extent of fine country. Since these
lines were written, I have come across a paragraph that exactly bears upon this
subject: it appears in the last number of The Colonies and India, and is to the
following effect: —
“ NEW WHEAT LANDS IN QUEENSLAND.
“ On this subject the recent report of Mr. Surveyor Watson to the Queensland
Colonies is most satisfactory. After viewing the country lying between Roma, 880
miles west of Brisbane, Charleville, and the further settlement in the interior, he
notes the prospect of railway making thus: — 1 1 believe a good, useful, efficient
line can be made at reasonable cost.’ As until very recently this western region
was regarded as little better than hopeless desert, it is well to hear from him that
‘ one-third of the adjoining land is excellent, equal to any I have seen in the
Australian Colonies.’
“ Recent news from Roma itself would confirm the expectation of those who
look upon this Colony as a future important wheat field. With twenty-five bushels
to the acre, in a district known to have a considerable area of volcanic soil, the
Western Queensland farmer has a hopeful future. But Mr. Watson reports the
new country so much farther west to be similar to the best wheat land of Victoria,
and anticipates a great waving of corn in a neighbourhood once deemed compara-
tively useless.”
A few years ago he would have been set down as a lunatic who had invested his
capital in husbandry in either of these districts; but the railway has not only brought
population to consume the produce on the spot, but has made it possible to transport
it to distant markets, and, as usual, demand has created supply. It may be conceded
that there are, throughout the interior, fifty miles suited for grazing to each mile
that is adapted for agriculture, but even that calculation will leave a very con-
siderable territory for the operations of the agriculturist. In this estimate of the
proportions of farming to grazing land, the country on the waters of the gulf is
not included. In that immense district it will, I have every reason to believe, be
found that at least one-fourth of the country is well adapted for tropical agri-
culture, while nearly all the remainder is unsurpassed as grazing country.
The great problem that presents itself for solution to whatever Government
may rule the destinies of Queensland is how best to utilise the latent resources of
his great estate, and compel it to yield a greater quota towards the prosperity of
the Colony and the wealth of the Empire than it has hitherto done. It is impos-
sible to imagine that this noble heritage is to remain much longer in the position


it lias hitherto occupied, as the hunting-ground of a few savages and the abode of
a few hundred graziers, whose stations are scattered at long intervals over its
surface, and whose flocks and herds scarcely occupy one-tenth of its available area.
It seems to me, that the only solution of this great problem is in the encouragement
of settlement, by opening up the country by means of railway communication with
the coast, the only mode of certain, speedy, and cheap transit that can be devised
in countries where nature has neglected to provide navigable rivers to serve as
highways for the commerce of infant communities.
Great strides have already been made in the direction of opening up the interior
by the construction and opening of a line from Brisbane to Eoma, 317 miles almost
due west; and a continuation has been authorised by Parliament, and is now being
made to Mitchell, 58 miles farther in the same direction. A branch leaves the
Brisbane-Eoma line at Gowrie Junction, on Darling Downs, and runs southward,
through the fine agricultural lands of that district, to Warwick, on the Condamine
Eiver, 166 miles from Brisbane. From Warwick, the line is nearly finished to the
tin mines of Stanthorpe, 41 miles, close to the border of New South Wales, where
it will join the eastern system of that Colony, now rapidly advancing towards the
border. But a glance at the map will show that these lines only traverse the out-
skirts of Queensland, leaving untouched and unprovided for the great tracts of
country I have described, stretching in uninterrupted vastness for 600 miles north-
westward from Eoma and Mitchell to the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria. The
resources of Queensland cannot be considered one-tenth part developed until this
great country is brought within the community of nations by the iron horse, which,
as far, at least, as new countries are concerned, seems destined to become the great
civilising and ameliorating agent of the future.
The large increase in the population which follows the stocking of a district
with sheep, creates consumers for agricultural and garden produce, the raising of
which has now become an important industry in many places where formerly it
was untried for want of a population to consume it. But it is in opening up the
mineral wealth of the interior, which for so many years has lain nearly useless for
want of the means of transit, that a line of railway will be found of extreme im-
portance from the moment it is opened. There is specially one district, near which
any line must pass on its way to the only port on the Gulf from the south, where
very rich and extensive deposits of gold, copper, and iron have been found, and the
two former worked, but not to any great extent, owing to the difficulty and cost of
transit to port, the nearest point on the Gulf of Carpentaria being more than 200
miles from the mines. The accounts we have of the great extent and richness of
this metalliferous district would seem fabulous if they were not proved, beyond the
possibility of doubt, by the concurrent testimony of numbers of people, experts and
others, who have seen what they describe. Lest I should appear to exaggerate, I
will not attempt to give an idea of the mineral wealth of this region in my own
words, but will, with your permission, shortly quote the reports of persons who
have visited the district and seen what they describe.
In the Queenslander of August 9, Mr. Sheaffe writes:—
“ And here I may point out a peculiarity never observed by me, or mentioned
by others, as far as I know, as existing in any other part of Australia: the Mackin-
lay ranges, teeming with an extraordinary wealth of minerals, are flanked, for nearly
200 miles, by high undulating downs, of exceeding fertility; so that, on the one hand,
you have almost boundless pasture, and, upon the other, almost inexhaustible mines.
That I am justified in speaking of these mines as almost inexhaustible, I shall pro-
ceed to show. The first known copper mines approached by this route are the
Mountain Home, the Eio Grande, and the West Briton, applied for some six or
seven years ago by some Sydney capitalists, and of which Mr. W. Wellington, who
was sent from England by Messrs. Bolitho and Sons, reported as follows:
“ The principal lode is at Mount Norma, is a well-defined lode, varying from
three feet to six feet wide, running north and south, and dipping to the east. It
stands in the face of an almost perpendicular mountain, showing from 400 to


500 yards. The ore is principally grey, of the following percentage —namely,
thirty-four. Thousands of tons could be taken away here at trifling expense. The
Eio Grande lodes consist of two, running parallel, with a distance of about 250
yards between them. The out crops show very distinctly on both these lodes for
about 300 and 400 yards in length, consisting of red oxide and grey ores of the
following percentage—namely, forty-four. These lodes appear to be running into
the Mountain Home lode. The West Briton, also running north and south, is
about a mile north-east of the Mountain Home on the top of a small ridge, showing
a large lode from six feet to eight feet wide, chiefly x-ed oxide and grey ore, of the
following percentage —namely, thirty-eight. These lodes appear to be well defined
and regular, all running north and south and dipping to the east.. The cost of
working these lodes will be very little for a long time to come, in consequence of
the ore being so near the surface.’
“ The line after leaving these mines, would then pass near the gold reefs of
Bishop’s and Fisher’s Creeks, where several auriferous claims are still working and
paying wages at from 61. to BZ. a week to engine-drivers, and 4 1. to rough-and-
ready men as miners, and where numberless other reefs are known to exist, but
are at present not worked, owing to the great expense of getting machinery, and
the difficulty and uncertainty of getting rations. Near this, also, the Homeward
Bound and Flying Dutchman copper mines are situated, from the former of
which 250 tons of ore have been sent to Sydney, all of which have yielded over
40 per cent, of pure copper. Twelve miles farther on the Clonourry copper mines
are reached, the richness and magnitude of which it is difficult to conceive without
having seen them; and though I have known many skilled miners who have
worked at, and several mining engineers of note (Mr. H. A. Thompson, the chair-
man of the Mining Board of New South Wales, being one) who have inspected
these mines, I have never known one who was not at first sight astonished at the
almost incredible amount of rich ore lying on the surface of the ground. Half a
mile to the south-west extremely rich and extensive lodes occur, while thirty miles
to the north-west unnumbered lodes and copper-bearing veins appear. I myself
know of nearly a hundx’ed, only eight or ten of which are secured, and none
worked. Mr. Sheaffe enumerates several other xnarvelloxxsly rich deposits of copper,
and again quotes Mr. Wellington’s report;— ‘ Eight miles to the north-west, on
the Leichardt liver, axe two lodes, containing ores of red oxide, grey and mala-
chite. These lodes are from 20 feet to 30 feet wide, immense deposits of copper.
Big boulders of grey ore are lying loose on the sux-face, of tons weight.’ ‘ These
things,’ continues Mr. Sheaffe, ‘ I have seen, and shall be most happy to show to
any one desirous of seeing them, when I return to the Clonourry.’ Thus, I think,
I am justified in speaking of these mines as almost inexhaustible, and in my
assertion that this district will find ample x’emunerative labour for tens of
thousands of our xniners, if only regular and moderately reasonable carriage,
with its natural port, were provided.”
Sub-Inspector Armit reports thus to the Colonial Secretary, Deo. 13, 1880:
. . . . “ The Clonourry gold-field is situated on a belt of ranges dotted
throughout by numerous isolated peaks, many of which consist of nearly pure iron
ore. Leaving the Cloncurry, and steering in a northerly direction, the country for
some sixty miles consists of ridges running out from the range, and foi’ming the
watersheds between the Cloncurry, Williams, Dugald, and Leichardt livers ; this
country is well timbered, and second-class pastoral. On x’eaching the Leichardt
the country opens out on either bank, foi’ming large plains and slightly rolling
downs, which extend for miles out from the river, and continuously down to
within a few miles of the coast; this fine country, over 200 miles in extent, is well
grassed and watered throughout, composed of fine x’ed or brown loam of great
depth, and does not offer any natural obstacles to engineers.”
Coal has been discovered in nearly all the districts of the Colony where it
has been searched for, principally near Bxlsbane, in West Moreton, on Darling
Downs, and at Maxybox’ough, and at Bowen and Cooktown in the north. Mr.


Jack, a well-known geologist, is of opinion that the western plains will be found to
overlie very large deposits of this invaluable mineral. The hard oil coals of the
Darling Downs are described as being capable of producing a large percentage of
illuminating oil and paraffine. Tin and antimony have been discovered and worked
in various localities, and the numerous gold fields are too well known to need par-
ticular notice. The number of miners for gold engaged throughout the Colony in
1879 was close upon 9,000. The estimated value of gold produced was slightly
under 1,010,000?.
The land laws of Queensland have been made as liberal as any land laws
well can be. Within the last dozen years these laws have been completely
remodelled, with the sole object of facilitating the settlement of population
on the lands of the Colony. Inheriting a vicious system of land laws from
the Parent Colony, Queensland continued for some years after separation to
encourage the accumulation of large leaseholds in the hands of capitalists,
discouraging the acquisition of small freeholds by men of limited capital, by
keeping up the minimum upset price to IZ. per acre, a price almost prohibitory
except for small lots of more than average quality, or with a situation commanding
large grazing facilities, or some other advantage, beyond the intrinsic value of the
land itself. The consequence was that only the best morsels here and there were
picked out and bought by the so-called poor man, and his stock was turned out to
graze on the neighbouring Crown lands, which were generally held on lease by
some squatter or pastoral tenant of the Crown. In this way the best of the country
was picked out, leaving the rest in the hands of the Crown tenant —a result that
seems to have been aimed at by those who devised this illiberal and exclusive law.
In Queensland it was found to work so badly, and occasion so much ill-feeling and
even crime, in the shape of cattle-stealing, that a compromise was hit upon, by
which the runs or holdings of the pastoral tenants in the settled districts—that is,
those within a certain distance of the coast, were divided into halves —the pastoral
tenant retaining one-half for a term of eleven years, the other being thrown open
for selection to the public, on terms so easy that the small capitalist and economical
working-man who had saved up his earnings had every facility given him for the
acquisition by purchase of as much land as his capital allowed, from the 40-acre
homestead area to the 5,120-aore holding—the largest quantity that can be lawfully
held by one person. The,system has been a great success, and much of the country
in the settled districts has been taken up by men of limited means. By a system
of deferred payments, the terms are made more easy to the purchaser than if
the full price had to be paid on purchase. By an annual payment of Is. per acre,
and some other conditions, consisting principally in fencing in and otherwise im-
proving the land, it becomes the property of the purchaser at the end of ten years;
or the price (10s. per acre) may, after the expiration of three years, be paid up,
when, on proof that the requisite conditions have been fulfilled, the land becomes
the property of the selector. Homestead areas can be selected at 2s. 6 d. per acre
on the deferred payment system of 6d. per acre per annum, becoming the property
of the selector when all is paid up and conditions fulfilled. One of these is per-
sonal residence. On ordinary selections and pre-emptives, residence by agent is
sufficient. The area selected as homesteads and conditional purchase in 1879 was
278,609 acres, of this area 67,728 acres were homesteads, and 210,886 were condi-
tional purchases. There are still open for general selection 23,130,774 acres, and
1,798,118 acres for homestead areas. The gross area held under conditional pur-
chase and homestead selection on December 81,1879, amounted to 3,720,000 acres.
It must not be imagined that the land open for selection and sale in the settled
districts (the 24,000,000 odd hundred thousand acres I have mentioned) is the only
land that is available for alienation; except some so-called railway reserves of a few
thousand acres that were sold by auction at 11. per acre in the Eoma and Clermont
districts, and the small pre-emptive rights which the runholders have over an in-


significant portion of the country they lease, to enable them to secure improve-
ments. With these exceptions and some small holdings round a few of the back
townships, there is not an acre that goes to compose the thousands of square miles
in the interior that cannot at very short notice be resumed by Government when
required for sale or public purposes, by the simple process of six months’ notice to
the lessee; and if both Houses of Parliament do not demur by resolution within
sixty days, the resumption can be carried out, the pastoral tenants being protected
only against private interlopers, but not against Government. No fixity of tenure
or compensation for disturbance is ever likely to come his way. He is only looked
upon as the advance guard, or rather forlorn hope, of civilization. When his work
is done, and his country wanted by the State, he is turned out, or, in mild official
phrase, his country is “ resumed,” with as much coolness as if he were a pachy-
derm or noxious reptile ; but he is an irrepressible animal, that pastoral tenant,
and Queensland is a wide word. When driven out of one place by the “ exigencies
of the State,” a,s it is euphoniously called, he just pulls up his tent pegs and
“ locates ” himself somewhere else. Nor have I ever noticed that the conscious-
ness of the sword of Damocles, which (worse than being suspended over his head
by a hair) is wielded by some cold-blooded and ruthless Premier, causes him to eat
his dinner with less appetite or prevents him from sleeping the sound sleep of the
innocent and just. Our present Premier is a large pastoralist, and I have often
wondered how he would enjoy having to perform the “ happy despatch ” on him-
self. But, in truth, the contingency is, as a rule, so remote out in the Par West,
that removal from one’s run seldom enters into one’s calculations. In the settled
districts it is different.
I hope I have by this time satisfactorily demonstrated that Queensland has the
means to satisfy the land hunger of all the people that are likely to quit the shores
of Great Britain and Ireland during the next generation; and what kind of recep-
tion those will get who may choose to cast in their lot with us now, I will leave to
the official exponent of the views of our Government to explain. Personally, I can
only say that I sincerely hope some means may be devised for transplanting a pro-
portion of our suffering Irish fellow subjects to the Colonies. Of the hundreds of
men that have passed through the hands of my firm since we began life in the
bush, I firmly believe that more than one-half were Irish, and better servants than
the majority of them have been it would be hard to find anywhere. Many of our
most trusted men have been of that nationality, and more faithful, upright service
no employer ever received than we have had from them. A great many develop
a decided tendency to economy, and invest their savings in land and stock or town
property, and become prosperous and conservative colonists. As this paper is not
a politico-economical disquisition, nor a theologioo-polemical lecture, I will not
pause to enquire into the reasons for this happy change in Paddy’s character. One
theory has, however, occurred to me, and as I do not think it likely to offend
anybody’s political or religious prejudices, I will just name it, leaving it as the
groundwork for the speculations of the future ethnologist. It is popularly supposed
here that people going to the Colonies from this portion of the Empire leave their
consciences and all other good qualities behind them at the Line. Well, my
theory is, that Paddy on his way out finds them there, and, with the quick per-
ception of the fitness of things for which he is so well known, adds them to his
already bountiful stock, and thus becomes the excellent colonist he is.
I hope it is not imagined that emigrants going to Queensland are cut off from
the ministrations of their clergy, or deprived of the advantages of education.
Almost all denominations and churches are well represented ; and though State aid
is withheld from all alike, that only seems to act as an additional incentive to the
liberality and zeal of the congregations, judging, at least, by the churches and
chapels that seem to spring up in every bush township whenever the population
reaches a few score: and itinerant priests and preachers are frequently met in the
most outlying districts. Few communities are so well provided as Queensland with
the means of education. An admirable national school system has been in opera-
tion for some years, by which children of all classes are educated at the expense of


the State. Schools are started even in the far outlying bush townships as soon as
a score or two of children can be got together, and these are frequently visited by
Government inspectors. The education is free, compulsory, and secular; but hours
are set apart for religious instruction by their own clergymen for those children
whose parents wish it. There are yearly exhibitions, entitling the winners to
attend one of the grammar-schools for three years free of charge. These grammar-
schools for advanced pupils are erected partly by public subscriptions and partly
by Government grant, and a small fee, also supplemented by a Government grant,
is paid by the pupils for teachers’ salaries and the expenses of the school. On
December 81, 1879, there were 314 primary schools in operation, comprising 210
State or vested schools, 82 provisional schools, 1 reformatory, and 21 non-vested
schools ; all of the latter, with one exception, are in connection with the Church
of Eome. The number of teachers employed was 478 males and 446 females. The
number of children on the roll was 41,380. The private schools on January 1,1874,
numbered 65, there being 2 for boys, 10 for girls, and 63 mixed; there were 151
teachers, 21 male and 130 female, and an aggregate attendance of 1,062 boys and
1,858 girls. There are grammar schools for advanced pupils at Brisbane, Too-
woomba, and Ipswich, and two were to be opened at Maryborough, and Rock-
hampton this spring. At the grammar schools there are competitive examinations
for university honours, and exhibitions to the universities of Sydney and
Melbourne of the value of 100/. per annum, tenable for three years; and I fancy it
will not be long ere Queensland has a university of her own. It will, I think, be
conceded, after what I have said, that few young communities have paid more
attention or bestowed more outlay on the all-important subject of education than
Queensland.
The employments that the working man has to look to for making his living
are numerous, and sufficiently diversified to enable every one to choose one or other
suitable to his tastes and habits; the principal are —first, mining, embracing gold,
copper, coal, and tin ; secondly, trades, embracing nearly every variety known in
the old countries, but workers in wood and iron and all in the building trades are
most sought after; thirdly, pastoral employment, embracing shepherding, boundary
riding, and stock-keeping; fourthly, agriculture in every branch, and some others
of lesser importance. Besides tradesmen, there are many labourers employed by
Government on railways and public works of different kinds; some years ago
tradesmen in towns earned from 15s. to 11. per day, and, though wages have fallen
somewhat of late years, they are still very high for this class of labour. In the
bush the wages for rough carpenters that can use an axe and adze and drive a nail
range from 355. to 455. a week, with rations. At lambing and shearing time—a
period lasting two or three months in the year —even ordinary labourers and
lambers are paid at about that rate; the rates for this class of labour during the
rest of the year range from 11. per week up to 355. with rations. Unemployed
men are frequently met with looking for work and taking care never to find it; this
is a class of men that I think must be peculiar to Australia—namely, the profes-
sional “ Sundowner.” The Sundowner is the Australian representative of the
European vagrant; and he has got his name from the peculiar circumstance that on
principle he never arrives at the station which he intends to honour with his
presence for the night till at or just before sunset. He will camp a little off the
road lor an hour or two to pass the time rather than make his appearance at any
other hour. He then crawls slowly up to the men’s hut or kitchen, where he knows
he is sure of a supper and breakfast, flings down his “ swag,” and proceeds to make
himself comfortable for the night. Next morning he will sometimes apply for
work (especially if he has heard that no men are required) ; or, if he thinks he
might be taken at his word, he will be up and away before the manager is about.
If offered work at a trifle below the current rate, he will decline, with the air of a
man whose sense of honour has been wounded in the most tender point, and march
off, to repeat the process at the next station. The sundowner will work at shear-
ing and lambing time, when wages range from 25 to 50 per cent, above ordinary
rates. During this time he will accumulate a cheque for perhaps 10Z or 15 1., with


which he will set off to the nearest public-house, and “ knock it down ” in a week’s
or ten days’ debauch. He will then hang about as long as he can get any one to
treat him; and when the time comes that his friends are all as impecunious as
himself, he resumes the profession of sundowning until lambing and shearing time
come round once more. He is, in fact, the product of hospitality run to vice, and
a climate that is only too enticing to a man who by nature is inclined to vagrancy
and disinclined to work. There are sundowners of a higher class than the one I have
described; but their manners and customs are different, and I have now no time to
bestow on them. But, however many of these there may be, wages never fall much
below the rates I have named, and often rise higher. Now, as a man in the bush,
who is supplied by his employer with ample rations, can live well and indulge in
tobacco and small luxuries, such as pickles, preserves, &c., at Bs. or 10s. a week,
including the simple and inexpensive clothing required, it follows that, even at
the lowest rate I have named, he can put by, as clear saving, from 10s. to 12s. a
week ; and how even that sum, regularly saved and properly invested, mounts up
in a few years is proved by the experience of those who try the experiment by
putting their savings in a bank or investing them in stock. Those who earn the
higher rates I have named, can, if they choose, lay by a very considerable sum in
a few years. Many do so; and from these men come most of our farmers and
selectors —a class that in a few years will form the backbone of the Colony. Un-
fortunately, those who do not save up their earnings by far outnumber those who
do ; and it is lamentable to see the amount of money that is worse than wasted by
these men in drink and every kind of excess. I have frequently seen instances of
men spending, in a week’s debauch at some low bush public-house, the earnings
of years; amounting, in one case that came under my notice lately, that of a
shepherd of my own, to more than 400 Z. Another man lately left one of my
stations to visit a neighbouring township, well mounted, with saddle and all appur-
tenances, and a pair of very grand top boots, a top coat, a watch, and about 2 01.
in cash in his pocket. In about a week he returned, without horse, saddle, bridle,
coat, boots, watch, or money, and some pounds in debt into the bargain. He was
also a shepherd; and returned to his flock to chew the cud of sweet and bitter
reflection for another year or two, and then probably repeat the operation. These
are only two of many instances that have come under my notice ; but I have, on
the other hand, known scores who have saved up their pay and invested it as I
mentioned before. The moral is, that if a working man in Australia chooses to
be industrious, frugal, and honest, and invest his savings judiciously, he cannot
but improve his position; but the idle, the thriftless, the self-indulgent, and the
dishonest have often very hard times of it there, as in every other part of the
world. It is, however, only the man that is accustomed to manual labour in some
form that I would advise to emigrate —all the so-called higher kinds of employment
are sadly over-stocked. He who has no capital, and can use no tool but the quill
or pencil, had better stop at home. Young women, fit for service, are in great
and never-failing demand, especially if they entertain no rooted aversion to matri-
mony. The proportion of them that “go off” in this way is very great, but I
have no statistics at hand to show what that proportion is. Many a mistress finds,
to her cost, that a promise to marry overrides all other promises and contracts
whatsoever.
It is now time to say something of the climate and sanitary state of Queens-
land —the boast of those who have lived there, and the bugbear of those who have
not. To an old Queenslander, it is partly amusing and partly annoying to hear
the remarks that are made, even in the Colonies, by people who have no personal
experience in the matter. After a residence of nearly twenty years, during which
I have explored a good deal of new country and helped to form several new
stations, which involves much hardship, camping out, and general knocking about,
and travelled over a large proportion of the Colony, I will venture to affirm that,
though the climate is hot from three to four months in the year, it will, in point of
healthiness, compare favourably with that of any newly-settled country in the
world that I have ever heard, seen, or read of. There are not many places, save


Australia, where a man can, with impunity, lie night after night with only a blanket
between him and the damp earth, perhaps finding when he wakes in the morning
that his slender covering has been soaked by some passing shower, or that his
hair is stuck together with hoar-frost; and yet this is the life led by hundreds in
all parts of Australia, and perhaps more in Queensland than in the southern
Colonies, when travelling in the bush or camping out with stock. On a journey of
four months, from Eookampton to the Hinders and back, I did not pitch my tent
half a dozen times, except for rain, preferring to lie under the glorious stars, with
a macintosh over my blankets to keep the dew from soaking them; and in that
time, I gained half a stone in weight, and my groom, who also preferred sleeping
out, looked the picture of health when we returned home.
In the elevated region, separating the waters flowing to the Gulf of Carpentaria
from those flowing south (22° south lat.), I have, in the winter, frequently seen ice
on basins and waterbags in the mornings; and any one having to trudge through
the hoar-frost in search of his horses soon realises what the sensation of icy feet
and powerless hands is ; a ride over the plains of Darling Downs on a winter night
is about the coldest operation I have ever experienced. In the low-lying country
boi dering the coast, the heat of summer is no doubt great for some four months in
the year; but it is generally tempered by a trade wind that blows nearly always at
that season from the S.E., imparting coolness and health wherever it reaches.
Anything delightful than the climate of this coast country during the other
eight months it is difficult to conceive. As a proof that the country is not unhealthy,
I may state that the 700 miles of railway already opened in the Colony comprised
in six lines, all starting from the coast at various points between the 27th and 19th
degrees of latitude, having being made by European labour, and I have heard of
no excessive mortality on these lines, as compared with those in other new countries.
Whether it is, as some say, the sanitary qualties of the gum-tree (Eucalyptus
globulus) that is found nearly everywhere, the wonderful purity of the air, or some
other unexplained reason, certain it is, that no country under the same latitude, as
far as my goes, can vie with Queensland in climatic advantages. Sick-
ness there no doubt is; lam even free to confess that people occasionally die, but
that is a habit they have got into all over the world, and it is one of which, I fear,
they cannot be cured, even by the most salubrious climate. As in nearly all newly-
settled countries, fever and ague is the most prevalent form of disease in the bush,
as it was at one time all over the Mississippi Valley and Western States of
America. I have personally sampled both the Australian and American article ;
and if the choice were given me which of the two I would prefer, I think I would
take the Australian, as the lesser of two evils. But the question of the suitable-
ness of central Queensland for European settlement is already solved by the
thousands of Europeans that already pursue their ordinary avocations, including
some very laborious ones, throughout the whole of that region as far as 16 degrees
south.
There is, however, one employment, confined entirely to the coast districts, that
has been found inimical to the health of Europeans—namely, the work of the
sugar-field; and it is accordingly generally performed by coloured labourers from
the different islands of South Seas, engaged for a term of three years, under
strict Government supervision, which is never removed from them during their stay
in Queensland. At the end of their term they are paid under the supervision of
Government inspectors, who never lose sight of them till they are fairly shipped
back to their own country. A few elect to remain in the Colony, but by far the
larger number return to their own islands. Formerly they could be employed in
any part of the Colony, but lately an Act has been passed prohibiting their employ-
ment, except in tropical cultivation, within 50 miles of the coast. It is probable
that coloured labour will have to be employed along the whole of the eastern sea-
board and all the coast country on Carpentaria, where large tracts of low-lying land
fit for tropical agriculture are known to exist; but the proper labour to employ here
is, unquestionably, that of the Indian coolie, which has proved so beneficial in the
Mauritius and some of our West Indian Colonies. It would indeed be a boon to


the patient, half-starved millions of India, our fellow-subjects, as well as to the
northern coasts of Australia, if numbers of them could be transplanted there to
assist in developing its great capabilities for tropical agriculture. Point Parker is
within 20 days’ sail of Calcutta and Madras, and their transport would consequently
be safe and inexpensive. But though the actual field-work in the coast country of
Northern Queensland will probably have to be performed by coloured labour, yet
the numerous other employments that spring from tropical agriculture will give
occupation to numerous whites—overseers, bookkeepers, machinists, builders,
blacksmiths, teamsters, must all be of the white race. I could dilate at length upon
the advantages to our suffering Indian fellow subjects that would follow on a well
conducted system of emigration from that overcrowded part of her Majesty’s
dominions to Northern Queensland, but I refrain, as the subject is somewhat
beyond the scope and intention of this paper.
From the aboriginal natives no assistance can be looked for in developing the
products of their country. It is difficult to make a guess at their number per square
mile of country, but on the great interior plains I should say one to ten or twelve
square miles would be an ample estimate. I have frequently travelled over hun-
dreds of miles of that country without seeing one native or a sign that any had
recently been there. When smoke and new tracks warn the traveller that he is
approaching a camp, it is generally found to consist of a dozen or perhaps a score
of people of all ages and sexes, unless there happens to be a grand gathering of
the tribes for the purpose of feasting, fighting, and holding corroboree, when from
50 to 100 may be found in a camp, but to muster that number miles of country
round must be cleared of its inhabitants. Their employment is hunting kangaroos
and wallabies and searching for small game, oppossums, bandicoots, and rats, or
digging for roots on the margins of creeks and lagoons. When food is plentiful
they eat voraciously ; when it is scarce they starve philosophically, or move their
camp to some other place where they hope for better luck. But work, in the sense
applied to the term by a white man —that is, steady, unflagging, persevering work
at the same thing day after day—they cannot be induced to do. At light jobs,
such as shepherding or stock-riding, the younger ones are often very valuable to
the far-out squatter when labour is scarce, and at such employment they can often
be induced to remain for two, three, or even six months. But when the wandering
fit comes on, and a corroboree, a fight, or a grand hunt is to be held anywhere
within reach, nothing on earth will induce them to remain. If they can’t obtain
leave in English they take French leave, and are seen no more, perhaps, for weeks
or months, when they may turn up again, looking woe-begone, repentant, and
often as attenuated as a starved greyhound.
I fear I have detained you much too long over the two first subjects forming
the title of this Paper, namely, the History and the Eesources of Queensland, to
have much time left for the last —Her Future Prospects; but, fortunately, there is
no occasion to dwell at any great length on this. Those who have honoured mo
with their attention will have no difficulty in forming their own estimate of the
prospects of a Colony combining within herself advantages and resources so great
and so diversified. Judging by what has followed in the other Colonies on the
settlement and consequent development of their territories by the agency of rail-
ways, it cannot be doubted that Queensland, which certainly is not behind any ol
them in natural resources, has a very great future before her —a future undreamed
of by the hardy pioneers that first took possession of her vast sohtudes, and who
little thought that they were laying the foundations of a Colony which is destined
one day to become one of the brightest jewels in the British Crown. In expressing
a hope that the connection between the Crown and the Colony may long continue,
I only echo that sentiment of loyalty for which Queenslanders have ever been
distinguished—a sentiment that it is to be hoped may go on increasing as years roll
by, drawing closer and closer those ties of mutual affection that should ever dis-
tinguish the relations between a Mother-country and her Colonies.


APPENDIX.
Speech by the Eight Eev. Dr. Stanton, Bishop of Northern Queensland: —
“ I find it exceedingly difficult to add anything to the comprehensive and
exhaustive paper just read. I am extremely glad to be here to-night,
and glad to be present in the Old Country, to hear this paper read; but
I should have been profoundly thankful had I heard it about three years
ago; I had then no idea whatever of the character of Queensland, and
certainly I found from all sides a vast amount of ignorance. I believed that
I was doing right in going out to Queensland, but I was nevertheless filled with
a certain amount of fear with regard to what awaited me. I was told, on the
one hand, that I was going beyond the line of civilization, and the picture of
landing on some dreary shore with a number of savages with tomahawks all about
me, and having to sleep in a canvas tent, was vividly presented to my mind.
But in contrast to that, I should like to say that the time I have spent in Queens-
land has been one of intense enjoyment, and a time of very great surprise, for I
found everywhere the presence of advanced social development. The people
have treated me with the warmest and heartiest welcome. Family sorrow has
now brought me home for a short time ; but I go out again by the next mail—a
time I am anticipating with extreme pleasure, for I feel that I have on that side
a large number of warm-hearted attached friends. The resources of Queensland
are too infinite to properly describe them. The northern part of it is that with
which I have been more particularly acquainted. The Maokay district and all
along the coast has suddenly started up through the growth of sugar. Maokay,
they told me when I left, had turned out 10,000 tons of sugar; and, considering
the place is only just commencing, I think that product marvellous. lam glad to
be here to-night to add my endorsement to all that has been stated in the paper;
and I am sure that now is the time here at home when a large influx of thoroughly
qualified persons may be drawn out to the new Colony. (Hear, hear.) Since I
have been here I have preached and spoken incessantly, and I have been hard at
work for the Colony from the moment I arrived; and on all sides an intense desire
has been expressed for information touching the Colony. I am sure that this
paper, if it is widely circulated, will do a vast amount of good, and that good, I
feel, will be largely due to Mr. Archer. I earnestly desire when in Queensland to
promote a hearty spirit of patriotism; but I have detected little jealousies springing
up. I suppose they are the characteristics of a young community; but we must
try to soften them down and weld the people together in one compact body for the
progress of the community, and, sinking petty jealousies, promote one grand pro-
gressive movement —(hear, hear) and I think all those connected with Queensland
here at home may remember their patriotism too; and so on this and that side of
the ocean, we can work together and make the young Colony and the Mother-
country mutually helpful.”
Information as to Passages, do., can be had at the Queensland Emigration
Office, 1, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, London, S.W.


S. W. SILVER & CO.’S HANDBOOKS, etc.
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND: including the Fiji
Islands. 3rd Edition, with Coloured Map. Crown Bvo. limp cloth, 449 pp. Price ss.
THE AUSTRALIAN GRAZIER'S GUIDE. No. 1.
SHEEP. Crown Bvo., limp cloth, price 2s. 6d.
Do. No. 2. CATTLE. Crown 6vo, limp cloth, price 2s. 6d.
UPS AND DOWNS; a Story of Australian Life. 312 pp.,
price 2s.
THE RESOURCES OF QUEENSLAND.— I 26 pp.
(with Map), price Is.
AUSTRALIAN DICTIONARY OF DATES AND
MEN 01 THE TIME. By J, H. Heaton. Royal Bvo. 550 pp., price 12s. 6 d.
CANADA; including Ontario, North-West Territory, Manitoba,
Quebec, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, British
Columbia, &c. With New Coloured Map. Crown Bvo. limp cloth, ss.
THE FUTURE OP THE DOMINION OF CANADA.
By Sir A. Galt, G.C.M.G., High Commissioner for Canada. Price Is.
SOUTH AFRICA (with Map and Illustrations) ; including Cape
Colony, Natal, the Diamond Fields, Orange Free State, See. 3rd Edition, revised
and enlarged. Crown Svo. limp cloth, 576 pp., price 5».
THE TRANSVAAL (with Map); containing information on the
Political, Physical, Commercial, and Social Aspects of the Colony. Crown Svo. limp
cloth, price 2s. 6 d.
ON TREK IN THE TRANSVAAL (with Map). By
Harriet A. Roche. Cro >m Svo. 367 pp., cloth, price 3s. 6d.
CLIMATE AND HEALTH IN SOUTH AFRICA.—
125 pp., price Is.; cloth, Is. 6 d.
THE UNION OF THE VARIOUS PORTIONS OF
BRITISH SOUTH AFRICA. By Sir Bartle E. Frere, Bart., G.C.8., &c. Price Is.
THE POCKET DOCTOR: for the Traveller and Colonist.
By Harry Leach, M.8.0.P. With Seasons’-Chart of the World. 2nd Edition limp
cloth, price 3s.
THE KEY TO FORTUNE IN NEW LANDS. Limp
cloth, price Is. 6d.
IMPERIAL FEDERATION. By Fredk. Young. Small 4to.
handsomely bound, 6s.
THE STATISTICS OF THE INDIAN EMPIRE.
By Sir Richard Temple, K.C.5.1., &c. Price Is.
THE LEEWARD ISLANDS, Past and Present. By the
Hon. T. B. H. Berkeley, C.M G. Price Is.
THE CULTIVATION OF LIBERIAN COFFEE IN
THE WEST INDIES. By H. A. Alford Nicholls, M.D. Price Is.
POCKET-BOOK SERIES : containing all the practical infor-
mation the voyager requires for his guidance in taking his passage, securing his
berth, getting his outfit, and embarking; points of interest en route , &c.
1. WEST INDIES; two books, (1) Leeward and Windward Islands, and
Trinidad, with Coloured Seasons’ Chart of the World, &c. ;
(2) Jamaica, Hayti, Cuba, the Bahamas, &c., with Seasons’ Chart, as No. 1;
Price ss. each.
2. SOUTH AFRICA, with Sheet of Sketches of Cape Scenery, Seasons’ Chart
&c.; Price ss. ’
PHOTOGRAPHIC VIEWS OF THE CAPE AND
NATAL.—lncluding Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, King William’s Town Graham’s
Town, Pietermaritzburg, Durban, Diamond Fields, Kaffir Ivory Carriers, &c. Is. 6el.
THE COLONIES AND INDIA. —Published every Friday
evening, 20 pp., price 3 d. Contains leading Articles on Colonial Questions; News
Summaries, from Australia, Ne.v Zealand, South Africa, Canada, India Ceylon
West Indies, &c. Home Subscription, 3s. 9 d. per quarter, post paid.
8. W. SILVER & CO.’S COLONIAL MAPS (L. each);—
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND—CANADA—SOUTH AFRICA—
SBASONS’-CHART OP THE WORLD, &c.
‘ JEPPE’S MAP OF THE TRANSVAAL AND
SURROUNDING DISTRICTS.’ With Index to 2,000 Districts, Tbwns, Riverl
Mountains, &c. Sheet, 23 in. by 22 in. 65.; in cloth cover, 7s, 6d.
S. W. SILVER & CO., Sun Court, 67 Cornhill, London.


3 1508 01204916
