

THE
LAW AND PRACTICE
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES
LETTERS PATENT.
A. G. TAYLOR.








See following page.


THE
LAW AND PRACTICE
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES
LETTERS PATENT
FOR
INVENTIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS IN THE ARTS
AND MANUFACTURES.
BY
A.G. TAYLOR,
EXAMINER OF PATENTS,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
SYDNEY CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, PHILLIP-STREET.
1883.
C a* 3—88 [2s. 6d,]


IT is to be borne in mind when reading this
book that many portions have been con-
siderably altered by reason of legislation
(viz.: 60 Vic. No. 39 and No. 15 of 1897=)
passed since its publication, and by the
bringing into force of fresh regulations.
19587
“ THE GREAT INVENTOR IS ONE WHO HAS WALKED
FORTH UPON THE INDUSTRIAL WORLD, NOT FROM
UNIVERSITIES, BUT FROM HOVELS ; NOT AS CLAD IN
SILKS AND DECKED WITH HONOURS, BUT AS CLAD
IN FUSTIAN AND GRIMED WITH SOOT AND OIL.”—
Isaac Taylor.




CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Preface...., 7
Chapter I.—The Historical Aspect of Patents 11
Chapter ll.—The Patents Statutes of New South
Wales . 16
Chapter lll.—Who may obtain a Patent 23
Chapter IV. —What Inventions are Patentable and
what are not 26
Chapter V.—The Degree of Utility necessary to
support a Patent 29
Chapter VI. —What constitutes Novelty of Invention 31
Chapter Vll.—What constitutes a Complete Appli-
cation 41
Chapter VIII. —Protests, Experts, and Duration of
Patents ••••• 45
Chapter IX.—The Essentials of a Sufficient Specifi-
cation *... 48
Chapter X.—lnfringement, Injunction, and Scire
Facias 55
Chapter XL —Certificates of Provisional Protection 63
Chapter Xll.—Suggestions for Future Legislation... 69
Maxims of Patents Law 73
Digest of Decided Cases 80
Parliamentary Debates on N.S.W. Patents Statutes 96
Statutes of New South Wales 108
''Rules of Practice of N.S.W. Patents Office 117


Forms and Precedents in Connection with N.S.W.
Letters Patent 129
Register of Experts 189
Patents Office Staff 190
Scale of Fees J* 191
Index to Forms 192
~ Regulations 194
„ Debates ; 197
~ Statutes 198
„ Cited Cases 200


PREFACE.
The following pages have been written in the belief that,
at a time when recent and remedial legislation has given a
spur to industrial invention, they will not be written in
vain. In respect to the relations between the State and
the inventor, the popular misconception is very great;
and this it is the primary object of these pages to
correct and diminish, in order to free the Patents Office
from the awkward alternative of either issuing Patents
of dubious validity or else returning for correction a
large proportion of applications.
In estimating the causes which contribute to this
popular ignorance, the composite character of our Patents
Laws must not be lost sight of. The regulation of
Letters Patent in encouragement of trade discoveries is
one of the few subjects in which there is much admixture
of English and Colonial law. Our Attorney-Generals have
successively decided that it is a subject which is governed
by the written Patents Law of this Colony, and by so much
of the unwritten Patents Law of England as our written
laws fail to repeal. Hence it is not unnatural to find an
inventor, though well versed in the Colonial Statutes on
this subject, yet exposed to annoyance and inconvenience
through his ignorance of some fundamental maxim of the
English Common Law of Patents. The essence of so
much of the deliverances of English Judges as serves to
formulate and expound the material portions of this law,
will be found either incorporated in the text of the
preliminary chapters, or recorded in a separate portion of
the book.
Every day’s official experience accentuates the demand
for a local publication of the character here attempted.
The current idea of Patent Eights by no means coincides


with the Law’s conception of a limited monopoly.
In the haze of popular interpretation the applicant
gathers the notion that the Patent is a formal and
assured sequel to the Invention —that the fee fixed by
the Act is the sole equivalent demanded from him for
the protection accorded to his discovery—and that, having
(either by application or accident) acquired a mechanical
or chemical novelty, he has nothing to do but to insist on
the Crown issuing directions by which the profitable use
and exercise of his discovery are reserved to him and his
assigns for half a generation. In short, the popular
notion teaches him that the lucky inventor is to receive
everything, and to give to the public nothing in return.
Very justly the law treats these ideas as the illusions
of ignorance; for, in the first place, the discovery of
some mechanical truth by no means authenticates the
discoverer as the “true and first inventor” of the apparatus
embodying its practical development. "What is novel to
him may be familiar to many others in the same range of
science; for, without fully endorsing Chaucer’s theory,
that “ there is nothing new but what has once been
old,” it must yet be admitted that to every novelty in
science the enquiries and experiments of many minds
simultaneously tend, under the pressure of that Neces-
sity which is the acknowledged parent of Invention.
Hence it frequently happens that the substance of a
supposed discovery has already been anticipated, pub-
lished, and protected ; and that several independent
inventors are one and all forestalled by “ the true and
first inventor,” to whom alone the law recognises the
donation of Patent privileges. Indeed, the “ simul-
taneousness of inventions” has practically passed into a
proverb, and to this day the honor of inventing the
steamboat is claimed with uniform persistence on behalf
of an Englishman, a Scotchman, a Frenchman, and a
Spaniard.


Equally erroneous is the conception that the fee fixed
by the Act is the price of the Patent. True it is that
a fee is charged to meet the expenditure incurred in the
examination of the claim and the issue of the grant
a fee which, in New South Wales, is smaller than in
any other country issuing similar grants of monopoly.
But the real price demanded from the applicant is
summarised in the following obligations: —(1) that he
must show that he is in possession of a useful industrial
secret, hitherto undivulged and unanticipated; (2) that
he must, in the document specifying the details of the
discovery, so effectually disclose the secret that the
public will know exactly what it is they are forbidden
to imitate, and will, at the end of the term of monopoly,
be enabled, by aid of this information, to work the
invention as efficiently as the inventor; (3) that he
must claim protection for no part which is not both useful
and novel; and (4) that he fully recognises that his
Patent is liable to voidance if any of his allegations arc
either intentionally untrue, or unintentionally erroneous.
It therefore follows that the inventor has much to
consider in formulating his claim to Patent rights.
What he should do, and what he should avoid doing—
these are subjects which this book professes to teach
him, as also what are the essentials of a valid Patent;
for the fact must not be discounted that a dubious
Patent is worse than none at all, and a bad one is a
burden of affliction and a mill-stone of misery.
In anticipation of the criticism that there should be
no technical obstruction to the issue of a Patent, it may
be answered that the public have a right to consideration
as well as the inventor, and in their interest the utmost
precision and perspicuousness are demanded. The public
incur heavy pecuniary penalties if they even unintentionally
infringe a patented invention; and so it is essential that


they should be furnished with explicit details of the
process they are forbidden to copy. Equally imperative
is it that “ the Great Seal ” of the Colony should not be
wantonly or loosely affixed to a document directed
against every subject of the State, forbidding him to do
what under other circumstances the professed freedom
of our trade laws gives him a license to do.
These pages, therefore, constitute an official exposition
of the Law and Practice of this Colony’s Letters Patent
for Inventions in the Arts and Manufactures; and they
represent the first Australian publication of a work on
Patents Law.
So far from encumbering the practice with any
additional formulary, they simply indicate to the inventor
the pitfalls and obstacles which, of necessity, beset his
path. By aid of the information here conveyed, an
intelligent mechanic—seeking to protect from piracy the
fruits of his calculation and industry—will, it is hoped, be
enabled to avoid the pitfalls and surmount the obstacles.
A. G. T.
N.S.W. Patents Office,
Chancery-square,
Sydney,
December , 1887.


THE LAW AND PRACTICE
OF
LETTERS PATENT FOR INVENTIONS.
CHAPTER I.
THE HISTORICAL ASPECT OF PATENTS.
The object of this publication is limited to the dissemina-
tion of the knowledge necessary, from an official standpoint,
to secure for inventions the full benefit of the protection
accorded to them by law. It is, therefore, unnecessary to
enter upon a prolonged consideration of the historical
aspect of the relations between the Crown and the
inventor.
It is sufficient to remind the reader that Patents germi-
nated in the desire of the early English monarchs to exer-
cise their sovereignty in personally regulating the trade and
commerce of their realm. It goes without saying that this
was one of the monarchical functions whose exercise was
as often swayed by caprice as by zeal for the welfare of the
State, and that what was due to the legitimate stimulation
of commerce was early lost sight of in the aggrandisement
of the courtier or the aggregation of the revenues of the
Crown.
The rational regulation of trade early degenerated into
capricious and tyrannous restriction; and, under the Tudors
and the Stuarts, monopolies began to deform the face of com-
merce to the gain of the sovereign, the glee of the courtier,
and the oppression of the common people. The extortionate
rapacity of Sir Giles Mompesson and Sir Erancis Michell
(described in the Lords’ Journals as Monopolists, Paten-
tees, and Co-Partners) is familiar to students of history as


exciting the resentment of the populace, awakening the
patriotism of the Parliament, weakening the King’s asser-
tion of a jure divino prerogative, and impelling the intro-
duction of the famous charter in suppression of monopolies.
This Statute of Monopolies, passed in the 21st year of
the reign of James 1., disabled all persons and corporations
from exercising any monopoly unsanctioned by Parliament,
and made the validity of all such restricted licenses deter-
minable by the common laws of the realm. But in the
interest of the widest development of trade discoveries the
Parliament wisely spared from this sweeping illegalisation
such modified monopolies as tended to encourage industrial
experiment and mechanical research.
The sixth section of the statute in question discriminates
between royal licenses to the hurt of trade and those in
encouragement of inventive genius, by reserving Patent
Rights to all true and first inventors of manufactures not
in use by other than the inventor at the time these rights
are claimed.
Not only so, but the same section may be said to formu-
late the legal essentials of a patentable invention by stipu-
lating, firstly, that the invention must not be contrary to
the law —that is, that it must conform to whatever may be
the existing laws in regulation of Patents ; secondly, that
it must not be mischievous to the State either by raising
the price of commodities at home, or by hurt of trade, or
by reason of being generally inconvenient —that is, in short,
that it must possess some quality of utility and none of
industrial or national mischief; thirdly, that the invention
must not, at the date of application for Patent Eights, be
in use by other than the applicant—that is, that it must
possess the distinctive feature of novelty; fourthly, that
the privileges pertaining to a Patent are comprised in the
right of the sole working or making of any manner of new
manufacture in the realm; and, fifthly, that the duration of
the Patent must not exceed fourteen years.


The above section of the Charter of Monopolies (21Jac. I,
c. G) is, therefore, the statutory source of the general
principles which now substantially underlie the Patent laws
of all British communities. It must be remembered, how-
ever, that this statute is only declaratory of what had ever
been the common law of the land, and that monopolies of
any other character represented the encroachment of the
Crown upon the rights of the people and upon the freedom
of trade; and that, independent of the stipulations of the
statute, the applicant was, by the terms of the common law,
required to purchase the privilege of a Patent by effectually
disclosing to the public the secret of his invention.
Upon the common law, therefore, rests the royal preroga-
tive of rewarding an inventor by extending to him for a
limited period the exclusive right to use his invention. In
Colonial possessions, also, the donation, by the Sovereign’s
representative, of Letters Patent in protection of inven-
tions or improvements in the Arts and Manufactures, rests
upon the common law of England, qualified by such altera-
tions as the Colonial Legislature has prescribed.
It is obvious, therefore, that a Patent is neither an empty
gift nor a hollow privilege; that it should neither be
wantonly withheld nor loosely granted; that the sufficiency
of the consideration upon which the grant is based should
be legally demonstrable; that, where the Crown has been
deceived, it may, by legal process, repeal its own grant; and
that Letters Patent, in protection of an alleged discovery
which fails to satisfy all the legal essentials of a patentable
invention, may be voided by a court of law.
And, further, it is apparent that just as any interference
with the freedom of trade is repugnant to the popular
instinct, so the exercise of the modified monopoly which
constitutes the virtue and virility of a modern Patent is
only justified by its countervailing advantages to industry
and commerce.


The Patent represents, in fact, a well-defined transaction
between the State and the inventor, entailing mutual
obligations and conveying mutual advantages. The State
is vested by the law with the privilege of protecting new
manufactures, and the applicant for a Patent is in pos-
session of a useful industrial novelty, known and used by
himself alone. It is to the advantage of the State that the
secret of the construction should be revealed to its subjects
at large. It is to the advantage of the individual inventor
that, on his putting his discovery into practice, he should
be protected from its piratical appropriation at the hands
of those who desire to reap where they do not sow.
This mutual advantage is secured —by the inventor, on the
one hand, effectually revealing his secret to the Crown, and
depositing in a place accessible to the public a document
explicitly descriptive of the details of his invention; and,
by the Crown, on the other hand, rewarding the inventor by
securing his invention to his exclusive use for not more than
fourteen years, at the end of which term the invention
becomes public property, and, according to its value, has a
more or less beneficial effect upon industrial development.
It is needless to add that as the primary object of the
law is to secure the immediate benefit to the inventor,
whilst assuring a prospective advantage to the State, the
discoverer is at liberty to barter his interest in the inven-
tion either before application or during the currency of
the Patent, In the former case the right to apply for a
Patent, beiug the inventor’s exclusive privilege, needs to
be specifically transferred in the conveyance of the inven-
tor’s secret and interest to his assignee.
In the early era, when journeys by land and by sea
lacked the facilities of modern times, and when there was
but little interchange of ideas between nations, it may be
readily understood that the trade developments of one
country were as a sealed book to the inhabitants of remoter


States. To become conversant with the latest improve-
ments in manufactures necessitated expensive journeys
and prolonged investigations, which entitled the student
to as great consideration as if he had, either by application
or accident, invented a new manufacture. To encourage
this spirit of industrial enterprise the courts of law re-
garded the introducer of a new invention as the quasi
inventor, and sustained the validity of a Patent granted to
him on that supposition. This fiction of law has been
perpetuated, and the principle of invention by introduction
is made applicable to this Colony both by the adoption of
the common law of England, and by the regulations made
in pursuance of the latest Colonial statute.


CHAPTER II.
THE PATENTS STATUTES OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
The introduction o£ a local Patents Law into the Colony
of New South Wales dates back to the year 1852, when a
bill with that object was brought forward by Dr. Henry
Grattan Douglass in the Legislative Council, which consti-
tuted the Parliament of New South Wales before the
advent of responsible Government.
The bill met with some demonstrations of dissent, and
the late Mr. W. C. Wentworth (whose opinions upon any
subject are worthy of preservation) expressed his belief
that the Colony would be none the worse if inventions
were not specially protected —a belief which is shared,
it may be remarked, by many weighty authorities in all
countries, including Prince Bismarck, Lord Derby, Sir
Roundel I Palmer, Sir William Armstrong, M. Chevalier,
M. Godefroi, and Mr. Macfie. ' The last-named gentle-
man, in a speech in the House of Commons aimed at the
abolition of Patents, went so far as to denounce the rights
of inventors as “too shadowy to have any recognizable
existence where there is not a submissive society to vend
to or trample on, and a complaisant State to compel their
submission.”
Dr. Douglass, however, succeeded in passing the measure
into law without any material modification of its principles,
though it is worthy of note that the late Mr. Holroyd con-
tended for the reduction of the fee from £2O to £5, a
proposal which was not carried into effect till thirty-five
years afterwards.
The bill, which was a short measure of six clauses,
passed the Legislative Council and was enrolled among
the Colonial Statutes on December 6th, 1852; but, in


accordance with the terms of section six, its operation was
suspended until the Eoyal approbation was received and
notified, which was not until January 10th, 1854. Only
two clauses —one and five —still remain operative, the
remainder having been since repealed and re-enacted in an
amended form.
The object of the Act, as gathered from the title, was
not only to introduce into New South Wales a system of
Patents in protection of inventions, but also to give to the
grants from the Crown to inventors the same effect within
the Colony as Letters Patent have in England. This latter
object must be well borne in mind, inasmuch as it impliedly
assimilates much of the Patent law propounded by the
decisions of English law tribunals; for to give Colonial
Letters of Eegistration the same effect as English Letters
Patent is to stamp them as voidable if the considerations
are not fairly expressed and legally demonstrable —that is,
if the alleged invention is not novel, useful, and so specifi-
cally stated as to reveal all its material features. In this
respect, therefore, so far from altering the principal
features of the common law, the Act may be said to con-
firm and continue them.
The preamble ot the Act sustains this view by an
expression of doubt as to whether the laws of the United
Kingdom respecting Patents then extended to or had
effect in New South Wales. At that period it must be
remembered that Patents for the Colonies w'ere granted in
England, and in the year 1850 there were 191 Patents
issued in London for the protection of inventions in
British Colonial possessions. Dr. Douglass’ Act, in
establishing a local Patent law, terminated their issue so
far as this Colony was concerned.
In pursuance of the above design, the Legislature
empowered the Governor and Executive Council to grant
Letters of Eegistration under His Excellency’s sign
B


manual and the Seal of the Colony. This grant from the
Crown conveyed to the grantee or grantees exclusive
enjoyment and advantage for his or their invention or
improvement in the Arts or Manufactures. The author or
designer of such invention (or his agent or assignee),
desiring to obtain Letters of Registration, was required to
petition the Governor for the same; and in his petition he
was instructed to state his claim, to specify the particulars
of his invention, and to produce a receipt from the Treasury
showing that he had paid £2O to defray the expenses of
examining the claim and preparing the grant. The Governor
was empowered to refer this petition to one or more com-
petent persons for report, and, where the report was in
favour of the petitioner’s prayer, to issue the Letters of
Registration accordingly.
These Letters had, by the terms of the Act, to be
registered by the grantee in the Supreme Court within
three days after their execution, and could only be granted
for a limited term, of which seven years was the minimum
and fourteen the maximum. During that period they
might be assigned to any person, and the assignment
(which had to be registered within three days after
execution) carried with it all the benefits and advantages
derivable from the original grant. The Letters of Regis-
tration were, and still are, liable to be repealed by writs of
scire facias for the same causes and in the same manner as
other grants of the Crown are liable to be repealed.
Lor the first few years the public were slow to avail
themselves of the advantages of the Patent law r . In seven
years only five Patents were granted, and only two hundred
in the first fifteen years. When eventually they began to
increase, public attention was attracted to the law and espied
many grievances, the chief of them being that the fee of
£2O was so comparatively excessive as to establish a tax
on brains and a formidable bar to humble inventors.
Attention Avas also prominently drawn to the disburse-
ment of this fee, which was generally condemned as simply


partitioning the revenue from inventions among a select
circle of professional gentlemen, who were already in
receipt of good, salaries from the State for other services.
In five years over £17,000 was distributed among a small
group of office-holders, the experts selected being profes-
sional officers of the Civil Service, who performed their
labours with admirable efficiency, but who were already well
remunerated in their regular official capacities. The £2O
fee paid by the inventor was found to be disbursed as
follows:—£s to the Attorney-General; £1 to his clerk;
£5 10s. Gd. to the Crown Solicitor; and £6 Gs. between two
experts, leaving, out of the £2O, a balance of £2 3s. Gd. to
meet the expenditure for the maintenance of a Patents
Office.
Prom 1880 to 1885 the Attorney-General drew £3,990
from this source; the Crown Solicitor, £4,514 ; the Attor-
ney-General’s clerk, £798; and the Board of Examiners,
£4,709. The sum of £441 was refunded to applicants
whose petitions were refused, leaving £2,993 to cover the
ordinary office expenses for five years.
This system was bitterly inveighed against by engineers,
mechanics, and other persons interested in inventions; and
it was contended that not only were the law officers of the
Crown inordinately remunerated for labours often merely
formal, but that the employment of two professional experts
was an unnecessary duplication of the expenditure in that
direction. Successive Governments frequently introduced
measures to abate the evil, and as frequently failed to pass
these measures into law. Eor thirty-five years the system
of spoliation, legalised by Dr. Douglass’ bill and legitima-
ted by official practice, pursued the even tenor of its way.
It was not until April, 1887, that the system received a
check, when Mr. William Clarke, who had newly accepted
office as Minister of Justice, accomplished by a stroke of
his pen what successive Governments had failed to achieve
with the curative legislation they had from time to time
unsuccessfully introduced.


Pending an alteration o£ the law requiring a deposit of
£2O, Mr. Clarke issued directions that the fee should be
received as usual, but that £ls should be at once refunded
to the applicant, the £5 retained being deemed sufficient
to more than defray expenses. In order to ensure this
•economy the Minister decided also to appoint an Examiner
of Patents, whose duty it should be to undertake the con-
joint labours hitherto performed in that respect by the
Attorney-General, the Crown Solicitor, and the Board of
Examiners.* The further employment of Civil Servants
to examine applications for Patents was forbidden, and
directions were issued that only the more complicated
applications should be referred to experts, not more than
one to be employed in any case.
This salutary reform was speedily followed by remedial
legislation in effectuation of the above objects. The bill
introduced by Mr. Clarke, in a speech published elsewhere,
passed into law without amendment, and is now the basis
of the improved administration of the Patents Office.
Though not as comprehensive legislation as could be desired,
yet the Act practically fulfils a very material measure of
reform, by vesting in the Minister and Examiner such large
discretionary powers as make the success of the Office
depend as much upon judicious administration as upon
that rigid adherence to hard and fast lines which charac-
terises the kindred legislation of other countries.
The new bill abolished the Board of Experts, appointed
an Examiner of Patents to administer the Act, and reduced
the fee for a Patent to five pounds. It re-enacted the obli-
gation of the applicant to petition the Crown, but permits
him to deposit the petition at the Patents Office in the first
instance.
Under the Act, the Examiner reports to the Minister
upon the merits of each petition, and the Minister there-
* In the teeth of these duties, an ill-informed portion of the Press, commenting
upon the appointment, styled the office a sinecure.


upon decides whether to recommend to the Governor-in-
Council to refuse or grant its prayer. The title of the
grant is altered from Letters of Registration to Letters
Patent, in view of the fact that the modern nomenclature
discriminates between the two by confining the term “ Let-
ters of Registration” to the mere registration in one
country of Patents granted in another, a practice which
prevails in some Colonies, but not in New South Wales.
Mr. Clarke’s Act further provides for the registration
of the grant by the Examiner instead of by the grantee, and
that such document shall bear date of the day of applica-
tion instead of the day of seal as heretofore. It also
authorized the removal of the registration copies of all
previous Letters of Registration, from the Supreme Court
to the Examiner’s Office, at which latter place all Letters
Patent are now registered and open to inspection; and
empowered the issue of regulations by the Governor-in-
Council, and the sale or barter of licenses by the holder of
a Patent.
A further new departure in the Act is the grant of a
Certificate of Provisional Protection, whereby an applicant,
on payment of two pounds, and on deposit of a provisional
specification, may obtain a license to use and publish his
invention without prejudice to the subsequent issue to
him of Letters Patent for the same invention. These
Certificates remain in force for twelve months unless they
are sooner merged into Letters Patent, which bear the
date of the original application for the Certificate of
Provisional Protection. The fee to supersede Provisional
Protection by Letters Patent is £3, being the difference
required to make up the fee of £5, charged for the issue
of Letters Patent in the first instance.
The only other statute dealing with Patents was intro-
duced in 1879 by Mr. W. C. Windeyer, now one of Her
Majesty’s puisne judges of the Supreme Court. It
provides for the exposition of unpatented inventions at


exhibitions, without prejudice (on the score of prior use or
publication) to the subsequent protection of the invention
by Letters Patent. The exhibitions to which this privilege
attaches are those of the Agricultural Society of Sydney,
or such other scientific and industrial exhibitions as are
specially proclaimed by His Excellency the Governor, in
the Government Gazette , to be “ Exhibitions ” within the
scope and meaning of this Act. Steps are now being taken
to gazette this privilege to all exhibitions held under the
auspices of the various Pastoral and Agricultural Societies
throughout the Colony.


CHAPTER III.
WHO MAY OBTAIN A PATENT.
Since the development of trade discoveries is the induce-
ment to the Crown to grant protection to meritorious
inventions, it follows that although the exercise of the
monopoly is confined within territorial limits, there is no
such limitation with regard to the persons to whom Patent
Eights may be conceded.
The grant of a Patent is an act of royal favor and not
ex deiito justitiee, and the Crown is therefore unfettered in
its dispensation of these privileges, except by such restric-
tions as are imposed by Parliament.
As a rule, Legislatures have been consistently slow to
create limitations under which the subjects of other coun-
tries have any less advantages in inventions than resident
applicants. The exception is in the case of those States
which, with a view to force the stimulation of local com-
merce, void Patents in which an invention is not locally
worked within a specified time.
In New South Wales the Legislature has widely avoided
any such restriction. The right of inventors to obtain,
within this Colony’s geographical limits, exclusive pro-
prietorship over useful inventions, is open to the wide world.
It is immaterial whether the applicant resides in New
South Wales or abroad. If the former, it does not matter
whether he is naturalized or not. If the latter, it is a matter
of indifference whether he is an alien friend or an alien
enemy, provided the Crown sees fit to grant the Patent.
It is obvious that a Patent may be granted alike to an
individual, or to several individuals, or to a trading asso-
ciation, registered company, or other corporate body, or


even to a foreign government. The grant, in terms,
conveys the monopoly to the individual patentee, his
executors, administrators, and assigns; in the case of a
corporate body, to itself, its successors, and its assigns.
In the case of an individual applicant, the grant may be
claimed either by the inventor, or by any person to whom
he has assigned his unpatented invention, for property in
ideas is as much the subject of transfer as property in land.
In like manner the grant from the Crown may issue to the
duly authorized agent of the inventor, or of his assignee, or
to the agent of the inventor’s agent, or to any person
capable of tracing his title by operation of law back to the
inventor.
As previously explained, the introducer into the Colony
of an invention new to the Colony is deemed to have as
good a title as if he were the inventor ; and, a fortiori, so is
the applicant who improves upon the invention he seeks
to introduce. It goes without saying that the ageut or
assignee of either has a similar claim, although iu practice
there is no assignee of an introducer, because the secret
having been transferred to the putative assignee, the latter
thereby becomes the introducer or quasi inventor, and as
such propounds his claim.
In joint Patents the privilege conceded by the grant is in
terms undivided, but is not therefore indivisible. This
concession by the Crown of an undivided privilege must
always be read and interpreted in conjunction with the
terms of the deed of association, assignment, or arrangement,
which is the foundation of the assignee’s claim to participate
in the privileges of the Patent.
Where the application discloses a joint interest, it is
evident that the applicants may either claim under a com-
mon title, as where they are joint inventors, joint agents, or
joint assignees; or each may derive his title from a different
source, as where the inventor is associated with his assignee,


or the inventor’s assignee with the holder of a sub-assign-
ment. So also a corporate body may be associated with
one or more corporate bodies or with one or more indi-
vidual applicants.
A corporation cannot, of course, claim as an inventor
(except of an invention introduced) unless every member of
it contributed his skill and labour to the elucidation of the
discovery; but it may establish its title to Patent Sights as
the inventor’s agent or assignee, or in association with the
inventor, or with any other individual or corporate body
tracing a title by transfer back to the inventor.
It is well also to bear in mind that, in regard to trading
associations, the grant may issue to the association or
jointly to its individual members, according as the prayer
of the petition seeks. The latter concession is preferable,
as enabling the right of the individuals to survive the
demise of the association.
It must also be observed that the petition must distinctly
disclose how each applicant derives his title to the protec-
tion sought for, and that any error or neglect in this par-
ticular not only endangers the success of the application,
but afterwards vitiates the Patent. The safer plan is to
first set out who is the author of the invention, and next to
specify how the applicants derive their title, and severally
or jointly as the circumstances may direct.
It is well further to remind intending patentees that where
one applicant makes the discovery and another furnishes
the capital, they must claim as inventor and assignee respec-
tively, and not as joint inventors, —and the same rule applies
where an inventor makes a present to another of an interest
in his discovery; for the law recognises that genius alone,
and not either money or benevolence, is capable of eliciting
a practical, scientific discovery.


CHAPTER IV.
WHAT INTENTIONS ARE PATENTABLE, AND WHAT ARE NOT.
The Statute of Monopolies,aspreviously explained,rendered
void all monopolies except “ Letters Patent and grants of
privilege for the term of fourteen years or under, hereafter
to be made, of the sole working or making of any manner
of new manufactures within this realm, to the true and first
inventor and inventors of such manufactures, which others
at the time of making such Letters Patent and grants shall
not use, so as also they be not coutrarj' to the law nor mis-
chievous to the State by raising prices of commodities at
home, or hurt of trade, or generally inconvenient.” In this
Colony the essence of the above limitation is retained by
confining the issue of Patents to the protection of useful in-
ventions in, or improvements to, the Arts or Manufactures.
It follows, therefore, both by English and Colonial law,
that no Patent can be obtained either for a new philoso-
phical theory, or a political scheme, or for any abstract prin-
ciple ; or for a new game of skill; or for a method of calcu-
lation ; or for a newly discovered natural product, either
as suitable for food or for industrial uses. But these,
when conjoined either with mechanical appliances, indus-
trial devices, or chemical combinations, may form the
subject-matter of a valid Patent. Thus a Patent may
be supported for a calculating machine, a new mechanical
apparatus for playing a game of skill or chance, or for a
method of preparing a natural substance for food, medicine,
or manure; or for “ a principle embodied with corporeal sub-
stances so as to produce effects in any art, trade, or manual
occupation.” And where unknown qualities possessed by a
natural earth or stone have, from the result of experiments,
been applied to useful purposes of life, such application is
a proper ground for a Patent (Muntz v. Foster).


In no case, however, can Letters Patent be sustained for
discoveries, inventions, or improvements which are contrary
to public health, detrimental to public welfare, hurtful to
public morality, or generally obnoxious to the interests of
the State.
A new addition to an existing machine is patentable, but
the Patent should be for the addition only. So also,
though a Patent for an improvement upon an existing
Patent is good, an improvement without invention is bad ;
that is, the means essential for a novel application of an old
thing must be new.
A new process is a good subject-matter for a Patent,
provided it produces effects useful to the public. So also
the production of a known substance from known materials
by acting upon them in a cheaper or more expeditious manner
is a good subject-matter for a Patent (Eex v. Wheeler) ;
and an invention for dispensing with one part of a double
process may be patented (Booth v. Eennard).
Patent Eights may also be obtained for a new combina-
tion of old parts, if the result produced is either a new
article, a better article, or a cheaper article to the public
(Crane v. Price) ; and in such case it is immaterial whether
the parts which together produce the combination are all
old, or partly old and partly new (Harrison v. Anderston
Foundry Co.) Distinct improvements for distinct purposes
are not to bo classed together as parts of a combination
(Clark v. Adie) ; and the Patent is not voided when the
combination includes part of an invention already protected
by a Patent (Crane v. Price). But, where a new combina-
tion is arrived at by merely conjoining two old inventions,
the Patent is bad (Saxby v. Gloucester Waggon Co.)
A new use of an old thing is not the subject of a Patent,
unless there is some novelty in the application; for, al-
though a person may discover a more beneficial use for an
invention than the owner knows, “he is not allowed the


privilege o£ virtually prohibiting the owner from exercising
an existing right over his own property” (Ralston v. Smith).
Distinct means to effect the same object as an existing
Patent will support Letters Patent. In the language of
Chief Justice Tiridal, “ There can be no doubt whatever
that, although one man has obtained a Patent for a given
object, there are many modes still open for other men of
ingenuity to obtain a Patent for the same object; there
may be many roads leading to one place, and, if a man has
by dint of his own genius and discovery, after a Patent has
been obtained, been able to give to the public without
reference to the former one or borrowing from the former
one , a new and superior mode of arriving at the same end,
there can be no objection to his taking out a Patent for
that purpose.”
On the same subject, Lord Westbury, when Lord Chan-
cellor, observed, “ If the invention be nothing more than a
particular means to attain to a given result which is certainly
well known, then the invention is for the means, and you can
no more prevent the invention of one distinct set of means
being interfered with—you can no more say that it interferes
with the invention of another, than you could say origi-
nally that there ought not to be Patents granted for the in-
vention of distinct means to an end. If we suppose a Patent
for a ladder to go down a pit, that Patent may be made to
comprehend all ladders, whether constructed of wood or of
iron, or of hemp or of wire, but if another man invented a
mode of letting men down the pit by a rope and pulley, it
would be impossible to say that the means of attaining that
particular end was to be regarded as identical with or com-
prehended in the other.”
It may be added that, if the invention is new and useful
to the public, it is immaterial whether the discovery was
the result of accident or art; whether from long experi-
ments and profound research, or whether by some lucky
thought or mere fortuitous circumstance.


CHAPTER V.
THE DEGREE OF UTILITY NECESSARY TO SUPPORT A PATENT.
Letters Patent arc granted solely for inventions in the
Arts or Manufactures; hut under the statute law of this
Colony, as well as under the common law of England, an
improvement which is referable lo an art or manufacture
is an invention which may he the subject of a Patent.
The main elements of a patentable invention so referable
are, of course, its utility and its novelty. The term “inven-
tion” necessarily implies novelty; but novelty alone is not
sufficient to warrant the State to use its power to forbid other
persons from doing “ what otherwise they have a natural and
inalienable right to do.” "With novelty must be conjoined
utility, or, in the words of Sir Edward Coke, “ there must
be urgens necessitas and evidens utilitas ,” and these must
be susceptible of demonstration.
In an action for infringement of a new hammer for the
locks of fowling-pieces, the plaintiff’s specification claimed
that the grooving of the vent of the hammer let the air
pass through but not the powder. Experiments made in
Court proved that the powder passed through as well as
the air, and there being thus a total and obvious failure of
utility the plaintiff was non-suited. (Manton v. Parker.)
The utility of each and every part of the invention is not
essential to the validity of a Patent, unless so suggested in
the Patent itself as the ground of the grant, which would
then be rendered void for false suggestion. If the entire
machine is, taken altogether, useful, the Patent is good
even though a part or parts may be useless, always
supposing that the Patent contains no false suggestion of
the utility of the parts which are useless. (Morgan and
another v. Seaward and others.) Where a useless brush


was part o£ an invention in a cloth-shearing machine, hut
was not described by the patentee as an essential part of
the machine, the Patent was upheld. And, again, where a
jury found that in some cases the invention was useless,
the utility in the generality of cases was apparent, and the
Patent was supported. (Haworth v. Hardcastle.) Very
little utility will suffice to sustain the Patent, and the fact
that the utility is either minimised or entirely obliterated
by an improvement subsequently pateiited does not bear
upon the question of the utility needed to support the first
Patent. (Otto v. Linford.)
In an action for infringement the onus of proving the
utility of the invention rests with the plaintiff, and is a
question to be determined by the jury.


CHAPTER VI.
WHAT CONSTITUTES NOVELTY OF INVENTION.
It follows, from what has been already written, that no
application for a Patent can be entertained, and no Letters
Patent sustained, unless the novelty of the invention in
question is unassailable. The object of the Legislature is
to secure the reward to the true and first inventor—the
author or designer of the invention —and this it does, in
practice, not only by approving the issue of the Patent to
himself or to those to whom he sells the product of his skill
and calculation, but also by refusing protection to others
who come to the Crown with an invention which they have
either pirated from a book or prior specification, or pur-
loined from the true inventor. It is therefore essentially
in the interest of inventors themselves that the Patent laws
of every civilised country insist that the supposed inven-
tion shall withstand the test of careful enquiry into its
novelty.
The strictness with which the essential of novelty is
enforced by the Courts may be gathered from the case of
Eex v. Elsee, a case which, from its antiquity, illustrates
the uniformity of the demand by the Courts that what is
claimed as novel shall be susceptible of the clearest proof.
Here it appeared that prior to the Patent, silk and cotton
thread had been used together and mixed upon the same
frame for making lace. Defendant’s counsel admitted this
to be a fact, but said he could show that the mixed thread
was inadequate for making lace. Puller, J., said; “It will
be to no purpose. The Patent claims the exclusive liberty
of making lace composed of silk and cotton thread mixed,
not of any particular-mode of mixing it; and, therefore, as
it has been proved that silk and cotton thread were before
mixed on the same frame for lace, in some mode or other,
the Patent is clearly void.”


Baron Alderson, in delivering judgment in a case in
■which doubts were cast on the originality of the discovery,
ruled that the question of novelty depends on whether the
whole taken together is new, though it may in part consist
of old parts, provided that the patentee does not claim
the old parts, but only the combination of them and
the new. (Newton v. Grand Junction Railway Company.)
In the same case Chief Baron Pollock concurred in the
general principle that in order to ascertain the novelty you
must consider the entire invention. Where, however, the
Patent is only for a combination, which is in itself novel, the
Patent need not discriminate between the parts which are
new and those which are old. (Harrison v. Anderston
Foundry Co.)
There are, it is manifest, but few discoveries of modern
times which do not, more or less, trench upon things
already known. The train of experiment proverbially
proceeds to the unknown through the medium of the par-
tially known; and obviously it is no disparagement to a
Patent that the invention includes a number of well-
known minor principles, contributing to a novel result.
In moving the judgment of the House of Lords, in
Cannington v. Nuttall, Lord Chancellor Hatherly well
observed that with every invention “ the skill and ingenuity
of the inventor are shown in the application of well-known
principles. Pew things come to be known now in the shape
of new principles; but the object of an invention generally
is the application of well-known principles to the achieve-
ment of a practical result not yet obtained .” His Lordship
added that the test of novelty is this: “Is the product,
which is the result of an apparatus for which the inventor
claims Letters Patent, effectively obtained by means of the
new apparatus, whereas it had never before been effectively
obtained by any of the separate portions of the apparatus
which the inventor has now combined into one valuable
whole for the purpose of effecting the object he has in view P”


Where a number of claims are inserted in a specification,
and one or more is proved to lack novelty, the Patent is bad
as to the whole; for “the consideration is the entirety of the
improvements, and if it turns out that there is no novelty
in one of the improvements, the consideration fails in the
whole, and the patentee is not entitled to the benefit of the
other parts of the invention, however novel they may be.”
(Brunton v. Ilawkes.)
In Thomas v. Foxwell, where the Patent was for a
Howe’s sewing machine, the plaintiff, who was the inven-
tor’s assignee, claimed the combination of a vibrating
needle with a shuttle, and, secondly, the application for
certain purposes of a shuttle in combination with a needle.
The drawings illustrating the second claim showed that
O O
it had been anticipated by Fisher and Gibbon’s Patent.
Both claims were, therefore, held to be bad, although
the first claim was a distinct novelty; and the Patent
was accordingly avoided.
In Patterson v. the Gaslight and Coke Company, the
Patent failed because out of five different matters claimed
only four were novel. Baron Parke explained, in a case
presenting similar features, that by force of the Statute of
Monopoly a Patent is void only so far as relates to that
which is old, but under the common law it is entirely void
on account of a false suggestion of the grantee by which
the Crown is deceived in its grant.
It is manifest that the novelty of an invention is not
destroyed where a previous knowledge (either vague or
complete) by another person, remains undivulged. But the
claim of novelty is untenable where the secret comes to the
knowledge of the public, either through the inventor him-
self, or through some person who has anticipated him in
his discovery and divulged it to a number of persons. In
other words, the alleged novelty of an invention must be
tested by inquiry as to any previous publication of the
c


secret, or public use of the thing alleged to be invented.
Where an invention is published in a book before applica-
tion for a Patent, the inventor gives away bis secret to
everybody, and therefore has nothing to offer in return
for the monopoly he seeks. Nor is it necessary, in order
to avoid his claim, that the public should have used the
invention previously published.
The various judgments delivered by the leading English
tribunals have reduced to plain and perspicuous limits the
law relating to prior publication and prior user. W ith
regard to the former, it must be borne in mind that no
prior description can invalidate a Patent, unless the article
patented can be made from that description. (Plimpton v.
Malcomson.) The information embraced in the prior pub-
lication must, mother words, coincide with the information
contained in the Patent and necessary to the adequate
revelation of the inventor’s secret; and this must, of course,
be such a knowledge as will enable the public to perceive
the very discovery, and to carry the invention into practical
use. (Hills v. Evans.) Where the anterior description is
not so explicit or complete as to enable persons of com-
petent mechanical skill to work it out to the same result as
that arrived at by the Patent, the invention is not antici-
pated. (Betts v. Neilson.)
It follows, from the foregoing, that mere conjectures,
however accurate or however valuable, do not amount to
such prior publication as suffices to destroy the novelty of
a Patent. On this point the remarks of Vice-Chancellor
Wood are worthy of reproduction “If a man sits down
and takes out a Patent from his own conjectures, without
ever having tried the experiment set forth in it, that will
not invalidate a subsequent Patent taken out and practically
worked, especially when it turns out that the method
described by the earlier Patent is practically useless. In
the ‘Century of Inventions,’ by the Marquis of Worcester,
there are many hints given and theories broached, which


have since suggested inventions, tlie subjects of Patents, to
ingenious men who have lived since the publication of that
book; and those Patents are good. Such a publication as
that will not suffice to invalidate a subsequent Patent which
is capable of being actually worked to a useful purpose.”
And again, where the same point cropped up in a case
before Judge "Williams, it was held that “where a patentee
made public, in the specification of his Patent, Ms notion
that lead and tin might be usefully combined into a new
material by mechanical pressure, yet inasmuch as he did
not know, or at all events make known, by what means
that notion could be carried into effect, he, in fact, made
no discovery, and was no inventor at all. The publication
of a notion that a certain useful art may be discovered,
without any information or knowledge of the means of
discovery, does not preclude a subsequent first inventor of
those means from taking out a Patent for the entire art.”
In the same case Lord Westbury made use of remarks
confirmatory of this principle, to the effect that an “ antece-
dent specification ought not to be held to be an anticipation
of a subsequent discovery, until it is ascertained that such
specification discloses a practicable mode of producing the
result, which is the effect of the subsequent discovery. A
barren general description, probably containing some sug-
gested information, or involving some speculative theory,
cannot be considered as anticipating, and as therefore
avoiding, for want of novelty, a subsequent specification or
invention which involves a practical truth, productive of
beneficial results, until it is ascertained that the antecedent
publication involves the same amount of practical and useful
information.”
The pertinent points in an allegation of prior publication
may therefore be summarised as follows:—The publication
must so coincide with the description in the Patent as, when
put into practice, to substantially produce the same result;


and it must be contained either in the specification of an
antecedent Patent, or in a book or other publication either
in circulation in this Colony or in a library to which the
public have access. The essence of the objection lies not
so much iu the presumption that the applicant has appro-
priated the alleged invention as in the inference that, as
his secret is already known to the public, he has nothing
to offer in return for the privilege of a Patent. Hence it
is material always to consider whether the publication
referred to has lain long in obscurity, and failed to reach
the public eye, or whether it has been in such active circu-
lation that a number of persons have had opportunities to
acquire the information it conveys.
■With regard to the destruction of novelty by prior use,
it matters little whether the user was by the applicant or
by some other person to him unknown. A prior experi-
mental or confidential user, or secret manufacture of large
quantities without sale, does not derogate from the appli-
cant’s title to Patent Eights; nor docs the prior exhibition
of a useless machine unsuccessfully attempting the same
object, nor yet the exposition of any invention or improve-
ment at any of the exhibitions referred to in the Colonial
statute, 42 Yic , No. 27. Prior public sale or prior user
without concealment is, however, a fatal objection to the
essential attribute of novelty; and, apart from that objec-
tion, it is obvious that to condone a prior public use is also
to prolong the life of the Patent beyond the limited term
sanctioned by law.
In illustration of the distinction in law between prior
public use and prior experimental user, Chief Justice
Tindal pronounced the law to be that “ a man may make
experiments in his own closet for the purpose of improving
any art or manufacture in public use ; if he makes these
experiments and never communicates them to the world,
anc l lays them by as forgotten things, another person, who
has made the same experiments, or has gone a little further,


may take out a Patent, and it will be no answer to him to
say that another person before him made the same experi-
ments, and therefore that he was not the first discoverer of
it; because there may be many discoverers starting at the
same time, and the first who comes to the Crown and takes
out a Patent, it not being generally known to the public, is
the man who has a right to clothe himself with the autho-
rity of the Patent and to enjoy its benefits. But if it was
generally known and practised and not merely as a matter
of experiment and trial kept secret by the party, and
thrown away as the result of that which was of no use to
the public, the Patent is gone.”
On the same subject, Lord Abinger, C. 8., declared to
the same effect that “ a man is entitled to a Patent for a
new and useful invention, and shall not be prejudiced by
any man having invented that before and made no use of
it; because the mere speculations of ingenious men, which
may be fruitful of a great variety of inventions, if they are
not brought into actual use, ought not to stand in the way
of other men equally ingenious, who may afterwards make
and apply the same inventions. ‘Public use’ therefore
means, that the use shall not be secret, but public—that a
man shall not, by his own private invention, which he keeps
locked up in his own breast or in his own desk, and never
communicates, take away the right that another man has
to a Patent for the same invention. Therefore, if a man
invents a thing for his own use, whether he sells it or not
—if he invents a lock and puts it on his own gate, and has
used it for a dozen years —that is a public use of it.”
So, upon the same principle, Baron Alderson defined
“public use” to moan a use in public, so as to come
to the knowledge of others than the inventor, as contra-
distinguished from the use of it by himself in his chamber;
and Lord Abinger declared that the public use and exercise
of an invention meant a use and exercise in public, and not
necessarily by the public.


In Dollond’s Patent (a case frequently cited by law
authorities), it was objected that Dollond was not the
inventor of the new method of making object-glasses, but
that Dr. Hall had made the same discovery before him.
But it was held that as Dr. Hall had confined it to his
closet, and the public were not acquainted with it, Dollond
was to be considered as the inventor.
On the question of how far the use by an inventor’s
servants affects the novelty of the invention used, it may
be remarked that the Courts invariably decide according to
the logical and perceptible effect of such use. Thus
Lord Campbell, C.J., in Betts v. Menzies, ruled that
“ the use of an invention, by the servants and mechanics
in the employ of the inventor, must be considered as
the inventor’s use, and not the use of the invention by
others. If, however, the effect of a long preliminary use
is really to extend the term of monopoly, that would be
fatal.”
The use by the inventor’s servants (even though experi-
mental only) frequently opens up a further pertinent
inquiry as to how far the improvements gleaned during
these experiments belong to the servant and how far to the
inventor. A very clear exposition of the principles which
in such cases control the judgment of the Court was
given in Allan v. Ranson, where it was asserted by the
Court that if a person discovers an improved principle,
and employs engineers, agents, or other persons to
assist him in carrying out that principle, and they, in the
course of the experiments arising from that employment,
make valuable discoveries accessory to the main principle,
and tending to carry that out in a better manner, such
improvements are the property of the inventor of the
original improved principle, and may be embodied by him
in his Patent. Where, however, the principle and object
of an invention are incomplete without the incorporation
of the workman’s suggestions, the Patent to the employer
for the invention embodying these suggestions is bad.


On the same principle it is not a valid impeachment of a
Patent that some other person finally tested the invention
prior to the application for a Patent. Six weeks before
the grant of a Patent an inventor lent a machine, in com-
plete working order, to a friend to test it. The machine
was placed in a mill, where a number of men went to and
fro. Objections that this was a public use sufficient to
invalidate the Patent wore over-ruled. Baron Creswell
said, “You cannot contend that if a man were to keep his
invention shut up in a room for twenty years, that circum-
stance merely would deprive him of his right to obtain a
Patent for it.” (Bentley v. Fleming.)
It has also been affirmed that a man cannot be said to
“use” a manufacture when accidentally and without any
knowledge or intention he produces that which, if it were
knowingly and intentionally done and for the purpose of
trade, would be a manufacture. (Blackburn, J., in Har-
wood v. Great Northern Railway.)
It is important to observe that if several simultaneously
discover the same thing, the party who first communicates it
to the public is entitled to the benefit of a Patent (Forsyth
v. Riviere) ; and that oftentimes a man makes an invention
which is partly covered by an existing Patent, and which he
therefore cannot use without the license of the patentee.
He may wait for the expiration of the Patent, and take out
one himself if his invention be novel, and that Patent will
be valid; but the invention must be something novel and
important. With regard to an invention which overlaps
the subject of a prior Patent, it has been decided by the
Courts that if you are obliged to adopt a combination of
machinery which originally is directed to one purpose,
before you can make it minister to another and additional
purpose, the user of it for this additional purpose is an
infringement of the Patent which first introduced that
combination; but if a person takes well-known processes


from a great number of sources and a great many inven-
tions, and adapts them all together to a perfectly new
combination for a perfectly new purpose, their previous
use is not an anticipation of the Patent. (Canningtou v.
Nuttall.)
It only remains to add, with respect to the novelty of
inventions, that where the want of novelty appears dis-
tinctly from documents or written instruments, such as a
prior Patent or specification, it is for the Court to take
notice of the identity of the two supposed inventions, and
the want of novelty therefore in the second. (Bush v. Pox.)
But, where the descriptions are not identical, the identity
in substance of the inventions becomes a matter of evidence
and not of construction.


CHAPTER VII.
WHAT CONSTITUTES A COMPLETE APPLICATION.
A complete application for a grant of Letters Patent
comprises, first, a petition to His Excellency the Governor;
secondly, a complete specification of the alleged invention;
and, thirdly, a covering-letter stating the number and
nature of the documents annexed.
A complete specification comprehends, first, a preamble;
second, a general description of the nature and character
of the invention; third, explanatory details of its construc-
tion or composition, its mode of working, and what is pre-
ferably the most efficacious means of utilising its peculiar
benefits; and, fourth, an enumeration and explication of what
the applicant regards as the novel feature or features for
which ho seeks the right of sole making and working. A
reference to the examples given in a subsequent portion of
this publication will best serve to convey to the reader the
character and object of the several descriptions which com-
bine to form what is termed a specification, and which
may or may not be illustrated by drawings, according to
the character of the invention and the comparative perspi-
cacity of the verbal description explaining it.
This specification must be furnished in duplicate, one copy
being ultimately attached to the grant and the other re-
tained in the Examiner’s Office. The essentials of a sufficient
specification and the errors which constitute insufficiency
and illegality are discussed at length in a subsequent
chapter.
The applicant’s petition is, in like manner, a document
which demands extreme care in its phraseology and con-
tents ; for the averments in the petition become the recitals


in the grant from the Crown, and conjointly constitute the
consideration for the issue of the Patent, which is of
necessity unsustainable when the consideration, in its
entirety, is either bad in substance or bad in expression.
The petition should, in its contents, reveal the name,
address, and occupation of the applicant or applicants; his
or their title to petition the Crown for a grant of Patent
rights; the address within the Colony to -which official
communications may be sent; the title of the invention;
such information as he or they possess as to whether,
when, and where the invention has been previously
patented; and it should further state that a complete
specification is appended to the petition (of which, in law
it forms part and parcel) ; that to the best of applicant’s
belief the invention has not been used or published within
the Colony (except under the authority of a Certificate of
Provisional Protection, and, if so, this should be stated in
substitution or qualification of the denial of prior use or
publication); and that the petitioner prays for the exclu-
sive right to use and exercise the invention for the term
of fourteen years.
The title, as alleged in the petition, should minutely
correspond with the title disclosed in the specification, and
cannot be too tersely explicit, as a flaw in the title endan-
gers the validity of the Patent. What may be termed
“ fancy titles” (because, in description, much more eupho-
nious than exact) cannot be too strongly reprobated as
being better suited for a prospectus than for a petition, and
as often containing averments incapable of the demonstrable
proof which the law requires. As an instance of this, the
inventor of the telephone did not describe his invention by
that name, but by the explicit and self-descriptive title of
“An improved means of transmitting sound.”
Whenever it is desired by the applicant to introduce his
invention to the market with a title appealing more to
euphony than fact, such a title should be registered as a


Trade Mark at the Registrar-General’s Office. Thus,
“ Reed’s Superior and Genuine Horse and Cattle Spice,”
is a defective title to a Patent, because it is incapable of
demonstration; but a Patent might be granted for a
“Nutritive and medicated composition for horses and
cattle,” and the exclusive right to the former title might
be subsequently secured at the Trade Marks Office.
So also, the title “ The Duplex Photographer,” is bad for
a Patent, as being vague and ambiguous, whereas, as
a matter of law, the title should be self-descriptive. But
“An improved apparatus for taking pictures by photo-
graphy,” is a good, sufficient, and self-explanatory title;
for the invention relates to an apparatus, which is claimed
to be of an improved character —its use is to take pictures,
and to take them by photography. Every element of the
title is there susceptible of proof.
Next to the title the most important paragraph of the peti-
tion is that which specifies the petitioner’s claim to a Patent.
Any error or deceit in this particular will void a Patent.
If the importer has simply stated that he is the inventor,
without explaining that he is so by virtue of a communica-
tion from abroad, the Patent is voidable; and so, also, if
the assignee styles himself the author of the invention; or
if the introducer, who improves upon the article introduced,
fails to state that he is the inventor partly by virtue of a
communication from abroad. The latter, it may be added,
must also carefully discriminate in his specification between
the part introduced and the part invented.
Especial attention may also be directed to the fact that
the grant is, to all intents and purposes, made to the
“ true and first inventor,” and no other person can obtain
a Patent except by virtue of a subsidiary claim, which the
averments in the petition must trace back to the inventor,
at the same time disclosing the various operations of law
by which the applicant succeeds to “ the true and first


inventor’s ” right. Thus, a statement that the petitioner
is “ tho author’s agent,” or “ the author’s assignee,” is too
vague and impersonal to justify the issue of a Patent. But
it is sufficient to allege that A is the agent of B, who claims
to he the author or designer of the invention. In the
latter case the petitioner alleges a title through B, the
true and first inventor; in the former, he simply claims
to be the agent or assignee of an impersonal unknown —a
claim which is too vague and inexact to form the basis of a
grant in protection of an invention.
Hence extreme care should be taken to specify in the peti-
tion who is the inventor, and what is the relation, in law, of
each applicant to the inventor. Thus, the petitioners may
allege that Ais the author and Bis his agent; or that A
is the author, that B holds an assignment from A of an
undivided half-interest, that C holds an assignment from
B of a third of B’s half, that D and E are C’s agents,
and so on.
As the Act speaks of the agent or assignee of “any
person claiming to be the author or designer, &c.,” it is
doubtful whether it is a sufficient compliance with the law
to aver that “ A is the agent of B, who is the author, &c.”
The safer phraseology is, that “ A is the agent of B, who
claims to he the author, &c.” The Act, in terms, requires
the claim to be made by the author, but, in the doubtful
instance cited, this claim is made by the assignee, and
neither by nor on behalf of tho author.
In the collection of “Forms and Precedents” compre-
hended in this work, such sufficient examples are set forth
of petitions from various claimants as, it is hoped, will
enable an applicant possessing ordinary intelligence to
frame his petition in a manner suitable to whatever exi-
gency his particular case may exhibit.


CHAPTER VIII.
PROTESTS, EXPERTS, AND DURATION OF PATENTS.
Befohe examination of the application for Letters Patent
a caveat may be lodged by any person in protest against
the grant and issue of Letters Patent. The various allega-
tions in justification of a protest may be summarised as
follows; —1, that the invention is entirely useless; 2, that
it is not novel, by reason either of the supposed secret
being generally known, or being the subject of prior use, or
being anticipated in a prior Patent or in a book or other
publication accessible to the general public ; 8, that the
applicant is not the inventor or importer, or the lawful
representative of either of them ; 4, that the claims in the
specification are in excess of the parts which are novel; 5,
that the invention infringes upon a manufacture or other
article already protected by Letters Patent of this Colony;
6, that the title is vague and inexplicit or faulty by excess;
and 7, that the applicant incorrectly propounds his claim
to Patent rights, as where he describes himself as the
inventor when he is, in fact, only the importer or intro-
ducer, or part-introducer part-inventor.
Whilst each of the foregoing averments affords good
ground for resisting the grant of a Patent, it will be
apparent that they differ materially in the consequences
they entail. The 4th, sth, 6th, and 7th objections may,
when sustainable, be obviated by an amendment of the
language of the application, provided such alterations are
made before the grant is signed bg the Governor. On the
other hand, successful disparagements of the utility or
novelty of the discovery, or of the applicant’s claim to
be recognised as “ the true and first inventor ” or his
equivalent, must, of necessity, ensure, the unconditional
rejection of the prayer of the petition.
As the donation of Patent rights impliedly forbids the
use or exercise of the invention by others than the patentee,


or those to whom he issues licenses so to use and exercise,
it follows that every subject of the State has a right
to protest against the promulgation of this restriction
where the circumstances do not warrant it; and therefore,
for good and sufficient reasons, any colonist of New South'
Wales has a hens standi in respect of lodging a caveat
against an application for a Patent. In like manner the
citizen of another State may protest where some person
dishonestly claims to be the author of what the caveator
has invented, or makes such an unlawful or improbous
claim as may, in any respect, tend to the caveator’s injury.
The only limitation in law is in regard to the inventor or
his lawful representative, w r ho, having bartered to another
his interest in a supposed discovery, is estopped by his own
act from urging anything in derogation of that which he
has, voluntarily and for his own advantage, represented to his
assignee to be a good and lawful subject-matter for a Patent.
Applications for Patents are carefully examined by the
Examiner of Patents with regard to their freedom from
any of the defects already noticed as tending to vitiate a
claim to Patent rights. In cases which present features of
special scientific complication, such as discoveries relating
to railway brakes or electricity, the Examiner is empowered
to call in the aid of a competent expert, who generally re-
ceives a fee of three guineas for his labours. Care is taken
to select the best possible experts, in order that the Colony
may not be subject to the slur of attaching the Great Seal
and vice-regal signature to Patents representing loosely-
considered claims, or based on thinly-investigated asser-
tions. The names of Mr. Norman Selfe, Mr. W. T. Poole,
Mr. T. S. Parrott, and Mr. C. G. Cameron may be cited as
a guarantee that careful and competent consideration is
given in these cases to the relative rights of the public and
the inventor.
With the introduction of the new Patents Act, an
administrative improvement was effected in the character


of the reports furnished by experts. Hitherto, the expert,
when favoring the prayer of the petitioner, simply
announced, in terms that became stereotyped, that he saw
“no objection to the issue of Letters Patent.” The
meagre and defective character of this report may be
gathered from a comparison with the labors ejusdam generis
in other professions, as for example, the Opinion furnished
by a barrister on a case stated for him by a solicitor.
Instead of a monosyllabic reply, the barrister invariably
discusses the legal merits of the case, and gives reasons in
support of the opinion he holds. After the same manner,
experts are now required to traverse the material details of
the specification, and to demonstrate, also, with what prior
Patents the invention is most closely allied, and wherein it
differs from each. The value of these digests, as precedents
and records in the official history of important Patents,
amply justifies the increased labour which is thus cast upon
the experts.
Letters Patent endure for from seven to fourteen years,
according as the grant from the Crown specifies. In practice
it has been customary to grant fourteen years’ protection
for every invention, irrespective of its scope, magnitude, or
other merits. It is contemplated, however, from the begin-
ning of the year 1888, to alter the practice in this respect,
so as to confine the duration of the grant in this Colony to
the minimum term of seven years when the invention is of
a trivial character, or shows but little ingenuity, or is
patented by the importer instead of by the inventor. It
needs no argument to maintain the justice of this limitation
further than to remark, that since the object of the Legis-
lature is to reward ingenious and useful inventions, the
incentive to industrial investigation and mechanical re-
search is minimised, when all inventions are made the
subject of equal privileges, irrespective of the ingenuity
and utility they relatively exhibit.


CHAPTER IX.
THE ESSENTIALS OP A SUFFICIENT SPECIFICATION.
The main condition antecedent to tlie granting of Patent
Rights is the revelation and public enrolment of the details
of the invention, so that the inventor’s secret maybe effec-
tually divulged to the subjects of the State. This detailed
explanation is termed a specification, because it purports to
specify whatsoever constitutes the improvement bartered
to the State in return for the monopoly accorded. B y the
regulations made under Mr. Clarke’s Act it is provided
that the complete specification must so explicitly reveal the
details of the invention that any person, ordinarily proficient
in the art or science to which the discovery most closely ap-
pertains, may be enabled, by aid of the information so
afforded, to make, construct, compound, and use the inven-
tion therein described, without resorting to any invention
or addition of his own.
The legitimacy of this direction is sustained by the judg-
ments given by the highest English tribunals in cases in
which the sufficiency of the specification has been brought
into litigation. These judgments concur in declaring that
the discovery disclosed in the specification must bo true
and fair, and full and unreserved ; or the Patent is useless,
being liable to repeal by a writ of scire facias , whereby the
Crown is empowered to cancel its own grant. In the lan-
guage of the Courts, “if the specification, in any part of it,
be materially false and defective, the Patent is against law,
and cannot be supported; for to entitle a man to the benefit
of a Patent for a monopoly, the applicant must disclose his
secret and specify his invention in such a way that others
may he taught hy it to do the thing for which the Patent is
granted ; and it must put the public in possession of


the secret in as ample and beneficial a way as the patentee
himself uses if. It is, however, sufficient, if it is so
explicit as to enable a man of ordinary competent skill,
and willing to learn, to perform the operation; but every
Patent being a monopoly, that is, an infringement of
public right, its object is to give the public learning of the
precise extent of the privilege conferred on the patentee;
and, therefore, if the specification contains an ambiguity on
a material point, that is a ground on which the Patent may
be avoided altogether.” (Campion v. Benyon). And again,
“ the Patent is to be considered as a bargain ivifh the public,
and the specification, therefore, is to be construed on the
same principle of good faith as that which regulates all
other contracts. If, therefore, the disclosure be such that
the invention is communicated to the public, the statute is
satisfied.” (Cartwright v. Earner.) The grant of the
Patent is simply “ an exercise of the prerogative, in which
—the ground on which alone the grant of a monopoly is
justifiable being that the invention shall be made avail-
able to the public—the Crown annexes as a condition of
the grant that the true nature of the invention, and the
manner in which it can be used, shall be fully and unre-
servedly disclosed.” (Peather v. the Queen.)
Chief Justice Tindal, on this point, observes that “if
there is a want of clearness in the specification so that the
public cannot afterwards avail themselves of it, much more,
if there is any studied ambiguity in it, so as to conceal from
the public that of which the patentee is, for a term, enjoy-
ing the exclusive benefit, no doubt the Patent itself would
be completely void. The question on this point is deter-
minable by the jury —whether it is such a fair and clear state-
ment, that a person with a competent degree of knowledge
on the subject-matter to which the Patent relates, would
be able to make that which the patentee enjoys the
exclusive privilege of.” And again, “the specification
ought to be so clearly worded as to lead, without any doubt
n


or difficulty, to that result; because it is the price that the
man, who takes out his Patent, pays to the public for their
being so long kept out of the enjoyment of the commodity
or manufacture that is protected: the price'he pays is, that
he will lodge such an account of his own discovery and
invention as will enable the public, at the expiration of the
fourteen years, to have as free and unreserved use of the
invention as he has himself l” This accurate exposition of
the obligation due from the inventor to the State should be
carefully digested by those who imagine that the inventor
is privileged by the law to receive everything and give
nothing.
With regard to the construction to be placed upon the
language of a specification, it must be understood that the
terms of this document legally bear the interpretation
commercially and conventionally assignable to them in the
trade or craft to which they most closely appertain. “ A
specification,” says Lord Blackburn, “is not addressed
to the world at large, but to a particular class; for
instance, skilled mechanicians, skilled metallurgists, &c.,
and its language must be construed in its application by
that particular class. It must be so intelligible that
those who are conversant in the subject are capable of
understanding it, and of perpetuating the invention when
the term of the Patent is expired. The clearness of
the specification must be according to the subject-
matter of it; it is addressed to persons in the profession
having skill in the subject, not to men of ignorance, and
if it is understood by those whose business leads them
to be conversant in the subject, it is intelligible. If,
therefore, it is such that mechanical men of common
understanding can comprehend it to make a machine by it,
it is sufficient; but it must be such that mechanics may be
able to make the machine by following the directions of
the specification without any new inventions or additions
of their own ; but if a specification states a number of


different devices, some of ivhich are thrown in merely to
;-puzzle , the Patent is void, for it is not that fair, full, and
true discovery which the public have a right to demand
from an individual who gets so great a reward as a monopoly
for fourteen years together.”
In addition to the details explaining the mode or process
of putting the invention into practice, the applicant must
reveal the best method known to him to secure the full
efficacy of the improvement constituting his invention.
Any material concealment in this respect vitiates the Patent.
In his specification relative proportions may be assigned,
and these the Courts interpret not “as things which are in
themselves unchangeable, but as being the best for the pur-
pose which the inventor desires to accomplish. These pro-
portions must then be accounted rather as illustrations of
the mode of use of the process than as certain definite ter-
mini which cannot be exceeded or diminished either on
the one side or the other.” (Betts v. Neilson.)
Care must also be taken to set out, in the specification,
such a specific title as will clearly disclose the nature and
character of the invention. The slightest flaw in this
respect is sufficient to upset a Patent. Thus, where a
patentee described his invention as an improved mode of
lighting cities, towns, and villages, when it referred merely
to an improved street-lamp, the Court held that the title was
too general, and accordingly they voided the Patent. Again,
where the title indicated that the invention was useful for
sharpening knives, razors, and scissors, and it was found
that it could not be adapted to scissors (except by an un-
specified alteration of the process), the Patent was held to
be bad.
So also a Patent for certain improvements in the English
flute, for the production of new notes, was held to be bad,
because, although the instrument had been greatly im-
proved, only one new note was produced. And again, the


title of a specification represented that the patentee was in
possession of a machine for making paper in single sheets
from one to twelve feet and upwards in width, &c. It was
proved that he was at the time possessed of one machine
only, and this adapted to only one degree of width. The
Patent was held to be void for false suggestion, but “ had the
first machine been capable of working to different widths,
however clumsily or imperfectly, the latter machine would
have been deemed an improvement of it.” On the other
hand, mere vagueness of title has been depicted by the
Courts as an objection which may well be taken on the
part of the Crown before it grants the Patent, but it affords
no ground for avoiding the Patent, unless it causes the
title to disagree with the specification, or unless it leads
to the inference of fraud upon the Crown and consequent
prejudice to the public.
As an illustration of a sufficient title, because self-
explanatory, the following may be cited: —“ A new Auto-
matic Multicolor Printing Apparatus.” Here, every word
carries with it a pregnant signification. The invention is
an apparatus—it relates to the art of printing—specifically,
it aims at the production of many colors in the exercise of
that art—its action is automatic—and the process is new.
Hence the title is, as it needs to be,—terse, intelligible,
full, perspicuous, and self-descriptive.
Even greater care must be exercised in setting out what
the applicant claims as the novelty of his invention. It
must not be forgotten that, when certain claims are speci-
fically set forth, the patentee is regarded as disclaiming
all he does not expressly claim. Where the claims are
too moderate or too grasping, the protection accorded to
the applicant is either minimised to the point of useless-
ness, or rendered so excessive as to endanger the validity
of the Patent.
It should be strictly borne in mind that if, out of twenty
claims, nineteen are good and one is bad, the whole Patent


is worthless, and the invention may he infringed with
impunity. It is therefore advisable to bear in mind the
counsel of Chief Baron Pollock, who on one occasion said—■
“In my mind the safest course for patentees to adopt in
framing their specifications is, instead of including every-
thing, to coniine themselves specifically to one good thing ;
and a jury will always take care that, if it be a real inven-
tion, no man, under colour of improvement, shall be allowed
to interfere with that which is the offspring of their genius.”
A very absurd practice prevails in some quarters, by
which the advantages of an invention are substituted in lieu
of the claims for novelty. The error is one into which ex-
perienced Patent agents do not fall, but the same cannot be
said of others who undertake the preparation of an appli-
cant’s specification. The latter frequently confound the
advantages with the claims , and so cause a specification to
read more like a prospectus. It is, of course, advisable to
enumerate the benefits of the invention, but this should be
done in the earlier stage of the description; and the claim
or claims should be confined to a precise definition of those
parts which are novel and useful, and which it is sought
specially to protect.
It may be noted that the various collected judgments of
the leading tribunals accentuate the theory that the Courts
should construe the language of a specification by neither
too liberal or too severe a standard, but by the ordinary
trade acceptation of the terms employed. Lord Chelmsford
said—“ The office of a claim is to define and limit with
precision what it is which is claimed to have been invented
and therefore patented. In the construction of a specifica-
tion, it appears to methatitoughtnottobe subjected either
to what has been called a benign interpretation, or to a strict
one. The language should be construed according to its
ordinary meaning—the understanding of technical words
being, of course, confined to those who are conversant with


the subject-matter of the invention —and, if the specifica-
tion is thus sufficiently intelligible, it performs all that is
required of it.”
An inventor of a machine (so it was ruled in Bloxam v.
Elsee) is not tied down “to make such a specification as,
by words only , would enable a skilful mechanic to make the
machine, but he is to be allowed to call in aid the drawings
which he annexes to the specification; and if, by a com-
parison of the words and the drawings, the one will explain
the other sufficiently to enable a skilful mechanic to
perform the work, such a specification is sufficient.”
It remains to add that the text of a specification has so
crucial a bearing upon the legal livelihood of a Patent that
it is a duty the writer owes to the public to counsel
inventors to avail themselves of professional assistance
whenever they feel diffidence regarding their own abilities.
The history of many important and interesting Patents
goes to show that many an ingenious inventor loses the
fruits of his skill and inventive talent through failure
either to effectually and legally disclose the merits of his
invention, or to restrict his claim to that which is lawfully
claimable. A clever inventor is not necessarily. a good
Patents lawyer; and so obvious is this fact that several
leading States openly advise recourse to professional Patent
Agents, whose experience in preparing the necessary docu-
ments is of the utmost service to the intending patentee,
who, otherwise, frequently finds that the cheaper the Patent
the greater its vulnerability in a Court of law. It need
scarcely be added that an experienced or competent Patent
Agent should combine the qualifications of a mechanic, a
draftsman, a scientist, and a lawyer. This book proposes
to render every intelligent inventor competent to act as his
own Patent Agent; but in all cases of doubt or moment,
the safest and wisest counsel, based on official and actual
experience, is to suggest a reference to a professional man.


CHAPTER X.
INFRINGEMENT, INJUNCTION, AND SCIRE FACIAS.
Since the object of a Patent is to reserve the exclusive use
of the invention to the patentee, the common law vests
him with the right to demand and receive reparation in
a court of law from any person infringing the rights secured
by the Patent. The infringement of a Patent is, therefore,
a tort, “ and all persons who are in any way acting towards
it are jointly answerable.”
The attitude of the Court towards persons guilty of
infringement, and the considerations which control the
judgment of the Court, have from time to time been enu-
merated and elaborated in a series of decisions, exhibiting
a logical uniformity of principle. Perhaps the clearest
exposition is that given by Chief Justice Wood in Curtis
v. Platt —“ On the question of infringement and evasion
of a Patent for a new object, the Court will scan the pro-
cess very narrowly, and necessarily give greater weight to
any evidence which there may be that this other process for
effecting the same object is simply colourable, instead of
being a bona fide new invention. Where the thing is
wholly novel and one which has never been achieved before,
the machine itself which is invented necessarily contains
a great amount of novelty in all its parts, and one looks
very narrowly and very jealously upon any other machines
for effecting the same object, to see whether or not they are
merely colourable contrivances for evading that which has
been done before. When the object itself is one which is
not new, but the means only are new, one is not inclined to
say that a person who invents a particular means of doing
something that has been known to all the world long before,
has a right to extend very largely the interpretation of those


means which he has adopted for carrying it into effect. Be-
cause, otherwise, that would be to say that the whole world
is to be precluded from achieving some desirable and well-
known object, which everybody has had in view for years.
In such a case it may be said that the means taken are simply
mechanical equivalents for the means previously adopted
for arriving at the same object. One looks more jealously
at the claims of inventors seeking to limit the rights of the
public at large for effecting that which has been commonly
known to all the world long ago. Of course, no Patent can
be taken out for effecting this as a new object, but only for
effecting it by a new means. What those means may be,
and what is the extent of a claim which the patentee has a
right to insist upon as to those means is often a matter of
much difficulty. Of course, the Court would take care,
whether the patentee has put it in words or not, that no
person shall be allowed to substitute a mechanical equiva-
lent or a chemical equivalent, as the case may be, for doing
the same thing without the slightest degree of invention on
the part of the person who substitutes it, or any benefit
whatever to be derived from that apparently new mode.
If you find a specific mechanical improvement claimed, then
you must hold the person strictly to that particular me-
chanical device which he has claimed for effecting the
object he had in view ; and if he says it is to be done in
one precise and particular way, to that precise and particular
way he must be held ; and those who have bond fide
employed a different system and a different way must not
be held to have infringed.”
If there is a Patent for a combination, the combination
itself “ is, ex necessitate, the novelty; and the combination is
also the merit, if it be a merit, which remains to be proved
by evidence. So also with regard to the discrimination
between what is new and what is old. If it is clear that
the claim is for a combination, and nothing but a combina-
tion, there is no infringement tinless the 'whole combination


is used, and it is in that way immaterial whether any or
which of the parts is new. If, indeed, it were left open on
the specification for the patentee to claim not merely the
combination of all the parts as a whole, but also certain
subordinate or subsidiary parts of the combination, on the
ground that such subordinate and subsidiary parts are new
and material, then it might be necessary to see that the
patentee had carefully distinguished those subordinate or
subsidiary parts, and had not left it in dubio what claim
for parts in addition to the claim for combination he meant
to assert.” (Lord Cairns, L.C., in Harrison v. The Ander-
ston Foundry Company.)
If a new process, of which the patentee and all others
were ignorant at the time of the specification, is found out
afterwards, the exercise of such new process will be an
infringement, if it is substantially the same with or includes
the patented invention. (Heath v. Unwin.)
In charging the jury in Bateman and Moore v. Gray,
Baron Martin said: “ The law will not permit a person to
take an article that has been patented, and to give a sub-
stitute in place of it, for the purpose of effecting the same
end by the use of equivalents, and using the skill and
knowledge which he may possess to evade the Patent. If
you believe that the defendant’s instrument, though he
might have employed skill and knowledge upon it, was
taken substantially from the plaintiffs’, and that what he
has produced is nothing more than a substitution of other
and equivalent means for producing the same end, even
though the means employed might be better than those of
the plaintiffs’, it is my duty to tell you that is an infringe-
ment of the Patent. If that were not the law, no Patent
would be safe.” A rule nisi for a new trial in the above
case, on the ground of misdirection by the judge, was dis-
charged by the Court of Exchequer,
In chemical discoveries where a patentee has made some
discovery in chemistry, any person may afterwards use for


the same purpose chemical equivalents which were not
known to be chemical equivalents at the time the Patent
was taken out. And where a Patent is taken out for a
process for arriving at a known result, “ any other person
may take out a Patent for another process, or may use
another process without taking out a Patent and without
peril of prosecution for infringement. But when a Patent
is taken out for a new result not known before, and there
is one process described in the Patent which is effectual
for the purpose of arriving at that new result at the time
when the Patent is taken out, the patentee is entitled to
protection against all other processes for the same result;
and no person can, without infringing upon his Patent,
adopt simply a different process for arriving at the same
result.” (Badische Anilin und Soda Eabrik v. Levinstein.)
An infringement, it is well to remark, need not be
modo et forma , but may consist of a colourable evasion.
“The phrase ‘colourably’” (says Lord Blackburn) “is
very apt to mislead in these cases. If part of the property
in the invention be really taken, there is an infringement,
however much that may be disguised or sought to be
hidden. If that is detected by the patentee, and if what
is taken is really part of his property given to him by the
Letters Patent, he has a right to proceed against the
infringer, however ingeniously the colours may have been
contrived to try to conceal the fact that there has been a
taking of part of the property. But for all that, it is not
correct to say that doing anything that answers the same
object is necessarily an infringement of the specification ;
we must look at what is shown in the specification. It may
be that the question arises whether the particular thing is
or is not within the specification. Whether it is for the
interest of one side or the other, I apprehend the duty of
the Court is fairly and truly to construe the specification,
neither favouring the one side nor the other—neither
putting an unfair gloss or construction upon the specifica


tion for the purpose of saving a Patent if it is said that the
Patent is void, nor putting an unfair gloss or construction
upon it in order to extend the Patent and make it take in
something which you may think was an unhandsome taking
of the fruits of his invention from the patentee, if it is not
really an infringement of the Patent.”
Pending the hearing of an action for infringement, the
plaintiff may apply to the Court for an injunction to re-
strain the defendant from continuing to use the plaintiff’s
invention. The practice of the Courts in this respect was
accurately set out by Lord Langdale when Master of the
Rolls:—■“ Where an injunction is asked to restrain the in-
fringement of a Patent, the Court has occasion to consider,
Ist, the validity of the Patent, and 2nd, the fact of the
infringement. Where those two facts are established, it is
within the power, as it is the duty of the Court, to grant
the injunction. But there are many cases in which it is
not clear either that the Patent is legally valid or that it
has been infringed. It depends on the degree of doubt
which exists on these questions w r hether the Court will
grant the interim injunction. In such cases it will
cautiously consider the degree of convenience and incon-
venience to the parties by granting or not granting the
injunction. These things are to be carefully considered:
the right between the parties is a legal right, and being a
legal right, this Court, in cases where the matter is doubt-
ful, is naturally anxious to obtain the decision of a court
of law, where the matter is properly cognizable, before it
interferes to prevent a party exercising his prima facie
rights. In cases of overwhelming mischief the Court has
authority to interfere at any time.”
On the same subject, Vice-Chancellor Turner said
“It is part of the duty of the Court to protect property
pending litigation ; but when it is called upon to exercise
that duty, the Court requires some proof of title in the
party who calls for its interference. In the case of a new


Patent, this proof is wanting; the public, whose interests
are affected by the Patent, have had no opportunity of
contesting the validity of the patentee’s title, and the
Court therefore refuses to interfere until his right has been
established by law. But in a case where there has been
long enjoyment under the Patent (the enjoyment, of
course, including use), the public have had the opportunity
of contesting the Patent; and the fact of their not having
done so affords, at least, prima facie evidence that the title
of the patentee is good; and the Court, therefore, inter-
feres before the right is established at law.” It may also
be added that an injunction will lie against any person
proposing, threatening, or essaying to infringe a patent,
even though steps in the direction of actual infringement
have not been taken.
Since the right to work an invention is not inherited by
the public until the expiration of the Patent, it follows that
the manufacture of the article patented cannot be pro-
ceeded with without the patentee’s authority, even in
anticipation of the speedy demise of the monopoly. Thus,
in a suit to restrain from infringing a Patent, it appeared
that the Patent was about to expire, and that defendant
had piratically manufactured a large stock of the patented
gas meters, ready to be thrown on the market as soon as
the monopoly was at an end. Lord Lyndhurst, L.C.,
granted an injunction to restrain the sale of such meters,
both before and after the term limited by the grant of
the Patent. (Crossley v. Beverley.) In a case present-
ing similar features, Lord Brougham said“l am of
opinion that the Court would interfere, even after a
Patent has expired, to restrain the sale of articles manu-
factured previous to its expiration , in infringement of a
Patent right; and that a party would not be allowed to
prepare for the expiration of a Patent by illegally manu-
facturing articles, and immediately after its expiration to
deluge the market with the produce of his piracy, and thus


reap the reward of his improbous labour in making it.
The Court would, in such a case, restrain him from selling
them even after the expiration of the Patent.”
As previously stated, the patentee may issue licenses,
permitting others to participate in the monopoly accorded
to him in his Patent. These licenses must he registered
at the Examiner’s office within a prescribed period, and
may be issued to one or more persons, and either for a
portion of the Colony or for the whole Colony. With
respect to litigation that may arise between the patentee
and his licensee, it may be noted that a licensee cannot,
under any pretence whatever, bring his licensor into litiga-
tion as to the novelty or utility of the invention, or as to
the sufficiency of the specification; but he is entitled to
invoke the aid of the courts to ascertain what is the ambit
of the specification as properly construed, and to claim
that he has not worked inside that limit. (Adie v. Clarke.)
By section five of Dr. Douglass’ Act, Letters Patent of
New South Wales may be repealed by writ of scire facias.
This writ empowers the Crown to repeal its own grant,
where it has either granted what it has no right to grant,
or more than it has a right to grant, or where the grantee
has obtained the grant under false pretences. Proof that
the alleged invention is utterly useless, or that it is no
invention, or that the patentee is not the author or intro-
ducer or the legal representative of either of them, or that
the claim to Patent Eights was destroyed by prior user or
prior publication, or that the title is inexplicit, or that the
claims in the specification are too grasping or partially
unsustainable —each of these is good and sufficient ground
of application, by any citizen of the State, to the Court
for the issue of a writ of scire facias to repeal the grant
from the Crown, and thereby to release the subjects of
the State from a restriction improperly hampering their
indivividual movements in trade and commerce.


On the subject of repealing Patents, it must be noted
that every Patent is issued at the applicant’s own risk.
The Crown takes every precaution, by its officers, to test
the merits of the petitioner’s claim, but beyond this it
assumes no responsibility as to the effectiveness or legality
of the Patent when granted. In even dubious and
controversial cases a Patent is frequently issued, with a view
to cast upon the law-courts the onus of investigating the
merits of rival claims and vexed contentions. The equity
of this course will be apparent, when it is borne in mind
that a defective Patent may be repealed on cause shown,
whilst for a wanton refusal there is no remedy—no appeal
lying from the Crown to the Courts until the freedom of
trade and liberty of commerce are assailed by the grant of
an unjustified monopoly.


CHAPTER XI.
CERTIFICATES OF PROVISIONAL PROTECTION.
The object and effect of a Certificate of Provisional Pro-
tection are the subjects of much misapprehension on the
part of those who take advantage of this innovation in our
Patents law. It is well, therefore, to explain that the
Certificate is not a Patent pro tempore , as many persons
imagine, but is simply a license to the inventor to perfect
and publish his invention without the use and publication
(so authorized) jeopardising his title to Letters Patent.
In effect the applicant says—“ I have hit upon what I
consider a useful invention, which I require a longer time
to perfect, and which I wish to put into experimental use
long enough to enable me so to improve it as to secure my
invention from being hastily superseded by a better one.
I also desire to publish my proposals to a number of persons,
with a view to bartering the invention to the best possible
advantage. I am in dread lest this use and publication
prior to application for a Patent, which my invention is not
yet forward enough for me to make, may entail the subse-
quent rejection of my application, or the ultimate cancel-
lation of my Patent.”
To this the Crown virtually makes answer —“We will
give you a license to use and publish your invention for a
year, without prejudice, on that account, to any application
you may in that interim make for a grant of Letters Patent.
But bear in mind that, in divulging a proposal which is
immature, you run a risk of inciting to increased energy
other persons leisurely contemplating the same object as
yourself ; and the first to come to the Grown with a complete


invention will he the only one to secure the protection of a
Patent. It will be no answer to say that you were the first
to foreshadow the discovery; because the only justification
for a monopoly is the effectual disclosure of an invention;
and an invention is the intelligent expression of a practical
result and not of an ill-developed notion. In availing your-
self of this license you therefore knowingly hazard the
possibility of being anticipated before your crude idea
reaches ripeness; all the Crown can do for your protection
is meanwhile to watch narrowly all interim applications
apparently coinciding with your own, and to investigate any
allegations which you may then make that other persons
have pirated your ideas. If the theft is of your invention
when perfected, you are safe; for you can follow on your
rival’s heels with a complete application, and your Patent
will date from the date of your first petition, thus securing
the monopoly for yourself and the consequent refusal to the
person usurping your ideas. But if the hints afforded by
your own publication of an ill-developed proposal have led
a clever rival to perfect that ivhich with you is still an
imperfection , your claim to a Patent is effaced, and the fault
is your own for revealing an imperfect idea before you had
acquired an intelligent conception of how to perfect it.”
This license, pure and simple—that is, authority to use
and publish the discovery without such authorised use and
publication jeopardising the holder's title to Patent rights
—constitutes the Provisional Protection secured by these
Certificates. The holder may publicly use and experi-
ment with his invention for a twelvemonth, and he may
also publish it to the world at large, with a view to
its sale, wholly or in part, to any person who is in a better
position to work it to a profitable end. One more advan-
tage, and one only, is secured by the Certificate, and that
is comprised in the obligation on the part of the Crown to
date the Letters Patent, when ultimately granted, as of
the date of the application for the Certificate.


It will readily be admitted that those are indeed very
great advantages to follow the payment of the small fee of
two pounds; which, it must be remembered, is, in case of a
subsequent successful application for Letters Patent, ac-
counted as part payment of the prescribed fee for the
latter grant. The Minister of Justice, in framing the
recent Act which brought these Certificates into existence,
wisely halted at the concession of these substantial benefits.
It is unreasonable for inventors to demur, as some do, to
what they term the meagre and insufficient character of the
privileges attached by the law to these Certificates. It was
never intended by the Minister or by Parliament that a
Certificate should be equivalent to a Patent for a year.
The law gives the holder no protection from infringement
until he subsequently lodges a complete specification and
makes application for Letters Patent for the invention
which has been made the subject of Provisional Protection.
The wisdom of this denial is obvious, because until the
invention is complete it is impossible to debar the public
from using a device which still lurks in the obscurity of
imperfection, or from imitating a process whose exact
details are still an unsolved problem to the inventor. When,,
however, the complete specification is lodged, the invention
is protected from infringement, though action against the
party guilty of infringement is suspended by law until the
Letters Patent are actually issued and antedated.
It follows from this exposition of the advantages and
deficiencies of a Certificate, that this probationary protec-
tion was not designed to apply to inventions which are
deemed by their authors to be susceptible of no further im-
provement. Por such, it is true, a Certificate may be
obtained equally as if for a crude invention, but the appli-
cant, runs the unnecessary risk of hazarding a loss by
interim infringement, which he might avoid by paying the
additional £3 in the first instance. In most cases this
course is so injudicious that the Office counsels applicants
E


whose invention is in a state o£ completeness to make
eo instanti application for a Patent instead of for a
Certificate.
.Nor must it be forgotten that the grant of a Patent is
by no means a logical corollary of the grant of a Certificate.
In the latter case the grant is next door to a matter of
form. The provisional specification presented by the appli-
cant may tread dangerously close on the heels of a prior
Patent; but as it is impossible in most cases to positively
predict the ultimate upshot of the discovery when brought
to perfection, it would be unfair to refuse to license the
holder to proceed with his experiments, which may possibly
result in a very material improvement on the prior Patent
to which it at first view appears to be assimilated.
And, furthermore, as already shown, the holder of the
certificate may be forestalled through the haziness and imper-
fection of his own ideas and his inability to compete in the
race with more ingenious rivals. If the law were other-
wise, then where a hundred people are on the track of a
common discovery (say an effective scheme for the
destruction of rabbits by poison) the least ingenious
might obtain a certificate protecting a vague proposal
hardly batched out of the shell of theory, and thereby
bar ninety-nine more ingenious men from the full
elucidation of their experiment and research. But in
an allegation of fraud the possession of the certificate
throws the onus probandi on the later applicant.
When eventually the complete specification comes to be
critically examined, the possession of the Certificate confers
upon the applicant for Letters Patent no greater immunity
than the protection from the consequence of the interim
use and publication of his discovery. If the specification
substantially infringes a prior Patent, his Certificate will
not avert the rejection of his application for a Patent ; and
it may even happen that the holder of a Certificate may be


cast in damages by a court of law for infringing a prior
Patent. Eor although his provisional description may not
so coincide with some previous invention as to point
directly to infringement, yet the elaboration of his sup-
posed discovery may lead him into imitating that which
the Crown has already forbidden its subjects to imitate,
and for this appropriation his Certificate is neither warrant
nor excuse.
Too much caution, therefore, cannot be enforced upon
persons availing themselves of this new departure in our
Patent law to make full preliminary search before apply-
ing for a Certificate, as the law is not designed to aid them
to pirate other men’s inventions under the veil of a provi-
sional protection obtained from the Crown through the
studied vagueness or incompleteness of the descriptions
accompanying the application for provisional protection.
Applications for provisional protection are made by
petition, and need only be accompanied by a provisional
specification, by which is meant a description of the out-
line and character of the invention as contradistinguished
from a narration of the more minute and explicit details
which constitute a complete specification. These provi-
sional specifications are treated as confidential communica-
tions which, during the currency of the Certificate, meet
no other eyes than those of the Examiner and his assistants.
They are not open to inspection by any persons other than
those exhibiting the authority of the lawful holder of the
Certificate.
These Certificates are in force for twelve months, unless
sooner superseded by the issue of Letters Patent, in which
case they are then open to public inspection as part of the
proceedings in the Patent. If no application be made
within the year to convert them into Letters Patent, they
are destroyed by the Examiner and treated as a nullity, ah
initio. It follows, therefore, that the holder of a Certifi-
cate, allowing a year to elapse without applying for a Patent,


is precluded from a subsequent independent application for
a grant of Patent rights, because, against the prior use
and publication of his invention, he is debarred from
pleading a protection which his own neglect and delay-
have vitiated and cancelled.
As the Act only empowers the issue of such Letters
Patent to the lawful holder of the Certificate, it follows
that an application to convert a Certificate into a Patent
should be made early enough to permit of its issue before
the expiration of the year, lest it should be argued that
there is then, by law, no Certificate, and, therefore, no
lawful holder to whom the Patent may be issued.
Care should always be taken to so particularise an inven-
tion in the provisional specification, however brief, as to
make self-apparent its identity with the discovery disclosed
subsequently in the complete specification. Otherwise, if
the inventions appear dissimilar, the full fee of five pounds
must be paid in the latter case, as for an eo instanti appli-
cation ; and a Patent otherwise issued would be in danger
of avoidance by the courts, on the ground that the
prescribed fee had not been paid on application.


CHAPTER XII.
SUGGESTIONS FOE FUTURE LEGISLATION.
The facilities afforded to inventors by the recent changes
in the law have contributed to a marked increase in the
number of applications for Patents; and there is every
indication that the liberality of this Colony’s Patents
laws will materially aid in giving New South Wales a dis-
tinct precedence in industrial greatness.
So far as the present Act goes in its adhesion to prin-
ciples which have become traditional and time-honored,
there is but little scope for improvement by future legisla-
tion. Any change, to be beneficially effective, must pro-
ceed to excise from official practice and procedure much of
the formality that has been bequeathed by the circumlocu-
tory proclivities of former historical eras.
It must, indeed, be obvious to the enlightened and pro-
gressive mind, that the direct donation of a Patent from the
hand of the Crown is no greater guarantee of efficacious
administration than if the grant were straightway made to
the inventor in open court by some competent person to
whom the Crown should delegate its functions and entrust
its interests.
Practically this is what takes place under the present
system, but there is the needless accompaniment of the
delay and inconvenience which inevitably attach themselves
to circumlocution and formality. At present the Examiner
advises the Minister, the Minister advises the Executive,
the Executive advise the Governor, and His Excellency
signs the grant prepared for him in the Patents Office.
To all intents and purposes, neither the Governor nor
Executive have the least knowledge of the merits of the
cases on which they adjudicate; and, except as to the pre-
sent Minister or his predecessor, Mr. Garvan (who both take


an intelligent interest in the progress of Patents), it as often
happens as not that the Minister is no whit better informed
as to the individual merits of the numberless applications
which come before him.
The uselessness of this routine practically casts upon the
Examiner the entire responsibility of granting or refusing
a Patent; and it is quite consistent with the principles of
good government that the Crown should thus delegate its
functions to its officers, with authority to act in the name
of the Crown as the law permits. The defect in the system
is the needless routine by which Patents are delayed, useful
publicity partly avoided, and (except under exceptional
circumstances) no more effective supervision attained.
Now it is a sound axiom of politics, that what is only
useful as a formality is not useful at all; and, on this sup-
position, it would be well if future reform eradicated much
of the present routine. To effect this object a Patents
Court should be created, and a Judge* appointed to hear
and decide in open Court all applications for Patents or
for Provisional Protection, and all applications for injunc-
tions or repeal of grants, and all actions for infringement,
&c. An appeal should, of course, lie from the Judge to
the Supreme Court, for by this means an effective super-
vision would be secured in substitution of the present idle
routine.
The present obligation to approach the Patents Office
by petition to the Governor should, in this age of demo-
cratic enlightenment, he abolished, and replaced by applica-
tions to the Judge in open Court, due notice of which
should be advertised at the applicant’s expense in the
official Patents Journal (which it is contemplated shortly
to establish), and in the daily press of the metropolis.
The Court should be held once a month, and should sit
from day to day till the business of that term is completed.
* Somewhat on the lines suggested by the Bill introduced by Mr. Garvan.


The applicants should be at liberty to appear in person or
by attorney or other agent. Patent Agents should pay a
license to the Crown, and have their names entered in that
capacity on the rolls of the Court after passing an examina-
tion before the Judge in Patents Law and Practice.
When the Judge decides to grant a Patent, the grant
should be immediately signed by him, sealed with the seal
of the Court, and delivered to the successful applicant.
The duration of every Patent should be limited in the
first instance to five years, with a right of formal renewal
for a second term of five years on payment of a further fee
of three pounds, and a similar right of renewal for a like
term on payment of another five pounds. By this means
inventors would secure protection for their inventions for
five, ten, or fifteen years, according as the success of their
Patents should urge them to seek. The effect of this
would be to provide a steady source of revenue from
successful Patents, the holders of which have a right to
pay more for Patents proved to be profitable than for those
which represent experimental speculation; and after five
or ten years, unsuccessful and often useless inventions
would be wiped off the record, where they at present
stand as the governing Patent to many a useful improve-
ment they either bar or blackmail.
The internal administration of the office should be under
the charge of a Registrar of Patents, who should be em-
powered to adjudicate in the absence of the Judge, and to
sit with the latter if necessary. The sworn testimony of
experts should be invoked by the Court where necessary.
In some colonies the adjudication here suggested is per-
formed by the Attorney-General in his office; but not only
are the labours sufficient to alone engross the time and
talent of one man, but it necessarily happens that a Patents’
Judge should possess special experience in Patents’ Law
and Practice, and special acquaintance with all matters
pertaining thereto.


Trade Marks, Designs, and Copyright, being kindred
subjects to Patents, should, in any new Bill, be embraced
under a united administration, as is the custom in most
other countries.
Unless further legislation takes some sucli circuit as
here proposed, in excision of old world formularies, it is
needless to advocate any alteration in the laws in regula-
tion of Patents; for upon the old lines which have become
historical, and have descended to us from mediaeval times,
the present Act sufficiently satisfies the inventors and the
public.


MAXIMS OF PATENT LAW.
A new combination of old parts is patentable.
*****
One defective claim illegalises all the good ones.
*****
Infringement is a question determinable by the jury.
*****
A new addition to an existing machine is patentable.
*****
Letters Patent may be repealed by a writ of scire facias.
*** * * *
All Patents are enrolled in a place accessible to public
inspection.
1 * * * * *
A new and useful process is a good subject matter for a
Patent.
*****
A patentable invention must be referable to an art or
manufacture.
*****
In all specifications, what is not specifically claimed is
disclaimed.
* * * * *
The patentee must be either the inventor or his legal
representative.
*****
In a Patent for a combination, the combination is itself
the novelty.
*****
Public use means a use in public and not necessarily It/
the public.
* * * * *
A patentable combination may include part or parts of
old inventions.


Long enjoyment of a Patent is a primd facie presumption
of its validity.
*****
Every Patent represents a bargain between the public
and the inventor.
*****
An invention for dispensing with one part of a double
process is patentable.
*****
A patentable invention must possess the qualities of
utility and novelty.
*****
Drawings form part of a specification, and both form
part of the petition.
*****
The minimum duration of a Patent is seven years ; the
maximum, fourteen.
*****
A licensee cannot dispute the novelty or utility of the
licensor’s invention.
*****
Grasping claims vitiate a Patent; too moderate ones
minimise its usefulness.
*****
Every specification must effectually divulge the inventor’s
secret to the public.
*****
A new use of an old thing is patentable, if there is
novelty in the application.
*****
Prior publication, or prior user without concealment,
invalidates a Patent.
*****
Distinct means to effect the same object as an existing
Patent will support a Patent.
*****
A new combination formed by the mere conjunction of
old inventions is not patentable.


An infringement need not be mo do et forma , but may be
comprised in a colourable evasion.
*****
The grant of a Patent is regarded as an act of royal
favour, and not as the concession of a right.
*****
A Certificate of Provisional Protection is no defence to
an action for infringing a prior Patent.
*****
A Patent is the reward which is held out for a discovery
referable to the arts and manufactures,
*****
A specification of a combination in itself novel need not
discriminate between new and old parts.
* * * * *
A Patent is void unless the discovery disclosed in the
specification is true, fair, full, and unreserved.
*****
A cheaper, quicker, or improved production of a known
substance from known materials is patentable.
*****
The title of an invention must be terse, lucid, and self-
explanatory.
* * * * *
The more ingenious the piracy the greater the wrong,
and therefore the more substantial the damages.
*****
The infringement of a Patent is a tort, for which the
Patentee may demand reparation in a court of law.
*****
A patentee who assigns his Patent as a valid one is
thereby estopped from derogating from his own grant.
*****
Where a specification includes a number of devices
thrown in to puzzle the public, the Patent is void.
*****
Letters Patent, superseding Certificates of Provisional
Protection, bear the date of the latter documents.


The prior publication of an invention in a book, news-
paper, or other periodical, disqualifies from Patent rights.,
* * * * *
A Patent must be for some new production from the
elements of science, and not for the elements themselves.
**#•#.#
In an invention partly original and partly communicated,
the specification must discriminate between the two.
* * - * * *
Inventions of but slight ingenuity, or of but trivial
usefulness, receive the minimum protection of seven years.
* * * * *
The onus of disputing the novelty of an invention is cast
upon the person proceeded against for infringement.
* * * * #
Every Patent granted by the Crown is issued at the
patentee’s own risk as to its validity and effectiveness.
* * * * *
A prior exhibition of a useless machine unsuccessfully
attempting the object achieved by a Patent does not
invalidate that Patent.
*****
The Court may repeal a defective Patent; but it cannot
compel the Crown to reconsider a refusal, however wrong
or wanton.
*.* * * *
The object of the specification is to give the public
warning of the precise extent of the privilege conferred on
the patentee.
* * # . * *
A writ of scire facias empowers the Crown to repeal a
grant of too much, or a grant obtained under false
pretences, . . •
* * * * *
In a specification you are not to tell the public to make
an experiment, but to tell them how to do the thing you
seek to patent.


Even after a Patent has expired, the Court will interfere
to forbid the sale of articles piratically manufactured
previous to its expiration.
*****
If it is clear that a claim is for a combination, and for
nothing but a combination, there is no infringement unless
the whole combination is used.
*****
Patents are issuable to an individual or individuals; to a
corporate body or corporate bodies; or to any association
of one and the other.
*****
The maximum duration of a Certificate of Provisional
Protection is one year; and the interim issue of a Patent
supersedes the Certificate.
* * * ' * *
Any person may lodge a protest against the issue of a
Patent; but an inventor is debarred from disparaging an
invention which he has assigned.
*****
Eelative proportions in a specification are interpreted as
illustrations of the best use of the invention, and not as
fixed and unchangeable elements,
*****
The language of a specification is interpreted by neither
a liberal nor a severe standard, but by the ordinary trade
acceptation of the terms employed.
* * * - * *
Every applicant for a Patent must reveal the best
method known to him to secure the full efficacy of the
improvement constituting his invention. i
*****
Where the Patent appears to be valid, and the infringe-
ment indisputable, the Court will grant an injunction as a
matter of right. Where either is in doubt, the Court
decides according to the relative consequence to the
parties.
* -* * * *


A prior experimental or confidential user, or secret
manufacture of .large quantities without sale, does not
derogate from the applicant’s title to Patent rights.
* * * * *
"When a specification describes the invention as to he
performed in one precise and particular way, to that
precise and particular way the Patentee is limited.
*****
An expert should give an explicit summary of the nature
and character of the invention examined by him, and should
show the contrast with prior kindred Patents.
*****
The importer of a new invention is regarded by the
Court as the inventor, but it is proposed to limit the
duration of his Patent to the minimum term of seven
years.
**- * * *
No Patent can be obtained for any abstract principle,
game of skill, method of calculation, or natural product,
or for any discovery hurtful to health, morals, or good
government.
*****
A specification—that is an effectual disclosure of the
patentee’s secret —is the price the patentee pays to the
public for keeping them so long out of the enjoyment of
the commodity protected.
*****
A Certificate of Provisional Protection is not a pro tem.
Patent, but simply a license to use and publish an inven-
tion without, on that account, jeopardising the inventor’s
title to Letters Patent.
*****
The Patents law of New South Wales is regulated by
the Statutes 16 Yic. No. 24, 42 Yic. No. 27, and 51 Yic.
No. 3, and by so much of the Common Law of England as
is not repealed by these Statutes.


Except in cases of fraud a Certificate of Provisional
Protection is no bar to the issue of a Patent for the
provisionally protected invention to a person other than
the holder of the Certificate.
*****
A specification must be so intelligible as to be under-
stood by those whose business leads them to be conversant
with the subject, in order that they may perpetuate the
invention when the term of the Patent is expired.
*****
The fact that one applicant furnishes the capital and
another makes the invention will not entitle both appli-
cants to make application as joint inventors ; but in such a
case they may become joint applicants upon the actual
inventor assigning an undivided part interest to his co-
applicant.
*****
In an action for infringement of a Patent for a new
object, the Court looks narrowly and jealously upon any
other contrivance for effecting the same object. Where
the object is old, and the means only are new, the Court is
slow to extend very largely the interpretation of those
means.


DIGEST OF DECIDED CASES.
An injunction was granted (three judges dissenting)
against the captain of a ship in which were fitted certain
pumps alleged to be an infringement of a Patent, and this
notwithstanding that the pumps were only used in foreign
waters. (Adair v. Young.)
*****
In an action for infringement of a Patent, the plaintiffs
claimed to be the inventors, but at the hearing one of their
witnesses proved that he himself invented the impi-ove-
meut which was the subject of the Patent, and whilst
employed in the patentees’ workshop. The plaintiffs were,
therefore, held not to be the inventors, and were non-
suited. (Barker and Harris v. Shaw.)
*****
The cases decided before the passing of the Statute of
Monopolies, prove that grants by the Crown to persons
who have brought any new trade within the realm, are
good at common law. (Tindal, C. J., in Beard v. Egerton.)
*****
The introducer of a new invention need not, to justify
his claim to a Patent, be the meritorious importer. He
may be a clerk, or servant, or agent, to whom the
communication is made by the foreign inventor. (Beard v.
Egerton.)
*****
An alien amy or other foreigner may hold a Patent, if
the Crown chooses to grant it to him. (Beard v. Egerton.
Tindal, C.J.)


If a manufacture be new in the realm, the importer is
the inventor and may have a Patent, if the Crown chooses
to grant it, even though he is not the assignee of the
foreign inventor, and even though he may be a foreigner
himself. (Baron Pollock.)
* * * * *
There may be considerable doubt as to the validity of
a Patent; still, if there has been a long exclusive enjoy-
ment, the doctrine of the Court is that an injunction shall
go to protect the Patent, until the question of its validity
is duly determined at law. (Lord Lyndhurst in Beeston v.
Pord.)
* * * * *
When a patentee has obtained a verdict establishing the
validity of his Patent, all the world must be taken to know
that if they infringe the Patent, they infringe it with a
liability for costs. (Vice-Chancellor Wood in Betts v.
De Vitre.)
*****
Where a plaintiff cannot show that he has not himself
sold the particular article, the use of which he seeks to
prohibit, he cannot succeed by way of injunction. (Lord
Hathcrley in Betts v. Wilmott.)
*****
There is a wide distinction between a Patent for the
invention of any useful article of commerce, and a Patent
for the invention of machinery by which such an article
may be manufactured. A discovery that the mixture of two
or more simple substances, in certain definite proportions,,
will form a compound substance, valuable for medical or
other qualities, would afford a good ground for a Patent.
A discovery of some machinery, whereby such a mixture
may be more quickly or more effectually accomplished,
might be the foundation of another Patent. (Lord
Cranworth, L.C., in Bewley v. Hancock.)
F


If the patentee has been long in possession the Court
will not, in a motion for an injunction, look into the title,
but will give credit to it until displaced by a trial at law.
(Lord Cottenham, L.C., in Bickford v. Skewes.)
*****
If a jury can understand the nature of the thing
alleged to be infringed, without a model or drawing, there
is no rule of law to require a model or drawing to be set
forth, or which makes void an intelligible specification of
a mechanical improvement merely because no drawing or
model is annexed. (Judge Eooke, in Boulton and "Watty.
Bull.)
*****
New methods of manufacturing articles in common use,
where the sole merit and the whole effect produced are
the saving of time and expense, and thereby lowering the
price of the article and introducing it into more general
use —these methods may be said to be new manufactures.
(Eyre, C.J., idem.)
*****
If, after obtaining a Patent, the patentee discovers an
improvement, he may apply that improvement, and his
Patent will not be affected by his using his own machine
in that improved state; but if at the time when he obtained
his Patent he was apprised of this more beneficial mode of
working, and did not by his specification communicate it to
the public, that is a fraudulent concealment from the
public, and renders his Patent void. (Gribbs, C.J., in
Bovill v. Moore )
*****
The Patent must not be more extensive than the inven-
tion, and therefore, if the invention consists of an addition
or improvement only, a Patent for the whole machine is
void. (Mr. Justice Buller, in Eex v. Else.)


Where a subject is not new ( i.e ., where various con-
trivances have previously been adopted tending to the same
desideratum), any Patent taken out for a method of
performing the operation is substantially confined to that
method, and cannot be extended to other methods obviously
different, because they involve some common principle
applied to the common object, and may apparently be
described by the same general phrase. (Pollock, C.C., in
Bovill v. Finn and Eand.)
* * * * #
The claim of having made an invention is not to pre-
clude others from using an old process and old machines;
nor ought the fact that one person who has infringed the
Patent was ignorant of the want of novelty to preclude
another person from showing that the invention had before
been known and been in use. The consequence is that, in
almost every instance, the patentee has to establish his
case from the beginning against any fresh person who
chooses to impugn the Patent and to contest its validity.
Many cases are on record where, after the plaintiff has
established the validity of the Patent in one case, it has
been decided to be invalid in a second. (Lord Eomilly,
M.E., in Bovill v. Grordier.)
**# * * ’
In a suit to restrain from infringing a Patent, the Master
of the Eolls, Lord Eomilly, refused an application to have
certain questions of fact tried with a special jury. On
appeal to the Lords Justices, the decision was affirmed, and
Lord Cairns, in delivering the judgment, said, “If the
Court thinks it best that a question should be tried before
a jury, a jury can be had; but if, in the opinion of the
Court, a trial without a jury is preferable, neither party
can claim a jury as a matter of right.” (Boyle v. Hitch-
cock.)


In a suit for injunction against alleged infringement,
the cause of action arose in January, 1848, but the bill was
not filed until December 30th of the same year. Lord
Langdale, M.E., said—“ I think that a party coming for
the assistance of the Court to protect a legal right, not
absolutely established, against the party who is alleged to
have infringed it, ought to come at an early period.”
(Bridson v. Benecke.)
*****
Although, on the one hand, a judge must not be astute
to defeat a Patent, on the other hand, he must not extend
a Patent so as to cover that which was not then discovered.
(Jessel, M.R., in the British Dynamite Co. and others v.
Kerbs and others.)
*****
Claim No. 2 being merely a claim to the user of that
which was included in claim No. 1, amounted probably to
the introduction of that which is merely useless, but on
that account did not vitiate the Patent. (Earl Cairns, L.C.,
idem.)
*****
The mere application of old machinery, in an old manner,
to an analogous substance, cannot be the subject of a
Patent; and a Patent claiming it is therefore void. {ldem)
*****
A license being granted for the use of six Patents, on
payment of an annuity of £4OO, and one or more of these
six Patents being voided, no action could be maintained
for the money. The consideration being for the entire six
Patents, and the contract failing to apportion the annuity,
no jury could apportion it. The consideration, by failing
partially, failed entirely. (Tindal, C. J., in Chanter v. Leese
and others.)


The consideration to induce the King to grant a Patent
is the statement made in the petition. Where it alleges
three novelties when in fast there are only two, the united
consideration on which the whole grant was made is
therefore void; and consequently the grant itself is void.
(Best, J., in Brunton v. Hawkes.)
*****
To grant a license not under seal may be a contempt of
the Crown, but does not exempt the man to whom it is
granted, and who derives a benefit from it, from paying the
price of it. (Baron Alderson in Chanter v. Dewhurst and
another.)
*****
The Letters Patent say that no one shall make, use, or
put in practice, the invention, which interdiction does not
apply to the case of a party buying a patent article in a
shop and using it. (Idem.)
*****
The “ general arrangement, construction, and combina-
tion” is not a combination in any sense except that in
which every one of the several improvements may be said
to combine with every other in making the machine a
better one. (Idem.)
*****
A Patent for a new combination or arrangement is to be
entitled to the same protection, and on the same principles
as every other Patent. The Patent is for the entire combi-
nation ; but there is, or may be, an essence or substance of
the invention underlying the mere accident of form, and
that invention may be pirated by a theft in a disguised or
mutilated form, and it will be in every case a question of
fact whether the alleged piracy is the same in substance
and effect or is a substantially new or different combina-
tion. (James, L.J., in Clark v. Adie.)


A license permitting the licensee to make and use the
invention for himself need not be under seal. (Idem.)
* * * * *
A combination or accumulation of three improvements
is a totally distinct thing from a combination or accumu-
lation of two of them—as distinct as a partnership of A,
B, and Cis from a partnership of A and B. If a man
really wants to patent not only the whole but something
less than the whole of what he calls “ a new arrangement,
construction, and combination of parte,” he must clearly
show that he claims that something less —of course perilling
his Patent if that something less is not a novelty. (Idem.)
*****
A Patent was obtained for the discovery of a proper
conducting medium. The plaintiff found after repeated
trials that nothing would serve the purpose except the
cloth described in his specification, yet he says that the
cloth may be of any suitable material, and merely that he
prefers the particular kind there mentioned. Other
persons, misled by the specification, may be induced to
make experiments which the patentee knows must fail;
the public, therefore, has not the full and entire benefit of
the invention—the only ground on which the Patent is
obtained. (Lord Tenterden, C. J., in Crompton v. Ibbotson.)
*****
It does not follow that, because an inventor thinks he
has invented more than he has in fact, and describes the
advantages of his invention, and some of these advantages
arise from an old portion of the invention, it may not still
be a good Patent; provided that the invention as claimed
is so limited as to fail to cover the actual thing in use,
while it covers some of the advantages mentioned; in such
a case it may still, no doubt, be a good Patent. (Jessel,
M.E., in Eearson v. Loe.)


If he had made a new combination, that might have been
a new discovery, and a proper subject for a Patent; but I
think Lord Abinger’s illustration is a striking one, and
applicable to the present case —“ It is like sweeping the
carpet of a new manufacture with an old broom.” If he
had introduced a new article which required the applica-
tion of a new principle to the production of it, that might
have formed a subject of a Patent, but the mere application
of a thing which existed before does not appear to me to
be a subject of a Patent. And, in general terms, I think
that the application of an article to produce any particular
result, the party having no claim either to the mode of
producing the article, or to the mode of applying it for
attaining that result, forms no ground for a Patent. (Lord
Denman, C.J., in Eegina v. Cutler and others.)
*****
If, having a particular purpose in view, you take the
general principles of mechanics, and apply one or other of
them to a manufacture to which it has never before been
applied, that is a sufficient ground for taking out a Patent,
provided that the Court sees that that which has been
invented is new, desirable, and for the public benefit. A
mere trifling matter or a thing of no value will not do,
inasmuch as the whole theory of the Patent law is based
upon the assumption that it is something of real value.
You must show that you have invented something useful—
a new and useful improvement in manufacture. (Wood,
Y.C., in Dangerfield v. Jones.)
*****
The claim set up by the defendants is a right to infringe
a Patent and manufacture the patented article for their
own profit, in order to enable them to sell the article, when
so manufactured, to the Government. That is, I think,
beyond the scope of the privilege which the Crown enjoys.
(Lush, J., in Dixon v. The London Small Arms Company.)


The plaintiff has, by a lawful grant from the Crown,
under the statute, obtained the right to “make, use, exer-
cise, and vend” his invention withinj the United Kingdom,
in such manner as he thinks fit, and the right to have and
enjoy “the whole profit, benefit, commodity, and advantage,
accruing and arising by reason of the said invention.”
Now, one of the most useful of inventions is that of a
process by which the common article may be made more
economically than it was made before. It would be a short
mode of destroying “ every profit, benefit, commodity, and
advantage,” which a patentee could have from such a thing,
if all that a man had to do was to get the thing made
abroad, import it into this country, and then sell it here in
competition with the patentee. I am of opinion, in this
case, that the obtaining from abroad and selling in this
country an article manufactured according to the specifica-
tion of a Patent, is a violation of the privileges granted by
the Letters Patent. (James, Y.C., in Elmslie v. Boursier.)
*****
I must, therefore, lay down the rule, which is consistent
with and in reality a mere sequence from the decided
cases, that in a Patent for a new arrangement or a new
combination of machinery, the specification must describe
the improvement and define the novelty otherwise and in a
more specific form than by the general description of the
entire machine ; it must, to use a logical phrase, assign the
differentia of the new combination. This obligation flows
directly from the condition of the Patent; it is part of the
condition of the Patent that the specification shall par-
ticularly describe and ascertain the invention. (Lord
Westbury, L.C., in Poxwell v. Bostock.)
*****
Now I am not aware of any suit or action in the Court
of Chancery which has been successful on the part of a
patentee without infringement having been proved ; but,
in my opinion, on principle, there is no reason why a


patentee should not succeed in obtaining an injunction
without proving actual infringement. I think so for this
reason Where the defendant alleges an intention to
infringe, and claims the right to infringe, the mischief
done by the threatened infringement of the Patent is very
great, and I see no reason why a patentee should not be
entitled to the same protection as every other person is
entitled to claim from the Court from threatened injury
where the threatened injury will be very serious. Of
course it must be plain that what is threatened to be done
is an infringement. If the threatened act so claimed as of
right is proved to constitute an infringement of the plain-
tiff’s Patent—and I consider it is proved—that, in my
opinion, would be a ground for granting an injunction.
No doubt if a man makes things merely by way of bond
fide experiment, and not with the intention of selling and
making use of the thing so made for the purpose of which
a Patent has been granted, but with the view of improving
upon the invention the subject of the Patent, or with the
view of seeing whether an improvement can be made or
not, that is not an invasion of the exclusive rights granted
by the Patent. Patent rights are not granted to prevent
persons of ingenuity exercising their talents in a fair
way. (Idem.)
* * * * *
The plaintiff professed to have invented a method for the
prevention of boiler explosions. It is not alleged that he
was guilty of any fraud. Why should we assume that the
plaintiff meant to assert that the Patent was indefeasible,
and that the defendants purchased on that understanding,
rather than that each knowing what the invention was, and
having equal means of ascertaining its value, they con-
tracted for the Patent, such as it was, each acting on his
own judgment? AVe think that the latter was the true
nature of the contract, and that there was no warranty,
express or implied. Here the plaintiff was capable of


fulfilling all he had contracted to. The defendants might
have had all they contracted to receive, and were therefore
bound to pay. (Williams, J., in Hall v. Conder and others.)
*****
The claim of a combination or arrangement of parts of
a machine, without more, is in itself a sufficient description
of a novel invention, i.e., of a combination of parts which
have never been combined in the same manner before.
The explanation of the novelty is to be found in the des-
cription of the arrangement of the parts in the body of the
specification. Whether the combination claimed is new
or not is a question of fact to be proved on a trial. Where
a claim is clearly and distinctly made, there can be no
necessity for a patentee to distinguish between what is
claimed and what is disclaimed. It is enough to say that
everything which is not claimed is disclaimed. (Lord
Chelmsford in same.)
*****
It was held —and that, I think, was all that was held (in
Poxwell v. Bostock) —that it was not competent to a man
to take a well-known existing machine, and, having made
some small improvement, to place that before the public,
and say: “ I have made a better machine. There is the
sewing machine invented by so-and-so ; I have improved
upon that. That is mine; it is a much better machine
than his.” That will not do; you must state clearly and
distinctly what it is in which you say you have made an
improvement. To use an illustration which was adopted,
I think, by Lord Justice James in another case, it will not
do, if you have invented a gridiron pendulum, to say : “I
have invented a better clock than anybody else,” not
telling the public what you have done to make it better
than any other clock which is known. (Lord Hatherley
in same.)


But it would be an idle thing, i£ it were possible, to take
a well-known mechanical contrivance and, by applying it
to a subject to which it has not hitherto been applied, to
constitute that application the subject of a Patent to be
granted as for a new invention. You cannot have a
Patent for a well-known mechanical contrivance merely
when it is applied in a manner or to a purpose which is
not quite the same but is analogous to the manner or
purpose in or to which it has been hitherto notoriously
used. (Lord Westbury, L.C., in the same.)
* * * * *
I am of opinion that a Patent for the use of a substance
in a process is infringed by the use of a chemical equiva-
lent for that substance, known to be so at the time of the
use, if used for the purpose of taking the benefit of the
Patent and of making a colourable variation therefrom.
If the Patent was for the use of soda in a process, and, by
subsequent analysis, sodium and oxygen were discovered
to be the elements of soda, the use of sodium and oxygen
in the patented process for the purpose of being equivalent
to soda in that process, would appear to me to be an in-
fringement, although the analysis of soda was subsequent
to the Patent. (Erie, J., in Heath v. Unwin.)
* * * * *
It is undoubtedly true, as a proposition of law, that the
construction of a specification, as the construction of all
other written documents, belongs to the Court; but the
specification of an invention contains most generally, if not
always, some technical terms, some phrases of art, some
processes, and requires generally the aid of the light derived
from what are called surrounding circumstances. It is
therefore an admitted rule of law that the explanation of
the words or technical terms of art, the phrases used in
commerce, and the proofs and results of the processes
which are described (and in a chemical Patent the ascertain-
ment of chemical equivalents)—that all these are matters


of fact upon which evidence may he given, contradictory
testimony may be adduced, and upon which undoubtedly
it is the province and the right of a jury to decide. (Lord
Westbury, L.C., in Hills v. Evans.)
*****
Although the construction of the specification clearly is
matter of law, yet, if there be two specifications to be
compared in order to arrive at a question of fact, the right
of drawing the inference of fact from the comparison
belongs to the jury, and is a question of fact and not a
question of law. (Lord Crauworth, L.C., in the same.)
*****
It is incumbent upon the patentee to give a specification
of the invention in the clearest and most unequivocal terms
of which the subject is capable. And if it appear that
there is any unnecessary ambiguity affectedly introduced,
or anything which tends to mislead the public, in that case
the Patent is void. If the process, as directed by the
specification, does not produce that which the Patent
professes to do, the Patent itself is void. It is certainly
of consequence that the terms of a specification should
express the invention in the clearest and most specific
manner, so that a man of science may be able to produce
the thing intended without the necessity of trying experi-
ments. (Ashhurst, J., in Turner v. Winter.)
*****
It is a principle of Patent law that there must be the
utmost good faith-in the specification. It must describe
the invention in such a way that a person of ordinary skill
in the trade should be able to carry on the process. (Lord
Lyndhurst, L.C, in Sturtz v. De la Eue.)
*****
It behoved the patentee, in order to give the public the
benefit of his invention, to describe very particularly the
material required for the rollers, and the mode in which
rollers of that material were to be constructed. We
cannot think that he has done either the one or the other.


Every step in the application of the invention as specified
would necessitate experiment, not merely for adopting the
best among many known materials and modes of con-
struction comprised in a general description in the specifi-
cation, but for the purpose of discovering a suitable material
and finding a practical mode of construction. (Thesiger,
L.J., in Weggman v. Corcoran.)
* * * * *
The specification would be bad, as containing a false
statement in a material circumstance of a nature that, if
literally acted upon by a competent workman, would mis-
lead him and cause the experiment to fail. (Parke, 8., in
Keilson and others v. Harford and others.)
*****
A specification which casts upon the public the expense
and labour of experiment is undoubtedly bad. There is
either no certain and clear process described, or the process
described is such as might be practised without the assist-
ance of the patentee. (Abbott, C. J., in Eex v. Wheeler.)
*****
The party obtaining the Patent must be the true and
first inventor in their country. If he import from a foreign
country that “ which others at the time of the making of
such Letters Patent and grants did not use,” it will suffice.
(Creswell, J., in Walton v. Bateman.)
*****
Where any man, by his own charge and industry, or by
his own wit and invention, doth bring any new trade into
the realm, or any engine tending to the furtherance of a
trade that never was used before, and that for the good of
the realm, then in such cases the king may grant to him
a monopoly Patent, for some reasonable time, until the
subjects may learn the same, in consideration of the good
that he doth bring by his invention to the commonwealth;
otherwise not. (Darcy v. Allin.)


If any man has brought in a new invention and a new
trade, within the kingdom, in peril of his life and con-
sumption of his estate and stock, or if a man hath made a
new discovery of anything ; in such cases the king, of his
grace and favor, in recompense of his costs and travail, may
grant a charter unto him, that he only shall use such a
trade or traffic for a certain time, because at first the people
of the kingdom are ignorant, and have not the knowledge
or skill to use it; but when the Patent is expired, the king
cannot make a new grant thereof. For when the trade has
become common, and others have been bound apprentices
in the same trade, there is no reason that such should be
forbidden to use it. (The Clothworkers of Ipswich.)
*****
A grant of monopoly may be to the first inventor, by
the 21 Jac. I.; and, if the invention be new in England, a
Patent may be granted, though the thing was practised
beyond sea before; for the statute speaks of new manu-
factures within this realm; so that, if it be new r here, it is
within the statute; for the Act intended to encourage new
devices useful to the kingdom, and, whether learned by
travel or study, it is the same thing. (Edgcberry v.
Stephens.)
*** ■ * *
A Patent granted to a British subject, in his own name,
for an invention communicated to him by a foreigner, the
subject of a State in amity with this country, is not void,
although such Patent be in truth taken out and held by
the grantee in trust for such foreigner. (Beard v.
Egerton.)
*****
You may have a Patent as the importer of a foreign
invention, because that is the construction that the Courts
have put upon the statute, that you are the quasi inventor,
if you import it for the first time. But has it ever been
said that such importation of a foreign invention is
negatived by a book in this country stating the foreign


invention? I am not aware that it has been held to
negative the right of an importer of a foreign invention
that the hook had stated it before. (Lord Brougham in re
Lamenaude’s Patent.)
* * * * *
When a Patent is taken out as for an original invention,
the subject of the Patent being in fact a communication
from a British subject, resident abroad, the Patent is void.
Semble, that an agent in this country of an inventor abroad
receiving a confidential communication of an invention, not
in a practically useful state, may take out a Patent for
his own benefit, if he, pursuing the idea thus thrown out,
discovers a practical way of carrying it into effect.
(Milligan v. Marsh.)


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES
ON
NEW SOUTH WALES PATENT STATUTES.
No. I. —DEBATE ON DR. DOUGLASS' BILL.
In the Legislative Council on August 12th, 1852, Dr.
Douglass moved the second reading of this bill. He did
not wish to detain the Council with any lengthened exposi-
tion of its principles, which, referring as they did, to various
technical details, could better perhaps be discussed in Com-
mittee.
Mr. Cox seconded the motion.
Mr. Allen did not intend to oppose the second reading,
but warned the hon. member that unless the details were
considerably altered in Committee he should give it his
decided opposition at a future stage.
Dr. Douglass hoped that the House would not, night
after night, put off the consideration of a measure which
had for its object the encouragement and protection of
ingenious and skilful professors of art, science, literature,
and mechanics. The House must bear in mind that the
Patent laws of England were not in force in this Colony.
Mr. "Wentworth : So much the better.
Dr. Douglass : In South Australia this had been con-
sidered an evil, and the local Legislature had passed just
such a bill as that which he now asked the Council of this
Colony to pass. The Government of South Australia,
under the authority of that Act, granted Letters of .Regis-
tration in many instances, all of which had graciously been
allowed by Her Majesty. A large number of scientific and


ingenious men were now hastening to these shores, many
of whom would come in hopes of making their inventions
and improvements available and remunerative here; which
they had been prevented from doing at home in conse-
quence of the very heavy expense of patenting an invention
there. As the bill before the Council proposed to make
the operation of registration a very simple and inexpensive
one, he (Dr. Douglass) trusted that the Council would not
refuse to colonial ingenuity and skill what England (albeit
at a high cost) granted to her talented children.
Mr. Lxmb hoped that the hon. member would accede to
the wishes of the Council, and allow the measure to stand
over for some time. The provisions, at the present time,
were but little understood either within or without doors,
and there were grave doubts whether the introduction of a
Patent law here would be beneficial or prejudicial. It was
true that, at first sight, the proposed process of registration
seemed (as the hon. mover stated) a simple and inexpensive
one. Still it might, in practice, be deemed necessary to
hedge the Patents round with just as many safeguards as
were placed in the English Patent laws; and if so, he (Mr.
Lamb) foresaw just as much expensive litigation here as at
home. Unless the hon. member could show a stronger case
of necessity for his projected measure than that the Legis-
lature of South Australia (a body probably not altogether
free from the reproach of hasty legislation) had thought
proper to pass a Patent law for the Colony, he (Mr. Lamb)
was afraid he could not promise his assent to the bill in its
progress through Committee.
The motion was carried, and the bill was read a second
time.
In Committee the fee for a Patent was, on Dr. Douglass’
motion, fixed at £2O, Mr. Holroyd protesting that this fee
was excessive, and that £5 was ample charge.
G


No. 2.—DEBATE ON MR. CLARKE'S ACT.
The Honorable William Claeke, Minister of Justice,
who introduced the bill, moved its second reading, and in
the course of his remarks, said: —The necessity of
amending the Patents law has, on several occasions,
been affirmed by the Legislative Assembly; but hither-
to the efforts to effectuate a judicious amendment
of these laws have successively failed. The urgency
of the reform and the lateness of the present session
make it inexpedient that we should propose such
a comprehensive measure as the advanced requirements of
the Colony demand. At the same time there is ample
justification for the introduction of a measure which will
give effect to the evident desire of Parliament that the
more glaring defects of the Letters of Registration Act of
1852 should be removed without further delay. The pro-
posed bill, it is hoped, will not only remedy those more
immediate deficiencies, but, at the same time, will suffi-
ciently provide for an efficient administration of the
Patents law, pending the introduction of a much more
comprehensive measure on the same subject. The Letters
of Registration Act, which it is proposed to amend, was
passed in the year 1852 by the old Legislative Council,
which existed prior to the passing of the present
Constitution Act, the introducer of the bill being Hr.
Douglass. The present law was, therefore, passed at
a time when the Patent laws throughout the world
were constructed on much less liberal and enlightened
lines than in later times. While other countries in
their legislation on this subject have kept pace with
advancing demands and modern requirements, this Colony
has still adhered most rigorously to the Letters of
Registration Act, 1852, at the ..expense of fastening upon
this Colony the censure of having the most illiberal


Patent laws of any Colony in the Australian group.
The more substantial defects of that Act which this
measure proposes to remedy may be summarised as
follows:—The imposition of the extortionate fee of £2O
each for the issue of Letters Patent not only impaired
invention and the advantages which flow from the fer-
tility of invention in any country, but it also led to a prac-
tice which disbursed the fees in such a manner that only a
fractional portion of the funds was paid into the Consoli-
dated Revenue of the country. I find from a return pre-
pared in the Audit Office that from the year 1880 to 1885
no less a sum than £17,386 was distributed in the payment
of fees to the Crown Solicitor, Attorney-General, and
Experts in the examination of petitions for Letters
Patent. The Letters of Registration Act failed to provide
anything analogous to the system of probationary protec-
tion under which, in other countries, an inventor is entitled,
on the payment of a moderate fee, to publicly experiment
with his crude invention, and perfect his improvements
without the fear of such use and publication endangering
.ns title to Letters Patent. The Act practically vested
the prerogative of granting or refusing a Patent in the
hands of Experts, to whom the Governor was advised to
refer the applicant’s petition, and it therefore failed to
specifically supply either a ministerial or official link
between His Excellency the Governor and the irresponsible
unofficial expert. Whilst the principle pervading the Act
was that the validity of Letters Patent should depend
upon their due registration, it failed to stipulate whether
the obligation to register should rest with the Crown or
with the patentee. Although the Letters of Registration
invariably contained a proviso that they would become
void if the grantee failed to register them within three
days—whether there was a legal proviso does not now
matter, as the Crown invariably registered them in
the teeth of its own injunction—it is obvious that such


an unreasonable injunction might be made to operate
disastrously on applicants residing in inland towns or
in places beyond this Colony. The Act provided for
registration in the Supreme Court, and official operations
were thus needlessly divided between the Supreme Court
and the Patents Office; and the public usefulness of
the latter office was thereby lessened. The Act further
neglected to insure any protection to the petitioner-during
the interval between the lodging of the complete speci-
fication (which is in law a publication of his invention)
and the actual registration of his Patent, and thereby he
was exposed to the hazard of serious loss through interim
infringements. It also disabled the patentee from assign-
ing any less privileges than those comprised in the
absolute transfer of his Letters Patent, and thus unjustly
despoiled him of the enjoyment of the benefits which in
England and other countries are conferred upon patentees
by royalties, licenses, &c. It practically vetoed any assign-
ment by intercolonial, English, or foreign patentees,
except under the expensive process of power of attorney,
because it made void any assignment registered after three
days from the date of execution. In the absence of express
statutory power to appoint an Examiner of Patents, or
some kindred officer, it substantially created a sub-depart-
ment over which there was no authorized official and
administrative head. It neglected to authorize the essen.
tial auxiliary of power to frame rules and regulations in
effectuation of the objects of the Act. In order to remedy
the defects in the Act the present bill is submitted for
the consideration of Parliament. Under this bill the fees
for Letters Parent are reduced from £2O to £5, and the
whole of the fees will be paid to the credit of the Consoli-
dated Eevenue. The assessment of the fee at this sum is
based upon the theory that the Crown should not strain to
make a direct revenue out of Patents, because the State
derives invaluable gain from the publication among its


subjects of useful novelties in the arts and manufactures.
Prom the 19th April to 27th May, 1887, no less than forty-
one Patents were applied for, and of this number thirty-
four were dealt with by the Examiner of Patents, and seven
of them were referred to an expert, who received m each
case a fee of £3 3s. for undertaking the labour of examining
all the specifications and drawings, and comparing them
with those belonging to Patents in issue. "With this
reduction of fees, economy of administration, and increased
demand for Letters Patent, it is anticipated that the
revenue thus derived will, firstly, provide the salary of an
examiner and staff; secondly, meet the expenses connected
with the printing required; thirdly, pay the fees of experts
necessary in the case cf occasional applications, owing to
their extreme scientific technicality ; and fourthly, leave a
balance, which it is proposed to judiciously expend in the
purchase and maintenance of a public library of Patent
publications, and in the erection of a suitable and com-
modious Patents Office. Since April 19th the Govern-
ment have reduced the fee lodged with every petition for
Letters Patent from £2O to £5, but the cumbersome pro-
cess of preparing vouchers for the return of £ls to the
applicants will be avoided if this bill passes into law. It
creates a direct ministerial responsibility which does not
exist under the present Letters of Registration Act, and it
provides for the followinglst, that a petition, addressed to
the Governor, is to be lodged with the Minister of Justice ;
2nd, that the Examiner of Patents shall be under the
direct control of the Minister of Justice ; 3rd, that upon
the Examiner’s report, the Minister is to advise compliance
with or rejection of the prayer of the petition; 4tb, that
the Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council,
is to grant Letters Patent in cases approved of by
the Minister; sth, that, before issue, the Letters Patent
are to be registered by the Examiner of Patents in h:s
own office, instead of being lodged, as hitherto, in the


Supreme Court. The bill also provides for provisional
protection. On payment of £2, and the deposit of a
petition accompanied by a provisional specification, an
invention will receive provisional protection which will
remain in force for twelve months, unless meanwhile it is
superseded by Letters Patent. If no application is made
within a year for Letters Patent it is proposed to regard
such certificate not alone as cancelled by effluxion of time,
but also as a nullity ab initio. At any time during the
currency of the certificate, the lawful holder may convert
it into Letters Patent by lodging a petition accompanied
by a complete specification and by the payment into the
Treasury of the balance, £3, of the £5 fee. When a
certificate becomes merged into Letters Patent the latter
bear date and seal as of the day when the petitioner made
application for a probationary certificate; but no proceeding
for infringement can be lawfully instituted until the actual
registration of the Letters Patent, and no action is main-
tainable in respect of interim infringements alleged to be
made prior to the lodging of the complete specifications.
Thus, if a provisional specification be lodged on Ist June,
and a complete specification on Ist July, and Letters Patent
issued on Ist August, then an action would lie for infringe-
ment between July and August, but not between June and
July, and proceedings could not be lawfully instituted until
August. It is well to bear in mind the legal distinction
between a provisional and a complete specification. The
former requires only such a general description as to
intelligently demonstrate the full nature of the invention
without regard to minute details. The complete specifi-
cation must so particularly and minutely describe the
nature of the invention and the manner of its performance
as to enable any competent workman, by the light of
ordinary skill and knowledge, to carry the invention into
effect without experiment. It is hoped that this amend-
ment of the law will stimulate invention, and reduce to a


minimum the obstacles in the way of struggling mechanical
genius, besides enabling the patentee to enjoy the full
fruits of the improvements published to the public. In point
of liberalism the measure will stand the test of comparison
with the Patent laws of any country in the world.
Mr. W. J. Poster, Q.C. (ex-Attorney-General and
senior member for Newtown), said : —The Minister has
gone into the details of the bill so fully that it is unneces-
sary to explain them any further. There can be no doubt
as to the necessity for an alteration of the Patent law. I
gave my assistance as far as I could towards the prepara-
tion of an elaborate measure that was introduced last
session, and I was very anxious at one time to see a
measure passed of an even more elaborate character than
the one now before us. There is a great deal of talk about
the taxation of brains, which really is scarcely consistent
with the facts of the case. No doubt the genuine patentee
of a really valuable invention is a man who ought to be
encouraged by the public; and even if the public were put
to a certain loss in forwarding his ingenuity, the State
would not be a loser on the whole. But those who have
had any experience of Patents in this country are aware
that for one really genuine useful Patent there are fifty
utterly worthless, which serve merely to air the hobbies of
individuals. "We ought not to assist these people to follow
their hobbies. It behoves the Government to be careful
to ascertain whether the fee will be sufficient to meet the
expenses that will bo incurred in connection with the
Patents. If all the details of each are to be advertised,
which I do not think is yet provided for —but it is required
by the law in some countries —then the fee of £5 will
be utterly inadequate. I hope, therefore, that the Minister
of Justice will consider whether it is not necessary to
increase the fee. There are two ways in which Patents
can be dealt with. We can give any one a right to patent
an article at his own risk absolutely. That is one way.


The other course is that which is adopted in this and most
other countries —that of giving to a person power to sue
for the infringement of his Patent, subject to proving that
he has a right to it, that he is the original inventor of the
article. The best system would be almost useless if you
gave no guarantee to the patentee that he has any right to
his Patent —that when he goes into a court of justice he will
not be met by a person who can say “ we have as good a
right to it as you have.” On the other hand, you cannot
give an absolute guarantee to a person who patents an
article that he has a right to the Patent; therefore he is
obliged to take it with a certain risk, and that risk,
generally, is his ability to prove that no one else was in
possession of the invention previous to his applying for it.
If any one can prove that another person has a prior right
to the Patent, the certificate issued by the Patent Office is
absolutely valueless. The difficulty arises as to what
extent ought the Government to go in order to secure, as
fur as possible, the validity of Patents. In some countries
the security given is that notice has to be given in the
public prints, and I would invite the Minister of Justice
to consider that point, as by this means a person who
thinks that he has a prior right to the Patent is called
upon to lodge an objection within a certain time. I
think that this is the best security which can be given
to a person who wishes to patent an invention. [Mr.
W. Clarke : And by public exhibition !] Publication of
the drawings in the Government Gazette would be as useful
a means as could be devised, but that would involve con-
siderable expense. It is not altogether reasonable that the
State should be put to the expense of printing these docu-
ments, at great expense, for the assistance of persons who
have hobbies to air, and cannot distinguish between one
and the other. Of course this system would give increased
security to the patentee ; and it may be worth considering
at some subsequent period whether it would not be


advisable to adopt the system, but under present circum-
stances I think that it would be much more desirable to
pass the bill in its present form. It seems to me that it
meets the requirements of the case. In all countries where
Patent laws have been brought to any degree of perfection,
provision is made for appeals against refusals to grant
Patents. That is not provided for in this bill; the power
of refusal rests absolutely with the Minister, acting on the
recommendation of the Examiner. Applications for Patents
sometimes involve matters of subtle law which require
most careful investigation. It is absolutely impossible for
the Minister to make these inquiries, and, therefore, he
must be bound to a large extent by the reports submitted
to him. If the Minister had to attend to all these matters
himself, he would have very little time to attend to other
business. Then, if the matters are to be left to the
Examiner, that officer will have to occupy a very much higher
position than I presume it is intended that he is to occupy.
I can hardly conceive that even one judge of the Supreme
Court ought to be the final court of appeal in determining
such matters. However, the bill effects great improve-
ments in the law, and under all the circumstances I shall
not be found offering any opposition to it.
Mr. Chakles Launcelot Oakland (senior member for
Carcoar) said; If the Minister of Justice is entitled to
nothing else, he is entitled to the thanks of the House for his
attempt to deal with this matter. Eor many years past we
have been promised an alteration of the Patent law, but until
now we have not had, anything reasonable submitted to us.
I have come into contact with many inventors, and the
general complaint which they have made has been about
the exorbitant amount charged for the registration of
Patents. The hon. and learned member for Newtown
suggested that the amount which has been fixed in the bill
might be found to be too small, but if only one out of five
Patents registered proves of public utility, I think that


the State can well afford to incur a little expense. Hon.
members can hardly conceive the hardships to which men
who wish to secure Patents for valuable inventions are
subjected. To-day I received a communication from two
men, who have been engaged for the last two years trying
to invent a machine for the saving of gold, tin, and other
metals. These men have been living in the ranges, and
have had to submit to all sorts of hardships ; they have not
had any assistance from any one. They have sent me
plans of a machine which I believe to be almost perfect.
These men are not in a position to register their invention
under the present law; in fact, they are so hard up that
they will have to tramp to Sydney, a distance of 130 miles,
in order to register their invention, and they will have to
borrow the money to enable them to do so. Any person
to whom they may apply for assistance, may dictate his
own terms, or he may rob them of their invention. The
clause of the bill which provides for the provisional regis-
tration of inventions for twelve months, is a valuable one.
I hope that the Government will make a determined effort
to have the bill passed this session, so that many persons
who, to my knowledge, are competent to patent valuable
inventions in machinery, will have an opportunity of doing
so at a price which they can afford to pay.
The second reading was agreed to item dis.


No. 3.— PREVIOUS DEBATES.
The various debates, which led up to this Reform, have
been omitted in consequence of the remedial legislation
suggested having been now carried into effect. Prominent
among the members of the Assembly who took especial
interest in Patents Eeform may be mentioned the follow-
ing : —Mr. J. P. Burns, now Colonial Treasurer; Mr. F.
Abigail, now Secretary for Mines; Mr. W. T. Poole,
Mr. Jacob Garrard, Mr. J.H. Young, Mr. Angus Cameron,
Mr. W. S. Targett, and Mr. Hugh Taylor.


STATUTES
REGULATING THE
ISSUE OE PATENTS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
No. 1.
An Act to authorize the Governor-General with the advice of the Executive Council
to grant Letters of Registration for all Inventions and Improvements in the
Arts or Manufactures to have the same effect as Letters Patent in England so
far as regards this Colony.
[l6 Victoria No. 24.—Introduced into the Legislative Council by Dr.
Henry Grattan Douglass, M.L.C., on 16th July, 1852. Passed
6th December, 1852, but did not come into operation until 10th
January, 1854.]
"Whereas it is expedient that the oxdusive benefit o£
inventions and improvements in the Arts or Manufactures
should be secured for limited periods to the author or
authors or designer or designers thereof or to his or their
agents or assignees, And whereas it is doubtful whether the
laws of the United Kingdom respecting Patents extend to
or have effect in the Colony of New South Wales: Be it
therefore enacted by His Excellency the Governor of New
South Wales with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Council thereof as follow's:—
1. Erom and after the passing of this Act it shall and
may be lawful for His Excellency the Governor of the said
Colony, with the advice of his Executive Council, to grant
Letters of Registration, under his Sign Manual and the
Seal of the Colony, for the exclusive enjoyment and advan-
tage, for a period of not less than seven nor more than
fourteen years, for all inventions or improvements in the
Arts or Manufactures* to the author or authors or designer
or designers thereof, or to his or their agents or assignees,


aa soon as sucli proceedings shall have been taken by such
author or authors or designer or designers respectively as
are in that behalf hereinafter mentioned.
2. Repealed by 51 Victoria No. 3.
3. Repealed by 51 Victoria No. 3.
4. Repealed by 51 Victoria No. 3.
5. Any Letter of Registration granted by virtue of this
Act shall be liable to be repealed by writ of scire facias for
the same causes and in the same manner as other grants
of the Crown are liable to be repealed.
6. That this Act shall come into operation so soon as and
not until the same shall have received the Royal approba-
tion and the notification of such approbation shall have
been made by order of His Excellency the Governor-
General in the New South Wales Government Gazette*
and that such notification shall be sufficient evidence of
such approbation.
* 10th January, 1851.


No. 2.
An Act to amend the law relating to Patents for Inventions and Improvements in
Arts or Manufactures.
[42 Victoria No. 27.—Introduced into the Legislative Assembly by
Mr. W. C. Windeyer, on March 3rd, 1879. Assented to 19th
June, 1879.]
Wheeeas [recites the preamble of the previous Act.'] And
whereas it is desirable, in view of the forthcoming Inter-
national Exhibition, to be held in Sydney during the years
one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine and one
thousand eight hundred and eighty, to provide that the
authors or designers of all such inventions and improve-
ments as might be protected by Letters Patent under the
said Act shall not be deprived of or prejudiced in the
assertion of their patent rights in respect of such inven-
tions and improvements by reason of such inventions or
improvements being exhibited or used at or for the purpose
of such International or other Exhibition : Be it therefore
enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and
Legislative Assembly of New South Wales, in Parliament
assembled, and by the authority of the same as follows :
1. This Act may be cited as the “ Patents Law Amend-
ment Act.”
2. In the construction, and for the purposes of this Act,
the expression “ Patents Act” means the Act sixteenth
Victoria number twenty-four; and the word “ Exhibition ”
includes the International Exhibition appointed to be held
in Sydney during the present or next year, as well as any
exhibition to be held in this or any other year, by the
Agricultural Society of this Colony, and any exhibition of
works of scientific invention or of the fine arts or of
industrial art, which the Governor with the advice of the
Executive Council may, by notification in the Gazette,
declare to be an exhibition within the meaning and for the


purposes o£ this Act.* And the word “Invention” means
any invention or improvement in the Arts or Manufactures
such as might be patented under the Patents Act.
3. The exhibition of any new invention at any exhibition
shall not, nor shall the publication during the holding of
such exhibition of any description of such invention, nor
shall the user of such invention for the purposes of such
exhibition and within the building or place where the same
may be held, nor shall the user of such invention elsewhere
by any person without the privity and consent of the
author or designer thereof prejudice the right of the
exhibitor thereof, if he be the author or designer thereof, to
apply for Letters of Registration for such invention under
the Patents Act; nor shall the exhibition of such invention
invalidate any Letters of Registration which may be granted
under the Patents Act in respect of such invention.
. * Steps are now being taken to attach this privilege to all the Exhibitions held
und< r the auspices of the Pastoral and Agricultural Associations throughout the
Colony.


No. 3.
An Act to further amend the law relating to Patents for Inventions and Improve-
ments in Arts or Manufactures and to authorize the appointment of an
Examiner of Patents.
[5l Victoria No. 3. Introduced into the Legislative Assembly in
May, 1887, by the Honorable William Clarke, Minister of Justice.
Assented to, Bth July, 1887.]
Whebeas it is expedient that the sum now payable by way
of deposit with the Colonial Treasurer pursuant to the Act
sixteenth Victoria number twenty-four ... by persons
desiring to obtain Letters Patent under the said Act should
be reduced; and that henceforth the sums so reduced should
be paid into and form part of the Consolidated Revenue
Fund; and it is also expedient to make provision for the
temporary protection of such Inventions and Improve-
ments and for the appointment of an Examiner of Patents,
to aid in carrying out the provisions of the Acts relating to
Letters Patent: Be it therefore enacted by the Queen’s
Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and con-
sent of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly
of New South Wales, in Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, as follows :—.
1. Every person claiming to be the author or designer
of any invention in or improvement to the Arts or Manu-
factures, or his agent or assignee, who shall desire to obtain
Letters Patent, shall pay to the Colonial Treasurer the sum
of five pounds sterling, and shall after such payment lodge
with the Minister of Justice a petition to the Governor
setting forth that petitioner is the author or designer or the
agent or assignee of such author or designer (as the case
may be) of a certain invention in or improvement to the
Arts or Manufactures, and specifying (and where necessary
illustrating) the particulars of such invention or improve-
ment, and that in connection therewith he has paid to the
Colonial Treasurer the sum of five pounds.


2. If the Minister of Justice shall (after examination of
the said petition and of the report thereon of the Examiner
of Patents) report to the Governor that he approves of the
prayer of the petitioner, it shall thereupon be lawful for
the Governor to grant Letters Patent, which shall then be
forwarded to the Examiner of Patents, who shall, before
issuing them to the grantee or his duly authorized agent,
register them as hereinafter provided.
3. Any person so claiming as aforesaid, or his agent or
assignee, may in like manner obtain a certificate entitling
him to provisional protection for any such invention or
improvement, upon payment to the Colonial Treasurer of
the sum of two pounds sterling, and upon depositing with
the Minister of Justice a petition addressed to the Gover-
nor and a provisional specification in the prescribed form.
4. A certificate of provisional protection shall be in force
for twelve months, and no and shall be null and void
if, before the date of the expiration thereof, the lawful
holder of such certificate shall fail to make application for
Letters Patent in terms of section one of this Act.
5. It shall be lawful for the Governor to grant and issue
to the lawful holder of such certificate, or to his agent or
assignee, Letters Patent for the invention or improvement
provisionally specified, provided that the petitioner so
entitled shall have deposited a complete specification, set-
ting forth how the invention or improvement is to be
carried out and performed, and provided also that all the
other conditions of sections one and two of this Act shall
have been complied with. And upon the issue of such Letters
Patent the certificate of provisional protection shall be
deemed to be cancelled.
G. The payment of two pounds sterling to the Colonial
Treasurer, on petition for provisional protection, and the
payment of three pounds sterling, on petition for Letters
Patent for the same invention, shall (if both payments arc
n


made by the original petitioner or the latter payment by
bis legal representative) be deemed to constitute the pay-
ment of five pounds sterling provided for in section one of
this Act.
7. While a certificate of provisional protection remains
in force, the lawful holder thereof may use and publish his
invention or improvement without prejudice to the issue
of Letters Patent for the same; and such protection from
the consequences of use and publication shall constitute
the provisional protection provided for in this Act.
8. Letters Patent shall (unless the Minister of Justice
shall in any case otherwise advise) be dated and sealed as
of the day of the deposit of the petition for provisional
protection, or, if there has been no petition for provisional
protection, then as of the day of the deposit of the petition
for the said Letters Patent. Provided that no action shall
be maintainable in respect of any infringement of an
invention or improvement, committed before the deposit of
the complete specification thereof; nor shall any person be
entitled to institute any proceedings at law or in equity for
infringement until after the actual registration of the
Letters Patent granted to him for the invention or im-
provement alleged to be infringed.
9. A certificate of provisional protection shall be no bar
to the granting of a like certificate for the same invention
to other petitioners; but it shall be at the discretion of
the Minister of Justice to approve or refuse the issue of
Letters Patent upon a second or other certificate during
the continuance of a certificate of prior date for the same
invention.
10. Every lawful holder of a certificate of provisional
protection and every grantee of Letters Patent (whether
granted under this or the Principal Act) shall be at liberty
to assign the same, together with all the benefits and
advantages derivable therefrom, to any person or persons,
by an instrument in writing under his hand and seal.


11. Every such grantee of Letters Patent shall also he
at liberty, by an instrument in manner aforesaid, to grant to
any person or persons a license (either exclusive or other-
wise and for any portion or portions of the Colony) to
manufacture, adopt, utilize, or exercise proprietary or co-
proprietary rights over, the whole or any portion of the
invention or improvement, which may be specifically pro-
tected by the said Letters Patent.
12. Every assignment made under the authority of sec-
tion ten, and every license issued under the authority of
section eleven, shall be null and void if not registered in
the prescribed time and manner.
13. All Letters Patent, and assignments thereof, or licenses
thereunder, and all certificates of provisional protection, and
assignments thereof, shall be registered in the office of the
Examiner of Patents by that officer; and it shall be lawful
for the Minister of Justice after the passing of this Act to
authorize and effect the removal, from the office of the
Supreme Court mentioned in the said Act to the office of
the Examiner of Patents, of all records and registers of
grants and assignments of grants made under the Principal
Act*
14. All sums paid by such persons as aforesaid shall be
carried by the Colonial Treasurer to the credit of the Consoli-
dated Eevenue Euud for the public purposes of the Colony,
15. The Governor may appoint some fit and proper per-
son to be an Examiner of Patents, who, under the direction
of the Minister of Justice, shall examine and report to that
Minister upon all petitions for Letters Patent presented
after the passing of this Act. The person so appointed
shall be paid such annual salary as Parliament shall pro-
vide, and shall perform such duties, and give such security
for the faithful performance thereof, as the Governor may
require.
* This removal has been effected, and all Letters of Registration, issued under
former Acts, and Letters Patent, issued under this Act, are now open for inspection
at the Patents Office, Chancery-square.


16. The Governor may make and proclaim regulations
for carrying into full effect the provisions of this Act and
the Principal Act, and for regulating the collection and dis-
posal of fees for registering assignments and licenses and
making searches of the records in the Examiner’s office.
And all such regulations shall upon publication in the
Government Gazette be valid in law. Provided that a copy
of every such regulation shall be laid before both Houses
of Parliament within fourteen days from the issue thereof,
if Parliament be then in Session, or otherwise within four-
teen days after the commencement of the then next
ensuing Session.
17. The following terms in inverted commas shall, for the
purposes of this Act, bear the meanings set against them
respectively: —
“ Governor” —The Governor with the advice of the Execu-
tive Council.
“ Prescribed” —Prescribed by regulations made under the
authority of this Act.
“ Letters Patent” —The Letters of Registration mentioned
in the Act sixteenth Victoria number twenty-four.
“ Principal Act” —The Act sixteenth Victoria, number
twenty-four.
18. The second, third, and fourth sections of the Act, six-
teenth Victoria number twenty-four, are hereby repealed,
but without prejudice to the past operation thereof, or to
any Letters Patent lawfully granted or assigned there-
under.
19. This Act may be styled and cited as the “ Patents
Law Amendment Act of 1887; ” and shall come into opera-
tion on the first day of August, one thousand eight hundred
and eighty-seven.
20. Nothing in this Act contained shall be construed to
the prejudice of the prerogative of the Crown.


See new Regulations.


RULES OF PRACTICE*
OF THE
NEW SOUTH WALES PATENTS OFFICE.
1. The Patents Office will be open to the public on
every week-day from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., except on Satur-
days, when it will be open from 10 a.m. to noon.
2. All business with the Patents Office should be trans-
acted in writing, and the action o£ the Office will be based
exclusively on the written record. A personal appearance
of the applicant or his representative is not required, unless
specially called for by the Examiner.
3. All communications with the Patents Office should bo
addressed to
“ The Examinee of Patents,
Patents Office,
Chancery Square,
Sydney.”
4. The Office is forbidden to respond to enquiries as
to the probability of a Certificate or Patent being granted
for an alleged invention, when such enquiries are made in
advance of an application for such Certificate or Patent;
and also to enquiries founded upon vague descriptions,
and propounded with a view to ascertain whether, or by
whom, alleged improvements have been patented or pro-
visionally protected.
5. Except as to questions connected with official prac-
tice and procedure, the Office-undertakes no responsibility
in regard to expounding the Patent Law; and, subject to
the same exception, the officers of the Department are
forbidden to give counsel to individuals.
•Regulations made under .the authority of Mr, Clarke’s Act.


G. In pursuance of the preceding regulation, every per-
son must judge for himself of the propriety of making an
application for a Patent or for Provisional Protection.
The records and models may he inspected by himself or
his agents, but beyond this the Office can render him no
assistance until his application comes regularly before it
in the manner prescribed by law.
7. An application for a Patent or for Provisional Pro-
tection may be made by any person, whether resident in
the Colony or not, provided that he claims to be either—
(l) the author or designer of an invention;
(2) the inventor’s agent;
(3) the inventor’s assignee ;
(4) the introducer into the Colony of an invention
new to the Colony;
(5) the introducer as to one part of the invention, and
the inventor as to the other part; or
(6) the agent or assignee of any person claiming under
any of the four preceding sub-sections.
8. Letters Patent and Certificates of Provisional Pro-
tection may also be applied for by trading associations or
other corporate bodies ; or joint application may be made—
(l) by individuals;
(2) by two or more corporate bodies; or
(3) by an association of one or more corporate
bodies with one or more individual applicants.
9. Applications may be made either personally or
through a duly authorized agent. In any case of agency
or assignment, proof thereof must be furnished to the
satisfaction of the Examiner.
10. Interviews with the Examiner concerning applica-
tions or other matters pending before the Office may be
had in the Examiner’s room at such times within office hours
as the Examiner may designate.


11. Applicants or their agents -will he required to conduct
their business with the Office with decorum and courtesy.
Papers presented in violation of this requirement will be
returned.
12. Por gross misconduct the Examiner may refuse to
recognise any person as a Patent Agent, either generally
or in any particular case; but the reasons for such refusal
must be duly recorded, and be subject to the approval of
the Minister.
13. Letters Patent or a Certificate of Provisional Pro-
tection may be issued to any applicant who (though not
the actual inventor, or his agent, or assignee) is the first
introducer of an invention into the Colony of New South
Wales, and notwithstanding that the invention has been
the subject of a Patent elsewhere.
14>. An applicant for a Patent or for a Certificate of Provi-
sional Protection in terms of the preceding regulation, must
state in his petition that he is the author or designer, by (or
partly by, as the fact may be) virtue of a communication
from abroad, of the invention in question, which he desires
to introduce into the Colony of New South Wales where
it is at the date of application, to the best of his belief,
neither made, sold, nor used.
15. Where the invention is partly communicated and
partly original, the specification accompanying the appli-
cation must explicitly discriminate between the part com-
municated to the applicant and the part invented by him.
16. Joint inventors are entitled to joint Provisional Pro-
tection and to a joint Patent; and neither inventor can
make separate claim to either privilege.
17. Independent inventors of distinct improvements in
the same article cannot ordinarily obtain a joint Patent or
joint Provisional Protection for their separate inventions ;


but where the combination of their improvements appears
to the Examiner to produce a single and beneficial result,
the inventors may be permitted to unite their claims
in an application for a joint Patent or for joint Provisional
Protection.
18. The issue of Letters Patent (or their equivalent) by
another Colony or country will not disable the inventor
from obtaining either a Patent or Provisional Protection in
New South Wales, unless—
(l) the invention has been introduced into public
use in New South Wales prior to the application
to the Office; or unless
(2) such invention has been wholly or in part anti-
cipated in any Letters Patent or Certificate of
Provisional Protection issued under the authority
of regulation 13.
19. Applications for Letters Patent of the Colony of
New South Wales must be made to the Examiner; and a
complete application should comprise—
(l) a receipt from the Colonial Treasurer of the pay-
ment, in connection therewith, of £5 sterling;
(2) a petition addressed to the Governor in the form
prescribed by law;
(3) a copy of the specification and drawings attached
to the petition ; and
(4) an accompanying letter, enumerating the name
and number of the documents annexed.
20. A petition for Letters Patent, if from a single
applicant, should indicate the petitioner’s title to a Patent;
as for example, whether he claims to be—
(1) the author or designer of the invention;
(2) the introducer;
(3) the inventor’s agent;


(4) tlie inventor’s assignee ;
(5) the introducer as to one part of the invention,
and the inventor as to the other part; or,
(6) the agent or assignee of any person claiming
under any of the four preceding sub-sections.
21. Where the petition is from more than one applicant
it should indicate how each derives his title to a Patent;
as for example, whether the petitioners claim to be —
(1) joint inventors;
(2) joint introducers ;
(3) joint agents of the inventor;
(4) joint assignees of the inventor ;
(5) joint introducers as to one part of the invention,
and joint inventors as to the other part;
(6) joint agents or assignees of any person claiming
under any of the preceding sub-sections 3,4, or 5 ;
(7) the association of the inventor with the assignee
of an undivided part of the invention ; or
(8) the association of the inventor’s assignee with
the holder of a sub-assignment.
22. In addition to disclosing how each petitioner derives
his right to apply for the Patent prayed for, the Petition
must, as far as possible, observe, in its contents, the follow-
ing plan of arrangement: —
(1.) The name in full, address, and occupation of each
petitioner (or the nominal composition if a trad-
ing firm, or registered or legal title if a corporate
body).
(2.) The address to which communications from the
Patents Office, relative to the application, may be
forwarded; and this (to obviate unnecessary
delay) should be an address in New South Wales.
(3.) A recital of the payment (in connection with the
application) of £5 to the Colonial Treasurer.


(4.) The title of the invention, which must distinctly
and specifically indicate the nature and object of
the invention.
(5.) A statement that the alleged invention has not
been published, or publicly used, or offered for
sale, within the Colony; or (if such be the fact),
only under the authority of a Certificate of Pro-
visional Protection then in force.
(G.) A statement that a detailed specification (in
duplicate) of the invention is annexed to the
petition, and (where drawings are necessary)
that the specification is illustrated.
(7.) Such information as is within the applicant’s
knowledge as to whether the invention has been
patented elsewhere or not; and if so patented,
where, when, and by whom; and
(8.) A distinct prayer for the grant and issue to the
petitioner of Letters Patent in protection of the
alleged invention.
23. The complete specification must so explicitly reveal
the details of the invention that any person, ordinarily
proficient in the art or science to which the discovery most
closely appertains, may be enabled, by aid of the informa-
tion so afforded, to make, construct, compound, and use
the invention therein described, without resorting to any
invention or addition of his own.
24. The specification should observe the following order
of arrangement:—
(1.) The preamble, giving the name and residence of
the applicant and the title of the invention.
(2.) A summary of the object and nature of the
invention.


(3.) A detailed description of the manner of construc-
ting and using the alleged invention, together
with a clear enunciation of any preferable method
which the petitioner regards as calculated to
ensure the fullest efficacy in the application of
his discovery.
(4.) A concise description of the drawings, wherever
drawings are either necessary or advantageous to
the elucidation of the specification.
(5.) A claim or claims; and these must not exceed
six in number, unless the Examiner certifies in
writing that, in his opinion, a greater number is
necessary to the adequate protection of the in-
vention from infringement.
(6.) Signature of applicant or agent (or seal of cor-
porate body).
(7.) Signature of one witness.
25. A specification of mere improvements should particu-
larly indicate the part or parts to which the improvements
relate, and should discriminate between what is old and
what is claimed as an improvement. In such cases the
descriptions, drawings, and claims should be confined to
the specific improvements and such parts as necessarily
co-operate with them.
26. A specification must not include a claim to two or
more distinct inventions, unless they mutually contribute
to produce a single and beneficial result.
27. In a specification containing several independent
inventions, the petitioner will be required to limit the
description and claims of the pending application to which-
ever invention he may elect; and the other inventions may
then be made the subjects of separate applications bearing
even date with the day of the deposit of the original
petition therein.


28. Specifications must be either printed, or else written
in a fair legible hand on but one side of the paper; and no
interlineations or erasures should be made. A wide
margin should (except as to drawings) always be reserved
on the left-hand side of the page, and all documents
should be of foolscap size.
29. The following directions should also be observed in
regard to drawings forwarded to the Patents Office in
connection with applications for Letters Patent: —
(1.) One copy of the drawings should be made upon
stout, white, smooth-surfaced drawing paper,
parchment, or tracing cloth, 13 inches by 8 inches,
or 13 inches by 1G inches, with an inch margin
all round.
(2.) The drawings should be of black Indian ink, and
any shading should be by lines clearly and dis-
tinctly drawn, and as open as is consistent with
the required effect.
(3.) Section lines should not be too closely drawn.
(4.) All letters and figures of reference should be boldly
and distinctly marked, and should correspond with
the letters and figures of reference quoted in the
specification to which the drawings relate.
30. A working model should accompany a specification
when the applicant regards it as necessary either to show
the precise operation of the machine, or to facilitate the
examination of the specification; and when a material
forms an essential feature of a machine, the model should
be constructed of that material.
31. Every model should have the name of the applicant
firmly fixed thereon.


1 32. After examination of the specification to which it
relates, the model may he either stored in a room in the
Patents Office, where it will be open to public inspection
within the prescribed office-hours, or, at the Examiner’s
discretion, it may be returned to the depositor.
33. When a composition is the subject-matter of the
invention, the Examiner may require the applicant to
furnish such sufficient specimens of the composition and its
ingredients as to allow of full experimental examination.
These specimens should be forwarded in glass bottles,
properly arranged; but explosive or dangerous substances
are not to be sent.
34. An application for a Certificate of Provisional Pro-
tection should (so far as is applicable to conformity with
the Patents Acts of New South Wales) comply with the
foregoing regulations regarding applications for Letters
Patent. The following material alterations in the details
of procedure should be observed by applicants, and the
language of the several documents demanded by these
regulations should be varied accordingly:—
1. The fee to be paid to the Colonial Treasurer is £2
sterling.
2. A provisional specification (not in duplicate, and
giving only the outlines and such material points
of the invention as show its nature and scope)
should take the place of the complete specifica-
tion required in an application for Letters Patent.
35. The specification accompanying an application for
provisional protection will not be open at any time to
public inspection, and will be destroyed at the expiration
of one year from the date of deposit unless the Certificate
to which it relates has been meanwhile superseded by the
issue of Letters Patent.


36. A Petition to supersede a Certificate of Provi-
sional Protection by tlie issue of Letters Patent for the
same invention should be lodged not later than ten
months from the date of the original petition for Pro-
visional Protection, so as to allow of the issue of the
Patent before the expiration of the period for which the
Certificate endures ; and such petition should allege the
fact that the invention referred to is, at the date of appli-
cation, the subject of Provisional Protection.
37. A Protest against the issue of a Patent or of a
Certificate of Provisional Protection may be filed by any
person whomsoever; but an inventor, who has assigned
his interest wholly or in part, will not be permitted to
lodge any document disparaging the merits of the
invention to the prejudice of the interests of his assignee.
38. Any invention or improvement in the Arts or
Manufactures may be made the subject-matter of a Patent
or of Provisional Protection, unless such invention or
improvement appears to be detrimental to public health,
public welfare, morality, or the interest of the State.
Scientific principles or theories cannot be patented, but the
practical application of them to industrial ends may form
the subject of a Patent.
39. Assignments of Certificates of Provisional Protection
or of Letters Patent, and all licenses or assignments
thereof, must bo registered in the Patents (Mce within
the following respective periods from the date of execu-
tion :
Within the Colony 14 day S .
Prom any of the Australasian Colonies... 30 ~
Other places 90 }}


Or such extended period as the Minister, on good cause
being shown for the delay, may in any particular case
approve.
40. The Examiner may, when the complicated character
of an alleged, invention appears in his judgment to require
it, refer any application or protest to a competent Expert
or Experts for investigation, comparison, and report; but
such references to Experts shall in each case be submitted
to the Minister for his approval.
41. Experts will be paid from the Consolidated Revenue
such fees as the Minister may approve or fix, and in their
reports to the Examiner the Experts should indicate the list
of prior Patents with which they have compared the appli-
cations referred to them; and where the application is
closely allied with a former invention, the Expert’s report
should differentiate between the two.
42. The Examiner’s reports to the Minister should, where
necessary, furnish such a synopsis of the law and merits of
each application as will enable the Minister to clearly com-
prehend the essential features involved,
43. The scientific publications and general Patents
Literature in the Library of the Patents Office will be
available, at the discretion of the Office, for public perusal.
4i. Whenever the Examiner reports to the Minister
that an informality in any application does not materially
affect the merits of such application or intentionally
infringe the spirit of the Patent laws, the Minister may
in writing direct the relaxation of such of the foregoing
regulations as demonstrate and affirm the informality;
and thereupon the application will be examined and dealt
with as if no such informality existed.


45. The following will be the scale of fees payable to
the Colonial Treasury through the Patents Office in
connection with the proceedings herein stated :
Piling a protest against the issue of Letters
Patent or of a Certificate of Provisional
Protection £1 0 0
Eegistering an assignment of Letters Patent,
or of a Certificate of Provisional Protection 0 10 0
Eegistering a license, or assignment thereof ... 0 7 G
A general search, i.e., inspection of five or more
Patents and the records thereof 0 5 0
Inspection of the Eegister, or of one Patent
and the records thereof ... 0 1 0


POEMS AND PRECEDENTS
IN CONNECTION WITH
NEW SOUTH WALES LETTERS PATENT.
No. 1.
Letter accompanying an Application for Letters
Patent.
Crown Street,
Corowa,
14th June, 1887.
Sir,
I («) beg to make application for Letters Patent
for an Invention o£ “Improvements in Telegraph Posts.”
In connection with this application I (a) enclose the
following documents: —
1. A Petition in the form prescribed by law.
2. A complete Specification of my (6) Invention.
3. A copy of the Specification.
4. Seven sheets of Drawings (c) (in duplicate).
5. A Treasury Receipt for £5.
I am, ( d )
Yours respectfully,
PERCY PAGET.
The Examinee of Patents.
(a) Or “ We,” as the fact may be.
(J) Or “Our.”
(c) Omit this line where there are no Drawings attached to the
Specification.
(d) Or “We are.”
I


No. 2.
Letter accompanying an Application for a Certificate
of Provisional Protection.
“Eookwood,”
East Melbourne,
Ist July, 1887.
Sir,
We beg to make application for a Certificate of
Provisional Protection for an invention of “ A new and
improved Gold and Silver Amalgamator and Separator.”
In connection with this application we enclose the follow-
ing documents: —
1. A Petition in the form prescribed by law.
2. A Provisional Specification of our invention («).
3. One sheet of Drawings ( h ).
4. A Treasury Eeceipt for £2.
We are,
Yours respectfully,
SIMON BOLGEE,
EUGENE COYLE.
The Examines op Patents.
(a) No copy need be sent.
(b) Omit where there are no Drawings.


No. 3.
Petition for Letters Patent from an Individual
Applicant.
To His Excellency the G-oternoe of the Colony
of Hew South Wales, —
The Humble Petition of Alexander Selkirk, of Moruya,
in the Colony of New South Wales, farmer,
showeth :
1. That your Petitioner is the author or designer of a
certain invention in, or improvement to, the Arts or Manu-
factures, for which he is desirous of obtaining Letters
Patent of the Colony of New South Wales.
2. That communications from the Patents Office relative
to this application may be forwarded to your Petitioner at
his address, High-street, Moruya.
3. That in connection herewith your Petitioner has paid
to the Colonial Treasurer the sum of Eive Pounds sterling.
4. That the title of the invention is—“ Improvements in
the construction of Harvesting Machines.”
5. That, to the best of your Petitioner’s knowledge and
belief, the invention has not been publicly used or published
or offered for sale within the Colony of New South Wales,
[ When the invention is the subject of Provisional Protection
add the following: —“ except under the authority of a
Certificate of Provisional Protection (dated 4/9/87) for the
invention in question.”]
6. That a detailed Specification of the invention, illus-
trated by Drawings, is annexed to this Petition (a).
7. That the invention, so far as your Petitioner knows
has not been patented elsewhere ( b ).


Tour Petitioner therefore humbly prays that Tour
Excellency, with the advice of the Executive Council, will
be pleased to grant unto him, his executors, administrators,
and assigns, Letters Patent for the said invention for the
term of fourteen years, in accordance with the provisions
of the Act 16 Victoria, No. 24, and of the Patents Law
Amendment Act of 1887.
And your Petitioner will ever pray, &c.,
ALEXANDER SELKIRK.
Dated at Moruya this 19th day of February, 1888.
(a) Omit “ illustrated by Drawings,” where there are no Drawings
necessary.
(4) Or, if patented elsewhere, state where, when, and by whom.


No. 4.
Petition for Letters Patent from two or mere
Individual Applicants.
To His Excellency the Governor of the Colony op
New South Wales, —
The Humble Petition of William Wallace, of Ballarat,
in the Colony of Victoria, mining engineer, and of
Henry Hansom, of Melbourne, in the said Colony,
Merchant, choweth :
1. That your Petitioners are the authors or designers of
a certain invention in or improvement to the Arts or
Manufactures, for which they are desirous of obtaining
Letters Patent of the Colony of New South Wales.
2. That communications from the Patents Office relative
to this application may be forwarded to your Petitioners’
Agent, John H. Carden, of 2 Wynyard Square, Sydney.
3. That, in connection herewith, your Petitioners have paid
to the Colonial Treasurer the sum of Eive Pounds sterling.
4. That the title of the invention is—“An improved
apparatus for extracting gold from ferriferous ores.”
5. That, to the best of your Petitioners’ knowledge and
belief, the invention has not been publicly used, published,
or offered for sale within the Colony of New South Wales.
[When the invention is the subject of provisional protection,
add the follotviny : —“ except under the authority of a
Certificate of Provisional Protection (dated 10/8/87) for
the invention in question.”]
6. That a detailed Specification, illustrated by Draw-
ings (a), is annexed to this Petition.
7. That the invention, as far as your Petitioners know,
has been patented only in the Colony of Victoria, the date
of the Patent being 24th May, 1887 (b).


Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that Your
Excellency, with the advice of the Executive Council, will
be pleased to grant unto them, their executors, adminis-
trators, and assigns, Letters Patent for the said invention
for the term of fourteen years, in accordance with the
provisions of the Act 16 Victoria, No. 24, and the Patents
Law Amendment Act of 1887.
And your Petitioners will ever pray, &c.
WILLIAM WALLACE.
HENRY HANSOM.
Dated at Melbourne, this 21st September, 1887.
(а) Omit “ illustrated by Drawings,” when no Drawings are attached.
(б) Or “ has not been previously patented,” as the fact may be.


No. 5.
Petition for Letters Patent from the Introducer of an
Invention.
To His Excellency the Governor of the Colony of
Hew South Wales, —
The Humble Petition of George Henry Cohen, of
Mudgee, in the Colony of New South Wales, news-
paper proprietor, showeth :
1. That your Petitioner is the author or designer, by
virtue of a communication from abroad, of a certain inven-
tion in or improvement to the Arts or Manufactures which
he desires to introduce into the Colony of New South
Wales, and for which he is desirous of obtaining Letters
Patent of the said Colony.
2. That communications from the Patents Office relative
to this application may be forwarded to his agents, Messrs.
Gordon and Gotch, George-street, Sydney.
3. That in connection herewith your Petitioner has paid
to the Colonial Treasurer the sum of Five Pounds sterling.
4. That the title of the invention is—“ Improvements in
a Machine for Cutting Paper.”
5. That, to the best of your Petitioner’s knowledge and
belief, the invention has not been publicl- used or offered
for sale within the Colony of New South Wales.
6. That a detailed Specification, illustrated by Drawings,
is annexed to this Petition.
7. That a Patent was obtained for the invention in
England, on July 12th, 1876; and that the details of the
communication from abroad are specified in a document
hereto appended.
Tours, &c.,
GEORGE HENRY COHEN.
Dated at Mudgee, this 19th October, 1887.


No. 6.
Petition for Letters Patent from an applicant who
is the Introducer as to one part of the invention,
and the Inventor as to the other part.
To His Excellency the Governor of the Colony
op New South Wales, —
The Humble Petition of Charles McEwen, of Bulli, in the
Colony of New South Wales, road superintendent,
showeth :
1. That your Petitioner is the author or designer (partly
by virtue of a communication from abroad), of a certain
invention in or improvement to the Arts or Manufactures,
which he desires to introduce into the Colony of New South
Wales, and for which he is desirous of obtaining Letters
Patent of the said Colony.
2. That communications from the Patents Office relative
to this application may be forwarded to Petitioner’s address
at George-street, Bulli.
3. That in connection herewith your Petitioner has paid
to the Colonial Treasurer the sum of Eive Pounds sterling
4. That the title of the invention is—“An Improved
Automatic Candle Extinguisher.”
5. That, to the best of your Petitioner’s knowledge and
belief, the invention has not been publicly used or offered
for sale within the Colony of New South Wales.
6. That a detailed Specification of the invention, illus-
trated by Drawings, is annexed to this Petition, and
discriminates between the part invented and the part
communicated.
7. That so much of the invention as was communicated
to your Petitioner was patented in England on 13th
September, 1885, and that the details of the communica-
tion from abroad are specified in a document hereto
appended.
Tours, &c.,
CHARLES MCEWEN.
Dated at Bulli, this 13th November, 18S7.


No. 7.
Petition for Letters Patent by the Inventor’s
Agent.
To His Excellency the Goveenoe of the Colony
of New South Wales, —
The Humble Petition of John Smith, of Woolloomooloo,
in the Colony of New South Wales, gentleman,
showeth :
1. That your Petitioner is the agent of John M‘Diarmid,
of Melbourne, merchant, who claims to be the author or
designer of a certain invention in or improvement to the
Arts or Manufactures, for which he is desirous of obtaining
Letters Patent of the Colony of New South Wales.
2,3, 4,5, G, and 7, as in Eorm No. 3.
No. 8.
Petition for Letters Patent by the Inventor’s
Assignee.
To His Excellency the Goteenoe of the Colony
of New South Wales, —
The Humble Petition of Henry Himmeloch, of Brussels,
in the Kingdom of Belgium, engineer, showeth :
1. That your Petitioner is the assignee of Otto Schmidt,
of Antwerp, in the same Kingdom, distiller, who claims to
be the author or designer of a certain invention, &c.
2,3, 4,5, 6, and 7, as in Eorm No. 3.
Note. —Where the applicant is the agent of the assignee, the
form will be as follows ; —“ is the agent of A. 8., the assignee of C.D.,
who claims to be the author,” &c.


No. 9.
Petition for Letters Patent by the Agent of the
person claiming partly as Introducer and partly
as Inventor.
To llis Excellency the Governor of the Colony
op New South Wales, —
The Humble Petition of Algernon Borthwick, of Redfern,
in the Colony of New South Wales, carpenter,
SHOWETH :
1. That your Petitioner is the agent of John Elias
Brown, of Liverpool, England, sugar-refiner, who claims
to be the author or designer (partly by virtue of a com-
munication from abroad), of a certain invention, &c.
2,3, 4,5, 6,7, as in Form No. 6.
No. 10.
Petition for Letters Patent from the Assignee of
the person claiming partly as Introducer and
partly as Inventor.
As in Forms No. 6 and No. 9, with the substitution of
the term “ assignee ” for “ agent ” in clause 1.


No. 11.
Petition for Letters Patent when the application
represents the association of the Inventor and
the Inventor’s Assignee or Assignees.
To His Excellency the Governor of the Colony
of New South Wales, —
The Humble Petition of John Smithers, blacksmith,
Eoger Eedwood, gentleman, and Jonathan Douglass,
engine-fitter, all of Parramatta, in the Colony of New
South Wales, showetii :■ —
1. That your Petitioner, John Smithers, is the author or
designer of a certain invention in, or improvement to the
Arts or Manufactures for which your Petitioners are
desirous of obtaining Letters Patent of the Colony of
New South Wales; and has, by deed of assignment, bearing
date 6th June, 1878, assigned undivided part interests to
his co-petitioners, Eoger Eedwood and Jonathan Douglass.
2,3, 4,5, 6, 7 as in previous Eorms according to the
respective circumstances of each case. Where the part-
inventor part-introducer assigns, alter so as to adapt the
language to Eorm No. 6.


JSo. 12.
Petition for Letters Patent where the application
represents the association of the Inventor's
Assignee with the holder of a sub-assignment.
To His Excellency the Governor op the Colony
op New South Wales, —
The Humble Petition of Henry Hindson, of Bathurst,
in the Colony of New South Wales, engineer ; and of
James Beavis, of El Dorado, in the Colony of Victoria,
State school-teacher, showeth :
1. That your Petitioner, Henry Hindson, is the assignee
of Louis Le Gros, of Paris, in the Ecpublic of Prance, aero-
naut, who claims to be the author of a certain invention in
or improvement to the Arts or Manufactures, for which your
petitioners are desirous of obtaining Letters Patent of the
Colony of New South Wales; and has assigned to his co-
petitioner, James Beavis (by a deed of assignment bearing
date Ist September, 1885) an undivided part interest in the
invention.
2,3, 4,5, 6,7, from previous Porms as circumstances
warrant. Where the invention is partly communicated,
adapt to Form No. G.


No. 13.
Petition for Letters Patent from a Trading
Association.
To llis Excellency the Governor op the Colony
of New South Wales, —
The Humble Petition o£ John Jackson, Henry Jackson,
Robert Wolfe, and Herbert Spenser, trading at
Maitland in the Colony of New South Wales, under
the style and firm of Jackson, Wolfe and Company,
SHOWETH :
1. That your Petitioners, &c. (as in previous Eorms.)
No. 14.
Petition for Letters Patent from a Corporate Body.
To His Excellency the Governor of the Colony
of New South Wales, —
The Humble Petition of the Societie Generate
D’Electricitie, precedes Jablochkoff, of No. 7 Rue
Drouot, Paris, in the Republic of France, showeth:—
1. That your Petitioners are the assignees of Paul
Jablochkoff, who claims to be the author or designer of a
certain invention in or improvement to the Arts or Manu-
factures, for which they are desirous of obtaining Letters
Patent of New South Wales.
2,3, 4,5, G, 7, from previous Eorms, as circumstances
warrant.
Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays that your
Excellency, with the advice of the Executive Council, will
be pleased to grant unto them, their successors and assigns,
&c.
©N. Yabey,
Lxurent Pescours.
Directors of the said Societe Generale
d’Electricitie precedes Jablochkoff,


No. 15.
Petition for a Certificate of Provisional Protection.
To His Excellency the Govebnoe of the Colony
op New South Wales, —
The Humble Petition of Peter Rooney, of New York,
in the United States, electrician, siioweth: —
!• That your Petitioner is the author or designer of
a certain invention in or improvement to the Arts or
Manufactures, for which he is desirous of obtaining a
Certificate of Provisional Protection.
2. That communications from the Patents Office
relative to this application may be forwarded to the United
States Consul at Sydney.
3. That, in connection herewith, your Petitioner has
paid to the Colonial Treasurer the sum of Two Pounds
sterling.
4. That the title of the invention is—“ An invention
for governing or regulating the pressure of fluids.”
5. That, to the best of your Petitioner’s knowledge
and belief, the invention has not been publicly used, or
published, or offered for sale within the Colony of New
South Wales.
G. That a detailed Specification of the invention,
illustrated by Drawings («), is annexed to this Petition.
7. That the invention, so far as your Petitioner knows,
has not been patented elsewhere (i).
lour Petitioner therefore humbly prays that Your
Excellency, with the advice of the Executive Council, will
be pleased to grant unto him, his executors, administrators,
and assigns, a Certificate of Provisional Protection in


respect of the said invention, and in accordance with the
provisions of the Patents Law Amendment Act of 1887.
And your Petitioner will ever pray, &c.
PETER ROONEY
Dated at New York this 9th day of December, 188 G.
Note. —Where the Petitioners for Provisional Protection claim
to be the agents or assignees of an inventor, or part introducers and
part inventors, or where they represent the association of an inventor
and his assignee, or of an inventor’s assignee and the holder of a sub-
assignment, see the corresponding forms of petition for Letters Patent,
and alter form No. 15, so as to adapt the language to the relative cir-
cumstances of each case.
(a) Omit “illustrated by Drawings,” where no Drawings are fur-
nished,
(ft) Or, if patented elsewhere, state where, when, and by whom.


No. 16.
Receipt issued by Patents Office on the Deposit of
an Application for Letters Patent.
Patents Office,
No. 1. Sydney, New South Wales,
Date, —2nd August, 1887.
This is to certify that the application of Arthur Allen
for Letters Patent, has this day been deposited at the
Patents Office (Department of Justice), and numbered and
dated as above.
A. G. TAYLOR.
Examiner of Patents.
No. 17.
Receipt issued by Patents Office on the Deposit of an
Application for a Certificate of Provisional
Protection.
Patents Office,
No. 50. Sydney, New South Wales,
Date, —25th August, 1887.
This is to certify that the application of William P.
Plunkett for Provisional Protection, has this day been
deposited at the Patents Office (Department of Justice),
and numbered and dated as above.
J. B. O’CONNOR.
pro Examiner of Patents.
Note. —The number and date of this Ecceipt must be quoted by
the holder of Provisional Certificate when applying for Letters Patent,
or corresponding with the Patents Office in relation thereto.


No. 18.
Protest against the issue of Letters Patent or
Certificate of Provisional Protection.
Darlington,
Sir, June 16th, 1888.
In the matter of the application of Henry Ward,
of St. Kilda, Victoria, for Letters Patent for an alleged
invention of “An Improved Hansom Cab,” I, William
Hardy, of Redferu, carriage-maker, beg to protest against
the issue of the Patent, on the following grounds:—
1. The alleged invention is not novel, being in one of
its main features (which constitutes the first claim in his
specification) substantially identical with an invention
for which James Eldon, of Parramatta, obtained Letters
of Registration of the Colony of New South Wales. Mr.
Eldon’s Patent is dated 18th August, 1867, and is entered
as No. 57 on the Patents Register.
2. The subject of another material feature of the alleged
invention (constituting the applicant’s' third claim) has
been in general use in this Colony for the last two years,
as may be demonstrated by a visit to my factory, or to any
of the principal coach factories in Sydney.
lam prepared to attend at the Patents Office, if required,
and to substantiate these objections; and I therefore beg
to request that the issue of the Patent petitioned for by
Henry Ward may be delayed till full investigation is made
into my allegations of prior use and lack of novelty.
I enclose the fee of £l, as prescribed by the regulations.
I am,
Tours respectfully,
WILLIAM HARDY.
Witness to the signature |
of William Hardy, |
Jonx Bridget, J.P.,
Glebe.
The Examiner of Patents.
K
Note.—Where the protest is against the issue of a Certificate
of Provisional Protection, the above form may be correspondingly
amended, to adapt it to the circumstances.


No. 19.
Treasury Receipt for fee for Letters Patent.
New South Wales,
The Treasury,
No. 25,130. 24th September, 1887.
Received from Harold Brown the sum of Pive Pounds,
sterling, for fee on Letters Patent, for an invention of “An
Improved Machine for Trapping Rabbits.
P. J. HOLDSWORTH.
£5.
Entd.—N.S.
pro Treasurer.
No. 20.
Treasury Receipt for fee for a Certificate of
Provisional Protection.
New South Wales.
The Treasury,
24th September, ISB7.
No. 25,428.
Received from Harry Cecil Warren the sum of Two
Pounds sterling, for fee on Certificate of Provisional Pro-
tection for an invention of “ An Improved Steering Appa-
ratus for Steamships.”
P. J. HOLDSWORTH.
pro Treasurer.
£2.
Entd.—N.S.


No. 21.
Preamble of a Specification.*
Specification of Eobert Dixon Bannister, of Essex
Lodge, Bellariue-street, Geelong, in the Colony of Victoria,
gentleman, and Samuel Milligan, of Viliamanta-street,
Geelong, aforesaid, engineer, for an invention intituled
“ A new Device to be used for Advertising purposes.”
******
Specification of William Eigg, of the firm of McLean
Brothers and Eigg, carrying on business as wholesale and
retail ironmongers, at No. 09, Elizabeth-street, Melbourne,
in the Colony of Victoria, for an invention intituled
“Improvements in Wire Eencing.”
******
Specification for a Steam Super-heater, invented by
George Clinch, of Eitzroy-street, East St. Leonards.
******
Specification for a Patent to be obtained in the Colony
of New South Wales, for Eeginald Scaife, of 11, Moorgate-
street, City of London, United Kingdom of Great Britain,
gentleman, “ Improvements in the method and means for
extracting oleaginous, fatty, and resinous matter from
textile materials, whether animal or vegetable, and from
other substances.”
******
Specification of a Machine shown in the accompanying
drawings, and styled the “ Generator,” and intended for
the more ready manufacture of aerated waters, claimed to
be the invention of Mr. William J. Grant, of Glen Innes,
in the New England district of New South Wales.
******
Specification of Edward Toungman Harrison, of High-
street, Avoca, in the Colony of Victoria, engineer, for an
invention of “ Improvements in Machinery for Pulverizing
and Amalgamating.”
* See Regulation 24.


Specification of invention of Friedrich Bockhacker, of
Hiickeswagen,in Rhenish Prussia,for “A new or improved
mode of and apparatus or balance for ascertaining the loss
of wool in weight by the process of washing,” hereunder
detailed.
I, Robert Yaile, do-hereby declare the nature of the
invention, and in what manner the same is to be performed,
to be particularly described and ascertained in and by the
following statement or specification and drawings thereof
(that is to say) :
Specification of improved Rotary Engine invented by
Robert Yaile, of Auckland, New Zealand.
Title : —“An improved Rotary Engine for applying the
motive power of steam, water, atmospheric air,
and similarly acting motive powers.”


No. 22.
Summary of the Object and Nature of an Invention.*
My invention relates to rotary engines for applying
motive power, and consists of an arrangement of mechanism
for applying the motive power of steam, water, atmospheric
air, and similarly acting motive powers, so as to obtain a
rotary motion direct from the power without the use of
the crank and its necessary parts, which are now used to
produce a rotary motion from the reciprocating engines at
present in general use. I obtain this result by causing a
drum or cylinder attached to a shaft to revolve within an
external cylinder ; the steam or other motive power, being
confined between these two cylinders and acting on slides
or pistons caused to alternately project and recede from
the surface of the internal cylinder, compels the internal
cylinder and its shaft to revolve, thus giving the rotary
motion desired.
******
Hobbles are now usually connected together by means
of a chain, the rings at the end of which pass over the
straps of the respective hobbles. When any strain is
put upon them they turn round the leg, the friction from
both buckle and ring thereby hurting the animal more or
less. In addition to this, the strap frequently gets twisted,
cracked, and stretched by the strain put upon it, and so
lasts but a comparatively short time. Now, my hobble
buckles have been devised for the purpose of doing away
with these objectionable features in hobbles and producing
one which will not turn round the leg, and in which the
chain is connected to the buckle instead of to the strap.
* Selected from specifications of inventions patented in this Colony.—See
Regulation 24.


This invention of improvements in machinery for removing
burrs and other impurities, such as grass seeds, dust, dirt,
&c., from the fleeces and skins of sheep, consists substan-
tially in the use and application of a pegged drum or
cylinder of wood or metal or partly of both, studded with
wood or metal spikes or claws, made to revolve rapidly by
any suitable motor. The sheep or skin is held in juxta-
position to or against this revolving drum oi 4 cylinder, and
every part of the fleece submitted to its action, until freed
wholly or to a very large extent from the burrs or other
impurities above mentioned.
******
The object of our invention is the improvement in the
manufacture of alcohol from molasses and other fermentable
substances, by adding to the wash or to the molasses
intended for fermentation tannic acid, alum, acetate of
alumina, sulphate of alumina, chloride of calcium, acetate
of lead, or other soluble lead salt, sulphate or any soluble-
salt of iron, sulphate or any soluble salt of zinc, sulphate
or any soluble salt of copper, soluble salts of mercury,
phosphoric acid or superphosphate of lime, either together
or separately, so as to increase the yield of spirit by regu-
lating the fermentation, and cause the yield of spirit to
agree with the attenuation of the wort.
******
This invention consists of certain improvements in
machines for excavating earth, such as in the making of
dams, &c., &c. The machine itself consists of a scoop-
shaped excavating tool, supported on the front carriage; a
receptable for the excavated earth supported on the back
carriage; and an elevator between the two for carrying the
earth from the excavating tool to the receptacle.
* * * * * *
These improvements relate to a method and means for
extracting oleaginous, fatty, and resinous substances from
animal and vegetable substances, textile materials, raw and
manufactured seeds, or their envelopes or cases, by the use


of alcohol, wood spirit, or naphtha, bisulphide of carbon,
various others, and light hydrocarbons, employed in the
state of vapour and at and above the temperature of
their respective boiling points. The invention consists in
the application of spirit vapours of the substances named,
in closed vessels communicating with other vessels in the
which the spirit vapours are condensed, the circulation
being assisted in some cases with a force-pump.
******
This is an invention for converting, by a novel and
peculiar method, wet steam into super-heated steam or
hydrogen gas, and using it for engineering purposes, by
conveying the steam from the steam chest through a small
iron pipe outside the boiler to the front of the furnace; the
oipe is then turned in beneath the furnace bars, and by
way of the ash-pit is carried towards the back cf the
furnace ; the pipe is there attached to one of two nozzles
which project downwards between the furnace bars, and
ire a part of the super-heating apparatus presently to be
described, which apparatus is placed within and at the back
of the furnace.
******
This invention is designed to supply a simple, efficient,
reliable, and economical system of railway signalling, aud
to enable railways to be worked in foggy or misty weather
with greater safety than heretofore, and without the
augmentation of staff necessitated when signalling in foggy
weather by the method at present commonly practised. To
this end I suppress or dispense with the wires or metal rod
connections usually employed as media of communication
between the signalling boxes, stations, or places, and the
semaphores, or arms and lamps, and in lieu of actuating
or changing the positions of such signalling bodies or
objects by the direct application thereto of mechanical
means, I actuate them pneumatically, that is to say, I
establish communication between the said signalling bodies
or objects, and the boxes, stations, or places whence the


same are to be operated, by suitable pipes, tubes, passages,
or vessels ; and I effect tbe necessary movements or changes
of position of the said signalling bodies or objects by
changing the density or pressure of a volume (or volumes)
of air or other elastic fluid contained in such pipes, tubes,
passages, or vessels.
No. 23.*
Concise Description of the Drawings relating to a
Specification.
Pig. 1, represents an elevation of the plant as now
worked. Pig. 2, sectional portion of above plan. Pig. 3
is a transverse sketch of the milk-pans and steam baths
showing the arrangements for applying the steam and hot
air. Aon fig. 1 represents the motive power for driving
the air-pump B, which forces the air into the receiver C,
from thence it is forced through the pipe D, which pipe
passes through the fires of two furnaces, marked E and P
respectively. By referring to the transverse sketch marked
“ fig. 3 ” the heated air then enters the telescope pipes
marked a' from thence passes into a series of
perforated pipes, as shown in the plan fig. 2, and marked
V h", which pipes are immersed in the milk through which
the air passes and carries off the vapour. C' C" on fig. 3
represents stop-cocks for regulating the inlet of air to the
milk-pans. lon fig. 2 shows a safety-valve designed to
carry off the compressed air when it attains a certain
pressure. Jon fig. 1, a boiler for generating steam to
supply the motive power. Kis a boiler for generating
steam to supply the steam baths H, whereby the milk con-
tained in the pan Gr is heated, cl' cl" on fig. 3 represent stop-
cocks for regulating the inlet of steam to the steam bath H.
* See Regulation 24.


In order that my invention may he clearly understood
I will proceed to describe the drawings hereto attached,
where figure 1 shows sample of my fencing erected, whilst
figure 2 shows one of my iron standards, figure 3 one of
my wooden standards, and figure 4 one of my stretchers,
all on a much larger scale. Figure sis a representation
on a larger scale still of one of my guide plates for
wooden standards, whilst figure 6 is a cross section —
exaggerated size—of my oval wire. In figure 1, AA
are the oval wires, BB the iron standards, and CC the
stretchers. DD in figure 3 shows position of the guide
plates on a wooden standard.
« * * * *
Fig. lis a ground plan of furnace. Fig. 2is a sectional
elevation of same at GH on plan. AA are the grates and
fire-places. BB the receptacles for fuel. CCC pipes from
the blast. DD, the ash-pits. EE, the dampers.


No. 24.*
Detailed description of the manner of constructing
and using an Invention.
The super-heater consists of a series of pipes singularly
arranged, being placed one within an another, that is to say,
a quarter-inch pipe is placed within a pipe of one inch in
diameter, and so formed by elbows (L) T’s (T) and joints
or unions connecting the pipes as to give the greatest
length of piping in the smallest possible space, and cause
the steam in its passage through the super-heater to be
violently agitated by its continually striking the piping at
right angles, and thus securing it becoming thoroughly
dry heated steam or hydrogen gas. This piping after
being fitted and prepared for the ingress of the wet steam
through a pipe at one end of the under part of the super-
heater and its egress, after passing through the several
pipes of the apparatus, and being thereby (as before
stated) converted into red-hot steam or hydrogen gas, at
the other end is then placed in a mould, say 2d in. x 10 in.
x 3 in., and enclosed within a casing of cast-iron of 1 in.
in thickness in some parts, and in other parts 2 in. in
thickness ; the casing thus formed leaves the two pipes,
the one for the ingress of the wet steam, the other for its
egress in its heated state, enclosed within the nozzles
mentioned in the first paragraph, with the exception of a
short length, say 1 in., for connection, so that nothing
appears or is to be seen outside the casting itself but the
pipes for ingress and egress. The wet steam from the
steam chest having been conveyed to the super-heater and
forced through the various turnings of the red-hot pipes
becomes red-hot steam or hydrogen gas, and is in that state
ejected from the super-heater through a pipe connected to
the pipe at the second nozzle, and is by this pipe conveyed
* See Regulation 24.


beneath the fire-bars by the way of the ash-pit back again
to the front of the furnace at a slight distance above the
burning fuel for about a foot in length ; the pipe is there
terminated by a fan-tail jet, from which the red-hot steam
or hydrogen gas is discharged with great force, and
mingling with the carbon or smoke causes it to ignite, thus
destroying it by combustion. The force or volume of the
dry steam or gas ejected is regulated by a stop-valve
placed on the pipe leading from the steam-chest in a
position where it can be readily reached; a second stop-
valve is placed on the same pipe close to its connection
with the steam-chest, to be used in case of necessity. The
dimensions of the super-heater must be regulated accord-
ing to the dimensions of the furnace in which it is to be
placed; the casing is rounded at each end and on the top,
to prevent the flame of the furnace, by thus taking off
its angles, as much as possible destroying it by combustion.
A casing for the pipes of good fire-clay, or other suitable
material, may be used in the place of iron in some
furnaces.
*****
In carrying out our invention we proceed as follows,
that is to say, we take such a proportion of valonia, divi-
divi, sumach, nutgalls, oak-bark, mimosa-bark, myrobalans,
gambier, cutch, catechu, kino, or other substance contain-
ing tannic acid as will contain tannic acid equal to one per
cent, of the weight of molasses used in setting up a
fermenting back, or that contains twenty-five (25)
pounds of tannic acid for each ton of molasses. The
exact quantity we discover from analysis of the substance
used. We place the quantity required in a cask or other
convenient vessel preferably having a perforated false
bottom, which is then filled with hot or cold water; we
allow the whole to soak for ten or twelve hours; we then
withdraw the liquor into any convenient vessel, and from
the residue wash out the whole or greater part of the


soluble matter by repeated effusions o£ hot or cold water.
The whole liquor, being mixed with that first withdrawn,
forms liquor No. 1. In another vessel we dissolve in a
sufficient quantity of hot or cold water two per cent, of
the weight of molasses used, of alum, that is fifty (50)
pounds of alum to each ton of molasses; this we call
liquor No. 2. Wo mix liquor No. 1 thoroughly with the
molasses and then add liquor No. 2, mix thoroughly and
dilute with sufficient water to reduce the mixture to
a specific gravity of I*o7o or thereabouts. This mixed
wash we then run into the fermenting back, where it is
allowed to ferment with or without the addition of yeast.
In using the other substances abovementioned we proceed
in a similar manner, using by preference about two (2) per
cent, of the weight of the molasses, that is to say about fifty
(50) pounds weight to each ton of molasses; or otherwise
we mix with the molasses immediately on its draining from
the sugar a concentrated solution of tannic acid, which
we obtain by evaporating liquor No. 1 in any convenient
vessel, so that twenty-five (25) pounds of tannic acid is
contained in each five (5) gallons of extract. This we
use in the same proportion, that is to say twenty-five
(25) pounds tannic acid to each ton of molasses, also a
concentrated solution of alum, fifty pounds (50) of alum
being dissolved in 5 gallons of boiling water to each ton
of molasses, adding first the solution of tannic acid and
after thorough mixing the alum solution. Solutions of the
other substances may be used in a similar mentioned
manner.


No. 25.*
Claims in Specification.
Having thus described the nature of my said invention,
and the mode of using the same, I would have it under-
stood that I do not confine myself to any shape or size for
my machine ; but what I claim is the making and using of
my said machine in the manner as hereinbefore substantially
described.
******
I do not confine myself to any particular size, shape, or
materials in the construction of my invention, so long as
the nature thereof be retained ; but I claim the improve-
ments in hobble buckles substantially as heroin described
and explained and illustrated by my drawings.
******
1. The form and combination of the moulds for containing
the water to be frozen. 2. The method of constructing the
apparatus by forming it with an annular space for the re-
ception of the water to be cooled, such annular space at
the same time affording, when empty, an additional barrier
to the ingress of heat when the greatest cold is required
in the apparatus. 3. The general form and arragement of
the apparatus.
******
I. The above described link-shaped label for marking
cattle and sheep, both ends being fastened closely to the
ear in the manner substantially set forth. 2. A machine for
making labels for cattle and sheep, in which the several
operations of numbering, lettering, cutting off, and binding
the metal strip are performed by means of dies, cutters,
formers, and jaws, constructed and operated substantially
as described. 3. The wheels d d'd", in connection with
the pawl e for numbering the metal strip, constructed and
operated substantially as described.
* Sec Regulation 24.


Having thus described the nature of my invention and
the manner of performing same, I would have it under-
stood that I do not confine myself to the precise form of
furnace shown in my drawings nor to the materials of
which my furnaces in any case may be built, but I claim—
1. The use of two fires, one at either end or side of
smelting furnaces, the heat from which passes into and
meets in a smelting chamber having the roof so constructed
as to prevent its passing directly over the ore-bed into the
flue and compelling it to mingle together and revolve over
and over the ore-bed, substantially as herein described and
explained. 2. The special form of such furnace shown in
my drawings.
******
1. A pavement constructed with a plank or board
foundation whereon are placed wooden blocks in rows
separated by flexible or other wooden strips, which are
packed with cement, gravel, stones, or other suitable
material, as herein set forth, and as illustrated in figures
1 and 2 of the drawings. 2. The combination with the
other parts of the said pavement of the shouldered blocks
in the manner and for the purpose set forth. 3. The
modification of my improved pavement as herein described,
and as illustrated in figures la 2 a of the drawing. 4. A
hammer or weight mounted on wheels arranged and operat-
ing in combination with a lever, and a bar or plate placed
below the said hammer, as herein set forth, for the purpose
specified. 5. The combination with the said hammer and
lever of the contrivances whereby the said hammer when
raised to the proper height will be automatically released
and dropped, as herein set forth for the purpose specified.


No. 26.
Examples of Complete Specifications.
Specification of Abiel Gifford Howland, of Christchurch,
Hew Zealand, coachbuilder, for an invention of “An
easy method of attaching and detaching shafts or
poles to and from carriages and vehicles having four
wheels, and to and from vehicles having four wheels
and known as buggies and American waggons.”
The nature of the said invention and the manner in which
the same is to be performed is as follows:
By placing on any buggy, waggon, or carriage, in lieu of
of theprdinary shaft clip, a clip and coupling to receive a
revolving journal which allows the pole or shaft to enter
while in an upright position, and by revolving in position
for draught it covers the top slaught and makes it secure
to perform the work of draught without bolt or screw, and
and by this coupling enables the said pole or shaft to be in-
stantly attached or detached, thus saving the time now
occupied in screwing in bolts to the thread of the clip and
fastening nut on same, and offering a greater safety from
accidents caused by broken bolts, loose threads and nuts,
and saving by such coupling a great amount of the usual
wear and tear.
I claim for an especial novelty a combination of the old
shaft clip with my shaft clip marked “ B ” shown in the
drawing annexed, and the journal revolving in same,
marked Cl, C 2, C 3, and also the shaft end marked A 1,
but I do not claim for the axle-bed marked “ D ” or the
axle marked “E” in the said drawing. I claim for new
parts of the said invention the shaft end A 1, the point of
clip marked “ B,” and the revolving journal marked Cl,
C 2, C 3.
ABIEL GIFFORD HOWLAND.
Witness—
A. Eokison, 142 Crown-st., Sydney.


Specification of John Henry Caton, stock-dealer, and
William Henry Allen, manufacturing chemist, both of
Melbourne, in the Colony of Victoria, for an inven-
tion intituled “ A new Method of curing the Fluke in
Sheep.”
This invention consists in the injection of a solution
capable of killing the fluke directly into the region of the liver
of the diseased animal. The solution which we prefer to use
consists of two ounces of cyanide of potassium, a quarter
of an ounce of carbonate of iron, half an ounce of bi-car-
bonate of soda, a quarter of an ounce of iodine, and thirty-
two ounces of water. We first dissolve the cyanide of
potassium in the water ; we then mix the carbonate of
iron and the bi-carbonate of soda together and # 'add one
ounce of the cyanide of posassium solution, after which we
pour in the iodine, and shake it about so as to amalgamate
the whole of the ingredients; finally we mix this with the
remainder of the cyanide of potassium solution, and it is
then fit for use, five to fifteen drops being a dose, according
to the strength and condition of the animal to be treated.
This dose we inject in the region of the liver (say between
the sixth and seventh ribs), by means of a syringe having
a long and sharply pointed nose, protruding (say) an inch
and a quarter beyond the barrel, which nose is pushed
through the flesh so as to reach or nearly reach the
diseased organ. As a matter of convenience we propose
to have a gauge marked along the barrel, so that the opera-
tor may know precisely when he has injected the desired
amount, so that by once filling the syringe it may be used
for several sheep in succession without being re-supplied.
The cyanide of potassium we use as the agent for killing
the fluke, the carbonate of iron for acting directly on the
liver and giving tone to the constitution to assist it to bear
the treatment, the iodine for keeping the solution in the
liver and preventing its being absorbed by the other organs,
and the bi-carbonate of soda to assist in the amalgamation
of the iodine and the iron.


Other chemical solutions capable of killing the fluke may
be substituted for that which we have described, but we
believe that the one we have described is the best.
Having thus described the nature of our invention and
the manner of performing same, we would have it under-
stood that we do not confine ourselves to the specific solution
herein described, but we claim, —
First—Our new method of curing fluke in sheep by in-
jecting a solution fatal to fluke directly into the
region of the liver of the diseased animal.
Second—The chemical solution herein described for the
purpose of being so injected.
JOHN HENRY CATON,
WILLIAM HENRY CATON.
Witness to Signatures—
A. Brown, J.P.
******
Specification of William Randle, Thomas Loader, and
William Elsdon, all of Melbourne, Victoria, for the
invention of “ A new mode of transporting passengers
through public thoroughfares, and in the apparatus
connected therewith.”
The invention consists of a mode of employing the
power of horses for drawing carriages through the public
streets, by which great economy is obtained, both in the cost
of the construction of the carriages as well as the saving
of time, by the increased speed or rate at which passengers
can be transported from place to place; and the invention
consists in working carriages on railways laid down in the
public streets, such carriages being drawn and driven in the
ordinary manner by horses; the rails are placed level or
nearly so with the surface of the street, so as not to offer
any obstruction to other carriages passing across the street.
We prefer the rails placed in the centre of the street, and
they are made about five inches wide, or any width or form
which is most desirable, and placed upon longitudinal or
L


other sleepers laid down in the ordinary manner, which,
being well understood, needs no further description. The
carriages have brakes applied to them, by which they may
be so stopped at any particular point that passengers may
disembark without danger. The improvements in the
apparatus connected with the system above described are
improvements in the wheels of the carriages used on the
rails before described ; also, in a peculiar form of rail, by
which the upper part of the rail on which the wheel rests
will correspond with the cone of the wheels, and the lower
part will be nearly a straight line, by which they will be
kept from clogging with dirt; and also in an arrangement
by which the carriages can be readily turned off from one
line to another, or on the road when used for street railways;
and the peculiarity of the arrangement consists in curving
the main track slightly from its main course, and placing
the fixed switch points in the line produced, thus rendering
it a certainty for a car coming from C to go upon the turn-
out track, and a car coming from A keeps the main track ;
but in order that the invention may be more clearly under-
stood, we will now describe the drawings which show the
mode by which we prefer to carry out the mode of giving
the requisite motion to the flange upon the wheel, although
we do not confine ourselves to that peculiar mode ; and we
would remark that in the drawings the nature of the
different figures is written thereon, by which they need not
be repeated here. In this mode, the flange is moved by
means of an eccentric which is acted upon by a lever worked
by the driver in the carriage; and it will be readily under-
stood, by an examination of the drawing, that by turning
this lever in one direction or the other, that the flange will
be raised or lowered so as to suit either the position of the
rail or common road. Ais a lever, Bis the eccentric, Dis
head of the wheel, C the flange, CC are the spaces in which
the bolts work, g is the axis of the wheel, and F is the head
of the bolts. By examining the drawing of the turn-out


for street railways, the nature and character of it will easily
be understood. We have also shown in separate figures a
section of a street railway, showing the mode of laying
down the rail and attaching it to the sleepers or block.
We have also shown a rail full size, with a portion of a
wheel showing the flange thereon acting upon it, by which
the nature and advantages thereof will at once be seen.
Having thus described the general character of the inven-
tion, we would have it understood that we are aware that
carriages have been before drawn upon railways for the
transport of earth and goods on private ways in the con-
struction of public works; wo do not therefore claim
working carriages on railways generally, but what we claim
is, the mode of transporting passengers through the public
streets, on railways, by means of horse power substantially
as herein described; and we also claim the construction
of wheels, with movable flanges, for the purposes herein
described. We also claim the peculiar form of rail, and
also the arrangement of turn-out, by which the carriages
can be readily turned off from one line to another, or on to
the road when used for street purposes.
WILLIAM RANDLE,
THOMAS LODER,
WILLIAM ELSDON.
Witness to Signatures —
Edwin Eichaeds.


No. 27.
Specification for a Certificate of Provisional’
Protection.
Provisional Specification of Michael Ealeigh, of JS r o. 6,
Sydney Terrace, Canning-street, Carlton, near Mel-
bourne, in the Colony of Victoria, bricklayer, for an
invention intituled “Improvements in Colonial Ovens.”
This invention consists of certain improvements in colonial
ovens, which have been devised for the purpose of assisting
to equalise the heat therein. The essential feature of my
invention lies in the introduction of a double flue under-
neath one of the shelves, running longitudinally from end
to end of the oven, and parallel to each other, or, in other
words, it might be described as one large flat flue divided
in the centre by a vertical partition, so that one half is
behind the other. The draught in these flues I make to
travel in opposite directions by leading the heat from one
side —say the left-hand side—of the fire underneath the
oven up to the front flue, and so through it to the right-
hand side, and from thence to the corner flue, whilst the
heat from the right-hand side of the fire I conduct to the
back flue, through which it travels until it reaches the other
end, where it is discharged into a passage leading to the
corner flue.
By means of these cross draughts running through
flues which traverse the baking space in the oven, the heat
is more equalised than by the present method, so that the
cooking will proceed from both top and bottom of the joint
or pastry to an approximately equal extent, in addition to
which the vertical partition between the two new flues is a
great strengthener to the shelf under which it is fixed.
MICHAEL RALEIGH.
Witness—
John Jenkins, Melbourne,


No. 28.
Assignment of the entire interest in an unpatented
Invention.
Know all men that I, Frank Naughten, of Sydney, in the
Colony of New South Wales, do hereby acknowledge and
declare that I am the author or designer of a certain
invention entitled “ An improved Sewing Machine,” and
and that I have assigned all right, title, and interest in and
to the said invention, so far as the Colony of New South
Wales is concerned, to Gordon Stanley, of Newcastle,
New South Wales, with full power for the said Gordon
Stanley to apply for and obtain Letters Patent for the said
invention, in the said Colony, in his own name.
Dated this second day of September, one thousand eight
hundred and eighty-seven.
FRANK NAUGHTEN
Witness — John Kine.
No. 29.
Assignment of an undivided part interest in an
unpatented Invention.
Know all men that I, Charles Kent, o£ Sydney, in the
Colony of New South Wales, do hereby acknowledge and
declare that I am the author or designer of a certain
invention entitled “ An improved Wire Strainer, ’’and that
I have assigned an undivided part interest in and to the
said invention, so far as the Colony of New South Wales
is concerned, to Frederick Thomas, of Sydney, New South
Wales, with joint power for the said Frederick Thomas to
apply for and obtain Letters Patent for the said invention,
in the said Colony, in our joint names.
Dated this fourth day of September, one thousand eight
hundred and eighty-seven.
CHARLES KENT.
Witness — Michael Powee.


No. 30.
Ministerial approval of tlie prayer of a Petition
for Letters Patent.
Minute Paper for the Executive Council.
Department of Justice,
Sydney, 24th September, 1887.
Issue of Letters Patent to "William Davis Stafford.
Haying examined the Petition for Letters Patent from
William Davis Stafford for an invention of “An improved
Horse Shoe,” and having also examined the Eeport thereon
of the Examiner of Patents, I now approve of the prayer
of the Petitioner, and recommend the issue of Letters
Patent, securing to the aforesaid Petitioner for fourteen
years the benefit of the said invention.
WILLIAN CLARKE.
Minister of Justice.
His Excellency the Governor
and
The Executive Council.


No. 31.
Ministerial approval of the prayer of a Petition
for a Certificate of Provisional Protection.
Minute Paper for the Executive Council.
Department of Justice,
Sydney, 24th September, 1887.
Issue of Certificate op Provisional Protection to
Frank David Hall.
Having examined the Petition for a Certificate of Pro-
visional Protection from Frank David Hall, for an invention
of “ An improved Corkscrew,” and having also examined the
Eeport thereon of the Examiner of Patents, I now approve
of the prayer of the Petitioner, and recommend the issue
of a Certificate accordingly.
WILLIAM CLARKE.
Minister of Justice.
His Excellency tiie Governor
and
The Executive Council.


No. 32.
Expert’s Report.
Sydney, September 15tb, 1887.
Sir,
I have the honor to report that I have carefully
examined the specification and drawings relating to Mr.
Luc Mace’s application for Letters Patent for the invention
of a “ Perpetual Solar Watch.”
The invention is, in my opinion, an improved arrange-
ment for a Sun Dial, the principle of arrangement being
that of the Bing Dial; and I find that it is not divested
of the known errors appertaining to Sun Dials, and there-
fore, is not applicable for accurate scientific purposes.
I consider, however, that the invention may be found
useful for ordinary purposes, and there is also sufficient
originality shown to warrant the issue to the applicant of
the Letters Patent petitioned for.
I may add that the subject of this invention cannot
accurately be designated a “Perpetual Solar Watch,” and,
therefore, before preparation of the customary grant, it
will be necessary to call upon the applicant to make such
alterations in the language of his specification and accom-
panying documents as will serve to correctly designate the
subject of the invention.
I am,
Yours truly,
The Examiner of Patents.


No. 33.
Examiner’s Report.
Patents Office,
September Ist, 1887.
Sir,
I have the honor to report that I have carefully
examined the various documents comprised in Benjamin
Broadhurst’s application (No. 117) for a Patent for an
“ Improved Method of Extracting Gold and Silver from
Ferriferous Ores.”
The petition, specification and other documents furnished
by the applicant, show a compliance with the forms pre-
scribed by law.
The Petitioner claims as the assignee of the inventor,
John Strashaussen, and the deed of assignment submitted by
the applicant is such satisfactory proof of the assignment
as is required by the regulations.
The invention relates to the extraction of gold and
silver from ferriferous ores. The various stages of the
process proposed may be summarised as follows: —
1. Roasting of the ore with charcoal to facilitate
deoxidisation.
2. Grinding the ore, preferably in water.
3. Applying sulphuric acid to the muddy compound,
and stimulating the formation of sulphate of iron
by addition of iron filings, turnings, &c.
4. Washing out the metallic salt and removing the
gold and silver from the residuum by any of the
ordinary methods.
5. Expelling the sulphuric acid from the ferric sul-
phate by furnace heat, and conducting it back to
the chamber containing fresh ferriferous ore on
which it consequently acts and re-acts.


It will be seen that (with the exception, perhaps, of
the stimulation by iron filings) all the details have been
more or less anticipated in previous Patents. Combined
they represent a process not previously patented, and as
the applicant narrows his claim to “ the process substantially
as described,” there is no reason why a Patent should not
be issued to him in protection o£ his restricted claim.
Prior to examination of the specification a protest was
lodged by Jacob Johnston, of Beechworth, on the score
that the invention did not disclose sufficient novelty to
warrant the issue of Letters Patent. This protest may,
however, be dismissed on the ground that the process is a
novel combination of known minor processes; and where
the Patent is for a combination only, which is in itself
novel and useful, it is immaterial whether any of the parts
are novel.
The Patent to which this specification is most closely
allied is that of James Ollis, No. 296. There is, however,
this tangible difference between the two methods specified —
the prior patentee carries off the gold in solution, and leaves
the baser metals as a residual, while the present applicant
removes the baser metal in the form of a metallic salt and
leaves the precious metals as residue.
I have, therefore, to report that in my opinion there is
no objection to the issue of the Patent prayed for.
I am, yours obediently,
A. G. TAYLOR.
Examiner of Patents.
To the Minister of Justice.


No. 34.
Copy of the First Letters of Registration issued in the
Colony of New South Wales.
By His Excellency Sir Charles Augustus Fitz Rot,
Knight Companion of the Royal Hanoverian Guelphic
Order, Captain General and Governor-in-Chief of the
Territory of New South Wales and its Dependencies.
To ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, Greeting :
WHEREAS Christopher Dunken Hats, of No. 474,
George-street, Sydney, hath by his Petition humbly repre-
sented to me that he is the agent and representative in the
Australian Colonies, of Christopher Kingsford, of London,
the inventor and patentee in Great Britain, of a machine
for compressing and solidifying peat, coal, and other
substances of a like nature, and that the said machine
consists of a mill for grinding coal, kilns for drying and
heating the same, and presses for the purpose of consoli-
dating the produce for use ; and which machine is parti-
cularly described in the specification which is annexed to
these Letters of Registration and the explanation thereupon
written ; and the said Petitioner further represented that
the Patent for this invention was issued to the said
Christopher Kingsford under the Great Seal of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, bearing date the
first day of October, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-
two, and that the said Petitioner had deposited the sum of
Twenty Pounds with the Colonial Treasurer of the said
Colony, to defray the expense of granting these Letters of
Registration, as required by the Act of Council 16 Victoria,
No. 24; the Petitioner, therefore, humbly prayed that I
would be pleased to grant Letters of Registration for the
above-named Christopher Kingsford, whereby the exclusive
benefit of the said invention might be secured to the said


Christopher Kingsford for a period of fourteen years; and
I, being willing to give encouragement to all inventions
and improvements in the arts or manufactures which may
be for the public good, and having received a report
favourable to the prayer of the said Petition, from com-
petent persons appointed by me to examine and consider
the matters stated in the said Petition and to report
thereon for my information, am pleased, with the advice
of my Executive Council, to grant the Petitioner’s request:
Know ye, therefore, that I, the said Sir Charles Augustus
Eitz Eoy, as such Governor as aforesaid, with the
advice of my Executive Council, and in exercise of the
power and authority given to me by the Act of Council 16
Victoria, No. 24, do hereby grant unto the said Christopher
Kingsford, his executors, administrators, and assigns,
special license, full power, sole privilege, and authority,
that he, the said Christopher Kingsford, his executors,
administrators, or assigns, and every of them, by himself
and themselves, or by his or their deputy or deputies, ser-
vants or agents, or such others as the said Christopher
Kingsford, his executors, administrators, or assigns, shall at
any time agree with, and no other, from time to time and
at all times hereafter during the term of years herein
expressed, shall, and lawfully may make, use, exercise, and
vend his said invention and improvement within the Colony
of New South Wales, in such manner as to him, the said
Christopher Kingsford, his executors, administrators, and
assigns, or any of them, shall in his or their discretion
seem meet: And that he the said Christopher Kingsford,
his executors, administrators, and assigns, shall and law-
fully may have and enjoy the whole profit, benefit, com-
modity, and advantage from time to time coming, growing,
accruing, and arising by reason of the said invention and
improvement, for and during the said term of years herein
mentioned: To have, hold, exercise, and enjoy the said
license, powers, privileges, and advantages hereinbefore


granted or mentioned to be granted unto the said Christo-
pher Kingsford, his executors, administrators, and assigns,
for and during and unto the full end and term of fourteen
years from the date of these presents next and immediately
ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended according to
the Act in such case made and provided. And to the end
that he, the said Christopher Kingsford, his executors,
administrators, and assigns, and every of them, may have
and enjoy the full benefit and the sole use and exercise of
the said invention and improvement according to the inten-
tion hereinbefore declared, I do by these present Letters
of Registration, require and strictly command all and every
person and persons, bodies politic and corporate, and all
and every other the subjects of Her Majesty the Queen, in
the said Colony of New South Wales, of what estate,
quality, degree, name or condition soever they be, within
the said Colony, that neither they nor any of them, at any
time during the continuance of the said term of fourteen
years hereby granted, either directly or indirectly do make,
use, or put in practice the said invention and improvement
or any part of the same, nor shall make or cause to be
made any addition thereunto or subtraction from the same,
whereby to pretend himself or themselves the author or
authors, designer or designers thereof, without the license,
consent, or agreement of the said Christopher Kingsford,
his executors, administrators, or assigns, in writing under
his or their hands and seals, first had and obtained in that
behalf, upon such pains and penalties as can or may be
justly inflicted on such offenders for their contempt of this
my command; and further, to be answerable to the said
Christopher Kingsford, his executors, administrators, and
assigns, according to law, for his and their damages thereby
occasioned : And moreover, Ido by these presents, for me
and my successors in office as Governors of the said Colony,
will and command all and singular the Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, Sheriff, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Officers


and Ministers whatsoever of Her Majesty the Queen, in the
said Colony, for the time being, that they, or any of them,
do not nor shall at any time hereafter during the said term
hereby granted, in anywise molest, trouble, or hinder the
said Christopher Kingsford, his executors, administrators,
or assigns, or any of them, or his or their deputies, servants,
or agents, in or about the due and lawful use or exercise
of the said invention and improvement, or anything relating
thereto : Provided always —and my Letters of Registration
are and shall be upon this condition—that if at any time
during the said term hereby granted, it shall be made
appear to me, or my successors in office as Governors of
the said Colony, that these Letters of Registration are
contrary to law, or prejudicial or inconvenient to the
subjects of Her said Majesty, in the said Colony in general,
or that the said invention and improvement is not a new
invention or improvement as to the public use and exercise
thereof in the said Colony, or not invented, designed, or
found out by the said Christopher Kingsford, as aforesaid,
then upon the signification thereof to be made to me, or my
successors in office as Governors of the said Colony, under
my or their sign manual and the seal of the said Colony,
these my Letters of Registration shall forthwith cease,
determine, and he utterly void to all intents and purposes :
Provided also that these present Letters of Registration,
and anything hereinbefore contained, shall not extend or
be construed to extend to give privilege unto the said
Christopher Kingsford, his executors, administrators, or
assigns, or any of them, to use or imitate any invention
or improvement whatsoever which hath heretofore been
invented, designed, or found out by any other subjects of
Her said Majesty in the said Colony, unto whom like
Letters of Registration or privileges have been already
granted for the sole use, exercise, and benefit thereof:
Provided likewise nevertheless—and these Letters of Regis-
tration are upon this condition that if at any time


hereafter these Letters of Registration, and the liberty and
privileges hereby granted, shall become vested in or in
trust for more than the number of twelve persons, or their
representatives, at any one time as partners dividing or
entitled to divide the benefit or profit obtained by reason
of these Letters of Registration, reckoning executors or
administrators as and for the single person whom they
represent as to such interest as they are or shall be entitled
to in right of their testator; and also, that if the said
Christopher Kingsford shall not particularly describe and
ascertain the nature of the said invention or improvement,
and in what manner the same is to be performed
by an instrument in writing under his hand and
seal, and cause the same to be registered in the
Supreme Court at Sydney, in the said Colony, within three
days after the date of these Letters of Registration; and
also, that if the said Christopher Kingsford, his executors,
administrators, or assigns, shall not supply or cause to be
supplied, for the service of the Government of the said
Colony, all such articles of the said invention as he or they
shall be required to supply by the officers administering the
department of the said service for the use of which the
same shall be required, in such manner, at such price, and
at and upon such reasonable price and terms as shall be
settled for that purpose by the said officers so requiring the
same, then these Letters of Registration, and all liberties
and advantages whatsoever hereby granted, shall utterly
cease, determine, and become void, anything hereinbefore
contained to the contrary thereof in anywise notwith-
standing : Provided that nothing herein contained shall
prevent the granting of licenses in such manner and for
such considerations as they may by law be granted. And
lastly, I do by these presents grant unto the said Christopher
Kingsford, his executors, administrators, and assigns, that
these Letters of Registration, or the registration or exemplifi-
cation thereof, shall be in and by all things good, firm, valid,


sufficient, and effectual in the law, according to the true
intent and meaning thereof, and shall be taken and construed
and adjudged in the most favourable and beneficial sense
for the best advantage of the said Christopher Kingsford,
his executors, administrators, and assigns, as well in all
Courts of Record in the said Colony as elsewhere, and by
all and singular the officers and ministers whatsoever in the
said Colony, and amongst all and every the subjects of her
said Majesty in the said Colony, notwithstanding the not
full and certain describing the nature or quality of the said
invention or improvement, or of the materials thereto con-
ducing and belonging.
In' witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Sign
Manual, and have caused these present Letters of
Registration to be sealed with the Seal of the said
(1.5.) Colony, at Government House, Sydney, in Hew
South Wales, this fifteenth day of January, in the
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred
and fifty-five.
CHS. A. FITZ ROY. (L.S.)
Note, —This antiquated and cumbrous form of grant was an
adoption of the English form of a Patent, but was soon superseded
by a simpler conveyance, which has been substantially retained in the
form of the Letters Patent granted under the recent Amending Act. The
Letters of Registration protecting the first Patent issued in New South
Wales, have been inserted from their historical value rather than from
any intrinsic usefulness as a precedent.


No. 35.
Letters Patent to an Inventor.
By His Excellency the Right Honourable Charles Robert,
Barox Carrington*, a Member of Her Majesty’s
Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and
Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-Chief
of the Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
To ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, Greeting :
WHEREAS Janies John Jackson, of King-street, Sydney,
in the Colony of New South Wales, plumber, hath by his
Petition represented to me that he is the author or designer
of a certain invention in, or improvement to the Arts or
Manufactures, that is to say of an invention of a Water-
tank Excavator, which is more particularly described in the
specification marked A, and the two sheets of drawings
marked B and C respectively, which are hereunto annexed ;
and that he the said Petitioner hath deposited with the
Colonial Treasurer of the said Colony of New South Wales
the sum of Pive Pounds sterling as required by the Patents
Law Amendment Act of 1887; and hath prayed that I
would be pleased to grant Letters Patent whereby the ex-
clusive enjoyment and advantage of the said invention or
improvement might be secured to him for a period of four-
teen years : And whereas I have received a report from
the Minister of Justice to the effect that after examination
of the said Petition and of the report thereon of the
Examiner of Patents, the Minister of Justice approves of
the prayer of the said Petitioner: Now, therefore, I,
being willing to give encouragement to all inventions in
and improvements to the Arts or Manufactures which may
be for the public good, am pleased, with the advice of the
M


Executive Council, and in exercise of the power and
authority given to me by the before-mentioned Act and
the Act of Council 10 Yictoria No. 24, to grant and
do by these Letters Patent geant unto the said James
John Jackson, his executors, administrators, and assigns,
the exclusive enjoyment and advantage of the said
invention or improvement for and during the term of
fourteen years from the date thereof: To have, hold, and
exercise unto the said James John Jackson, his executors,
administrators, and assigns, the exclusive enjoyment and
advantage thereof for and during and unto the full end and
term of fourteen years from the date of these presents
next and immediately ensuing and fully to be complete
and ended.
In witness wheeeop I have hereunto set my Sign
Manual and have caused the present Letters
Patent to be sealed with the Seal of the said
Colony of New South Wales, at Government
House, Sydney, in New South Wales, this
twentieth day of August, in the year of our
Lord one thousand eight hundred and eighty-
seven. V
(L.S.) CARRINGTON.


No. 36.
Letters Patent to Joint Inventors.
By His Excellency the Right Honourable Chaeles
Eobeet, Baeon Caeeington, a Member of Her
Majesty’s Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight
Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of
Saint Michael and Saint George, Governor and
Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of New South
Wales and its Dependencies.
To all to whom these Peesents shall come, Greeting:
WHEREAS John Kelman, of Wellington, in the Colony
of New South Wales, printer and publisher, and William
John McCulloch, of Sydney, in the said Colony, general
stationer, have by Petition represented to me that they
are the authors or designers of a certain invention in
or improvement to the Arts or Manufactures, that is to
say, of an invention of an Improved Printing Machine,
which is more particularly described in the specification,
marked A, and the eleven sheets of drawings, marked
B, C, D, E, E, G, H, I, J, K and L respectively, which are
hereunto annexed; and that they, the said Petitioners,
have deposited with the Colonial Treasurer of the said
Colony of New South Wales the sum of Eive Pounds
sterling, as required by the Patents Law Amendment Act
of 1887; and have prayed that I would be pleased to grant
Letters Patent whereby the exclusive enjoyment and
advantage of the said invention or improvement might be
secured to them for a period of fourteen years: And
whebeas I have received a report from the Minister of
Justice to the effect that after examination of the said
Petition and of the report thereon of the Examiner of
Patents, the Minister of Justice approves of the prayer
of the said Petitioners: Now theeefoee I being willing


to give encouragement to all inventions in and improve-
ments to the Arts or Manufactures, which may he for the
public good, am pleased with the advice of the Executive
Council, and in exercise of the power and authority
given to me by the before-mentioned Act and the Act
of Council 16 Victoria No. 24, to grant and no by
these Letters Patent grant unto the said John Kelman
and William John McCulloch, their executors, adminis-
trators, and assigns, the exclusive enjoyment and
advantage of the said invention or improvement, for and
during the term of fourteen years from the date hereof:
To ha ye, hold, and exercise unto the said John Kelman
and William John McCulloch, their executors, administra-
tors, and assigns, the exclusive enjoyment and advantage
thereof for and during and unto the full end and term of
fourteen years from the date of these presents next and
immediately ensuing and fully to be complete and ended.
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Sign
Manual and have caused the present Letters
Patent, to be sealed with the Seal of the said
Colony of New South Wales, at Government
House, Sydney, in New South Wales, this ninth
day of August, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and eighty-seven.
(L.S.) CARRINGTON.


No. 37.
Letters Patent to an Inventor’s Agent.
By His Excellency the Eight Honourable Charles Egbert,
Baron Carrington, a Member of Her Majesty’s
Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael
and Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-
Chief of the Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
To ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, Greeting:
WHEEEAS Jabez Jamrach, of Calcutta, in the Indian
Empire, spice merchant, hath by his Petition represented to
me that he is the agent of Leopold Lugger, of Cabul, in Af-
ghanistan, who claims to be the author or designer, &c., &c.
No. 38.
Letters Patent to an Inventor’s Assignee.
By His Excellency the Eight Honourable Charles Egbert,
Baron Carrington, a Member of Her Majesty’s
Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael
and Saint George, Governor and Commander-m-
Chief of the Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting:
WHEEEAS Philip Vandebdechen, of Amsterdam, in the
Kingdom of Holland, artist, hath by his Petit ion represented
to me that he is the assignee of Otto Yon Attems, of Berne,
in the Eepublic of Switzerland, who claims to be the author
or designer, &c., &c.


No. 39.
Letters Patent to the Agent of an Inventor’s
Assignee.
By His Excellency the Eight Honourable Charles Robert,
Baron Carrington, a Member of Her Majesty’s
Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael
and Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-
Chief of the Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
To ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, Greeting :
WHEREAS William Wallace of Market-street, Sydney,
in the Colony of New South Wales, ironmonger, hath by
his Petition represented to me that he is the agent of Henry
Hunter, of Melbourne, in the Colony of Victoria, and of
William Johnson, of Adelaide, in the Colony of South
Australia, who are the assignees of Albert Thomas Watson,
of Auckland, in the Colony of New Zealand, who claims to
be the author or designer, &c., &c.


No. 40.
Letters Patent to the Introducer of an Invention.
By His Excellency the Eight Honourable Charles Robert,
Baron Carrington, a Member of Her Majesty’s
Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael
and Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-
Chief of the Colony of Hew South Wales and its
Dependencies.
To ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, Greeting :
WHEREAS Frank Roberts, of Inverell, in the Colony of
New South Wales,tin-miner,hath by hisPetitionrepresented
to me that he is, by virtue of a communication from abroad,
the author or designer, &c., &c.
No. 41.
Letters Patent to an Applicant who is in part
Introducer and part Inventor.
By His Excellency the Right Honourable Charles Robert,
Baron Carrington, a Member of Her Majesty’s
Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and
Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-Chief
of the Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
To ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, Greeting :
WHEREAS John Williams, of the Glebe, in the Colony of
New South Wales, coach builder, hath by his Petition
represented to me that he is (partly by virtue of a communi-
cation from abroad) the author or designer, Ac., &c., &c.


No. 42.
Letters Patent to the Agent, &c., of the part
Inventor part Introducer.
By His Excellency the Eight Honourable Charles Egbert,
Baron Carrington, a Member o£ Her Majesty’s
Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and
Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-Chief
of the Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
To ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, Greeting :
WHEEEAS William Wandsworth, of Kiama, in the
Colony of New South Wales, grazier, hath by his Petition
represented to me that he is the agent* of Prank Hobbs, of
London, England, who claims to be (partly by virtue of
a communication from abroad) the author or designer, &c.,
&c., &c.
* Or “assignee,” or “agent of A. 8., the assignee of B. C., who claims to be t
author or designer, Ac.”


No. .43.
Letters Patent to an Inventor and bis Assignees.
By His Excellency the Right Honourable Chaeles Eobeet,
Baeon Caeeington, a Member of Her Majesty’s
Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael
and Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-Chief
of the Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
To all to whom these Peesexts shall come, Greeting :
WHEIffiAS Abeaham Jacobs and Lewis Lamont, both of
Tirana, in the Colony of New South Wales, farmers, have
by their Petition represented to me that the said Abraham
Jacobs is the author or designer of a certain invention in, &c.,
&c., &c. And that the said Abraham Jacobs hath assigned
unto the said Lewis Lament an undivided part interest in
the said invention. And that your Petitioners have
deposited, &c., &c., &c.
No.. 44.
Letters Patent to a Corporate Body.
By His Excellency the Eight Honourable Chaeles Eobeet,
Baeox Caeeington, a Member of Her Majesty’s
Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael
and Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-Chief
of the Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
To all to whom tiiese Peesents shall come, Greeting:
WHEREAS the Westinghouse Beake Company, Limited,
of Canal Road, King’s Cross, in the County of Middlesex,
England, have by their Petition represented to me that
they are the assignees, &c.; {as in a Patent to an individual ,
hut omit the icords “ executors, administrators," retaining only
the term il assigns," or substituting “ successors, and assigns.")


No. 45.
Certificate of Provisional Protection.
By His Excellency the Right Honourable Charles Robert,
Baron Carrington, a Member of Her Majesty’s
Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight G-rand Cross
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael
and Saint George, G-overnor and Comraander-in-Chief
of the Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
To ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, Greeting :
WHEREAS Jacob Brown, of Goulburn, in the Colony of
New South Wales, hotelkeeper, hath by his Petition repre-
sented to me that he is the author or designer of a certain
invention in or improvement to the Arts or Manufactures
that is to say, of an invention of “ Improvements in Exca-
vating Machines,” which is more particularly described in a
specification marked A which is hereunto annexed. And
that he the said Petitioner hath deposited with the
Colonial Treasurer of the said Colony of New South
Wales the sum of Two Pounds sterling as required by
the Patents Law Amendment Act of ISB7 and hath
humbly prayed that I would be pleased to grant to him a
Certificate entitling him to Provisional Protection for the
said invention or improvement for the term of twelve
months in accordance with the provisions of the said Act.
And whereas I have received a report from the Minister
of Justice to the effect that after examination of the said
Petition, and of the report thereon of the Examiner of
Patents, he the said Minister of Justice approves of the
prayer of the said Petitioner. Now therefore I, being
willing to give encouragement to all inventions in and
improvements to the arts or manufactures, which may be for
the public good, am pleased with the advice of the


Executive Council and in exercise of the power and
authority given to me by the said Act, to grant and do by
this Certificate of Provisional Protection grant unto the
said Jacob Brown, his executors, administrators, and
assigns, the exclusive enjoyment and advantage of Pro-
visional Protection for the said invention or improvement
for and during the term of twelve months from the date
hereof. To have hold and exercise unto the said Jacob
Brown, his executors, administrators, and assigns, the
exclusive enjoyment and advantage of the said Provisional
Protection for and during and unto the full end and term
of twelve months from the date of these presents next
and immediately ensuing and fully to be complete and
ended. Provided always that this Certificate shall be
deemed to be cancelled upon the issue of Letters Patent
for the said invention or improvement to the lawful holder
of this Certificate.
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Sign
Manual and have caused the present Certificate
of Provisional Protection to be sealed with the
Seal of the said Colony of New South Wales, at
Government House, Sydney, in New South Wales,
this fifth day of June, in the year of Our Lord
one thousand eight hundred and eighty-eight.
(L.S.) CARRINGTON.


No. 46.
Assignment of a Patent.
Memorandum of Assignment of Letters Patent from
George Ainley to David Gelston.
WHEREAS, I, George Ainley, of Custom-street West,
City of Auckland, in the Colony of New Zealand,
am the author or designer of an invention known as
the Carbon Burner, for which Letters Patent in
New South Wales have been granted to me the
19th day of September, one thousand eight hundred and
eighty-seven, No. 194 : And whereas I have covenanted
and agreed with David Gelston, of Botany-street, Water-
loo, Sydney, New South Wales, to sell my interest in the
said Letters Patent for the sum of fifty pounds sterling,
which I hereby acknowledge to have received : Now I,
the said George Ainley, by this instrument, under my
hand and seal, assign the said Letters Patent with all the
rights contained therein to the said David Gelston, his
heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, to have, hold,
exercise, and enjoy all the privileges and advantages men-
tioned in the said Letters Patent. And I hereby certify
that I have no further interest in the said Letters Patent
whatsoever.
In witness whereof, I, the said George Ainley,
have hereunto set my hand and affixed my seal
this seventh day of November, one thousand
eight hundred and eighty-seven.
GEORGE AINLEY.
Signed, sealed, and delivered. by the said George
Ainley in the presence of—
J. B. O’CONNOR.
Patents Office, Sydney.


REGISTER OF EXPERTS EMPLOYED BY THE
PATENTS OFFICE.
Mr. Norman Selfe, 345, G-eorge-street, Sydney.
Mr. Wm. T. Poole, 79, Pitt-street, Redfern.
Mr. T. S. Parrott, 120, Pitt-street, Sydney.
Mr. C. G-. Cameron, 120, Pitt-street, Sydney.
Mr. Thomas Richards, “ Thorngrove,” Manly.
Mr. G-. M. Robb, Chapel-street, Rockdale.


PATENTS OFFICE STAFF.*
Examiner A. G. Tateoe.
Chief Clerk J. B. O’Cosnoe.
Second Clerk P. P. Packham.
Engrossing Clerk A. Geant.
Messenger H. Adams.
Experts (See page 189.)
* Under the direction of the Minister of Justice.


SCALE OF FEES CHARGED BY THE
PATENTS OFFICE.
£ s. d.
Application for Provisional Protection... ... 2 0 0
„ Letters Patent ... ... ... 5 0 0
„ a Patent after Certificate ... 3 0 0
Piling protest against issue of Patent 10 0
„ „ Certificate ... 1 0 0
Eegistering a License 0 7 6
„ an assignment of License 0 7 6
„ „ „ Certificate 010 0
„ „ „ Letters Patent ... 010 0
Inspection of the Register 0 1 0
„ „ records of one Patent... ... 0 1 0
„ „ „ five Patents ... 0 5 0
Making a general search ... 0 5 0
Copies of Patents, Certificates, or extracts there-
from, 6d. per folio of 72 words.


INDEX TO FORMS.
Page.
Assignment of the entire interest in an unpatcnted invention ... 165
~ „ an undivided part interest in an unpatented
invention 165
- „ „ Letters Patent 188
Certificate of Provisional Protection 186
Examiner’s Report 169
Expert’s Report 168
Letter accompanying Application for Provisional Protection ... 130
M 99 Application for a Patent 129
Letters Patent—to an Inventor ... ’'' i 77
„ .to Joint Inventors ... 179
„ to an Inventor’s Agent 181
~ to an Inventor’s Assignee 181
„ to the Agent of an Inventor’s Assignee ... 182
„ to the Importer or Introducer 183
„ to the Part-Introducer, Part-Inventor 183
~ to the Agent, &c., of the Part-Introducer, Part-
Inventor 184
~ to an Inventor and his Assignees 185
„ to a Corporate Body 185
Letters of Registration—Copy of the first Grant issued in the
Colony 171
Ministerial approval of Letters Patent 166
99 99 Provisional Protection 167
Patents Office Receipt of Application for a Patent 144
» » >, Provisional Protection 144
Petition for Provisional Protection 142
~ Letters Patent —from an individual applicant ... 131
» „ from two or more individuals ... 133
99 99 from the Importer or Introducer ... 135
» » from the Part-Introducer, Part-
Inventor 136


Page.
Petition for Letters Patent—from the Inventor’s Agent ~, 137
„ „ from the Inventor’s Assignee ... 137
„ „ • from the Agent of the Part-Intro-
ducer, Part-Inventor 138
„ „ from the Assignee of the Part-
Introducer, Part-Inventor ... 138
„ „ from the Inventor and his Assignee 139
„ „ from the Assignee and Sub-assignee 110
~ ~ from a Trading Association ... 141
„ „ from a Corporate Body 141
Protest against the Issue of Letters Patent 145
Specification—Preamble of 147
„ Summary of the Object and Nature of 149
„ Concise description of the Drawings 152
„ Detailed description of the Manner of Construct-
ing and Using ... ... ... ... 154
„ Claims in 157
„ (complete) ... ... ... ... ... ... 159
„ (provisional) 164
Treasury Eeceipt for Patent Fee ... ... ... . ... ... 146
„ „ Provisional Protection Fee 146


INDEX TO REGULATIONS.
No. of t,
Regulation. 1 age '
Address of Patents Office 3 117
Agency —Proof to Examiner’s satisfaction 9 118
Agent (Patent) —Penalty for misconduct of 12 119
Agents—Conduct of business by 11 119
Applicants—Conduct of business by II 119
Applications —How made 9 118
„ Propriety of making, how judged 6 118
„ (complete)—For Letters Patent, bow comprised 19 120
Assignment—Proof to Examiner’s satisfaction 9 118
„ Fee for Registering 45 128
~ Registration of 39 126
Certificates of Provisional Protection—Registration of ... 39 126
„ „ „ Fee for 3t 125
„ Nature of Petition to convert into Letters
Patent 3G 126
Complete application for Letters Patent—bow comprised 19 120
Composition for Experimental Examination ... ... 33 125
Confidential character of Provisional Specification ... 35 125
Drawings—Official directions regarding 29 121
Duties of Experts 41 127
Erasures to be avoided in Specifications 28 124
Examiner—Authority to refuse to recognise offending
Patent Agent ... 12 119
„ Interviews with 10 118
~ Authority to appoint Experts 40 127
„ Authority to demand proof of agency or
assignment 9 118
„ Report, nature of 42 127
Experts—Appointment of, by Examiner 40 127
„ Ministerial approval of appointment of ... 40 127
„ Remuneration 0f... ... ' ... 41 127
„ Duties of 41 127
Fee on application for Provisional Protection 34 125
Fees—Scale of 45 128


No. Of p
Regulation. la °°-
Hours of Patents Office ... ... ... ... ... 1 117
Improvements —Specification of 25 123
Independent Inventors 17 119
~ Inventions in one Specification 27 123
Interlineations to be avoided in Specifications 28 124
Interviews with Examiner 10 118
Introducer of Invention, Patent to 13 119
Invention by Introduction 13 119
Inventions —What are Patentable 38 126
~ What are not Patentable 38 126
„ (independent)—ln one Specification ... 27 124
Inventor (Importer or Introducer) —Form of Petition from 14 119
Inventors (independent)—Obtaining a Joint Patent ... 17 119
~ (joint)—Not entitled to make separate claim.,. 16 119
Joint Inventors —Not entitled to make separate claim ... 16 119
Legible—Writing in Specifications 28 124
Letters Patent —Registration of 39 126
~ from Certificate —Nature of 36 126
„ (of other countries) how affecting local
applications 18 120
Library—of Patents Literature, public perusal of ... 43 127
Licenses—Registration of 39 126
„ Fee for Registering ... ... ... ... 45 128
Ministerial—Approval of non-recognition of offending
Patent Agents 12 119
„ Approval of Experts 40 127
Misconduct—of Patent Agent, penalty for 12 HD
Models —Name of Applicant to be firmly fixed thereon... 31 121
~ Open to public inspection ... ... ... 32 125
Non-patentable —Inventions, definition of 38 126
Patent Agent —Penalty for Misconduct of 12 119
Patents —(to an individual) to whom grantable 7 US
~ (to several individuals) tr whom grantable ... 8 118
„ Inspection of the Records of One 45 128
„ „ „ Five 45 128
Patents Office—Address 0f... ... ... ... ... 3 117
„ Nature of communications with ... 2 117
„ Office-hours of , 1 117
„ Limitation as to giving counsel to in-
dividuals 5 117


No. of p
Regulation. ° *
Patents Office—Limitation of responsibility in expound-
ing the Patents Law 5 117
„ Nature of enquiries not answerable by... 4 117
Patents Library—Available for public perusal 43 127
Patentable—lnventions, definition of 38 126
Petition—(from holder of certificate) —Nature of and
limited period of deposit... 36 126
„ Plan of arrangement 22 121
„ From more than one applicant 21 121
Petitioner—How claiming 20 120
Petitioners—How claiming... 21 121
Protest—Who may file 37 126
„ Inventor may not lodge one in prejudice of his
assignee 37 126
~ Fee for filing 45 128
Provisional Specification—Confidential character of ... 35 125
„ „ Nature of 31 125
„ Protection —Fee for 34 125
Public Inspection of Models 32 125
Publications in Patents Library .... 43 127
Register—Fee for Inspection of 45 128
Registration of Documents connected with Patents ... 39 126
Regulations—Relaxation of ... ... 44 127
Relaxation of Regulations 44 127
Remuneration of Experts 41 127
Reports of Examiner—Nature cf ... „ ;.. 42 127
Search (General) —Fee for 45 128
Specification of mere Improvements 25 123
„ Order of Arrangement 24 122
„ (complete)—Definition of 23 122
„ Where the Invention is partly communicated
and partly original ... ... ... 15 119
(Provisional)—Confidential character of ... 35 125
„ „ Nature of , ' ... 34 125
„ Claims in, where inventions are distinct ... 26 123
„ in legible writing, on marginal sheets, with- ,
out interlineations or erasures ~, i ... 28 124


INDEX TO DEBATES.
Page.
Mr. Allen’s Remarks 96
„ W. Clarke’s Remarks 98
„ Cox’s „ 96
Dr. Douglass’ ~ 96
Mr. W. J. Foster’s Remarks ... ... ... 103
„ C. L. Garland’s „ 105
„ Holroyd’s „ 97
„ Lamb’s „ ... 97
„ W. C. Wentworth’s Remarks 96


INDEX TO STATUTES.
Section. Page.
Action—When Maintainable ... ... g 114
Agent—Patent to 1 112
Arts —Patent for Improvements in 1 H 2
Assignee—Patent to ... 1 112
Assignment of Patent, License, &c. 10 114
Author (of invention) —Patent to 1 H 2
Cancellation of Certificate ... ... ... ... ... 5 113
Colonial Treasurer to receive fee 1. 112
Commencement of Act ... ... ... ... ... 19 no
Concurrent Certificates 9 114
Crown—Rights of, unprejudiced 20 116
Designer of Invention —Patent to 1 112
Duration of Patents ... 1 log
„ Certificates 4 113
Examiner of Patents—to Report on Applications ... 2 113
„ ~ Qualifications of 15 115
» Duties of 15 115
Exhibition —Definition of 2 110
„ Without prejudice 3 m
Fee for Letters Patent 1 112
„ Provisional Protection 3 113
~ a Patent after a Certificate 6 113
Gazette—Publication of Regulations in 16 116
Governor—may grant Letters Patent 2 113
„ Interpretation of 17 Hg
Lt tiers Patent ~)
~ of Registration | fco bear the same meaning ... 17 116
License —Issue of H 115
„ Registration of 12 115
Manufacture —Patent for 1 112
Minister of Justice—to receive Petition ... 1 112
.. >. to report to the Governor 2 113
» » to advise date of Patent 8 114


Section. Page.
Minister of Justice —to decide as to issue of Concurrent
Certificates ... ... ... 9 114
„ ~ to authorize removal of records from
the Supreme Court to Examiner’s
Office ... ... ... ... 13 115
„ „ to receive and supervise Report from
Examiner ... ... ... 15 115
Petition to the Governor 1 112
Registration of Assignments, Licenses, Ac. ... ... 13 115
Regulations—Authority to frame 16 116
Repeal of Grants 5 109
„ Sections 18 116
Scire Facias 5 109
Seal of the Colony 1 108
Sealing Patents 8 114
Sign-Manual of the Governor 1 108
Title of Act 19 116


INDEX TO CITED CASES.
/ Page.
Adair v. Young 80
Adie v. Clarke 81
Allan v. Ransom 38
Badisehe Anilin und Soda Fabrik v. Levinstein 58
Barker and Harris v. Shaw 80
Bateman and Moore v. Gray 57
Beard v. Egerton 80
» »• 94
Beeston v. Ford 81
Bentley v. Fleming 39
Betts v. Jfeilson 34
>» «• » 51
„ v. Menzies 38
„ v. Be Vitro ... 81
„ v. Wilmoth 81
Bewley v. Hancock 81
Bickford v. Skewes 83
Bloxam v. Elsee 51
Booth v. Kennard ... ... . , ... ... ... ... 27
Boirlton and Watt v. Bull ... 82
Bovill v. Moore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 82
„ v. Finn and Rand ... ... ... ... ... 83
„ v. Hordicr 83
„ v. Hitchcock 83
Bridson v. Bcnecke 81
British Dynamite Co. and others v. Kerbs and others 8i
Brunt on v. Hawkes 85
» »• » ' ••• 33
Campion v. Benyon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 49
Cannington v. Hutfall ... 32
» ®- 40
Cartwright v. Earner 49
Chanter v. Leese and others ... ... ... ... ... 84
„ v. Dewhurst and another 85


Page
Clarke v. Adie ... 85
>i ®* » ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ... 27
Clothworkers of Ipswich 94
Crane v. Price 27
Crompton v. Ibbotson 86
Crossley v. Beverley... 60
Curtis v. Platt 55
Dangerfield v. Jones 87
Darcy v. Allin 93
Dixon v. London Small Arms Company 87
Dollond’s Patent 38
Edgeberry v. Stephens 94
Elmslie v. Boursier 88
Feather v. The Queen 49
Forsythe v. Riviere 39
Fox well v. Bostock 88
Hall v. Conder and others ... 80
Harrison v. Anderston Foundry Co , ... 27
>» ®. » » ft ... ... ••• ... 32
tt ®* ii ii ii ... ... ••• ••• 57
Harwood v. Great Northern Railway Co 39
Haworth v. Hardcastle ... 30
Heath v. Unwin 57
®* jj ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 91
Hills v. Evans 92
II 35 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34
Lamenaude’s Patent 95
Manton v. Parker 29
M lligan v. Marsh 95
Morgan v. Seaward 29
Muntz v. Forster 26
Neilson and others v. Harford and others ..< 93
Newton v. Grand Junction Railway Co. ... ... ... ... 32
Otto v. Linford 30
Patterson v. The Gas-light and Coke Co. ... 33
Plimpton v. Malcolmson 34
Ralston v. Smith ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
Rearson v. Lee 86
Regina v. Cutler and others 87
Rex v. "Wheeler 93
0


Page.
Eex v. Wheeler , it £7
„ v. Elsee .. 31
j> m ••• ••• ••• '■>. ••• ••• ••• 82
Saxby v. Gloucester Waggon Co 27
Sturtz v. De La Eue 92
Thomas v. Eoxwell 33
Turner d. Winter £2
Walton v. Bateman 93
Weggmann v. Corcoran 93
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer, Phillip-strcct,—






