

Third Edition
The
GUN
ALLEY
TRAGEDY
New Light
on a
Sensational Trial
By T.C. BRENNAN
Barrister at Law




Third Edition.
The
Gun Alley Tragedy
Record of the Trial
:: of ::
COLIN CAMPBELL ROSS
Including
A Critical Examination of the Crown Case
with
A Summary of the New Evidence
by
T. C. BRENNAN
Barrister-at-Law
1922
FRASER £ JENKINSON, Printers, 343-5 Queen St.. Melbourne
GORDON £ GOTCH (Austral!*) Ltd., Publishers




PREFACE.
No trial in Australian history has created such a public
sensation as did the trial In Melbourne of Colin Campbell
Ross for the murder of the little girl, Alma Tirtschke, on
the afternoon of December 30th, 1921. It was presided
over by Mr. Justice Schutt and lasted for more than five
days. Mr. H. C. G. Macindoe conducted the case for the
Crown and Mr. G. A. Maxwell appeared, with Mr. T. C.
Brennan as junior, for the defence. For many reasons,
it is desirable that the proceedings at the trial should be
placed on record. It is not merely that the story itself—
a veritable page out of real life—makes tragically inter-
esting reading. The nature of the evidence was so
unusual, and the character of the chief Crown witnesses
was so remarkable, that it is entirely in the interests of
justice that the whole proceedings should be reviewed
in the calm light of day.
While the trial was on, and for weeks before it was
on, anything in the nature of a dispassionate review
tyas impossible. Public opinion was inflamed as it has
inflamed within the memory of this generation.
Ross was tried for his life in an atmosphere charged and
overcharged with suspicion. Whether guilty or innocent,
he entered the dock in circumstances under which few
men are compelled to enter it. As everyone in Australia
knows, he was condemned almost entirely on the strength
of two confessions he was alleged to have made. It
would probably be admitted that, in the absence of those
alleged confessions—which he strenuously denied ever
having made—-no jury could have convicted him. It
is doubtful, indeed, if without them there was a case for
the jury. But did he actually say what either the woman
Ivy Matthews or the man Harding declared he said?
The verdict of the jury does not supply an answer. The
question remains unanswered, and the doubt in regard
to it constitutes the enduring mystery of the Ross trial.
All students of criminology—and all friends of truth—
are under a debt of gratitude to Mr. Brennan for the
cool, precise and perfectly dispassionate manner In which
he has, inter alia, analysed the statements of these two
people, Harding and Matthews. He has placed the
salient features aide by side. There seems no escape


from the irresistible logic of his conclusion—that
Matthews and Harding, knowing certain facts about Ross
from an outside source, were compelled to fill in the gaps
in their own way. They could not have been drawing
from the one alleged source when they differed so abso-
lutely as to the essential circumstances of the crime.
As Mr. Brennan points out, he is not undertaking to
prove that Ross was innocent of the Gun Alley murder.
Anyone who reads his closely reasoned pages can have
little doubt that such is his opinion. But his task is
simpler. It is to show that Ross should not have been
convicted on the evidence, that the evidence for the
Crown was, to a large extent, contradictory—far more so
than in the heat and passion of the trial was allowed
to appear. He is able to go even further than that, and
to show that a great part of it, so far from being cumula-
tive on other parts, as the jury may have naturally
believed, was really destructive of those other parts.
He has performed his task with carfe and discretion.
No one who reads Mr. Brennan’s review of the case can
doubt that he has thrown off the role of advocate —ably
as he sustained it at the trial and on the two appeals—
and is only anxious to arrive at the truth. There should
be no other desire in the minds of any reader; and the
people of Australia, who cannot possibly have followed
the case with the care that Mr. Brennan has followed it,
will appreciate both the value of his work and the deep
interest of the story that he tells. Whether they think
the mystery of the Gun Alley murder was cleared up by
the jury’s verdict, or whether it remains a mystery is
for them to say.
A. J. BUCHANAN.
Selborne Chambers, Melbourne.


PART I.
INTRODUCTORY.
On the early morning of the last day of the
year 1921 the dead body of a little girl of 12,
named Alma Tirtschke, was found by a bottle-
gatherer in an L-shaped right-of-way off Little
Collins Street. She had been violated and
strangled, and her nude body had been placed in
Gun Alley.
On the morning of Saturday, February 25th,
1922, Colin Campbell Ross, a young man of 28,
was found guilty of her murder, and on the morn-
ing of April 24th he was executed in the Mel-
bourne Gaol. Face to face with his Maker, as
he himself put it, he asserted his innocence on
the scaffold in terms of such peculiar solemnity as
intensify the feeling, already widely prevalent,
that an innocent man had been done to death.
In the eyes of officialdom the mystery had been
cleared up. Detectives walk the streets with the
consciousness that they are the men who cleared
it up and brought the murderer to the gallows.
The list of persons who shared in the reward
offered by the Government, with the amounts
allotted to each, has been published.* It does
• The Government reward of £lOOO was distributed
as follows:—lvy Matthews, £350; Sydney John Harding.
£200; Olive Maddox, £170; George Arthur Ellis, £5O;
Joseph Dunstan, £5O; David Alberts, £3O; Madame
Ghurka, £25; Maisle Russell, £25; Blanche Edmonds,
£2O; Muriel Edmonds, £2O; Violet Sullivan, £2O;
Michaluscki Nicoli, £2O; Francisco Anselmi, £2O. A
reward of £250 offered by the “Herald” was distributed
pro rata. It was never disclosed, either on the trial or
in the press, what the services rendered by Madame
Ghurka or Maisie Russell were.


nothing to allay the sense of public uneasiness to
reflect that by far the greater part of the reward
has gone to men and women whose society would
be shunned by every decent person. That in
itself should be sufficient to raise doubt. But
there are graver reasons for thinking that justice
may have miscarried in this extraordinary case.
The purpose of this short review is to show how
strong are the grounds for the prevalent feeling
of uneasiness, and how much reason there is for
believing that the life of Colin Campbell Ross
was, as he himself asserted as he went to the
cells with the death sentence ringing hi his ears,
“Sworn away by desperate people.”
Why, it may be asked, rake over dying embers
and fan again into flame a fire that is dying
down? Is it not better that the Ross case should
Sink, with Ross, into oblivion? Even if he were
now proved innocent, it may be said, he cannot
be recalled to life, and no good purpose can be
served by reviving the case. But in the first
place, there are hundreds of people in whom the
memory of the case is still quite fresh. With
them it is not a question of reviving, but of dis-
cussing. And even though Ross be dead, death
is not the end of all things. In Ross’s case it is
a small matter compared to the dishonor asso-
ciated with it. Ross has left behind him a mother
and brothers who bear his name, and for a
generation to come the name of a Ross will never
be mentioned without recalling that particular
bearer of it who died an ignominious death for a
revolting murder. If all the truth has not come
out, the community owes it to those of his blood
left behind him that it shall be brought out. It
is largely at the solicitation of those bearers of
the name that this review is being written. But
the interests of abstract justice also require some-
thing. Ross was condemned on evidence of a


kind which puts the case in a class by itself. It
has no parallel in the annals of British criminal
jurisprudence. A perusal of this review, whether
or not it satisfies the reader of the innocence of
Ross, will, at least, satisfy him of the need for a
close scrutiny of evidence of this kind; and future
juries will be reminded of the necessity of never
being stampeded by newspaper or popular clamor
into preconceived ideas of the guilt of any man,
and of ever being on their guard against perjury
and conspiracy, even though they are not satisfied
that either were present in this case.
THE APPELLATE COURTS.
At the outset it is desirable to correct a wrong
impression which, very widely felt, has tended to
allay the feeling of uneasiness in the public mind.
Ross, as is well known, appealed to the Full Court
of Victoria, which dismissed the appeal. Thence
he carried his case to the High Court of Australia,
Which refused, one learned Judge dissenting, to
interfere with the decision of the Supreme Court.
From this fact it has been assumed that two
Appellate Courts, consisting of three Judges and
five Judges respectively, have endorsed the ver-
dict of the jury. Nothing could be further from
the facts. Substantially what the Appellate
Courts were asked to say was (1) that there was
no evidence on which a jury could rightly con-
vict Ross; (2) that the Judge had failed to direct
the jury properly on various points enumerated.
To take the second point first, the Courts both
declined to say that there was any non-direction,
though Mr. Justice Isaacs, in the High Court,
held that on one point the Judge had failed to
direct the jury properly.
As to the first point, the position is this: An
Appellate Court will not interfere with the finding


of a jury if there is any evidence on which a jury
could find as it did. It will not weigh the evi-
dence to see on which side the balance lies. That
is the function of the jury, and the Court will not
usurp that function.
That position was made quite clear in the judg-
ments of both Courts. In the Supreme Courts
the Chief Justice of Victoria said: “There was
abundance of evidence, if the jury believed It, as
the jury apparently did believe it, to support their
finding, and we need add nothing more upon that
point.” In the High Court, the Chief Justice of
Australia, speaking for the majority of their
Honours, dealt with the same point thus: “As wo
have before indicated, there was, in our opinion,
abundant evidence, if the jury believed it, to sus-
tain their verdict. But we desire to add that, if
there be evidence on which reasonable men could
find a verdict of guilty, the determination of the
guilt or innocence of the prisoner is a matter for
the jury, and for them alone. And with their
decision, based on such evidence, no Court or
Judge has any right or power to interfere. It is
of the highest importance that the grave respon-
sibility which rests on jurors in this respect
should be thoroughly understood and always
maintained.” Even Mr. Justice Isaacs, who dis-
sented from the majority on a point not material
to this review, was quite at one with his learned
brothers on this matter. “The ground upon
which,” said his Honour, “I agree to a rejection
of all the other grounds brought forward by Mr.
Brennan is that, however powerful the considera-
tions he advanced, however tainted and discre-
pant and improbable any of the facts relied on by
the Crown might be, that was all matter for the
jury alone, and I have no right to express or to


form any opinion about them in favour of the
prisoner.”
No Court and no Judge has, therefore, ever
pronounced judgment on the correctness or in-
correctness of the. jury’s verdict. All that they
have said is that there was some evidence on
which the jury could find as it did, and that that
"being so, the responsibility for the verdict must
rest with the tribunal which the law has set up to
pronounce upon the evidence. The purpose of
this review of the case is to show, not that the
Appellate Courts were wrong, but that there are
.-strong grounds for believing that the jury was
wrong. And that brings us naturally to a second
preliminary point.
WHY THE JURY MISJUDGED.
Not often, indeed, do juries err on the side of
convicting an innocent man. But the circum-
Tstances of this case were peculiar. Not merely
was the ravishing of the child and the strangling
of her a crime of a peculiarly detestable nature,
but the stripping of the body, and the placing of
it on the cold stones of a squalid alley, though it
really added nothing to the horror of her death,
was an incident well calculated to excite the
deepest human sympathy. In addition, it was a
•crime of which none but a degenerate would be
guilty, and it is an extremely unfortunate thing
that at the inquest the Coroner allowed, under
the guise of evidence, statements to be made by
witnesses which would tend to show that Ross
was such a degenerate. Those statements were
not allowed to be made on the trial for the simple
reason that they violated the fundamental rules
of evidence. The Coroner allowed them in, hold-
ing that he was not bound by the rules of evi-
dence, and apparently labouring under the im


pression that the laws of evidence are arbitral*;
rules, tending at times to obscure the truth.
Instead of being, as they are, rules evolved from
the experience of the ages as being best calcu-
lated to bring out the truth. There was probably
no truth in the statements made, for the plain
fact is that Ross had never been charged with a
sexual offence, and had never even been ques-
tioned about one. But such was the interest in the
case that every line written about it was eagerly
devoured, and not One member of the jury was
likely to have forgotten what was said on that
head at the inquest—false though it all may have
been.
Again, the little girl had been seen near Ross’s
wine shop in the afternoon. Her dead body was
found about 115 yards from it. The police had
been 12 days making enquiries about the case
before Ross was arrested. They had followed
clues, and abandoned them when they led
nowhere; they had suspected individuals and
questioned them, only to reach a dead-end; they
had formed theories, and dropped them because
they could not get the facts to fit them. But
the public, from which a jury is drawn, knew
nothing of all this. Indeed, Detective Piggott
said, in his cross-examination: “We had the case
well in hand on the 31st.” This may be dis-
missed as a little bit of puff. It excited the
smiles of Piggott’s brothers in the force, who
knew the dead-end the detectives were at after
the first week. If it were strictly accurate, it
would show that Piggott’s conduct of the inves-
tigations was disfigured by a colossal blunder, for
the detectives, although they were in Ross’s
saloon on the first day, did not even go into the
little room off the bar from which came the




incriminating blanket, though they knew that the
whole place was about to be abandoned and dis-
mantled. Once Ross was put upon his trial
nothing was, or indeed could be, said which did
not appear to point to his guilt. The result was
that the searchlight was thrown directly on to
him. Other suspected people were in the*
shadows. Everything, therefore, appeared,
superficially at least, to point to his guilt. The-
crime called for vengeance, and in all these cir-
cumstances it is not wonderful that the jurors-
were unable to divest themselves of the pre-
conceptions with which they had gone into the-
jury-box.
Never in the history of serious crimes in Vic-
toria, or, indeed, in the British Empire, it may be-
safely said, has a man been convicted on such a
jumbled mass of contradictions as served to con-
vict Ross. The only explanation of it is that, in
view of the nature of the crime, the Jury quite
unconsciously formed opinions before they went
into the box, and, with their judgments clouded
by their natural indignation, they were finable to*
view the matter dispassionately.
How strong public feeling was, how the judg-
ments of even level-headed men and women were-
clouded, how completely the public was convinced
of the guilt of Ross before ever he was put upon
his trial, is shown by the fact that the counsel
for the defence were criticised, in public and in
private, for accepting briefs in his defence.
People holding those views were apparently un-
able to see where they led. There is no logical
stopping-place between such views and lynch law.
If a man is to be adjudged guilty on what appears,
ex parte, in the press, it is as logical to blame a
judge for trying him as a counsel for defending
him. He is guilty, and why go through the hollow


form of trying him? Why not settle the matter
at once in the easy manner of the less civilised of
the American states.
But the position of the bar in these matters has
been well settled. The same view was presented
by Lord Chief Justice Reading in 1916 as by
Erskine in 1792. When Erskine took a brief for
the defence of Tom Paine 130 years ago, and in-
sisted on holding it in spite of the protests of the
courtiers, his obstinacy, says Lord Chief Justice
Campbell, in his “Lives of the Chancellors,” was
much condemned “by many well-meaning people.
Ignorant of professional etiquette, and of what is
required by a due regard for the proper admin-
istration of criminal justice.” But Erskine ap-
peared, and on the trial, referring to the storm
Which his conduct had provoked, he said:—
“Little, Indeed, did they know me who
thought that such calumnies would influence
my conduct. I will for ever, at all hazards,
assert the dignity, independence and integrity
of the English bar, without which impartial
justice, the most valuable part of the British
Constitution, can have no existence. From
the moment that any advocate can be per-
mitted to say that he will or will not stand
between the Crown and the subject arraigned
in the court where he daily sits to practice,
from that moment the liberties of England
are at an end. If the advocate refuses to
defend from what he may think of the charge
or of the defence, he assumes the character
of the judge; nay, he assumes it before the
hour of judgment; and, in proportion to his
rank and reputation, puts the heavy influence
of, perhaps, a mistaken opinion into the scale
against the accused, in whose favor the be-
nevolent, principle of English law makes all


presumptions, and which commands the very
judge to he his counsel.”
When Sir Roger Casement was tried for treason
in 1916, the same question arose, as it had arisen
many times in the interval. Lord Chief Justice
Reading, addressing the jury, then said: —
“There are some persons who, perhaps a
little thoughtlessly, are inclined to rebel
against the notion that a member of the
English bar, or members of it, should be
found to defend a prisoner on a charge of
treason against the British State. I need not
tell you, I am sure, gentlemen, that if any
person has those thoughts in his mind, he
has but a poor conception of the high obliga-
tion and responsibility of the bar of England.
It is the proud privilege of the bar of England
that it is ready to come into court and to
defend a person accused, however grave the
charge may be. In this case, we are indebted
to counsel for the defence for the assistance
they have g;iven us in the trial, and I have
no doubt you must feel equally indebted. It
is of great benefit in the trial of a case, more
particularly of this importance, that you
should feel, as we feel, that everything
possible that could be urged on behalf of the
defence has been said, and particularly by
one who has conducted the defence in accord-
ance with the highest traditions of the
English bar.”
With the lapse of a little time the public may
be able to look more judicially at the case. Let
us, therefore, look briefly at the facts.
Though the case took the full legal week, and
encroached on the Saturday, the facts relied upon
by the Crown to support its case may be put in a
comparatively short compass.


PART II.
THE CROWN CASE.
The girl, who, so far as is known to the public,
was a modest, obedient. Intelligent, quiet child,
between 12 and 13 years of age, left her aunt’s
home at Jolimont between half-past 12 and a
quarter to 1, to go to Bennet and Woolcock’s
butcher’s shop in Swanston St., Melbourne, where
her uncle acted as secretary. She wore a navy
blue box-pleated overall, a white blouse with blue
spots, and a Panama hat with a conspicuous
badge of a high school on it. At about a quar-
ter-past 1 she arrived at the shop, went upstairs
. to her uncle’s room, returned shortly afterwards
without seeing her uncle, and left the shop about
a quarter of an hour after her arrival at it, carry-
ing a parcel of meat some eight or nine pounds in
weight. She was next seen in Little Collins
street, and she evidently went up Little Collins
Street to Russell Street, and down Russell Street
into Bourke Street, because “well after a quarter-
past 2” she was noticed by Mrs. and Miss
Edmonds about 50 yards from the entrance to
the Eastern Arcade. She went into the Arcade
in front of the ladies, and when she was about
half-way through they turned up the stairs to the
right, and did not see her again. Colin Ross at
this time, according to Mrs. Edmonds, was stand-
ing in front of his door. In cross-examination,
Mrs. Edmonds fixed the time at which she last
saw the girl at a quarter to 3, because, she said,




“I looked at the clock on the balcony.” Between
half-past 2 and 3 o’clock Mr. and Mrs. Stanley
Young saw the girl come out of the Arcade, walk
across Little Collins Street, and stand at what
they described as the Adam and Eve comer.
This means that she was standing near a
lodging-house kept by a witness named Ellis, in
the delicensed premises which was formerly the
Adam and Eve Hotel. It is on the comer of
Little Collins Street and Alfred Place, Alfred
Place being a rather pretentious right-of-way
running through to Collins Street. Had she
desired to go to her destination, which was the
Masonic Chambers at the east end of Collins
Street, she might have gone either along Alfred
Place to Collins Street, or up Little Collins Street
to Exhibition Street, and thence to Collins Street.
According to Mrs. Young, the girl looked
frightened, and she was seen to drop and pick up
her parcel. The Youngs walked on down to
Russell Street, which would take her two or three
minutes, they said, and when they looked back
the girl had disappeared. She might have still
been standing in Alfred Place, or she could have
returned to the Arcade, but they do not think she
would have had time to have got to Exhibition
Street. That is the last seen of the girl by any
witness whose evidence is admitted by both sides
to be credible. It should be noted that she was
then within an easy 10 minutes’ walk of Bennet
and Woolcock’s, and she had taken an hour and a
quarter to cover the distance.
ROSS INTERVIEWED.
The detectives first saw Ross on the morning
of the 31st. He said that he had seen a child
answering to the description of the murdered girl.


but in reply to a direct question by Detective
Piggott, “Ross, how much do you know?” he
replied: “I do not know anything.” On January
sth they again saw Ross at his home, and
brought him to the Detective Office, where he
was detained for eight hours, and made a state-
ment, which was taken down in writing. To
show how consistent Ross was throughout as to
his movements on the fatal day, it is well that
this statement should be given in full. It is as
follows:
COLIN CAMPBELL ROSS states:—
“I am at present out of business. I was the
holder of the Australian Wine Shop license in
the Eastern Arcade for about nine months
past. The license expired on the 31st Decem-
, her, 1921. I reside at ‘Glenross,’ Ballarat
Road, Footscray. On Friday, the 30th Decem-
ber, I came into the shop about 2 p.m. It was
a very quiet day. Between 2 and 3 p.m. I
was standing in front of my shop, and looking
about I saw a girl about 14 or 15 years of age
in the Arcade. She was walking towards
Bourke Street, and stopped and looked in a
fancy dress costume window. I later saw her
walking back, and she appeared to have noth-
ing to do. She wore a dark blue dress,
pleated, the pleats were large, light blouse,
white straw hat with a colour on it (looked
like a college hat), wore dark stockings and
boots —she may have had shoes on. I went
back into the cafe. I cannot say where she
went. I was about the cafe all the afternoon.
“About 4 o’clock, a friend of mine, Miss
■Gladys Linderman, came to the saloon front.
I spoke to her for about an hour. She came
into the private room, and we had a talk in the


room off the bar, the one in which the cellar is
which is unused. She and I went into the
Arcade at 4.45; remained talking for about Id
minutes. I then saw her out into Little Col-
lins Street. I made an appointment to meet
her again at 9 p.m. at the place I left her. I
went back into the cafe, and remained until 6
p.m., when I left for home, got home about T
p.m., had tea, left home at 8 p.m., came into the
city, waited at the comer of the Arcade in
Little Collins Street. Miss Linderman came
to me at 9 p.m., and we went straight into the
cafe. We remained in there till 10.45, then
left, locked the place up, went to King Street.
She went to her home, 276 King Street. After
leaving her I went to Spencer Street Station,
took a train, arrived home at 11.50 p.m., and
remained there all night.
“I know the shop opposite. No. 33. It is
occupied by a man named McKenzie, Several
men visit there. I have seen a stout, foreign
man go there. I don’t know his name—l never
spoke to him in my life. lam sure he has not
visited the saloon. He has come to my door
and spoken to me. On one occasion, about
four months ago, I went over to that shop by
his invitation. He desired to explain a certain
signalling patent. He unlocked the door, and
I went inside with him. I saw a box affair, a
couch, and nine or twelve chairs. I did not
see the patent—it was locked. I have never
possessed a key of that shop, and no person
has ever loaned me one. I have two keys of
my wine saloon. I had one, and my brother
Stan, had the other. On Friday I possessed
one, and my brother had the other. These
keys are Yale keys. No person could enter


that wine shop unless let in by my brother or
myself. I think my brother was in the city
that night with his friends. I can’t say where
he was.
“On the Saturday I was again in the saloon.
It was the last day of the license. I saw Mr.
Clark, manager of the Arcade, about 11 a.m.,
and arranged with him to get me a key of the
back gate of the Arcade, which is locked by
means of a chain and padlock. He gave me a
key about noon, and I left there about 6.15
p.m. I came back to the Arcade at 6.50 a.m.,
Monday, and a van came at 7 a.m., and then
took my effects from the saloon, which con-
sisted of 26 chairs, 6 tables, a small couch, a
counter, 2 wooden partitions, shelves, and lino-
leum off the floor, about 20 bottles of wine, and
9 flagons of wine. There were two dozen
glasses, and about 18 pictures. My brothers
Stanley and Tom were with me. I left there
at 8.30 a.m., and went home. I handed the
keys to the caretaker.
“I cannot say what goes on inside No. 33 in
the Arcade, but I have seen several women
going in and out, and in company of McKenzie.
I have never seen the other man, who looks
like an engineer, take women in there. The
ages of the women would range from about
20 years and upwards. I cannot say if any
person saw me with Gladys Underman while at
the Arcade. I was not in the company of any
other woman that afternoon or evening at the
saloon. Close to the saloon, and about 36 feet
distant, is a man’s lavatory, the door of which
is generally locked. At night time it is occa-
sionally left open. I had a key of that lava-
tory. The water used in my saloon was


obtained from a tap in a recess adjoining the
cafe.”
“COLIN CAMPBELL ROSS.”
Witness: FREDERICK J. PIGGOTT.
This statement was obtained largely, as all
police statements are, by question and answer,
and committed to paper in narrative form. When
it was concluded, further questions, more dis-
jointed, were put to Ross, and his answers being
given, the question and answer were committed
to writing, and were signed by Ross. The sup-
plementary statement thus obtained is as fol-
lows:
“I admit I did walk up and down Little Col-
lins Street in front of the Arcade from about
8.45 until 9 p.m. I say there was not a light in
my saloon after 10.45 p.m., unless my brother
was in there. My brother was first to enter
my saloon on the Saturday morning. I came
while the detectives were talking to my bro-
ther. He did not make any complaint about
the condition of the shop when I arrived. I
did have two blankets in the saloon. They
were used as a rug or cover for the couch to
lie down on in the afternoons. I was home
all day Thursday. I was not well. I did not
leave the shop on Friday and say that I was
ill. I was not away from the saloon during
the afternoon of Friday. I can give •no reason
why my brother should say I was away ill. I
have not been engaged in a telephone conver-
sation with a man named Williams. I have
not spoken on a telephone since Thursday,
29th. I remember, before Miss G. Linderman
came to the cafe, there were two young women
in the bar. They would be 19 or 20 years of
age, and they left the saloon in company with


two men. That was on Friday, 30th. In my
opinion No. 33 is a brothel. Several men have
keys of the room.”
“COLIN CAMPBELL ROSS.”
Witness: FREDERICK J. PIGGOTT.
Ross was still further interrogated, but this
part of his statement was not taken down in
writing. Piggott said: “Where did you have
lunch on Friday, December 30th?” and he
replied: “At home,” and question and answer
proceeded as follow: —
What time did you get into your wine bar?—
About 2 o’clock.
Who was in the bar? —A man named Allen and
a woman.
Who was the woman?—l do not know, but
Detective Lee ordered her out.
. What time did you see Gladys Linderman?—
About 4.45, and I remained talking with her about
three-quarters of an hour.*
What time did you leave her?—About 6 o’clock,
but I had to meet her again.
Did you meet her? —Yes, I met her at 9 o’clock,
as arranged.
What time did she leave? —About half-past 10.
Where did she go?—I saw her home. I got
the train, and got home about midnight.
This was the material that the police had to
work on up to that time, but about Tuesday,
January 10, they received an important addition
to their stock of knowledge from a girl named
Olive Maddox. This girl, an admitted prostitute,
said that, being a bit “potty” on Monday, January
♦ By comparing this question and answer with the
statement, it will be seen that Plggott was slightly In
error here. What Ross said was that it was 4.45 when
he and Gladys left the saloon.


9, she had a conversation with Ivy Matthews, who
advised her to go and tell the police what she
knew. What she told the police will appear from
her evidence to be given later. It is important
to remember that at this time, according to the
police. Ivy Matthews had herself given no infor-
mation to them. In fact, she had been interro-
gated by the detectives on January 5, and had
told them that she knew nothing. More than
that, she met certain members of the Ross family
outside the Detective Office on that night, and
indignantly protested against being brought there
to be catechised, saying that she knew nothing
about the matter. On the day of Ross’s arrest
she was again at the Detective Office, and seems
to have hinted at something, because, while de-
clining to make any statement, she said: “Bring
me face to face with Colin, and I will ask him
some questions.” She was never brought “face
to face” with Colin Ross. There is ample reason
for believing that though the police knew that
when she came to give her evidence Matthews
would advance their case, they did not know
exactly what she was going to say. The posi-
tion, therefore, is that, on January 23, the police
had practically no evidence against Ross. On
that day Harding disclosed his “confession,” and
by January 26 Matthews had given to the world
her account of what she alleged she had seen and
what she alleged Ross had told her.
THE TRIAL.
Ross was committed at the Coroner’s inquest
on January 26, and came up for trial before Mr.
Justice Schutt on February 20. Evidence was
given, as indicated above, as to the movements
of the girl on the day of her death. Medical
evidence, to be dealt with later, was also given


and then the Crown called a succession of wit-
nesses, who deposed as to certain extraordinary
“facts,” and as to certain admissions or confes-
sions supposed to have been made by Ross.
THE BLOODY BOTTLE.
The first of these was a man named Francis
Lane Upton. Upton had not been called at the
inquest. The defence had been served with
notice that he would be called on the trial, and a
short summary of his evidence was given, accord-
ing to practice. His evidence is remarkable, not
so much for its glaring improbability as for the
fact that it was dramatically abandoned by the
Crown Prosecutor in his closing address to the
jury with the contemptuous intimation that he
would not ask the jury to “swing a cat on it.”
How it has been assessed by the police is shown
by the fact that, in the distribution of the reward
offered by the Crown, Upton has not shared.
That his evidence was prompted wholly by a
desire to share in the reward, or gain notoriety,
was revealed by his cross-examination. When
that is borne in mind, it supplies its own comment
on the Crown's contention that it is incredible
that witnesses like Olive Maddox, Ivy Matthews,
Sydney Harding, and Joseph Dunstan would have
been so -wicked as to come forward with false
testimony to swear away the life of an innocent
man.
The story told by Upton was that he was a
labourer out of work, that he had been about the
town on December 30, fell asleep in the Flag-
staff Gardens, walked through the Victoria Mar-
kets “and all round trying to rake up a drink,’*
and found himself, at about half-past 12 or 1
o’clock, at Ross’s saloon, which he had heard of


some months before. By this time he was sober,
hut very thirsty. Entering the Arcade by the
little Collins Street gate, and seeing a light in
the saloon, he went to the second door of the
establishment—the door nearer Bourke Street.
It was not locked, and he pushed it, and it came
open. As he did so he heard a woman’s voice
saying: “Oh, my God, darling, how are we going
to get rid of it?” Just then Ross said: “There is
somebody here,” and he rushed out like a lunatic.
Upton said to him when he got to the door:
“What about a bottle?” Ross had a bar towel
or some such thing on his arm, his hands were
covered with something that looked like blood;
he rushed back, and seized a bottle from behind
the bar, thrust it into Upton’s hands, and pushed
him from the room, without even waiting to take
the money which Upton had ready in his hand.
Upton walked down Little Collins Street to Rus-
sell Street, where he discovered that there was
blood on the bottle. He walked on down Little
Collins Street to William Street, thence down to
Flinders Street, and at the corner of William
Street and Flinders Street he disposed of the
bottle (out of which he had had one drink) in
what he described as a culvert or sewer.
In cross-examination it was disclosed that
Upton had come from the Mallee a day or two
before the tragedy. He read of the murder in
the Footscray Gardens on the Monday, and he
immediately returned to the Mallee, worked in
several places, drank the proceeds of his labour,
heard about the reward, and, when he was with-
out money, went to the Donald Police Station and
told the officer in charge that he “was connected
with Alma Tirtschke’s murder.” He was
Retained, and a detective went up from Mel


bourne to bring him down, Upton’s evidence
may be dismissed with the remark that it was
physically impossible for him to have seen from
where he said he was the things he said that he
did see (for a glance at the plan will show that,
from the second door, he could not see the
cubicle), and with the further observation that
his evidence having been formally repudiated by
the Crown, no notice whatever was taken of it in
either Court of Appeal. He was a derelict, a
drunkard, a wife deserter, a notorious romancer,
a convicted criminal, and his evidence was a fit-
ting prologue to that which was immediately to
follow.
OLIVE MADDOX’S EVIDENCE.
Olive May Maddox was the next witness. She
was living at the time of the inquest at Cam-
bridge Street, Collingwood, and when asked,
“Have you any other means of livelihood but
prostitution?” she answered; “No, not exactly.”
She said she knew Ross well, and she used to visit
his premises every day up to the time of the
shooting affray. (That was in the previous
November, and up to that time Ivy Matthews had
been employed there.) Since the shooting
affray she had only visited the cafe “once, some-
times twice, sometimes three times or four times
or five times a week at the most.” She went to
the wine cafe on December 30 at five minutes
past 5, walked straight into the bar with another
girl named Jean Dyson, and ordered two drinks
at the counter. She then looked into the parlour
through the curtains hanging from the arched
doorway between the two main rooms in the
saloon, and seeing a girl named Lll. Harrison in
that room she went in. As she passed the beaded
curtains of the small compartment on the right


she saw the little girl in it —that is to say, she
described the girl she saw, and if her evidence is
true there can be no doubt the girl was Alma
Tirtschke. There was a glass in front of her,
“but you couldn’t tell whether the contents were
white or whether it was empty.” There were,
she said, a couple of strange men also in the
room. The two men were near the entrance,
and the girl was near the comer. After talking
to Harrison for a time, she came back into the
bar to her friend, and seeing Ross, she said,
■"Hello, Col., she is a young kid to be drinking.”
He replied: “Oh, if she wants it she can have it.”
At a quarter past 5 Maddox left, and she re-
turned about five minutes to 6. She ordered
drinks, and went again into the other room. Lil.
Harrison was still there, but the little girl was no
longer in the beaded room. Maddox left soon
after 6, and she did not see Ross on that occasion.
She next saw him on Thursday night, January 5,
“down where the old Repatriation was in Joli-
mdnt, just off Flinders Street.” Maddox had
been there with some girls, and Ross, when she
saw him, was with “a girl named Plorrie Dobson
and another named Pauline Warburton, and their
two young chaps.” “We started talking about
different things,” she said, “and then Ross said:
‘What do you think about this case, 01.?’ I
said: T don’t know; if I knew anything I wouldn’t
tell the police.’ He said: ‘You don’t want to tell
them if you know anything. The papers all say
that she was a goody-goody, but that is only for
the sake of the public. She was a cheeky little
devil, and’ ” —and he added a disgusting com-
ment. He said also, the witness added: “I tried
to pool the b b of a Madamfe Ghurka.
fhe police came to me and asked me if I saw


anything about the little girl, and I told them r
saw her looking in Madame Ghurka’s window,
and I tried to pool the b b because she
decoys little girls when they are missing away
from home.”
In her cross-examination Maddox admitted that
she knew from the papers the description of the
little girl’s dress, and that it was after she had
had a conversation with Ivy Matthews on the
subject that she informed the police. That con-
versation took place on the Tuesday, January 10.
She told Matthews she was afraid to go to the
police on account of her convictions, and
Matthews asked her whether she really had any
doubt it was the little girl, and she said she was
positive. Matthews said: “The police cannot
touch you,” and she replied: “Well, I will chance
it, and go and do it.” She also admitted that
on Saturday afternoon, December 31, she was
arrested for absconding from her bail, and she
remained in the watchhouse until the Sunday
afternoon. It is worthy of note that no proceed-
ings have been taken against Olive Maddox on
that charge. She admitted also that the meet-
ing on the Thursday evening was purely by
chance, as far as she was concerned. Asked
how many people were in the saloon when she
was there at 5 o’clock, she said she did not know
how many were in the bar, but in the parlour
there were two girls she knew, and one she didn’t
know, and two or three men, and there were two
other men in the beaded room with the little girl.
Therefore, there were seven or eight persons
who were in as good a position as Maddox to see
the little girl, if, in fact, she had been in the
saloon.


THE MATTHEWS CONFESSION.
Ivy Matthews was the next witness. She
“didn’t quite know” what to say her occupation
was, as just at present she was out of employ-
ment, but she had been a barmaid. She had been
employed by the accused from the 23rd of De-
cember, 1920, up to some time In November,
1921. She left the day following Ross’s acquit-
tal on the shooting charge. She described min-
utely the interior of the wine saloon as it was in
her time, and on being shown two blankets, said
that one of them—a greeny-blue military blan-
ket—was on the couch in the cubicle in her time,
but not the other, a reddish brown blanket. On
the afternoon of Friday, December 30, she was
at the bar door, she said, talking to Stanley Ross,
who had beckoned her up while she was talking
to a friend in the Arcade. Whilst she was talk-
ing to Stanley, Colin Ross came out of the little
room at the end of the bar, and as he opened
the curtains to come out she saw a child sitting
on a chair. Colin came along the bar and poured
out a drink. She saw the glass, but did not see
what was poured into it. Colin returned to the
little room, and as. he did so he must have said
something to the girl, because she parted the cur-
tains “and looked straight out at me.” She gave
a very minute description of the child’s hair and
clothing, considering the very cursory glance she
admitted having had. Colin, she said, must have
noticed her, but he did not acknowledge her in
any way.
Matthews said nothing of how long she stayed.
Next day, at the Melbourne Hotel, at 3 o’clock,
where she had an appointment, she read in
“Truth,” so she said, of the murder of the little
and she went straight to Ross’s wine cafe.


“He was busy serving behind the bar,” she con-
tinued, “hnd I walked past the wine cafe door
twice. I mean that I walked past and I came
back again. The second time he saw me and he
came to the door without a coat, and he spoke to
me [although he wouldn’t acknowledge her on
the previous day]. I was the first to speak. I
said, T see about this murder; why did you do
It?’ He said,‘What are you getting at?’ I said,
‘You know very well; why did you do it, Colin?’
He said, ‘Do what?’ I said, ‘You know very well
what you did. That child was in your wine cafe
yesterday afternoon, for I saw her.’ He said,
‘Not me.’ And with that he said, ‘People are
looking at us; walk out into Little Collins Street,
Ivy, and I will follow you.’ He returned to the
wine cafe and put on his coat. I stood at the
comer in Little Collins Street for perhaps two
minutes, and then he followed me. Before that,
when he said, T did not do anything like that,'
I said, ‘Don’t tell me that, because I know too well
it is you, for I saw the child in your place yester-
day.’ It was then he passed the remark that
people were looking.”
“When he came into Little Collins Street what
did he say,” she was asked.
"I cannot think of the exact words,” she re-
plied.
“Well, tell us the substance of it,” said His
Honour.
Mr. Maclndoe: What did he say when you re-
sumed the conversation?—First of all he tried
to make out that I did not see the girl.
His Honour: Well, what did he say?—He said
it was not the child. He simply said: “You know
I did not have that child in there,” I said, “Gra-
cious me, I looked at the child myself, and I
know it was the same child by the descriptions


given/’ and for a long wbile be bung out that
this was not the child.
Mr. Macindoe: How did he hang out?—He said
it was not the child. I cannot tell you exactly
every word he said.
This was in the Arcade?—lt was in Little Col-
lins Street, just at the comer of the Arcade.
Well, what then? —I was so sure It was the
child, and I would make him know it was the
child.
Will you tell us what he said?—l anp. trying
to explain it.
His Honour: You have been told several times
that you are only supposed to tell what was done,
or what was said, between you and the accused,
instead of telling your inferences, or assump-
tions, or suppositions. Tell us now what took
place—what was said.
Mr. Macindoe: Don’t tell us why he said things;
just tell us what he said.—Well, at last he
told me that it was the child. He told
me that the child came to him while he
was at the door, on the Friday afternoon.
He said there was no business; there was
no one there and he was standing at his door,
and when the child came up and asked him for
a drink he said, “I took her in and gave her a
lemonade/’ I said, “When the child came and
asked you for a drink of lemonade why didn’t
you take her into the bar? Why did you take
her to that little room?” I said, “I know you
too well. I know what you are with little chil-
dren.” He said: “On my life. Ivy, I did not take
her in there with any evil intention, but when I
got her there I found that she knew absolutely
what I was going to do with her if I wanted her.
Assuming that this ”


Mr. Macindoe: Never mind the assumption.
Did he say what he assumed?—Well, you cannot
expect me to say it just the way he put it to me.
His Honour: No, it is the substance of It we
want.—Well, I am trying to tell you to the best
of my ability.
I am not saying that you are not, but tell us
what he said.—He said that after taking the child
in there he gave her a drink of lemonade. He
did not say wine; he said lemonade. And she
stayed on there talking to him for a while. She
stayed there until about four. He said a girl
named Gladys came to see him and he told the
child to go through to the little room with cur-
tains and he kept her in there until Gladys Lin-
derman left, and he then brought her back into
the little private room.
Mr. Macindoe: What did he say then?—After
that, he said he stayed with her during the rest
of the afternoon, with the full intention at six
o’clock of letting her go; but when six o’clock
came she remained on. He said that after six
o’clock, when Stanley went, he left us in there
together. I could not tell you just exactly what
he said that led up to the
His Honour: No, you need not tell us exactly;
just as far as you remember the substance of it.
—I can remember everything quite wfeU, but it
is
His Honour: I think if you would not go quite
so fast you would remember better.
Mr. Macindoe: What did he say then?—Just
after that he said that he had outraged the child;
he said that between six and eight o’clock he had
outraged her.
What did he say about it?—What do you
rpean?


Well, I suppose lie didn’t say, “I outraged the
child” ? No, that is the hardest part of it. —I can-
hot say it.
His Honour: Is it because you cannot remem-
ber it, or because it is too foul? —It Is because
the language he used is too fouL I cannot say
It.
Will you write it down? —I will try to the best
of my ability to say it.
Mr. Macindoe: What was it, as near you can
remember?—He said, first of all, “After Stan
went, I got fooling about with her, and you know
the disease I am suffering from, and when in the
company of young children I feel I cannot con-
trol myself. It was all over in a minute.”
Are those his words?—That is just using my
own language.
His Honour: Is that the substance of what he
said? —Yes, that is the substance, and he said:
“After it was all over 1 could have taken a knife
and slashed her up, and myself too, because she
led me on to it.” He tried to point out to me
that, so he believed, she went there for an im-
moral purpose. That is what he said to me.
That is what he tried to imply to my mind.”
The witness then wrote down the exact words
used, which was a statement in coarse language
that the girl had previously been tampered with.
The witness went on to tell what happened
after the girl’s death. “After it had happened,
he said that he had a friend to meet—a girl
friend. He took the body of the little girl and
put it into the beaded room, and left it wrapped
up in a blanket, and at nine o’clock, or half-past
nine he brought a girl named Gladys Wain there.
She stayed until ten o’clock v He took her home
at ten o’clock, and came back between ten and


half-past, after seeing her to the station or tram,
and removed the body from the beaded room into
the small room off the bar. He then went to
Pootscray by train, but came back again between
one and two a.m. I asked him how he got
back, and he said he came by motor car, and
went in there and looked for a place to put the
body. He first thought of putting it in the re-
cess alongside the wine cafe, but that the “Sky-
talians” would be blamed for a thing like that.
Then he thought he would put it in Mac’s room
(that is room 33 opposite, occupied by a man
named McKenzie). I said what an awful thing
to do. He said: “I did the very best thing. I
put it in the street.”
It will be noted that up to this time the witness
had not said a word of the actual death of the
child, and that great difficulty had been experi-
enced in dragging a consecutive story from her.
She was brought back to the main point by the
question: “Did he tell you at any time how the
girl had died?” She answered: “I had better
write it down. He strangled her while he was
going with her. He said he strangled her in his
passion. He said he heard or saw where they
were saying a cord had been round the child’s
neck. He said that was not so. He said: T
pressed round her with my hands. I did not mean
to kill her; but it was my passion that did it.’ He
said she was dead before he knew Where he was.
That was just his words to me.”
In cross-examination, the witness absolutely
declined to say anything that wbuld let light in on
her past life. She objected to saying where she
lived, and when that was forced from her she said
at an apartment house at 25 Rathdown Street.
Asked if among the people who lived there was a


woman named Julia Gibson, she replied that she
was the proprietress. Asked if Julia Gibson was
identical with Madame Ghurka, she said she did
not feel called upon to say anything as to the
names Mrs. Gibson assumed. She knew her as
Mrs. Gibson, the proprietress of the boarding-
house, but didn’t know she was a fortune-teller,
though she knew her as a phrenologist. She had
lived with her since the previous November. She
admitted that she had made several additions to
her evidence as given at the inquest, and these
are so suggestive that they will be referred to in
more detail later. She admitted that she had
gone—or “may have gone”—at different times
under the names of Ivy Sutton, Ivy Bolan, and
Ivy Marshall. She swore that she was married,
but declined to say what her married name was.
She admitted that Ross had dismissed her from
his employ following the shooting case with the
Intimation that, after the evidence she had given
in the case, he “would not have a bitch like her
about the premises.” “Those were his exact
words to me,” she said. She admitted that, after
her dismissal, she claimed to be a partner, and
that a lengthy correspondence ensued between
her solicitor and Ross, in which she demanded a
week’s wages in lieu of notice, and claimed a
share in the partnership; that Ross claimed £lO
from her as a debt, and that her solicitors wrote
to him, in reply, accusing him of insulting her by
calling her Miss Matthews, instead of Mrs., “on
account of not being able to force from her the
sum of £lO which he wished to obtain.” She
admitted that Ross sued her for the £lO, but
withdrew the case on the morning of the return
of the summons in petty sessions; that her soli-
citor wrote saying that, If the costs were not paid,


a warrant would issue. All these letters were
written with her authority, but she denied that
there was any ill-feeling whatever between her
and Ross. She did admit, however, that Ross
and she had never spoken from the day she left
his employ until the day she spoke to him about
the tragedy.
By comparing the evidence which Matthews
gave at the inquest with that which she gave at
the trial, it will be seen that on the trial impor-
tant additions were made. The significance of
the additions will be discussed later when her
evidence is being analysed, but here it may be
said that at the inquest she said nothing about
Ross going back for his coat; she never men-
tioned the name of Gladys Wain (or Gladys Lin-
derman), or anything about meeting with such a
woman. She did not say in the Coroner’s Court
anything about the tragedy having happened
after Stanley left; she did not say anything about
Ross having got the murdered girl in the after-
noon to go from the little room (the cubicle) off
the bar to the little room off the parlour (the
beaded room), in order to clear the way for
Gladys Wain, or about having brought her back
when Gladys Wain was gone; she did not say
that Ross had said that, when Gladys was coming
in the evening, he took the dead body from the
cubicle to the beaded room, and then came back
between 10 o’clock and half-past 10, and shifted
it from the beaded room back to the cubicle.
What is more important than all this, at the
inquest Matthews made the conversations all
take place in Little Collins Street. In one way
this may seem a small matter, but it is very
important, because when one is retailing a con-
versation he can clearly visualise the place where


,^ as st anding when certain things were said
Matthews* exact words at the toJnSTJ££
After I passed the third time he came mit r
spoke to him in Little Collins Street ” &nd 1
waKf t WCre 1 1 ° 0Mng at us from the Arcade i
sasss
HARDING’S STORY
next disreputable witness—the odious
“.SMKKEa « “
V 4 "*? stSS
might almost of a againSt him
®®atence W
for crimin’als VV* Ied ’. has a Peculiar terror
awaiting trial 7 ay in the Melbourne Gaol
ISSeSt SU aSd 1 4?,rr" ,i0U8,5 ' s ‘ ron ® 1 -
State tt„_ a. an<l some service to the
state. Harding arrived to Melbourne frcs£


Sydney on January 4, a fugitive from justice. He
was on bail in that city,-and he bolted. He was
arrested on the 9th, and lodged in the Melbourne
Gaol. He was in the remand yard with different
persons, including Ross at different times, and on
the 23rd of January was in the yard with four
men, again including Ross. The conversation
was general for a while, he said, and then re-
verted to Ross’s case.
“I remarked to Ross,” he said, “that a girl
named Ruby, whom we both knew, informed me
that a woman was down in the female division of
the prison in connection with his case. He said:
T wonder if it is Ivy Matthews?’ I said: ‘lt could
hardly have been her, for Ruby knows her, and
would have told me so.’ He said: T wonder what
she says?’ I said: ‘Can she say anything?’ and
he said: ‘No.’ I said: ‘Why worry?’” Ross
and he meantime were walking up and down the
yard, which is triangular in shape, while Dunstan,
because he had rheumatism, was sitting under
the shed on a form, “idly turning over the pages
of a magazine.”
“After saying ‘Why worry?’ ” said Harding, “I
said: ‘Did you see the girl?’ He said: ‘Yes.’ I
said: ‘How was she dressed?’ He said: ‘She was
dressed in a blue skirt and a white blouse, and a
light-coloured hat with a ribbon band around it,
and black shoes and stockings.’ I said: ‘Did
you tell the detectives you saw her?’ and he said:
‘Yes, but I told them she had black boots on.’ I
said: ‘Did you speak to the girl?’ and he said:
‘No.’ After a little while he said to me: ‘What
do you think of the case?’ I said: Tdo not know
any of the details of the case, and, therefore, I
am not qualified to offer an opinion.’ We ceased
talking on that for a little while, and continued


walking up and down, and then he said to me:
'Can a man trust you?’ I said: ‘Yes; I have
known you a good time, and have not done you
any harm, have I?’ He said: ‘No.’ I said:
'Did you speak to the girl?’ and he said: ‘Yes.’
I said: ‘Where?’ He said she was standing in
front of Madame Ghurka’s, and she came down
the Arcade, and when she got in front of his place
he spoke to her, and she took no notice of him at
first. J He said: ‘You have nothing to be afraid
of. I own this place, and if you are tired you
can come in and sit down.’ I asked him what
time this was. He said about a quarter to 3, or
a quarter-past 3, lam not sure which. I said:
'Did you tell the detectives you spoke to her?’ and
he said: ‘No.’ I said: ‘Did you take her into the
cafe?’ and he said yes, she went in, and he took
her into the cubicle near the counter. I said:
‘Could not any of your customers see her?’ He
rsaid: ‘No; we were not busy that day, and the
•customers were in the parlour.’ When he had
The girl in the cubicle, he said, he spoke to her
Tor a few moments, and then offered her a drink
.of sweet wine. She at first refused it, but even-
tually accepted it and sipped it, and appeared to
like it. He said he gave her a second glass, and
gave her in all three glasses. He said about this
-time a woman whom he knew came to the door
-of the cafe, and he went and spoke to her for
about three-quarters of an hour, that when she
left he went back to the cubicle and the girl was
asleep. About this time his own girl came to
the door of the cafe, and he went and spoke to
her until nearly 6 o’clock. I asked him who
■ served his customers while he was talking to the
-girl. He said his brother did. I said; ‘Could
not your brother see the girl in the cubicle when


he went behind the counter to get the drinks V
He said: ‘No, the screen was down, and when the
screen was down no one dared to go into the
cubicle.’
“At 6 o’clock, or a few seconds afterwards, he
closed the wine cafe and went back into the
cubicle. The little girl was still asleep, and he
could not resist the temptation. I asked him
did she call out, and he said: ‘Yes, she moaned
and sang out,’ but he put his hand over her
mouth, and she stopped and appeared to faint.
After a little time she commenced again to call
out, and he went in to stop her, and in endeavor-
ing to stop her from singing out, he said, he must
have choked her. He further added that ‘you
will hear them saying that she was choked with a
piece of wire or a piece of rope, but that was not
so.’ He said he picked up her hand, and it
appeared to be like a dead person’s hand, because
it fell just like a dead person’s hand would do. I
said to him: T suppose you got very excited when
you realised what had happened?’ He said:
‘No; I got suddenly cool, and commenced to
think.’ There was a great deal of blood about,
he said, and he got a bucket and got some water
from the tap, and washed the cubicle and around
the cubicle, but seeing that, by comparison, the
rest of the bar looked dirtier than the cubicle, he
washed the whole lot. I asked him: ‘What time
was this —7 or 8?’ and he said; ‘Yes, about that
time.’ I said: ‘Was it before you met your girl?'
He said: ‘Yes,’ that he had time to clean himself
and go for a walk around the town before meet-
ing his girl. I asked him did he meet his girl,
and he said he did. I said: ‘You took a risk,
didn’t you, in meeting her?’ He said: ‘No, I
would have taken a bigger risk had I not met her.


because I would have had a job to prove my
whereabouts.’ I said: ‘Could not she see the
girl when she went into the wine cafe?’ He
said: ‘No, we had our drink in the parlour.’
“He said he took his girl home at half-past 10,
and caught the twenty to 11 train to Footscray.
When he got to Footscray he got on to the elec-
tric tram for his home. Whilst on the tram he
created a diversion so as to attract the attention
of the passengers and conductor, so that he could
have them as witnesses to prove an alibi. I
asked him if he went home, and he said: ‘Yes.’
I said: ‘Did you come back to Melbourne by
car?’ He said: ‘No,’ that he had a bike. I said:
‘A motor-bike?’ He said:‘No, a push bike.’ I
said: ‘Have you a push bike of your own?’ He
said: ‘No, but a man I know, who lives near us,
had a push bike, and I know where it is kept.’ I
said: ‘Did you go straight into the Arcade?’ He
said: ‘Yes.’ I said: ‘But the gates are locked
there at night.’ He said: ‘Yes, but I have a
key.’ I said: ‘When you went to the Arcade did
you go straight in and remove the body?’ He
said: ‘No. I went in and took the girl’s clothes
off,’ that he went out and walked around the
block to see if there was anybody about, that he
came back and rolled the body in a coat or an
overcoat —I don’t know which—and carried it to
the lane. I asked him was he going to put it in
the sewer, and he said he did not know. I said:
'‘Did you not know there was a sewer there?’ He
said he did, but he heard somebody coming, and
he went from the lane into Little Collins Street,
and saw a man coming down from the Adam and
Eve Hotel. He added that, if they tried to put
that over him, he would ask what the old bastard
was doing there at 1 o’clock in the morning. I


said; ‘Where did you go then?' He said he went
back to the cafe. I asked him what he did with
the clothes. He said he made a bundle of them,
put them on his bicycle, and rode to Footscray,
that when he got to the first hotel on the Foots-
cray-road he got off the bicycle and sat on the
side of the road and tore the clothing into strips
and bits. He went round with the bicycle and
distributed the strips and bits along the road, and
when he came to the bridge crossing the river he
threw one shoe and some of the strips into the
river, and then distributed more strips, and went
down the road and down Nicholson street to the
Ammunition Works, to the river, and threw the
other shoe and some more strips in. He then
went back and got his bicycle and rode home to
bed.
“Before this I said: ‘Supposing they open the
girl’s stomach and find wine in it?’ He said:
‘What do they want to open her stomach for
when they know she died of strangulation?’ I
said: ‘Suppose they do open it?’ He said: ‘l’m
not the only one who could give her wine;
couldn’t I sell a bottle of wine over the counter
in the Arcade to anyone, and couldn’t they give
it to her to drink?’ I said: ‘That is so.’ He
then said: ‘What do you think of the case?’ I
said; ‘Pretty good; have you told anybody else?’
He said: ‘No. Sonenberg told me to keep my
mouth shut.’ I said: ‘Why didn’t you keep your
mouth shut?’ He said: T can trust you; any-
how, you are in here.’ ”
On the next day, said Harding, the conversa-
tion was resumed. “I asked him did he always
have a screen up in that cubicle. He said; ‘No;
I used the one in the parlour—the red screen.”'


alS ° Said to the witness) that
there was a good deal of blood about and on
being asked by the Crown Prosecutor' “nw ho
Teplied^ 1 “He naT^th 0 *' 1 man again? ’’ Harding
‘u H P as sed the remark that this old
thev e uut b thL 7 ° y6arS ° f age ’ was there > and if
ww £ Ut that ° ver 0n him he said: “I will ask
Zrt nAIT d T S there ’ and that he is just the
trime atd?wt7 WOulc ! pick for that sort of
’ aUd that they would never think a young
fellow like me would do it.” young
Mr In M™S Xa S^ at i° n ’ Harding was asked by
Mr Maxwell: 'Did Ross tell you that on that
night, he had had hard luck in that he’was seen
ly, 'Dldh?n P t < ? l i? ? " " H t e dW not Harding.
Did he not tell you that, when he was in the
whether h man J l f d come U P and asked him
whether he could lend him a pencil’” No
Mr. Maxwell was slightly in error there for
had said was that R oss came to him '
asked him for a pencil.
. be gotten you that, While he was prepar-
] ag tbe bod y for removal, a man pushed his way
tato the wine cafe, and that he (Ross) went olt
with o l u, ha^ d ? overed with Wood, and served him
a bloody bottle ?” —“No/*
lf S a t l h !?,rf or(i ’ Har,llng “M k« waa
1 yea ,® oi b ad been convicted “about nine
:° r J e *} t*mes—it might be eleven.” His offences
Inciudetl housebreaking, larceny, assault wound-
*wiiSiiJwirr t**.- * founierc-
solitary while in prison for making false stat*
ts against two warders. The confession he


said, was made on Monday, January 23rd, and
that same evening he sent for the governor and
asked him to send for Detective Walsh, and when
Walsh came he communicated it to them. The
inquest was on the 25th and 26th, and it finished
about midday on the latter date. He thought
he saw a report of his evidence in the “Age” of
the next day, and Dunstan might have seen that
report. When asked how long he remained in
gaol after making his statement to the Governor,
he answered: “Until the 27th of January—no, it
was more than that, I think the 30th January.”
DUNSTAN’S CORROBORATION.
Dunstan was then called to corroborate Hard-
ing. He was awaiting trial with Harding for
housebreaking, and at the Police Court he had
pleaded guilty, and had exonerated Harding. It
should be recalled here, however, that when the
two men came up for trial, and the same course
was adopted, the jury declined to accept the story
that Harding knew nothing of the charge, and he
was found guilty of receiving. Dunstan had
twice previously been convicted of larceny, and
he was one of the five that were in the remand
yard on January 23. His story was that he
heard certain answers made by Ross, but only
one question put by Harding. The answers
were: “I was talking to the girl”; "if they do find
any wine inside her, that ain’t to say I gave it to
her”; “my brother was serving”; “I left my girl
at half-past 10”; “I ain’t the only man that has
got a disease”; “no, a bike”; “I will ask the old
bastard what he was doing there at half-past l”r
“Ammunition Works.” The only question he
heard Harding ask was: “How was she dressed?”
Dunstan admitted that when Ross came back
from the inquest Ross said to him; “That is a nice


cobber of yours, to go into the box and swear a
man’s life away.” Dunstan had not been called
at the inquest He said that he first told the
Governor what he had heard on the Friday or the
Saturday two or three days after the inquest. He
had had opportunities for quiet talks with Hard-
ing in the meantime, but there had been no con-
versations on the subject of Harding’s evidence.
He said he had never read in the papers any
account of Harding’s evidence. Harding had
asked him had he heard the conversation, and he
had told Harding that what he had heard he
would tell to the governor of the gaol. He had
not told Harding, because he “didn't have much
time for him.” Being shown a copy of the
“Herald,” with Harding’s photograph in it, and
being asked if he had seen that before, he said:
“I do believe I did.” He couldn’t say when it
was, but it was when it was in gaol. He had
said that he never read a paper in gaol, but that
didn t mean that he had never seen one. It
was only a passing glance of the “Herald” as he
walked up and down the yard.
Harding, who had been out of court, was then
recalled, and further cross-examined by Mr. Max-
well. He said that, on the day following the
inquest, he and Dunstan were reading a paper
either the “Age” or the “Herald”—that is, he was
reading it aloud, and Dunstan was looking over'
his shoulder. He had often had papers lent from
the adjoining yards, and on these occasions Dun-
stan got the benefit of them.
ROSS’S MOVEMENTS.
We now come to a different class of evidence—
the evidence which purported to tell of the move-
ments of Ross on the important dates. The coii-
fact between this evidence and the supposed con


fessions and the inherent improbability of the
evidence itself will be dealt with later.
David Alberts, an eccentric-looking individual,
who described himself as a vaudeville artist, re-
siding at 47 Little Smith Street, Fitzroy, said that
he left home about half-past 6, and between half-
past 7 and a quarter to 8 he walked into the
Arcade through the Little Collins Street gate.
Opposite the wine saloon he saw a man whom he
now recognised as Ross. The man asked him if
he could lend him a pencil. Alberts said: “I am
sorry; I have not got one,” and walked on. He
went as far as the middle of the building, and see-
ing there was no light in the office upstairs, he
walked back, and the man was then standing in
the doorway of the wine saloon. He recognised
Ross by his gold teeth and by his hair, which was
brushed neatly back. It would, he said, be about
three weeks after the incident that he went to the
Detective Office and reported it. He knew the
reward was offered in the meantime, “but,” he
said, “I was looking for no reward.” It should,
however, be mentioned here that he has shared
in the reward. It may also be taken as certain
that, if Alberts was honest, he was mistaken, for
the evidence that Ross was at home between 7
and 8, and came back to Footscray on the tram
with Mrs. Kee and George Dawsey, may be
accepted as being beyond question. Apart from
that, however, it is simply incredible that a man
who was engaged in the gruesome task of wash-
ing away the bloodstains of a murdered victim,
and who would have the deepest interest in keep-
ing his presence in the Arcade at an unwonted
hour a close secret, should have gone out deli-
berately to ask a passer-by for a lead pencil,
which could be of no imaginable service to him.


Alexander Olson, who described himself as a
phrenologist, carrying on business in the Eastern
Arcade, said that, between 9 and a quarter past 9,
he walked out into Little Collins Street, to go to
a Chinese laundry, and he saw the accused «i«n
pacing up and down between the back gate of the
Eastern Market and the back gate of the Eastern
Arcade. How this evidence, so far from being
damaging, supports the truthfulness of Ross’s
statement to the police, can be seen by a refer-
ence to the statement, for this was the exact time
that he was waiting outside the Arcade gates for
Gladys Wain.
Then we come to the evidence of George Arthur
Ellis, “and very important evidence it is,” said
Mr. Justice Schutt in summing up to the jury.
Ellis keeps the “lodging-house” previously re-
ferred to as the old Adam and Eve Hotel. On
the night of the 30th December he was sitting at
his front door, at the comer of Alfred Place and
Little Collins Street. He saw Ross a little after
9 > on that night. He next saw him before 10
o’clock, then at 11, and two or three times after
that, until ten minutes to 1, when the witness
wound his clocks and went to bed. Ross was
walking in and out of the Arcade. There was
an arc lamp, hung over the centre of the street,
between where the witness sat and where Ross
was walking up and down. At a quarter to 1
two 'ltalians came out of the Arcade and bade him
good-night. Some time after he had gone in he
heard a loud report, and he rushed out on to the
pavement, and looked up and down for a few
seconds, but saw no one. He had never before
seen Ross until that night. The light was almost
equal to broad daylight, and he admitted that he
would be as obvious to Ross as Ross was to him.


When the two Italians came out the man walked
down towards Russell Street. They went up to
Exhibition Street, and when Ellis turned to look
again Ross was back at his post. He would
walk in and out of the Arcade. Half the gates
were open, and it was very dark inside. He first
informed the police of what he had seen on the
Sunday after the tragedy. His house, he said,
was a lodging-house—night and day. Anyone
could get a bed for the night; they paid in
advance, and were sometimes gone before he got
up. He identified Ross on the day he was
arrested —January 12. He had known the wine
shop for years, hut had never been in it, though
he had seen some “terrible bad characters there,”
and had seen some “terrible carryings on” there
as he had been coming through from Bourke
Street. It was his habit to sit outside his lodg-
ing-house every night as long as it was fine.
The two Italians, Michaluscki Nicoli and Fran-
cisco Anselmi, had been in the Italian Club until
about a quarter to 1. The club is at the Little
Collins Street end of the Arcade, upstairs, and the
stairs go up close to the wine saloon. There was
an electric light upstairs, and as they came down
they noticed a light in the wine shop. When
they got into Little Collins Street one of them saw
a man walking towards Russell Street. They
said “Good-night” to Ellis, and walked up towards
Exhibition Street. A third Italian, Baptisti Rol-
landi, the caretaker of the Italian Club, came
down about a quarter of an hour or twenty
minutes after Nicoli and Anselmi had gone, to
lock the back gate, and he saw no light in the
wine shop when he came down. It was his duty
to lock the gate when the last member had left
the club, whatever time that happened to be.


A curious piece of evidence came out quite in-
cidentally whilst this last witness was in the box.
Ross, at about 3 o’clock, or half-past 3, on the
Friday, had asked Rollandi for the loan of a key
of the back gate. The witness said: “I can’t give
my key to anybody; go to Mr. Clarke, the man-
ager; he might give you one.” This looked sus-
picious, until it was revealed that Ross wanted
™ y T order to get into the early on
the Monday morning to remove his things from
the saloon, Saturday being the last night of the
license, and Monday being the New Year’s Day
holiday. The prisoner did get the key from Mr.
Clarke on the Saturday afternoon, and did re-
move his things early on the Monday morning.
This was mentioned to the police in the state-
ment, was no doubt verified by the detectives, and
was not challenged when Mr. Clarke was called.
. [ ar> tliere fore, from the circumstances of Ross
wishing to borrow the key being incriminating it
was entirely in his favor, for it showed he had no
key of his own, and is almost conclusive evi-
dence against his having told Harding that he
had a key, or having told Matthews that he came
back between 1 and 2,” whqn he could not have
got into the Arcade unless he had a key.
THE SHEEN OF GOLDEN HAIRS.
Two other pieces of evidence, of still another
class, were used against Ross. One was that
hmrs, which it was claimed were identified as
Alma Tirtschke’s, were found on blankets taken
s house at Footscray on January 12;
the other was that pieces of serge, which it was
claimed were identified as being part of the
child s dress, were found oii January 27 on the
Footscray-road, thus confirming the supposed
confession to Harding.


The story of the hair is one of the most re-
markable ?nd one of the most unsatisfactory,
in a case every feature of which is unsatisfactory.
On the day Alma Tirtschke was
buried, Constable Portmgale went to house
where the body was lying, and with a pair of
scissors he cut a lock of hair from the left side of
her head, just over the ear, “and about six inches
from her head.” When the detectives went to
Colin Boss’s house to arrest him on January ,
nearly a fortnight after the tragedy, they took
two blankets from a sofa in a vestibule. “Brophy
and I,” said Piggott, •'opened one ot tte brown
blankets which were folded up. I tume
blanket back, and I could see the sheen of what
appeared to be some golden-coloured hair. I
said to all present; ‘Fold those blankets, and care-
fully place them in the car; they must go to the
Government Analyst.’” Jhey did go to the
Government Analyst next day. Where they were
kept in the meantime was not disclosed on the
trial except that Ross, at about 2 o’clock on the
SSin?on of his arrest, saw them lying ««»
back’ofa chair in the clerk’s room ot tne Detec-
tive Office. The detectives, in the room ot the
Government Analyst (Mr. Price),
stvread the “reddish-brown blanket over a
w P oSen screen, and removed from it In his pre-
sence twenty-two hairs
from the other blanket by Mr. Price himself, mr
Price then took ten or twelve hairs from the
envelope containing Alma’s hair. They had an
average length, he said, of 6y 2 inches, the ingest
of them being 9 inches. Let it be remembered
that these were cut 6 inches from the girl s, head.
He then took the twenty-two hairs, and found
they, too, averaged inches, but the longest


them were 15, 12, 10, 9 inches, down to 2%
inches.
“They were not identical in colour with the
hairs in the envelope,” said Mr. Price; “they were
of a light auburn colour. They were not a deep
red; they were of a light red colour. They were
not cut-off hairs; they had fallen out, or had been
taken from the scalp somehow or other. They
did not appear to have been forcibly removed.
One had a bulb root, but the others did not show
the presence of any bulbous portion or root, as
they would if dragged direct from the scalp. I
came to the conclusion that they were hairs
about to be cast off in the ordinary process of
nature.”
“If hairs were cast off,” Mr. Price was asked,
“would there be any distinction in their colour as
compared with hair that was actually growing?”
“Well, I cannot say that directly,” he replied, “but
the conclusion I formed, as regards the hairs I
found on the blanket, was that they did not come
from the frontal portion; that they had not been
exposed much to the light; that they came from
the back portion of the head, and that that is the
reason why their colour was not as deep as those
on the front portion.” The two sets of hair, he
said, were “very similar.” Microscopically, they
agreed, because there was a kind of coarseness
about them, and when treated with caustic soda
it tended to bring out the pith portion of the hair,
“and that pith was identical with the hairs on the
blanket.” The five hairs from the grey blanket,
Mr. Price said, were “similar in colour” to the
hairs on the reddish-brown blanket, but that was
all he had to say about them. When being re-
examined, he said that his reason for thinking the


front and back of the hair would differ was that
in one head he had tested “the frontal portion was
quite red, and the hair from the back of the head
quite dark.”
On cross-examination, Mr. Price admitted that
it was “several years” since he had last made an
examination of hairs from any woman’s head.
“It does not often come under my notice,” he
added. He had made very few such examina-
tions in his life. Not only did the hairs from the
child’s head and the hairs from the blankets dif-
fer in colour, he said, but they differed in dia-
meter, and it was possible, but not probable, that
the hairs on the blankets may have come from
another head. He had examined many hairs
since he had conducted this particular examina-
tion, and he had, in the course of his examina-
tion, found some hairs that were as like Alma
Tirtschke’s as the hairs on the blankets.
It will be shown later that Mr. Price might, on
the facts which he deposed to, have been called
as a powerful witness for the defence. Yet in
the atmosphere that prevailed, it seemed to be
assumed that his evidence advanced the case for
the prosecution.
THE FINDING OP THE SERGE.
The finding of some pieces of serge on the
Footscray Road, on the 26th or 27th day of
January, was also relied on strongly by the
Crown. Mrs. Violet May Sullivan was on the
Footscray Road on January 26, and she saw cer-
tain strips of serge on the left-hand side going to
Kensington. She didn’t pick them up. On the
next day she read, in the alleged confession to
Harding, that Ross had said that he had strewn
the serge of the girl’s dress on the Footscray


Road, >and Mrs. Sullivan went back to the road,
and on the opposite side to where she had seen
it on the previous day she saw a roll of serge.
She picked it up and handed it to the local police.
One piece she left at home. The serge was pro-
duced in court. One piece was fairly large, in
no sense a strip, looked quite new and fresh, and
bore no signs, as Mr. Justice Isaacs indicated in
his High Court judgment, of having lain on a
dusty and busy road for nearly four weeks, fit
the rest, one was a strip of a quite different tex-
ture, and looked much older than the piece.
There were also a couple of other fragments.
None of them appeared to have been four weeks
in the dust. The serge that she had seen on the
first day, Mrs. Sullivan said, resembled the frag-
ments, but were not like the larger piece, so that,
whether it was the same bundle she saw on both
days does not appear. When Mrs. Murdoch, the
girl’s aunt, was in the box, the serge was handed
to her for identification, and she was asked to say
what she had to say about it. “It is very similar
to the serge she had on on that day,” said the
witness. “All of it?” she was asked. “That
has nothing to do with it, I should say,” said the
witness, discarding the larger piece. The three
other pieces, she said, were “very similar” to the
material of which the girl’s dress was composed.
When asked further, she said she recognised a
row of stitching on two of the pieces. “Do you
recognise it as a row of stitching you did your-
self?” she was asked, and she answered: “No; I
fancy the stitching there is from the old stuff I
made up. I believe that is the stitching. It did
have stitching on.” She remembered the old
stitching, because she had had some difficulty in
ironing it out. She made the dress out of old
material. It was box-pleated, and the stuff she


had in her hand looked to be box-pleated, but
there was a portion missing.
Summarised, then, Mrs. Murdoch’s identifica-
tion amounted to this, that she remembered there
was some stitching on the dress that she had
made up, and there was also a little bit of stitch-
ing on two of the three pieces handed to her
which she “fancied” was the same stitching,
while the fourth piece handed to her, which was
part of the same bundle, “had nothing to do with
it.” It was on such “evidence” that Colin Ross
was hanged!
It will be remembered that Harding’s account
of what Ross said was that he “tore the clothing
into strips and bits, and distributed them along
the road.” Yet we are asked to believe that, by
some operation of the laws of cohesion peculiar
to the Footscray Road, four or more of them had
rolled themselves together by the 26th, and that
they had succeeded by the next day in crossing
the road and joining up with another and dis-
similar piece of blue serge.
On January 23 the police knew that Ross was
supposed to have said that he scattered the frag-
ments of the girl’s dress along the Footscray
Road. If this could have been verified it would
have clinched the case against Ross, for it would
have established beyond question the fact of
some confession. Every effort should have been
directed to clearing up this point. The road
Ross said he took was clearly indicated —so
clearly that it showed beyond question that
Harding knew the locality well. If that is
doubted, let anyone who does not know the
-locality try to describe Ross’s alleged route after
reading the description once. If one knows the
locality, he has a mental picture, as the words are


spoken, which he can reproduce. If he does not,
the words are words merely, and cannot be re-
peated without rehearsal. But the point is that,
on getting this alleged confession, the detectives
should have got half a dozen men to take the
road, or the two roads if necessary, in a face
in order to discover the serge. It was so plain,
Mrs. Sullivan said, that “it could not be missed.”
The local police did not find it, the detective’s
agents did not find it, but a casual wayfarer
stumbles across it twice, because “you could not
miss it.” Piggott’s answers to questions were
that, on learning of the confession, “we took cer-
tain steps,” and “gave certain directions”; and
his explanation of the failure to find the serge
was that his men searched the wrong road! One
would have liked to have heard the comments of,
say, the late Mr. Justice Hodges, on this extra-
ordinary admission.
THE MEDICAL EVIDENCE.
The last class of evidence, though given first
on the trial, was the medical testimony. It
showed that there was an abrasion on the left
side of the neck which extended across the mid-
line, and measured 2% inches in length by 7-16
of an inch in breadth at its widest part. Below
this, on the left side of the neck, there was a nar-
rower abrasion, about % of an inch in width,
and not extending across the mid-line. There
was another abrasion on the left side of the
lower jaw, an inch in length, and a quarter of an
inch in breadth. There was a small abrasion on
the outer side of the right eye, a small abrasion
in the centre of the upper lip, another small
abrasion at the back of the right elbow, and the
skin of the back of the left elbow had been


slightly rubbed. There was some bruising and
lividity on the right side of the face. Tim upper
part of the chest was livid, and showed small
haemorrhages. Haemorrhages were also found
in the scalp and on the surface of the eyes.
There were some small bruises on the right side
of the neck. Internally, there was a bruise on
the left tonsil.
In view of absurd rumours that have been cir-
culated as to the injuries to the body, it is well
to give Dr. Mollison’s next words as he uttered
them: “I think those were all the abrasions and
bruises.” It has got abroad that there were facts
about this case that were unprintable. There is
no truth in the report. With the exception of
one coarse sentence said to have been used to
Matthews, and one coarse word said by Harding
to have been used by himself, there was nothing
in the case, from start to finish, which has not
appeared, either literally or euphemistically, in
the reputable press. The child had been vio-
lated, but the cause of death, in the doctor’s
opinion, was strangulation from throttling. The
violation would have led to a considerable amount
of blood being lost. The stomach was opened,
and contained some thick, dark-coloured fluid,
mixed with food. No smell or trace of alcohol
was detected, but the doctor added that the smell
of alcohol would disappear fairly rapidly. In
this, it may be here stated, Dr. Mollison is not
supported by a number of other medical men of
standing. The post-mortem examination was
held within a few hours of the discovery of the
body, and within about sixteen hours of the
child’s death, if she died between 6 and 7.
“Alcohol,” said the doctor, “starts to be absorbed
almost immediately it is swallowed.” This sub


ject was discussed at the British Medical Associa-
tion Conference in Glasgow at the end of July,
1922. Professor Mellanby, who has made a
special study of the effects of alcohol on heredity,
said that* “after a good carouse, it had taken
from ten to eighteen hours for the alcohol to be
cleared out of the circulation of a man.” Now,
three glasses of sweet wine is a “good carouse”
for a child who probably never drank a glass of
wine before. Sweet wine contains a very high
percentage of alcohol. Accepting the Harding
story, the girl was dead within an hour or two
of taking them, and the process of clearing the
alcohol out of the circulation would cease, or be
greatly retarded. And still the fact remains that
no trace of alcohol was found in the body.
DETECTIVE BROPHY’S BLUNDER.
That was the full case as made by the Crown
against Ross, with the exception of an admission
said to have been made to Detective Brophy.
This admission may be stated and dealt with at
once. Brophy said that, on the 16th of January,
he took a man named White to the Melbourne
Gaol, and confronted him with Ross. White
said: “Yes, that is the man.” Brophy then said:
“This man has identified you as the man whom
he saw in the Arcade speaking to the little girl,
Alma.” Ross said: “Oh,” and then, turning to
White, he said: “What time was that?” White
said about 3.30. Ross said: “Yes, that’s quite
right.” Ross’s version of the conversation, as
given in evidence, was that Brophy said: “This
man says he saw you talking to a girl in the
Arcade at 3.30, and he said; “That is correct.”
Brophy made no comment. It is not only clear
that Ross’s was the correct account, but it is


extremely hard to see how an intelligent man
could have any doubt about it. Let us look at
the facts.
Ross had denied on December 31, when first
seen by the detectives, that he had spoken to
“the girl Alma,” but had said that he was speak-
ing to a girl at the door at about the time men-
tioned; in his written statement on January 5 he
denied that he had spoken to the girl; when
brought to the Detective Office, under arrest, on
January 12, Piggott said to him: “It will be
proved that the little girl was seen in your wine
shop on December 30,” and he promptly answered:
“That’s a lie.” From first to last he had denied
specifically that he had ever spoken to the girl
Alma, and frorn^first to last he had said that he
was speaking to Gladys Wain at the saloon door
about that time. Gladys Wain, it should be re-
marked, though a married woman, is very small,
and extremely girlish in appearance. Yet we
are asked to believe that Ross, by a quite casual
remark on January 16, made an admission, the
most important by far he had made during the
course of the police investigation, and that one of
the detectives in charge of the case turned away
from him without the slightest comment on his
startling admission.
But there is the further fact that White can-
not have said that he saw Ross speaking to “the
little girl Alma,” for the simple reason that White
did hot know Alma. From that it follows that
Brophy could not have said, if he were speaking
accurately—and a detective should be accurate
—that “this man saw you speaking to the little
girl Alma.” If Ross had intended to refer to
Alma, he would not, and need not, have inquired
“What time was that?” The time would have


been quite unimportant. If he had another girl
in his mind, the enquiry as to the time was
natural. In any case, the evidence never should
have been tendered or admitted, for if it was
sought to be proved that Ross was seen speaking
to the murdered girl the proper way to prove it,
according to the “rule of best evidence,” was to
can White to prove it. And White was not caned,
not because he had disappeared, but because it
was known that he would not swear that he had
seen Ross “talking to the little girl Alma.”


PART III.
ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE.
In. seeking to show how doubtful it is that Ross
should have been convicted on the evidence, it is
not proposed to go deeply into the case for the
defence, and argue that the weight of testimony
lay with the prisoner. It will be shown later that
not one word that Ross said as to his movements''
was shown to be false, and that every word he
did say was supported by strong evidence, but in
the meantime the Crown evidence will be sub-
jected to analysis, with a view of showing that
from it it was impossible to arrive at a certain
conclusion that Ross was guilty.
WHY CONFESS TO MATTHEWS.
Let us take first the evidence of Ivy Matthews.
Suppose Ross were guilty, why should he have
made a confession to this woman? They were
at daggers drawn. He had cast her out of his
employment with terms of the deepest insult.
They had fought bitterly, through their lawyers,
almost up to the date of the tragedy. They had
not seen one another, much less spoken to one
another, between the date she was turned out of
his employment and the 31st of December. Yet
on the 31st of December, according to the
Matthews evidence, we have them addressing
one another as “Ive” and “Colin,” and we have
Ross handing his life over to the unsafe keeping
of this “woman scorned.”


The strongest appeals were made through the
press for anyone who saw the child to inform the
police. But Ivy Matthews, if her evidence is
true, not only saw the child in the saloon on the
Friday, but on the Saturday she had a full con-
fession from Ross. Yet she remained silent,
according to herself and the detectives, until she
gave her evidence at the inquest. She gave no
reason for keeping silence, and she gave two
reasons for eventually speaking. At the inquest
she said: “I pledged my word to Ross I would not
give evidence against him,” but even if he had
not been arrested, she said: “Perhaps my con-
science might have made me tell.” “If some
other man had been put in the dock on this
charge,” she added, “I would have come up and
said Ross is the guilty man.” On the trial, when
asked why, if she had given her word, she had
not kept it, she answered: “Would you expect me,
a woman, to keep the secret?” But the fact is
that she did keep the “secret” for over three
weeks. At the inquest she said that the cir-
cumstance that the £IOOO reward was offered
should not be put to her, for, she said, “money
and those sort of things hold no interest for me.
I do not suppose I will get anything, and I do not
want it.” But, again, the fact is that now she
has been allotted £350 out of the £IOOO Govern-
ment reward offered, and £B7/10/- out of the
£250 offered by the “Herald.” This is not a
negligible inducement for a lady who had done
no work between November and the end of
February.
CHANGES IN MATTHEWS’S EVIDENCE.
But it is the changes in Matthews’s evidence, as
between the inquest and the trial, that cast the


most doubt on it. She makes Colin Ross in his
confession, as retailed at the trial, get the girl to
come out of the cubicle in the afternoon, and
stay in the beaded room for an hour or so, while
he talks to Gladys Wain; she makes him bring the
girl back to the cubicle when Gladys Wain is
gone ; she makes him cause the girl’s death there
after 6 o’clock, and then carry the dead body back
to the beaded room, in order that he may make
love to Gladys Wain in the cubicle later on; she
makes him come back, after seeing Gladys Wain
home, and carry the dead body back from the
beaded room to the cubicle.
There are several features about that narration
which are absolutely incredible. Nothing was
said about any of these incidents at the inquest.
In the first place, how did this modest, good, re-
tiring little girl come to remain for over an hour
in the beaded room in the afternoon, while Ross
talked with Gladys Wain in the cubicle? It was
separated from the Arcade only by a sheet of
glass, and there were two doors opening into the
Arcade through which the girl could have passed.
Again, it is utterly unbelievable that Ross would
have indulged in the unnecessary perambulations
with the dead body, as deposed to, and it is
equally unbelievable that, if he had aone so, he
would have given those details to a person to
whom he was confessing the simple fact of the
murder.
Why, then, were the additions put in? The
answer is quite simple. At the inquest Olive
Maddox gave her evidence before Matthews, and
Matthews was out of court. Olive Maddox said
that she saw the child in the beaded room at five
minutes to 5. Ivy Matthews followed her into
the witness box, and said that she saw the child


In the cubicle at 3 o’clock. How or why did it
come about that the child went from the one
room to the other? On the trial Matthews has
to be, or thinks she ought to be, ready with*an
explanation. So she makes Ross say that he
sent the little girl into the beaded room while he
was with Gladys Wain in the cubicle. Accord-
ing to the stage setting, the death has to take
place in the cubicle, for there is where the only
couch was, and there is where the blankets with
the sheen of golden hair came from. So Ross is
made to say that, when Gladys went, he got Alma
to come back again from the beaded room to the
cubicle, where she met her death soon after 6.
Ross in his statement said that Gladys Wain was
with him again in the cubicle in the evening from
9.15 for over an hour. The police were satisfied
that that was a fact. Matthews has again to
reconcile her story with that position, and again
she is equal to it. She makes Ross say that he
carried the dead body from the cubicle to the
beaded room in order that he may make love to
Gladys in the cubicle. But before she gave her
evidence on the trial, the hero of the bloody bottle
had been in the box, and his evidence had
appeared in print. He is supposed to have seen
and heard certain things which showed that the
body was in the cubicle after midnight.
Matthews thinks it desirable to meet that, so she
makes Ross say that he came back to the cafe
after seeing Gladys home, and before he went
home himself, and carried the body once more
back from the beaded room to the cubicle. No
possible theory can be advanced why Ross should
have done all these things; no possible theory can
be advanced why, if he had done them, he should
have given the details of them to Matthews. But


if we assume Matthews’s knowledge of Maddox’s
evidence, and Upton’s evidence, and her know-
ledge that Gladys Wain was in the cubicle
from 9.15 until after 10.30 —all of which we are
entitled to assume—then we are in possession of
ample material for explaining why Matthews
should have invented the details.
Then there is the change in the place at which
the conversation is supposed to have taken place.
At the inquest it was put as beginning in Little
Collins Street, at the end of the Arcade, and as
being resumed a short distance from the end of
the Arcade, but still in the street. On the trial it
was put as beginning, and going on for a little
time, at the door of the saloon, and then as being
resumed, when Ross suggested that people were
looking, out in Little Collins Street. The signifi-
cance of this change will not be realised unless
it is disclosed that just prior to the trial notice
was served on the defence that it was proposed to
call as a witness on the trial Julia Gibson, other-
wise Madame Ghurka, to prove that she saw Ross
talking to Matthews on the Saturday afternoon.
Ghurka was not, in fact, called. There may be
some doubt as to whether her evidence would
have been admissible. Probably it would have
been admitted in rebuttal, when Ross swore that
he did not have any conversation with Matthews
on that afternoon. At any rate, her evidence
was not tendered. The fact remains, however,
that Ghurka must have told the police, or Ivy
Matthews must have told the police, that Ghurka
saw the two in conversation, and was prepared
to testify to It. She could not, from her own
door, have seen them in conversation in Little
Collins Street.
60
THE GUN ALLEY TRAGEDY


Matthews, in her evidence, said that she had
not told the police that Madame Ghurka had seen
Ross talking to her, and added that, if Madame
Ghurka was to give evidence of having seen them
conversing, she did not know how the police
acquired the information. When asked, how-
ever, “Have you discussed with Madame Ghurka
at any time anything about this case?” she
answered: “To say I had not would be a lie—l
have.”
It has been published in a Sydney paper, which,
during and after the trial, was in the closest touch
With the witnesses for the Crown, that it was
Madame Ghurka who induced Matthews to tell
all she knew about the case. It is also a fact
that both were well acquainted with Ross, and
both were unfriendly with him, a circumstance
which would make discussion natural; and that
Matthews had lived at Madame Ghurka’s house
from November, 1921, up to the date of the trial,
a circumstance which would make discussion
easy. It is also a fact that Madame Ghurka and
two of her family have shared in the reward,
though nothing has ever appeared officially to
show what services Madame Ghurka rendered to
the police, which entitled her thus to share. We
may assume, further, that the reward was not
allocated until the views of the police had been
ascertained. When we know what Madame
Ghurka’s services to the State under this head
were, and when we know—what may appear
irrelevant, but what is very germane to the
matter in hand—why nobody was ever prosecuted
for the recent theft of Ivy Matthew’s box of
clothing, and when we know why a charge of in-
decent language laid against Sydney John Hard-
ing was precipitately withdrawn when called on


in the police court, then we shall know something
which has a very close connection with the
making of a case against Colin Ross.* And if
Madame Ghurka gave information (undisclosed)
to the police, which they felt entitled her to share
in the reward, her information should be con-
sidered in the light of the fact that she gave
evidence in a recent divorce suit, and was then
described by the presiding judge as a “bitter, vin-
dictive woman,” and “the sort of woman who
would say anything, whether it was true or false.”
POWERS OF INVENTIVENESS.,
Incidentally, during the trial, a remarkable side-
light was thrown on Ivy Matthew’s powers of
invention, and her unscrupulousness in exercising
them. The Crown Prosecutor cross-examined
Mrs. Ross at some length as to a visit she is
supposed to have paid to Ivy Matthews on Febru-
ary 6, in order to “beseech” her not to give
evidence against her son. The passage is worth
transcribing in full.
“Have you ever discussed anything with Ivy
Matthews?” asked Mr. Macindoe, the Crown
♦ Ivy Matthews, in June, 1922, reported that a box of
clothing, containing some money which she had ready
packed to take to Sydney, had been stolen. It had been
called for by a cabman in her absence, and taken away.
Some weeks afterwards the box was discovered at the
railway station; but about £2O worth of the clothes were
missing. That was the last ever heard—publicly—of
the matter. In September, 1922, Harding was arrested
on a charge of indecent language. When his case was
called on next morning at the police court, the prosecut-
ing sergeant said, “The accused has apologised to the
constable; the constable is satisfied, and wishes to with-
draw the charge.” It was withdrawn accordingly. All
offenders do not get so easily out of their troubles, and
plain constables are not, as a rule, allowed to withdraw
charges for public offences. But no doubt Harding was
able to say, “I have done the State some service, and
they know it” —with the accent on the “they.”


Prosecutor. “No,” was the answer, “I have only
had one conversation with Ivy Matthews in my
hfe,” and question and answer proceeded as
follow:
When was that?—That was the time of the
shooting affair. That is some time back.
I am going to remind you of the 6th of Febru-
ary last?—l had no conversation with Ivy
Matthews on February 6.
Do you know what day of the week it was?—
No, I could not tell you.
Do you know where you were on February 6?
—On February. 6 I would be home. I have not
been out of my home very much since tbia
trouble has been on.
You have been into town since this trouble? —
I have only been into town to see my son Colin.
Have you not seen Ivy Matthews since the
inquest?—At the inquest, but not since the
inquest.
Do you know where Rathdown Street is?—l
know Rathdown Street.
Do you know where Mrs. Julia Gibson (Madame
GhurkaJ lives?—l do not.
No idea? —I have not the slightest idea where
she lives.
Do you know where Ivy Matthews lives?—l do
not.
Or was living in February?—l do not.
Did you not go to the house where Ivy
Matthews was living in February of this year?—l
did not.
You swear that? —I will swear it.
You know, of course, that Ivy Matthews had
given evidence at the Morgue?—l did; at the
Coroner’s inquiry, you mean?


Yes; and that she had given evidence against
your son? —Yes; I know that.
Have you ever seen her and talked about that
evidence? I have never set eyes on Ivy
Matthews since the day I saw her at the Coroner’s
Court.
Do you say you did not go to the house in
Rathdown Street, and were shown into the
parlour by a maid on February 6, and that you
asked for Ivy Matthews, and that Ivy Matthews
came down to that parlour?—l did not; I can
swear it.
And that you besought her not to give evidence?
—No. I never did.
If you had done it would you say so? —I would.
I had no reason to do so. Ivy Matthews is a
woman I would not demean myself to talk to, let
alone to plead to.
Why?—l talked to her once and once only, and
that was quite sufficient for me.
Those who heard Mrs. Ross’s answers to the
questions put to her, saw the look of mystification
spreading over her face as they were developed,
heard her solemn declaration that she had never
even set eyes on Ivy Matthews since the day she
saw her at the Coroner’s Court, heard her
earnest, low-voiced assertion that “Ivy Matthews
fs a woman I would not demean myself to talk to,
let alone to plead to,” could not, for a moment,
doubt that she was speaking the truth. A some-
what similar line of cross - examination was
pursued when Stanley and Ronald Ross were in
the witness box, but in their case a different date
was alleged. Stanley Ross was cross-examined
on the point as follows:


Do you remember, on February 3, the Friday
oSI a^ th „ e inquest, going to Rathdown
.street, Carlton?—No.
Did you know where Ivy Matthews lived?—No
ret street ’ but 1
I did not ask you that, I asked you if you knew
where she lived in Rathdown Street? No
n/r 1 ?* 1 yo “ and your br other Ronald go to
JSSrs
Or at any time in February? No.
I am going to put this to you that a maid-
servant opened the door to you? No.
tolhe T e n* ? and brOUght Iy y Matthews
to the gate to talk to your brother Ronald?—
Never m my life; ! could not tell you where
Madame Ghurka, or Mrs. Gibson, lives.
So you say—and did you say to Ivy Matthews:
Are you going on with this?”— No.
Or did your brother?—No.
And when she said: “I am" did you then or did
your brother, say to her: “If eridence
you will have your lights put out”? No
Or anything to that effect?—No
laslflJecember?—Yes. ken ‘° ! '' ,, “ heWß
Wh^ r ? ? ~ the Thursday, January 5, that we
were detained at the detective office.
Since then have you spoken to her?—No
Never seen her?—No, only at the Morgue. I
saw her at the inquest.
You did not speak to her there?—No.
. Wh®u Ronald Ross was under cross-examina-
tion, he was questioned as to the same alleged


interview. A woman was asked to stand up in
Court, and he was asked if he knew her by sight
His answer was: “I never saw her in my life
before.” He was then further interrogated.—
Did you go to Rathdown Street on February 3
last and see that young woman?—l never saw
that woman in my life before.
Did you see Ivy Matthews on February 3? —I
did not.
At Rathdown Street, Carlton? —No. I did not.
Did you and your brother go out there to see
her?—No.
Were you together on that day?—We might
have been.
Were you at Rathdown Street on that day?—l
say I do not remember where I was.
You might have been? —Perhaps I might have
been; on that particular day goodness knows
where I might have been.
Did you go with your brother to a house where
Ivy Matthews lives? —I did not.
Did your brother go to the front door and ask
Ivy Matthews to come to the front gate?—l do
not know.
In your presence?—He did not.
Did Ivy Matthews come to the front gate and
did you tell her if she went on with this case she
would have her lights put out?—No; I did not.
You would admit it if you had done it?—Yes;
I am here to tell the truth.
One brother was out of Court while the other
was giving his evidence. It was again perfectly
clear that neither brother had the slightest know-
ledge of any such interview. It would have been
competent for the Crown to have called evidence
to prove this conversation if it had taken place,
but no application was made to call the evidence.


There is an importance —indeed a tremendous
importance —about this series of questions which,
as they led to nothing, may not be appreciated by
the layman. According to the rules of cross-
examination, Counsel may not ask random ques-
tions. His questions must have a basis of know-
ledge, or at least of information, to rest upon.
Before the Crown Prosecutor could ask these
questions, he must have had information to the
effect indicated by his cross-examination. It is
impossible to conjecture anyone who was in a
position to give such information but Ivy
Matthews. If that be so, then Matthews abso-
lutely invented the stories. There is not a scintilla
of truth in either of them.
But in still another way Matthews’ story can be
shown to be, if not false, at least highly improb-
able. She said that at 3 o’clock on the Friday she
was standing at the door of the-wine saloon,
talking to Stanley Ross. “I was at the wine cafe
door,” she said, “but not in the saloon.” She came
to the door, she said, because Stanley beckoned
her up from lower down the Arcade, where she
was talking to a friend. Stanley, of course, denies
this absolutely. But if it were true, then Stanley,
in order to see her standing down the Arcade,
must himself have been standing flush with the
building line of the cafe, and could not have been
in the recess by which the door is entered. When
she came to Stanley, she said she saw Ross come
out of the cubicle, and as he did so she saw the
little girl sitting on a chair in it. When Ross got
the drink and went back, she says he must have
spoken to the girl because “she parted the cur-
tains and looked straight out.”
Now if Ross had taken that little girl into the
room, one would have thought that he would




have been very anxious not to reveal her presence
unnecessarily. According to Matthews, he seems
to have been at pains to disclose it.
But if the plan of the saloon* (on page 68) is
looked at, it will be noticed that before Matthews
could even see the curtains on the cubicle she
would have to be standing right in the doorway
of the saloon and not merely flush with the build-
ing line. There are two circumstances which
make it improbable that she would be so standing.
One is that if Stanley were standing clear of, or
«yen flush with, the building line, the conversa-
tion, if any, would be likely to take place where
he was standing. The other is that she was not
likely to stand right in the doorway of the saloon,
when she was not on speaking terms with the
proprietor of it. But again, the child, in order to
be seen at all, would have to have her chair
almost blocking the 2ft., 7in. doorway of the
<jubicle. The whole room is duly 6ft. by sft. sin.,
and Ross must have placed her in the only portion
of it in which she could be seen by a person
standing right in the doorway. Yet Matthews’s
glance was sufficient to enable her to describe
the girl as wearing a little mushroom-shaped hat
“coming round her face something like mine”—
a white hat with a maroon sort of band like the
one produced, pushed back a little from the face,
but coming down around the face, a white blouse
* This plan is only approximately to scale. The sloping
wall going in to the doorway is actually not at as sharp
angle as the plan shows. Each of the big rooms Is,
oyer all, 15ft. lOin. x lift. 41n. The cubicle occupies
6ft. x sft. sin. of the one room, and the beaded room
occupies 7ft. Bin. x 6ft. 7ln. of the other room. The
walls of the beaded room went almost up to the ceiling.
There was no door where the “arch door” is shown, but
only a doorway with curtains hanging in it.


or jumper “with just straps over the shoulder; her
hair was a sort of auburn shade, not particularly
a ginger hair, but that pretty shade of auburn,”
while as to her age “she struck me as being 12 or
13.” An excellent example of instantaneous men-
tal photography in colours!
There are some further facts about Matthews
which help to explain why she, although, accord-
ing to the detectives, she made no statement to
them until she gave her evidence in the Coroner’s
Court on January 25, has yet got awaj with the
lion’s share of the reward. That, however, will
be dealt with fully when we come to deal, under
the head of the new evidence, with the extraor-
dinary story of a man named Halliwell.
OLIVE MADDOX TESTED.
Olive Maddox’s testimony is also worthy of a
few lines of examination. She said that, having
seen the girl in the beaded room, two men also
being in it, she came'out and said to Ross: “That
is a young kid to be drinking there.” The room
in which the child was alleged to be was only 7ft.
by 6ft. Tin. The girl, therefore, must have been
within three or four feet of the men. Ivy
Matthews, in her evidence at the Morgue, said it
was no unusual thing, when respectable women
came into the place for a drink with a child, to
show them into the little room. Olive Maddox,
a daily visitor to the place in Matthews’s time,
must have known of this practice. Therefore,
even if she did see the child in the same little
room with two men, there was not the slightest
thing about the circumstance to suggest that she
was not with one of the men, and everything to*
suggest that she was. At the worst, she had an
empty lemonade glass in front of her, and that,
combined with the fact that she was with two


men, would never have prompted Maddox to say
anything about “a young kid” drinking.
When it is remembered that Matthews and
Maddox were old and close acquaintances, and
that Maddox admitted that it was after consul-
tation with Matthews that she decided to speak
to the police, and when it is remembered that this
consultation was just at the time that Matthews
was trying to enlist the services of Halliwell,
which will be referred to later, and when it is
remembered that just at this time the reward had
been increased to £1250 (including £250 offered
by the “Herald”), it does not seem hard to sug-
gest what may have happened. Matthews says
that she saw a drink being brought into the
cubicle to the child at 3 o’clock. It was suggested
in the Appeal Courts that Maddox was to say that
she saw the child in that room at 5 o’clock, with an
empty glass before her; that Maddox was a stupid
girl—according to her own testimony, barely
able to read; that she blundered in the simple
task assigned to her by the master mind, and put
the child in the wrong room. The rooms at that
time had no distinguishing names. It was not
until the trial that they became known as the
"cubicle” and the “beaded” room. Matthews did
not know at the inquest of this blunder, but on
the trial she tried to repair it by telling the absurd
story of how Ross got the girl to go into the
beaded room, and kept her there by some form of
mesmerism for over an hour, while he entertained
Gladys Wain in the cubicle.
Maddox herself says that when she saw the
girl in the beaded room there were three girls and
two men in the adjoining parlour, and there were
two men in the little room with her. It was a
busy afternoon,, the eve of the closing of the wine


saloon, and almost the eve of the New' Year. If
that girl were in the wine shop from 3 until 5 or 6
she would have been seen by anything from fifty
to a hundred people. It is incredible that all
these people were degenerates, who would con-
nive at a dastardly outrage, by whomsoever com-
mitted. Yet the simple fact remains that the
only persons who came forward, in response to
earnest and widely-published appeals for infor-
mation about the girl, were the prostitute, Olive
Maddox, and her mysterious friend, with the in-
scrutable past. Ivy Matthews. And neither of
them came forward until a handsome'reward was
offered for the information. Of this reward, Ivy
Matthews has received £437/10/-, and Olive
Maddox £214/5/-. If we know all the services
rendered by each, the positions should have been
reversed, for it was Olive Maddox who first gave
the information which put the police on what
they, no doubt, still honestly believe was the right
trail. But do we know all? It will be shown
later that, at the time Colin Ross’s doom was
sealed, we did not.
HARDING’S COCK-AND-BULL STORY.
Turning now to the alleged confession to Hard-
ing, it will be seen that it will bear analysis no
better than Matthews’s. The questions supposed
to have been put by Harding bear their own
refutation.
Take the words near the opening:—“l said:
‘Did you see the girl?’ He said: ‘Yes!’ ” What
would have happened had the conversation
reached that interesting stage? All eagerness,
Harding would have followed it up by asking
what happened. But what does he do? He
inquires weakly, like a lady of fashion: “How was
she dressed?” With great minuteness Ross


described her dress, down to her shoes and stock-
ings, and with great accuracy Harding remem-
bered it all. Then Harding inquired, still curb-
ing his curiosity: “Did you tell the detectives that
you saw her?” And Ross replied: “Yes; but I
told them that.she had black boots” —a little
touch not borne out by Ross’s written statement,
but clearly designed to furnish corroboration of
Harding’s story that Ross had confessed. Then
a little later on we have Harding interposing with
the unreal inquiry: “What time was this?” as if
time were, at that stage of the inquiry, either
important or interesting. There are many other
questions equally unreal. The purpose of all of
them is quite clear. They are plainly detective
questions, devised to establish at the outset, as he
had no doubt been instructed to establish, or as
he knew by experience detectives are wont to
establish, the identity of the girl Ross was talking
about. There was to be left no room for misun-
derstanding, such as Brophy left in his bungled
interview of the 16th.
Again, take the question supposed to have been
put by Harding when the conversation was re-
sumed on the second day. It is on a different
footing from the others. “I asked him,” said
Harding, “did you always have a screen up in
that cubicle?” and Ross is supposed to have re-
plied: “No; I used the one in the parlour—the red
screen.” The reference, apparently, was to the
screen which hung in the arched doorway
between the two main rooms of the saloon. Can
any earthly reason be suggested why Harding
should have put such a question to Ross? The
only possible answer is: “None whatever.” But
a reason can be suggested why, if his story were
an invention, he should have invented that parti


cular part of it. Harding had been in the saloon,
and he could not have missed the conspicuous
screen that hung between the two rooms. He
would probably not have remembered clearly
whether there was a curtain over the cubicle door
or not. For aught he knew, he might have been
confronted by fifty witnesses who could swear
truly that there never had been a curtain there.
He tried to rise to the occasion, and invented the
ludicrous story of Ross having said that he re-
moved the large curtain and hung it over the
cubicle door to hide the little girl from the public
gaze—the same little girl as, according to
Matthews, Ross got deliberately to reveal herself
when Matthews took her hasty glance over Stan-
ley Ross’s shoulder. The idea of Ross removing
the large curtain from between the rooms and
hanging it over the cubicle door (all in the
presence of Stanley), in order to prevent Stanley,
amongst others, from seeing the girl, would be
laughable if anything about this terrible case
could be laughable.
Being reticent up to a certain stage, Ross,
according to Harding, then determined to speak,
for what reason no one can suggest, seeing that
he knew Harding’s reputation as a “shelf,” and
seeing that he had been warned by his solicitor
to “keep his mouth closed.” That much Harding
admitted, but in fact Ross was warned that the
remand yard would be full of pimps. The Hard-
ing touch was made apparent by another little
incident. He makes Ross throughout speak of
the small compartment at the end of the bar as
“the cubicle.” It is a most fitting name, and it
has stuck to the room throughout the trial, but it
had never been called that by the Rosses. They
had never even heard the word, and prior to the


trial did not know what it meant. But Harding,
during his inglorious war service, had been em-
ployed on a hospital ship, and that is the expres-
sion used in hospitals to denote a little room with
a couch in it such as this. Then Ross is made to
say that none of the customers could see the girl
because they were in the parlour, whereas,
according to Matthews, the little girl thrust her
head out as if in order to be seen, and, indeed,
thrust it out in pursuance of Ross’s suggestion,
and, according to Maddox, she was in the beaded
room with two of the customers, and was seen
by Maddox herself, who was an excellent cus-
tomer. But, furthermore, if the Maddox story is
true, the customers would have had to be in the
parlour in order to see her, for the beaded room
is part of the parlour. Then Ross offered this
quiet, bashful little girl a glass of wine, and she
took three, and fell off into a stupor in the
cubicle, though, according to Matthews, he gave
her a glass of lemonade, and afterwards sent her
over to the beaded room, where she was seen by
Olive Maddox, bright and alert, sitting up with an
empty glass before her, at 5 o’clock.
The idea that Stanley should have seen, and
been a party to, his brother’s lust, was too much
even for the credibility of a Harding, so Ross is
made to say that Stanley couldn’t see the girl
when he went behind the counter, because the
screen was down, “and when the screen was down
no one dared to go into the cubicle.” The
absurdity of the story of the screen in one aspect
has already been referred to, but a glance at the
plan will show its absurdity in another aspect.
But even the plan does not show that the cubicle
walls were only 6 ft. 4 in. in height, the lower 3
ft, being thin lining boards, and the upper 3 ft. 4


in. being glass. There was no top or ceiling to
it. A girl could scarcely breathe in that
cubicle without its being noticed by a man
squeezing in and out at the end of the bar
counter. Everything, according to Harding,
took place in the cubicle, and the girl never left it
from the time she went in at 3 o’clock until she
was carried out, dead and nude, between 1 and 2
o’clock next morning. There are none of the
perambulations by the' child when alive, or by
Ross when the child was dead, backwards and
forwards with the body to and from the cubicle
of which Matthews speaks.
According to the Harding confession, the crime
was consummated soon after 6, and the girl was
dead. The fact that no trace of blood was ever
known to have been seen in the room had to be
accounted for, so Harding makes Ross first wash
out the cubicle, and then the whole bar. The
washing of the cubicle would suggest itself to a
much cruder imagination than Harding’s, but the
little touch about the rest of the bar was worthy
of him. Even Piggott and Brophy, when they
had the matter so “well in hand” on the morning
of the 31st, that they did not think to go into the
cubicle, might be expected to notice that one part
of the bar was cleaner than the other, fbr Hard-
ing would not have dreamt that the detectives
would neglect the elementary step of looking into
the cubicle. And so Harding put in the touch
of verisimilitude about the washing of the whole
bar.
If Harding’s story be true, then it was while
Ross was engaged in this labour of scrubbing out
the bar, with the dead body of an outraged and
murdered child keeping vigil over him, that he
went out into the Arcade to borrow a lead pencil
from the vaudeville artist, Alberts, who just hap


pened to have reason, at the psychological
moment, to walk half-way through the Arcade
and back again, like a famous character in his-
tory. Of course Mr. Alberts may have been mis-
taken in his identification, but at least he, too, as
has been said, has shared in the reward for the
information he gave.
Having finished his task of scrubbing out the
bar, Ross had time on his hands—still accepting
the Harding narrative —to clean himself up and
go for a walk before meeting his girl. Having
honoured his appointment, and met his girl at 9
o’clock —though, as a tragedy had occurred in
the meantime which might have been expected
to, and did, in fact, cost him his life, he would have
been excused for breaking it —one would have
thought that he would have suggested a walk in
the park, or about the streets —anywhere hut
back to where the stark body of the little girl was
awaiting him. Had he walked down Bourke
Street the alibi that he was so anxious, according
to Harding, to establish would have been much
better established, for he might have been seen
by a dozen acquaintances, and the risk which
even Harding saw he was taking would have been
avoided. But no! Ross must go and sit for an
hour and a half with his lady love a few yards
away from the child he had foully murdered so
recently, and whose body he must dispose of
within the next few hours, under pain of death.
CONFLICTS IN THE CONFESSIONS.
Harding, so he says (and Harding “is an hon-
ourable man”) puts the question to him directly:
“Could Gladys not see the girl when she went into
the wine cafe?” “No,” said Ross, “we had our
drink in the parlour.” This again is the exact
opposite of what Matthews says he said, for


Matthews makes him carry the dead body out of
the cubicle into the beaded room (which is part
of the parlour) in order that the cubicle may be
free for his reception of Gladys Wain. It might
be thought that Ross had special reasons for
wanting the cubicle, as it had a couch in it, but
any idea that sexual misconduct took place that
night is negatived by the fact that Ross was
physically unfit and that Gladys Wain knew it.
Harding next makes Ross, after seeing Gladys
Wain home, himself take train for p’ootscray,
though he fixes the time at about an hour earlier
than it was in fact shown, by overwhelming inde-
pendent testimony, to have been. He also makes
Ross say that he created a diversion on the tram
in order to call attention to himself, and have the
conductor and other witnesses to prove an alibi.
The closest inquiries by the police, which it may
be assumed were made, failed to disclose the
faintest evidence of this “diversion,” In fact, it
was absolutely negatived by the three men,
merely casual acquaintances, who travelled home
with Ross that night. Not only that, but the
defence knows exactly how this story of the row
on the tram originated. A witness named Patter-
son, on hearing of Ross’s arrest, went voluntarily
to the local police station to say that he had
travelled home with Ross that night on the tram.
He was questioned as to the date, to see whether
he was making any mistake; and by way of fixing
the actual night he said that he remembered it
because there had been a disturbance in the fish
shop where he was having supper with another
man in Footscray, before taking the tram for
Maidstone, on which he saw Ross. The local
police appear to have misunderstood what he said,
and reported the disturbance as taking place on


the tram. The Ross brothers, Ronald and Stanley,
were cross-examined as to whether they them-
selves had not called on the motorman and con-
ductor of the tram, and themselves indicated that
a disturbance had taken place on it. The cross-
examination only served, once again, to show the
honesty of their belief in their brother’s case, for
it revealed that they went to the tram office to
find the names of the conductor and motorman
who had charge of the tram Colin travelled by,
to ascertain if they had noticed Colin on the tram,
and to get, if possible, the names of any pas-
sengers on it.
Harding next put the question to Ross: “Did
you come back by car? ” A motor would naturally
suggest itself as the means by which he would
return to town, and it will be remembered that,
according to Ivy Matthews, he said he had come
back by car. But that was a matter that could be
tested, and the detectives had no doubt satisfied
themselves by inquiry before this that Ross did
not return by a car. So Harding makes him reply
to the query by saying: “No, a bike.” “A motor
bike?” asked Harding. “No, a push bike,” Ross
is supposed to have replied. Harding probably
knew that Ross had no bicycle of his own, or at
least he guarded against that contingency by
making Ross say that he knew a man who had a
bike and knew where it was kept. The ques-
tions and answers which follow are specially
notable as carrying on their face the mark of
falsehood. Harding’s narrative at this point
was—“l said, ‘Did you go straight into the Ar-
cade?’ He said, ‘Yes.’ I said, ‘But the gates
are locked there at night?’ He said, ‘Yes, but I
have a key.’ I said, ‘When you went to the Ar-
cade, did you go straight in and remove the
body?’ He said, ‘No, I went in and took the


girl’s clothes off and went out and walked
around the block to see if there was any-
one about.’” The stilted nature of the
dialogue suggests at once that it is the
invention of a crude fictionist. But it sug-
gests a good deal more than that. How did Hard-
ing know, if he had not been told, that the gates
were locked at that time? How did he know, if
he had not been told,' that a tenant in the ordi-
nary course, would not have a key to the Arcade?
That is the first thing that would suggest itself
if Ross said that he went straight back to the
Arcade. The walking round the block to see if
there was anybody about is equally incredible, for
there might be nobody about when Ross walked
around the block on one occasion, and
several about when he came out with the
body two or three minutes later. The
purpose of that unreal inquiry, and the others
that follow was to get answers fitting in with the
stopr told by the vigilant lodging-house keeper,
Ellis. But Ellis, with all his vigilance, strangely
enough never saw Ross enter the Arcade with a
bicycle. How that part of the story not only does
not fit in with Ellis’s, but violently conflicts with
it, will be shown in a moment.
A MODEL LODGING-HOUSE KEEPER.
Ellis’s story may be taken up here and
analysed. He, as has been said, is a lodging-house
keeper, but the sort of lodging-house he keeps is
known by another name among the ribald. He
saw Ross, according to his evidence, “a little after
9, before 10, then at 11, and two or three times
between that and 10 minutes to 1,” when he re-
tired. Strange to say, he did not see Ross go in
with Gladys Wain or come out with her, though
the sight of a young couple near his “lodging-
house” is just the sort of thing that might have


teen expected to attract his attention. He did
not see Ross come back on the bicycle, as he had
been said to do, though one would have thought
he could not have failed to see it, if it were a fact,
and if he did keep constant vigil until nearly 1
o’clock.
It should, however, be noted that Ellis did not
say, in so many words, that he saw Ross at the
times mentioned. According to the evidence, he
told the police on the Sunday following the mur-
der that he saw a man whom he did not know,
and had never seen before, walking in and out of
the Arcade, as stated. On the 12th, when Ross
was arrested, Ellis was brought to the Detective
Office, and he there and then identified Ross as
being the man whom he had seen. Ellis lives
within a few yards of the Eastern Arcade, and
according to his own evidence, knew all about the
wine saloon. Through the Arcade would be his
direct way to Bourke Street. Ross had received
great publicity seven or eight weeks previously
in connection with what has been referred to as
the Arcade shooting case. Ellis must have been
an extraordinarily unobservant man if, in spite
of that publicity, of his knowledge of the wine
saloon, and of its close proximity to his residence,
he had never set eyes on Ross before. When
called upon to identify Ross, he was bound, of
course, to say that he had never seen him before,
because, if he knew Ross, he would have been
asked how it was that he did not tell the detec-
tives that it was Ross he saw walking in and out.
It is also curious if Piggott, as he said, had the
case “well in hand” on the first day, and had
Ellis’s statement on the following day, that he did
not confront Ellis with Ross until a fortnight had
elapsed. But, conceding Ellis’s honesty, it is
surely risking much to depend on the fortnight


old observations of a witness who is so unobser-
vant that he had never observed a man who car-
ried on business within a few yards of him, and
who, a couple of months before, was locally “the
cynosure of every eye, the observed of all ob-
servers.”
But if the story told in the confessions is true,
then Ellis can not have seen Ross “at 11, and two
or three times betweeh that and 10 minutes to 1,”
for Ross was away at Footscray at the time.
Apart altogether from the confessions, it was
proved by overwhelming independent evidence
that Ross did catch a train at Spencer Street at
about 11.30, and caught a tram which left him at
the terminus, not far from his home, shortly
before midnight.
But here, again, apart from the evidence, the
story told by Ellis is so inherently improbable as
to render it Incredible, even conceding, as has
been said, that it was honest. The theory put
forward for the Crown was that Ross, in his
anxiety and restlessness, was walking in and out
of the Arcade. If Ross were anxious and restless
it would be about the safety of his own neck. The
safety of his own neck could be best assured by
keeping his presence at the Arcade, late at night,
a secret. Whatever his uneasiness, he was hardly
likely to have let that fact lapse from before his
mind for an instant. It is incredible, on the one
hand, that he should have contemplated disposing
of the body before midnight in such a brilliantly-
lighted and well-frequented spot. The street
might be empty while Ross was patrolling it, and
yet before he could go in to the saloon and get
the body and carry it to Gun Alley, a dozen people,
including a constable, might be in it. It is in-
credible, on the other hand, if he did contemplate
disposing of it, and was waiting for Ellis to dis


appear, that he should have needlessly exposed
himself to Ellis when, from the darkness of the
Arcade (which Ellis deposed to) he could have
seen every movement of Ellis without himself
being seen. Ross must have known Ellis well by
sight, and, whatever are the facts, must have be-
lieved that Ellis would know him.
This is one of the points at which the Crown
case became not only absolutely incoherent, but
absolutely inconsistent. The evidence of the
Italians about seeing the light in the wine saloon
at 10 minutes to 1, of the caretaker that there
was no light twenty minutes later, of Ellis hear-
ing a mysterious noise after he had retired and
coming out to see what caused it, of the Harding
confession that Ross heard Ellis coming and de-
sisted from putting the body in the sewer, was
all designed to show that Ross chose the moment
after the two Italians had left and Ellis had re-
tired, and before the caretaker closed the gate,
to rush out with the body and carry it to Gun
Alley. But the Matthews confession and the rest
of the Harding confession were put forward to
show that after the gates were closed Ross came
back, and, with his own key, opened the gates
and disposed of the body. The Matthews con-
fession makes him return “between 1 and 2,” and
Harding’s confession makes him say, in effect at
any rate, that the gates were closed when he got
back, and that he opened them with his own key.
A long interval, according to the Harding con-
fession, occurred between Ross’s return and the
disposal of the body, for in the meantime he took
off the girl’s clothes, and washed the body, and
walked around the block. The gates would be
locked long before this, and Ross had no key. The
stories, therefore, fail hopelessly to fit in the one
with the other. The mark of truth is that it must


fit in with every other truth, while the mark of
falsehood is that it can only be made, by what-
ever ingenuity, to fit in with a limited number of
truths. If the Ellis evidence is true, the Harding
and Matthews evidence on this point cannot be
true. It may be true in the limited sense of being
a true narration of what. Ross said, but it cannot
be true in the important sense of being a true re-
cital of what Ross did. And unfortunately, in this
case the jury was not told that the vital thing was
not what Ross said, if he said anything* but what
he did, and was not asked to consider why he
should have said he was at Footscray if, in fact,
he was parading up and down in front of Ellis.
CONFESSIONS COMPARED.
Then the objection will be raised, as it was
raised by no less august a tribunal than the. High
Court, that even though the two confessions dis-
agree in important details, and conflict hopelessly
with the direct evidence of Ellis, they are in
agreement in the main fact that they contain the
admission that Ross outraged and killed the child,
and disposed of the body in the alley, and are in
agreement in a number of minor points. It is,
however, the points of agreement and of dis-
agreement that suggest so strongly that the two
confessions were fabricated. Let us look at the
facts.
On January 23 the police had no account of the
supposed confession from either Matthews or
Harding. By January 25 they had both. Let us
see how they agree. It is essential in testing the
confessions to keep in mind what the police knew
on January, 23. We can deal afterwards with the
question whether what the police knew Harding
and Matthews also knew, or probably knew. The
police knew that the girl was in the vicinity of


the Arcade at about 3 o’clock. They knew that
Boss had been talking to Gladys Wain in the
saloon for about an hour after four o’clock in the
afternoon; they knew he was to meet, and did
meet, Gladys Wain at 9 o’clock; that he went
home for tea in the meantime; and that he was
with her for over an hour after 9.15; they knew
that he went home late by train to Footscray, and
thence by tram to Maidstone. All these things
were in Ross’s statement made on January 5, and
the police had the opportunity of testing them.
They interviewed Gladys Wain and apparently
they satisfied themselves as to the truth of Ross’s
statement so far as it concerned her. They knew
that the dead girl had been outraged and had
been murdered by strangulation; and they knew
that though at first it was said that the marks
around the girl’s neck pointed to strangulation by
a cord or wire, that this was disproved by the
medical examination (see the “Herald” of Jan-
uary 6 and January 10). They knew that tifate
body was not in the alley at 1 o’clock (see the
of January 2); and they knew that Ellis
had said that he had seen a man going in and out
of the Arcade up to nearly 1 o’clock. They knew
that Ross was suffering from a venereal disease.
With these points settled, there were only five
matters to be filled in by conjecture if Ross was
to be saddled with the crime. One was how did
the girl actually get into the saloon, the second
was how did Gladys Wain fail to see anything of
the girl when she was there in the afternoon. The
third was the exact manner of the girl’s death.
The fourth was how was Gladys Wain prevented
from seeing the body when she came in at 9
o’clock. The fifth was how did Ross get back
from Footscray late at night to dispose of the
body. How these matters of conjecture were


filled in in the two alleged confessions can be
seen clearly by the following parallels. (The
rooms indicated will be described in the terms
used through the trial, not in the terms used in
the “confessions.”)
THE MATTHEWS
CONFESSION.
(1) The child came up
and asked him for a
drink. He gave her a
glass of lemonade and
took her Into the cubicle.
THE HARDING
CONFESSION.
When the child got op-
posite his place he spoke
to her, and she took no
notice of him at first. He
said; “You have nothing
to be afraid of; I own this
place, and if you are tired
you can come In and sit
down.” She went in and
he took her into the cu-
bicle and induced her to
take three glasses of
sweet wine.
(2) She stayed there
until about four. Stanley
could kee her too. A girl
named Gladys Wain came
to see him, and he told
the child to go through to
the beaded room, and he
"kept her in there”
[how?] until Gladys left,
and then brought her back
into the cubicle.
About this time a
woman whom he knew
came to the door of the
cafe, and he spoke to her
for about three-quarters
of an hour, and when he
went back to the cubicle
the girl was asleep. A
little later “his own girl”
came to the door of the
cafe, and he spoke to her
until nearly 6 o’clock.
Stanley couldn’t see her
when he was serving, be-
cause the screen was
down, and when the
screen was down no one
dared go into the cubicle.


THE MATTHEWS
CONFESSION.
(3) After 6 o’clock,
-when Stanley left, lie got
■"fooling about with her”
(she being quite alert and
knowing what was
meant), and it was all
over in a minute. ‘T
strangled her in my pas-
sion.” After it was all
over, “I could have taken
a knife and slashed her up
and myself too, because
she led me on to it."
(4) He had to meet a
girl friend, so he took the
body from the cubicle
and put it in the beaded
room oft the big room,
and brought Gladys Wain
into the cubicle, and when
Gladys was gone he
brought the body back
into the cubicle.
(5) I asked him how
he got back, and he said
he came back by motor-
car.
THE HARDING
CONFESSION.
At 6 o’clock the girl
was still asleep In the cu-
bicle, and ‘T could not re-
sist the temptation.” She
moaned a little and
seemed to faint. I left
the room, and after a
little time she commenced
to call out again, and I
went in to stop her, and
in endeavouring to stop
her I must have choked
her. I got suddenly cool
and commenced to think.
“Could Gladys not see
the girl when you went
into the cafe?” No, as
the body was In the cu-
bicle, we had our drink In
the big room.
I said: “Did you go
back by car?” He said:
"No”; he had a bike. I
said: "A motor bike?” He
said: “No, a push bike.”
It will be seen that on every point about which
nothing was known to the police, the two “con-
fessions” are absolutely at variance. On the
points known to the police, they absolutely agree
except that Harding (rightly) makes Ross speak
to another girl at the door before he speaks to
Gladys Wain. This the police knew from Stanley’s
statement, though it is not in Ross’s written


statement. Further comment on these sug-
gestive facts seems unnecessary.
WAS THERE “INSIDE” KNOWLEDGE?
How, it may be asked, could Ivy Matthews and
Harding become possessed of the information the
police had? That question is not difficult to
answer. It will be shown later that Ivy Matthews
was driving around with the police on January 9,
assisting them to get evidence in the case, and
that she, on her part, was trying to get it manu-
factured. If that is so (and a sworn declaration
to that effect has gone unchallenged) then she
was not likely to lack any information that the
police thought it might be useful to them for her
to have. It has been stated in the Press that the
police employed Chinese spies to see if evidence
could be got against any of the Chinese in the
neighbourhood. The statement, though it ill
accords with Piggott’s evidence that “we had the
case well in hand” on December 31, has not been
denied. If Chinese spies were called in to assist
in the unravelling of the crime—and that course
of action may have been quite justifiable—the
detectives are not likely to have cried “non tali
auxilio” when Matthews volunteered her services.
As to Sydney Harding, the source of his know-
ledge can be guessed if not inferred. Harding
was a criminal with a record, like one of the
Arbitration Court disputes, extending beyond the
limits of one State. He was “wanted” in Sydney,
when he favoured Melbourne with his society on
January 4. At that time. Detective Walsh, of
Sydney, was doing duty in Melbourne as an ex-
change officer. He was one of the detectives
engaged on the Ross case and was present at the
arrest. On Sunday, January 22, according to
statements since made to Ross’s advisers r


Harding sent for Walsh, whom he knew, and
Walsh visited him at the gaol and had a long
interview with him. On Monday, January 23,
Ross made the “confession” to Harding, and that
night Harding again sent for Walsh, as is Ad-
mitted, and recounted the confession to the
Governor in the presence of the detective.
Neither of these facts—that Ivy Matthews was
acting as assistant detective on January 9, and
that Detective Walsh had visited Harding in the
gaol by invitation on January 22—was known at
the trial. Had they been so, they would have pro-
vided excellent material for cross-examination,
and would have given the jury something to con-
sider which was never present to their minds.
It has been suggested that it would be a dread-
ful thing if the police had prompted Harding in
this matter. It certainly would have been a dread-
ful thing if they had prompted him or anybody
else to manufacture a confession, and nobody
suggests for a moment that they would do, or did
do, such a thing. But believing Ross guilty, as
they no doubt did believe him guilty, and yet not
having sufficient evidence to prove it, they would
have been merely following a commonplace prac-
tice if they had employed Harding to endeavour
to get a confession of his guilt. In one of the
daily papers, Mr. Brennan was represented as
having said in argument before the Appeal Court
that it would have been a very dreadful thing for
the police so to employ Harding. In fact, he said
the exact opposite. But Harding was a very
dangerous agent to employ on this task. Some
at least of the Detective Force knew that he had
volunteered for this kind of duty on a former
occasion, and that his services had been declined.
There would have been nothing wrong from the


point of view of anyone engaged In unravelling a
mysterious crime for a detective to have said:
“We know this, and that, and the other; see if
you can get from him information on the points
we know nothing about.” And whether that is,
or is not, what they did, the simple fact remains
that if they had done so, they would have told
him the things in which the Harding and
Matthews “confessions” agree, and would have
assigned to him the duty of filling in the gaps
which are filled in by Harding and Matthews in a
manner absolutely at variance the one with the
other. '
AN EXPERT ON HAIR.
Nothing could point more strongly to the guilt
of Ross than satisfactory proof that hairs from
the head of the murdered girl were found on a
blanket in his private room. It becomes neces-
sary, therefore, to examine Mr. Price’s evidence,
to see whether it does establish this important
fact. It will be seen by a reference to that evi-
dence, that Mr. Price uses very guarded language.
He “came to a conclusion” about certain things
and he “formed the conclusion” about others,
but he at no time definitely stated that the hairs
taken from the blankets were from the same head
as the hairs in the envelope. None the less, the
fact cannot be blinked that the tendency of Mr.
Price’s evidence was in that direction, or that
in that direction lay the bent of his mind.
A word of caution as to expert evidence gen-
erally may, therefore, appropriately be given, and
if a quotation from “Taylor on Evidence” is
selected, no one who knows anything of the sub-
ject, will question the weight of the authority.
“Perhaps the testimony which least deserves
credit with a jury,” says the author, “is that of


skilled witnesses. These gentlemen are usually
required to speak, not to facts, but to opinions;
and when this is the case it is often quite sur-
prising to see with what facility, and to what
an extent, their views can be made to correspond
with the wishes or the interests of the parties
who call them. , They do not, indeed, wilfully
misrepresent what they think, but their judg-
ments become so warped by regarding the
subject in one point of view, that even when
conscientiously disposed, they are incapable of
forming an independent opinion. Being zealous
partisans, their Belief becomes synonymous with
Faith as defined by the Apostle, and it too often
is but ‘the substance of things hoped for, the evi-
dence of things not seen.’ To adopt the language
of Lord Campbell, ‘skilled witnesses come with
such a bias on their minds to support the cause
in which they are embarked, that hardly any
weight should be given to their evidence.’ ”
The first criticism of Mr. Price’s evidence is
that he is not an expert on the subject, and indeed
he made no pretence of being one. He knew
nothing about the subject beforehand, and his
experiments and reading were principally done
after the event. For all he knows to the contrary,
the pith of all hairs may be identical. He made
one admission in the course of his cross-examina-
tion which absolutely destroyed the probative
force of his evidence. In his post-factum observa-
tions he had examined hairs from several auburn
heads, and he admitted that he had found some
hair as like Alma Tirtschke’s as the hairs from
the blankets. The “proof,” therefore, resulting
from Mr. Price’s evidence may be reduced to an
elementary syllogism as follows:


This hair is like Alma’s.
All hair like Alma’s is not Alma’s.
Therefore, this hair may (or may not) be Alma’s.
It was said earlier that Mr. Price might, on the
facts he deposed to, have been a powerful witness
for the defence. Let us show how this is so.
Suppose, having deposed to the examination of
the two sets of hairs, exactly as given previously,
he had been examined by Counsel for the Defence,
and had answered in the following way, would
not his answers have been fully justified by what
he had already stated?:—
Defendant’s Counsel—Having examined the
two sets of hair, are you of opinion they did not
come from the same head?—l am.
Can you give reasons for your opinion?—l can,
many.
What are they?—ln the first place, the hair
was not of the same average length, that from
the head of the girl being, on the average, six
inches longer than that from the blanket. In the
next place, the hair from the blanket was of a
light auburn colour, while the hair from the head
was an auburn colour tending to red or a deep
red. What is more important, the hairs from the
two sets were not of the same diameter, and I
cannot imagine why hair from the same head
should differ in diameter. In the next place, in
hair I have examined since, the frontal portion
was quite red, and that from the back of the head
quite dark, suggesting that where the hair is ex-
posed, it lightens in colour, while in this case the
hairs, which must have come from the back of
the head, were actually lighter than those which
came from nearer the front. In the next place,
I found in my investigations hairs which were
quite as like Alma Tirtschke’s as the hairs on the


blanket, and though this does not prove that they
were not Alma’s hairs, it prevents, by an ele-
mentary rule in scientific investigations, any de-
duction that they were. Lastly, it appears incred-
ible to me, that if a girl of 13 were lying on a
blanket for three hours she should lose 27 hairs
—or rather that 27 of her hairs should still be
remaining on the blankets at the expiration of
a fortnight, during which the blankets had been
removed to a distant suburb, and constantly
handled.
A MISSING LINK.
There are other features about this hair ex-
amination which call for comment. When a man
is on trial for his life, he himself, his counsel, and
indeed the public generally, are entitled to
demand that every link in the chain connecting
him with the murder shall be found in its place.
It was objected on the appeal that a link was
missing in the case of the blankets, since it was
not shown where they were during the night pre-
ceding their handing over to the analyst. One of
the learned judges in the High Court asked
whether this “sinister suggestion” had been put
to the detectives. With the greatest respect, it
is not, in the first place, a sinister suggestion, but
an elementary requirement In proof; and In the
second place, it is no part of the duty of a defend-
ing counsel either to fill up gaps in the Crown
evidence, or to give the Crown witnesses a lead
by which they may do it. But a blow would be
struck at the whole administration of justice, If
once the principle were admitted, that evidence-
just because it Is police evidence, Is not to b«J
subjected to the ordinary tests. The principle
admitted, it would soon come to be known and
traded upon, and the result would be the lowering


of the whole morale of the Detective Force. The
logical outcome would be the transfer of the seat
of justice from the Law Courts to the Detective
Office. It is the knowledge that their evidence
will have to run the gauntlet of the fiercest
criticism and examination which the skill of the
bar can bring to bear on it which helps to keep
the members of the Detective Force up to their
present high standard. On such a question as
spiritualistic manifestations, the sceptics require
the exclusion of every opportunity for fraud, even
when the high, priest is a man of the reputation
of Sir Conan Doyle; and a prisoner under the
shadow of the gallows, who speaks through his
counsel, is entitled to demand the exclusion of
every possibility of fraud, even when a man of
the standing of Detective Piggott is in charge.
It is almost impossible to believe, apart
altogether from the question of Ross’s guilt, or
the question of the supposed identity of the hairs,
as deposed to by Mr. Price, that the hairs on the
blankets could have been Alma Tirtschke’s. As
was mentioned during the legal argument, golden
hairs do not shine out conspicuously on a reddish
brown blanket when they are well imbedded in
the fabric. Yet when Detective Piggott picked
up this reddish brown blanket in the darkness of
a vestibule, a fortnight after it had left the wine
saloon, after it had been used for packing pictures
on the day of the removal, after it had been put
out to air on a line, after it had been in use for a
fortnight at Maidstone —all of which was sworn
to—his quick eye immediately detected “the sheen
of golden hairs” on it. They must, therefore, have
been lying loosely on it It would surely have
been fair that he and his men should have im-
mediately started to pick them off—and in the
presence and with the knowledge of Ross. It


was hardly in accordance with the fairness with
which the case was investigated throughout, to
defer the picking off until the blankets had been
placed, on the following day, over the screen in
the Government Analyst’s room. Nothing was
known by Ross of the discovery of the hairs until
the evidence was given, a fortnight later, at the
inquest. It is also remarkable that Piggott, who,
according to his own testimony, had the case
against Ross “well in hand” on December 31,
never even went into the cubicle on that day to
see if it would reveal anything, although he knew
the place was to be vacated and dismantled on
that very evening.
On the trial, evidence for the defence was given
that Mrs. Tom Ross and her sister, Miss Alice
Ballantyne, had gone into the cubicle on the
Wednesday before the murder, and had “done”
their hair in it, each letting her hair down and
combing it. Alice Ballantyne’s hair bore the
strongest resemblance to Alma Tirschke’s, and
leaving out the improbability of the hairs remain-
ing on the blanket for a fortnight, it was far more
likely that 27 hairs would come out under the
operation of combing than that they would come
out from a girl simply lying on the blanket.
Something might have been said on this point by
Ross had he been apprised at the time of “the
sheen of golden hairs.”
It was not mere thoughtlessness that allowed
the examination of the blankets to be delayed for
a fortnight, for, if Ross’s supplementary state-
ment of January 5 is looked at, it will be seen
that he said on that day, in answeuto a question,
“I did have two blankets in. They
were used as a rug or cover to lie down in the
afternoons.” Thus put on his guard, one would


have thought that, if Ross were a guilty man, he
would have seen that the blankets did not rise up
a week later to confront him. And one cer-
tainly would have thought that the detectives, if
they had the case against Ross “well in hand” on
the 31st, would have seen the desirability, at least
on January 5, of sending out, while they had Ross
temporarily in custody, and getting possession of
the blankets.
There was still another fatal weakness in the
“reddish brown blanket” as a link in the chain
connecting Ross with *he murder. When Ivy
Matthews was shown this blanket, she decisively
tossed it aside as not having been in the saloon
in her time. Either it was, or it was not, in the
saloon on December 30. If it was not, the hairs
on it could not have come from Alma Tirtschke’s
head. If it was, then how comes it that not one
spot of blood was found on it, when, according
to the Harding “confession,” the place was like
a shambles, and, according to the medical evi-
dence, there would be much bleeding? It may be
suggested that this blanket was under the girl’s
head, and another blanket was under her body,
and received the blood stains. If so, it would, if
discovered, have been the most damaging piece
of evidence against Ross, and its disposal must
have been a matter of the gravest concern to him.
Yet although he is supposed to have given to
Harding the most minute details of unimportant
matters, together l with a complete account of how
he disposed of the girl’s dress, he never said one
word about this blanket, or its disposition!
THE GIRL’S ATTIRE.
Another of the facts urged as showing that
Ross murdered the girl was the exact description
he gave of her clothing on the morning following


the giii’s disappearance. On being asked by
Piggott how the girl was dressed, he described
her dress and her hat with the college band on fit,
said in answer to a question that she had on a
white Mouse, and, on being asked “what else?”
said: “Well, she had black stockings, and boots
or shoes—l think boots.” (In the signed state-
ment the corresponding passage is “she wore
dark stockings and boots, or she may have had
shoes on.”) Again, on being asked about her
hair, he said it was golden coloured and hung
down her back.
The answer to the suggestion that that was a
minute description for a man to give of a girl’s
dress is that, in the first place, it was given
mainly in answer to questions, and it ought not
to be difficult for a man to visualise the girl’s
dress after a lapse of 18 hours, especially as she
was dressed in conventional school-girl style.
(Her dress was quite as accurately described by
a hotel porter who saw her walking up Little
Collins Street.) Harding’s “confession” credits
Ross with saying that he told the police she wore
boots, and with suggesting that this was an
erroneous description designed to mislead. The
evidence does not bear Harding out, and the idea
that in any case the trifling discrepancy was de-
signed to deceive is ridiculous. And while Harding
suggests that Ross was purposely inaccurate in
order to deceive, the Crown Prosecutor used
Ross’s accurate description to show that he was
accurate not merely because he had seen the girt
in the Arcade, but because he had taken her
clothing off. Since the question of the disposal
of the clothing was supposed to have been raised
by Harding and dealt with by Ross, it is curious,
by the way, that nothing was said to Harding of


the underclothing, or of the distinguishing hat,
or of the parcel of meat, for these, too, had to be
disposed of. But this is only another proof that
Harding put nothing into Ross’s mouth which
was likely to be falsified by independent testi-
mony.
Here, again, this very matter of hesitation
about the boots or shoes tells entirely in Ross’s
favour. Either he gave a description to the best
of his ability, or he gave a description purposely
designed to deceive. The latter alternative may
be dismissed at once, because the description was
so nearly accurate that it is absurd to suppose
it was meant to mislead. There remains, then,
the alternative that he described the dress to the
best of his ability. A man describing the appear-
ance of a conventionally-dressed school-girl has
not room to go far astray. The one thing he
would not be likely to remember, or to carry in
the mind’s eye, was whether she had on boots or
shoes—especially if her stockings were black.
But if Ross had stripped the body, that is the one
thing that he would have been clear about, for
by the hypothesis he took the boots off, and he
could hardly have forgotten the gruesome task
of unlacing them.
THE LIGHT IN THE SALOON.
There is one piece of evidence which causes
some difficulty in that it suggests that someone
was in Ross’s saloon after midnight. It is the
evidence of the two Italians who swore that there
was a light in the saloon at 10 minutes to 1. There
does not appear to be much room for mistake in
this evidence, for the Italians said they talked
with one another about the unwonted circum-
stance of the light. There does not appear to be
any reason to doubt their honesty, even though


they have since shared in the reward. During
argument before the Appeal Courts, it was sug-
gested as a possibility that other persons might
have gained access to the saloon. It was proved
in evidence by Mr. Clarke, the Manager of the
Arcade, that the door of the saloon nearer Bourke
Street could be opened by inserting a knife or
piece of tin between the bolts of the Yale lock
and the part into which it fits, the lock being
loose and the door ill-fitting. Apart from Mr.
Clarke’s unchallenged testimony on this point,
the fact may be accepted as being beyond con-
troversy, for Mr. Clarke, on the eve of the trial,
opened the door in the way mentioned without
the slightest difficulty, in the presence of the
counsel and solicitors for Ross.
This being the fact about the door, it was not
altogether improbable that it would be known to
some patrons of the wine saloon who were
tenants of the Arcade. The suggestion made in
the Appeal Courts was that other persons with a
dead body on their hands, which it was urgent
they should dispose of, might have bethought
themselves of the disused cellars in the wine cafe
as a possible hiding place. This would be the
more probable by reason of the fact that it was
known that the following day would be the last
on which the wine saloon would be open, the
license expiring with the year. It was known in
fact that the police questioned, and detained for
a time, at least one occupier of a room in the
Arcade whose reputation was far from good. In
any event, there is strong evidence that Ross
knew nothing about the light in the saloon if it
was, in fact, there. On the day of his arrest, he
was interrogated for the third time by Piggptt.
Piggott said: “It will be proved that a light was


burning in your wine shop on the early morning
of the 31st.” Ross replied promptly: “That is a
lie—a deliberate lie.” Piggott said; “It will be
proved that a little girl was seen in your wine
shop on the afternoon of the 30th.” Ross said:
“That’s a lie.” “It will be proved that she had a
glass in front of her and was sitting in the room,”
continued Piggott, and again Ross answered:
“That’s a lie.” And being asked if he had any
explanation to give, he added: “You have got
nothing over me.”
If that light had been in the wine saloon at 1
o’clock with Ross’s knowledge, he must have
known, or at least have thought, that the fact
might be proved by a dozen independent and re-
putable witnesses. If it had been a fact he would
have been ready with an explanation, such as
that they were dismantling the premises. But
his emphatic, if not very polite, answer was;
“That’s a lie.” The same remark applies to the
answers in regard to the little girl being seen in
the saloon with the glass in front of her. If she
had been there she would, as has already been
said, have been seen probably by a hundred
people. But Ross’s answer to the suggestion that
she was there was to brand it as a lie. And
Matthews and Maddox were the only persons
called to prove it was not a lie. That, however,
is not the present point. We are dealing with the
light in the saloon.
Since the trial a further fact has been disclosed
in connection with this question which lends a
great deal of support to the theory put forward
by counsel on the appeals. A Sydney paper, still
in its youth and advertising stage, has degraded
journalism in connection with the Ross case in a
way that is happily rare in the annals of the


newspaper world. As Ross lay in the condemned
-cell, it gloated over his impending doom in a
manner that showed that it did not appreciate
the cowardice of kicking a man, even a criminal,
when he is down. But it apparently had plenty
of money to spend for the work of pushing its
circulation among those who like that kind of
literature. Its Melbourne representative did un-
doubtedly get well into the secrets connected with
the working up of the case against Ross. In its
issue of March 25, it had an article dealing with
the preparation of the case which was clearly in-
spired. One paragraph referred to “another
piece of unrecorded history,” as follows:
“There is a card school that assembles fre-
quently at the Arcade, or did prior to the trial. On
the night of December 30, the players dispersed
shortly before midnight. They went out of the
Arcade by way of Little Collins Street. Passing
the wine shop, they noticed that it was lit up. But
this they also noticed —that Room 33 also showed
a light. The tenant was nofrm the room. He had
lent it to a friend who was entertaining there a
young woman, the daughter of a former officer
of police. Ross, too, had seen the light. He must
have noticed it at intervals during the evening,
and watched it with despairing hope that its users
would go away instead of staying on, hour after
hour, spoiling his plans. At last it appeared as
though the room was going to be occupied all
night. Some new way had to be found. It was
then that he thought of Gun Alley. . ”
Ross’s thoughts, it will be seen, are here set
down as though the writer were recording some
plain matter of fact. The suggestion is that Ross
had intended putting the body in this room* but
"was thwarted by the unfortunate circumstance


that someone, not the tenant, had got the use of
it for the night. The allegation about the inten-
tion of Ross to put the body in Room 33 is taken
bodily out of the supposed Matthews confession.
It has no other foundation, in fact. How closely
the correspondent was in touch with Ivy
Matthews is shown by the fact that another
number of the same paper gave the story of her
life. But again we are face to face with the fact
that Harding, to whom Ross is supposed to have
given such minute details of the disposition of
the body, has not a word to say about this unex-
pected obstacle. A murderer and a ravisher who
was confessing his double crime was hardly likely
to have boggled at admitting, if such were the
fact, that he contemplated disposing of the body
by putting it in another man’s room. But at
least, since he gave such details of his plan for
disposing of the body, and his execution of them,
it is curious that he said nothing about the diffi-
culty which the light in Room 33 created.
Again there is the remarkable circumstance
that not one of the card school was produced on
the trial to say that in fact there was a light in
the saloon at midnight. But whatever may be
the facts about a light at 10 minutes to 1, it is
certain that if there was a light in the saloon at
midnight, Ross was not responsible for it. If the
guilt or innocence of Ross depends upon the ques-
tion of whether he was, or was not, in the saloon
at midnight, it may be taken to be established,
as clearly and definitely as human testimony can
establish any fact, that Ross is innocent. Those
who heard the evidence of Patterson, Studd, and
Bradley, (to be mentioned later) as to Ross going
home on the last tram to Maidstone, the suburb
out from Footscray where Ross lived, and had the


advantage of private consultations with these
witnesses, cannot entertain the slightest doubt
that Ross was on the tram. Conceivably, his
brother and mother, as deeply interested wit-
nesses, were lying as to what took place after he
got home, though they never wavered, and were
never shaken in the slightest degree in their tes-
timony, but as to the honesty and accuracy of the
three disinterested witnesses named there can be
no doubt whatever. But, even if the confessions
are relied on, it should be noted that both nega-
tive the suggestion- that Ross was in the saloon
at midnight.
Not a word about the light in room 33 or of the
observations of the card school came out on the
•trial. Of course, there may be no truth in the
story. But, true or not, no questions concerning
cither were put to Ross by the detectives which
would have allowed these matters to get out on
the trial. This is not meant as adverse criticism
of the conduct of the case. It merely illustrates
what has been said earlier how events so shaped
themselves as to cast all the light on Ross, and
leave others, who at one time or another were
suspected, entirely in the shadow.
The detectives explain the light in the one
room by the theory that a stranger to the room
had been given the use of it for the night for an
immoral purpose; they explain the light in Ross’s
room, if the newspaper account is true, by the
theory that he is engaged disposing of a dead
body. But if the jury had known that all night
a light was burning, not only in the saloon, but in
a room opposite to it, they might not have been
so easily satisfied about either theory, as it is sug-
gested the detectives were.


NO insinuation is made against the fairness
with which the detectives presented the case-
against Ross. In particular, Piggott’s account
of the conversations with Ross give, with great
(rankness, Ross’s answers, when it would have
been perfectly easy for the detective, had he
desired to be unfair, to minimise the emphasis
Ross put upon his denials. There are two pass-
ages in Taylor’s great work on “Evidence,” how-
ever, which are peculiarly applicable to this case..
One deals with the caution necessary in con-
sidering all police evidence.
“With respect to policemen, constables, and
others employed in the detection of crime,”
says the learned author, “their testimony
against a prisoner should usually be watched
with care, not because they intentionally per-
vert the truth, but because their professional
zeal, fed as it is by an habitual intercourse with
the vicious, and by the frequent contemplation
of human nature in its most revolting form,
almost necessarily leads them to ascribe
actions to the worst motives, and to give a
colouring of guilt to facts and conversations
which are, perhaps, in themselves, consistent
with perfect rectitude. ‘That all men are
guilty till they are proved to be innocent’ is
naturally the creed of the police, but it is a
creed which finds no sanction in a court of
justice.”
The other passage deals with the dangers
which have necessarily to be guarded against in
any case depending on circumstantial evidence.
Says the learned author: —
“It must be remembered that, in a case of
circumstantial evidence, the facts are collected
by degrees. Something occurs to raise a sus


picion against a particular party. Constables
and police officers are immediately on the alert,
and, with professional zeal, ransack every place
and paper, and examine into every circum-
stance which can tend to establish, not his
innocence, but his guilt. Presuming him
guilty from the first, they are apt to consider
his acquittal as a tacit reflection on their dis-
crimination or skill, and, with something like
the feeling of a keen sportsman, they deter-
mine, if possible, to bag their game. Innocent
actions may thus be misinterpreted, innocent
words misunderstood, and as men readily
believe what they anxiously desire, facts the
most harmless may be construed into strong
confirmation of preconceived opinions. It is
not here asserted that this is frequently the
case, nor is it intended to disparage the police.
The feelings by which they are actuated are
common to all persons who first assume that a
fact or system is true, and then seek for argu-
ments to support and prove its truth.”
Piggott himself admitted that the press were
giving them “a pretty rough time” about their
failure to effect an arrest. How “rough” it was
may be gauged from one editorial in “The
Argus” about three days before Ross's arrest,
which said: “As each day passes the grievous
disappointment of the public at the failure of the
police to track down the murderer of the child,
Alma Tirtschke, grows more profound. . . .
Even among citizens less given to displays of
anger the sense of disgust is acute. The detec-
tives and police force of Melbourne are on their
trial, and no matter how exacting they may find
the ordeal they must realise that the public will
not tolerate failure on their part." Being thud


on their trial, with their reputation at stake, they
had a tremendous incentive to try and sheet the
crime home.
POINTS THE JURY MISSED.
But even with what they had before them, the
mystery still remains how any jury of reasonable
men, appreciating the evidence properly, could
say that there was no doubt as to Ross’s guilt.
Reviewing it as dispassionately as one may, and
without comparing it with the evidence for the
defence, to be adverted to in a moment, the
balance of probability, to say the very least,
dips on the side of his innocence. The inherent
weakness of the Crown case would remam
though not one witness were called for the de-
fence. The unfortunate thing for Ross was that
the jury never was told that there was any weak-
ness or inconsistency in the Crown evidence. On
the contrary, the evidence was left to them, and,
indeed, put to them, as though there was a cumu-
lative force about it. At one stage they were
told by the learned Judge that “the accused m his
evidence denies what is attributed to him by
Brophy, denies the statements of Ivy Matthews
incriminating him, denies the statements of Olive
Maddox incriminating him, denies Harding’s and
Dunstan’s evidence, and denies also the evidence
of Upton.” The inherent improbability of the
supposed admission to Brophy, or the inherent
probability of Ross’s account of it, whs never sug-
gested; the conflict between the Matthews
and the Harding confessions was never hinted at;
the fact that Dunstan had read Harding’s evi-
dence, as given at the Morgue, and had not re-
ported Vhat he is supposed to have heard until
after he had read it, was never adverted to; and
the fact that Olive Maddox’s evidence could not


be true that the girl was awake in the beaded
room at 5 o’clock if Harding’s “confession” was
true that she was asleep in the cubicle at that
time was never referred to. •
It was never pointed out to the jury that Hard-
ing and Matthews were deposing only to confes-
sions, and that, while it is possible for a man to
say things that are verbally inconsistent, it is not
possible for him to do things that are actually
inconsistent, and that what the jury had to deter-
mine was not what Ross said, but what he did.
They were never asked to consider why he
should have made two different confessions to
two different people, or why he should have made
a confession at all. They were never told that,
in dealing with an alleged confession, they must
approach the consideration of It in a manner
entirely different from that in which they would
approach evidence purporting to deal with sub-
stantive facts. Indeed, in the passage above
quoted, Upton’s evidence of supposed facts is put
in exactly the same categpry as Matthews’s and
Harding’s evidence of supposed confessions. The
learned lawyer, Sir Michael Foster, author of an
historic legal work, may have realised that
confessional evidence “is not, in the ordinary
course of things, to be disproved by the sort of
negative evidence by which the proof of plain
facts may be, and often is., confronted,” but a
Melbourne common jury was hardly likely to
realise that truth by the light of nature. Mr.
Justive Cave, in delivering the judgment of a very
full Bench in a trumpery case of embezzlement
not so very long ago, said; “I would add that, for
my part, I always suspect these ccyifessions
which are supposed to be the offspring of peni-
tence and remorse, and which, nevertheless, are
repudiated by the prisoner at the trial. It is re


markable that it is of very rare occurrence for
evidence of a confession to be given when the
proof of the prisoner’s guilt is otherwise clear and
satisfactory, but, when it is not, the prisoner is
not infrequently alleged to have been seized with
the desire, born of penitence and remorse, to sup-
plement it with a confession—a desire which
vanishes as soon as he appears in a court of jus-
tice,” How aptly those words applied to this
case!”
They were never warned that they could take
the confessions, if they were satisfied that they
were made, and accept as much of them, or
either of them, as they chose, but that, if they
rejected any portion of them, they could not fill
in the gap by conjecture if there was no other
evidence on the point.
They were never reminded of the difficulties
of cross-examining two persons who purport to
depose to a confession, for, whatever incon-
sistency with the facts is pointed out, the wit-
ness merely replies, “That may be so; I know
nothing but what he told me.”
They were told that Ellis’s evidence was impor-
tant “because it was so contradictory of the evi-
dence of some of the witnesses for the defence,”
but they were never reminded that, if Ellis’s evi-
dence was true, they would have to reject a great
portion of the supposed confessions to Matthews
and Harding.
It is extremely likely that, in dealing with
Matthews’s and Harding’s evidence, they would
reason that “Harding says this” and “Matthews
says this,” and then draw inferences unfavour-
able to Ross from the supposed cumulative
effects of the two sets of evidence; and extremely
unlikely that they would reason that “Harding
says that Ross said this,” and “Matthews says


that Ross said that,” and then go on to draw
inferences favourable to Ross from the fact that
they make him say totally inconsistent things.
Yet this is what they should have done. They
probably have not yet realised that they were
dealing with a case absolutely without parallel in
the annals of British criminal jurisprudence, in
which they were invited to hang a man on contra-
dictory confessions, which he is alleged, by
thoroughly disreputable witnesses, to have made,
which on his oath he denied having made, for the
making of which no reason could be assigned,
and which were so seriously in conflict as to sug-
gest that they were never made.
In the nature of things they were likely to put
Harding, Matthews, Maddox, Dunstan, Ellis, and
the Italians on one side, and Ross and his wit-
nesses on the other, and were not likely to recall
that the one set was a contradictory jumble, and
the other set a solid mass of unshaken testimony,
much of it disinterested, directed to establishing
certain definite things.
To the writer, these all seem matters that it
was of the first importance the jury should have
had in mind. True it is, that many of them were
touched upon in Mr. Maxwell’s eloquent address
for the defence; but the last words, and the
weightiest wonds, must always come from, the
presiding judge. It is also true that before two
appeal courts it was urged that these omissions
constituted a ground for saying that the sum-
ming-up fell short of what was required, and that
both courts rejected the contention. But that
does not preclude the respectful comment that
the jury, overlooking them, may have approached
the evidence from the wrong standpoint. That
they did, for some reason, approach it from the
wrong standpoint seems established by their ver-
dict.


PART IV.
FRESH FACTS.
There is, perhaps, more truth than poetry in
the lines that, “of all the sad words of tongue or
pen, the saddest are those, ‘it might have been.’ ”
If everything which is known now had been
known on the trial the result might have been
different. And, as we can all be wiser after the
event, it may even be conceded that, if different
use had been made of things that were known, or
were at least within the grasp of knowledge,
another conclusion might have been arrived at by
the jury. Facts not brought out on the trial
were placed before the Court of Criminal Appeal,
and when all legal remedies had been exhausted
were put before the Cabinet. The one tribunal
declined, on legal principles (which are not here
criticised), to act upon them; the other, in the
exercise of its discretion, declined to give weight
to them. None the less, they may be of interest
to the public, and they may be appropriately
recalled to the public mind with some observa-
tions which were not before either court or
Cabinet.
HALLIWELL’S STRANGE STORY.
Reference has been made more than once to
an extraordinary story told by a young man
named Percy Halliwell, and as it has gone
unchallenged, in circumstances which seemed to
call for challenge if it were untrue, it may be
given first place in the recital of the fresh facts.
Detective Piggott was strong throughout the case


in his assertion that Ivy Matthews had never
made any statement to the police as to what she
could or would say. Literally that was, no doubt,
true, but it remains to be seen whether, in view
of what follows, it was not an assertion which,
while literally true, was well calculated to create
a totally false impression. When representa-
tions were being made to the Government with a
view of securing a reprieve of Ross, pending an
appeal to the Privy Council, a statutory declara-
tion by Halliwell was (inter alia) laid before the
Attorney-General. This declaration, in addition
to being laid before the Government, has been
published in the press, and it has never been con-
tradicted. In it Halliwell said that he was in the
saloon during the Friday afternoon; that at 6
o’clock he was in the cubicle with the two Rosses
and another man named Evans (who, in the
meantime, had left the country), and that they
drank a bottle of beer in it; that they all left
together, and that it would have been impossible
for the little girl to have been in the saloon with-
out him seeing her. His evidence about the bottle
of beer is all the more valuable because neithek
Stanley nor Colin Ross were asked anything
about it on the trial, and, consequently, said
nothing of it.
Halliwell’s declaration then goes on to say that
on Monday, January 9, Ivy Matthews called at
his house in Gore Street, Fitzroy, and told him
that she had told the detectives that he had made
a key for Ross. Halliwell said: “That is untrue."
It is important to remember that, at this time, the
problem of how Ross, if he were the murderer,
got back to the Arcade, was troubling the detec-
tives, and Matthews appears to have come for-
ward with a suggestion, for she knew that Halli


weii was a locksmith. Matthews then said: “I
want you to tell the detectives you made a key,”
and she said that she also wanted him to tell the
detectives that he was in the saloon on the Satur-
day, and asked Ross if he knew anything of the
murder, and that Ross replied: “I have never been
a ‘shelf ” —a “shelf” being, in criminal language,
an informer. Matthews then said to him: “Tve
got a friend down at the comer in a motor, who
is very much interested in this case, and I want
you to tell him what I have said to you.” He
accompanied her to the comer of Westgarth
Street, where he found Detective Piggott in a car.
Piggott directed him to sit in the front seat with
the driver, and Matthews got up beside Piggott
on the back seat. Piggott after a time said to
him: “What about those keys?” and he replied
that he knew nothing about them. Piggott said:
“I want you to come to the Detective Office with
me,” but Matthews said: “I want to see him this
afternoon.” Piggott and Matthews had a con-
versation, and then Matthews said to Halliwell: “I
want you to meet me at the comer of the Queen’s
Mansions at 8 o’clock this afternoon,” and when
Halliwell said he did not know where they were,
she explained that they were at the comer of
Rathdown and Victoria streets. He then got out
of the car, and later he met Matthews at the time
and place appointed. She took him to her house,
-supplied him with some drink, and then said; “I
don’t want you to slip in anything I told you this
morning; why did you tell Piggott you never
made the keys?” Halliwell said: “I was only
telling the truth when I said it.” She then sent
him to the Detective Office, where he was ques-
tioned by Piggott and Brophy. When he said he
was at the saloon on the Friday Piggott said:


‘‘No, it was on the Thursday,” and told him he
was also there on the Saturday, and that the con-
versation, as indicated above, took place between
him and Ross. Halliwell signed a statement and
left. There is little doubt that statement con-
tains the assertion that Halliwell was at the
saloon on the Thursday.
The simple fact that Halliwell was in the
saloon on the Friday, and could not have failed
to see the murdered girl had she been there, was
put before the Court of Criminal Appeal on affi-
davit. In reply, Detective Brophy filed an affi-
davit that Halliwell, before the trial, called at the
Detective Office and informed Detective Piggott
and himself that Stanley and Ronaldi Ross wanted
him to swear that he was in the saloon with Colin
Ross when they closed the place on the night of
Friday, December 30. Brophy said to him:
“Were you there?” and Halliwell replied: “No,
but they wanted me to say so, and l am not going
to commit perjury.” Nothing was said in the
affidavit as to whether or not he gave a signed
statement to the police, but if he did it is not
clear why he should have been gpt to sign a
statement that he was in the saloon on the
Thursday (which could have been of no affirma-
tive use to the police), unless he had said some-
thing about being there on the Friday. The fact
remains that he was never called as a witness by
the Crown, which proves that he was not pre-
pared to assist the Crown case. He was not
called for the defence for two reasons—firstly,
because the statement he had signed effectually
prevented him being called; and, secondly,
because, when seen at the court, he told Ross’s
solicitor that “what he had to say he would say
in the box.” When it was too late, Halliwell


was willing to make amends, and was firm in his
assertion that he was in the saloon on the Friday
afternoon, as stated above.
The important part of Halliwell’s declaration,
however, is not his backing and filling as to
whether or not he was in the saloon on the
Friday, but whether, on January 9, Ivy Matthews
was taking an active part, in co-operation with
the detectives, in getting evidence against Ross.
This was not mentioned in Halliwell’s declara-
tion as laid before the court, but was in the
declaration put before the Cabinet. If she was
not, then Halliwell should have been prosecuted
for perjury; if she was, then Piggott’s evidence
may remain literally true, that Matthews never
gave a statement to the police; but its effect was
to convey a wrong impression as to the part
which Matthews took in making ,a case against
Ross. It will be noted that there is a curious
resemblance between the account which Maddox
gives of the conversation she had with Ross on
Thursday, Jan. 5, and the conversation which
Halliwell swears he was asked to say took place
on Saturday, December 31, between him and Ross.
In neither case was there a direct admission, but
in each there was the suggestion that Ross knew
all about the tragedy if he would only speak.
There is another fact which shows that Ivy
Matthews gave more information to the detec-
tives than the evidence given in court would sug-
gest. In her evidence at the inquest Matthews
said that, when she was conversing with Stanley,
she said: “Where is Colin?”—an unlikely thing,
since she was not on speaking terms with Colin.
Stanley said (according to her): “He is not well;
he hais gone home.” Immediately after, she
said, she heard Colin laugh, and she said to


Stanley: “I thought Colin was not in?” Stanley
said (according to her): “He must have come in
by the other door.” In his supplementary state-
ment, made on January 5, which was taken down
in answer to questions, Colin Ross said: “I was
home all day Thursday—l was not well. I did
not leave the shop on Friday and say that I was
111. I was not away from the saloon on the
afternoon of Friday. I can give no reason why
my brother should say I was ill.” From this it
is clear that on or prior to January 5 Ivy
Matthews had told the detectives, whatever else
she told them, that Stanley had said that Colin
was away ill on the Friday.
MADDOX IN THE SALOON.
Another very important thing is now known
which was not known on the trial. It concerns
Olive Maddox’s visit to the saloon on the after-
noon of Friday, December 30, when she is supposed
to have seen Alma Tirtschke in the beaded room
with a glass before her. (At this time, accord-
ing to the Harding confession, the little girl was
asleep in the cubicle.) Maddox, it will be remem-
bered, said that, when she went into the saloon
on that afternoon, at five minutes past 5, there
were two girls whom she knew in the parlour,
and one whom she did not know. She left, she
said, at a quarter past 5, and returned to the
saloon at five minutes to 6, but did not see either
Colin or the little girl on that visit. The girl
whom Maddox did not know came forward volun-
tarily after Ross had been condemned. She went
out on the Saturday night of his conviction to
Ross’s house at Maidstone and told what she
knew. She was brought to Ross’s solicitor on
the Monday, and made a statement as to what
took place in the saloon on the fatal Friday after


noon. Her name need not now be mentioned.
Suffice it to say she is a respectable girl, a
tailoress by occupation, who has never been out
of employment a day during the three years she
has been in Melbourne. She has no relatives in
Melbourne, and she used occasionally to go to
the wine shop because it was in a quiet spot, and
as she was on holidays at the time she remained
on this occasion for over an hour, arriving before
5 and stopping until after 6. She was there when
Maddox came m at about 5 o’clock, and she is
positive that Alma Tirtschke was not in the
saloon at the time. Maddox was under the in-
fluence of drink, and was talking excitedly to her
two friends. The tailoress sat listening to her,
but taking no part in the conversation, and,
indeed, refusing to be drawn into it.
Maddox’s story that she left soon after coming
in, and returned shortly before 6, is not
true, the tailoress says—her stay was unbroken.
This girl was cross-examined by Ross’s advisers
before she made her declaration, and she re-
mained unshaken in her story. If Maddox’s
evidence is fabricated, her reason for saying that
she left the place for three-quarters of an hour is
obvious. It saves her having to explain how the
murdered girl got out of the room and where she
went to. This evidence of the tailoress was
rejected by the Full Court on the ground that it
was not shown that it could not have been pro-
cured on the trial. It was dismissed by the
Attorney-General as evidence that “would not,
and ought not,” to have affected the jury. It
is hard to follow this observation, since if the
declaration were true it proved that the main part
of the case against Ross was false.


OTHER NEW WITNESSES.
There were other persons about the saloon on
the Friday afternoon who are equally confident
that the little girl was not there. When interro-
gated by the detectives on the sth, Ross was
asked who was in his wine bar when he came
there on December 80, and he mentioned the name
of a man named Allen, and a woman wljom he
did not know, but who, he said, was ordered out
of the saloon by Detective Lee. Allen was one
of those whom the defence was anxious to call
as a new witness. Every effort to locate him
before the trial failed. After the trial he was
found. He says that he went into the saloon
fire t about a quarter to 2, and saw there a man
named Edwards and two other men. He re-
mained for some time, then left, and returned
again about 5 o’clock, remaining until 6. He
-spoke frequently to Colin Ross, heard him talk-
ing to Gladys Wain in the cubicle, but saw noth-
Jag of any girl answering the description of Alma
Tirtschke. As many as fifteen and twenty
people, he says, were in the bar at the one time
T?.Z g n i t °? G ° f the men he was
Thomas William Jordon. Jordon says that he
«ame m, about a quarter past 3, and remained
untfi 4 o clock. He, too, saw Victor McLough-
hn, Allen, and Edwards. He talked with Ross
frequently saw him talking to others, and is
confident that there was no little girl in the
saloon during the time he was there. On
tah r7 f s+i,tlier^ay 5 +i, tlie r^ ay after Ross was first interro-
gated at the Detective Office, he went to the
Detective Office and told Piggott and Brophy
what he knew. This was not denied in Detec-
tive Brophy’s affidavit. When Piggott was in
the witness box he was asked as to this inters


view, but the question was disallowed, and Jor-
don was not called as a witness for the defence.
Herbert Victor Edwards and Victor McLoughlin
were both prepared to bear out this evidence.
These four young men, though acquainted, were
not of the one party. They came at different
times. Some were there for an unbroken
period, and some left and returned, but between
them they covered the whole afternoon. They
all knew Ivy Matthews, and none of them saw
her, or saw Ross leave the saloon, as Matthews
said he did. Two of them sat on the form, with
their backs to the flimsy cubicle for some time,
and they are confident that, even if the little
girl had been asleep in that room, they would
have heard her breathing or moving.
The line of the Crown case indicated that the
detectives’ view was that those witnesses were
talking of the Thureday, and not the Friday.
Detectives Piggott, in perfect honesty, no doubt,
tried to establish that fact early in the investiga-
tions. On the day that Ross was arrested ho
said to him (inter alia), according to his evi-
dence: “You told me (on January 5) that Detec-
tives Saker and Lee had put a woman out of your
bar on the Friday.” Ross replied: “So they did."
Brophy, Lee, and Saker were present, and Pig-
gott said to Lee: “Did you put a woman out of
the bar on Friday?” Lee said; “No,” and Pig-
gott said: “How do you know?” Lee replied;
“Because Saker was with me, and Saker was on
leave on the Friday.” Piggott then said to
Ross: “Do you recognise those as the two men
who put the woman out?” and he said: "Yes.”
Piggott said: “But Lee says that Saker was on
leave on the Friday,” and Ross replied: “Well, I


must have been making a mistake; it must have
been the Thursday.”
Now, it must be borne in mind that this was a
conversation recalling the incidents of a fort-
night previously. Piggott was not necessarily
verbally accurate, and Ross, being under arrest,
may have allowed himself to be “led” into his
answers. The first thing to notice is that Pig-
gott was wrong when he said: “You told me that
Detectives Saker and Lee had put a woman out.”
What Ross said, according to Piggott’s own
account of what took place on the sth, was that
“Detective Lee” ordered her out. Saker’s name
was not mentioned. But if Ross had been a
guilty man, his answers would have been all
ready prepared, and his candid admission, “I
must have been making a mistake; it must have
been the Thursday,” points to his candour rather
than to his cunning.
There was no opportunity of cross-examining
either Lee or Saker as to the date on which they
were there, for neither was called as a witness,
but there is every reason to believe that the mis-
take was made by them, and not by Ross. One
of the four men mentioned above, who saw the
Incident, was questioned later on as to the possi-
bility of a mistake. He had come from the
wharf, where he had been on board a ship sailing
that day, and had come thence to the saloon, and
he maintains (and he maintains it in circum-
stances which can leave no room to impugn his
honesty) that there is not the slightest doubt as
to the day that he was at the saloon. One of the
ethers had come from his factory at, Fitzroy, after
it had closed for the week, and though he did not
see the incident, he saw the other men, and he is


equally confident that it was the Friday, and not
the Thursday.
THE CROWN’S NEW EVIDENCE.
When the agitation was on foot for Ross’s re-
prieve the Attorney-General was reported to have
said that he was in possession of evidence which
would convict Ross in five minutes. That state-
ment was officially denied, but it was always
maintained that the Crown were, after the trial,
put in possession of facts which were most dam-
aging against Ross. All that the present writer
can say as t© that is this, that he was made
acquainted with the facts in the possession of the
Government, and that those facts were not such
as would have the slightest weight With him in
confirming the guilt of Ross.
It has further been publicly said that Ross
wrote to Ivy Matthews a letter which incrim-
inated him, and that Mrs. Ross called on her and
begged her not to use the letter. Matthews is
said to have given the promise not to use it, and
in consequence of the visit to have tom it up.
This has appeared in print, but whether Matthews
herself ever said it the present writer does not
profess to know. Matthews’s character was bit-
terly assailed, both at the inquest and on the
trial, and she never even hinted at such a letter.
That she should have destroyed it, if she received
it, is incredible, and Mrs. Ross’s answer to the
allegation that she ever waited on Matthews has
already been given in her own words.
Harding, too, is said to have received from
Ross, while Ross was awaiting execution, a letter
which impliedly admitted his guilt, and he, too, is
supposed to have tom it up. In the witness box
Harding was attacked for what he is—the most


oily and odious scoundrel that ever polluted a
court of justice. If he had, or had ever re-
ceived, a letter from Ross which would have done
anything to rehabilitate his tattered reputation,
he would have used it. But, in fact, there is in
Melbourne one man at least whose lightest word
would carry more weight than Harding’s most
solemn oath, who knows that Ross did write a
letter to Harding, knows its contents, and knows
that, s® far from it containing an implied ad-
mission of guilt, it contained exactly the opposite.


PART V.
THE DEFENCE.
As has already been said, the purpose of this
review is not to set out the evidence on either
side and ask the public to weigh it. That was the
function of the jury, and if they did their work
unskilfully there is no redress in this world. The
main purpose has been to set out the Crown case,
and to show, by an analysis of it, that Ross’s guilt
could not, as a matter of logic, be deduced from it
with the certainty which the law requires in
criminal cases. How far that has been done the
reader must judge.
None the less it is right to show that Ross,
from first to last, did what was humanly possible
to establish his innocence.
As far as his evidence is concerned, it simply
followed the lines of his written statement made
on January 5, and his answers to questions given
on that and other dates. His cross-examination
left him absolutely unshaken as to his story,
though it has to be admitted that his demeanour
in the box, his unveiled hostility to the police, his
direct allegations against them, his blunt affirma-
tion that what Harding knew he had been told by
“the coppers,” and his assertion that the hairs on
the blanket had been put there by the detectives,
were not calculated to make a favourable im-
pression on the jury. He admitted that he had
spoken to Harding about the case, had told
Harding that he was in prison to keep the public’s
mouth closed, and had mentioned to him that he


was with “his girl” that afternoon and evening,
but he denied strongly that he had ever confessed
to Harding. He said, also, that he knew Harding’s
reputation as a “shelf,” and defined a “shelf” as a
man who not merely tells tales on prisoners, but
makes them up as well—a man “who hears on©
thing and builds on it.” It is well, however, that
Ross’s outline of his movements, both on the fatal
day and on January 5, when he is supposed to
have made damaging admissions to Olive Maddox
during a chance meeting at Jolimont, should be
recapitulated in order to see how it was borne out
by "the long string of witnesses who were called
to support him.
ROSS IN THE BOX.
Ross said that when he got into the saloon at
about 2 o’clock on the Friday, he saw there,
besides his brother Stanley and others, two men
named Albert Allen and Lewis. He did not see
Ivy Matthews that afternoon, and had not seen
her since a couple of days before his trial for
robbery under arms in the November previous.
He did see a little girl “answering the descrip-
tion” of Alma Tirtschke. It should be' borne in
mind, in view of Ross’s .dying speech, that that
was the furthest he ever went, viz., that he saw a
girl, between 14 and 15 years of age, whose dress
answered the description of Alma, but he never
spoke to her, and she had never been in his
saloon. She was, when he saw her first, walking
towards Bourke Street, and at his next glance
was looking in the window of a fancy goods shop
next to Madame Ghurka’s. He remained about
the saloon all the afternoon, talked to Gladys
Wain for a long time, made an appointment with
her to meet him again at 9 o’clock, and left the


saloon about ten minutes past 6. He then went
home. When he got home about 7 he met his
eldest brother, Ronald, coming out of the gate.
At home he met his mother and his brother Tom,
with whom he had tea. He cleaned himself up,
and left home again with his brother Tom about
8. They went by the tram to Footscray, and saw
and spoke to Mrs. Kee and George Dawsey on
the tram. The brothers took the train to-
gether at Footscray, and Tom left him at
North Melbourne, to go to his (Tom’s)
wife’s people, the Ballantynes, at West Mel-
bourne. He got to the Eastern Arcade about
a quarter to 9, and waited about the Little
Collins Street entrance until a little after 9, when
he was joined by Gladys Wain. They went into
the saloon, and remained there until half-past
10 or a quarter to 11. They came out into Little
Collins Street, went along Russell Street to
Lonsdale Street, along Lonsdale Street to King
Street, where they remained talking for about
ten minutes, close to the girl’s home. He left
her at about ten minutes past 11, and went to
Spencer Street, where he took train to Footscray.
He got to Footscray about fourteen minutes to
12. He there took the tram, and on the tram he
met a friend named Herbert Studd, who intro-
duced him to a man named James Patterson. He
got off the tram at the terminus, and walked
from the terminus to his home with a young fel-
low named Frederick George Bradley, who was a
very casual acquaintance living further along in
Ross’s street. He reached home about 12, his
mother being still up. He went almost straight
into the room, where his brother Ronald was in
bed, but awake, and went to bed. He never left
his room that night. His brother, Tom, who was


working in the neighbourhood, and had come
back for breakfast, came into the room about
twenty minutes to 7 next morning. He him-
self had breakfast later on with his mother and
Ronald. He then went in to the Arcade, where
he was told by Stanley of the murder, and was
later on interviewed by the detectives. To them
he gave offhand this account of his movements,
not with all these details as to meetings with per-
sons, but exactly the same account of his main
doings on the previous day and night. Stanley,
in the meantime, had given to the detectives his
own account of his own and Colin’s movements,
and it exactly corresponded with Colin’s account,
so far as the movements of the two Impinged on
one another. In addition to that, the detectives
later saw Gladys Wain and got her independent
account, and it, too, exactly coincided with Ross's
account.
Turning to his movements on January 5, Ross
said that he was seen by the detectives at 11
a.m., and detained until 7 p.m. About that there
is no doubt. From the Detective Office he went
to Mrs. Linderman’s (Gladys Wain’s mother), in
King Street, saw there the Linderman family,
Mrs. Kennedy, his own mother, and Mrs. Tom Ross,
his sister-in-law, Mrs. Kennedy and his mother
arriving soon after him. His mother and Mrs.
Kennedy left before him to go down to the “Age”
Office. Mrs. Tom Ross also left to go to the
house of her mother (Mrs. Ballantyne), some
twenty minutes’ walk away, and about 9 he left
and went to Ballantyne’s, where he remained,
with several others, until about half-past 19,
when he left, with his brother Stanley and
others, to catch the train at North Melbourne.


STRONG CORROBORATION.
Stanley Gordon Ross said that Colin arrived at
the saloon about 2 o’clock on Friday, December
30. He remembered Allen being there at the
time, sitting In the comer, and Lewis coming in a
little after. Ivy Matthews he had not seen that
afternoon, and had not spoken to since about
eight or ten days before Christmas. No girl
answering to the description of Alma Tirtschke
was in the saloon that afternoon, or could pos-
sibly have been there without him seeing her. His
brother was talking at the door for a good while
that afternoon, the first person he noticed him
talking to being a lady in an Assam coat, whose
name he gave. Shortly after 4 o’clock he noticed
Colin talking to Gladys Wain, and about 5 Gladys
came into the “cubicle” (though he had never
heard it called by that name before), and re-
mained for about ten minutes or a quarter of an
hour. He remained in the bar until about 6
o’clock, or a little after, and Colin left before
him. Stanley then locked up, went and had tea
at the Commercial Cafe, in Elizabeth Street, had
a shave, and came back into the Arcade at about
half-past 7, and got the lavatory key. He
went to the lavatory and returned the key
soon after. There was no person in the
saloon at this time. He returned to the
saloon on the following morning, and opened
it up according to custom, swept and scrubbed
it out, and saw no signs of it having been
scrubbed on the previous night. Early in the
forenoon he was seen by Piggott and Brophy,
who gave him, so he says (though this is denied
by Piggott) a description of the dress worn by
the murdered girl, a description which he, in turn,
gave to Colin when Colin arrived soon after.


Stanley and Colin were not, at the time, living
in the same house, and between 6 o’clock on the
Friday night and Colin’s arrival at the saloon on
the Saturday morning they had not seen one
another.
It is noteworthy that Stanley gave a full
account of his movements to the detectives
before they had seen Colin. The evidence he
gave exactly agreed with the statement, except
that he told the detectives that he got back to the
saloon on the Friday evening at about 7, whereas
in his evidence he said it was about half-past 7.
He explained this very slight discrepancy by say-
ing that he spoke offhand to the police, but that,
on reckoning up afterwards the time he had spent
having tea and the time he was in the barber’s
saloon, he thought it would be about half-past 7
when he returned to the saloon. The cross-
examination of Stanley on this point was directed
to show that he had made the time half-past 7
because he had heard in the meantime that the
witness Alberts had sworn that he saw Colin Ross
in the Arcade at half-past 7. This was another
of the incidents that pointed to the honesty of the
evidence for Ross. Counsel for the defence
were under the impression, owing to some-misap-
prehension, that the answer to Alberts’s evidence
was that he had spoken to Stanley, and had mis-
taken him for Colin, the two brothers being very
much alike. Alberts, therefore, was not very
strongly cross-examined on the point. He was
given permission, after his evidence had been
taken, to leave the court, as he had to go to New
South Wales. In his evidence-in-chief Stanley
was asked: “Did you talk to any person in the
Arcade?” (when he returned at half-past 7).
The unexpected answer was “No.” Alberts could


not then be got for further cross-examination.
But if the Rosses had desired to make a case on
this point, they could havaeasily done so by get-
ting Stanley to say that it Was he who had asked
Alberts for the lead pencil
Turning to the events of January 5, Stanley
said that, pursuant to a message left for him
where he was boarding, he went to the Detective
Office about a quarter to 7, and found that Colin
was still there. He went by train to Pootscray,
and he came back to BaUantyne’s, in West Mel-
bourne (the family of Mrs. Tom Ross), at about
half-past 9. There he met Colin and several
other persons, and about half-past 10 he and
Colin and two others left the house for Pootscray.
Mrs. Elizabeth Campbell Ross, the mother, said
she remembered her son leaving home on Friday,
December 30, after lunch. At about 7 that night
he came home for tea. Her eldest son, Ronald,
her married son, Tom, and herself had had tea
when he arrived. She got him his tea, and he
left the house afterwards with Tom. She her-
self left homeland went down to Pootscray to do
some shopping, it being the late shopping night.
She returned at about 10,- Ronald arrived soon
after, and Colin came in at midnight and went to
bed. She locked up the house and went to bed,
Colin then being In his own and his brother’s
room. She got up at 6, to get Tom’s breakfast
at 7, and she closed the door of her son’s room,
as Ronald was a sufferer from malaria, and a
light sleeper. Colin and Ronald were then both
In bed. She got them their breakfast later on,
and Colin left to go to the cafe.
On Thursday, January 5, the detectives called
and took Colin away at about 11 ama. At about


7 o’clock, Mrs. Ross said, accompanied by her
son Tom, she went to the Detective Office, calling
at Mrs. Linderman’s on the way. At the Detec-
tive Office they were told that Colin had just been
released. They returned to Mrs. Linderman’s,
and saw there the people mentioned in Colin’s
evidence. She and Mrs. Kennedy, in about an
hour’s time, went to the “Age” Office, and from
there she went home.
AN UNBROKEN PHALANX.
It is needless to set out in detail the evidence
called to support the story told by the three fore-
going witnesses. Suffice it to say that Tom
Ross, Ronald Ross, Gladys Wain, Mrs. Kennedy,
Mrs. Kee, Oscar Dawsey, Herbert Studd, James
Patterson, F. G. Bradley, Mrs. Tom Ross, Mrs.
Linderman, and Miss Alice Ballantyne were all
called, and each testified to his or her own portion
of the story. There were some persons at Ballan-
tyne’s house on Thursday, January 5, who were
not called, for the reason that the evidence
seemed overwhelming that Colin Ross was at
Ballantyne’s soon after 9on that date. They
would have been called had it been known that
Olive Maddox was going to say that it was about
half-past 9 that she saw Colin at Jolimont. But
that was not said until after the case for the
defence was closed. The Crown Prosecutor
then asked leave to- recall Olive Maddox to get
from her the time that she said she met Ross at
Jolimont. She had been in court while the evi-
dence for the defence was being given, and knew
its effect. Being recalled, she was questioned
as follows:
Mr. Macindoe: Do you remember the sth
January last—you told us you saw the accused
that night?—Yes.


What time was it?—lt may have been—it was
—any time after 10 to half-past 10, when I first
seen him.
Prom 10 to half-past 10!—From 9 to half-past
9—any time until then.
Assuming, however, that Maddox got into the
box intending to say that the time was from 9 to
half-past 9, and merely made a slip, it will be
noticed that the time she fixes is significant. It
only conflicts with the witnesses who deposed to
seeing Ross at Ballantyne's, and is consistent
with the testimony of those who swore to seeing
him at Linderman’s, for it was possible, apart
from the evidence, that Ross, after leaving Lin-
derman’s, went to Jolimont. The inherent impro-
bability that, after having been detained for eight
hours by the police, and questioned about the
tragedy, he should have gone to Jolimont, and
should have happened, when there, to meet quite
accidentally, one of the only two people in the
world who say they saw the child in the saloon,
would still stand out, even if the poor street-
stroller’s testimony were not confuted by a host
of unbroken and unshaken witnesses.
It is not going too far to describe the whole of
the evidence for the defence as unbroken and
unshaken. The test to which it was subjected
was remarkable. The other witnesses were all
out of court while a particular witness was being
examined. Some deposed to all the time covered
by Ross, some to part only. Their evidence
locked and interlocked in a remarkable way. All
were ably and severely cross-examined, but with
the exception of one slight disagreement as to
which two of three blankets were in the saloon—
a natural mistake, seeing that all the blankets
were of the same type, though differing slightly in


colour—not the smallest flaw was revealed in the
story told by any of them. It is true that Ross
swore that, when he and Gladys Wain were in the
saloon on the Friday night, the lights were out
some of the time, whereas Gladys Wain swore
they were alight “every minute of the time,” but
Gladys Wain knew what Ross had sworn on the
point, and she went into the box insisting on
her right to put her own account of the mat-
ter. It was not a case of revealing a conflict by
cross-examination.
The different pieces of evidence were like a
mosaic which, when put together, form a com-
plete and harmonious pattern. From its nature
it was full of pitfalls if concocted. The Crown
Prosecutor skilfully searched the witnesses to
find some break in the completed pattern, but
failed signally to do so, and the whole story stood,
as every one of the witnesses stood, absolutely
unimpeached before the jury. But the weak-
ness seems to have been in the jury rather than
in the story.
The criticism usually levelled against an alibi
is that the witnesses are either honestly mistaken
about the day or have deliberately taken the
movements of another day and applied them to
the vital day. The alibi, if it can be properly
called an alibi, in this case was not open to either
criticism. The Friday was the late shopping
night, just before the New Year. It was a day
that could be easily recalled after the lapse of a
week or two. The Thursday following was the
day that Ross had been detained by the detec-
tives for eight hours, and was not likely to be
soon forgotten by the members or friends of the
Ross family. Mrs. Ross could be making no
mistake about the day, because it was in regard


to her son’s detention that she went to the “Age”
Office. The theory that the wrong day was
deliberately chosen by the witnesses involves the
inference that independent witnesses, like Mrs.
Kee, Mr. Dawsey, Mr. Studd, Mr. Patterson, Mr.
Bradley, and Mrs. Kennedy, all took part in a
conspiracy with the object of saving a man who,
if guilty, did not deserve to be saved. Anyone
who had the advantage of conferring with them,
or of hearing their testimony in the box, could
not fail to be impressed by the story they told.
ROSS’S FIRMNESS.
As far as Ross himself is concerned, he not
merely stoutly maintained his innocence from the
day he was arrested to the day he was hanged,
but his conduct and bearing throughout was that
of an innocent map. It was not tactful or
amiable. It was blustering and bad-tempered,
and at times aggressive. But it was, through-
out, that of a sullen man, suffering under a sense
of wrong.
He made a free statement to the police on the
day that the body was recovered, admitting that
he had seen a girl answering to the description of
the murdered girl. On January 5, after, or in
the course of, a detention of eight hours, he made
a full statement to the police which was com-
mitted to writing. Not one word of that state-
ment is shown to have been false, by evidence
that is worth a moment’s serious consideration.
A great deal of it the police did not dispute. A
solid phalanx of witnesses, as has been shown,
was called on the trial to bear out the statement,
and not the smallest flaw was revealed by a skil-
ful cross-examination in that long chain of
evidence.


But more than that, on Thursday, January 6,
the day following his eight hours’ detention and
interrogation, like a man suffering from a sense
of wrong and indignity at the questions put to
him and the suggestions made against him, Ross
went boldly back to the Detective Office and said
to Piggott: “Who has been saying these things
to you about me?” Piggott said: “I won’t tell
you.” “Well, I want to know,” said Ross. Pig-
gott replied; “Well, you won’t know. I never
divulge where I get my information. Why are
you so anxious to know?” “Because,” said
Ross, “I will warm them up,” and he went so far
as to tell Piggott that he did not believe anyone
had told him. Piggott himself gave this in evi-
dence. It was all very foolish and impudent on
Ross’s part, no doubt. It was characteristic of
his quite fearless and “cheeky” attitude through-
out. But a guilty man, who had just escaped
from an eight-hour ordeal with the detectives,
might surely be expected to keep as far away
from Russell Street as possible.
Again, on the 12th, the day he was arrested,
Ross answered: “That’s a lie,” “That’s a lie,” to
each new allegation made against him. On the
following day he was brought before the Police
Court. He was undefended, and was asked if
he had any objection to a remand. “Yes,” he
said, “I don’t require a remand. There is no
reason why I should be here. I can prove my
whereabouts on that night. I strongly object to
a remand. I have all my witnesses here.” As
he left the dock, remanded, he called out: “That’s
the country’s law,” and then he added, in his
characteristic, blustering tone; “This is a great
country, there’s no doubt about it.” It may


have been all simulated, but it did not sound like
simulated indignation.
It is worth recording, too, that his mother,
unable to restrain herself, rose in court that day
and said: “I can prove where my son was that
night.”
On the morning of February 25th he was found
guilty of murder. Asked if he had anything to
say why the death sentence should not be pro-
nounced, he stood forward, and, without a quiver
on his lip or in his voice, he answered: “Yes, sir;
I still maintain that I am an innocent man, and
that my evidence is correct. If lam hanged, I
will be hanged an innocent man. My life has
been sworn away by desperate people.” He
listened calmly to the death sentence, and re-
peated: “I am an innocent man.”
Hanged he duly was, or, rather, he was hanged
with more than usual expedition. Within less
than a week of his doom being sealed by the High
Court, a special meeting of the Cabinet was
called, and his execution was fixed to take place
in a fortnight. The Government, notwithstand-
ing strong representations, supported by affi-
davits of new facts, declined to allow time for an
appeal to the Privy Council. Ross went to the
gallows. He was attended by his minister
throughout, and he accepted the ministrations in
the most worthy spirit. But he never wavered
for a moment in his profession of innocence,
either to his minister or to his solicitor. Stand-
ing on the scaffold, with the rope around his neck,
he delivered a final protestation of his innocence
in words which have rung through Australia.
“I am now face to face with my Maker,” he
said, “and I swear by Almighty God that I am an
innocent man. I never saw the child. I never


committed the crime, and I don’t know who did
it, I never confessed to anyone. I ask God to
forgive those who swore my life away, and I pray
God to have mercy on my poor, darling mother
and my family."
Some sticklers for accuracy, who have never
made a public speech, and who, it may be hoped,
will not have to make a start with a hangman’*
rope around their neck, and the gallows for a
platform, have fastened on to the words, "I never
saw the girl,” as being the assertion of an
untruth. Ross signed a statement that he saw
a girl answering the description of Alma
Tirtschke; he went into the witness box and
swore that he had seen such a girl. The words,
therefore, at the worst, could only mean, and
could only be read by an intelligent man as mean-
ing, that he had never spoken to the girl or seen
her otherwise than as he had already said. He
was not given much time for correction, or for
second thoughts, because within a moment or
two of uttering the words he had passed to
eternity.
But it is now known that Ross’s words were
deliberately chosen, and that he meant to tell
the world with his dying breath that he never, as
far as he knew, set eyes on Alma Tirtschke. That
being his intention, his actual words, it must be
admitted, went too far, or not far enough, for
from the description he gave of the girl, com-
bined with the other facts, it appears certain that
the girl he saw and described was Alma
Tirtschke. But that he did not mean to recede
from the position he had all along taken up
seems so clear as to be beyond the realm of
argument or the reach of adverse comment.


ROSS AND HIS FAMILY.
Cowards, who have sought to steel their con-
sciences against the effects of Ross’s dying
speech, have circulated the story that Ross’s
brother begged him, whatever he did, not to make
a confession on the scaffold. It is part of the
same policy of easing the public conscience as
the base and baseless statements about the let-
ters written to Harding before his execution and
tp Matthews before his trial. The story of the
farewell injunction to the brother can be most
fittingly described as a dastardly lie. Whether
Ross be guilty or innocent, the brothers never
wavered in their belief In his innocence. The
idea of a confession would never be present to
the minds of any of them.
There was another thing Ross did on the last
night of his life which has affected many people
even more than his dying speech. His family,
including his mother, took farewell of him on the
Sunday afternoon. When they had left him,
when all hope of mercy was gone, he sat down in
his cell and wrote to his mother a letter which
was not delivered to her, and was not intended to
be delivered to her, until after his death. It is
well worth giving, because it is so strongly in
accord with the attitude he maintained through-
out. It is almost impossible to believe that it is
a tremendous piece of hypocrisy. The letter
was as follows:
“Good-bye, my darling mother and brothers.
On this, the last night of my life i want to tell
you that I love you all more thu i ever. Do
not fear for to-morrow, for I know God will be
with me. Try to forgive my enemies—let God
deal with them. I want you, dear mother, and
Ronald, to thank all the friends who have been


so kind to you and me during our trouble. I
have received nothing but kindness since I have
been in gaol. Say good-bye to Gladdie for
, me, and I wish for her a happy life. Dear ones,
do not fret too much for me. The day is
coming when my innocence will be proved.
Good-bye, all my dear ones. Some day you
will meet again your loving son and brother.
“COLIN, x x x x x x x*x x x”
Ross has been described as inscrutable, and his
■conduct as puzzling. His firmness or obstinacy
—it has been called indifferently either—has
been criticised as suggesting a curious nature.
But Ross and his conduct are only inscrutable if
one starts with the assumption that he was a
guilty man. Concede that he was innocent, and
everything that he did, or said, or failed to say,
not merely ceases to be inscrutable, but becomes
quite natural. It is that, amongst other things,
which has caused the widespread feeling that his
life has been “sworn away by desperate people.”
IS THE MYSTERY SOLVED?
If Ross is innocent, the mystery of the death of
Alma Tirtschke remains. It was, however, no
part of Ross’s duty to solve it. In this connec-
tion it is doubtful whether sufficient attention
has been ever paid to the evidence tendered by
Joseph Thomas Graham. He is a cab driver by
occupation, middle-aged, respectable, intelligent,
and thoroughly level-headed. On Friday after-
noon, December 30, at about half-past 3, he was
in Little Collins Street, nearly opposite the Adam
and Eve lodging-house, when his attention was
arrested by a series of heartrending screams
coming apparently from a young girl. They
became higher in pitch as they succeeded one


another, to the number of five or six, and then
they died away. They were so noticeable that
Graham and a man on the opposite side of the
street both stopped and listened, but as the
screams faded out each man went about his
business. On or about Saturday, January 7,
Graham saw a notice in the paper saying that, as
the girl had been she was probably
throttled to stop her screams, and asking anyone
who had heard screams to communicate with the
Detective Office. He went on the Monday to
the Detective Office and reported what he had
heard, but his reception does not appear to have
been sympathetic. Graham was never called at
the inquest. The police explanation is that he
was not sure whether it was Thursday or Friday
that he heard the screams, and that, in any case,
he placed them as coming from higher up Little
Collins Street. Neither explanation can be
accepted, for Graham was absolutely definite as
to his every movement on the Friday, and abso-
lutely definite as to time and place. An absurd
story was told by Detective Brophy about making
inquiries in the neighbourhood, and learning of
some child that had a reputation for screaming,
as though an intelligent man could not tell the
difference between the bad-tempered screaming
of a naughty child and the agonised death
screams of an adolescent girl. When Ross was
condemned Graham went to his solicitor and re-
peated his story. That was the first the defence
knew of it. The Full Court heard his evidence,
but it declined to allow a jury to hear it.
Whether it would have had any effect on the
jury can now be only a matter of conjecture.
There is this to be said of it, however, that it fits
in with the medical evidence, for it suggests a


struggle, and the medical evidence of the abra-
sions suggests a struggle. It fits in, also, with
all we know of Alma Tirtschke’s nature. The
fact must be faced that, if the Matthews confes-
sion is true, the girl was not what her relatives
believed her. She boldly went to Ross, and
boldly remained in Ross’s saloon for three hours,
like a pert and forward youngster, not to put it
any further. If it comes to a choice, most people
will prefer to think of the child as good and inno-
cent and retiring, rather than to accept anything
to the contrary which comes unsupported from
the lips of Ivy Matthews. If the Harding con-
fession is accepted the matter is very little bet-
ter, for you then have the girl walking deliber-
ately back into the Arcade after she was seen in
Little Collins Street by the Youngs, accepting the
invitation of a stranger to come into his wine
saloon, and taking wine at his hands—wine of
which no trace could be found when the stomach
was opened less than eighteen hours afterwards.
The attractive feature of Graham’s evidence, if
the screams he heard were connected with Alma
Tirtschke, is that it allows us to think of the
little girl as we would all like to think of her —
pure, innocent, and modest. That little girl met
her death, in all human probability, within a few
minutes of the time she was last seen alive by
the Youngs, she met it in some place which was
much handier to Gun Alley than Ross’s wine
saloon, and she met it in a house provided with a
fireplace or other conveniences for disposing of
incriminating evidence. If anyone would like to
see one other improbability in connection with
the Crown case against Ross, he should visit the
Little Collins Street entrance of the Arcade by
night, and ask himself whether it is likely that


any man would carry the dead body of a mur-
dered child such a long distance up a brilliantly
lighted thoroughfare even at 1 o’clock in the
morning.


APPENDIX.
During the progress of the trial numberless let-
ters, anonymous and bearing signatures, were re-
ceived by Ross’s legal advisers. They were of
all classes—helpful criticism, incoherent com-
ment, threatening, laudatory, and censorious.
One received on the eve of Ross’s execution, with
a covering note asking that it should be handed
to him, and saying that it would have been sent
direct only the writer had doubts whether the
prison regulations would allow Ross to get it,
bore on its face some suggestion of genuineness.
No one, of course, can say definitely, but the let-
ter may perhaps be given as possessing some pub-
lic interest. The envelope bore the postmark of
a small country town, but there was nothing
otherwise to indicate whence or from whom it
came. With the elision of a sentence or two,
rather Zola-esque for publication, it was as fol-
lows :
“Colin C. Ross,
“Melbourne Gaol.
“You have been condemned for a crime which you have
never committed, and are to suffer for another’s fault.
Since your conviction you have, no doubt, wondered what
manner of man the real murderer is who could not only
encompass the girl’s death, but allow you to suffer in his
stead.
“My dear Ross, if it is any satisfaction for you to
know it, believe me that you die but once, but he will
continue to die for the rest of his life. Honoured and
fawned upon by those who know him, the smile updn
his lips but hides the canker eating into his soul. Day
and night his life is a hell without the hope of reprieve.
Gladly would he take your place on Monday next if he


had himself alone to consider. His reason, then, briefly
stated, is this; A devoted and loving mother is ill—a
shock would be fatal. Three loving married sisters,
whose whole life would be wrecked, to say nothing of
brothers who have been accustomed to take him as a
pattern. He cannot sacrifice these. Himself he will
sacrifice when his mother passes away. He will do it
by his own hand. He will board the ferry across the
Styx with a lie on his lips, with the only hope that religion
is a myth and death annihilation.
“It is too painful for him to go into the details of
the crime. It is simply a Jekyll and Hyde existence.
By a freak of nature, he was not made as other men.
. . . This girl was not the first. . . . With a pro-
curess all things are possible. ... In this case there
was no intention of murder —the victim unexpectedly col-
lapsed. The hands of the woman, in her frenzy, did
the rest.
“May it be some satisfaction to yourself, your devoted
mother, and the members of your family to know that
at least one of the legion of the damned, who is the
cause of your death, is suffering the pangs of hell. He
may not ask your forgiveness or sympathy, but he asks
your understanding.”
FINIS.
