

By GEO. WM. TOWNSEND.
FULLER’S “LIGHTNING” STEAM PRINTING WORKS.
; j
ill!
* *
; >: *
v » V v a~ * * * o *~ a * a a ■>
!»; A ■> _ A A :A A A A A . A A A A A
JflDote anti flnmgjts;
AND
* » >: « v~ * * * » *~ a >: *: * * *
aV*A*A>:>:* > * * « » » »♦
POW ¥0 CURE Bo¥fl ¥flEsE EYHig.
\m\
ALSO,
Jk yiSION OF WHAT WILL BE
pENTURY ENCE.
!« >:
§§gi
If:
SUfl;
15
* *
m
; : : : : ; TT~TT~I :: £■ i ;s; m


y 72 67


*73 3 5 V jF
77
THE BISHOP OF MELBOURNE ON THE
DROUGHT.
Dk. Moorhouse, Bishop of Melbourne, haying been
recently asked to issue a prayer for rain, intimated in
reply (the Argus states) that it is in the power of all
clergymen to use the “ prayer for rain ” in the Book
of Common Prayer when they please ; but that he
hesitated to comply with the request. He went on to
say that he had warned the people that God indicated
by his providential arrangements that it was his will
that we should conserve the water sent to us in the
winter ; but that nobody heeded, and that it seemed to
the bishop absolutely impious to cry to God and to
neglect His own providental indications of His will.
The bishop added that if he did issue a prayer it would
he as follows :— u Forgive us, 0 Lord, that we have so
indolently and irreligiously broken Thy natural laws,
and dispised the indications of Thy will in the time
past, and give us grace, we beseech Thee, so as to lay
to heart Thy present grievous and most just chastise-
ment, that we may bestir ourselves to conserve and
employ Thy precious gift of water, to the fertilising
of our fields, the relief of our necessity, the replenishing
of our land with prosperous and happy people, and the
glorifying of Thy holy name, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.” If anybody likes to use this prayer he has
the Bishop’s full leave, and he believes that then his
prayer will not he a mockery of God, and may do good
to himself and those that join in it.
I venture to take the above as a preface, for it
embodies in far better language than I can command,
and in a few words all that I have striven to make
clear to all in the following pages.
GEO. WM. TOWNSEND.




FLOODS PU DipiGpg;
lIOW TO GUARD AGAINST THEM.
[from carcoar chronicle.]
JBNT <3-_ W- TOWITSEISTD.
Portions of this article appeared in the u Town and
Country Journal” at the end of 1877, hut, haying re-
written several portions, adding a quantity of new
matter, I consider the subject of sufficient importance
to warrant my asking you to allow me space for
insertion. In the same issue of the u T.& C. Journal”
in which this was published was a leader advocating
the locking of rivers as a means of supplying the hack
country with water, hut anyone knowing the lower
rivers and the country lying between them must at
once perceive the absurdity of this scheme, for the
only country that could be benefited by such works
would he that having frontage to the rivers, and to
the billabongs flowing from them —such as the Wil-
landra Creek from the Lachlan, and the Tallywalka
from the Darling, and other similar outflows from
rivers. To such frontage blocks locking the rivers
would he of great advantage, but, to the interior, which
is of vast extent compared with the area having
frontage, it would seem worse than useless, for it
would not only do them no good by reason of the


high level of their land, but it would be manifestly
unfair to owners of back country for any Government
to spend enormous sums of money on securing
water for blocks that are already far more favourably
situated in that respect than is the back country.
Locking the rivers that are navigable is work that
will undoubtedly be undertaken eventually, and the
sooner it is commenced the better; but, with our
system of railways yearly extending, rendering easily
accessible hundreds of thousands of square miles of
dry country hitherto almost locked up, and at best
only very lightly stocked; Improved navigation, impor-
tant as it undoubtedly is, dwarfs into insignificance
compared side by side with any comprehensive scheme
that will ensure an unfailing and copious supply of
good water for that back country that only needs
water to be equal to the frontage in carrying capa-
bilities.
Apart from the relative importance of these two
great works, whenever any scheme for locking the
rivers is undertaken, unless the flood water has been
previously dealt with, it will prove a source of great
trouble and expense in causing the need of costly
compensation channels and heavy works to secure the
locks and weirs against destruction, for the soil along
the large rivers is generally friable loam that can only
he secured by preventing the water from over-topping
it; once allow ever so small a stream to creep round
the end of a wing wall of a weir, we should soon have
the whole of that weir and locks forming a promontory
jutting into the seething, boiling flood, or an island
surrounded by it. Xo ! the natural precursor of any
system for locking the rivers will be one for storing
the flood at the heads of those rivers, thus at once
dealing with the two evils mentioned in the original
heading of this article, “ Floods and Droughts, and
how to guard against them.”


That which will cure on© of the above mentioned
evils will cure the other. We cannot allow the whole
of a large annual rainfall to run to waste from off the
high ground, thereby causing floods, without suffer-
ing from want of water on the low flat country, where
the yearly rainfall is much less than it is in the hills.
A river with its catchment area or water-shed
may aptly be represented by a long-handled fan, in
which the handle will bear something the same pro-
portion to the fan that the river will to its watershed.
Although it would be manifestly absurd to attempt to
deal with the flood when once it had reached the
river, it will become quite a different mattei if we
look at the wide part of the fan-shaped catchment
basin, intersected by numberless small streams, each
carrying its quota to swell the devastating body of
water in the main channel. It is in these small
streams that the enemy must be met, imprisoned in
suitable reservoirs, and converted into a useful ally.
How useful, and of what magnitude the services
of the ally so gained will be, can be approximately
arrived at by considering the amount of water that
goes to waste in one great flood.
The Darling Eiver at Wilcannia is about 3 chains
across, and moderately high floods attain a height,
above ordinary summer level, of about 30 feet. In
such a flood the water travels at the rate of something
over a foot in a second \ take it at 1 foot a second,
and take the mean width at 200 feet, we haAe in 24
hours 3,240,000,000 gallons flowing to Avaste. In
very high floods that extend 8 miles back from the
river near Wilcanuia and fill three large channels in
the Tallywalka, the amount going to waste may safely
be taken at twice the above, or 6,480,000,000 gallons
flowing to Avaste in 24 hours. So far, to the unpro-
fessional reader, this means simply a large quantity of
muddy Avater running doAvn its natural course to


the sea; but put a money value upon it, say a sheep
requires for all purposes 730 gallons a year, allowing
300 gallons for washing, scouring, or otherwise
getting up the wool for market, this is equal to
365,000 gallons a year for 500 sheep supplied, mind
you, at any point or points on the station in an
elevated position available for spout washing, or any
other form of washing or scouring suitable. Could
not |d. per lb. (one farthing a pound) extra profit on
the wool be secured under such circumstances ? I
think it could. Put the average clip for a sheep at
4-lbs per fleece, that is a penny per sheep profit above
what is realised at present on stations not most
advantageously situated with regard to water, to say
nothing of the improvement that would soon be
apparent in the sheep and their fleeces from an ample
supply of water. That would allow over l|-d. for 1000
gallons; so putting the price at Id. per 1000 gallons,
equal to Jd. a sheep a year, it will give over
a sheep a year, after paying for all the water necessary
for the station use, clear profit; so we may safely say
Id. per 1000 gallons will gladly be paid by sheep
owners in the back country. We have already seen
that the amount going to waste in a moderately high
flood in the Darling is 3,240,000,000 gallons in 24
hours, that gives, at Id. per 1000 gallons, ,£13,500
being thrown into the sea every 24 hours’ duration of
a moderately high flood. Say there are only six
days in each year of such floods, it gives us £BI,OOO
a year in the Darling alone, without reckoning an
occasional big flood, while stock, and often human
beings, are perishing for want of water within 50
miles of the frontage.
The Murrumbidgee, and New South Wales portion
of the tributaries of the Murray, and the Lachlan
may safely be taken to give an amount equal to that
flowing down the Darling, showing a yearly loss to


the country of £162,000 ; this for only waste water
that is at present useful for nothing but filling a w
hack channels, and which, if wisely conserved at a
proper elevation, will keep the rivers (when locked)
full for the whole year, and most of this flood watei
could in no way be saved by, and would only prove
a source of danger to any system of locks.
The actual yearly loss above what is needed to
keep the rivers full for navigation is more than five
times the above amount, for the rivers are often run-
ning half bank high for months (only a portion of that
amount is necessary to Icccp the rivers full when locked
mid only the same amount as is required to keep them full
when locked can possibly be conserved by lockingJ, say
five times as much, £BIO,OOO, equal to five per cent
on £16,200,000— think of that, members ot the
Legislative Assembly.
But when we come to reckon the amount that
can be stored at the sources of the rivers before it has
had a long run over porous soil, into whmh immense
volumes of water are absorbed, doing but little good
except locally, and that only to a small extent, as in
the cases of the Macquarie and Lachlan nvers, eve
the enormous amount here reckoned on is insigni-
ficant compared with the amount really available ioi
X stl6W f Tixth-Gl? OH* # •
In’ the face of these figures the question arises, is
a penny per 1,000 gallons too high a charge. The
answer can only be arrived at by enqun
uses, other than sheep farming, the water is likely
be applied, and how the location of these industries
will be with regard to the distance the water will have
to be carried before being supplied to them. Of
course, water used near to a reservoir can be supplied
at a much cheaper rate than when it has to be earned
some hundred or two miles m costly channels, subject
to loss from various causes. Near to the reseivons


one penny for 10,000 gallons will pay well, and a pro
rata charge throughout in proportion to the distance
the water has to be carried will obviously be a fail-
one, ending at the extreme points of delivery at one
penny per 1,000 gallons.
Let us see what can be done with water at one
penny for 10,000 gallons, used as a motive power.
Say a water mill is erected at any point along a line
of supply at such a level that 20 feet effective head
can be secured. 10,000 gallons is 1,600 cubic feet,
and twelve cubic feet a second falling through one
foot of space is equal to one horse power; the same
amount, falling through twenty feet, is equal to 20-
horse power; that gives us exactly 2s. 3d. for one
hour’s work for a twenty-horse mill—equal to grinding
and dressing 20 bushels of flour.
For one hour’s work with a 20-horse steam engine
f non-condensing as most of our small engines arej,
with fireAVOod at Bs. per cord, and driver’s wages at
7s. a day, running night and day, the cost is nearly
the same. With an engine running in the day only,
the cost would be at least 2s. 6d. per hour; the dif-
ference is owing to the loss of time and fuel in getting
up steam every morning, and cooling doAvn every
evening, while, by increasing the head, or in other
words securing a greater fall, with a water-mill the
cost would be proportionately less.
Of course the water after being used for the mill
can be turned into irrigation channels and made to
grow wheat for the mills to grind, so that after hav-
ing, by using water instead of fuel, obtained his
irrigation Avater for nothing, a farmer could irrigate
many a fertile hill-side and gully, getting thereby
enormous yields. For groAving a crop of any cereal
an acre requires from twelve (12) to twenty-four (24)
inches aggregate depth of Avater over its whole surface
during the time the crop is growing; that is, the


amount of water distributed over the surface of and
allowed to soak into, the soil during the growth of the
crop would amount to that depth if accumulated oyer
the whole surface at one moment. One acre contains
43,560 square feet, this at twelve (12) inches deep,
272,250 gallons. Twelve (12) cubic feet per second,
if allowed to run for one hundred (100) days, about
the time that a crop would need irrigating, would
amount to seven hundred and ten and a half-million
(710,500,000) gallons, this quantity would be suf-
ficient to cover 2610 acres 12 inches deep, or halt
that area, or 1305 acres 24 inches deep. Take the
area irrigated at sixteen hundred acres, and the
aggregate depth of water at about nineteen and a
half (194) inches, equal to 442,812-5 gallons per
acre we may safely assume that thirty bushels an
acre would be a moderate yield under such circum-
stances, so that for an outlay of <£296, assuming tie
price of water to be one penny per ten thousand
(10,000) gallons, forty-eight thousand (48,000)
bushels of a previous season’s wheat could be ground
at a cost far less than that ordinarily charged by
millers, while the water, after being used as a motive
power, could be reckoned on to largely increase the
yield of the farm ; or a mill-owner who used water as
a motor could sell his tail water at a highly re-
munerative rate, to be used for irrigating surrounding
farms. No one will dispute the assertion that the
profit accruing from wheat growing increases m a
rapidly increasing ratio with the increase of the yield
per acre, taking as zero a certain yield that will just
coyer expenses. Let us assume that on oidmaiy
small farms in New South Wales it takes ten (10)
bushels per acre to pay expenses, we then have the
farmer just paying his way, and making no profits.
As things are at present a very large proportion ot
the farmers do not pay their way, hut, haying com-


menced with a small capital, the result of hard earned
sayings, they gradually drift into the hands of the
men who assist (?) them by advancing money or goods
on growing crops, and handicapped by being charged
usurious interest on such assistance, the class that
should form the backbone and sinews of our country
is being gradually stamped out. Seven to eight
bushels per acre pays in South Australia, hut in this
colony it appears to need at least ten, so we will
assume that ten bushels per acre is the least yield
that will cover expenses, while anything under that
represents a loss, and a yield in excess of that amount
shews a profit, and as there are known to be, even in
the most favoured districts, a large proportion of
farmers who are in the hands of their friends, who
assist them with credit for “ goods sold,” taking their
farms as security, we may assume ten bushels per
acre as about representing the average yield in blew
South Wales; anything that will increase the yield
fat a cost less than the worth of such increasej will
benefit the farmers, and anything that benefits any
producing class benefits the whole country. Irrigation
will benefit all the producing classes, and therefore it
must largely benefit the country at large. Let us see
how what it will do for the farmers hears the test of
figures. We have seen that the cost of water
necessary to irrigate sixteen hundred (1600) acres
(without taking into account that the water for
irrigation can be first used for mill work) is tivo
hundred and ninety-six pounds (£296); this is equal
to 3-7 shillings per acre. The cost of preparing ground
for irrigation is considerable and very variable, but it
only has to be incurred once, the necessary terracing
once done, the cost of working irrigated ground is not
much greater than that of working ground that is not
irrigated, so that only the interest on the first cost can
be charged against the yearly yield. Let us assume


the average cost of preparing ground for irrigation
to he fifty shillings per acre ten per cent, upon tliat
is five shillings, and for the small difference m the
cost of cultivation between irrigated and non-irngated
put 1-3 shilling, that will give ns an outlay ot ten
shillings per acre for irrigated land m excess of that
which is needed for non-irrigated, for every crop,
say three bushels of wheat per acre would y e needed
as the yield per acre on irrigated land, to just make
it pay expenses, in excess of what woiud be needed
on non-irrigated land, that is thirteen bushels for
irrigated and ten bushels for non-irrigated. can
safely state from my own knowledge of what irriga-
tion in India has done for lands that were worthless
previous to their being irrigated, that thirty bushels
an acre may safely be reckoned on as an average
yield from land that now gives an average of ten
bushels, so we have in favour of irrigation thirteen
bushels to pay expenses, leaving out of thirty bushels
seventeen bushels, at say, after paying commission,
bagging, carting, and all incidental expenses, may
safely be estimated at two shillings and sixpence
a bushel, making forty-two shillings and sixpence
an acre clear profit in favour of irrigation.
Now, as I show further on that m the year of
least rainfall 672,000,000,000) six hundred and
seventy-two thousand million gallons would annual y
be available for farming and other producing purposes,
we are quilt? safe in reckoning upon water sufficient
to supply a million acres, thereby putting in circula-
tion (£2,125,000) two million one hundred and
twenty-five thousand pounds clear profit from , and
solely the result of this one branch of irrigation. Will
any one dare to deny that this is our most pressing
need? All tropical and semi-tropical countries have
to fall back on it. Have we so heavy a rainfall that
we may hope, as our population increases, to be


exempt from the tax ? If tax that can he called which
will render valuable hundreds of thousands of square
miles of country where now the land is waste, or at
least only feeding a few sheep.
We hear a lot about the smiling homesteads of
Australia, hut the smile is rather a ghastly one in the
dry times in the hack country: a good deal like the
smile to he seen on the face of a poor felloiv who,
having lost his way, and finished his last drop of
water, lies down to bask in the nice warm sun;
gradually his spirit tires of contemplating the scenery
under the circumstances, and leaves; his skin dries
and draws hack the lips, and he smiles as much as he
can without cracking, hut it is hardly a pleasant
smile. There will he a good many such though if we
people the hack country without first giving an
adequate supply of water, and the blood of every
human being so perishing is on the head of every man
aspiring to the name of statesman in this colony who
does not move in this matter. It is the bounden duty
of every man aspiring to Parliamentary honours to see
into this matter, and inquire diligently for the truth,
not allowing himself to be hoodwinked by a bundle of
official red tape, but to use the powers of reasoning
God has endowed him with, and to think for himself.
Let the House call for competitive preliminary designs
and estimates, giving a good premium, and a contract
for the necessary survey for carrying out the work, to
the successful competitor.
Provisional designs and estimates can he prepared
for this great and important work by taking the
county maps, which are generally very accurate, and
are drawn to a sufficiently large scale for the purpose,
and with their help carefully examining the country in
question : by using two aneroids, one of which should
be kept in camp and carefully watched by an assistant
who should note the reading every half-hour during


the day, and the observer in the field, with the other,
also hooking the reading every half-hour, a check will
be obtained against local barometric changes during
the time of taking the field observations. By this
means a great source of error in fixing heights by
aneroid will be eliminated ; and by constantly compar-
ing the reading of the instruments in use at points,
the height above sea level of which is known, a series
of levels can be obtained sufficiently accurate foi a
provisional design and estimate. In such a design all
reservoir sites should be marked on the map,, giving
estimated capacity, height above sea level, minimum
and maximum probable annual supply, area of water-
shed commanded by creek or race by which the reser-
voir will be supplied, geological formation in and
around the reservoir site, and whether the proposed
site is oft the river or creek channel, or whether it
occupied a wide basin through which such channel
runs; in the latter case care should be taken to state
particularly what facilities exist for securing a good
by-wash. In a vast scheme such as is now under
consideration, in which we are not bound to look for
suitable reservoir sites within certain restricted locali-
ties, and in which suitability as to capacity compared
with cost of impounding the water will out-weigh all
consideration as to locality, many instances will occur
in which we shall be able to make use of low promon-
tories nearly meeting and ending in steep bluffs,
forming a gorge through which the stream runs;
while higher up the course of the stream the country
opens out into a wide flat where large lakes may be
formed at a comparatively small cost by either build-
ing a good dam across the gorge, and forming the
waste weir or by-wash over one of the low spurs
forming the lower end of the basin, 01 , m a case in
which the spurs are high, building a substantial weir
across the gorge, and letting the waste water run over
it into its natural channel.


On streams which, in the lower part of their
course, are absorbed into the earth, and which are use-
less in filling any navigable stream, provision should
be shewn for storing the whole of the available water
collected on their gathering grounds or watersheds,
only allowing sufficient to run down their courses to
keep the river ordinarily full; and the amount neces-
sary to do this should be reduced to a minimum by
building weirs at convenient intervals, so that, with a
small constant stream, the river could be maintained
at a uniform level. By this means the Bogan and
similar water courses that are not only dry, but often
in portions of their length hardly distinguishable from
the surrounding country for many months at a time,
and that form dangerous torrents in wet times, could
be converted into a series of long deep waterholes
always full, as is shewn by the few dams already
constructed, notably Brown’s, at Mudall. In navig-
able streams the same plan would be adopted, only
modified by there being locks in the weirs to allow for
the passage of vessels, thus keeping our rivers per-
manently full with a yearly expenditure of water
perfectly insignificant compared with the enormous
volumes that run to waste in one single flood. It
urgently behoves every individual that has a voice
to raise to cry aloud in furtherance of this great and
good cause.
If the various departments of the Public Works
Service were left unmolested to carry out what, from
their intimate knowledge of the country, and the high
professional ability of the gentlemen at the heads of
those departments, would most surely be the very best
schemes for the extension of our railroads, water supply
schemes and roads, we might safely leave in the hands
of those gentlemen the heavy and responsible task of
providing for the future wants of our fast growing
country; but, alas, vested local interests are far too


powerful to allow of this, so our engineers, highly
qualified as they are, confine themselves to a piecemeal
patchwork hind of jobbing, instead of making each
new work or extension a part of one grand scheme.
Therefore, as a warning to the public not to neglect this
matter by trusting to their paid staff of engineers to
point out what should be done, let me quote from the
<< Sydney Morning Herald,” March 25, showing what
has become of leaving to red tapedom a less impor-
tant work, though still one of some magnitude— We
cannot say the design for a great city was badly con-
ceived because there does not appear to have been any
design in the matter ; the city got planned by degrees
without any particular forethought, and we are now
left to regret that in the Government departments
there was no engineer or surveyor whose prophetic
soul foresaw what was to come, and who, with rule
and nompass, or with pegs and chain, laid out the
ambitious lines of a great metropolis. _ This m regard
to the laying out of the city and environs, how much
more shall we have cause for regret if m the far greater
matter of settling a vast population on our waste lands
we leave it to chance, making no further provision foi
supplying that most necessary and vital want, water,
that il never likely to he initiated by the department
in charge of the matter, until grim gaunt famine with
giant strides overtakes thousands of helpless families
* of poor men, women, and little children like the Angel
of Death, slaying not only the first-born but who
families-and destroying stock by myriads. Verily
shall we then have cause for regret, and we who now,
with a sparsely-populated country—unlimited borrow-
ing powers—and an urgent demand for reproductive
public works that shall cause an influx of a hardy,
self-reliant population, by first giving them work and
means of livelihood for many years that shall fit the
scene of their labours for occupation by them, tbeir


children, and great grandchildren, have the oppor-
tunity of securing an abundant supply of good water
for future generations; neglecting that opportunity
shall be their murderers. It may be said—“lt will
be time enough to think of all this years hence. I
emphatically deny that it will then be time enough;
this is not a work that can be undertaken or carried
out hurriedly, and it unfortunately is one the want of
which will not be very severely felt until it comes as
a dire and crushing national calamity—for when the
tide of population sets westward, it will almost assur-
edly be at the commencement of one of those cycles
of good seasons that, while they last, make our extreme
western and north-western plains tbe paradise they
occasionally are. Ho one seeing them in the bright
and beautiful garb they then wear, could possibly
believe that the same country could ever become the
sterile waste that all who know it well —know to their
cost, it often is. Look at the famine that has recently
passed like a black cloud of despair over India, to
what did the collective wisdom of the country at once
fly, to prevent a recurrence of the castrophe ? a com-
prehensive scheme for irrigation ; and this in a country
with a far greater average rainfall than we possess.
A remark similar to that above quoted as to the lack of
design in laying out the city of Sydney may be made
with at least equal truth anent our so-called system
of railways and roads. Why should all the heavy
traffic from the west and north-west be carried over
all the high bad land over which the Blue Mountain
line goes ? There is no need that this should be so.
excepting that the local influence of Bathurst and
Orange says that it must be so. Give those fast-grow-
ing inland centres of population railway communica-
tion by all means—but why should all the heavy
traffic from the great Murray basin be raised two
thousand feet higher in course of its transit to the


coast than there is any necessity for? Wellington is
the natural point of junction for the west and north-
west goods traffic —thence via Mudgee, Ityistone, the
Capertee, and Colo* valleys, to Windsor. Doubtless
we shall most of ns live to see this carried out, hut it
should have been the first, instead of being the last
line made; but here, as in all our public works, the
best interests of the country are sacrificed to local
influence, and lines of railway and roads have to be
made in positions of but little general use to serve the
purposes of a few wealthy individuals.
Why have we not some feasible scheme for con-
necting our inland traffic with the shipping ? Why
are we to be committed to that monstrous absurdity of
Government wharves in Darling Harbour, to which
nothing larger than a firewood or coal barge can get ?
Many years will not elapse e’er, instead of doing away
with Pyrmont bridge, every main street running to
that part of the harbour will have its bridge. Again,
let me beg and pray of all to consider what this
scheme for water supply for the interior means; for,
woe, dire woe will be our lot if we force population
by giving ready means of transit into the back
country without supplying water.
J -will mention only a few of the cases in which
benefit will be derived from a copious supply of water
for the interior. Let us consider the inland towns
supply. Here, alone, is a reason for giving e \ eiy
consideration to the merits of this subject. How can
our inland centres of population, which are unfavoid-
ably situated as regards water (we have many sucb,
and, from the nature of our country, must always
have), ever become more than mere hamlets, unless
they are made secure in the matter of a regular and
constant supply of good water ? It may here be said
that tanks may be made of sufficient capacity to
supply a large number of people j so they may ) but,


in the west and north-west, I have known large tanks
stand for more than two years before getting filled.
If tried on a large scale the supply will be, at best
precarious, and the water will be' found by no means
good for sanitary purposes. Artesian wells are often
mentioned as a source of supply for the interior. I
quite believe in the existence of deep-seated water-
bearing strata throughout the whole of the interior,
and that, when that source is tapped by deep boring,
good water will be obtained, as has been the case
recently near our northern boundary. Here, only
about 120 feet of boring reached a copious supply of
good water that rose to the surface. Further south,
the strata which carry this good water lie deeper, and
are often overlaid by runs of brackish and, sometimes,
very salt water. This has discouraged private enter-
prise, owing to the very great expense that will be
incurred for tubing in the bore to keep back the salt
water gone through. But deep-seated sources of
water supply, inexhaustible as they at first appear,
and almost miraculous to the unthinking, with their
column the size of the bore-hole flowing constantly,
and often rising many feet above the level of the
ground, after long use are found to grow weaker; and,
in many instances, where the water at first rose 20
feet above the surface when only one well was down,
when several more were sunk in the some locality
pumping had to be resorted to ; proving that these
supposed inexhaustible subterranean reservoirs are
finite, which must be expected when we consider
their origin. As this is not generally understood, a
few words of explanation may not be out of place.
We will take as an instance the great Murray catch-
ment area, bounded as it is, on three sides by ranges
and elevated table land, with only a comparatively
narrow outlet to the sea. This immense basin com-
mences on the south (kindly take a map of Australia


Floods and Droughts 17
and follow this description on it) with the Goulburn
Liver in Victoria ; thence follows in an easterly
direction past the heads of the various sources of this
river, including the Ovens and King Rivers ; thence,
still easterly, past the Mitta Mitta Kiver, and all the
sources of the Murray, Murrumbidgee and Lachlan
Kivers; thence, northerly, past the heads of the
Macquarie and all the other tributaries of the Darling,
away into Queensland, until you reach the head of
the Balloon; thence, westward, past the heads of the
Warrego and Paroo to the Barrier Ranges, from
which chain of hills, a line of elevated broken country
runs to the coast of South Australia, passing round
the north-west bend of the Murray, and touching the
coast on the west side of the Murray, which terminates
in the Goolwa. The whole of the vast basin con-
tained within the boundaries here sketched out was
at one time a large, deep estuary or arm of the sea,
dotted with large islands, the higher portions of which
form the detached ranges which are found over this
area at present. In the picture thus placed before
the mind’s eye, we have an immense basin-shaped
cavity with only a narrow outlet to the sea. Suppose
the bottom of this cavity to be covered entirely with
sand, shingle, or other porous material easily pene-
trated by water. This porous layer in time becomes
covered by a layer of fine silt, wliicli settles closely,
and forms an impermeable stratum overlying the first
deposited porous one. Imagine the deep basin
becoming gradually filled up to the level of the
surface of the water by layers of sand and mud, each
successive one taking less of the basin shape of the
original bottom, until, at last, the surface becomes
flat, the sea water being driven back by the constantly
accumulating detritus from the hills. T urther
accumulations force the coast line further back, until
at last, that which was originally a sandy, shingly


beach, bounding a large estuary, and forming its bot-
tom for hundreds of miles, becomes a layer of porous
material along which water can percolate, in which it
is confined by the bed rock upon which the sand and
shingle rests, and by the overlying layer of imper-
meable material whose upper edges here and there
crop out many hundreds of feet above present sea
level, being in some places covered with earth and
accumulation of vegetable matter, running in a true
contour line, excepting where cut through by recently
formed gullies, ravines, or river beds, or when con-
torted and upheaved by volcanic eruption or similar
convulsions of nature.
It requires no great stretch of imagination to con-
ceive the idea of surface water constantly soaking into
the out-cropping portions of this old beach ; and, per-
colating through the sand and drift, washing out and
removing all trace of saline matter in its downward
passage to at last find its way, at a great depth from
the surface to the sea. It will be easily understood
that in a bore put down to this water bearing
layer of sand, etc., the water will rise to the level of
a line drawn from the mean level of the out-crop of
the porous layer to sea level; so long as the out-let
along the sand by which the water soaks away to the
sea does not exceed the amount of surface water
caught and absorbed by the out-cropping portion of
the layer of sand, etc. We see, therefore, that though
in all probability, we have an enormous subterranean
reservoir, of which we can avail ourselves by deep bor-
ing, it is by no means an inexhaustible one ; and that,
after the first accumulation becomes diminished, we
shall only have the comparatively small amount to
depend upon which can he caught in the out-crop
each year. True, a number of wells may draw at
this ancient reservoir for many years without appreci-
ably effecting the supply; but it is now an acknowledged


fact that, although one or two wells may he sunk into,
and draw supply from a deep-seated spring, when
more than a certain number tap the run of water it
rapidly diminishes ; and, when once it has commenced
to diminish, the supply will continue to do so in a
rapidly increasing ratio, until all that will he obtained
from this source will he, as I have said above, the
comparatively small quantity absorbed by the out-crop.
It is frequently asserted in letters in the papers
that we may reasonably hope for an unlimited supply
of water in artesian wells all through the Riverina
country because of the great soakage from some of the
rivers, and from swamps that are fed by the rivers.. I
greatly fear that we can in no way count on recovering
any of this water in a state fit for use, even by stock,
for the country that receives this soakage is full of
water bearing strata, the water in which is as salt as
brine, and I think this occurrence is to be accounted
for in this way :—-There can be no reasonable doubt
that the whole of the lower portion of the water shed
of the great Murray tributaries has been at one time
an estuary or landlocked arm of the sea which has
gradually become filled up and raised above present
sea level in the manner already described, while through
long ages this silting up process has been going on,
many extensive, shallow, salt water lagoons would be
formed, as these gradually silted up the water in them
by evaporation, becoming intensely salt, would com-
pletely saturate the soil with brine ; as the raising and
silting up process continued the coast line would be
forced farther back and these once open, stagnant
salt lakes, would become covered with a greater or less
depth of soil and would give rise to the apparently
strange phenomenon of runs of salt water high above
sea level, while, wherever in sinking or boring we tap
an old river bed that has retained unobstructed its
drainage to the sea, we obtain fresh water by reason


20 Floods and Droughts.
of all the saline matter being washed out by the con-
stant run of fresh water draining along the sand or
gravel forming the bed of such ancient water course.
The original bed of the estuary, on the other hand,
will probably be found to contain fresh water through-
out its whole area, for it would in every part retain
along the sand and gravel forming the ancient bottom,
uninterrupted drainage to the sea, by means of which
the constant run of fresh water soaking in along the
outcrop and draining through the porous layer to the
sea would dissolve out and carry with it all saline
matter. This opinion of the origin of the many salt
water accumulations that are found by wells being
sunk, to exist throughout so large a portion of the
Murray basin is in a measure borne out by the fact
that by long continued baling or pumping (provided
that the water raised is carried clear off and not allowed
to drain bach into the well) the water generally becomes
less salt, shewing, I think, that the original accumu-
lation becoming exhausted, it is replenished by drainage
of fresh water from the surface, which doubtless in
time, would dissolve ouj; from the water bearing layer
or stratum, all saline matter; but this would be a very
costly experiment, in that the immense volume of
water that would need to be disposed of before the .
desired result could be attained on a scale sufficiently
large to be of any practical value, would swamp miles
# upon miles of flat country and destroy much valuable
pasturage. I fear that once the. water is allowed to
run from the high ground, we must regard it as lost.
So that, although we are perfectly justified in trying
to get all the water we can from this source of supply,
it will not, even when proved available over a large
area (which it by no means is so far) in any way
' relieve the country of the responsibility of providing
a water supply by the only reliable means, viz., that
now advocated by means of open reservoirs formed by
dams or weirs.


To return to considering inland towns supply.
Why should this subject be considered one of such
grave importance for Sydney, and in no way worthy
of consideration for other towns, or, if thought of at
all, only in a temporary catch-penny style, which, in-
stead of assisting the advancement of the town, seems
to set a boundary to its future progress, giving it no
room to grow ? What supports Sydney, and yearly
adds to its fast growing _ importance ? Isolate it for
a few years from inland intercourse, and where would
it be ? Much in the same plight as would be maw
of an octopus which had been shorn of its arms or
feelers, or like Geelong. The Sydney merchants
show their appreciation of this fact when they. stand
in the way of railway extension to the great shipping
centre —Circular Quay. They well know that once
this is established, country storekeepers now calling
themselves importers will really be so, and that the
fat agencies with all their little pickings will be gone.
Water supply for the interior will tend towards the
growth of large centres of population inland, which
will do more to develope the latent resources of the
country, and swell the traffic on our railway lines,
increase the revenue of the country, add enormously
to the value of our land, open new ports on the coast,
cause the construction of new lines of railway, largely
increase the population by giving increased field for,
and activity to business, than any work upon which
money can be expended while the work itself would
pay a higher interest on its cost than any other that
can be undertaken.
I have already mentioned the immense advantages
that will accrue to stock owners ] whether they be of
V.U.WI/ T T J-S.A. J V ,
the large or small class of owners, from a copious
supply of water; aucl, at the risk of being tedious, I
will repeat a portion of a former letter. With water
at Id. per 1000 gallons, 500 sheep can be watered for


twelve months, giving an ample supply for daily
wants of the sheep and those attending them, besides
allowing 300 gallons for each sheep for washing and
scouring, for the small sum of 30s. 5d., (thirty
shillings and five pence). The same sum would pay
for water for one hundred (100) head of cattle or
horses, allowing ten gallons a day each. Think of
the stock our great salt bush and cotton bush plains
would carry with a constant supply of water. We
should not then hear of any special inducement being
needed to bring immigrants, and those of the right
sort, to our shores.
Perhaps next in importance to the supply for in-
land towns, and that for stock, comes a good gold-
field supply. Here, Id. per 10,000 gallons would
render payable many millions of cubic yards of
auriferous gravel and quartz which is now waste for
want of means for economically working it. The most
extravagant way of using water for washing gold is
by sluicing. A stream of 120 gallons per minute will
wash twenty-five (25) yards of free gravel in 10 hours ;
that is equal to exactly 6s. for 25 yards; not quite 3d.
per yard—about one grain and a half. Puddling and
quartz crushing take little more than half as much
water per load as is used for sluicing. Many millions
of pounds worth of gold can be made available for
circulation at remunerative prices for working when
we have water, which will otherwise he for ever locked
up in our hills (and that, generally, in the most barren
and unprofitable portions of them) without the scheme
now advocated is carried out. As it is peculiarly one
which must, from the nature of it, be a national
undertaking, it should be made a test question at the
next election, u no man should be returned ” as a
member of Parliament who did not faithfully promise
to use his best endeavour to bring about this most
necessary work. How would Mount Browne and


Temora be now if we had water? Both of these
places could he reached; in fact, Temora is near
where a main reservoir would be on the Upper Bland.
Forest culture could, with water, be piofitab y
carried on in land now waste, also that of opium,
indigo, and silk. The portions of our land that have
soil and temperatures suitable for many remuneiativ
industries lack that most essential fertiliser, water. No
one who has not seen the back country in a good
season can possibly imagine the fair and beautifr
land we have for our birthright, if we ivill oniy put
forth our hand and grasp it by carrying out the works
necessary for a copious supply of water; thereby cal ■
ing into existence, as by the touch of a mag c wand
lar-e inland centres of population which could nevei
exist without it, and rendering possible the reclama-
tion and conversion into priceless pastures our vast
tracts of mallee and porcupine—the dom o
only requires water to enable stock to exist on them,
for feed is already there and will increase, to the ex-
termination of the worthless growth when the country
is being continually traversed by weil-watered stock.
In fact I believe that, under more favourable cncum
stances, the character of the now dreaded porcupine
will change; for, it appears tome to be a kind of k
grass, not dissimilar m some respects to couch or
buffalo grass. It is, perhaps, necessary to explain
that the porcupine of bushmen, and spnnfex o scien-
tific writers, are one and the same plants, but what
matters? a rose under any other name would ha^e
just as ugly thorns. . ~ , x
There seems to be a general impression that s y
scheme for irrigation means turning t e lac o
country irrigated into a farm, and holders of stock see
in it swarms of selectors and small farmers covering
the face of the land. An impartial view of the sub-
ject must convince any unbiassed mind, t a


prehensive system of irrigation will draw the agri-
cultural producers to the rich portions of the high
giound,. where good natural drainage can be obtained,
and which are at present untenable for want of water ’
of such land so situated, there is in New South Wales
alone enongh to supply the whole of Australia, and
to allow of extensive exports of grain, when the
population of the country far exceeds its present
strength.
In designing the works regard would be had to the
future requirements of such localities, and seeing that
when once the water has reached the large channels
or rivers it would be impossible to deal with it, the
uplands must perforce be the first to receive the
benefit of any such work. The low flat country along
and between the great rivers, even supposing the soil
to be nt for agricultural purposes, is by reason of its
flatness quite unsuitable for agricultural pursuits aided
y lrr igation, because there is no adequate natural
drainage and no means of artificial draining unless at
undue outlay, such as to render producing, even good
crops, a loss on any but a very limited scale.
The bulk of this great area is fit for the production
of wool, and that only; for, although cattle do well
lor a time on new country after they have taken the
rough feed off, the character of the herbage changes
and sheep are then the only profitable stock. But
what of that ? What would Australia be without the
wool ? _ It is at present our main source of wealth.
There is more capital invested in its production than
m the production of anything else. A bad year for
the wool producers is felt through all classes, and
any scheme that will render more permanent the
annual yield of wool in quality and quantity will do
good to the whole country. Irrigation will do this.
I' ol e lands it simply means increasing their
capability for carrying stock; doing away with that


curse of the country, stock travelling for water,
eating up on their way all feed that should belong to
stock going to market, or otherwise legitimately travell-
ing ; rendering permanently valuable thousands of
square miles of fine country that can now be only
occupied in good seasons, country of which one often
hears men say, when looking at a small hill stream,
«My word, I’d give some thousands to have that
in ” well, some place abounding in feed, and only
lacking water. Nearly every one interested in the
western country knows some such place.
It is from this source the revenue that would pay
such a scheme would come; therefore it is for the
supply of this magnificent country that the woiks
would be chiefly designed. A well considered scheme
of irrigation would render more evident than nature
has done the peculiar material any given locality is
suited to produce. That this great work will soonci
or later be carried out there can be no possible doubt.
How is this to be done ? First, as the country to be
dealt with embraces a large area, about (120,000) one
hundred and twenty thousand square miles in IS ew
Soutn Wales (and this, fortunately, can be dealt with
without in any way interfering with, or needing the
co-operation of Victoria or Queensland) a veiy com-
prehensive survey, embracing every important creek
on the western watershed, from the head. of the
Lachlan River to the head of the Macintyre River on
the borders of Queensland, showing the height above
sea level of all points on or near such creeks suitable
for reservoirs, and for weirs for taking water from the
creek for supplying reservoirs situate off the couise
of the creeks ; also survey along the proposed . course
of feeders, main aqueducts, and their distiibuting
channels. The information gained by such a sui\ey
should be shown on a large scale map, on separate
sheets, bound together and numbered for reference.


The scale should he about one inch to the mile, and
on this map should be written the heights above
datum of all salient points. From such a survey
an approximate estimate could be formed of the prob-
able cost of such an undertaking. Second, money
sufficient to carry out the proposed works. This will
be reckoned by millions, for every creek of importance
will need its reservoir, on a watershed extending in a
northerly direction over four hundred (400) miles, as
before stated, from the head of the Murray to the head
of the Macintyre.
This catchment area, from which we may reckon
to. obtain our supply, may be taken as all the land
lying for a distance of forty (40) miles westward of
the top of the Dividing Range, bounded on the west
by a contour line of fifteen hundred 4500) feet
elevation above the sea, and embracing all the land
contained between such a line and the top of the
range for a distance of over four hundred (400) miles
in length by 40 miles wide ; giving a catchment area
of sixteen thousand (16,000) square miles, over the
whole of which large area there is an average annual
rainfall far in excess of that which falls in the country
lying below and to the westward of the contour line.
Allowing all the magnificent supply of water that
might and should be stored for use, obtainable from
this source year after year, and spending money in
trying to store water down in the flat country, is
quite on a par with the action of a man who should
carefully drain off all the water from the roof of his
house, while his friend made a little hole in his door-
step for the purpose of catching what small portion
of the precious fluid might fall upon it, while he
looked down into the drain by which the roof water
was being carried away, and on which he had spent
much money and time in taking out roots and in
otherwise clearing the channel.


But, seriously, bow are we to mend this lament-
able state of affairs ? Briefly, by impounding, m
suitable reservoirs, all available water on every creek
or large water channel on the western fa
Dividing Kange, from the head of the Murray on t
south to the head of the Maeintyre on the northern
boundary of this colony, and the *’
so stored in suitable channels or conduits to portions
° f %"L n rvohs must be located in accordance
with the nature of the creeks on or near which.th y
will be made. Some creeks have a fair permanent
supply of water at their head, while lower down t
filers 7 away in the drift ; in these evidently the
water must be impounded on their upper parts, or
catchment channels must be cut on each »de of &e
creek, intercepting all feeders to conduct the watei
without any undue loss to tbe reservoir.
Again, large reservoirs may be filled when fai
removed from any main creek or river by catchment
channels judiciously placed, so as to mtercept s ot
water. The quantity of water that could be obtain
from these twJ sources, and that at present is
utterly useless, would be enormous. Other creeks
and rivers, and some important ones, draining ar 0
areas of country, are merely dry courses ror
the greater portion of the yeai, whi e lej
with irresistible torrents in flood times Sucn streams
should have weirs built across them to throw a por-
tion of the water into a suitable channel that will
convey it into a reservoir situated man adjacen va ey
or some other suitable place, the remainder of the
water escaping harmlessly over the weir to be aga
and again stopped, robbed of a portion of its be y,
and allowed in a diminished stream to proceed on
course.
Having secured a sufficient number of reservoirs


in suitable places, it remains to convey the Avater from
the various store places to the points at Avhich it
is to be used.
A number of small catchment reservoirs will
eventually be. connected by channels of a suitable
description with one large distributing reservoir.
From this will run a main aqueduct, Avith its Avater
channel at a sufficient elevation above the surrounding
country, to enable Abater to be taken from it to a
considerable distance on either side. One such could
be made to supply all the country between the Lachlan
and Murrumbidgee by placing it midway betAveen the
two rivers.
Tavo such channels, judiciously placed, will supply
all the country lying betAveen the Lachlan and Darling
rivers ; and one would supply all the country betAveen
the north side of the Darling Biver and the northern
boundary of the colony, that is, at such a level as
could be reached from this source.
Two more running northwards would command
the country between the Bogan and Macquarie, and
the Macquarie and Castiereagh rivers; so that six
main trunk aqueducts, each with its separate large
distributing reservoir and system of feeding channels
and storage works would be needed, any one of which
could be completed with its entire system of distri-
buting channels independently of the others. One
more question remains to be answered: is the avail-
able supply equal to the demand ?
The answer to that question can only be given in
one way, and that is by examining the area of Avater-
shed that is at a high enough level to be utilised in
the scheme, and finding out AAdiat is likely to be the
amount of annual rainfall upon that area that can be
reckoned upon as available for storage purposes on
one hand, and on the other estimating the largest
demand that is e\ 7 er likely to be created by the in-


crease in the producing capabilities of the area sup-
plied with water. To answer either portion of the
ouery I fear I must ask your readers to go into the
least enticing of all kinds of reading, viz., figures—
first as to available watershed. From my own
knowledge of the western slope of the Dividing
Bange, I answer that I am within the mark when 1
estimate the area available for water storage at four
hundred miles in length, by an average width of forty
miles, or sixteen thousand square miles of country, at
a sufficiently high level above the area to be irrigate ,
that can be used for catchment purposes When it
conies to be surveyed, as it assuredly will when we
have a statesman at the head of affairs, the area
reckoned in this estimate will be found considerably
less than what will be found really available. It is
generally acknowledged amongst engineers that from
one-fourth to one-half of the annual rainfall over any
given watershed, may safely be counted on for storage
purposes ; and in designing storage works for any
given purpose, it is usual to estimate the probable
supply from the least annual rainfall of a series oi
observations extending over as many years as possible.
The area that I reckon for catchment lies at from
(1500) fifteen hundred to (4000 four thousand feet
above sea level, on, as I before stated, the western
slope of the Dividing Bange. Looking at the pub-
lished meteorological tables I find I am quite safe m
taking the least possible rainfall for an/ year, over
the whole of this area, at (13) thirteen inches. One-
fourth of this, or three and a quarter inches is, theio-
fore what may be reckoned on for stoiage, allowing
for loss by evaporation, for one-third may reasonably
be counted on as the amount stored. It does not
seem much does it? It gives in round numbers
seven and a half millions of cubic feet of water over
one square mile, or one hundred and tv enty thousand


million cubic feet over sixteen thousand square miles,
or it is equal to seven hundred and fifty-five thou-
sand and forty millions of gallons, annual supply—
this, and often more than five or six times this
enormous amount, is allowed to run to waste annually
on only one slope of our great rain-catching scope of
country—that which falls on the eastern slope of the
range generally exceeds the western rainfall, —but
what we are considering at present is the enormous
amount of water annually wasted on the western fall.
It is equal to filling a lake of an average depth of ten
feet, and forty and one-third of miles long by a width
of ten miles, in the year of least rainfall; this in a
country whore stock are frequently perishing for want
of water.
Does it not seem incredible that some of our
statesmen (?) have not taken the matter in hand ere
this ? What better return could possibly be made for
the alienation of our land than in this way augmenting
the value of the, at present, comparatively valueless
parts and making them capable of supporting a large
and thriving population. So far for answering the
first portion of the question. For the second portion,
take the whole area of the low lying land, estimated
to be only fit for stock, at one hundred and twenty
thousand square miles ; allow that this, by being sup-
plied with water, carries on an average a sheep to the
acre, or what is equivalent to a sheep to one acre,
a beast or horse to five acres, the amount of water
needed will be about the same in either case —say a
sheep takes two gallons a day for all his require-
ments all the year round, equal to ten gallons a day
for a beast or a horse; that, I think will generally be
allowed to be a liberal allowance —that is two gallons
an acre a day, an utterly insignificant quantity with
regard to irrigation for growing purposes, but ample
for stock, equal to fifty-five thousand two hundred and


ninety-six millions of gallons a year over the whole
area ; add half that amount for waste and evaporation,
it gives, in round numbers, eighty-three thousand
millions of gallons for the largest possible yearly de-
mand, little more than one-ninth of the smallest possi-
ble yearly supply, leaving six hundred and seventy-
two thousand million gallons to he applied to farming,
mining, null work, and the thousand and one purposes
to which a large population will he able to profitably
turn a copious and permanent supply of water.
While Australia is sparsely populated,. the order
of things at present obtaining may exist without any
great harm ; hut so sure as we are alive, as the coun-
try becomes more thickly populated, and moi e heavily
stocked, w r e shall experience some of the trials that
the poor people of India were lately suffering, unless
adequate provision is made for a geneial supply of
water. What lam now advocating is not a work
that can be undertaken hurriedly when the need
arises; it will he one of greater cost, and of far
greater importance to the future welfaie of om coun-
try than even our railways, for they cannot he either
made or worked without water, and wheic the neces-
sary water is to come irom for working some of the
proposed extensions has already begun to he a question
of importance to engineers, and even a mattei foi
anxiety. „
The class of works I would advocate are more o±
the American style than the English, the weirs and
dams of timber, crib work, that is, logs bolted across
and across and filled in with rubble stone,, and
earthern dams ; the aqueducts ot the cheapest kind to
he durable; no costly masonary, the foundations of
which often cost more than would suffice to. cover the
cost of the whole structure of a less costly kind.
Although the supplying the whole of the low-
lying Riverina country with water will he a work of


immense benefit, and one that will return handsome
profits, when the actual amount of water to be distri-
buted per second—equal to 3805-5 cube feet—is con-
sidered, and it is remembered that this quantity is to
be divided amongst six main channels or aqueducts,
and allowing for their having occasionally to carry
more than now reckoned on, say the maximum amount
t° be carried in any one channel is equal to 800 cubic
feet per second, the distribution of the water does not
require any heavy works. The amount just men-
tioned, or 800 cubic feet a second, could be carried in
a rectangular channel of 40 feet wide, and 10 feet
deep, but, as the cuttings will be of trapezoidal form,
I allow 500 feet sectional area, with a fall of only 6
- * inches a mile, provided that it was a channel with
a smooth lining, and with curves of such a radius as
the current would flow round without increasing the
friction; and as the amount to be carried in the main
aqueduct would from supplying side channels every
few miles of their course, be constantly diminishing,
the cost of construction would also diminish until at
the end of their length they would become little
heavier than the side distributing channels; so, the
average cost per mile of the whole length of a main
aqueduct would be about equal to two-thirds of the
cost of a mile of the same at its upper end, when it
was carrying its full complement of water. Now,
considering that from having to buy no land, from
having almost unlimited choice as to site, and from
having no vested interests to consult, we may arrive
at a rough estimate of the works needed, and thence
at an approximation to the cost of both storage and
distribution works. To commence with the distribu-
tion.
Every main channel or aqueduct would command
a strip of country 100 miles wide, that is 50 miles on
each side of its course, by being raised 25 feet above


the level of the lowest point to be supplied by the
side channels. I would carry these raised portions,
when high ground is not available, on trestlework,
and form the channels themselves of wood; there _ are
several modes of making such channels water-tight
cheaply and efficiently. The weight of water in a
channel of 400 feet sectional area running full would
be 11 tons 362 lbs., say, without weight of channel
11*12 tons to the foot forward, equal to 111*2 tons on
a 10 feet span.
I would not make the spans more than 10 feet
each. Such a trestle way could be built entirely of
bush timber and by bush labour. These temporary
works, as they needed renewal, could be replaced by
more permanent ones. All that would be needed in
the way of plant would be a small portable sawmill
for each party, with a forge and smith, besides ploughs
and scoops with good teams to work them, and con-
sidering that in many places rising ground could be
taken advantage of to save building, and that often
for miles the channel could be a canal cut in low hill
ranges, lined when necessary to prevent soakage, and
that the aqueducts would only be needed to carry the
channel over low ground, and that all these canals
could be made by plough and scoop work, which can
be done in ordinary ground from about sd. to 6d. per
cubic yard, £5,000 a mile would be ample to allow for
the main channels; and estimating the amount of
water to be carried by each side distributing channel
at 20 cubic feet a second, and that these side channels
will be placed every 5 miles, so that no sub-distribut-
ing channels will be needed, the distribution from the
main channels may be taken at about £3,000 a mile ;
so that, supposing a main channel to supply a width
of country equal to one hundred miles, the cost of the
distributing work for ten miles along the lengh of the
main channels would be £60,000 for side channels


and <£50,000 for main channels —equal to £llO,OOO
for supplying with water 1000 square miles of country.
As to the cost of storing water, any attempt must he
purely hypothetical, hut it may he interesting to enter
into a speculation on the subject.
There is an assumed watershed of 400 miles in
length, and 40 miles in width. Allowing one reser-
voir for every four miles of length, that will give one
hundred reservoirs for catchment purposes. These
may he roughly taken to cost (£lOO,OOO ) one hundred
thousand pounds apiece. Six large distributing reser-
voirs, with outlet works at, say, £250,000 apiece,
makes the sum of £11,500,000. Allow for catchment
channels, and channels to connect the various reser-
voirs of any one system, £5,000,000 ; that places the
cost of storage works at £16,500,000; distributing
works at £llO per square mile for 120,000 square
miles is equal to, say, £13,200,000; total, £30,000,000.
This is equal to £250 per square mile, or 7s. per
acre, for which outlay we shall get abundant water for
stock oyer the whole 120,000 square miles, besides
having enough water for irrigation for crop growing
to supply abundantly one twenty-five acre paddock to
every square mile.
We have already seen that the nett yearly supply
will equal seven hundred and fifty-five thousand and
forty million gallons (775,040,000,000). This, sold
at one penny per thousand gallons, will give the
considerable income of £3,146,000. For temporary
works, such as now proposed, the cost for mainten-
ance is always heavy. Put the total cost at £30,000,000
and allow 5 per cent, upon that sum for management,
maintenance, and the forming a fund upon which to
draw for the cost of replacing the first temporary
works by more permanent ones as they are needed. It
then leaves us £1,646,000, equal to over 5J per cent,
on the total cost, which can be reckoned as clear profit.


The question here arises whether, in the face of
these figures, a lower charge may be advantageously
made, as I suggested in the early portion of this
article. In the available amount of water reckoned
upon, the lowest possible rainfall is taken as a basis
of calculation. Taking the average, one year with
another, we should obtain a far greater supply.
Further, in a country subject to periodical droughts,
alternative with occasional heavy falls of rain, the
storage works should be designed with a capacity equal
to, at least, three years’ minimum supply; for a very
large proportion of these heavy rainfalls could be
stored. The number of storage reservoirs allowed for,
viz.—loo —would give an average capacity for each
reservoir of twelve miles in length, one mile average •
width, and ten feet average depth These would be
capable of holding the abundant reserve of 2,265,120
million gallons. One year’s average fall would fill the
whole of such a series of lakes with the waters im-
pounded off the gathering ground here proposed of
16,000 square miles So that, generally, we could have
available a far greater supply than the minimum one
reckoned upon; and one penny per thousand gallons
would be a famine price to be charged only in dry
times when the supply fell to the minimum reckoned
upon.
Is it not grevious to consider that the whole of
this wealth is annually thrown into the sea ? Will no
public man come forward and cause a fair enquiry to
he made into the matter ? A survey and provisional
estimate would not cost much compared with the
£20,000 annual vote for trial railway surveys, most of
which are utter waste of money. _ Our country will
never come to any great position in point of wealth
and population without a supply of water for the in-
terior. I have shown that, with the small and uncer-
tain rainfall of the interior, tanks are only to be
i


depended upon as make-shift, hindering instead of
advancing the progress of the country by placing a
limit to the producing power of the land, as must be
the case with any mere temporary scheme for towns
supply; for, where once money has been spent upon
any work such as water supply, people are very apt
to look upon that work as final, and to allow the pro-
gress of their locality to be arrested by thinking that
every means for giving a copious supply of water have
been exhausted.
I have also shewn that artesian wells, from the
nature of the source from which they draw their
supply, can only be looked upon as temporary expe-
dients. Take for example the great Murray basin
containing something like half a million square miles
much of which is dry and arid in the extreme, and
oyer which innumerable wells would he required.
The source from which these wells derive their supply
would he the line along which, the upper edge of the
permeable water-bearing stratum, cropped out on the
surface. The extreme length of this line, following
the course dilineated further back, cannot exceed
three thousand miles, and it is very unlikely that it
drains an extent of country greater than about two
miles in width. This will give us only six thousand
square miles of gathering ground to supply over five
hundred thousand square miles of country when once
the water already contained in the subterranean reser-
voir had become exhausted. (I do not think we have
any geological equivalent to the gait or greensand
formation from which the deep wells of France and
England draw their supply, and which is famous for
the large quantity of water contained in its various
layers or strata.)
I am confident that the only source of supply upon
which we can depend for water for all purposes needed
to thoroughly develop the varied resources of our


country is that of storage works here advocated; and,
looking at the map, one. sees at a glance °W.i
mensely superior the position of New Sout
is, as regards facilities of storing water, to that ot any
other colony excepting Yictona. Therefore, it is m
her own hands to, not only keep her premier posi 1 >
but, with her immense resources of coal and iron,
far outstrip all competitors in the race for supremacy.
For no sane person can dispute the tact, that in
progress of any Australian colony is limited by supply
of water. , . , .
We frequently hear of clays being set apait 101
prayer for rain. Apart from the question as o
whether or no it is impious to venture to in ei qi
with the designs of the Creator, would it not be muc
more sensible to try to avail ourselves of ©
at hand for supplying the wants, not only ol tne
present generation, but those of the nmny genera ion
to come, by storing the really bountiful rainfa _
is, even in the driest years, given us on e °
g This concludes what I sincerely hope may draw
the attention of public men to a most nnpor an
subject.
GEO. WI. TOWNSEND.


* ■ -*
• *
-
*>• * •
. **


A VISION
OP WHAT
tSydney will be @alf-a-@entury gence.
While drifting up the Harbour a few clays since
before a light easterly breeze, soothed by the calm
beauty of the scene and (thanks to having the wind up
the Harbour) not being regaled with any of the
delicious scents exhaled from the imbecile efloits at
drainage, that poison the air and water around Sydney,
lazily lying at full length in the stern sheets of my
boat, giving way to a delicious langour between sleeping
and waking, I had a vision of what Sydney will be half
a century hence :
Methought I had a companion in the little centie
board dingey of which I had till then been the sole
occupant, and stooping low to catch a view of his
features under the foot of the lazily flapping sail I saw
reclining in the bow of the boat a youngish man of
prepossessing appearance with a grave, mild thoughtful
face, who seeing me look with astonishment at the
altered aspect, of what were once familiar scenes, thus
broke silence.
u You seem,to be a stranger here.”
Looking with amazement at the spot, on which a
few minutes since I d seen the light ship heaving
gently to the ocean swell, which sweeping in between
the Heads broke ever and anon upon the reef known
as the ‘ Sow and Pigs,’ and seeing there a massive


granite wall nearly bending north and south, having on
its northern end a lighthouse of beautiful proportions,
also built of granite, while from this same northern
end there ran with gently sweeping curve, connecting
with the shore the first named structure, a heavv mass
of masonry faced on seaward side with mighty blocks
of granite, that would for many centuries withstand
the dash of angry waves; I said, “Well I suppose I
must be, or else I’m mad or dreaming, for I thought
I knew the place a few short moments since, and now
it all is changed as if by magic.
lie merely smiling with mild compassion in his
eyes said “ I’ve much more yet to shew.”
Our boat, still lazily impelled by the light evening
air, and dropping slowly round the southern end of
the first named granite wall, which from the northern,
where the lighthouse stood, was full seven hundred
feet, my self-invited guest or spirit friend, which ever
he might be, beckoned me to put the helm hard-a-star-
board, and lay the boat’s head round close underneath
the southern end of this same granite wall. I mutely
answered to his signal, and hauling aft the sheet,
brought the boat close up to the wind and stood along
the southern end for full one hundred feet. Then, he
beckoning still to starboard, I put the tiller over, let
go of the sheet and with it made fast the sail up to
the mast; while he, taking up the sculls, pulled
lightly to some steps that came down to the water’s
edge upon the landward side of this immense sea wall,
and making fast the boat to one of several iron
rings that hung on each side of the steps, invited me
to land and to ascend the steps. This having done,
there opened on my gaze a noble esplanade fully one
hundred feet in width, and seven hundred long. A
double line of rails came down the seaward side and
all along this side at intervals were heavy iron bollards
to which to moor great ships, and on this side also


there were cranes for lifting cargo and other cranes
that lifted gangways that could at will be lowered into
the decks of ships, by which the passengers could either
land or go on board.
“ This, said my spirit guide is the mail station for
ocean-going steamers, all bullion, mails, and passengers
are shipped and landed here. They are brought here
from and hence are taken to the central depot in the
city, by the railway that runs direct from here.”
In most amazed bewilderment I ask, “ what
central depot do yon mean ? Is it the general office of
the Post and Telegraph Department ?” . He, placing
his two elbows on the handsome iron railing that went
round the outside edge of all this noble terrace, and
resting his chin upon one hand, fixedly regarded me
awhile with grave compassion in his eyes.
“Do you not know,” said he, “ that Sydney is
now the model city of the world —that even fair Paris
yields to us the palm for beauty—London, Hew York,
and Liverpool for the completeness and extent of the
accommodation for our shipping, while our poplation
numbers millions vying in point of number and pro-
ducing power with that of those great centres of
commercial industry. All these great changes have
been brought about in the short space of half a
century.”
I, meekly and with awe : “But surely one brief
cycle of just fifty years is all too short a time in which
to have effected all these great reforms? ”
He, with calm superior wisdom : “As things were ,
most surely, yes ! but as things are , that period forms
a great and mighty era in the history of this land, the
tide of our success commenced to turn when first we
gave our serious attention to the conservation of the
water given by a bounteous rainfall on our inland
mountain ranges, wherewith we could supply the land,
lowlying, stretching for many hundred miles in a west


and northwesterly direction which until then was
arid, parched and dry, sufficing barely for supporting
some few hundred thousand sheep : —Now through all
our hills, off which the water erstwhile drained in
wanton wasteful floods as quickly as it fell, great lakes
abound which night and day through all the year pour
forth their constant streams: These streams, in con-
duits carried, run from off the hills far down into the
plains fattening and fertilising all the land through
which they pass, supporting now a hundred men when
only some few years ago there lived but one, clothing
with verdure all that land which once was desert:
This changing all the surface of the land from parched
and dry to pleasant moisture, has much improved our
climate, and year by year wc find our rainfall is in-
creasing steadily : This and this only was the cause
of all this mighty change : —No sooner did the nations
of old Europe see the vast progress we were making
than their surplus population poured in thousands upon
thousands to our shores, and all were welcome, and the
cry was still u There’s room for more ” Then
came too that mighty lever by which the destinies
of nations are decided, which we call capital.
Millions upon millions were invested iii largely repro-
ductive works, until Australia’s federal states have
now become one of the mightiest nations of the earth.”
But I must now crave pardon for thus digressing from
our subject, and will return to answering your queries
anent our central depot; I remember the old building
you refer to, it still is standing, but it is so built round
and added to that no one now would know it. It forms a
portion of the depot, and the granite eolonade that
formed its George-street front, now has been extended
the whole length from King to Hunter streets, and all
that block of land from Pitt to George streets, and
from King to Hunter streets, is covered by this
building, presenting the same noble front to ail four


streets ; its ground floor, traversed by great passages,
through which run lines of railway. Hence you can
either take your passage by rail or steamer—post a
letter book a parcel that does not exceed a certain
weight, send and insure the safe delivery of any
amount of bullion or specie, or send a telegraphic
message to any portion of the habitable globe, 1
going yourself by rail, you take your seat, or berth
for sleeping, here at the central depot m the self-same
carriage in which you are conveyed to any portion o
our continent —all break of gauge between the different
lines is done away with since the federations ot the
colonies became a fact. .
“ For heaven’s sake, my friend, said 1, k pray
pause awhile in your relation of all these wonders and
let me draw my breath, all power ol doing which
you’ve robbed me of.” ..
He, merely smiling, thus continued: .Besides
all this it is the central office for our system of street
railways, and by these the vast suburban postal service
is performed. ' Three times each day a thousand men
in postal service uniform leave by the various trains,
each one with his load of letters. These having
delivered, each man collects from the branch office o±
his district what letters there may be lying there, and
hurries back by train to the central depot. But all
this you yourself can see on any day on which you
like to visit this busy centre of our city—so, mean-
while, let us walk along this terrace past the lighthouse
to the shore.” .
We went, and on the way I noticed how witn
gentle curve around which the trains could pass, the
wharf for the mail steamers was connected with the
shove by a broad curved terrace built in crescent form
on which were laid a double line of rails, each sice
of these a carriage drive and footpath; the view irom
here was grand. The terraced rows of streets, rising


one above another, tier on tier, shewing the existence
of a busy, thickly peopled suburb even at this distance
from the great centre of the city. While I gazed
enraptured with the scene, the sudden booming of a
heavy gun announced, so said my guide, the hour at
which the English mailboat left the coaling wharf to
come down here, where she would take on board the
bullion, mails, and passengers. Before the echo of the
signal had fairly died away we saw the boat majestically
steaming slowly round from Bradley’s Head, all coaling
wharves being, so said my guide, on the north side of
the harbour. While yet we watched the stately
steamer’s course I heard the shrill whistle of an engine,
and looking landward saw a train approaching swiftly
along the continuation up the harbour’s shore of the
curving terrace on which we stood. The steamer
neared the wharf, and ere the hawsers by which she
moored were fastened to the bollards on the wharf, the
train shot swiftly past and stopped just underneath a
crane close by the steamer’s gangway. The crane
swung round and lifted, so it seemed to me the whole
superstructure of each car, leaving only a bare truck
or platform on the wheels, and swinging round again
lowered it down the steamers open hatchway. There
were three cars in all and each was served the same.
Soon as they were clear the engine with its train ran
off the line on which it was and by a switch at the
southern end of this long wharf, turned on to the other
line. Hardly was it clear before another whistle
sounded, and looking round I saw another train of
five carriages and a luggage van approaching rapidly.
u The passenger,” said my guide.
Another crane swung round, and lowered down a
gangway like an ancient drawbridge so broad and
strong it was, until it touched the steamer’s deck. It
was not fairly down when with a grating sound of
brake hard pressed on wheel, the train shot swiftly up


and stopped just opposite the gangway ; the passengers
alighted, said good-bye to those who came to see them
off, and went on board. The luggage van had stopped
just underneath the first named crane, which swiftly
put on board its load. A second gun boomed forth
its signal. The warps are all cast off, the screw re-
volves, the steamer like a living monster moves ahead,
and in five short minutes she is through the Heads
and hidden from our view just twenty minutes from
the time the first gnu gave its signal. Hardly had the
mail boat passed the Heads when the firing of a third
gun told, so said my friend, of the arrival of the
inward mail; the sound had scarcely died away when
we saw her proudly steaming in between the Heads;
she comes up to the wharf, lands bullion,, passengers,
and mails. A fourth gun fires, the two trains move
swiftly off for Sydney, the mail boat for the coaling
station. We have now, my guide informed me, a
daily mail from here to London ; these boats carry no
cargo, only mails, passengers, and specie. All their
stowage room is taken up with coal; they make the
passage round the cape in thirty days, and carry on an
average two hundred passengers each trip; besides
these English mails we have daily communication with
India and South Africa.
And let ns go on board our boat again and we
will sail along the great sea wall that gives us six
long miles of frontage to deep water along the south
and east sides of our harbour, along the whole of
which large ships can load and unload. All along the
landward side are warehouses and stores, and engineers’
and builders’ yards, foundrys, and smelting works,
and all things appertaining to a large and thriving
seaport. Dry docks are there of length and breadth
sufficient to take in any of the largest ships afloat.
i Descending then the steps we went on board our
dingey and pushed oh from the granite wall —stood


across towards the southern shore, then turning sailed
along it and traced the course of all that noble wall
that made deep water frontage all along the shore,
where formerly the water had been shallow, now
giving thirty feet of water at lowest of low tides close
beside the wall. Sailing still along the wall, and
turning into what was once Hose Hay, leaving what
once I’d known as Shark Island on our right, on which
was now built a powder magazine, a scene that to
my dying day I’ll ne’er forget, burst on my astonished
sight. In front and to the right, away to the heights
of Waverlyand Bondi, all was one vast mass of streets
and houses, fine handsome churches, and other large
and stately public buildings, here and there relieved
by open squares, gardens, and grounds for public
recreation; while all along the margin of the bay there
ran the great sea wall, with all its wharves and cranes
and w arehouses and ships that busily were loading and
discharging cargo', while near to the eastern end of
this same bay there rose a massive pile of buildings
that were removed but a short distance from the wall
that formed the frontage. The feature that was most
prominent in these buildings was a chimney that was
full five hundred feet in height, and of huge dimen-
sions, while the many storied buildings that surrounded
it covered an area so vast that any stranger to the
scene must needs be dumb with wonder as to what
strange. and mysterious manufacturing process could
bo carried on within those walls. Seeing me thus
bereft of power of speech, my spirit friend addressed
me thus :
“ Hitherto you have only seen our outworks, now
you are approaching what is in truth regarded as a
great invention, and one from which great benefit
accrues to all the city and its neighbourhood for many
miles around. You have doubtless remarked that
chimney that is but a prolongation upwards of a


shaft or well that is more than one hundred feet in
depth. This well is built round both sides and bottom
with solid masonry set in good cement, so that it is
impervious to any moisture. Into this well are
emptied all the main sewers of our drainage system ;
the great depth of the well is needed to give the
necessary fall per mile along the length of some of
those great underground canals which run for miles,
and which at no portion of their length are much
above high water mark. The largest and most exten-
sive of all these is carried along the inshore side of all
the frontage wall on the east and south sides of the
harbour, and into this are drained some hundreds of
much smaller sewers; another great main channel
comes from the northern shore and is tunnelled
underneath the harbour. Into this is carried
all the drainage of Balmain, North Shore, and
Mossman’s Bay and all that densely populated northern
portion of the city —a high and low level one come
down from Waverley and Randwick and many others
of more or less importance, each one draining its portion
of this vast city, and each one has its vast reticulation
of small channels, into which again are emptied
smaller ones, each of which runs through the centre
of a street, one through every street in all the city and
surrounding suburbs and into these are carried pipes,
a separate one for every house on either side, while all
along each side of every street there constantly is
running in an open channel a stream of clear cool
water, this at certain places finds its way into the
channels underground by means of traps, through
which, though the water passes down no effluvia or
noxious vapours can arise.—One hundred million gallons
daily thus is needed to supply these channels with the
necessary water to keep them clear of sediment and to
ensure that no foecal matter shall anywhere effect a
lodgment, but that all shall be carried clear away down


into the great receiving pit that I first mentioned.
To supply this vast amount of water, large engines,
amounting in the aggregate to five thousand horse
power are pumping day and night within that pile of
buildings, raising clean salt ivater from the Harbour
(I smiled increduosly at the idea of clean salt ivater from
the Harbour , hut he, not noticing, continued) which is
forced through pipes of varying dimentions to the
elevated portions of the city at which it is first made
use of ; while other engines of similar horse power are
constantly employed in pumping from the great receiv-
ing pit, the water with all the solid and liquid matter
that has been added to it and that it there contains
and that it has brought down along the various drain-
age channels : The boilers that supply these engines
with the steam they use are kept in steam by a range
of enormous furnaces that form a fiery circle round the
pit; each furnace draws the air that it uses for the
combination of its fuel from the receiving pit; just
above the point at which the poisoned air is thus drawn
off from the surface of the fluid in the pit, the passage
from the pit into the chimney is covered by a dome
that quite prevents the upward passage of any of the
poisoned air from the lower portion of the pit into tho
chimney, the upcast flue from every furnace has en-
trance to the chimney at a point above the dome, so
that all poisoned air is purified by passing through the
furnace fires before it can pass into the chimney, thence
into the outer air. The great elevation of the chimney’s
top above all the highest portions of the city, the
immense area of its transverse section, together with
the high temperature maintained witnin it, cause such
a downward draft along all the drainage channels into
the receiving pit, thence through the furnaces into the
chimney, as to quite prevent all tendency to effluvia
arising from the drains throughout any portion of
their course, so that instead of any rising of foul


air from out the drains there is a constant draw-
ing of pure air from the outside into all the drains
through every crack and crevice throughout their
course. From thirty-five to forty thousand cubic yards of
solid matter daily are carried by the streams of water
that run down these drains into the receiving pit,
thence all is pumped together into large vats or tanks.
You will see, on looking at the buildings, that they rise
to four floors or stories above the basement or ground
floor, this last is occupied by engines, workshops,
boilers with their furnaces, and room for storing all the
fuel and all other stores, material, and tools in daily
use in this vast hive of labour, in which is found em-
ployment for about six hundred men and boys; through
all the night and day, without cessation the work is
carried on, and though six hundred hands find work
here two hundred is the largest number that ever is em-
ployed at once; the engine and boiler power is so much
in excess of what is needed, that always there is some
portion of it lying idle or working at half power so
that in case of any repairing being needed no stoppage
to the work is ever caused thereby. The three upper
floors or stories are occupied by large vats or tanks,
into these is pumped all water and solid matter from
the pit, in these it settles and all solid matter is pre-
cipitated from the liquid by the addition of some
chemical which renders clear the liquid, and free from
all noxious matter, it also, by some strange chemist’s
combination neutralises all the saline matter in the
water, which in its normal state is death to vegetation,
and makes it fit to use for irrigation purposes; the
water, when drained off, is run by covered channels to
the gardens which supply the city and its environs with
all the vegetables that the many million people there
consume, and is purchased by the gardeners at the
high price of six pence for one thousand gallons, for
its fertilising powers are marvellous ; the solid matter


is taken from the vats and is found to be deprived of
all offensive smell and to give off no vaponr that is
hurtful to mankind, the “ deodourising and rendering
innocuous all sewerage matter ” process has been com-
plete, it is now on the first floor or one next the base-
ment, dried, pressed by machinery in moulds and sold
at five shillings the cubic yard. Like the water, its
fertilising power is wonderful, some of it is used upon
the gardens near the city, but most is carried to the
farms that lie without the suburbs and is used for
raising fodder for stall feeding all the sheep and cattle
that are yearly slaughtered to supply the wants of all
this vast community:—Many a hundred thousand cows
and calves are also here fed and kept for dairy purposes,
nothing is lost but all is turned to good account. The
expenses of this vast industry are large, but the profits
are also very large, each day the expenditure for fuel
stores and wages amount to about three thousand
pounds the same amount reckoned at four per cent, upon
the outlay first incurred in the construction of all these
works is daily needed to pay the interest, one thousand
pounds a day for maintenance and the expense of all
repairs that so frequently must be needed to keep in
efficient order all the various working parts of so vast
an undertaking, for in these the wear and tear is great.
Another thousand pounds is duly deposited at interest
to form a fund upon which to draw to cover the
expense of all extensions that are needed to keep pace
with the rapidly increasing growth of all the outskirts
of our suburbs, thus making the considerable sum of
eight thousand pounds a day, against this we set as
income,—sale of one hundred million gallons of sewer-
age water, at sixpence one thousand gallons, two
thousand five hundred pounds \ sale of thirty five
thousand cubic yards of solid matter at five shillings for
each yard, eight thousand seven hundred and fifty
pounds, in all,-eleven thousand two hundred and fifty


pounds, shewing thus a profit of three thousand two
hundred and fifty pounds a day, equal to four and one
third per cent, per annum upon the whole outlay which
amounted to five and twenty millions, thus is this, as
are all other institutions and enterprises of our state,
not only self-supporting hut remunerative, and this
has always been the case since we have profited by the
precepts and examples of our great teacher and bounte-
ous mother, nature, which may he all summed up in
three short words “nothing is lost.” There is nothing so
small or unworthy, hut what, if it rightly he used, may
be turned to account and in some way be made to
promote the general welfare of all, so we adopt
as our motto, “ Nothing is Lost.” The gardens
occupy all that low-lying land between Rose Bay and
Bondi, the range of low sand hills that used once to
lie between the swamps and the ocean beach have all
been levelled off—the sand being used to fill up all
the swamps, the compost from the drainage matter
of the city has so enriched and fertilised this erstwhile
barren sand that it now returns enormous yields of
every kind of garden stuff, the drifting of the sand
that once had formed the sand dunes, heaped up by
the wind, have been stopped hv the thick growth of
vegetation. Through all the year the busy Mongol
gardeners raise perennial crops; thus every month
can every kind of garden stuff be had. This once
hated race have had assigned to them by law their
true position in the State, which now is truly free to
all—a liberal education having done its work. No
quasi politician now with blatant gush can ever get a
hearing when he raves about “the people’s wrongs,”
and tells how he, their friend, will get their wrongs
redressed. "We have still a remnant of this fungus
growth, floating like a poisonous scum upon a stagnant
pool by the side of a broad and clear and deep strong-
running stream, but the stream is steadily rising in


its channel year by year and soon will it permanently
overflow its banks and sweep away into oblivion all
traces of these fonl blots which once had covered its
whole surface, and which had been swept away some
years ago in one tremendous flood which had left
the water in the stream turbid and discoloured, it is
true ; but still it was wholesome, pure and sweet, and
as the flood subsided, leaving the unwholesome growth
in little stagnant pools upon the hank, the water in
the stream became as clear as crystal, and there still
remained a broad and deep strong-running stream,
retaining still its purity, where once there had been
nothing hut a chain of stagnant waterholes
fostering and feeding all kinds of poisonous fungi
and noisome weeds, both round their hanks and
floating on their surface; vox popali vox dei is now
no longer the cruel sarcasm that it was, for verily the
voice of a great true-hearted, liberal-minded, well-
educated people is as the voice of God, speaking in
still, small tones, words of the mightiest import.
Thus my spirit guide, as we slowly sailed along
the great sea wall past Eose Bay and where Hills Bay
had been, where the wall now formed one grand sweep,
not nearly so deeply indented as was the old shore of
these two bays, much land having been reclaimed by
filling up the shoal and building the wall far out into
deep water; round past the intervening headland,
between Eose and Double Bays, where once had been
a rocky cliff, on which had stood the house and
grounds of Mr. Hill, hut all which had now been
levelled, as had the rocky point between Eose and
Watson’s Bays, and all the stone that once had formed
these points had now been used for building, some for
the inner hacking of the granite facing to the great
sea wall, some for the warehouses that were built
thereon ; behind and above the warehouses rose the
streets in tier on tier. Eound into Double Bay, and


there again was I astonished by what I saw—more
land had been reclaimed, and warehouses and extensive
stores now lined the place where once the old u Magic”
and the u Peri ” with the u Neried ” and the u Lone ”
had been wont to anchor, while in front of all there
swept in graceful curve, the wall with its cranes and
double line of railway; hut the greatest change that
here had taken place was on the point that lay on the
Westward side of Double Bay, here the line of railway
left the frontage for a space of some four hundred
yards in length, having on its Northern, or right hand
side a spacious yard that was covered by large sheds
the outer end of which reached quite down to the
water’s edge, and here alone, so far as I had seen, the
frontage line of wall was broken, for here, extending
far out into deep water, were ways for launching
ships, and all the hill that once had formed the outer
end of Darling point was cut away to form the yard
on which these sheds were built. Here my guide
informed me the largest ship afloat had just been
launched. ‘ i
She is, “ said he,” just “ seven hundred and I
twenty feet in length from stem to stern between the »
uprights, and sixty feet across the beam, eight-and-
twenty feet her draught of water aft when loaded,
and three-and-twenty forward ; over all she measures
seven hundred and fifty feet in length, and now is
lying just round the point under the company’s big
crane, getting on board her engines masts and
boilers. She is built throughout of steel. The plates
were rolled, and every portion of her engines hull
and boilers all were manufactured here in this same
yard. The last one launched from off this slip, which
was till now the largest ship afloat, was seven
hundred feet in length, and was the fastest ship
afloat, the extra twenty feet in this last new one,
the “ Federal Australia,” as she is called, giving a


rather finer entrance, will, it is expected, make her
slightly faster than the u Congress,” the last one
built. In all, but this slight difference of length,
their dimensions are the same. This last one makes
just fifty ships, the smallest of which is six hundred
feet in length, belonging to this company, that ply
between this port and India. Our trade with this
rich country is enormous; hence we take wines, fruit,
horses, frozen meat, iron work of all kinds, heavy
guns, machinery, tin in great quantities, copper,
manufactured woollens, wool, and many other valuable
exports, bringing in exchange tea, coffee, cotton, rice,
spices of all kinds, and large quantities of gold and
silver, which India now produces in enormous
quantities, and has done ever since the independent
state lying along the south-western slope of the
Himalayan Mountains have been thrown open to the
entry of Anglo-Australian enterprise, energy and
capital. A fine and very pure magnetic iron ore, of
which the finest steel is manufactured we also get from
therein considerable quantities; this we use in the manu-
facture of the finer class of barrels for fowling pieces,
cutlery and instruments for surgical use.
From Madras, Calcutta, and Bombay, all the
many kinds of merchandise that are landed there from
Sydney and from many other large Australian ports
are distributed throughout the inland districts by the
railways, and by these the produce of the whole
country is brought into the seaports for shipment
thence principally to Australian ports, of which the
most important are in the order in which they are
here mentioned, Sydney, Melbourne, Newcastle,
Adelaide, Rockhampton, Brisbane, Port Darwin, King
George’s Sound, and Perth ; there are also many other
ports of smaller note. From the coast much of this
enormous quantity of sea-borne cargo is distributed
throughout Australia by railway. In all the ports


great care has invariably been taken to give the best
and most complete communication possible between
the railways and the shipping. In some of the older
ports, most notably in our own, enormous sums of
money have had to be expended in the re-purchase by
the state, of alienated land and in the re-construction
of large public works which had been designed so
badly as to be useless. The annals of our country say
long weary years elapsed e’er we could break through
trammels of red tape in which we so foolishly had
bound ourselves and by which all progress was pre-
vented, but at last we gained our freedom; all official
dictatorships held by departmental engineers in chief
were replaced by boards of works whose every act
was open to the country and the press; all ideas for
extensions of existing works or for proposed new ones
are laid before these boards and are by them discussed ;
when any just and satisfactory conclusion is arrived
at, competitive designs and estimates are called for,
these are laid before the board, who reward by honor-
able mention, and give the carrying out the work to
the successful candidate; this practice has fostered
the growth in our community of a highly efficient
class of engineers and architects, each one of whom
gets a fair share of work. We also have a large and
very important trade with Southern Africa, which is
now a great and powerful state.
“But” said I “has Madras a harbour now
suitable for receiving such fine vessels ? ”
“Madras! Yes, surely there you will find one
of the safest, most commodious, and best suited for the
the loading and unloading of large ships of any port
in India, the breakwater and approaches, with all the
wharves, form one of the greatest engineering works
in all the world. But now we are nearing the great
crane at which the last new ship is lying —the
“ Federal Australia” : a proud name is it not ?—That


crane is capable of lifting two hundred tons, the
massive bed plates of the engines of these great ships
require such powerful lifting gear.”
“ Pray answer me one question and bear patiently
with my ignorance: I see the crane with all its
lifting gear, its cylinder and piston rod, but how, in
the absence of a boiler, do they get the motive power ?”
u lf you were nearer you would see that the
cylinder is unsuitable for steam and is of the kind
that is used for gas.”
“ Ah ! thanks ” said I, antediluvian as I am I’ve
heard of these same gas engines, and wonderful things
they are.
“ But,” said he, with grave composure, “ I
hardly think you can have heard of this new form
of theirs, for many things strike you as being new
that are of far older date than these, the ones you
know must be the first invented ones that were new
some fifty years ago, these failed to utilise to the
fullest possible extent the expansion and contraction
of the gases consequent upon and following instan-
taneously after the explosions. These new ones work
expansively to the greatest possible extent, and
greatly economise, thereby the expenditure of car-
buretted hydrogen, the oxygen is supplied by
admitting air, the nitrogen in which, not being
exploded with the other gases, expands with the heat
evolved by the explosion, and contracts again to
nearly its normal volume, acting as a cushion to
prevent injurious collision between the piston and
cover of the cylinder, which would most probably
ensue were pure oxygen and hydrogen made use of,
owing to the almost perfect vacuum being formed so
suddenly by the combination of the oxygen and
hydrogen.”
While he was still speaking we passed under-
neath the bow of the great new ship, the “ Federal


Australia.” She did not at first sight look so very
large.
“ Would you like to go on board,” said my
friend and guide.
“ Very much,” said I, and taking no heed of
time we fastened our boat to the gangway ladder, and
on board we went; then in going up the ladder I
found the great height above the water that her deck
was, and a noble expanse of deck she showed, flush
from stem to stern, bounded only by a light and
tasteful iron railing, which supported a wire netting
skylights and companion-houses, only broke the grand
sweep of deck right fore and aft, excepting where her
two huge funnels rose from out the stoke-hole hatch-
way. The masts you hardly noticed, of these there
were only two, and those by no means large for this
huge vessel, and each was formed, or seemed to be, of
one long tapering spar without a break; no yards
had they or aught to hold the wind, and the light
steel wire rope rigging looked like threads of
gossamer. He, seeing me looking intently at the
masts said,
“ They are made of best steel plate, and are
capable of bearing an enormous strain, which indeed
they have to do when carrying each one its two large
sails— a staysail and jib-headed trysail; but let us go
below, so that you may see the main and lower
decks.”
The height ’tween decks astonished me, a clear
ten feet, splendid saloons, luxuriously furnished, ex-
tending quite across the ship from side to side, large
ports with handsome plate-glass windows opening
nearly to the deck, and being fully six feet high
allowing egress to a balcony that ran along the outside
of the ship for a hundred feet amidships on each side,
the forward and after end of this main deck weie
occupied by cabins furnished splendidly, these amid


other wonders met by astonished gaze; then going
still further down into the lower deck, I found the
height ’tween decks the same, full ten feet clear, here
all along each side, were cabins of dimensions quite
beyond all I had ever seen on board a ship, each
with a large and roomy port with plate-glass window.
“Will she be able to carry these lower ports open
when at sea ? ” asked I.
“The “Congress” carries hers open in all but
very heavy weather, so I fancy this boat will; you
see they are a great height from the load water line :
just eighteen feet to the sill of the lower ports when
she is fully loaded. You will have to come some
other day to see the engines, as at present they are
not completed.”
Getting out through a main deck port on to the
same gangway ladder at which we left our boat, we got
on board, and, casting off, set sail again. Thinking it
must be late, and looking at my watch, I found to my
amazement it was twelve o’clock at night and still it
was broad daylight. “ How is this ” said I “ amongst
so many other wonders does the sun not set at all ? It
should have been down five hours, and still it is broad
daylight.”
u Do you not know that now we have no darkness,
as soon as the sun gets low the electric light’s turned
on' on every prominent point there is one fixed, so
that you scarce can note the change from night to day
and day to night. Clarke Island is one station, do
you not see the light ? ” I looked and saw what
seemed to me just like the sun seen through a thick
mist—no bright disagreeable glow, but a slightly
luminous centre surrounded by a halo or a ring of
light seemed to diffuse its light most agreeably to the
eye; there are fifty of these lights in all and they give
perfect light to all the city and. its environs.
“ Thus,” said my guide, “ all work was going


on as if it was really daylight, all the many ships
were loading and unloading, trains passed and re-
passed, and shunted on to sidings lines of trucks that
had either brought down cargo for some ship just
loading, or that were empty, and to be loaded from
some ship discharging, all was bustle and activity,
sounds of busy labour echoed from the ship we had
just left, where while we had been on board all
had been still as death, remarking this, my friendly
guide informed me that the day that had just closed
was Sunday, which day they strictly kept. Said he,
“ From twelve o’clock at night on Saturday to
twelve on Sunday night all labour ceases. Only the
mails by boat and train go out and come in as usual.
Letters are delivered only twice, at seven in the
morning and six o’clock each Sunday evening, on
every other day there is also a delivery at noon. The
sewage works are also carried on the whole week
through without cessation, for it is considered better
to do such needful work on this the Day of Best than
by a more close observance of the day, to risk the
health and possibly the lives of many, for all around
the works the population is almost too thickly
crowded, and though great care has been taken to
supply well-built, well-drained, well-ventilated houses
for the workmen and their families—large handsome
houses too, and so arranged that each floor accom-
modates a family, each has bath and wash-house and
every convenience. A stoppage of the works, even
for one single hour, would so vitiate the air as to be
unwholesome, and we hold it to be no desecration of
God’s Holy Day to do a needful work.”
I noticed that my friend slightly, but with
reverence, bowed his head at mention of the word s,
“ God’s Holy Day.”
The Postal and Telegraph -Service too we deem
of great enough importance to need attention on a


day, for who can tell in such a vast community as
ours, how many aching hearts through all that seven-
and-thirty hours, from six o’clock on Saturday afternoon
to seven on Monday morning, might wearily be
craving for some tidings of a loved one, whose
precious life might even then be hanging by a thread.
Believe me, in cases such as this, God holds the
keeping of His Sabbath to be more honoured in the
breach than the observance.” Again he slightly
bowed with reverence at mention of that holy
name. Still were we gently sailing on, and passing
Elizabeth Bay, I saw the busiest and most stiring
scene that could be well imagined, men, like mere
pigmies in comparison with the enormous masses they
were moving, were bringing down to the new ship’s
side the heavy bed plates for her engines; these far
overhung the trucks on which they lay at both ends
and sides, and many men with careful hands and
levers, kept the huge masses from commencing sway-
ing to and fro; one was already underneath the crane
and was being slung ready for hoisting, three
more, each one on separate trucks, were being slowly
and carefully moved up, the little shunting engine
that was pushing the three great loads in front of her
coughing and panting with the load as she slowly got
it into motion after each stoppage. Still sailing slowly
on round into Rushcutters’ Bay, I found that more
than fifty acres had been reclaimed from the shoal
water along its shores, on which had been established
extensive workshops and all the numerous appliances
for conducting the varied work of a large engineering
and ship building company, these stretched continu-
ously round to the point on which the building sheds
and ways were placed; in front of all these works
except the sheds and ways, there ran the wall with its
deep water frontage and double line of railway, with
frequent sidings and points and crossings, by which


whole trains could be turned off the lines into the
various workshops or stopped beneath the cranes, by
which great ships were lying. Sailing past this vast
establishment round under Pott’s Point we saw a long
extent of wharves with warehouses, in front of each
warehouse was a crane placed on the outer edge of the
sea wall so that it could raise the cargo from the hold
of any ship lying along-side the wharf, and swinging
round, could land it in a truck placed upon the railway
line. Carried across the double line that went along
the frontage from every crane a line of rails was laid,
that, passing through a wide-open door in each
warehouse front, allowed the passage to and fro
between each crane and its attendant warehouse
of loaded trucks that could pass with their
precious freights clear within the warehouse,
and there unload at leisure. And passing round
Pott’s Point I saw that between the north-
western corner and Garden Island what seemed to be
an elevated roadway had been built, all the rocky
eminence had been removed, and in its place there was
a large dry dock that had been excavated on the spot
on which the island once had stood, all the low-lying
rocky ledge that was covered by shoal water had
been reclaimed and formed into a large rectangular
platform, that seemed to be about fourteen hundred
feet in length, and four hundred wide, bounded all
round by a massive granite wall, excepting where
the dock gates opened. Seeing my attention fixed on
this grand structure, my guide thus spoke,
“ Here are two dry docks, though from where
we are you only can see the one that opens on this
side of the wall, along which we are now sailing.
The other dock opens on the opposite side, and both
gates face the southern shore. Each dock measures
one thousand feet in length, and in the widest part
one hundred feet in width, and their length runs


parallel with the wall which continues its course
between them. Along the Avail between the docks
there runs a line of railway. There is never less than
thirty feet of Avater at the entrance of these docks at
quite loav tide. Just stand across outside the island,
and Ave will go round outside the docks, and then
along the Avestern side, the Avail, the whole of which
is occupied by patent floating docks, on Avhich ships
of all sizes can be hoisted up clear of the water.
These are fast superseding the old • dry docks. The
Federal States Company, at whose yard you saAV the
large neAV ship, have two of large dimensions, and
these are all they use for docking any of their ships.”
The Avind freshening as it dreAV toAvards morning,
though all this time it Avas as light as day, and had
I not been told that it Avas night, I never should have
knoAvn it, save for a darkened appearance in the sky,
as if a thick dark mist was hanging like a pall above
the earth obscuring the bright sunlight, and yet
beneath the mist all Avas clear and bright. The
electric burners, my guide informed me, were enclosed
in a globe of peculiar construction, that dulled
the brightness and unpleasant glare, and only gave
fOl th a toned-doAvn and agreeable light, that though
not bright and glaring, penetrated as the sunlight
does on a dull and cloudy day, throAving no shadow,
and giving an equal and good Avorking light. With
the freshening breeze Ave quickly rounded Avhat Avas
once old Garden Island, and stood along the Avestern
side of the long Avail, along the whole length of
which I saAV great caissons moored that formed the
patent floating docks, on Avhich large ships were lifted
clear above the Avater. While Ave Avere passing, a large
ship steamed sloAvly up. u See,” said my guide,
“ There is a vessel just going to be raised on
this neAV floating dock, let us stay and Avatch the
operation, it does not take long.”


All that could be seen of this large dock were
two long, low, narrow, flat-topped iron tanks, running
parallel to one another, about one hundred feet apart,
each one about twenty-five feet wide, about one
thousand feet in length, and no more than about
three feet above the water. Along the centre of
these tanks were heavy iron rings, and all along the
top of each were laid long spars, with long ropes
fastened to each end, and several men were waiting
on each tank. The ship steamed slowly in between
these two long tanks; two ropes were thrown one
from each bow of the tall ship and were caught by men
upon the tanks. These, one on each tank, walked
quickly forward holding the rope and keeping before
the ship which still steamed slowly on, as her midship
part came in between the tanks two other ropes were
thrown one from each side, these again were caught
by men upon the tanks, one mao on each, who again
walked quickly forward with the ropes, the ship still
kept advancing slowly though the engines now were
stopped, as her quarters came slowly in between the
tanks two other ropes were thrown, one from each
quarter, and were caught by men upon the tanks,
these, instead of walking forward with their ropes,
quickly hauled upon them and drew from over the
ship’s side two hawsers with large iron hooks upon
their ends, these were hooked each one into one of the
large rings upon the tanks, and as the ship advanced
and her stern came up within the outer ends of the
two tanks a slight commotion in the water told that
the engines were reversed for half a turn, four other
warps were now hauled quickly from over the ship’s
side by the ropes that had been already caught by the
men up on the tanks, one from each bow and one from
each side amidships. These hooked into rings upon
the tanks were soon hauled tight on board, and the
great ship was moored between the tanks by three


stout hawsers on each side. Now these began, as if
by magic, to pour forth from all along the outside of
each tank great streams of water; a number of small
ropes were now thrown from each side of the ship upon
the tanks, and these were quickly fastened to the ropes
that were upon one end of the spars that were laid
along upon the top of each great tank, the ropes were
hauled on hoard, and with them one cf each spar,
the other end being fastened each by its rope to a
ring holt on the tank, not tightly, hut allowed to hang
over the inner side, so that one end of each spar would
butt against the tanks’ inner side while the spars
other end would rest against the outside of the ship.
The water still kept pouring in great streams from all
along the outside of the tanks, and in scarce three
minutes time the whole vast mass had risen full four
feet, the tanks being now full seven feet out of water,
I now could see that though the outer side of
these great tanks went down quite straight the
inner side went down in steps so that one length of
spars could find support for ships of various breadth
of beam and height above the water; as still the
huge mass kept rising, men with large mauls and
wedges tightened up the spars that were intended
when she should cease to he supported by the water,
to keep the ship upright, still the great streams of
water kept pouring forth from the inside of each tank
and as the mass kept rising I saw, that the two inner
sides, still going down iD steps, would soon come close
together, at last the ship was quite clear of the water
and I could see that underneath her keel were heavy
transverse wooden hearers upon which she rested, now
the men with maids and wedges filled up the spaces
between the keel and such bearers as she did not rest
upon for she did not touch them all at first. Now
that I had time to look I could perceive that these
two separate tanks as I had taken them to be were


merely the hollow walls of a great floating dock and that
they were joined together at the bottom by a great flat
tank the upper sides of which they formed, the water
being pumped from this huge hollow tank gave it the
power of floating its own weight together with that of a
large and heavy ship, but said I to my friendly guide
I see no pumps.
“ The cylinders for the gas engines are ranged
along inside each tank, so are the pumps, a cylinder
and pump to each compartment, of which there are
great numbers on both sides, and each side is quite
separate from the other by means of a water-tight
division that runs from end to end right down the
centre of the bottom tank; tubes that are both strong
and flexible convey the gas straight from the main
that runs the whole length of the wall, into the iron
pipes, one on each side, that supply the cylinders.”
Scarce half an hour had passed since first we saw
the ship come steaming up to go upon the floating
dock. And now sailing swiftly on, I saw that the
double line of railway had passed round into the Bay
of Woolloomooloo, inside, or to the south of all this
work, and that only a branch line ran along the wall
out to the two dry docks. Now sailing round the Bay,
I saw that here again, along the great frontage wall,
were cranes and warehouses, with ships loading and
discharging cargo—stores and workshops, trains
passing and re-passing, and many a hundred men and
boys busily employed; much land had been reclaimed
from the shoal water, and the great frontage Avail
SAvept round the Bay of Woolloomooloo, and round the
point Avhere Lady Macquarie’s Chair had once been
carved in stone; but all the long rocky point had been
cut away, and the line of railway swept round with
gentle curve, inside of where the baths had used to be,
leaving on its outward or northern side the long narrow
point on Avhich Avere noAV erected building sheds for


ships, with ways for launching, and the once narrow
point had been much increased in width. Sailing
round this point into old Farm Cove, I saw a picture
that indeed was beautiful. The old Botanical Gardens
were still where I had known them, but so enlarged
and beautified, that they formed a very paradise,
quite shut off from the busy hum of labour, by a lofty
wall. The railway line alone encroached upon this
fairy land, and passed along the frontage wali, and, by
strong contrast between the useful and the beautiful,
rather tended to heighten the extreme beauty of the
scene. Here the frontage wall was surmounted by a
handsome parapet, and in the centre of the graceful
curve by which the wall swept round the bay, a broad
and handsome flight of steps reached to the water’s
edge, where boats might land their passengers; a
statue of great beauty adorned the lower steps on
either side, these statues leaning gracefully against
the lower end of a handsome balustrade that was
carried up on each side of the flight of steps, formed
ornamental terminals; others again there were on
either side the broad and spacious landing, where the
balustrade joined the parapet, while all along this last,
upon its gorgeously carved and handsome copeing,
placed at convenient intervals, were statues of exceed-
ing grace and beauty. Here also much land had been
reclaimed from the shoal water, and the gardens had
been much enlarged, both by this reclamation, and by
being extended further back, so that what encroach-
ment had been made on the eastern side, had been
more than compensated for.
They now extend, my guide informed me, oyer
all the land that once belonged to the old residence of
the Governor, taking in the two domains, as they were
called—the inner and the outer.
Though it was night, large fountains, throwing
their graceful jets more than a hundred feet in height,


played constantly. A band was playing, people
thronged the walks, and all seemed like a fairy land.
Seeing me perplexed, my kind and patient friend and
guide thus spoke:
u During the hot weather, we frequently turn
night to day, and day to night, while work goes on
without cessation night and day. All labourers and
tradesmen now work each man eight hours, so that all
may have eight hours for work, eight hours for sleep,
and eight hours for recreation, and improvement of
their minds. This last, I’m proud to say, all classes
avail themselves of largely ; our schools are crowded,
our lecture halls attended daily by crowds of students,
our university degrees are esteemed the highest that
can be obtained in all the world. The library belong-
ing to our National Museum is daily thronged by
crowds of anxious seekers after knowledge—true
knowledge that teaches us humility, and that we’re
only on the threshold of the vast storehouses of science.
We read with wonder that in the olden days science
and theology were at variance. This seems strange,
for now they go hand in hand. The latest new
edition of the Bible is a wonderful exponent of all the
mysterious labarynths of science.
As he still spoke, we sailing swiftly, rounded the
point on which had once stood old Fort Macquarie;
here was now a yard for building yachts, and several
of these of elegant and graceful model were on the
stocks in various stages of completion. The railway
line turned round the point close under the cliff, to
the upper edge of which the gardens reached, whence
trees and flowering shrubs, and gorgeous creepers
overhung the fence, the creepers climbing more than
half-way down the cliff, the line so turning round
the cliff, left the boat and yacht-building yard on the
outward or northern side, and having passed the yard,
came again into the frontage, hence it swept round


the Circular Quay: here, excepting for the railway
line, the handsome frontage wall, the cranes and
conveniences for loading and discharging, there did
not appear to be much change; so, sailing across to
where Dawe’s Point and Battery had been and thence
across the little intervening bay to Miller’s Point, I
found that the whole of those two points had been
removed, and round where they once had been, the
frontage wall, with its deep water and double line of
railway, now swept in one bold curve, thence,
turning round to Darling Harbour, the wall continued
to give deep-water frontage all round Darling Harbour
—from where Dawes’ Point had been there stretched
a double bridge, one branch of wdiich reached Blue’s
Point, the other went to Milson’s Point—this, an
extremely picturesque and graceful one of the
suspension class, gave sufficient headway to allow the
passage of small craft; but above this, no vessels with
masts or lofty funnels can ever go. Passing under-
neath the bridge and continuing southward, we passed
through seven other bridges, making eight in all,
the double line of railway still running along the
frontage wall underneath the bridges until it
reached the head of Darling Harbour; here it
left the wharf, and ran my guide informed me,
to Redfern, where the grand junction was of all
the lines of railway. Sailing onward still, we
followed the wall round the south end of this inlet
(Darling Harbour), and passed on the western side
what, amid all this busy scene, appeared most strange,
—a spot that seemed to be devoted to nothing useful
or ornamental, but was entirely idle and unoccupied,
and was enclosed by a tall iron railing. The frontage
wall, too, as it approached this apparently ill-omened
spot, abruptly terminated, and passing on we found
that it commenced again just as abruptly on the
other side of this deserted place. The two ends of


the wall were separated by an old rusty and neglected
structure that appeared once to have been an iron
wharf, for the superstructure still was tolerably sound,
but the piles or cylinders on which it was supported
were eaten through and honey-combed by the action
of the water, which seemed to have contained at one
time much free acid, or the iron could hardly have
been so destroyed. In large cast-iron letters, fastened
to the fence, I saw this notice: “Darling Harbour
Government Wharf Feeling that more was intended
to be conveyed by this announcement than I could
comprehend, I, mutely, with enquiring look, turned
to my companion. He, smiling, said :
u This melancholy ruin we retain as a monument
to the official obstruction to all progress of a
bygone time—this little miserable travestic of a wharf
was designed to be the great connecting link between
the seaborne and inland traffic of our harbour. It
seems almost too absurd to say so now, but it is a fact
that for many years all progress in the improvement
of our harbour and the connection of our railway
lines, with its deep-water frontage, was impeded, and
to a great extent prevented because one or two high
officials had, in their ignorance, pronounced in favour
of this ridiculous idea; so now we preserve it as a
warning to prevent our race falling into so grave an
error as to allow any paid official to dictate to us as to
what we shall have done in the extension or improve-
ment of our public works.” Now, as I not long ago
informed you, when the carrying out of any important
work is contemplated, competitive designs and
estimates are called for, with instructions to com-
petitors that a general uniformity of design in out-
ward form shall be preserved between the newly-
projected work and all works similar in character
that have been previously executed. These designs
and estimates are submitted to a board of works


composed of men well-tried and honourably-known,
who after due deliberation, decide upon and choose
the best. How, let us land ?
So, taking down the sail, we pulled across the inlet
to the steps at the foot of Market Street; here I saw
a broad and handsome stairway, round which were
lying many boats. Tying our’s amongst them, my
friend beckoned me to ascend the. steps.
It is now past three o’clock, and I am sure you
must be both tired and hungry —I am, I know.
There is a club hard by, of which I am a member, and
as it is one to which we can invite a friend without
the absurd formality of his being an honorary member.
I can offer you some lunch, a comfortable bed, a bath,
and breakfast.
I, smilingly : “It seems strange to me to hear of
lunch at this time of the morning.”
“ I daresay, but you remember what I told you.
Will you prefer the general table, or shall we have a
private room ?
I, wishing to observe all I could of this strange
people, replied, —“ By all means the general table.”
“Would you like a cup of coffee, or a glass of
wine before you retire to rest ? ”
“ Some coffee I should enjoy immensely; and a
trifle of something solid would by no means come
amiss.”
“All right,” said he, “here’s our club; let us
see what we can get.”
Turning in through a lofty and spacious doorway
we entered a large long hall, from which on either
side there opened several doors. Opening one of
these we entered a handsomely furnished room; a
large long table occupied the centre with massive
chairs all round it, while all along each side of the
large room were ranged small tables of various sizes—
some with two, some three, and some with four chairs


round them. Sitting down to one of those with two
chairs only, and inviting me to take the other chair,
my guide and host said:
“Now you can hardlyusk for anything that we
cannot supply you with at almost a moment’s notice,
so say what you would like, or as you’re a stranger let
me suggest something that I think you’ll like. At
dinner yesterday we had a very nice game pie—they’re
sure to have one cold for lunch or an occasional snack
such as we want now. Suppose we try some with a
bottle of Lindemann’s Cowarra—we have some of 1887,
just forty-five years old, a real good wine, Cowarra is
always good, but that vintage is exceptionally so—for
a light sound wine it is my favourite of all the many
brands we have; after that some cafe noir with or
without a soupcon of eau de vie as suits your taste, a
weed or cigarette and then to bed.”
The very thing, said I. Putting his lips to a
funnel-shaped orifice in the table, he whispered down
his orders in so low a tone that I could barely catch a
word. Barely a minute had elapsed when a servant
in neat livery placed upon the table a tray with neatly
folded cloth and napkins of finest damask folded on
the plates. On raising up the corner of the cloth we
found all that had been ordered ; the servant after
waiting a few seconds for any further orders and
receiving none, retired; we hungry as hawks were not
long in dispatching all we wanted of the pie, which
verily was delicious, the wine equal to the finest
Burgundy. On a separate little tray were placed two
little eggshell china cups and saucers, a little silver
coffee pot, that held within it some arrangement for
retaining heat, for the coffee when poured out was
almost boiling, and the fragrance of it was delightful.
Beal Mocha, said I.
“No,” said my friend smiling, “ Australian.”


Helping ourselves to sugar we sipped the hot and
fragrant beverage awhile in silence.
“ How,” resumed my friend, u we will retire to
rest, let me show you to your room/’ taking up a
little ivory tablet off the tray, “ this is your number
for to-night—l see the room is next to mine.” Going
out from the room in which I’d been so hospitably
entertained and turning to the left down the long hall
into which we first had entered from the street, my
friend and I following stepped upon a platform slightly
raised. A stout cord that ran through a hole in the
centre of this platform ran also through the ceiling, in
which was a large square opening of size and shape
similar to the platform. A quick pull upon the rope
and we ascend swiftly to the next floor; another pull
upon the rope, the platform stopped and we stepped
off. Passing along a passage from which on either
side there opened many doors ; we stopped at one.
“ This,” said my guide, “is yours, my room the next
one farther on. When in bed you’ll see what you may
take to be a bell rope on your right hand at the bed’s
head—pull that and you’ll let down a heavy curtain
that will shut out the light.” Cordially shaking hands
and bidding me good-night he left me. Before open-
ing my door I noticed written on the wall “ Please
take your boots off here,” and looking down saw a
small recess within the wall, across which was fixed
an iron bar * in this was a notch like the opening in a
boot jack, and underneath a pair of slippers. By the
help of this arrangement I easily pulled off my boots,
and taking out the slippers put them on. Going
within the room I found it plainly but most comfort-
ably furnished with every convenience, even |to a
shower bath. Getting into bed I pulled the rope, and
sure enough down came a heavy curtain, darkening all
the room. I was soon asleep, and never woke till
twelve o’clock at noon that day. I bathed, dressed as


best I could and found my friend. We then had
breakfast —splendid fish and game, good claret, and all
that the veriest gourmand could possibly desire. The
various tables were many of them occupied by a quiet
well-dressed, gentlemanly lot of men whose grave and
courteous demeanour bespoke them well bred and
highly educated. Breakfast over, my friend proposed
that we should take a cab.
Said he, “I will drive you round and shew you
the most noteworthy portions of the city, and this will
be as much as we can do to-day.”
Going out into the street he hailed a cab ) while
it was driving to the curb stone I took a hasty look
along the street—how all was changed from what it
was when I remembered it—large houses of three
stories with handsome freestone fronts of uniform
height and style of architecture lined both sides of the
street, which I saw by looking at the name upon the
corner was Market-street; this was at least one hundred
feet in width with a double line of tramway through
the centre. Turning to the right and looking west-
wards I saw that this street crossed a broad street
which also had a double line of tramway along its
centre; then passing through the line of warehouses
that were built along the frontage, it crossed over the
frontage'railway line, and formed the approach at this
end of a bridge which had so wide a roadway with
its double line of tramway down the centre and broad
raised footpath on each side, that but for the lack of
houses it appeared to be a continuation of the street.
“ Now,” (getting into the cab and turning north-
wards), “I’ll drive you first along a part of Quay-street
which runs parallel with the frontage wall, and has as
you see in common with all our streets, its tramway.
This Quay-street is a continuation of Devonshire-street,
which passes in front of the Terminal Grand Junction
station at Kedfern, and follows the line of railway to


the southern end of Darling Harbour—thence it is
called Quay-street, and still follows the line of frontage
to the north end of Macquarie-street. This portion is
called Quay-street west, Quay-street east commences
where the railway line and frontage wall debouche from
the Botanic Gardens on the eastern side of Wooloo-
mooloo Bay, and thence runs parallel to the frontage
line down to the fortifications at South Head.”
_ Driving northwards, we passed the approaches
to six more splendid bridges, each with its magnificent
extent of roadway, double line of tramway, and broad
raised footpath on each side. The constant stream of
traffic across these bridges was enormous—to and fro
in two long unbroken lines of vehicles and foot-
passengers, while trains of tramcars passed and re-
passed incessantly, so that the cab horses seemed
trained to go steadily between the crossings, and then
to watch their chances to make a dart across the
tramway lines.
“We have a legend,” said my guide, hut it
seems almost too absurd to mention that the imbeciles
who proposed to make that little iron wharf the
terminus and sole connecting link between the
shipping and the railway lines, contemplated the con-
struction of swing bridges to connect the eastern and
western shores of Darling Harbour, so that the
shipping might pass up and down the Harbour to and
from their little toy. Dancy stemming the torrent of
the traffic across these eight great bridges each time a
ship needed to pass up or down, its really too absurd,
however, I give it you for what it’s worth.
Having passed the bridges, we drove past lines
of lofty warehouses that faced to Quay-street on the
one side, their other fronting to the wharf.
“Here,” said my guide, “is where old Miller’s
and Dawes’ Points used to be, we are now passing
the south end of the great double bridge that con-


nects the northern and southern shores of our city ”
then as we drove on
passing old Circular Quay.” Here, though I
had not remarked much change from the water’s
side, was a great improvement. Mort’s fine wool
stores had been taken as a pattern for the line
of warehouses along this portion of the Quay,
and being joined onto, had been extended completely
round the basin. The old Custom’s buildings and
all those little stores where the P. and 0 Company’s
Wharf had used to be had been removed, and one
unbroken sweep of these noble freestone buildings had
replaced them, and lay between Quay-street and the
frontage wall and railway lines. How entering
Macquarie-street, my guide showed me where a broad
carriage drive, passing through handsome gates and
leaving Macquarie-street, passed round between the
railway and the gardens until it ran into Quay-street
east on the other side of the Gardens. Then turning
our horse’s head southwards along Macquarie-street,
we had on the eastern side the Gardens, on the west a
noble row of what seemed to be private residences.
“ These houses,” said my guide, “ are the pro-
of the State, and are kept as is the President’s house,
for members of the Congress. Of these there are
forty besides the President, and during session they
are their city residences.”
“Tell me,” said I, “of this Federation of the
colonies of which you several times have spoken.”
“ With pleasure,” said my friend. “Throughout
Australia there are forty states, each one of which
sends one member to Congress; each Congress lasts for
seven years. At the commencement of a new Congress
there is a general election throughout the country,
first for members of Congress. When these are
chosen, one of these is, by the whole country, elected
President, thus the seat in Congress for one state


becomes vacant by the election of the President.
This state has then to return another member. We
cede to Great Britain the right to have a voice in the
election of our President, by reason of the large
amount of British capital invested here. This country,
the South African Free States, India, Canada, Hew
Zealand, the small but very wealthy Island of
Tasmania, Hew Guinea and Egypt, together, form one
vast united British Empire, indissolubly bound
together by the firmest ties of friendship and mutual
assistance. But to return to our own Government:
Besides the General Congress, each of our forty states
has its Legislative Council, formed of twelve members
and a President; these hold office for three years, and
are elected each by his own state, and all merely
local matters are entrusted to their charge—but the
Council of each state has yearly to render an account
to Congress of their doings. The President of the
Congress of each of the separate Federations forming
the United Empire of Great Britain is for the seven
years that he holds office a member of the Central
Congress of the Empire, of which the King or Queen
of the British Isles and Emperor or Empress of Greats
Britain is the hereditary President. England, Ireland,
Scotland, Wales, Australia, South Africa, India,
Canada, Hew Zealand, Tasmania, Hew Guinea and
Egypt return one member each, making in all twelve
members and a President; of course there must
always be some few abuses in every form of Govern-
ment, but I think ours, both local and general, is as
near perfection as anything on earth can be—our
people throughout the Empire are well educated,
prosperous and contented, what more can be wanted.”
While he spoke we were driving slowly along
Macquarie-street. As he ceased, I, watching some
leaves falling from an English oak that overhung the
garden fence, as I silently mused upon the strange


story I had just heard, noticed that as the leaves
neared the ground they seemed to be caught in an
eddy or small whirlwind and drawn rapidly down-
wards to the gutter. I, remarking this, my friend
said:
“ You remember what I told you of the constant
ventilation that is kept up in all the drains of oui
vast sewerage system?” “Yes,” said I. “Well,
the place in which you saw those leaves drawn down
is where there is one of the down-cast pipes through
which the water from the gutters runs down into the
drain. There is a constant downward current of air
through all these pipes.”
I had ceased to wonder-—it seemed quite right
and not in the least strange that these things should
be. _ ~
“ Now,” said lie, “ let ns turn down Bridge-
street and I will shew yon the new public offices.
“Would you mind,” said I, “if we get out and
walk, for I can see better so than in the cab ?
“Not at all,” said he.
So out we got, bidding the cab to follow leisurely.
Looking up and down the street, I saw that here, as
it was in Market-street, all the houses were of
uniform height and style of architecture, and that the
style adopted was that of what I remembered as the
new Public Offices at the corner of Bridge-street and
Macquarie-street. The old Treasury had been re-
moved, and was replaced by a far handsomer and
larger building, like to the one at the opposite corner.
“ This one,” said my friend, pointing to the one
that had been the new Public Offices, “is the
President’s home, the house at the opposite corner is
the one appropriated to the foreign office and all the
numerons departments attached thereto. In it is the
great hall in which Congress sits.”
While he spoke someone, I thought, coming


suddenly out from a passage in the President’s house
pushed against me—“ A thousand pardons ” I heard
murmured as I thought, and turning round found
myself lying in a very cramped position in the stern
sheets of my dingy, very cold, the boat broadside on,
bumping on the rocks of what in the pitch dark night
I took to be Shark Island. Fortunately for me the
sheet was let go, for there was rather a fresh easterly
breeze blowing. Sitting up as well as my cramped
legs would let me, and taking up a scull, haying first
caught up the flapping sail and made it fast, I poled
the dingy round the south end of the island, and,
when clear, made sail for home, thanking God that
things were no worse, and thinking oyer my strange
dream.
Itjllee’s “ Lightning ” Printing Works, Parramatta and Sydney.




