

Fellow-Citizens


the Sompiimentd oj the
aAudtrafian Bredkyterian Board oj efytiddiom
and tke Soutk BOaied
zMjiddiond Sommittee.
FOREIGN MISSIONS
1946
CONTENTS.
(a) General.
Page.
Front Cover: Jalla-itti-Shepherd at Ernabella.
Inside Back Cover: List of Missionaries.
Back Cover: Birdseye Map of our Mission Fields.
“Fellow-citizens” .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
Black Australians for Citizenship .. .. .. .. . . .. 2
Volcanic Hills and Coral Reefs . . .. .. .. . . .. 4
Building Amidst the Turmoil .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
Church Grows While India Struggles .. .. .. .. .. 10
Liberated, But Not Yet Free . .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
Friends in Our Midst .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
(b) New South Wales Supplement.
Convener’s Report .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17
The Missionary Church at Home .. .. . . .. . . 17
Annual Consolidated Financial Statement . .. .. .. .. 19
Comparative List of Congregational Giving .. .. .. .. 20
Concerning Legacies .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 24
Gifts towards Foreign Missions work may kindly be paid in through
the local Church funds, or sent direct to the State Foreign Missions Office,
Box 100, G.P.0., Sydney.
Information concerning the field work, missionary service or missionary
training will be gladly supplied by the Church Offices in Sydney, or by the
Board of Missions Secretariat, Box 100, G.P.0., Sydney.
PLEASE READ AND SHARE WITH ANOTHER HOUSEHOLD.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by John Andrew & Co., 21 Phillip Street, Sydney.


“Fellow- Citizens.”
"Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens
with the saints, and of the household of God.” Eph. 2:19.
“The greatest source of power in the world”—such is an official des-
cription of atomic energy. Every man has power. Many have access to
power greater than their own. The peace and happiness of society depend
on how they use it.
The dread power of this new “absolute weapon” confronts us with the
black potential of utter misery and destruction. Wrongly used, it will
damn human kind to the thraldom of fear; perhaps to lingering wastage
and death. Science gave it to us. Science will develop it further. But
science cannot provide a control for the awful scope of its application. That
lies only in the will and heart of man.
Mr. Bernard Baruch, opening the United Nations Atomic Energy
Commission in New York, was constrained to begin: “My Fellow Citizens
of the World: We are here to make a choice between the quick and the
dead.” Later he said: “Science has taught us how to put the atom to
work. But to make it work for good instead of for evil lies in the domain
dealing with the principles of human duty. We are now facing a problem
more of ethics than physics.”
This is no new problem. It is still the age-old menace of the spirit
of man directing his thoughts and acts. But it is magnified by a new
physical power. Its range has become limitless and none may escape its
terror. To-day the world’s extremity transcends all barriers. In face of
the atomic bomb, there is but one people, in one world, with one question—
how to control the spirit of man; how to remake men.
Jesus Christ came among men to answer just that question. He shows
the way. He supplies the safeguarding energy. When the spirit of man
is re-fashioned by the Spirit of God, the result is a changed being. Such
truly God-controlled men may be entrusted with any power—even atomic
bombs.
Wanted, then—enough truly God-controlled men to re-shape public
opinion and goodwill. They will leaven the lump of world humanity. For
Christ has a programme for that, too —the Gospel “into all the world.”
The Gospel has a social content. But its social content is not the whole
Gospel. Taken alone it is dangerous. For the more power that mere
“things” bring to men, the more they threaten each other’s peace. Some-
thing more is imperative. That something is Christ’s whole system of
economics. “Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness;
and all these ‘things’ shall be added unto you.” The world has never
believed that. To-day we can no longer doubt it.
' Some within the Church have known it for centuries. The world
missionary movement is its practical expression, sponsored by the few.
“Into all the world” have missions been sent, evangelising multitudes;
re-making men. Resultant Christian groups in every land are the nuclei
of a real world brotherhood of God-controlled men; cells of living witness
to the Way that is mankind’s last hope. They now number scores of millions.
Racially, socially, linguistically diverse, they are, nevertheless, one in loyalty,
one in faith, one in purpose. They are united in spirit on a global scale,
as no others have ever been or could ever be. For they are fellow-citizens
of a Kingdom that has no end.
Christ’s remedy belongs to all. Every child on earth has a right to it. None can
receive it and enjoy it selfishly. Of its own nature, it must be shared. Hoard it in the
soul, and the soul turns in upon itself. Share it, and the soul grows.
That is why every living church has its missions. We Australian Presbyterians
enlarge our hearts by sharing our spiritual riches with the people of China, of Korea,
of India, of the Pacific, and with the erstwhile owners of our homeland. A grand
enterprise this, with wondrous results. But it is not yet big enough to be our worthy
contribution. It never will be that till we all—every one of us—are really extended,
winning fellow-citizens for the world-wide household of God.
Evangelism is a sure hope; evangelism—by all for all. Missions have the strategy.
They know the tactics. But they need multiplied resources.


Two bundred miles and from Ernabella, Mr. Ron Henderson adjusts the
distributor, while Pompey tests the wool load.
BLACK AUSTRALIANS FOR CITIZENSHIP.
Ernabella.
The native with the spear*, on the cover of this booklet, it Jalla-itti.
The picture was taken recently at Ernabella while he was on duty as a shepherd to
a flock of 800 sheep. Assisted by his wife, he watches their grazing and watering by clay:
and sleeps near the sheep yard where they are folded, by night. Neglect for a few hours
would mean ravaging by dingoes or wild native dogs.
A few months before;' Jalla-itti had never done anything other than food-gathering
and hunting over the wide Musgrave Range country of the Great Central Reserve. He
inherited all the skill Ira bushcraft lor which his intelligent tribe is famous. But he was,
nevertheless, living the life of the stone age. Perhaps one thousand Pitjantjatjara
Tribesmen such as he, inhabit the region. The days of their isolation from our white
civilisation are numbered. They know the things which the white man has and does and
though they suspect and even fear them, they are drawn as a moth to a consuming
candle. They are unprepared for the impact of our encroaching culture, so different
from their own. Left unassisted, they will follow the sad trail of so many of our past
Aborigines; either to die out, or to be replaced by an unwanted community of half-castes.
It was to meet this situation that our Church established the Ernabella Mission nine
years ago. A flock of 3,000 carefully bred sheep has been built up. Natives find congenial
employment in the pastoral industry which teaches them much. Last shearing produced
96 bales., Approximately half was shorn with power-driven hand pieces, by tribesmen
who had quickly learned. The next step will be to attempt to develop small settled
communities of peasant pastoralists, owning their own flocks, with the Mission as a
central servicing station.
Ernabella is well established; but development is still necessary. Children attend the
school, studying in both English and Pitjantjatjara. Adults, too, are eager to learn.
Hunters bring in their dingo scalps and trade them for goods at the Mission Store.
Some receive employment for three-monthly periods. Some stay for medical treatment
or for training. Others go and come. But a more settled type of life must be developed
on a self-supporting basis. It is difficult to teach and train people who must ever be
wandering in search of food.
The Church is central. It is the daily gathering place for all within walking distance.
The Gospel of St. Mark is now in use in their own tongue. Progress is slow, but it is
always upward. If these primitive people can be kept free from exploitation for some
years to come, our carefully planned Mission work, under the wisdom of God, will be
able to bring them safely to Christian citizenship. But those years of protection are sorely
needed. That is why the proposed Rocket Bomb Testing Range, passing through their
territory, would seem to have a special menace.


Kunmunya.
Following the withdrawal of the Rev. A. J. and Mrs. Heggie, Mr. R. A. and Mrs.
Ross took over the work in July, assisted by Mr. J. Souter on temporary appointment.
This mission station has been functioning for 36 years. It is situated on Port George IV.
Bay and serves a wide district. Communication with the “outside” is by the Mission
lugger “Watt-Leggatt.” Recently a landing ground has been constructed at Kunmunya
and it is hoped that the mail plane will touch down fortnightly. The “Watt-Leggatt”
was severely damaged by being thrown on a reef. Repairs have been effected at
considerable cost and the boat is now in full commission again. Constant overhauls are
necessary. The work of transport is heavy and exacting.
The Mission has reached the stage of development where a definite forward step
should be possible. Accordingly, measures are being adopted to strengthen personal
responsibility in the Church life, and to promote education and training in mechanics,
agriculture, carpentry, sewing, cooking and hygiene and in appreciation and expression
of the arts. Self-dependence and industry in improving living conditions and in producing
more and better foodstuffs, are slowly being _ encouraged. Recreational facilities in
substitution for some of the less satisfactory tribal activities, are being advanced. It is
hoped that the raising of cattle, sheep and garden produce will grip the imagination of
the people and help them on the road to self-reliance. This, together with the character
which Christ brings to them, will fit them for true Christian citizenship.
North Queensland.
Our North Queensland stations are in the Gull of Carpentaria. Mapoon, Weipa and
Aurukun are on the mainland on the western side of Cape York Peninsula. Mornington
Island is out in the Gulf, about 60 miles north of Burketown. The three mainland stations
adjoin and are roughly about 90 miles apart from north to south in the above order.
Mapoon lies 100 miles south of Thursday Island. The territory controlled by our Church
under agreement with the State Government, is roughly 300 miles long and 30 miles
wide. It is set aside as an Aboriginal reserve. On the three stations the population is
about 1,300, about 25 per cent, of whom are half-castes.
Mapoon was opened in 1892 by Rev. N. and Mrs. Hey, and Rev. J. G. and Mrs. Ward.
The people are largely half-caste and are fairly well educated. They live in a village.
All attend the Church services. Some 90_ children attend the school. There is a large
Church membership and a Session of native elders. ' Industries are cattle raising, copra
and fishing for the men; and faneywork and fan making for the women. The present
population is about 320. Mr. F. A. and Mrs. Cane are missionaries in charge.
Weipa is the smallest station in point of population, about 180 people, all Aborigines.
The progress of the people here in recent years_ has been very marked. They are fitting
themselves under the guidance of the missionairies for the new world into which the war
has flung them. The men engage largely in timber getting and fishing, while the women
are very skilful in faneywork. Mr. J. and Mrs. Winn are in charge, with their daughter,
Margaret, as teacher.
Sister Turner distributes goats’ milk after morning dispensary.


Aurukun is the largest of our northern missions, having a population, together with
the out-station of Kendall River, over 650, all aborigines. Cattle and fishing employ the
men; but there are as yet no industries fdr the women. In both Weipa and Aurukun the
people live in neat houses, erected by themselves. The streets of the villages are orderly
and tidy. Each station has a good Church building. The worship of the people is sincere
and reverent and there is a fine body of communicants in ’each place. Rev. W. F. and
Mrs. MacKenzie have been in charge here for over 20 years, and are greatly beloved by
the people. Mr. C. D. Sydney is also at Aurukun rendering valuable assistance.
Mornington Island is the youngest of our missions, about 25 years old. The people
number 350, including many half-castes. Cattle work and fishing employ many of the
men and the women make beautiful fancywork. Mr. J. B. and Mrs. McCarthy are in
charge, assisted by Mr. D. and Mrs. Belcher. About 30 miles from Mornington Island
is Bentinck Island, where we hope to establish a mission soon. Friendly relations have
been established with these islanders. They are very primitive and suspicious of white
men. Their need is great. They must suffer great privations during the wet season.
They have no shelters from the weather and wear no clothing, while their food supply is
precarious. There are probably 400 natives on the island.
Valiant work has been, and is being done. But the workers are too few and greatly
over-worked. We need Christian helpers —many of them. Those proficient in stock work
and in building trades are necessary, and a competent engineer who can care for the
boats and engines would be a great asset in the work. These_ stations are becoming
industrialised and mechanised, and there is a wonderful opportunity for men and women
to live and preach the Gospel of Service for Jesus Christ to these black brethren in the
far north. So many already in the Household of God —so many more to win.
VOLCANIC HILLS AND CORAL REEFS.
The New Hebrides are a strange mixture of upthrust coral reefs and mighty hills
formed by volcanic fires. The loftiest peak, not far from Tasariki on Santo, reaches a
height of 6,195 feet! Three volcanoes are active, two of them almost constantly.
Most of the Christians live in villages which are built either on coral shore fringes or
on small islets just off the coast of the larger land masses. It is in the hill country of
the volcanic formations that the remaining non-Christian groups are found, notably on
Tanna, Ambrym, Malekula and Santo. Towards these folks the eyes of the Church are
turned, impelled by the urge to evangelism.
Coming and Going.
The year saw many changes in missionary staff. The prospect of transport to Britain
made deferred leave possible for some. Others had become due for, and were in need of,
a break. Those who left or were away on furlough were; —Dr. W. and Mrs. Armstrong,
Dr. A. S. and Mrs. Prater, Rev. C. K, and Mrs. Crump, Rev. J. G. and Mrs. Miller,
Rev. C. G. and Mrs, Stallan, Rev. W. F. and Mrs. Eaton, Rev. J. W. P, and Mrs. Gillan,
Rev. E. L. and Mrs. Sykes-, and Rev. W. and Mrs. Anderson. Some have already returned,
being absent only on short furlough of a few months. Dr. Prater has withdrawn from
Mission House, Kunmunya.


Tangoa Teacher Trainees spend a leisure hour making models while little
Helen Gillan shares the fun.
the service to take up his new appointment as Principal of the Central Medical School, Fiji.
At one stage, three ordained missionaries were left with the oversight of thirteen stations.
New arrivals in the field were: —Deaconesses Maloney and Beel, to Paama; Miss
Williams and Rev. R. T. C. and Mrs. Williamson, to Tangoa; and Dr. T. J. K. and Mrs.
Jamieson, Miss Harber and Sister Edgar, to Vila and Lenakel. The building programme
for Vila also received a new impetus by the arrival of Mr. and Mrs. Cunningham.
Tazma.
The experiences on Tanna have been a cruel testing time during the past decade.
Very definite differences between French and British administration of justice have so
often resulted in injustice. The strong Christian movement, built up after many setbacks
in the opening years of this century, has been driven to confusion, and sometimes to
insincerity by the infiltration tactics of Roman Catholics and Seventh Day Adventists.
Unscrupulous dealings by some itinerant and other commercial men have added to the
bewilderment and created a widespread spirit of unsettlement, not unmixed with cunning
and a keen eye for personal advantage.
Out of such an unhealthy flux sprang the indefinable Jon Frum Movement, with all
its wierd rumours and promises of miraculous uplift for all. It has been anti-mission and
often anti-Christian. For a season it almost emptied the churches and flung whole tribes
back a generation in their beliefs and practices.
Many of the stalwarts remained faithful. With their aid, under God, we shall build
again from the wreckage. Only enlightenment can free the people from the paralysing
domination of the “Big Men,” who play on their superstitions and exploit their economic
and social dependence, to -rule their whole destiny. Our missionaries are, therefore,
concentrating on the younger folks in schools and Sunday Schools, medical contacts
and carefully-planned church activities.
Launch defects have largely confined activities to the main island. The Rev. C. W.
McLeod was able to pay one visit to Aniwa. In spite of the loneliness of this small
island and the long isolation from missionary help. Pastor Vani and Christian Chief
Weiwei have continued to maintain a_ healthy church through their faithful leadership.
On Futuna a somewhat similar condition prevails. On Aneityum, for many reasons,
both local and imported, the Christian population is badly in need of spiritual re-vitalising.
The need for more frequent visitation of these outposts of the Church is very urgent,
and somehow our transport problem must be overcome to make it possible.
Efate.
The churches around Vila have had the benefit of constancy in their missionary
oversight. They are rapidly growing up. All church organisations as in our home charges,
including well-organised P.W.M.U.’s in five villages, function regularly.
The Irririki District School is now well established, with hostels for boys and girls,
Kalcheche, who had Fiji training, is headmaster, and does extremely well. In Miss Skinner


he always has a wise and experienced colleague and friend. A four-day church conference
resulted in much deepening of spiritual life and inspiration to diligence in evangelism at
home and on other islands. A new church ha* been built and opened at Blacksands,
and a day school established to meet the needs of a group of native plantation workers.
The Paton Memorial Hospital and the Lenakel Hospital continue to Provide medical
service and training for the northern and southern parts of the Group respectively. At
Vila, four native medical dressers were trained and sent back to their villages to work.
Three native nurses finished their course. The two native dressers trained by the Rev.
R. V. Merritt in 1945 in dental practice, are giving fine service. They completed a
successful six weeks’ visit to Ambrym in the course of their duties. Baby welfare clinics
were also a feature of the mission health programme.
Ambrym.
The Rev. W. F. Paton reports many difficulties and encouragements. There have been
some accessions to the Church and the opening of new school work. Where a single
teacher was needed and could not be found, a team of six Christian men take turns of a
week’s duration. Outposts are regularly visited, services are reverently attended and the
Sacrament received with understanding.
There is much hard uphill work still to be done in Ambrym’s villages, scattered over
the tortured surface of that great island with its living volcano. Mr. Paton knows how
important is the provision of Scripture in the native language. With this object in view,
his researches into its structure and principles have resulted in a grammar of the
Lenwolwol dialect. Arrangements have been made to provide Mr. Paton with effective
assistance in the practical work, so that during his last term on Ambrym he will have
more time for concentration on his vitally important translation work. His efforts will
prove of inestimable value to the people and his successor.
The Tasmanian Church is providing a new launch to replace the little steam vessel
which is so well known in Ambrym waters.
Paama.
The many Christian people in this compact little island are rejoicing in the printing
of the complete Paamese New Testament, a monument to the finished work of the Frater
family and the old faithful teacher, Sam Tungan.
Since this station fell vacant on the withdrawal of the Rev. H. M. Bell from the work,
a group of trained native teachers have laboured faithfully in the churches and schools,
under occasional visitation by Mr. Paton. Medical work is largely cared for by a native
dresser, one of Dr. Prater’s trainees. This aspect of things was greatly helped on the
S. Ambrym section of the field, by a campaign of five or six weeks’ duration carried out
by Native Medical Practitioner John Kalsakau, who gave 1,200 injections for yaws,
offered other medical assistance and engaged in Gospel work. This fine young man is
from Vila, and was trained first in the Paton Memorial Hospital and later in the Central
Medical School, Fiji.
The spiritual need of 2,500 people in the Paama —S.E. Ambryn field remains
a challenge to some man of God to volunteer for service. For some months the problem
has been partly solved by stationing two splendid new workers (Deaconesses Maloney
and Beel) in the Paama mission house. Already the people have responded gladly. But
the vacancy for an ordained missionary remains, and somehow it must be filled.
Malekula.
Of the three stations on this great and populous island —Aulua, Onua and South-West
Bay—only the last-mentioned has had a resident missionary for some years. Of necessity,
his work has been largely itinerant. Even in this the Rev. C. G. Stallan was greatly
handicapped by the breakdown of the engine which put the launch out of commission for
many months. The little motor-boat helped out in fine weather, but was lost in a severe
storm early one morning. For the rest, mobility ha* largely depended on foot travel and
the kindly help of neighbours.
There are many evidences of a rising urge among the youth for better training and
education. Deaconess Hildebrand did successful work among women and children, the
progress of the girls’ school being particularly gratifying. Dr. Jean Davies, when not
engaged in her valuable medical surveys on other islands and relieving at the Vila Hospital,
devoted her time to work on Malekula. Her ultimate departure from her Bamboo Cottage
at South-West Bay was deeply regretted.
Marked progress was made in winning out the non-Christian bushmen. Teacher Misi
from Onua gathered in new converts and Pastor Kalorib, with several young trained
teachers, made visits to Little Nambas villages. Two new Christian villages have been
established on Toman Island. Preaching bands of trained men have made monthly
journeys to the interior. They have met with adventure, challenge, some success, and
much that is saddening. Nowhere were they rebuffed. On occasions they witnessed
gruesome practices connected with the ritualistic feasting of the spirit of the dead during
the process of disintegration of the body. Spontaneous approaches are being made by
bushmen to link up with the Christian villages.
Malekula presents a picture of opportunity for the Church. Perhaps it is now or
never. Only the filling of vacant stations by new ordained missionaries can meet the
situation.


Companions of Rev. E. L. Sykes when visiting high mountain villages in
West Santo.
Santo Tangoa Malo,
There have been more conversions at Hog Harbour. The work was stimulated by
the temporary settlement of Kalmermer, a faithful servant of God sent out by the
congregation of Pango, Vila. A very large Communion Service was held in March, with
worshippers present from Big Bay, Shark Bay and Calu. Two new Christian Chiefs were
appointed and set apart amid rejoicing.
On Malo, under the guidance of the Rev. E. L. Sykes and the leadership of Pastor
Samuel, the work of the church and schools flourishes. There,* too, reaching the
unevangelised has become a subject for concentration. The missionary completed the
manuscript for a new Malo Hymn Book and Catechism ready for printing—a truly
monumental task.
Visits were paid to West and South Santo villages to encourage the people of the
outlying churches and to reach out to the bushmen. A Santo anti-Christian “movement”
in the interior of this largest island of the Group, has occasioned some concern. The
need for immediate evangelistic effort becomes more and more urgent. Advance is
expected now that the Rev. R. T. C. and Mrs. Williamson are in the field filling a place
so long greviously vacant.
In Tangoa and surrounding villages, as elsewhere, an awakening sense of self-
dependence is encouraging. Elders and others are taking a keen interest in the plans and
constitution for the establishment of the new indigenous Presbyterian Church of the
New Hebrides.
The withdrawal of the Rev. J. W. P. and Mrs. Gillan from the Tangoa Teacher
Training Institute has occasioned much regret. Every good wish goes with them in
their quest for renewed health and vigour and in their re-union with their children in the
homeland.
In the new Principal, the Rev. J. Graham Miller and his wife, the Institute is
fortunate to have a tried worker of high training and successful experience. He will be
more than ably supported by Miss M. Williams, who has taken to her new task, the
fruits of wide and varied experience in teaching and other Christian work.
General.
A constitution for a New Hebrides Mission Council is under consideration by Sending
Committees and the Synod. Its purpose is to bring the whole of the Presbyterian work
in the Group, including that carried on by the New Zealand Church and the John G.
Paton Fund, into closer unity.
An over-all medical scheme is still being planned, but this depends largely on official
approval and co-operation from the Condominium Administration.
Inter-island transport remains an ever-presept problem. At present there is no
indication that this very serious handicap can be overcome except by the use of a Mission


Children, Women and Piccanninies in the coral island village of Tangoa.
boat of up to 60 feet in length, based on a safe harbour anchorage. Adequate medical
mobility, visitation of outlying island congregations such as Aniwa, Aneityum, Futuna, and
Erromanga; transport of missionaries to conferences, hospital, and mail steamers; moving
native teachers to and from stationing and training assignments; and planned evangelistic
campaigns in areas difficult of access —all these call for a suitable vessel always in use.
Such would be expensive, but its contribution to the success of the present Ten-Year Plan
for intensive upbuilding and development of the Church and for the survival of the people
as self-respecting vital Christian citizens, would be inestimable.
BUILDING AMIDST THE TURMOIL.
Our First Missionaries to China.
When the first missionaries from the Presbyterian Church in Australia flew into
Yunnan from India on the 17th January, 1946, they were pioneers of our work in China.
They were also the first missionaries to go forth from our midst under a system of
co-operation which will undoubtedly be the ruling principle in all future missionary work.
They had been sent out after considerable correspondence with the Church of Qirist in
China. That church issued an invitation asking for co-operation from the Church in
Australia and assured a welcome for the first workers. These were: Dr. Helen P.
Mackenzie, Sister Catherine Mackenzie and Deaconesses Margaret Cranstoun and Irene
Watkins.
Travelling difficulties were very great. Much of the heavy luggage did not reach its
owners till after the lapse of 12 months. There are also major difficulties in the matter
of living conditions and costs. In spite of all these our missionaries, after a very warm
welcome, have become established in the strange conditions.
They were settled in Yunnan—Miss Cranstoun for the time at Kunming; the others
further south in Kienshui, near the border of Indo-China. They, with colleagues from
the U.S.A., Canada and other Westerners, are in the closest association with Chinese
fellow-workers.
Language, of course, is the first priority on their time. After periods of study in
Yunnan, interrupted inevitably by calls for work, they have all gone to the Language
School in Peking. There for at least a year, they will have the advantage of the best
possible teaching and study in conditions that should give them the maximum of benefit.
We have been assured from China, not only that the co-operation of Australian
Presbyterians is welcomed, but that our workers personally are greatly appreciated.


Life is busy for the people of China’s villages where our Missionaries have
been working.
Reinforcements.
Late in 1946 Mr. Alexander Yule, M.A., was accepted by the Board of Missions for
service in China. Again this appointment was made on the invitation of the Church
of Christ in China, Mr. Yule, who has had all sorts of trouble in leaving Australia, owing
to frequent shipping postponements, is to go in the first place to the Language School in
Peking. He has been able to work with a teacher for some months in Australia. Mrs.
Yule and their two children will go out as soon as practicable.
A Temple Becomes a Hospital
The Church in China, in opening up work in Kienshui, secured a ten-years lease of an
old Taoist temple. Part was set apart for a hospital. Space on an upper floor was reserved
and remodelled to make living quarters. A Chinese Superintendent, with Dr. Mackenzie
and other associates, are in charge of this new agency of Christian service. The hospital
was opened in May, 1946. Much help in the way of medical supplies and other equipment
came from the American forces, from the Friends’ Ambulance Unit, from C.N.R.R.A. and
from various Relief Agencies, so that the hospital, in spite of present-day shortages, is
moderately well-equipped. .Out-patients have continued in a steady and slowly growing
stream; in patients, also, though few in number, are beginning to be a feature.
Direct evengelistic work is also going on in what is almost virgin soil. When our
missionaries return from Peking they should have enough language to take a real share
in the campaign with their Chinese colleagues.
Whether Mr. and Mrs. Yule will be stationed in Yunnam or in some other part of
China will depend on the decision of the Church. He and all workers will be stationed
wherever they can serve to the greatest advantage.
Vast Enterprise of the Chinese Church.
The Church in China, after the disasters and chaos of war, is addressing itself not
only to the immense tasks of reconstruction, but is also facing the further challenge of
the unnumbered millions, who are still without any knowledge of Jesus Christ. In other
words, it is not only seeking to bring order and new life in the settled areas, but has
also before it the high ideal of winning all China for Christ and His Kingdom.
To consider that the activities of the Church of Christ in China are carried on in
District Associations (Presbyteries) and Synods, throughout areas stretching from


Manchuria in the North-East right down through China to Yunnam in the South-West,
is to realise something of the vast extent of the church’s enterprises.
Considerable organisation is necessary. The officers of the General Assembly are in
Shanghai, where the Rev. Dr. H. H. Tsui and the Rev. E. B. Copland are associated as
General Secretaries. Mr. Copland is a missionary of the United Church of Canada and
has been set free by that Church to make his contribution to the united enterprise. These
two men, with their staff, are in touch with all sections of the Church throughout China,
and are familiar with all its activities and problems. The Chinese Secretary in particular,
spends much time in making personal contacts with groups throughout China. Travelling
itself is an exacting portion of the task. The Church is more and more functioning as a
united fellowship.
Another part of the task is in conferences to assess the damage done and to plan for
restoration.
An Historic Gathering.
In October, 1946, the General Council of the Church met in Nanking for several
days. This was the first occasion for many years that a representative gathering of
Church Leaders was possible. Several Mission Board Secretaries were able to attend
and join in discussions on still better co-operation and on continued improvement in the
good working arrangements between the Church, the Missionaries and the Sending
Boards. The proceedings of the Conference have been published and are available to
those interested.
As already indicated, there is a real missionary spirit in the Church. An example of
this is the Border Mission in the far-west, which owes its efficiency and initial success in
large measure to the vision and zeal of Mr. Wm. Djang. The workers are for the most
part Chyiese, though some missionaries are giving valuable help. The Church knows the
importance of such work, and will continue to press on with it in spite of financial
difficulties.
Fantastic Figures in Finance.
The Budget for 1947, shown in terms of the fantastically inflated Chinese currency,
is staggering. Millions are flung about as if they meant nothing. One million, indeed,
means very little nowadays. After a full statement of the needs, an estimated budget
of hoped-for receipts is shown. Included in this are very large amounts to come from
Chinese services and requests for contributions from co-operating Boards. The Australian
Church is asked for fS.IOO for the general work of the Assembly, and £S.IOO for the
costs of the Border Mission. These amounts will be found for 1947 from the funds of
the Victorian Foreign Missions Committee.
An Arresting Booklet
In an effort to publicise this work, and in particular to set forth in easily understood
graphic form the work of the Church of Christ in China as an attempt to unify the
Christian forces in China, a booklet, entitled “Solving a Chinese Puzzle,” was prepared
in Melbourne. Not only was this well received in Australia, it was also approved in
China, and from the U.S.A. and Canada have come requests for copies.
Looking Ahead.
The budget for the Chinese work is causing some concern; not so much because there
is a deficit but because of the extreme difficulty of forming anything like dependable
estimates of costs. If and when the currency is stabilised, we shall be able to make
fairly accurate calculations and know just what is possible. We expect to be able to
maintain the present staff of five and to help to a limited extend in the general tasks
of the Assembly. It is a great privilege to share in this grand Christian fellowship,
committed to the task of winning the world’s largest people for the Kingdom.
CHURCH GROWS WHILE INDIA STRUGGLES.
As India struggles upward towards political maturity, the fields of missionary planting
are yielding their first fruits in indigenous church leadership of splendid quality. Clearly,
for this very time has God wrought, and not in vain.
Indian Leadership.
In the Sholinghur—Pallipat field—capable, devoted men and women are rising from
the ranks of trained Christian workers to assume responsibility of a high order. Mrs.
Lucy Koilpillai is now in full charge of our Girls’ Boarding Home and Sholinghur Girls’
School. .Mr. P. D. George John has become Manager and Headmaster of our Paravathur
Higher Elementary School. Mr. S. Jesunesan Raj, 8.A., has complete oversight of the
Pallipat Higher Elementary School.


The pastorates of Sholinghuf and Pallipat, both integral parts of the South India
United Church, function independently with their ordained Indian ministers and sessions
in charge of all congregational work. Now that the S.I.U. Church is to enter into organic
union with the Anglicans and Methodists, these pastorates will come within the great
new United Church of South India with 1,300,000 member*.
Training and Fellowship.
Bible study and witness-bearing are central in the life of the Church, as they were
in apostolic times. Illiterate village adults, led by their teachers, have followed a
syllabus of study prepared by the Session. The year’s work concluded with a competitive
examination. Village women took additional courses on Christian home life, including
the care of children. These were led by teachers’ wives, who themselves meet monthly
in the Mission bungalow for fellowship and Bible study.
The ninety odd boys and girls in the two Boarding Homes and High School Hostel
eagerly attended daily Bible classes. One boy won the Sadhu Sundar Singh medal in the
India Sunday School Union examination. Other boys and girls gained prizes and
certificates.
Again outstanding features in the Church life were the annual congregational
conferences —for men in April, and for women in August. 120 came from widely-
scattered villages to stay through the women’s meetings. For the first time the women
themselves had organised the gathering; choosing the Speaker, planning the studies and
programme, and arranging the cooking and camp provision.
In March another new venture was a lay-preachers’ training retreat, over a week-end.
Leaders from many Christian village groups attended. The real vitality of the Indian
Church springs largely from its trained lay leadership.
Many hundreds of non-Christian Hindus and Mahommedan children in our 22
Mission schools received a daily half-hour of Scripture teaching. Voluntarily, numbers
purchased Bibles and Gospel portions in English and in Tamil or Telegu, for their
personal reading. Thus again, the Word of God has found a place in more and more of
the homes of the district.
Pastors, teachers and other Christian workers have found their renewal of inspiration
in the whole day set apart monthly, for their coming together for fellowship, prayer and
study. Better methods of work, daily problems of the faith, and Hindu beliefs and
practices have been thought-provoking subjects for sharing and concentration.
India’s Church Evangelism.
Firmly convinced that evangelism is the life stream of a healthy growing Church,
old and young have been taught and helped to take a part. Moonlight night and Sunday
preaching bands have visited many centres. Hindu festival days when crowds congregate
at certain centres, have offered splendid opportunities. Young Christian Endeavourers,
in a dignified way, have passed through the streets in the early mornings, reciting
Scripture, singing hymns and distributing literature. They are respected and attract a
good hearing. Thus into many a closed home, into many a remote village, the words
of life—either spoken or written—find their way. Good results frequently follow;
sometimes in strange and unexpected places. Such diligent cultivation and seed-sowing
will surely bring a great reaping.
Schools as Strategic Centres.
Our schools are strategic centres from which truth radiates widely. All have gone
from strength to strength during the year. For years an opening had been sought on the
Tirruttani Road. Hopes were realised when in August the Agoor School was established.
Held under a tree in the opening months, it is now housed in a suitable new building.
This and the teacher’s house, were erected on excellent pieces of land given by previously
hostile caste Hindus, expressly for the purpose. Thus do the barriers go down.
In Bomipalli, near Pallipat. the caste Hindu community, for the good of their children,
prevailed on the Mission to take over their school and amalgamate it with one we already
had in an adjacent village. Caste and non-caste are being brought together under the
influence of the Gospel.
Paravathur, our large central school, has attained complete Higher Elementary
status, i.e., to Bth standard. Its service extends over fifteen villages. Christian teachers
live in the surrounding hamlets, minister to the congregations, and take the children to
school with them daily. Such schools are something more than schools. They are
community centres with all activities Christ-informed.
Sholinghur High School opened its 6th form in June, 1946, so making it a complete
high school. Many difficulties had to be overcome. Through them all the Headmaster
was a tower of strength. His ceaseless industry, tact and ability, combined with his
sterling Christian character, exactly met the need. Christian boys and girls, future leaders
of the Church, do not now need to go away to another town to matriculate. Hindu boys
and girls remain with us through the formative years of adolescence. They in turn
influence their families.


New Mission School-Church (thatched) and Teacher’s House (tiled) at
V enkatarajapuraum, Pallipat.
Boarding Homes Build Character.
Happiness and industry have been the keynotes of the Girls’ and Boys’ Boarding
Homes and the 1 High School Hostel. The programme of practical training in farm and
workroom has again proved to be justified. Most Hostel boys do part time work to help
maintain themselves. One boy’s whole career was changed by his ability to climb trees
and cut leaves for goats! For the first time, a first-generation Christian girl from the
home of a village labourer, has risen to the third form in the High School.
Village Women and Children.
In the Women’s Centre at Ramakrishnapet, kindergarten, children’s classes, work
among weaver women, and village visiting have again proved a joy. Scripture lessons
are also given regularly in Local Board schools, on the invitation of the Hindu teachers.
Depletion of missionary staff has hindered the furtherance of the promising work among
caste women.
Missionary Staffing.
Mr. C. J. R. Price arrived home on furlough in February. After a few months with
his wife and children who had preceded him to New Zealand, he returned to do deputation
work in New South Wales. The family left again in December and arrived back in
Sholinghur on New Year’s Day.
Miss Catherine McCredie who had continued on the field long past her furlough date
left when she knew that Mr. Price would be returning. She arrived in Sydney in time
to have Christmas dinner with her ain folk. The strain of the war years has taken its
toll and Miss McCreadie must rest for some months before visiting the home churches.
The Rev. C. S. Boyall has now sufficiently recovered after the rigours of a Japanese
internment camp, to be passed by the doctors for return to India. He, with Mrs. Boyall,
expects to be settled in Pallipat again some time in May, 1947. His arrival will make it
possible for Miss A. Hope Goldie to leave her post for a very much overdue furlough.
Miss Mavis M. Griffin, in spite of the handicap of indifferent health, has made
splendid progress with Tamil study. There should be at least one more woman worker
in the field.
On every hand there is encouragement. Never was the opportunity for the Gospel
in India, greater than it is to-day. Perhaps it will not always be so.
Needed Immediately.
Our most pressing need is to re-open the Sholinghur Hospital. The buildings were
released by the Military Authorities from the beginning of 1947. The growth of the
High School and of the Town School brought to the Mission an ultimatum from the
Educational Authorities. Additional classroom accommodation had to be found
immediately.


Years of effort had not succeeded in securing a missionary doctor and nurse to
re-establish the medical work. So the High School was temporarily moved to the hospital
and the Town School to the old High School building.
The people are urgently looking to the Mission to continue its largely self-supporting
medical work. This, however, will not be possible till an Australian doctor, and nurse
have come forward and the means are available to provide a new High School building.
Life is difficult in India to-day. Communal tension and political ambition dominate
the scene. Conditions may become worse before than can be better. But India’s Christian
Church of nearly 8,000,000 is ready for it. Well organised, their united voice does not
go unheard. Theirs is the ministry of reconciliation; a fact which receives recognition
in strange places. Indian Christians are being weighed in the balance. They do not
intend to be found wanting. That is why evangelism and strong Christian home life are
the focal points of their planned concentration and endeavour. They have proved that
Hindus and Moslems are being brought into harmony when they are won out as fellow-
citizens of the Kingdom. For India there is no other way.
LIBERATED, BIT NOT YET FREE.
In July, 1946, the Rev. Geo. Anderson, Foreign Missions Secretary for Victoria, and
the Rev. H. W. Lane set out for Korea to make the first post-war contacts with the
Christian Church in that land. After overcoming many difficulties they at last set foot in
Korea in September. Another three weeks elapsed because of a bitter and disastrous
railway strike, before they were able to reach Pusan, the capital of the Province of South
Kyung Sang. This had been the headquarters of the Australian Presbyterian Mission
for more than SO years.
Korea has greatly changed. While there was no fighting on Korean soil, some
ships were sunk in the harbour of Pusan. Great areas of the city were destroyed by the
Japanese to make firebreaks in case of bombing attacks. The hills have been stripped of
trees; the roads are in a very bad condition; even the fine railways are in a state of
disrepair and chaos. The country has been stripped of iron, of brass, of anything that
might be used for the manufacture of war material. Industry is almost at a standstill.
So much of the Korean economy depended on Japan. Since that connection has been
broken there is, for the present, very little left on which to build.
Liberation and Disappointment
There are no Japanese to be seen though a few are still in the country. On the other
hand nearly 2,000,000 Koreans have come from Japan and elsewhere. Most of them are
poor, and hundreds of thousands are crowded into the cities where food is scarce. Their
lot is a very hard one. The authorities are trying to cope with the problem of food supply
by requisitioning the grain crops for rationing and by importing large shipments.
The unhappy country, which was at first wild with joy at the thought of deliverance
from the strong control of Japan, now finds itself occupied for the time by two other
power*. North of the 38th parallel Russia is in control. The Americans occupy the
Southern half. Ostensibly, and in the terms of the Moscow Agreement, both are working
toward the creation of a Provincial Government for Korea, after which there will be
a period of Four Power Trusteeship to lead the nation on to real independence. Actually,
at the present time, two differing and often opposing political theories are in operation


in the two areas. There are hardly any communications across the iron curtain that
divides the country; no railway service, no postal service and no travel permits. Nine-
tenths of the hydro-electric power is generated in the North. The supply that comes
South is inadequate and uncertain. Unless the United Nations Organisation can work
out a basis of agreement, about the evacuation and then the protection of Korea, the
outlook for early independence and peace is not bright.
Political Hopes in the South.
Necessarily, accurate information is from the South only. The American Military
Government is genuinely concerned for the well-being of the people. It has, to quite a
considerable extent, transferred the details of administration to Korean hands. In no
small measure, Korean leaders are sharing also in the framing of policies. A Provisional
Assembly of 90 has been constituted. In its numbers are 15 Christian*, including the
President. Its task is to frame laws for the election of a more permanent body which will,
it is hoped, lead on to the ultimate creation of an Assembly for all Korea.
The Military Government, probably largely due to American influence, has been
definitely friendly to Christian activities. This may be construed as favouritism and may
possibly lead to problems for the Church in the future.
Strain Within the Church.
What of the Christian Church? On first appearances its condition seems healthy.
In the city the large churches are very well attended and the services very well conducted.
Several congregations are enlarging their properties in spite of extremely high costs. One
or two have large rebuilding programmes.
But all is not well. During the terrible stress of war the pressure of the Japanese
in the demands for attendance at Shinto Shrines as a token of loyalty, wrought great
harm to the Church. Officially it was forced to conform. It has since recorded its
sorrow for this and has rescinded the resolution on its books. But the hurt remains.
Many ministers and leaders also conformed though often with anguish of heart. Some
few went much further and became active (and in some cases) paid advocates of a
total war effort. A number —a large number—elected to suffer for their faith. Some of
them perished in prison; others are seriously impaired in health. History shows that
after every period of persecution, the Church has been disturbed by factions. So in
Korea there are recriminations and hard feelings, some jealousies, and distressing conflicts.
There have been times when there was real danger that the Church would be
shattered into fragments. There is a secession of a small group of very earnest people,
some of them sufferers for the Faith, who have formed “The Little Church which is
according to the Truth.” While it is too soon to say that the danger of this shattering
has passed, there is no doubt of the strong purpose of many of the best and wisest of the
Christians, to sink themselves and do everything possible to preserve the unity of the
Church while doing everything in their power to cleanse it of all pride and hypocrisy.
The One Thing that will Save Korea.
There is a strong feeling that the preaching and living of the Gospel is the one thing
that will save Korea. The Bible Institute has been revived to help the training of
workers. During the war years in “our” province, out of a total of 332 groups, about 100
ceased to meet. Nearly all of these were small. Some of these congregations were
forced to close their doors because of police orders. Approximately 50 have begun to
meet again.
The future ha* danger but it also has hope; because there are so many devoted true
men and women through whom God can work. These good people most earnestly ask the
missionaries to come back and share their tasks with them.
The Problem of Accommodation.
The Mission properties are in a serious state of disrepair. Some buildings have been
sold; two were destroyed by fire. On Account of almost impossible exchange difficulties,
the dearth of materials, and the extremely high costs, no work of repair or reconstruction
can be attempted at present. Many of the houses are occupied by incredible numbers of
displaced persons. Two houses are at present accommodating military personnel.
When missionaries go out they will have to live, possibly for several years, under
conditions of great inconvenience and even hardship. Nevertheless, in addition to the
Rev. H. W. Lane, who is already there, the following are awaiting transport to the scene
of their former work: The Rev. J. L. and Mrs. Macrae, Rev. F. W. Cunningham, Miss
M. Withers, Miss E. W. Dunn, Miss D. F. Leggatt.
There is a considerable number of former missionaries working as military or
civilian personnel under the Government. Some of them are doing exceedingly fine work.
On quite a different footing, however, and living much nearer to the Korean people, are
the 30 or so who have been allowed to enter the country and engage freely in their
vocation with their Korean fellow Christians. The policy of the Government now is
to allow a number of experienced men and women to return. For the present, certain
privileges are given which enable them to buy food. But for this, it would be difficult
for them to live.


Korean singers of Pusanchin Church Choir at Tondo Temple in Piansan.
Welcome to Missionaries.
The welcome given by the Korean Christains has been overwhelming. In our own
case the Presbytery asked that the missionaries return. From all sides came requests
from individuals and congregations that their friends should be in with them once more.
Many of them will, doubtless, expect more than we shall be able to give, for they are
full of ideas about great schemes. Without doubt the control will be in Korean hands.
That need not mean less effective service on the part of our missionaries. It will, probably,
mean much more fruitful and permanent work.
A new Korea gives an invitation and a challenge to the best we have.
FRIENDS IN OUR MIDST.
Chinese in Sydney.
Our Campbell Street and St. Luke’s Chinese Congregations in Sydney are the poorer
for the withdrawal of the Rev. S. K. and Mrs. Lo in September. They had been with
us on loan from the Methodist Overseas Mission during the occupation of Darwin, to
which place they have now returned.
A new minister must be secured from China for Sydney, as also for the Melbourne
Church. Enquiries had been made through the Church of Christ in China and through
interested Chinese friends at Shanghai and Canton. The names of two likely men were
received, but suitable arrangements could not be concluded. Negotiations continue in the
hope that men of God’s choosing may be raised up to take full advantage of the local
situation which is ripe with promise. It is the nature of a post-war period that suitable
workers are not readily available, and when they do appear, the need in China is often
so great that they cannot be spared.
Meanwhile in Sydney, the Session, Committee of Management, and other leaders,
carry on nobly. Attendances at worship have been well maintained. The average
number of communicants at the quarterly sacraments was 62, being an increase on 194 S
totals. Visiting preachers assisted. Services continue in both Chinese and English.
Mr. A. A. Cobban, who for eleven years has been a devoted worker in the Church
as Fellowship Leader and in other capacities, was inducted to the eldership. He is the
first non-Chinese elder of the Campbell Street Church.
Ten infants were_ baptised during the year. Both Sunday Schools function actively.
They will improve with the coming of a settled minister. Three young men who were
baptised in December, 1944, have ably assisted in the Sunday services and have been very
active in the open-air street services.
Income from freewill giving showed an upward trend. Investigations have revealed
that an improvement will follow the calling of a pastor. £74/16/1 was subscribed to the
Relief in China Fund and remitted to China in the name of the Church. Contributions
were also made to Missions and the other enterprises of our General Assembly.


Corner of the Chinese Class, Campbell Street Church, Sydney.
(By courtesy of "Pix.”)
. The Church is handicapped in its outreaching work among the young, by lack of a
suitable hall and amenities. A considerable sum is in hand for this purpose, but it is
inadequate. It is hoped that before long the way will open for the establishment of a
Presbyterian Chinese Centre, with proper equipment and suitable trained personnel. We
believe that such would do much to bring together many more of Sydney’s 4,000 odd
Chinese friends. Many are not strangers, having been born here. But many are strangers
to the Kingdom. Our Church may not rest till they have become fellow-citizens-of the
household of God.
Chinese In Victoria.
After a period of some years, the vacancy in the pastorate in Melbourne has been
temporarily filled by the appointment of the Rev. A. Langhorne. It is still not possible
to find a suitable Chinese worker.
Mr. Langhorne spent 16 years in China and has a knowledge of Mandarin. Although
the Chinese spoken for the most part by the Melbourne community, is Cantonese, he will
be able to give real help in the pastoral work of the congregation.
A most encouraging thing about this group is that even since the death of Mr. Chin,
a loyal band of capable workers have maintained all the services. Every Sunday, the
afternoon and evening services are conducted in Chinese. Every Sunday evening there
is in addition a well attended service in English. At the Quarterly Communion both
languages are used. In the evening the leaders are either members of the congregation,
visitors, students from the Theological Hall, or from among the Deaconesses.
In addition regular meetings of the Fellowship and of Missionary Gi ! very
much alive. The work done in the Sunday School is of a high order. There is no
doubt of the spiritual vitality of the congregation. One evidence of this is the regular
open-air meeting of witness, in which a band of workers join with others of the Methodist
Church.
A monthly news sheet keeps the people in touch with each other and with the life of
the whole church.
The Session is functioning well. Several young people have entered on the course
at Melbourne Bible Institute. A young woman has finished her studies at the Institute
and has also completed nursing training. Her objective Is Foreign Mission Service. One
young man has completed his first year as a candidate for the ministry.
In Ballarat and in Geelong the work goes on. The Rev, T. Tong Way, ordained
nearly SO years ago, seems to be like Moses in that his eye is not dim nor his natural
force abated. Regularly and faithfully he carries on his work in Ballarat. Each month
he visits Geelong, and calls on the men in their homes. He is a true soldier of Christ.
So far as is known, the Mission established in the Canton area by the Chinese
Christians of Melbourne is still functioning well. Thus are the Kingdom outposts
established.


NEW SOUTH WALES SUPPLEMENT.
Convener’s Report
In the records of the Foreign Missions Committee the year 1946 was outstanding for
a number of reasons, the principal of which are: —
(a) The financial response to the missionary appeal and the rising spiritual tide in
the life of the Church unmistakably evident wherever the claims of the foreign
field are presented to individuals and congregations.
(b) The marked and gratifying increase in contributions to the cause of Christian
missions; the year’s figures revealing an amount received in excess of 1945.
(c) The all-Australian missionary programme entrusted to the Board of Missions by
the General Assembly of Australia.
In July, 1946, the re-constituted Board of Missions assumed its new responsibilities
and with vigour, insight and unbounded faith approached its task of co-ordinating and
managing all the Foreign Missionary work carried on in the name of the Presbyterian
Church of Australia. Under the set-up the Board controls the work on the several
fields and is charged with the responsibility of recruiting, training, placing and maintaining
all who from time to time will go forward for service under the missionary banner of
the Church.
Throughout the year the claims of Foreign Missions were constantly before our
people, and it is pleasing to know that the home Church is becoming increasingly
missionary minded, evidenced in spiritual growth and understanding and in the liberal
financial support that was forthcoming from congregations, organisations and individuals
in all parts of the State.
During the first half of the year the Rev. V. W. Coombes in his capacity of Secretary
for Foreign Missions served the Church with his usual faithfulness and ability. As always,
Mr. Coombes brought to his task a spirit of devotion and a keen appreciation of our
Foreign Mission needs. Much of our missionary success in recent years is directly
attributable to Mr. Coombes’ efforts during his term of office and to his flair for long-
range planning. As from the Ist July, Mr. Coombes shouldered the onerous duties
appertaining to the position of General-Secretary to the Board of Missions.
The Rev. G. F. Buckley, appointed by the last General Assembly to the position of
Secretary for Foreign Missions, assumed office in July. Mr. Buckley entered on his
duties with enthusiasm and his approach to the task has made a favourable impression
wherever he has had opportunity of making contacts with the people of the Chufch, in
metropolitan and country areas.
The Foreign Missions Committee has given its mind to the work assigned it by the
General Assembly and by wide and sustained publicity has sought to inform the Church
of her missionary responsibility, to remind our people that the supreme task to which we
are committed is the extension of the Kingdom of God, both at home and abroad, and
to solicit adequate financial support that the living Church may prayerfully and gladly
fulfil her obligations to the peoples of the world who await the promulgation of the
Gospel message.
Your Committee expresses its thanks to all who by their prayers, their gifts and
their co-operation have assisted in carrying on our Foreign Mission enterprises; commends
to the Church the missionary programme and assures all its supporters that every
contribution to its funds is utilised for the up-building of the world-wide Church by the
preaching of the Word at home and in lands beyond the seas.
J. A. MORRISON,
Convener.
THE MISSIONARY CHURCH AT HOME.
If it be true that the Foreign Missionary activity of a Church is a pulse of its
vitality, then we can rejoice in the marked growing development of our Presbyterian
Church in New South Wales. The sustained interest reflected in the generosity of all
who have contributed to this most important work is something for which we are
profoundly thankful.


The widening of the functions of the Board of Missions brought to the missionary
Church at home a new and clearer conception of the manner in which she should shoulder
her missionary responsibility. There came the realisation that the work at home should
be organised in a better way and that the time was ripe for a great forward step to be
undertaken, based on a keener sense of duty and a firmer faith in God. This new
conception of the Church’s task and the will to measure up to it were stressed during
the year, resulting in the deepening of the spiritual life of many of our people, the
fruit of which is a prayerful appreciation of the task before us —world evangelisation in
our time.
The times called for better local organisation and the devising of means whereby
more direct and intimate contacts could be made with the Ministers of the Church and
the personnel of Congregations in order that our missionary programme and commitments
might be better understood and shared by all who are made aware of the opportunity and
the need. This was attempted and a large measure of success resulted. Attractive
literature of an inspiring and informative nature was prepared and distributed on a
State-wide basis. The missionary story was presented on the screen by the judicious
use of both the silent and the sound film. The radio was also utilised and over the air
went the message of the Cross, told by the Church’s missionaries at home on furlough.
The sustained efforts of the Foreign Missions Committee to maintain and increase the
missionary constituency at home are bearing fruit, reflected in the growing interest of
our people in foreign "missions in all lands, the increasing revenue that is being received
for the maintenance of the work, for which our own Church is responsible, and in numerous
enquiries from keen young people who are thinking in terms of missionary service as
they plan their life’s future.
During the year deputation work was undertaken by the Revs. V. W. Coombes,
C. S. Boyall, G. F. Buckley and Mr. C. J. R. Price. Upwards of one hundred parishes
were visited in the interests of foreign missions and with the sympathy and co-operation
of Ministers and Office-bearers much of value was aehieved. An up-to-date sound
projector was used at many centres which enabled the claims of- missions to be presented
in a very effective and attractive manner. This means of propaganda has much to
commend it, and it will be increasingly used as appropriate films become available.
A very important aspect of our missionary activity is the ever-present and pressing
need to strengthen the links that bind the home Church to the Churches on the fields.
The Church at home and the Church on the field move on parallel courses. The one is
dependent on the other for spiritual growth and uplift. The one ministers to the other
and their destinies are the same. This is recognised by all who have an interest in the
work overseas and applies in no small measure to the personnel of the Board of Missions.
The administrative control of all the Church’s missionary undertakings is now vested in
the Board and the report of that body (presented in the foregoing pages) sets out in
some detail the progress on the several fields and the plans for the future. While it is
true that the missionaries serving the Church are directly responsible to the Board of
Missions, the Foreign Missions Committee is anxious that when at home on furlough, they
be afforded every opportunity to visit Congregations, that the “living” contact may be
preserved and that the people of the home Church may have the privilege of hearing
from the lips of the missionary, the story each has to tell.
The Foreign Missions Committee’s relationships with the Board of Missions have
been most happy and profitable. There has been mutual understanding and a sincere
desire to further the cause of missions on every field for which the Presbyterian Church
has assumed responsibility.
The financial position, as at the close of the year, was satisfactory and gratifying.
The Committee was enabled to meet all its commitments with a small credit balance in
hand. The response from all sections of the Church was excellent, demonstrating that
foreign missions is not a “lost cause,” but one that is very much in the heart and mind
of the people of the Church in whom the missionary spirit burns and glows.
The income received from all sources (inclusive of income from trusts, etc.) for the
carrying on of our Foreign Missions work was £12,072. Income from Trusts, etc.,
amounted to £2,499 —the amount received from the Church by direct giving being £9,573.
The Committee records its gratitude to God for His blessing on the work undertaken
in His Name and for that measure of success He has been pleased to accord His servants
who have laboured at home and abroad, for the coming of the Kingdom.
During the year the amount received from legacies was £2,419. As it falls due
the interest on the capital will be available to the Foreign Missions Committee for the
furtherance of the work.


Statement of Receipts and Disbursements for the Year ended 31st December, 1946.
RECEIPTS.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
1946—January 1st.
To Opening Credit Balance —
Chinese Mission . .. .. .. .. 266 11 11
General Account . .. .. .. .. 67 0 5
‘ 333 12 4
1946 —December 31st.
To Congregations —Collections and Budget .. 3,436 17 10
„ Donations .. .. .. .. .. .. 152 10 4
„ W.M.A. and Y.P.M.B.—
General and Allocated 2,462 7 7
St. Andrew’s Tea Rooms .. .. .. 1,275 0 0
3,737 7 7
„ Fellowship Union .. .. .. .. ... 611 6 8
„ Girls’ Auxiliary .. .. .. .. 512 10 0
„ Sunday Schools .. .. 290 17 3
„ Contributions, support of Mission Children .. 414 11 1
„ Ashfield Own Missionary Fund .. .. .. 136 0 0
„ Anonymous —Missionary’s Salary .. .. 120 0 0
„ Assembly and Induction Collections .. .. 51 16 0
„ McCaughey Bequest Grant 100 0 0
„ Sale of Literature and Stamps .. .. .. IS 2 9
„ Interest 2,399 7 1
„ Rents .. .. .. .. .. .. S3 18 0
„ Missionary Rally .. .. 300
„ Nurses —Collections from Congregations .. 27 0 0
„ Non-Caste School .. .. .. .. .. 10 0 0
DISBURSEMENTS.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
1946 —December 31st. .
By Mission Field Expenses —
India, General .. .. .. .. .. 3,842 16 6
Passage Money for Missionaries .. .. 400 0 0
Aborigines .. .. .. .. .. 696 0 8
New Hebrides, General . .. .. .. 590 7 4
Rev. R. T. C. Williamson, Travel and
Removal Expenses .. .. .. 40 6 9
New Hebrides Launch Account .. .. 51 9 3
Chinese in Sydney .. .. .. .. 65 10 10
„ Home Base Expenses —
F.M. Secretary .. .. .. .. .. 525 0 0
Travelling and other Expenses .. .. 137 16 3
662 16 3
General Office Charges .. .. .. 450 0 0
Beneficiary Fund . .. .. .. .. 10 0 0
Rent of Office .. .. .. .. .. 25 0 0
Interest .. .. .. .. .. .. 22 0 3
Printing and Stationery .. .. .. 64 0 3
Postages and Telegrams .. .. .. 50 2 6
Publicity and Literature .. .. .. 158 6 4
Demonstrations, Publications, etc. .. .. 182 18 7
Projector and Transformer .. .. .. 173 19 9
Delegates to Melbourne .. .. .. 27 0 0
Telephones, Lighting and Sundries ... 21 11 6
Australian Presbyterian Board of Missions 4,298 3 0
„ Closing Credit Balance —
Chinese Mission . .. .. ... .. 373 11 10
General Account . .. .. .. .. 199 IS 4
573 7 2
£12,405 16 11
£12,405 16 11
N.S.W. FOREIGN MISSIONS DEPARTMENT.


Comparative Statement
of •
Total and Per Capita Congregational Giving
for the Financial Year* 1945 and 1946.
CONGREGATIONS.
1945
1946
1946
Place
Order
Charge
1946
No. of Com-
municants.
Congregation
Total
Annual
per Capita.
Congregation
Total
Annual
per Capita.
1
175
£ s. d.
103 5 4
s. d.
11 10
£ s. d.
154 4 0
£ 6. d<
17 7
2
64
21 11 0
8 6
39 15 6
14 9
8a
134
75 12 1
11 3
77 19 11
11 8
3b
Murwillumbah
253
38 13 2
2 10
147 19 6
11 8
5
71
29 0 0
9 4
40 2 4
11 4
6
Lake Macquarie
80
60 2 0
15 0
43 3 0
10 9
7
Hurstville
327
243 17 7
14 6
168 1$ 11
10 4
8
81
50 6 6
12 5
40 6 1
9 11
0
48
24 0 0
10 0
23 6 0
9 8
10
133
78 17 4
11 9
60 17 3
9 2
11
Maitland, West
218
16 6 10
1 6
96 2 3
8 10
12a
Eylstoue-Kandos
30
—
—
13 1 1
8 8
12b
112
26 7 3
4 11
48 6 6
8 8
14
Wollongong
250
87 7 0
7 0
105 15 3
8 6
15a
Fairfield
45
—
—
18 11 10
8 3
15b
Karrandera
180
36 9 6
5 7
53 14 10
8 3
17
51
7 8 6
2 11
20 18 2
8 2
18a
444
218 16 11
10 6
179 1 0
8 1
18b
Newcastle : St. Andrew’s
356
154 15 0
8 9
143 6 0
8 1
18c
472
249 12 11
10 8
186 17 4
8 1
20
39
23 11 5
12 1
15 10 0
7 11
21
Cronuila
100
34 4 4
7 7
38 3 0
7 8
22
West Strathfleld
66
22 8 11
7 0
24 16 2
7 6
OUR CHURCH’S CONTRIBUTION TO
FOREIGN MISSIONS.


1945
Place
Order
Charge
1945
1946
1946
No. of Com-
municants.
Congregation
Total
Annual
per Capita.
Congregation
Total
.
Annual
per Capita.
23a
Casino
200
66
11
11
6
9
69
12
4
7
0
23b
Cowra
150
30
10
11
3
0
52
10
0
7
0
23c
Port Macquarie
110
167
18
5
1 10
6
38
16
8
7
0
26a
Lithgow
183
25
19
3
2
7
62
18
1
6
10
26b
Lower Manning
154
39
13
5
5
2
52
15
2
6
10
26c
Maitland, East
234
1
5
2
2
80
2
8
6
10
26d
Orange
..
,230
60
1
6
5
1
79
0
3
6
10
26e
Springwood
77
28
0
9
7
3
26
4
0
6
10
31a
Inverell
336
95
17
11
5
8
110
0
0
6
7
31b
Neutral Bay
268
79
18
1
5
10
87
15
10
6
7
33
Culcairn
96
30
16
4
6
5
34
Ebenezer-Pitt Town
74
37
5
2
10
1
23
5
7
6
4
35a
Cessnock
150
37
3
0
5
11
45
19
0
6
2
35b
Moruya
30
8
6
1
8
3
9
5
6
6
2
S5c
Riverstone
38
24
14
6
13
0
11
15
0
6
2
S5d
Wallsend
34
10
6
4
2
6
10
10
6
6
2
39
Woonona-Bulli
74
28
0
0
8
0
22
10
9
6
1
40a
Braddon
111
3
9
10
8
33
7
0
6
0
40b
Mullimbimby
91
14
3
7
3
2
27
8
0
6
0
40c
Muswellbrook
106
22
16
0
3
10
31
9
9
6
0
43a
Mumimburrah
180
55
4
9
5
6
53
4
9
5
11
43b
St. Peter’s North Sydney .. ..
..
120
26
0
0
4
9
35
7
6
5
11
45
Tenterfleld
..
104
10
0
5
2
0
29
9
11
5
8
46a
Deniliquin
164
27
12
10
3
4
45
13
1
5
7
46b
Elftinft
105
23
16
0
4
7
29
4
5
5
7
460
Lane Cove
in
33
18
4
6
7
30
18
3
5
7
46d
Mosman
650
122
15
0
3
9
181
5
7
5
7
50
Kempsey
103
28
19
4
5
1
28
3
2
5
6
51a
Canberra
..
305
85
18
10
8
3
82
2
10
5
5
51b
Jerilderie
72
29
0
0
8
1
19 10
9
5
5
51c
Yass
125
23
3
8
4
3
33
14
0
5
5
54a
Blacktown
28
5
0
0
3
7
7
10
0 .
5
4
54b
Wahroonga
303
24
8
7
1
8
81
4
0
5
4
54c
W indsor-Richmond
66
32
11
9
9
11
17
11
0
5
4
57
Greenwich
97
28
12
2
5
2
25
12
2
5
3
58a
Blayney
76
14
2
8
3
6
19
11
0
5
2
58b
Clunes-Dunoon
160
35
1
6
5
3
41
3
11
5
2
60
Warren-Trangie
100
42
13
11
7
5
25
10
0
5
1
61a
Trundle
150
15
10
0
2
1
37
7
6
5
0
61b
Upper Manning
.. .. ..
173
38
6
0
4
5
43
10
11
5
0
63a
Bathurst
215
75
11
0
8
5
52
1
6
4
10
63b
Lakemba
115
31
6
6
5
5
27
18
0
4
10
65a
Haberfleld
633
164
3
8
5
2
150
2
10
4
9
65b
Punchbowl
..
28
3
4
4
2
4
6
12
8
4
9
67a
Chatswood
400
128
17
5
6
5
91
12
6
4
7
67b
Drummoyne
279
38
3
9
2
11
63
1
8
4
7
67c
Thirroul-Scarborough
92
10 16
10
2
4
21
4
9
4
7
70
Bangalow-Byron Bay
167
33
17
9
4
1
37
15
8
4
6
71a
Bingara
131
51
1
6
7
10
29
0
9
4
5
71b
Campsie
194
52
5
1
5
7
43
0
10
4
5
71c
Grenfell
118
17
1
7
3
3
26
5
2
4
5
71d
Warialda
127
29
0
0
4
4
28
1
0
4
5
75
Bowral-Mittagong
..
123
37
14
1
6
3
26
11
9
4
4
76
Newcastle: St. Philip’s
..
186
88
10
0
9
6
89
10
0
4
3
77a
Dungog
..
130
25
4
9
3
11
27
1
9
4
2
77b
Eastwood-Ermington
345
94
12
11
5
6
72
4
5
4
2
77c
..
292
80
6
5
5
4
60
13
6
4
2
80a
Maclean
..
69
15
17
3
3
9
14
1
11
4
1
80b
Wentworth
..
35
7
3
0
4
1
82a
Auburn
..
177
44
15
11
6
1
35
2
8
4
0
82b
Sutherland
40
6
1
9
3
1
8
0
7
4
0
84
Concord Central
..
48
6
18
6
2
6
9
9
0
3
11
85
Willoughby
110
8
1
0
1
6
21
5
4
3
10
86a
Epping
345
103
9
9
6
2
64
0
6
3
9
86b
Gunnedah
100
33
6
10
6
6
18 14
0
3
9
86c
Narrabrl-Wee Waa
122
4
18
0
11
23
0
0
3
0
86d
80
9
12
0
2
4
15
0
0
3
9
90a
Beecroft
105
31
6
1
6
0
19
7
1
3
8
90b
Dulwich Hill
127
21
1
0
3
4
23
8
9
3
8
90c
Kingsgrove
57
8
9
10
3
0
10
7
0
3
8
90d
Kurd Kurd
45
9 11
4
4
3
8
5
1
3
8
90e
Pensburst
151
41
4
3
5
5
27 12
2
3
8
90f
Rose Bay
246
213 19
11
17
6
45
0
0
3
8
90g
Wollomombi
60
9
9
8
3
2
9
1
0
3
8
97a
Bland
..
73
2
19
11
10
13
2
6
3
7
97b
Burwood
457
130
7
0
5
9
82
2
0
3
7
97c
Cobar
20
4
8
0
8
10
1
16
0
3
7
97d
Crow’s Nest
250
69
3
3
5
6
44
6
8
3
7
97e
Lindfleld-KUlara
516
92
8
2
3
10
92
6
9
3
7
97f
Parramatta
250
39
4 11
3
7
44 19
0
3
7
97g
Thomlelgh-Normanhurst .. ..
140
30
4
0
4
4
25
6
1
3
7


1946
Place
Order
Charge
1945
1946
1946
No. of Com-
municants.
Congregation
Total
Annual
per Capita.
Congregation
Total
Annual
per Capita.
104a
Bombala
122
21 2
8
3 6
104b
St. Stephen’s, Sydney
1135
267 9
8
4 9
196 10
0
3 6
104c
Turramurra
209
52 0
9
5 2
36 13
0
3 6
107a
Quirindi-Werris Creek
145
32 8
0
4 2
24 4
4
3 4
107b
Taralga-Crookwell
101
16 14
4
3 9
16 17
11
3 4
107c
Wagga Wagga
474
114 12
0
4 10
79 6
3
3 4
110a
Coff’s Harbour-Coramba .. ..
70
9 1
6
2 7
11 4
9
3 3
110b
Qilgandra
199
1 0
0
2
32 5
8
3 3
110c
Hornsby
127
28 18
3
4 9
20 10
0
3 3
HOd
Leeton-Yanco
212
46 12
3
4 7
35 6
6
3 3
IlOe
Petersham
61
8 17
1
2 11
9 16
5
3 3
115a
Arnciiffe
128
19 17
0
3 2
20 3
1
3 2
116b
Botany
63
10 0
0
3 2
10 0
0
3 2
115c
Coonamble
54
18 7
10
6 10
8 10
1
3 2
115d
Granville
140
11 6
5
1 8
21 17
7
3 2
115e
Hay
73
11 0
0
3 0
11 10
0
3 2
115f
Lockhart
112
19 19
6
3 7
17 13
0
3 2
115g
Waloha
75
21 14
2
5 10
12 0
0
3 2
122a
Gosford
134
22 0
7
2 7
20 15
6
3 1
122b
Ryde-Meadowbank
221
66 19
2
5 11
34 5
6
3 1
124a
Asquith-Berowra
15
1 17
0
2 6
2 5
0
3 0
124b
Double Bay
50
13 15
7
6 5
7 9
7
3 0
124c
Randwick
571
94 15
10
3 2
86 8
3
3 0
127
Forbes
190
21 3
0
2 2
26 1
9
2 9
128a
Kyogle
220
28 4
10
2 7
29 14
1
2 8
128b
Marrlckville
289
44 13
6
3 1
38 18
0
2 8
128c
Mascot
60
15 8
7
5 2
8 0
1
2 8
131a
Goulburn
327
42 0
0
2 7
42 13
3
2 7
131b
Scone
151
21 15
7
2 11
19 3
11
2 7
131c
The Rock-Collingullie
162
17 11
6
3 0
20 12
4
2 7
134a
Moss ale *.
115
—
14 10
2
2 6
134b
Waverley, Grahame Memorial
160
23 13
0
2 9
19 14
0
2 6
136b
Corowa
170
48 13
7
5 8
20 2
0
2 4
136c
Gladesville
198
20 0
0
2 0
23 9
6
2 4
136d
West Pennant Hills
52
7 2
0
3 3
5 19
6
2 4
140a
Albion Park
20
2 5
0
2 3
140b
Chalmer’s Church
180
29 0
0
3 4
20 10
0
2 3
140c
Glen lanes
251
31 7
3
2 5
28 6
0
2 3
HOd
Scot’s Church
448
43 17
6
1 10
50 3
0
2 3
144
Five Dock
77
10 8
9
2 3
8 6
6
2 2
145a
Bexley
145
34 19
2
4 9
15 7
10
2 1
145b
Liverpool-Ingleburn
156
15 3
6
1 9
15 19
3
2 1
147a
Brocklesby
66
16 0
0
4 1
6 14
6
2 0
147b
Manly
614
98 14
5
3 11
61 6
8
2 O
147c
Kankin Springs-Weethalle
40
1 0
0
0 5
4 18
6
2 0
147d
Tumbarumba
132
12 15
9
2 4
13 4
9
2 0
151a
Armidale
421
56 10
4
2 8
40 0
0
1 11
151b
Grafton
170
18
2
0 1
16 10
0
1 H
151c
Singleton
151
30 4
6
4 0
14 3
6
1 11
154a
Blackheath-Mt. Victoria ..
44
6 14
O
3 1
4 0
0
1 10
154b
Plcton
50
1 12
4
0 9
4 12
2
1 10
156a
Berry
90
5 15
4
1 3
7 18
6
1 9
156b
St. Mary’s-Rupertswood ..
60
10
0
0 2
5 6
0
1 9
156c
Walgett
12
1 10
0
0 9
1 1
0
1 9
156d
Wellington
163
21 16
5
2 9
14 8
7
1 9
160a
Abbotsford
60
1 0
0
0 3
5 1
7
1 8
160b
Marulan
12
5 12
1
9 4
1 0
0
1 8
160c
Northbridge
113
19 11
4
3 6
9 11
6
1 8
160d
Tocumwal-Flnley
116
11 15
10
1 9
9 17
2
1 8
160e
Ungarie-Cargellico
110
—
9 5
0
1 8
165a
Carcoar
72
_
5 11
0
1 7
165b
Merewether-New Lambton
86
10 9
10
2 5
6 15
8
1 7
165c
Middle Clarence
119
11 1
7
1 7
9 8
0
1 7
165d
Shoalhaven
206
54 17
6
5 4
16 0
0
1 7
165e
Strathfleld
360
39 9
7
2 3
27 17
2
1 7
l«5f
West Wyalong
126
4 11
5
0 9
9 15
5
1 7
171a
Mortdale-Oatley
61
3 18
8
1 3
4 9
8
1 6
171b
Tweed Heads
81
12 17
9
3 8
6 2
9
1 6
173a
Cooma-West Monaro
150
9 12
2
1 3
10 14
9
1 5
173b
Gloucester
85
3 13
5
0 10
6 0
4
1 5
173c
Maryville-Kotara
86
34 8
6
8 0
6 2
0
1 5
176a
Artairmon
241
55 11
3
5 0
15 14 11
1 4
176b
Campbelltown
80
5 5
8
1 4
5 8
0
1 4
176c
Longueville
174
23 4
5
2 9
11 9
3
1 4
176d
Narabucca
97
.
6 12
7
1 4
180a
Balmain
104
15 8 10
2 7
6 15
0
1 3
180b
Stroud
21
1 6
0
1 4
1 6
0
1 3
180c
Tamworth
205
30 16
1
2 6
12 11
0
1 3
183a
Berrigan
104
4 16
0
0 11
6 2
6
1 2
183b
Guildford
51
12 8
1
4 10
2 19
4
1 2
183c
Tumut
276
12 14
4
0 11
16 11
6
1 2


1946
Place
Order
Charge
1945
1946
1946
No. of Com-
municants.
Congregation
Total
Annual
per Capita.
Congregation
Total
Annual
per Capita.
186a
Abermain-Weston
45
5 17
3
2 10
2 8
9
1 1
186b
Braidwood
40
5 17
3
2 11
2 3
10
1 1
186c
Hillston-lvanhoe
168
3 13
11
0 5
8 19
9
1 1
186d
Parkes
190
20 17
6
2 0
10 0
0
1 1
190
Merrylands
50
1 13
0
0 7
2 11
3
1 0
191a
Ballina-Alstonville
192
13 8
6
1 5
8 12
0
0 11
191b
Chinese Church
72
11 0
4
3 1
3 5
0
0 11
191c
Condoboliii
53
4 10
0
2 1
2 10
0
0 11
19ld
Coonabarabran
149
9 14
4
1 4
6 4
11
0 11
191e
Crovdon Park
109
7 18
0
1 5
4 16
6
0 11
191f
Karlwood
138
1
0
0 2
6 0
11
0 11
191g
Katoomba
60
14 0
8
3 7
2 14
6
0 11
191h
Kogarah
319
31 18
2
2 3
15 0
0
0 11
1911
Narrabeen*l)ee Why
100
18 5
3
3 8
4 13
11
0 11
191 j
Paterson-Clarencetown
40
6 3
0
2 9
1 17
6
0 11
191k
Itockdale ..
150
6 0
0
0 10
7 0
0
0 11
202a
Annandale
177
16 15
6
1 11
7 10
0
0 10
202b
Bellinger Kiver
110
2 16
0
0 7
4 15
0
0 10
202c
Cootamundra ..
145
—
6 5
9
0 10
202d
Mudgee
76
9 16
3
2 7
3 0
11
0 10
202e
\oung
98
10 15
0
2 2
4 2
9
0 10
207a
Canulen
38
4 5
4
2 2
1 8
9
0 9
207b ■
Gundagui
20
—
15
0
0 9
207c
Junee
153
8 10
11
1 1
5 12
10
0 9
207d
Kozelle
131
5 15
2
0 11
4 18
8
0 9
207e
Woodburn
52
—
2 1
0
0 9
212a
Coraki
196
19 19
0
2 0
6 9
6
0 8
212b
Dubbo
244
39 5
4
3 3
7 18
4
0 8
212c
Maroubra Junction
206
22 3
5
2 2
6 11
0
0 8
212d
Paddington
38
4 0
0
2 1
1 4
7
0 8
212e
Stanmore
40
9 17
6
5 0
1 5
0
0 8
217a
Castle Hill
32
3 4
3
I 7
19
0
0 7
217b
Hamilton
340
38 18
6
2 4
10 1
8
0 7
217c
Waratah
264
14 14
9
1 1
7 9
0
0 7
220a
Corrlmal-Balgownie
60
7 3
7
1 5
1 8
0
0 6
220b
Kensington-Kingsford
80
—
—
2 0
0
0 6
220c
IJralla
42
—
—
1 1
6
0 6
223a
Albury
440
14 9
3
0 8
10 0
10
0 5
223b
Grilhth-Darlington Point
265
69 14
4
6 2
5 7
0
0 5
223c
Lidcombe-Berala
205
6 2
8
0 9
3 19
0
0 5
223d
Manilla
140
2 6
2
0 4
3 0
0
0 6
223e
Nimbin-Goolmaugar
50
11 2
6
2 5
1 0
0
0 5
223f
Stockton
46
_
1 0
0
0 6
229a
Bankstown
137
2 3
5
0 4
2 2
10
0 4
229b
Belmont-Cardiff
127
4 12
3
0 9
2 0
0
0 4
229c
Lcura-Wentworth Falls
69
7 5
11
2 1
1 3
8
0 4
229d
Molong
58
1 0
0
0 3
1 0
0
0 4
233a
Bowenfels
73
1 11
0
0 5
1 1
0
0 3
233b
Brighton-le-Sands
88
10 13
4
2 5
1 0
0
0 3
233c
Coolamon
170
8 9
1 0
2 6
6
0 3
233d
Kembla
162
1 5
6
0 2
2 0
0
0 3
233e
Putney
39
1 6
8
0 11
10
0
0 3
238a
Narromine
65
14
0
0 3
10
0
0 2
238b
Newtown
96
1 0
0
0 2
17
9
0 2
240
Leichhardt
146
17 3
2
2 4
17
6
0 1
241
Aberdecn-ilouchel
49
1
0
1
0
_
0.0
Ardlethan-Barellan
100
—
0.1
Ashford
54
—
0.2
Bega-Eden
169
—
—
—
0.3
Bondi ...
90
16
7
0 2
—
—
0.4
Bourke-Brewarrina
56
39 8
0
9 11
—
—
0.5
Camden Haven-Combovne
75
—
—
—
—
0.6
Captain's Flat
10
2 0
0
4 0
—
0.7
Collarenebri
45
—
—
0.8
Fullerton Memorial
172
8 2
0
0 11
—
0.9
Glebe
55
—
—
0.10
Gulgong-Dunedoo
39
—
—
—
0.11
Guyra-Wandsworth
149
13 13
0
1 10
—
0.12
Harboard
40
2 0
0
1 0
0.13
Henty
152
13 2
6
1 7
—
0.14
Langlea
30
—
—
0.15
North Strathfleld .. . .*
66
10 3
4
3 1
0.16
Palmer Street
28
—
0.17
Queanbeyan
120
4 0
0
8 0
0.19
Ultimo
32
2 19
8
1 10
0.19
Waverley, Macneil Memorial
56
1 9
6
0 8
0.20
Wentworthville
92
10 2
0
2 2
0.21
Western Kiverina Patrol
43
0.22
Woodenbong-Bonaldo
52
13 0
6
5 0
—
0.23
Woy Woy
60
16 8
6
4 1
—
—


N. 8.—1. Totals include contributions from congregations, W.M.A., Fellowship Associations, Sunday Schools
and Foreign Mission percentage of unallocated Budget received up to sth January, 1947.
2. Number of communicants as per statistical returns received up to March, 1947, otherwise figures
are as previously published.
N.S.W. FOREIGN MISSIONS TARGET FOR 1947
£11,720
CONCERNING LEGACIES.
Our world to-day is mainly good or less good according to the extent
to which the Divine Truth in Christ was spread abroad in past generations.
Even more so, the world of our children’s children will reflect the measure
of our missionary zeal to-day.
God’s own formula for abundant life for man is still “Seek ye first the
Kingdom of God.” No other investment of ourselves and our substance
will serve through time and eternity.
To assist such as desire to perpetuate their missionary service through
the continuing agency of the ongoing Church, the following form of bequest
has been prepared:—
“I bequeath to the Presbyterian Church (New South Wales)
Property Trust the sum of pounds (free
from legacy duty) for the Foreign Mission Fund of the said Church
and I direct that the said Legacy shall be a preferential charge
against such part of my estate as may be available for charitable
purposes.”


LIST OF MISSIONARIES.
Aborigines.
Mapoon :
Mr. F. A. and Mrs. Cane.
Mr. W. Norgate.
Weipa :
Mr. J. and Mrs. Winn.
Miss M. Winn.
Aurukun :
Rev. W. F. and Mrs. Mackenzie.
Mr. C. D. Sydney.
Mornington Island :
Mr. J. B. and Mrs. McCarthy.
Mr. D. and Mrs. Belcher.
Ifunmunya :
Mr. R. A. and Mrs. Ross.
Mr. J. Souter.
Ernabella :
Rev. A. C. and Mrs. Wright.
Mr. J. H. Bennett.
Mr. R. R. and Mrs. Henderson.
Sister Melba Turner.
Miss Barbara Bills.
Mr. R. M. Trudinger (on leave).
India.
Sholinghur :
Mr. C. J. R. and Mrs. Price.
Miss Catherine McCredie (furlough).
Miss M. M. Griffin.
Ramakrishnapet ;
Miss Hope Goldie (furlough).
Pallipat :
Rev. C. S. and Mrs. Boyall.
New Hebrides.
Malo:
Rev. E. L. and Mrs. Sykes (furlough).
Tangoa T.T. Institute:
Rev. J. G. and Mrs. Miller.
Miss M. A. Williams.
Rev. J. W. P. and Mrs. Gillan (furlough)
Mr. A. and Mrs. Wilson (furlough).
Vila :
Dr. T. J. K. and Mrs. Jamieson.
Miss A. G. M. Skinner.
Miss M. I. Harber.
Sister S. Mackenzie.
Sister N. Parkinson.
Mr. A. L. and Mrs. Cunningham (Car-
penter).
Mr. A. K. Peerman (Carpenter).
Paama ;
Deaconess M. J. Maloney.
Deaconess V. J. Beel.
Tangoa-Santo:
Rev. R. T. C. and Mrs. Williamson.
Ambrym :
Rev. W. F. and Mrs. Paton.
Mr. E. O. Cox (Carpenter).
Mnlekula :
Aula, Vacant.
Onua, Vacant.
China.
Language School, Peking :
Dr. Helen P. Mackenzie.
Sister Catherine Mackenzie.
Miss M. Cranstoun.
Miss R. Watkins.
Mr. Alex, and Mrs. Yule.
Korea.
Under Re-appointment:
Rev. F. W. Cunningham.
M iss M. Withers.
Miss E. W. Dunn.
Miss D. F. Leggatt.
In Korea ;
Rev. H. W. Lane.
Under Re-appointment:
Rev. F. J. L. and Mrs. Macrae.
Others will go forward as the way opens up.
Chinese Church in Australia.
Melbourne: Ballarat:
Rev. A. Langhorne. Rev. J. Tong Way.
Sydney: Vacant.
Associated Missions under the New Hebrides
Presbyterian Synod.
(a) John G. Paton Fund.
Hog Harbour : Rev. Wm. and Mrs. Anderson (furlough).
Malekula: Rev. C. G. and Mrs. Stallan (furlough).
Lenakel; Dr. Wm. and Mrs. Armstrong, Sister Janet P. Brown (furlough),
Sister E. Edgar.
White Sands; Rev. C. W. and Mrs. McLeod.
(b) New Zealand Presbyterian Church.
Nguna: Rev. C. K. and Mrs. Crump.
Tongoa: Rev. R. W. and Mrs. Murray.
Offerings towards our Church’s Foreign Missions may be sent to the Presbyterian
Church Office, Box 100, G.P.0., Sydney, or paid in through the local Church organisations.


Into All
the World
