

,
MONA DESMOND
I |g§gip|i B -jqp
IP-*
3RS»Bs33
WH SHHIM!
■Will
« &rz?M ik
iif#:
miss
3;:: |& -'
E^alar-Z
'•jsKi~'*-sicw : *-r?ST« » •” *-’• : - • ~r*- i*
rTfiffiflggTwiti nr. ~, zj»*- •;
is Kmm
«SSsini®aSs s«z2a
<■ ifrtiitxil' •'
WfS'jrjiSjftf-S




♦-




MONA DESMOND
AND OTHER STORIES
M. A. B.
The Catholic Depot
PELLEGRINI & CO.
Catholic Furnishers, Catholic Booksellers
543 George St. 244 Elizabeth St.
SYDNEY MELBOURNE




CONTENTS
MONA DESMOND 5
HERBERT GREY’S COLLEGE DAYS 29
“LITTLE MISS CAN’T’’ 47
TED 61
BILLIE’S CONFIDENCE IN THE ROSARY 101




MONA DESMOND
“COME, FOLLOW ME”
CHAPTER I.
“What is that pile of stately buildings?” is the
question invariably asked by the visitor to Richmond,
Surrey, as the carriage or taxi he occupies sweeps
into Queen’s Road on its way to Richmond Park.
And the invariable answer is, “A boarding school
for young ladies.” As our story is very closely
connected with this fine old Convent, we shall con-
sider it attentively for a few moments. It has an
unrivalled position in one of the healthiest and most
aristocratic boroughs in the vicinity of London, with
large gardens, fine old English trees, and large
meadows at the back. The soil is rich and the
gardens are well kept. The flowers, especially the
white roses, are said to be the choicest in England.
Every out-door amusement is to be found in the dear
old convent—in fact, you might say that it is a
perfect paradise for young girls. The pupils’ names
hold a prominent place on the Oxford lists each year,
and a very high percentage get honours, both in the
junior and senior classes. The prelims, do their
teachers credit also, and when the annual results


come out, they are generally more anxious to hear
if they had been successful at the examinations, than
the older girls.
There are over 100 pupils in this school, 30 of
whom are E’s. de M. On this particular evening, in
September, 1914, several of them can be seen with
a gentle nun gathering flowers in the gardens and
grounds. You may like to know the reason of this
unusual proceeding, for this is rosary hour, and all
the E’s. de M, are supposed to be in the confrater-
nity chapel. Well, to-morrow is September B—the8 —the
feast of the Nativity of Our Lady and also Mona
Desmond’s 18th birthday. She and four of her
friends have been allowed to decorate their little
chapel as beautifully as possible. Mona is doing it
out of pure love for her Heavenly Mother, but her
friends, though they love Our Lady tenderly, are
doing it partly for Mona’s sake as well.
You have guessed right, kind reader. She is an
Irish girl, and president of the Sodality of the Child-
ren of Mary. She is the youngest daughter of a
widow, who has a beautiful home in Bray, County
Wicklow—one of the beauty spots of the Emerald
Isle. Mrs. Desmond was educated at St. Mary s
Lodge, where she was intensely happy, and natur-
ally, when her daughters were old enough to be
sent to school, she confided them to the dear nuns
who had trained her to love duty even when it
was least attractive.


Mona was a sweet girl, with lustrous Irish hair
which often was a cause of secret envy to her
English friends. She was beautiful in every sense
of the word, and her simple and sincere piety added
an indefinable charm to nature’s gifts. She was
the most popular girl in the school, and, as senior
student, had the confidence of all the pupils, both
big and little. She knew how to extricate everybody
from the nastiest of scrapes. The prelims, used to
say sometimes: “Mona is such a darling; she is so
good without being a horrid ‘goody-goody,’ ”
At last, the floral decorations are finished, the little
chapel looks its best, and as Mona places the white
roses at Our Lady’s feet she says: “I wish Gerald
could see these flowers. He loves to see pure white
roses on an altar.” “Who is Gerald?” says Doreen,
who had never heard Mona mention him before. “He
is my only brother, and a lieutenant in the Dublin
Fusiliers; he is such a dear, noble boy.”
Now the altar looks exquisite, and Sister Dorothea,
who comes in at this moment, congratulates the four
pupils on their work, and hopes that Our Lady will
repay them spiritually for their good taste and their
diligence in decorating her shrine.


CHAPTER 11.
The golden sun was shining through the windows
of the study hall as the pupils, in rank for chapel,
waited for the signal to proceed through the long
corridor that led to it. The Children of Mary wore
their cloaks, veils and blue ribbons; and, as they
filed into their places in the large chapel, the angels
must have smiled on the pure souls that genuflected
reverently before the High Altar. It was a day of
general Communion and everybody felt supremely
happy.
Ivy, Constance and Doreen sang Mona’s favourite
hymn, in parts; and as Mona thanked God for the
many favours He had bestowed on her during the
last 18 years, she did not consider the friendship of
these noble girls as the least of them.
After the thanksgiving, the girls wended their
way to the refectory, where Mona was wished a
happy birthday by all, and then she looked at the
many tokens of friendship that had been placed
around and on her breakfast plate.
Of course, it was a whole holiday and the girls
determined to make the most of their time in the
grounds. After breakfast, Mona retired to the
seniors’ room to look at her treasures, and read the
little notes containing good wishes attached to them.


Suddenly, Jessie Hallet rushed in saying, “A letter
for you, Mona, and one for me! lam going to
leave school at the end of this year, but I cannot go
to Paris —it is rather disappointing. I hope mother
will take me to Rome instead.” Mona, who re-
cognised her brother’s writing, hastened to open her
letter. “Oh, it is from Gerald! Listen, Jess, I will
read it to you.”
Duntroon Manor,
BARY, CO. WICKLOW,
September 6, 1914.
Dearest Mona,
Many happy returns of your birthday. Fancy, 18 !
you will soon be grown-up, wearing long
dresses, and all the trappings of feminine vanity!
No; my little sister will never be vain. If she were,
I should efface her from my affection. I know she
will leave such silly nonsense to those who lack
brains and good taste.
Now, Mona, I am sure you will be a brave little
girl when you hear that I am going to the front
very soon. You know I was home on Convalescence
for three months, but when I heard that an ex-
peditionary force had been sent to France, I asked
the doctor if I could rejoin my regiment at once.
After some demur he allowed me to write to head-
quarters, so I shall be in London soon and, of course,
will run out to Richmond. Mother is grieved, but
you will console her, won’t you my fond sister?
How I wish you were at home this week; you would


cheer mother up. Never mind, we shall all be to-
gether next year. I am longing to he in the firing
line. I shall not have much time to see you, as once
I am in London, I do not know what orders I maj
receive.
Please ask Sister Patrick to pray for me and not
to prepare too long a sermon, as I shall not have
time to listen to it all.
I have a little present for your birthday, which I
shall give you in passing.
Good-bye till Thursday,
Your Loving Brother,
GEEALD
Mona’s voice trembled as she read “going to the
front soon.” What would she do without her only
brother? She was sorry and glad; at the same time,
she was proud to think that Gerald was going to
help in the fight for honour and civilisation. She
knew how Belgium had been treated by the powerful
and ruthless enemy that was now in fair France!
“Oh, Mona,” cried Jessie. “If I were you, how
proud I’d be to think my brother was fighting for
King and country. If Harold were alive lam sure
he would take part in the struggle and do his share
bravely.” She thought of her brother, who was
drowned two years ago while trying to save a com-
rade’s life. “Yes, Jessie, lam proud, but still I
cannot help feeling a pang of sorrow, for I know
how impetuous Gerald is. Danger seems to have a


peculiar fascination for him and he may never re-
turn.”
“Ask Our Lady to take care of him, dear; that
is all you can do, and look on the bright side of
things. You will have the pleasure of seeing him
in a few days.” “So I shall, I had forgotten that.
Well, let us go to the tennis court; however, I must
see dear Old Sister Patrick first, and give her his
message. She would rather see him wear a cassock
than a uniform. When he was a baby she used to
tell mother that he would be a Eeligious one day.
Gerald has great faith in her prayers, and when In
College he always wrote to her to ask her to pray for
success at his examinations.”
That day, and the following, passed quickly at
St. Mary’s Lodge, and Thursday came in due course.
Mona did not expect Gerald till the afternoon.
About 3.30: Sister Simeon, the portress, told the
head-mistress that Lieutenant Desmond wished to
see his sister. Mona was sent at once to the parlor
where Gerald was waiting.
He was a tall, well-built young man, with a clever
forehead and frank blue eyes. He stooped to greet
his sister, who was too happy and sad to say more
than “Oh, Gerald!” In boyish fashion, he gave her
a chair. Then, with a military salute, presented a
little packet, saying “My precious self.” A merry
laugh greeted this remark, and Mona opened the
packet. She was delighted to find that it was a


portrait of her brother in khaki, in a golden frame,
on which was the crest of the Desmonds.
“Thank you, dear Gerald, there is nothing that
could have given me more pleasure. It will just fit
on the little bracket, near the altar in my room.”
“This is from Mother.” A pretty little wristlet
watch, which Mona prized very much. “Eileen
wrote to Washbourne’s to send you some books that
you have been wishing for. I suppose you will
receive them to-day or to-morrow.” Then they
talked about home and friends. Mona was pleased
to hear that after the first outburst of grief, her
mother was quite resigned to let Gerald go. In fact,
she encouraged her son to do what was plainly his
duty. He left her quite cheerful. This was a pleas-
ing piece of news for Mona. Besides, Eileen was
with her, so she would not be quite alone. But,
Gerald hinted that Eileen, who was an M.D., felt
that her place was in a field hospital, and that, per-
haps, she might not be able to resist that feeling
long. Poor Mona’s face fell as she realised the
meaning of her brother’s words; but he quickly
changed the subject and began to talk of his dogs
and a hundred other things that he knew would
interest his sister. They had not seen each other for
six months, and there was so much to talk about
that the time simply flew. Mona was highly amused
at Gerald’s description of a tea party, given by the
aunt of one of his brother officers, at which he met
half a dozen of the worthy lady’s nieces, and the


quantity of powder and slang these young ladies
made use of was simply appalling. “I felt sorry for
poor Wallace,” said Gerald, “lam sure he was quite
ashamed of his cousins, for, no doubt, he guessed
what we thought about them. Directly O’Hagan
got into the street after we had taken our leave,
he said, “Glad I am not their brother.” And I
answered with the same satisfaction. “Delighted
they are not my sisters.” “Are they Catholics?”
said Mona. “Mr. Wallace is; his mother was a
convert, I scarcely think they could be Catholics,”
said Gerald, “and I feel inclined to hope they are
not. Ido not know where they were educated,
but they are no credit to their teachers, anyhow—
they seemed to have followed a special slang course.”
Mona could not suppress a laugh, as she thought how
horrified Sister Patrick would be at such conduct,
for the good nun had a special dislike for what she
called “the destroyer of refined speech.” Before
Mona had time to tell Gerald the cause of her merri-
ment, the parlour door opened, and Sister Patrick
herself entered. A heavenly smile lit up her face as
she gazed on the honest, manly countenance of the
young soldier. She had not seen him for four years,
and never in uniform, but her experienced eye
divined at once that he was in every sense of the
word a grand Catholic! She had known his mother
for years, and taught her in several classes, and had
a special affection for her children, for they scarcely


remembered their father. Many a prayer she had
offered up for their welfare.
After the first greetings, Gerald was cross-
examined about his rosary beads, scapular medal
and Sacred Heart badge; but his pious mother had
seen to all that, so he was quite according to regu-
lations as far as spiritual equipment was concerned.
Then Reverend Mother, a highly-cultured French-
woman, came in and told him that her two nephews
were in Joffre’s Army, that she had just received a
letter from her sister in Boulogne, telling her about
the Battle of the Marne, fought on September 8, in
which the French were victorious. Rev. Mother
chatted away in her native tongue, and Gerald under-
stood her perfectly. He was glad now he had learned
French thoroughly. A glance at the clock told him
that he must take his leave. Mona was very brave.
Sister Patrick repeated a pious thought, all said
good-bye, God bless you! and two minutes later the
young soldier was speeding along the Mortlake
Road in a taxi-cab on his way to London.


CHAPTER 111.
Everything went on smoothly till November.
Gerald had written several times, and he related some
amusing experiences he had had. His French was
such a help to his friends. He was in the best of
spirits, and was confident that the Allies would be
ultimately victorious.
On November 21st, the pupils of St. Mary’s Lodge
had a half-holiday. Many were in the library, en-
joying the companj” of their favourite authors. In
a cosy corner are our three friends —Mona, Doreen
and Jessie. They are making plans for the future,
as all three are leaving school this year. Jessie de-
clared that she meant to have the best of a good
time, and would have parties and balls galore. She
was a beautiful girl—a bit worldly—but had the
good fortune of being blessed with a good mother,
whom she loved tenderly. “You two darlings must
come and stay with me, and you’ll see how stylish
I’ll make you.” Both laughed and said together:
“"We shall not let you make us forget that we are
Es. de M., Miss Jessie.” “'Well you can be nice and
good at the same time,” said Jessie, as she tossed
her curls back. “You must come and stay with me
sometimes,” said Mona. “Bray is such a beautiful
place. I shall be so lonely now that Gerald is away.
We used to enjoy ourselves so well together.”


Just then Sister Dorothea made a sign to Mona to
follow her. “Come to Rev. Mother’s room, dear, I
think she has some news for you,” said the head-
mistress, kindly, though her tone was very sad, as
she led the way to the room of her Superioress.
Mona wondered what this news could he. She could
tell by the tone of Sister Dorothea’s voice that it was
about some grave matter. As she entered the room
she noticed an open telegram on Rev. Mother’s desk.
Mona was then told as gently as possible that a
telegram had just arrived, which contained sad
news. Gerald was wounded. Rev. Mother omitted
the word “dangerously” at first, but seeing how
courageous the child was, she gave her the telegram
to read.
“Gerald dangerously wounded. At base hospital
now. Eileen going to him—Mother.”
The young girl checked her tears, and said in a
firm voice: “Rev. Mother, I think I ought to go home
at once to mother.” “It is just what I was about
to suggest, child. You had better begin your pack-
ing this evening. Go to the chapel for a little while
first, and then I shall send you Sister Xavier. Be
brave, Mona, and do not refuse anything Our Dear
Lord may ask you for.”
As she entered the Children of Mary’s chapel she
threw herself on a prie-dieu, and gave way to silent
grief. Dear, dear, Gerald; dying perhaps! Eileen
going to France too! She must go home and help


to console her mother. She loved the old convent,
and its fascinating ways, and, above all, she loved
the dear nuns and the school girls too. She had set
her heart on staying the whole year in school. She
passed the Oxford Senior brilliantly the preceding
year, and got honors in languages and literature.
This year her time was wholly devoted to accom-
plishments, such as music, painting and singing.
Nevertheless, the voice of conscience told her that
it was her duty to hasten to her mother’s side.
She made an act of resignation to God’s holy will,
and was preparing to leave the chapel when Sister
Xavier appeared.
Mona now attended to collecting her belongings
and bringing them to Sister Xavier, who packed
them most carefully. After night prayers, Sister
Dorothea told the pupils the sad news Mona had re-
ceived and also that she would probably leave school
the next day. A gloom fell on all. The senior
girls thought of their brothers who were in the
trenches, and sympathised deeply with Mona. The
Prelims, were indignant to think that they were
going to lose their dear Mona, all on account of those
“horrid” Germans.
At 10 o’clock next day, Rev. Mother got another
telegram to say that Gerald had succumbed to his
wounds, asking her to break the sad news to Mona,
and to have Masses said in the Convent Chapel for
the repose of his soul. Eileen had already started
when the doleful news reached Wicklow. The kind


Superioress knew Mona’s affection for her brother,
and she shrank from the task that lay before her.
However, she found the young girl in the chapel;
she knelt beside her for an instant, then pressed her
hand and said: “Let us make the way of the Cross
together, Mona.” The child did so, and when they
had finished the customary Paters and Aves to gain
the indulgences, Rev. Mother began the “de Pro-
fundis.” Mona understood, and she recited aloud
the sad prayer in spite of her tears. Rev. Mother
rose from her knees, and said in a soft whisper:
“Our Lord wants you to give him all, Mona.” Then
she left her alone at the foot of the altar, and hur-
ried away to make arrangements for her departure.
She determined to send Sister Xavier with her. It
would give pleasure to Mrs. Desmond, and probably
the good Sister would he glad to see the green hills
of Erin, after an absence of 25 years.
At 6 o’clock that evening, they were both at
Euston Station, getting their tickets for Kingston,
when they were accosted by a Red Cross Nurse. It
was Eileen. She was just going to Richmond to say
good-bye to her sister, as she meant to cross over
to France the next day. She was glad Mona was
going home, as her mother, though entirely resigned,
was not well, and wanted a constant companion.
She was anxious to know if there was a priest with
Gerald in his last moments. Mona said that
troubled her, too, so Eileen promised to write soon
and send all the details she could gather. At last


the train for Holyhead was formed, and the two
travellers got into a comfortable carriage, and ar-
rived safely next day at Duntroon Manor.
The feeble rays of a November sun were shining
on the large, white chrysanthemums as they seemed
to welcome their young mistress home. Anna, the
faithful servant, who met them at the station, could
not help remarking that it was Master Gerald who
had them planted there.
The meeting between mother and daughter was
a sad one, though each tried to hide her grief from
the other. Sister Xavier’s presence had a soothing
influence, and Rev. Mother kindly allowed her to
spend a fortnight in her native land. She needed
a rest, and at the same time her visit cheered a
desolate home. It was almost harder to console the
servants and tenants than Mrs. Desmond and her
daughter.


CHAPTER IV.
Before Sister Xavier’s departure for England,
Mona had planned out her work at home. She was
going to lead a useful life, and the poor and the
suffering would receive a good share of her atten-
tion. One of her greatest delights was to clean and
decorate the village church where she spent much
of her time. The choicest flowers of the garden
were cut for the altars, and arranged by Mona her-
self. She placed a fresh bouquet every day at Our
Lady’s feet, in memory of her brother, and then
said her Rosary, just as she did in dear old St.
Mary’s Lodge. One day early in December, as
Mona was leaving one of the hot-houses with the
usual bouquet for Our Lady’s altar in her hand, she
thought she heard someone groaning near the garden
wall. She turned her head and saw distinctly a
man lying close to the wall. Thinking it was one
of the gardeners, she approached to see what was
the matter. What was her surprise on seeing a
stranger, quite unconscious, with a nasty gash in his
head. On looking more closely she guessed it was
an escaped prisoner from the German camp in
Dublin. He fell on a piece of sharp rock while
scaling the high wall. Mona called the gardeners,
who carried the man to the servants’ quarters. She
sent for the doctor at once, and in the meantime


gave first aid to the wounded man. The physician
found the head badly hurt and said that he would
need great care and should be watched all night.
Mrs. Desmond wanted to get a nurse, but in vain.
Mona would take the nurse’s place, and watch the
wounded man till morning.
Gerald had told her in one of his letters that most
of the Germans were very brave, and that, though
they were engaged in an aggressive and dishonor-
able war, yet individual soldiers could not be blamed
for what their Government did. If Gerald had
been made prisoner and taken to Germany, how she
would have blessed the German girl that had nursed
him.
Everybody had retired to rest in Duntroon Manor
except Mona, who sat near the sufferer. She was
saying ejaculatory prayers for the poor souls, and
counting them on the beads of her Rosary, Sud-
denly the patient got delirious. Mona understood
German perfectly, and, though at first he uttered
several incoherent phrases, she heard, “Ich habe sie
genommen die borse die kette
die uhr Ach! mein gott, ich habe ihn
gestochen!” Certainly he was talking of a watch,
a purse and a chain; then of stabbing. He was de-
lirious and she attached no importance to his words,
but moistened the parched lips and bathed the
feverish brow according to the doctor’s directions.
The patient grew calm and was soon quite still.
Mona rose to trim the little lamp, and while doing


so she remarked that Anna had forgotten to take
the prisoner’s garments away. They were lying on
the floor covered with mud, and Mona stopped to
tidy them. As she lifted the tunic, something fell
out of the pocket. She picked it up—her heart
almost failed her. Could it be Gerald’s purse? She
examined it more closely. Yes; there it was, with
his initials in silver on it. The very purse she her-
self had given him last Christmas. What would she
do? There were other things in the same pocket;
a chain was hanging out of it. Poor Mona raised it,
and, behold! there was Gerald’s watch, with her
mother’s photo, in the little locket. The German’s
words recurred to her mind. “Ach, mein gott! Ich
habe ihn gestochen.” Did he stab her brother? Oh,
the wretch! Her head began to swim, and she caught
hold of the chest of drawers to prevent herself from
falling. Then she sank into the armchair and held
her head with both hands. The unhappy girl knows
by these things that she has just discovered that
the German killed and robbed her brother. Hatred
for the German, and sorrow for her brother’s fate
arose in her heart together. A terrible interior con-
flict ensued. Gerald’s murderer was there in that
room! And she had been nursing him! Treating
him as an honourable prisoner of war . . . but
then, Jesus forgave his murderers!
Deep down in her soul she heard the words:
“Come, follow me.” She knew what this meant.
The sick man became delirious again, and, without


a moment’s hesitation, Mona arose and went for-
ward to moisten the sufferer’s lips and bathe his
brow anew.
The moral battle was won. She determined to
keep the discovery a secret from her mother, as
she knew the dreadful effect it would have on her,
and holy, old Father O’Dempsey, whom she con-
sulted, approved of her resolution.


CHAPTER V.
The noble girl watched by the wounded man’s
bedside day and night with the greatest assiduity.
He could not speak a word of English, and she
alone understood German. She was not afraid that
Anna, who replaced her when she was forced to go
to her own room for a little rest, would learn the
secret. At last he was out of danger, and recovered
little by little. At length, the doctor said he could
go for a short walk in the garden. Mona sent for
his garments, that were now clean, and placed them
near the foot of the bed. Then she retired from
the room, but, before doing so, told him that she
would send the butler to help him to dress and take
him to the garden. Burke had no liking for Ger-
mans, nevertheless, he obeyed Miss Mona’s orders,
and was kind to the sick man. He led him to the
garden, and allowed him to lean on his arm. But
the German got tired soon; he was still very weak,
and sat down on a bench in the sun. Mona now
came on the scene and released Burke from his
charge. The butler returned to the servants’ hall,
where he entertained his fellow-servants by an il-
lustration of the “gibberish” Miss Mona and the
German were talking.
After a few moments silence, the sufferer tried to
thank Mona for her great kindness to him, who was


really an enemy. He seemed to belong to the middle
class, but there was something very harsh in his
look. He tried to soften it now. Mona simply said
she had only done her duty, what any German
girl would have done in similar circumstances “I
do not think so,” he answered. ‘‘lt appears to me
that religion is at the bottom of all your acts. I
know you are a Catholic, and Catholics act differ-
entty to other people. I noticed it in my own regi-
ment before I was made a prisoner.” The conversa-
tion then turned on religious subjects. However,
Mona thought that the sick man ought not to stay
too long outside. She rose to lead the way into
the house. She now told him that she had placed
the objects she had found in his tunic in one of
the drawers in his room. The German paled and a
thick perspiration covered his forehead, and he was
unable to speak for some moments. Something in
the young girl’s expression urged him to tell her all.
Mona heard now how her brother had been left on
the field, how the prisoner and two or three other
men of his regiment were looking for German
wounded, but as they passed a wounded British
Officer, one of his comrades gave the latter a kick
and said it would be worth while searching his
pockets. He acted at once upon the suggestion, and
took the three objects Mona had found. When the
young lieutenant realised what they had done he
said in an exhausted voice in German, “I thought
you were honorable soldiers.” The German was
irritated on hearing this, and stabbed the Britisher,


but he did not think he had killed him outright. He
expressed sorrow for what he had done, and said
he wished he could restore the objects in question
to the officer’s family. Mona said she thought she
could help him by means of the initials on the
objects, and the photo, in the locket. In fact, she
took the responsibility of finding the soldier’s re-
latives, and of sending them the objects in question
herself. The German thanked her. Then she led
him to his room, but as soon as he reached the door
she left him and hastened to the little church, where
she gave vent to her feelings before the Blessed
Sacrament, whence she returned consoled and forti-
fied in her resolution to keep her secret.
The German’s strength seemed to be fast return-
ing, and each time he saw Mona he talked to her
about religion, and listened attentively to her ex-
planations. He had been a kind of Lutheran, but
the truth was that he practised no religion at all.
A week before the feast of Christmas, the doctor
said he was fit to return to camp, which he did.
Some weeks later Mona heard from a Jesuit Father,
who could speak German, and who visited the camp
regularly, that her former patient had embraced the
Catholic faith. The young girl thanked God for
this great grace, and prayed every day for his per-
severance.


CHAPTER VI.
After Christmas, which was a happy one, spiritu-
ally, at Duntroon Manor, Mrs. Desmond received a
letter from a distant relative in England, saying
that a cousin’s child was an orphan, and had no
home, as her father had been ruined by the war,
before his death. Mrs. Desmond determined to take
the child to live with her, and Mona encouraged her
in this. Mary proved to be a charming, lovable
little girl, and was Mona’s delight. Mrs. Desmond
loved her dearly, and Mary would do anything she
could to make Mrs. Desmond happy, and please her
big sister, as she often called Mona.
Letters came regularly from Eileen. One con
tained a detailed account of Gerald’s death. He
had been picked up by the stretcher-bearers the day
after he had been wounded and brought back to the
base hospital. At first he seemed to do well, but
the doctors soon saw that there was no hope for
him. He received the last Sacraments in excellent
dispositions; made the sacrifice of his life cheerfully,
and died pronouncing the holy names of Jesus and
Mary. A French Sister of Charity was at his side
and placed his rosary in his dying hands. This news
was sad, but consoling. Eileen was quite well, but
very busy, and her services were much needed, as
fresh wounded were continually coming in.


Mona had determined to consecrate her life to
the service of God, the night she learned the Ger-
man’s secret. Now she broke the news gently to
her mother, who consented willingly, and thanked
God with the piety of an Irish mother, for the honor
he conferred on her in choosing one of her children
for his own special garden—the religious life.
Mona entered the novitiate of an order consecrated
to Our Blessed Lady, May 1, 1915. Two days later
her mother received a packet—the address in an un-
known hand—which contained her son’s purse, watch
and chain, and the little gold locket, in which was
her own portrait. The last we heard of our little
friend was that she is a most fervent little postulant
and perfectly happy in her vocation.
FINIS.


■


HERBERT GREY’S
COLLEGE DAYS
to*


Herbert Grey’s College
Days
CHAPTER I.
Mrs. Grey, a beautiful -woman, who had lost her
husband some time before our story opens—the
latter had left enough money to keep his wife in
comfort longer than she would live—inhabited a
large mansion, surrounded by glorious English
gardens, in one of the many pretty suburbs of Scar-
borough. She had one child—a dear little boy
called Herbert, who was her greatest and only joy.
As the child was fatherless, all his affection was
centred in his mother. He was now eight years of
age, and in two years’ time Mrs. Grey would have
to send her little boy to school, as she believed it
would be better for his future to do so. She used
to sigh when she thought of this, but she was con-
vinced that it was necessary for the proper forma-
tion of a boy’s character to send him to school
young. He would become more manly, more inde-
pendent, and better fitted for the battle of life.
Herbert always tried to console his mother, when
she spoke to him on this subject, by telling her


that when he did go to school he would try his
hardest to have a good report sent to his dear mother
every month to cheer her up and compensate her
in some small way for the sacrifice she was making.
He loved his mother, but being a very precocious
child, the thought of school life fired his imagina-
tion and he wished to work and play with boys of
his own age.
The two years rolled swiftly into the boundless
ocean of time. Each day seemed too short for poor
Mrs. Grey, and a month before the appointed time
for Herbert to go from home the fond mother
lavished tokens of affection on her son more than
ever. At last the day arrived. All Herbert’s lug-
gage was ready and he was to leave by the 9 o’clock
train for London.
Mrs. Grey was full of grief and shed many tears
while packing her only boy’s box. She would not
allow anyone else to do it. Then in one of those
fond conversations, that only mothers can hold with
their children, she told her son to be always good
and honourable, never to cheat in his lessons or
games; or look down on any of his fellow school-
boys. He listened with the greatest attention to his
mother’s advice and kissed her till the carriage was
at the door waiting to convey him to the station.
Herbert got into the carriage and started off,
accompanied by Mrs, Grey’s maid, as the former
said she would surely break down when she had


to leave her son and she did not feel equal to the
journey at all. Mrs. Grey re-entered the house, and
the carriage travelled on with Herbert, who was
very grieved leaving his gentle mother and happy
home, but little by little his grief subsided and he
dried his tears. The maid, who was very tactful,
spoke to him about the train and the country they
were passing through. After a while he went to
the carriage window and the apparently passing
objects absorbed his attention, though tears would
rush now and then into his eyes, till they reached
London.


CHAPTER 11.
The school to which Herbert was going was
situated in a suburb of "West London. It was a boys’
high school and was conducted by the Marist
Brothers. All the boys were of rich parentage, and,
of course, the school was a very good one. It had
all modern appliances and every convenience for
the boarders’ comfort and enjoyment, including
tennis court, croquet lawn, golf links, cricket
grounds, etc.
“I say, did you hear the news? A new boy is
on his way here, he comes from Scarborough,” said
William Taylor, who was 14 years of age, as he
rushed off with bat and ball to the tennis court.
“Oh, I hate new boys,” said a cranky looking
fellow in a corner, who was afraid that the new
boy might surpass him in class and receive more
prizes than he.
“You are a selfish fellow, Eric. Why, I
thought everybody loved to see a new boy
in our school, because it pleases our professors so
much,” said Leslie Williams.
Just at that moment a motor car was heard
coming up the college drive. The boys did not like
to stare, “but, of course, Master Inquisitive, Eric,
had to see what the new boy was like,” said Leslie.


The head brother came to the door, evidently ho
was expecting the car, and in a few minutes, Herbert
Grey alighted from it. Brother John was struck
by his intelligent face and general bearing. He
wrote a hasty note, which he gave to Mrs. Grey’s
maid for her mistress, and in this he said that he felt
sure Herbert would be happy in school and prove
a dear, intelligent boy, such a one as a mother
would be proud of. Brother Nicholas then took
Herbert to have some refreshments and afterwards
showed him round the grounds and introduced him
to all the boys.
“Now, Leslie, I want you to be very kind to our
new pupil, I will introduce him to you first, as you
are his age, and I think you will be good friends,”
said the brother.
The two boys shook hands cordially. Then, when
Brother Nicholas saw they were friendly, he left
Leslie to take Herbert to the part of the recreation
ground he preferred. Everybody welcomed our
new visitor with the greatest politeness and Herbert
thought that he would be as happy as could be
amongst these nice friends.
The next day was glorious in the Marist College.
It was neither too hot nor too cold. The birds sang
in the beautiful garden and the boys worked
earnestly in the school. Herbert was examined the
evening before and the professor found that he
could easily follow the sth class, in which he was


placed the next morning. Eric Taylor was head
of this class before Herbert came. But now it was
to be different. Herbert was highly delighted when
he found that he was in the sth class with Leslie
and William, his dearest friends, and that Brother
Nicholas was also the teacher of this class. He had
taken to this brother as soon as he saw him, and
the professor could easily see that there would soon
be rivalry between Eric and Herbert, as that day
Herbert was already seventh in a class of thirty.
Eric disliked Herbert at once and would never join
in any of the games that he took part in. Herbert
was very popular with the other boys; he was kind
and obliging; then he was one of the best players
during recreation and he seemed to have a delight-
ful way of overcoming every difficulty. Apparently
he was a born leader, besides, he made wonderful
progress in his studies. A few weeks after his
arrival at St. Peter’s Lodge, Leslie said, “I’m afraid
Eric will be taken down in class by Herbert soon,
he seems so clever. It would do Eric good. You
ought to have seen the way he insulted poor Herbert
in the tennis court to-day. I felt so sorry for him—
for Herbert I mean.” “I had to keep my fists in
my pockets yesterday afternoon,” said a blue-eyed,
auburn-haired son of the Emerald Isle, “otherwise
I would have knocked the bully over and given
him a fine thrashing. I cannot realise how Herbert
contains himself.” “You forget,” said a tall boy
with grey Irish eyes and chestnut curls, “that


Herbert is a daily communicant and that he would
consider it a breach of charity to retaliate.” “Hail
glorious St. Patrick!” said Brian, for that was the
name of the first speaker, “You are both fit to be
canonised, but I think a ‘shillelah’ would be more
effective in knocking the impudence out of Eric
than your charitable ‘procedure.’ ” The tall boy,
who was one of the senior students, smiled, but
made no reply. They were both excellent Christians
and a credit to Catholic Ireland, and though of
different dispositions, they understood each other
thoroughly.
It was evident that Herbert was admired for his
noble character by the boys generally, and that his
rival was considered a bully.


CHAPTER 111.
One afternoon, a few weeks later, after lessons
were finished, the boys were leaving the school room
and the majority crowded round Herbert, asking
him what game he would play and pressing him to
join their respective sides. Eric, who was standing
bv, saw and heard this and reddened with anger.
v 7
“This fellow thinks he is going to make himself
head of the boys, does he? Well, 111 see that he
doesn’t; I’ll stop him, I bet.”
Herbert, William, Leslie, and nearly all the others,
were down at the cricket pitch enjoying a healthy
exciting game, while Eric and two boys, as jealous
of Herbert as himself (one nicknamed “Bunky”
and the other “Snubs”), were sitting in a corner
trying to find out some way of “paying Herbert out”
(as they called it). At last they decided that when
the game was finished they would sneak down and
break the bat and throw it away, because, as Eric
explained, Herbert, who has charge of the bat, will
be put down to the bottom of the class for not
looking after it. Presently the bell rang and the
boys scampered off in the direction of the re-
fectory. Herbert alone remained hunting for the
hidden bat. It could not be found anywhere. At last
Brother Nicholas came along. “Well, Herbert, why


are you not in your place in the refectory?” The
poor boy simply told his teacher that he could not
find the cricket bat. “Do you know that this means
loss of your charge, Herbert? Why, I believed you
thought more of your place in class than to bej so
careless as this, my boy.”
Herbert could not speak. It was mysterious where
the bat had gone to —nobody had seen it. And to
think he would have to give up his charge upset
him very much. What a disgrace! How Eric would
laugh at him! Herbert could not enjoy his tea that
night and Leslie almost cried as he saw the dis-
couraged look on the face of his friend. He tried
to cheer him up afterwards, but it was of no use.
The poor boy was thinking of his mother and how
disappointed she would be when she heard he was
put from the 2nd place of honor in class to the last.
Herbert felt very much ashamed on the following
day, as he stood in class. To think that he, the boy
who had been second top, was now at the bottom,
it was almost unbearable.
Towards evening, Brother Nicholas announced
that the yearly exam, would be held in July. It
was now the end of May.
Everybody gasped when he gave this out, and
Eric gave an “enormous’ look at Herbert, which
seemed to say, “you’ve got a lot of hope of coming
first.” Poor Herbert felt this terribly, but, he
determined to put up with it all and bear it silently


and breathed a prayer to his angel guardian to help
him. “I will try and get a good pass. Ido not want
to get higher marks than Eric, as I know it will
offend him. Besides, he does not seem to realise
that he is uncharitable. Perhaps he is not.”
Herbert tried his hardest, he never wasted a single
minute in class, and he even devoted some of his
free time also to his studies. But he had to bear
a great deal. Every time he went for his books,
they were either torn or hidden. He was told that
Eric did it, but he would not tell tales and get Eric
into trouble with the professors. He would rather
put up with anything than stoop to what he con-
sidered mean.
While Eric was just the contrary; every little
real or imaginary fault he could get about Herbert
he would report to the masters, and sometimes
Herbert was punished for things that he had not
really done. Of course, the masters were ignorant
of this, as Herbert was too honourable to explain
and get another into trouble, so as to escape being
kept in half an hour himself.


CHAPTER IV.
A few days before the year’s July examination,
which was to be held on the 9th of that month,
something very wrong and deceitful happened. The
master of Herbert’s class was setting the questions
for the said exam. He was in his study. All the
pupils of his class were supposed to be in their
own school room “grinding” for their exam. But
whom do we see creeping round the window of the
master’s study as soon as he left it? —“Eric”—You
will ask, “What is he doing?” Well, he knows that
the questions are being set and he is trying to find
out what they are so that he can learn the answers
by heart and thus beat Herbert.
“Master Herbert thinks he is sure to pass me,”
said Eric, “I bet I’ll pull him down.”
He crept up to the window, put his head in and
read every question, from the top to the bottom of
the paper, that was on the master’s table. He then
rushed back to the study, made a note of what he
had read, so as to prepare the answers at once. All
the boys knew he had left the hall without per-
mission, but they were “men,” and would not run
and tell tales.
The morning of the examination dawned at last.
Some said their morning prayers with extra fervor


on that account, and even the laziest and most care-
less recommended mutely their work to Our Lady’s
protection and help.
At nine o’clock all the boys were in their places
doing their papers. The work of supervision was
in the hands of, or rather, the eyes of two brothers.
The children seemed to be doing their very best and
were most intent on their work, but little by little
they all fell off except the two rivals, Herbert and
Eric. When these two had finished all their
questions, Eric walked up to the master with his
papers high in the air and a triumphant look on his
face.
“Finished, Eric?” “Yes, Sir, I answered every
question.”
At last the results came out, and, of course, Eric
came first, with a total of 499 marks out of 500,
while Herbert was only beaten by two marks, as
he got 497. Evidently Herbert would surely have
come first if Eric had not cheated.
The school broke up a few days after that, and
Herbert went home to his mother, his heart full of
pleasure to think that he had come 2nd in the exam.,
to pass which he had worked so hard and so per-
severingly. But what was his great sorrow when
he reached home to find that two days before, his
mother had become seriously ill. She was now in
a very bad condition, and the doctor gave no hopes.
Herbert never left her bedside except to assist at


Holy Mass. He went to Communion nearly every
morning for her recovery. But the Almighty wished
to have her with Himself, and she died a week before
Herbert was to go back to school.
Oh, how sad he was now! No father or mother
to love, no one to tell his sorrows and joys to. He
was left alone in the world. Where would he go?
He soon learned, however, that his Uncle in India
was returning to England for good and that he
was going to look after him, and that he would go
back to his same dear old school to work harder
than before to please his parents, who were both
in heaven now. And so he did, but, he never could
beat Eric at the exams., though Herbert’s work was
the better of the two at other times. He worked so
hard that one could see his health would give way
soon. He was, however, compelled by the Brother
Superior to take a rest, and he did so.
He began to pick up soon again. He wanted to
go to the University to study law, and we see him
again in October studying for Matriculation. It
was his last year in the Marist College, and he had
been so happy there that it would cost him a great
deal to bid farewell to his Alma Mater. He came
out with flying colours in the test that was given
by the head master, and everybody felt sure that
he would not only pass successfully,but take honours
in nearly every subject. But what has become of
Eric? A week before the exam, we see him lying
in a bed of agony in the infirmary. He is dying—


he fell from a •window, broke his spine and sustained
internal injuries. He is now full of good disposi-
tions and wishes to tell Herbert how he cheated and
deceived to beat him at the exams. But how can
he? The thought that the act of humility he would
make by doing so would please God and lessen his
time in Purgatory, urged him on to follow his in-
spiration. So all at once he cried out in a loud
voice, “Herbert, Herbert.”
The boy was sent for and there in that room the
two boys shed tears of joy and sorrow. Eric asked
Herbert to forgive him and to tell the whole school
what he had done. But Herbert, pressed his hand
and said, “Don’t worry, please pray for me and I
shall not forget you.” Then Eric said very gently:
“Good-bye, dear Herbert, I am going to God.
Pray, pray ” There was a slight movement of
his hands towards his rosary beads. The Brother
placed the cross between his fingers—a sigh, and he
was dead, before Herbert or the brother could
realise it.
A terrible scene of boyish anguish followed as
Herbert bent over the dead boy’s brow. He prayed
and sobbed till he was at last forced to leave the
bedside.
Thus Herbert’s life was clouded by another death,
which affected him very much. But all these
sorrows seemed to form his character, and make him
understand that life is short at best and only a


preparation for eternity. His name headed the list
when the matric. results came out. He had a very
brilliant University course. He read for the bar,
and is now one of the most distinguished barristers
in London, and if any of you, dear readers, happen
to go to England and see him, you can ask him to
tell you his college story, and he will, perhaps, give
you more details than I have in this little sketch.
FINIS.




“LITTLE MISS CANT”




“Little Miss Can’t”
CHAPTER I.
Some of my readers know this little girl
already, others, I am sure, would be pleased to
hear about her, and some might like to imitate her;
for, little Miss Can’t is not the only little girl in the
Southern Hemisphere who makes an immoderate
use of this much abused little word.
I can hear you say “What is she like?” “How
old is she?” “Where does she live?” “Has she got
another name?” Well, I shall endeavour to answer
your questions in proper order.
She is rather tall for her age, has blue eyes, fair
hair and fat rosy cheeks, with very white skin —a
bonnie child in every sense of the word. She has a
hearty, silvery, contagious laugh, and is full of fun
and mischief. She was 12 years old last birthday,
which occurred two months ago. She lives in the
prettiest cottage you ever saw, in a beautiful suburb
of Sydney and she has another name—a name that
every Catholic loves—in fact she has two beautiful
names—Mary Gertrude. The first is God’s own
Mother’s name and the second is that of one of his


dearest Saints. But she is “Mollie” every day, and
is only called by the other names on great occasions.
Yet her pet name does not make her forget Our
Lady, or the Saint who was such a special friend of
Our Blessed Lord. She loves both of her heavenly
patrons dearly.
The question now arises as to how she got that
other name. Why is she called Little Miss Can’t?
About 2 years ago our little friend got the measles
and she was absent from school for five weeks. When
she returned she found that her companions had
learned a new rule in Arithmetic and she had been
left behind. She never had any special love for
this branch of her education, and though the teacher
did her best to explain the said new rule to Mollie
while the other pupils were working their problems,
yet the little girl did not try to understand. She
had made up her mind that she could not learn it
and began to say, “I can’t!” every other minute. It
was useless to'tell her that she did not try; that she
did not listen all the lime; that she let her mind
wander when the explanations were given. Mollie
said, “I can’t, even when I do try”—hence her new
name.
Now this young little Australian was not devoid
of energy or intelligence. She organised two bazaars
at her own home for the local Red Cross Society,
and got very substantial sums for this sublime work,
and she made no mistakes in her calculations. This
was remarked to her and she answered “Oh, that


kind of arithmetic is all right. There is nothing
about triangles or parallelograms, or litres, or centi-
meters in that; besides it’s patriotic and I like it.”
Yes, Mollie is a thorough Australian and intensely
patriotic. On her birthday her Father took her to
Sydney to buy her a pony, but as she passed a
jeweller’s shop she saw a little gold ring with her
soldier cousin’s colours on it (she has 25 at the front),
and she almost compelled her Father to buy it,
though her Mother disapproved of the purchase as
she thought her little daughter was too young to
wear jewellery. In the end the pony was set aside
for a pianola, as she told her school friends when
she returned to school the next day. The School
was breaking up for the Michaelmas holidays on the
21st September and two great events were to take
place the following week. Mollie was giving a
birthday party to her little friends on the Sunday,
and on the same day a Mission was to begin in the
parish. The good Missionaries had made special
provision for services for the children and little Miss
Can’t meant to have her birthday party early in
the afternoon so 'that she could attend the evening
Service with her little friends.


CHAPTER 11.
The two Missionaries were very zealous, religious
priests; one was exceedingly eloquent, and Mollie
just loved his sermons. She went to Mass every
morning at 6.30 a.m. and to Holy Communion. Dur-
ing the day she enjoyed herself at home but was
always in her place in Church before the evening
devotions began. She said her rosary with great
fervor and listened attentively to the word of God.
She felt that she wanted to be very good, but, not
a “goody-goody.” She loved reading and had al-
ready romped with the Seven Little Australians;
played the violin and decorated Our Lady’s altar
with Nellie Doran; loved Mercy with Portia; and
hated Shylock with Gratiano.
During the Mission she wanted to read a holy
book to keep her good, and her cousin, who knew
all that is worth knowing about good books, gave
her John Ayscough’s “Friend who came back.” As
she read it her heart melted with pity for the poor
lonely gentleman priest in a far-off, out-of-the-way
corner of France, who was respected by his people,
but who had not a friend amongst them. “They
were Catholics and believed in the Sacraments. .. .
so a priest was a thing inevitable. But his friend-
ship ! Ah, that would be a thing to puzzle one what


to do with.” Nevertheless this lonely priest had one
Friend in the village—Jesus in the Tabernacle.
Mollie’s heart beat with delight. She was so glad
that he received such comfort before the altar.
“Often he had been used to stay there very long till
it would not have surprised him if his only Friend
had come to him visibly out of the silent tabernacle
and greeted him; that patient Presence had been as
actual to him as if it had been tangible also. That
is why he had never gone mad” Mollie, who had
so many friends, had never been lonely and she
wondered if 20 years of loneliness would really drive
one mad. She was glad the poor priest had not
gone mad during the 20 years that he had spent in
this uninteresting village doing his duty in such an
admirable way.
“But this special evening he is more lonely than
ever. He goes into the church to his only Friend,”
and Mollie is glad, because she is sure he will be
comforted by the Divine Presence he loves so well.
“But to-night comfort would not come. He had
temptations against Faith. He was in dreadful
anguish. He made silent acts of faith, then he made
them aloud, but it only seemed a blank discharge of
words. Faith had gone out of his heart. He was alone
in the church and suddenly the sanctuary lamp went
out without a warning flicker. He knew the oil
was not used up.” Mollie’s heart stood still. What
did that mean? Was it a miracle? She read on,
eager to know what followed. “The church was


pitch dark. The priest rose, groped his way to the
sacristy—after 20 years it was familiar —where there
were candles and matches. Mechanically he lighted
a candle, put on a surplice and stole, went back to
the church, mounted the altar steps, lighted two of
the candles there, then opened the tabernacle. There
was the ciborium. There was the lunette. Both
were empty!” Mollie nearly fainted. Had our dear
divine Lord gone away because the priest’s faith
had gone? Her emotion had made her lose the
place, but she must read and see what followed.
“He blew the tall candles out, the tabernacle was
closed again, and with the other candle he made
his way back to the sacristy. His step was unlike
itself, wavering a little. Presently he heard a foot-
step unmistakably. Loud was the rattle of the wind,
but as to the sound of some one walking in the
church there could be no possibility of deception.
It was no mere echo, and though he stood still the
footfall did not cease. Certainly no robber would
be tempted to such a place. All the same a chill
misgiving seized him and grew strongly.
The footsteps were those of a man, firm, and
rather swift. They were in the middle aisle. They
moved in the direction of the big west door, which
was locked. The priest followed them. They ceased
at the door and he heard the withdrawing of the
bolts, the turning of the key in the lock. Then he
came himself to the door and his light fell upon a
figure. The back was turned to him, nevertheless


he knew that it was familiar and knew that he had
not seen it before —“The Most Beautiful of the
Children of Men!” A young man in the perfection
of manhood. One hand was raised aloft to the top-
most bolt and bore a strange scar upon it, visible in
the wavering light of the priest’s guttering candle.
Still He did not turn and the priest stood behind
watching Him. Unmistakably the dress was that of
a poor man. Nevertheless conscious authority was
expressed in every line, inherited, inborn, inalien-
able. The door swung open. He who had opened
the door turned round then and their eyes met. “I
was going,” He said. Mollie cried out so earnestly,
“Please don’t —Do come back,” that her Mother
came out on the verandah to see what was the
matter. But as she saw her little girl lost in her
book she went back without speaking to her.
Mollie felt disappointed when the priest did not
speak, but watched the well-known features never
seen till now.
“I have stayed for you only,” said the familiar
stranger, “He turned again to go; the priest moved
forward slowly to watch Him to the last. A sub-
mission, the more poignant that it was dumb, seemed
personified in this patient, poor priest. The other
stopped, looked back, and again their eyes met.
This time neither spoke, but He who had been going
pointed up the dark church towards the altar and
the priest looked thither. The strangely scarred
Hand continued to point through the darkness to


the unseen altar, which was black too. "Was it a
command?” Mollie felt it was and she was annoyed
with the priest for not going up quickly to the altar.
Then she felt sorry, for she knew he must be some-
what bewildered. “He moved a little in the direc-
tion whither the Sacred Hand pointed. It pointed
still, and he obeyed, though this parted them. When
last he noted the Face that watched him, a gentle-
ness that was like a grave kind smile had lighted it.”
Mollie thought, “It is all right now; I am sure the
priest has faith for all eternity and he will be happy
for ever,” but she continued to read. “At the altar
he lighted again two candles and again opened the
tabernacle. It was no longer empty, and the lamp
that hung before it out of the darkness of the roof
flung down its yellow light again. Outside the cold
moon shone clear. He turned to look, but though
the big west door stood open still, it framed no
figure.”
Our little friend was overcome with emotion. Our
dear, loving, merciful Lord worked all these wonders
to comfort for ever His faithful, lonely priest. She
was sure he would never be sad again with such
a friend so near. Never again would he be assailed
by doubt, and how he would love to go into the
empty church and let his heart melt in love and
gratitude for the divine and voluntary prisoner who
remained in the tabernacle for him. How his mind’s
eye would call up every feature of the Divine visage
that he had beheld with his human eyes!


Till now, Mollie thought of the Divine Presence
as something mysteriously beautiful and intangible.
Presence, all light, but now she felt that Our Dear
Lord is really a prisoner for love of us and as she
was a very practical little person she thought that
He too must be lonely in His tiny house on the altar
and that she would often pay him a little visit. She
would cut the best flowers in her garden and put
them in a pretty vase which she would place on the
altar steps, and they would watch when the church
was deserted and He was all alone.
The church was in the school grounds and very
few people visited it during the day except the
teachers and school children. She would go with
her companions when the teacher took them, but
she would go sometimes by herself too. She decided
to hurry to school in the morning, cut the flowers in
her own garden and take them into church before
the other scholars arrived. School would re-open
on 'Monday and she would have such a lovely lot of
flowers that had bloomed during the week. She
closed her book, looked at her wristlet watch. It
was nearly time to get ready for the evening devo-
tions.
Our little friend was in church before the time.
She wanted to pay a special visit to the Blessed
Sacrament before the missionary began the rosary.
Rev. Father M.
preached a most beautiful
sermon on “pet sins.” She never heard a sermon
like that before. Did she have a pet sin? Her de-


fects marched past; she scrutinised them one by
one as they swept past in single file. It must be
“can’t” she said to herself. There and then she
determined to destroy it and substitute “I will” for
the disagreeable word, and Mollie had a “will” and
when she “willed” anything it generally came
about.
The sermon was followed by benediction of the
Most Blessed Sacrament and as she bent her head
in profound adoration she could feel the Eyes—
those divinely kind Eyes that looked at the lonely
priest reading the depth of her soul and approving
of her resolution. She felt happier than she ever
had been before.
She returned to school the following Monday the
same healthy, mischief-loving girl. Her laugh had
the same happy contagious ring and her voice
dominated as she went with her companions “gather-
ing nuts and May.” But the quick eye of the teacher
detected a “something” unusual in Mollie’s con-
duct. She noticed also that the prettiest flowers in
the little girl’s garden had disappeared and she re-
cognised them on the altar step when she took the
first communion class into church for their visit to
the little Jesus. As the days went by “can’t” dis-
appeared from Mollie T s vocabulary and metres and
litres, grams and parallelograms seemed to have a
special attraction for her. She was making rapid
progress in the subject that she detested a short
time ago. Some of her companions wondered what


had become of “Can’t.” They did not know that
their little friend used to hide it sometimes in the
calyx of a rose. At other times she would entwine
it round the stem of a snapdragon or hang it on the
thorn of a rosebud, but it was always hidden, and
firmly fixed among the flowers on the altar step.
Last Friday one of Mollie’s little friends said
rather slyly to the teacher “Sister, you never say
‘Little Miss Can’t’ now.” “Because she is dead,”
replied the teacher, smiling.
“R.1.P.” laughed Mollie, as she took “The Three
Daughters of the United Kingdom” out of the school
library.
FINIS.




TED




TED
CHAPTER I.
“It’s rotten luck all the same,” muttered a blue-
eyed, dark-haired lad of fourteen, as he threw him-
self into a garden seat under a leafy Tamarind,
one scorching day in February.
“Slang, brother mine!” came as quickly as an
echo from a large eucalyptus tree hard by. The
first speaker lifted his eyes. He did not expect to
see a kookaburra, but the face of his friend, Jack
Lochnane, whom he had not seen for a whole week.
Instead of Jack, he was shocked to see his rosy-
cheeked, little sister, Peggy, sitting on the topmost
branch. He was terrified lest she should fall and
kill herself. She was just eleven, but the most
reckless, healthy, mischievous loving child in the
world. At first, he was going to rush into the house to
bring paternal authority to bear on the occupant
of the gum tree; but he knew his little sister, whom
he loved better than himself (in spite of all the
tricks she played on him), would divine his intention
and come down headlong when he turned his back,
risking, in so doing, both limb and life. He knew


her wilful love of contradiction and that it was
useless to tell her to descend—she would only do
that if it pleased herself. Ted was a resourceful
boy and being convinced that a playful mood would
suit Peggie’s humour better than anything else, he
simply said, “Why, I thought you were a laughing
jackass suddenly endowed with the gift of speech!”
“You do make rude remarks, Master Ted, I think
you should admire my ‘charger.’ You are only
jealous because you never reached this height.”
“Of course, I admire your ‘charger,’ Alexander’s
was nothing compared to yours,” said her brother.
“You need not show off your superior knowledge. I
know all about Bucephalus and Alexander. See, I
have turned my back to the sun. Alexander did
not do any better—of course, it suited him to turn
his horse’s face to the god of the pagans and his
own too.” Ted smiled, he did not expect this
answer, but added, “Well, your steed is more like
the wooden horse of Troy than Alexander’s, only
you can be seen and the Greeks were hidden. What
Ulysses told you to take up your present position?”
“It does not matter much if I am visible, for my
horse cannot be carried into Troy or anywhere
else, and I have never had the good luck of meeting
a Ulysses. I think I will do the opposite to Achilles
—dress up as a boy and enjoy myself. You boys
can play cricket, football, and all kinds of exciting
games, while we, girls, have to be quiet and tame
and a half dozen other etceteras. I don’t think it


is fair.” So saying, she abandoned her perch and
slipped from branch to branch with the greatest
agility and was soon standing in front of her
brother.
“You have been acting more like a squirrel than
a girl for the last half hour,” said Ted. “Now, it
is awfully dangerous to climb so high and sit on
such a frail branch—at the very edge too. If mother
saw you she would have received such a shock that
she would have been ill, and, you know, she has
not been well for some time.”
“Well, I took that into consideration, Rev.
Preacher. I did not climb the tree until I had heard
mother tell the cook she was going to rest, then I
felt frightfully good-for-nothing, so I made for the
top of the old gum. Mother is not the same since
Uncle Tom was killed in France at that unpro-
nounceable place P-o-z-i-e-r-e-s. Of course, we did
not know him and he is not the only one that has
been killed in action. I am sorry mother should
worry so much.”
“Mother worries because he had neglected his
religion and she does not know if he received the
sacraments. He had not practised for j r ears before
he left Sydney,”
“I wonder why he never went to church. I heard
Dad once say, it was a terrible shame he married
into the Rook family. Dad did not seem to like
Uncle Tom. He was never invited here and I do not
think either he or mother ever visited him.”


“Well, mother was ashamed that her brother
should be such a bad Catholic. Of course, it was
all the result of a mixed marriage. I heard mother
say so over and over again.” Peggy laughed out-
right at this remark of her brother, and merrily
rejoined, “Here we are like two old maids talking
about such serious things that you look nearly a
hundred, and, I suppose, I look quite 50. But what
was that luck you were talking about just before
you located my aerial position?”
This question brought Ted back to his old train of
thought, and he did not know whether he would tell
Peggie the cause of his annoyance then, or wait
till tea time, when his mother would be sure to "tell
her—in fact, it would be the general topic of the
household that evening.
Probably Peg would not like the new arrangement,
and he certainly disliked it very much, though he
knew it was a necessary evil. lie had made up his
mind to make the best of a bad matter. "You are
slow in answering a lady’s most polite question. How
long more shall I have to wait until you have col-
lected your thoughts and framed a correct sentence?
I am glad I am not a boy, they are such slow
thinkers.”
Ted smiled and rejoined, “It is not a hundred
years ago since you were envying our sports.”
“Sports! Oh, yes! but not your thoughts. Hurry
up and let me know what is this bad luck that has


fallen; or is about to fall; or may fall upon you.”
“On the Ist of March I am to be a ‘day boarder’
at St. I’s College, Darlinghurst, Sydney; I shall have
to leave home at 8 a.m., and will, probably, return
at 6 p.m. with tons of lessons to learn and miles
of exercises to write. What kind of luck do you
call that?”
“Mother does not like slang, yet it is very ex-
pressive. It is certainly R-o-t-t-e-n with a vengeance.
We shall not have much fun together now, except
on Saturdays and Sundays. Poor, old Ted! lam
very sorry; however, we shall make the best of
our time when we are together,” said Peggie car-
essingly. “You know it would have been much
worse if you had been sent to a boarding school.
Then we should have been entirely separated.”
“I do not think mother would like that just at
present; though, I suppose, it will come one day,”
and the blue eyes grew thoughtful. Then he sud-
denly brightened, saying, “We must not let mother
see we dislike this new order of things, it would
only sadden her. Besides, there is no help for it, as
dad is bent upon it. In fact, he made all the arrange-
ments with the college authorities before he men-
tioned the subject to mother or me.” Peggie smiled
and added, “Dad always does things like that. Well,
let us be as happy as we can. It probably is the
best thing for you anyway. You will have plenty of
friends all day long. I’ll mind Fido while you are


away and we shall come to the boat every evening
to meet you.”
“All right, little sister! But promise me you will
never climb to the top of that old eucalyptus tree
again. I should feel very unhappy if I thought
that you ever went up there while I was away.”
“I never thought boys could be nervous. Well,
I won’t, if that is all you require to make you
happy. I shall race Fido instead, and it will be just
as exciting. Hark to the tea bell! We are late
and it annoys mother. I shall race you in.” So
saying, Peggie started off at full speed, her pretty
curls floating in the breeze, and, though three years
younger than her brother, he had great difficulty
in reaching the verandah the same time as she did,
where both were greeted by their dear mother’s
kind smile.


CHAPTER 11.
On March the Ist, Ted began his new life. Up
to the present he attended a private school near
his home, in which boys were well prepared for
entrance into the great public schools. He went
successfully through his course, and the headmaster
told his father that there was a great future in
store for his son if his studies were properly directed.
He was clever and eloquent, and had excellent judg-
ment—qualities that go to make a lawyer who would
climb to the top of his profession. Mr. Ward took
the hint and determined that his son should enter
one of the best colleges in Sydney; and eventually
go to the University and read for the bar. He was
a physician himself, and he did not think that Ted
would care for the medical profession. He knew
that his wife prayed morning, noon and night that
her son might have a vocation for the priesthood,
and being a good Christian, he considered that it
would be the best possible thing that could happen to
Ted. However, that was a very delicate matter, which
should be left between his creator and his child.
In the meantime, it was his duty to educate him
so as to fit him for the battle of life, and he finished
off by saying to himself, “Well, if he does become
a Jesuit, he will be all the better for having studied


law. Father de Ravignan, the great French preacher,
was a barrister before he entered the society of
Jesus, and he was one of the greatest and holiest
men of his time.” Mr. Ward was a practical man
and he was certain that the experience acquired
in a great public school under the guidance of re-
ligious teachers would give his son a true know-
ledge of the world and that is why he settled all
the details without consulting his wife.
Mrs. Ward had perfect confidence in her husband’s
judgment, and knew that it was only to spare her
unnecessary worry that he acted thus, as she was
very nervous about everything that concerned her
children. Now that everything was settled, she
accepted the accomplished fact and did not analyse
the dailv rides in tram and boat and the thousand
and one attendant dangers and risks that her son
would run on his way to and from college.
Peggie attended a day school in the neighborhood
of her home. Her father insisted on short lesson
periods, and on plenty of fresh air and sunshine.
The result was that his little daughter was a healthy,
clever child, for she assimilated all she learned in
school and enjoyed all nature taught her. She and
Ted were very fond of each other’s company and
both would feel keenly the partial separation. Mrs.
Ward knew this, and made up her mind to induce
Peggie to take up some hobby that would occupy
her thoughts during her brother’s absence. She
noticed that Peg had a decided talent for drawing


and she could improve her talent and taste by in-
teresting her in photography—there were so many
beautiful scenes that would make charming pictures
m the neighborhood of the pretty suburb they in-
habited. Consequently, the day before the re-open-
ing of the college, Peggie received a first-class
camera, which delighted her. Her mother told her
that she would take her to a photographer’s to learn
how to develop the negatives and that she, herself,
would become a pupil too, as she wanted to fill a
large album with photographs of the neighborhood.
This completed Peggie’s happiness, and, though
there was something electric in the air all the even-
ing, an air of expectancy of something unusual about
to happen, Peggie could not define whether it was
caused by the thought of Ted’s departure for his
new school the next day, or her projected excur-
sions in search of the ‘‘beauty spots” of the district,
which would be transferred to paper by her wonder-
ful camera.
Parents and children alike seemed lost in their
thoughts and everybody retired early, but Mrs.
Ward saw that her son’s school bag contained all
his books, and that everything which he was to
take to school was in perfect readiness before she
left her little boy’s room, whither she accompanied
him after the family rosary had been said.
Mother and son had a long chat together about
everything they imagined was going to take place
on the morrow. Ted laid his mind and heart quite


bare to the one on earth who loved him best. She
saw, with joy, the pious aspirations of his innocent
soul, and without any intrusion or compulsion, her
voice, words and manner nourished and fostered
those inspirations which she fondly hoped would
one day blossom in the garden of the church.
Next morning as Ted surveyed the beautiful
scenery on the right bank of the Parramatta RPei
as the ferry boat plied her way through the sunlit,
sparkling waters as she steered towards Port
Jackson —the most beautiful harbor in the world;
about which Sydneyites rave, and which all visitors
admire —he wondered how many years he would
go thus, down and up in the ferry boat. He had
made up his mind about going to the University and
reading for the bar. Beyond that he could not see
clearly. There was certainly a refulgent light sur-
rounded by glittering stars which attracted him.
'Which of those golden orbs would he choose to
lead him to the central light? Time would tell.
One thing he was certain of, that the attractions
would be heeded and the choice made as soon as
he attained his manhood —perhaps before.
He was so deeply lost in thought and the glories
of the matchless scenery, which is only found in a
sub-tropical climate, that he did not notice three
or four college boys who had wandered round to
his end of the boat and were leaning against the
bulwarks. One of them was eyeing him with juvenile
curiosity. They were all mostly his own age, or,


perhaps, a couple of years older. He could tell by
their badges that they did not belong to a Catholic
school. He just threw them a passing glance, but
rather disliked the stare of the sharp-featured boy
that was leaning against the post. Though he did
not consider himself a judge of faces, yet, Ted in-
stinctively felt that this fellow lacked both courage
and honesty, but he repressed the ungenerous
thought. Appearances deceive.
Circular Quay was reached in due time, the ferry
boat moored and the business men and school boys,
who formed the majority of the passengers, were
quickly through the turnstiles and rushing for
trams. Ted soon got into a comfortable corner of
a Darlinghurst tram, and at 9 a.m. was in the
college. As he had been all through the preparatory
courses, he was placed at once in the Intermediate
Class and his professor soon saw that he was a very
promising pupil. He was immensely pleased with
his conduct, knowledge and general deportment.
The days lengthened into weeks and months and
Ted increased in knowledge and size. The healthy
college sports, in which he took a keen delight, de-
veloped his physical qualities in such a way that
the tons of lessons and miles of exercises were not
the terrible bore he anticipated. He used his foun-
tain pen and got through many of his exercises
during his homeward trip on the boat. Peg and
Fido were always waiting for him near the wharf
an<i tbev had a pleasant ten minutes walk home


together. Whatever exciting happened in school
or at home during the day was duly chronicled by
the brother or sister, so that it could be related
during the homeward walk.
Mrs. Ward was on the verandah every evening
and Mr. Ward sometimes, but the doctor's time was
not his own; being thoroughly devoted to his
patients his motor car was to be seen at all hours
taking him to the bedsides of the sick and dying;
and often, his car was seen by his children entering
the “garage” as they entered the garden.
Dinner was a happy evening meal which reunited
the whole family and there was a quiet hour after,
during which, Peg showed her photos—she had some
remarkably good ones, Mrs. Ward did fancy work
and Ted either admired his sister’s photos or teased
her. Then Peg practised her piano and her brother
prepared his lessons for next day. He was very
industrious and did to the letter what had been
set. His reports were always excellent and he kent
continually at the top of his class. He took honors
in six subjects at the Intermediate, and got “A’s”
in all the others. When his well-earned holidays
came, Dr. Ward sent his family to the Blue Moun-
tains. He, himself, could only get away for a short
time. He thought Katoomba was too crowded and
Blackheath was just as bad; however, he succeeded
in getting a very pretty cottage in Mount Victoria
for the two summer months after Xmas. This de-
lighted everybody.


CHAPTER 111.
Though Ted was a docile student, yet he was as
independent as any Australian is, and the Aus-
tralians are certainly the most independent people
on the face of the earth. As a day boarder he did
not exchange entirely the freedom of home for the
barrack-life of school, and he did not find himself
continually under the magnifying glass as boarders,
especially in Europe, do. Nevertheless, he had 16
account for his actions during the day and this
entire freedom for two whole months among the
mountains and valleys of his native land was eagerly
welcomed by him.
Master Ward was now in his third year and had
only one more year in college. He was still head
of his class, though it was composed of a large
number of extremely clever boys who vied
with each other for the first places. Ward’s
scholastic victories were well won, for every
inch of the ground had been hotly contested. His
school fellows used to describe him as a tall, gentle-
manly, quiet, uncommonly clever boy. Though
quiet, determination was written in every line of
his mouth when in repose. He had a cool sort of
courage, but could boil over with enthusiasm when
a subject appealed to him —but only noble subjects


did appeal to him, and the, distant look in his dark-
blue eyes indicated that he had not yet quite found
his ideal.
The doctor took his motor car up to their summer
residence, and motor drives were the order of the
day. There are so many “beauty spots” in the
Blue Mountains that one has, as the French say,
“L’embarras du choix.” Each day had its excur-
sion planned out, so that there was method in their
enjoyment.
After three weeks of this happy life the doctor
had to return to Sydney, but Mrs. "Ward did not
abandon the excursions. She and Peggie, who was
now almost grown-up, were busy with their camera,
and, so that Ted would not feel out of his element,
she invited friends to join them —preferably those
who had boys, so that her son might have com-
panions when sealing rocks or doing the other
dangerous things which boys between fifteen and
twenty think they have a right to do.
One afternoon they went for a long walk, all three
together. Mrs. Ward and Peggie wanted to read.
They had brought books with them and chose a
cool spot where they would be comfortable and
undisturbed. Of late, Peggie had become a real
book-worm, and it was serious work for Mrs. Ward
to procure a sufficient supply of books for her
daughter in the mountains. The demand for litera-
ture was very much in excess of the supply, especi-
ally as Peggie’s mother would not allow her child


to read dreamy “trash.” Peg herself had no love
for that kind of stuff. But titles deceive. How
many innocent hearts have become corrupted by
the reading of a bad book? Vile trash, which is
sold in public stalls or in cheap book shops! Both
Mr. and Mrs. Ward were very careful about the
books their children read. Mr. Ward often de-
clared that less novel-reading, and more flower-
growing, would be better in every way far the
youth of sunny Australia. He was convinced that
emotional reading as well as emotional “pictures
were nerve-racking. He had first-hand knowledge,
as he had already treated many of these nervous
wrecks.
When his mother and sister were comfortably
settled, Ted went off exploring. He went down a
gentle slope to the bottom of a ravine; then, when
after considerable difficulty, he reached the summit
of a high rock, he saw two or three other boys at
the bottom of the valley. He soon recognised them
as the college hoys who travelled on the same boat
as himself every morning on their way to school.
They were jumping and wrestling, as boys on holi-
days generally do. Quite near them was a leaning
tree, under which a woman was playing with her
little girl. As Ted was surveying the scene and
wondering if the woman and child were related to
any of the boys in question, the leaning tree sud-
denly crashed down upon them. The mother gave
an unearthly scream, tried to grasp her child, but


the poor little creature was pinned under the
fallen branches. The distracted woman cried
wildly and looked towards the spot where the boys
were standing, but they had already disappeared
round the ledge of rock. However, help came from
another quarter. Directly young Ward realised
what was happening, he came down, clutching one
shrub after another —risking life and limb —till he
stood beside the distressed mother. Their combined
efforts raised the branches and the poor little
creature was extricated, bruised and half dead with
fright. By this time, Mrs. Ward and Peg had
reached the scene of accident by another path. The
poor woman was consoled and helped back to her
lodgings. Ted ran on in front to get a doctor. On
his way he passed the trio of gallant heroes who
had so quickly disappeared on the fall of the tree.
He knew that a doctor lived a short way from the
cross road, but he was not quite sure which was
the road he should take. He looked round to see
if there was anyone near from whom he could get
the information he required. There was no one in
sight except the three college boys he had just
passed. “Well,” thought he, “though they seem
cowards, perhaps they would be able to tell me
where the doctor lives.” Then he walked back
and inquired very politely if they knew which road
led to the doctor’s house. All three glared at him
and the thin-featured boy, whom he had remarked
on the boat, and whom he instinctively disliked,


the first morning he went to college, sneeringly
said, “We hold no intercourse with papists!” A
flush of indignation tinged Ted’s countenance, a
scornful, defiant reply rose to his lips, but, with a
tremendous effort, he subdued his emotion and
quietly replied, “The poor woman whose child has
been hurt by a tree, in your presence, is not a
Catholic. Probably she belongs to one of the sects
in your church, and it is for her I am trying to get
a doctor.” Then, with a polite bow and a slight
trace of sarcasm in his voice, he rejoined, “I thank
you, gentlemen, for your courtesy, it is only equalled
by your courage.” So saying he turned round to
address another person that had come out of the
nearest cottage. It proved to be the doctor’s
sister, who directed him to her brother’s residence.
The three college boys slunk away when they
realised that Ted had noticed their cowardly with-
drawal from the neighbourhood of danger. But the
boy who had called him a papist vowed he would
be “even” with him some day. Ted’s quiet sar-
casm cut him deeply. The other two rather admired
the chivalrous conduct of the handsome, young
fellow who was now out of sight.
The doctor declared the little girl had no broken
bones, but was badly bruised and shaken. He con-
soled the poor mother by telling her that all traces
of the accident would disappear in a few weeks.
Mrs. Ward was very kind and helped her materially.
Her name was Sadler, She was a widow, and had


come for a short holiday to the mountains for her
child’s sake. This accident meant greater expense,
and if it had not been for Mrs. Ward’s help, she
would be reduced to very straitened circumstances.
A few days later, Dr. Ward wrote to his wife to
tell her he would be glad if she would return with
the children so that they could be all together for
the last week of the holidays.
Though they enjoyed the free life, fresh air, and
grand mountain scenery, yet they were not sorry
to return to the pretty, little Sydney suburb, where
home, sweet home, nestled in bouquets of verdure.
The train journey down was rather tedious. It
was very hot in the train, though there were not
many passengers, but they increased in numbers as
the locomotive stopped at new stations. There was
such a crowd on Katoomba station that the car-
riages were getting filled. Leura contributed a
large number of travellers also, and after that there
was no elbow room in any carriage in the whole
train. At last Sydney was reached. The doctor
was waiting with his car, the servant looked after
the luggage and away they sped in the cool evening
air. It was simply delightful, and Peg, who had
a passion for everything Australian, recited softly
one of Henry Kendall’s verses: —
“By channels of coolness the echoes are calling,
And down the dim gorges I hear the creek falling;
It lives in the mountain where moss and the sedges


Touch with their beauty the banks and the ledges;
Through brakes of the cedar and sycamore bowers
Struggles the light that is love to the flowers;
And softer than slumber, and sweeter than singing,
The notes of the bell-birds are running and ringing.”
Ted, who loved teasing his sister, declared that it
would have been more appropriate to give those
extracts from Kendall when they were strolling by
the brooks in the valleys between the mountains
than now, when they were rushing through the
atmosphere in a motor car. He was quickly in-
formed that the poetry was recited for the Doctor’s
pleasure and certainly not for his criticism. Mrs.
"Ward was highly amused at the wordy battle which
followed; and her husband was delighted to find
all his dear ones in such good health and spirits.
At length the car stopped and the tired travellers
soon did justice to the delicious evening meal which
Kate, the cook, prepared with more than usual care.


CHAPTER IV.
St. I’s College re-opened early in March—the
Monday after the results of the Leaving Certificate
had been published. The college candidates did
■well. Many got honors, and “A’s” were in abund-
ance. The principal was so satisfied that the college
was given a whole holiday. Nearly every boy that
passed was going to the University, and Ted was
delighted to knew that Saint I’s topped the list in
the “Honors” column. He began to think that at
about the same date the following year he would,
probably, be no longer a school boy, but an under-
graduate at the University. Yet, would he? The
question remained unanswered as he joined a party
of young fellows racing surfwards.
The month of May had arrived and everything
was going on as usual at the college. The elder
boys were grinding away at their studies and the
new boys were now quite accustomed to the college
rules. It was the month of May—the month which
brings sweet pleasure to the heart of every Catholic,
because, during this month, we honor in a very
special manner, Mary, the Mother of God —who is
also heaven’s gracious Queen.
On May Day, Ted was in the prefect’s study, and
after a short conversation, the prefect, who was the


boy’s spiritual guide, took up two fair-sized volumes
and asked Ted if he had ever read the life of
Cardinal Vaughan. Young Ward replied that he
had heard his father speak about it, but that he
had never read it himself. “Well,” continued the
kind priest, “take these two volumes and try and
read them during this term. They will certainly
give you an insight into character, for, in reading
them, you will be studying the character of a true
priest and a great cardinal.” Ted coloured, took the
books, thanked the prefect, and returned to the
study hall. He had read some of Father Bernard
Vaughan’s sermons during the last retreat, and he
was glad to be able to read, at least in part, the
history of this very Catholic family. He put the
books in his bag, intending to begin to read the first
volume directly he got on the ferry boat on his
way home.
The first chapters were quickly devoured by this
voracious young reader. He was very impressed
by the letter, written by Father Bernard Vaughan,
S.J., to his cousin (the author), about his childhood
days; especially so, by the passage relating to his
mother, in which he says: “She (Mrs. Vaughan)
made heaven such a reality to us that we felt that
we knew more about it, and liked it in a way far
better even than our home, where, until she died,
her children were wildly, supremely happy. Re-
ligion under her teaching was made so attractive
and all the treasured items she gathered from the


lives of the saints made them so fascinating to us, that
we loved them as our most intimate friends, which
she assured us they most certainly were,” This
made Ted think of his own dear mother, who was
aiming at the same high ideals. He was so immersed
in his reading that he did not notice the three college
boys, whose names were unknown to him, but, whom
he knew well by sight, leaning against the side
of the boat and apparently joking at his expense.
They disembarked at the wharf just before his
landing stage and in passing the one whom he
disliked most trampled heavily upon his feet. The
sharp pain he momentarily felt, made Ted look up,
but the aggressor did not utter a word of apology,
he did not even raise his hat as he proceeded to
the landing stage. When relating the ex-
periences to his mother, Ted referred to his late
tormentor as the worst of the three, and his mother
understood exactly what had happened—when leav-
ing her son’s room she had a vague fear of what
might happen. Before the little altar in her own
room she breathed a fervent prayer to ask the Queen
of Heaven’s special protection for her dear boy.
Ted simply loved the life of the noble English
cardinal. Aubry de Vere’s remark about the beauty
of his countenance left him cold; but when De Vere
says that “Mr. Vaughan renounces prospects as
brilliant almost as any man in England can command
to be a priest in some out-of-the-way village in Wales
and seems as happy as the day is long at his de-


votions,” Ted began to feel deep emotion. He read
the two volumes in less than a week and he was so
charmed with their contents that he determined to
read them again—this time slowly, making notes
of the passages that struck him most. He read and
reread the account of the holy man’s death. “It
was the 19th of June, Feast of the Sacred Heart.
At 11.30 p.m., the cardinal grew suddenly worse
When Mr. Young, his nurse, approached
him, the cardinal could only whisper, ‘I have had
a bad attack—the worst I have had.’ Then relief
came and for a little while he lay back in his chair
murmuring, ‘Jesus—Mary—Joseph.’ Minutes went
by, and the words came more slowly and faintly
until suddenly an ashen veil seemed to close over
his face. Note was taken of the time by a priest
who had been called hastily and who had anointed
the dying prelate during the day. It was ten
minutes to midnight. He had thought of the
cardinal’s desire to die before the Feast of the
Sacred Heart had passed. He hurried to the sick
room but the angel of death was there before him.
The cardinal had died quite quietly—his lips still
trying to shape themselves to the words ‘Jesus,
Mary, Joseph.’ ”
Thus the death of Cardinal Vaughan was in keep-
ing with his life—both were holy. Young Ward
realised fully that the longest life is short compared
to eternity, and that our eternal happiness depends
on the state of our soul when we die; and that as we


live we die. This thought sank deeply into his soul
and he determined to lead the life that ensures a
happy death.


CHAPTER V.
Ted’s last year at college was drawing to a close.
He was now turned 18, but looked quite 20. This
year had been very successful from every point of
view. At the quarterly exams, and at the final
year’s test, he came first in every subject he studied,
and in a few weeks more he would sit for the
Leaving Certificate. His professors felt sure that
he would win prizes and University exhibitions
galore. He was their best student. Though he was
now and then discussed by the staff, only one of
the priests thought that he had a religious vocation.
The others declared that he was an all-round, good
boy, who had no difficulty with his studies and who
would certainly read for the bar. They said he
would die Lord Chief Justice of the Supreme Court
of somewhere, if God spared him a long life. He was
captain of the school and a keen sportsman.
At all events, Ted stood now at the parting of
the ways and though he had not decided in so many
words his future, yet it was pretty well decided in
his heart.
He was re-reading the life of Cardinal Vaughan.
He found it so beautiful that he could not tear him-
self away from it. He read part of it on his way
to and from the college every day, noted the pas-


sages that impressed him most and carefully tran-
scribed them into a note book in his own room every
evening. We hope it will not be indiscreet to repro-
duce a few of these “gems” culled from the
cardinal’s biography by his cousin, Snead Cox.
“Above all things, he (Cardinal Vaughan) loved
plain dealing and plain speech, whether the outcome
of it be palatable to him or not. . . He had a
kind of instinctive dislike for evasions, shifts, or
too ingenious explanations.”
“God has proved a thousand times over, not only
by his direct instructions in the gospels, but by the
example of the saints, that He is glorified by the
good will, by the labors and sufferings, by the
prayers and desires of his servants, as much as by
the glorious results which are so consoling when
we behold them.”
“I know no instance of a saint striving to obtain
honor or dignity even for a good purpose.”
Then just under this were written the words of
another cardinal —words which have been im-
mortalised by Shakespear:—
“I charge thee, fling away ambition
By that sin fell the angels; how can man then.
The image of his Maker, hope to win by ’t?”
He could not afford to neglect in the slightest
degree his studies, since his exam, was so near,
therefore the only time he had for reading was on
the boat. Latterly he was so engrossed in his book


that he did not see the sharp-featured boy, whose
name was Smith, and who, he instinctively felt, was
his enemy, watch him from a certain angle on the
boat. They generally travelled by the same steamer
in the morning, but rarely met in the evening. Smith
had always a couple of other boys with him and they
seemed to have some unpleasant design on Ted. The
latter did not notice them even once; and on this
special morning he was reading about one of Car-
dinal Vaughan’s many acts of kindness. It hap-
pened during the English prelate’s last visit to
Rome in the Spring of 1901. “It was brought to
his (the cardinal’s) knowledge that an old man, an
Irishman, whom he had known well years before,
was lying seriously ill in the Nursing Home kept
by the English sisters of the little company of Mary
in the Via Castelfidardo. The cardinal was warned
that the case was a distressing one, because, owing
to some financial worry, the patient’s mind was
wandering—he would lie for hours in a sort of
stupor crying out for money. When the cardinal
stood by the bedside, the sick man seemed hardly
to know him, and refused to be comforted, and
instead, as he tossed from side to side, kept moaning
out the words, ‘Money, Money—£2o.’ The cardinal
tried to reason with him, and told him that as long
as he was in the ‘Home’ he could have no use for
money, that the nuns would gladly nurse him back
to health without payment. It was all to no pur-
pose, and the same impatient crj'- for £2O went on


continuously. When the cardinal returned to the
guest-room he learned that, on the whole, the
doctors took a hopeful view and thought the case
would gradually yield to time and treatment. But
Cardinal Vaughan wanted a quicker way. He
listened, and for answer, asked for pen and paper.
He then wrote out a cheque for £2O and told the
nuns to give the gold without delay to the sufferer.
It is pleasant to be able to add that the remedy was
so far efficacious that the patient fell into a refresh-
ing sleep that night and was afterwards able to leave
the home.”
Ted shut his book, wondering for what special
purpose the Irishman wanted the £2O, but, as he
looked up, he saw Smith walk towards him. He
remembered how this fellow had brutally crushed
his toes some months before, so he drew them back
to a safe distance. He was sitting outside the
men’s cabin on the lower deck and there was just
room to pass between him and the bulwarks —he
was very near the gangway and the plankman was
standing near the sliding bar, rope in hand, for, in
a few minutes, they would call at Cockatoo Island.
Smith was followed by two other boys, the first
of whom threw him against Ted. The collision
knocked the book out of the latter’s hands and
Smith kicked it hurriedly into the water; and im-
mediately turned his back to the iron slide and leant
carelessly against it, appearing as though he had
not seen the book, Ted was livid, his eyes flashed


fire as he rose to his feet. But then the boat gave
a sudden jerk, the slide (which had not been
securely fastened) gave way and Smith went plung-
ing heels over head into the briny waters of the
Parramatta River. A shriek of terror arose on the
still morning air, business men dropped their papers,
life-buoys were thrown over board, and Smith rose
to the surface; but he went down again—he could
not swim. In a twinkling Ted’s coat was off. He
measured the distance with his eye, leaped forward,
swam a few strokes —he was an expert swimmer—
and caught Smith as he was going down the third
time. He swam towards a life buoy, holding the
drowning boy up. The latter managed to catch
hold of it. Now the plank man threw out his rope,
which Ted managed to catch and fasten to the life
buoy. Then was heard from the upper deck, the
cry of “A shark! Quick! Quick! A shark!” The
cold perspiration stood out on Smith’s face and he
nearly relinquished his hold of the life buoy, for, in
his terror, he imagined that he had hold of the
shark’s tail. Ted redoubled his efforts; the men
on the ferry boat pulled the rope towards them,
and the two dripping youths were soon hauled on
board, Smith first and Ted afterwards. The shark
did not appear. A man simply saw something in
the water which he feared was a shark, but on
closer observation it proved to be a piece of white
sail cloth that had been caught in the current.
Fortunately, some of the boys on board had port-
manteaux containing sport’s costumes, so the wet


clothes were exchanged in the cloak-room for dry
ones. But the ridiculous part was that Ted was
rigged out in the “blazer” and badge of an Anglican
college and Smith in the costume of a Catholic
school. Both looked at each other. Ted smiled, but
before he could speak, Smith went towards him and
in the same breath, but in a humble tone of voice,
said: “Oh, forgive me, and thanks for your noble
act!” Young Ward grasped his hand, which he
shook warmly. The other smiled frankly and added,
“It is so good of you!” Once Smith smiled, Ted
saw that he was quite another boy. It was prejudice
that made him “horrid” and now that prejudice
had been drowned in the still waters of the Pacific,
he was as nice as any other lad of the Catholic
boy’s acquaintance. They remained in the cabin
till the boat was moored and then their respective
friends congratulated the rescuer and the rescued.
Smith’s father, who was slightly acquainted with
Mr. Ward, paid the family a formal call. He
wanted to thank Ted personally and went to the
college to do so. Strange to say, Ted Ward and
Tom Smith became fast friends.
The laudatory paragraphs in the “dailies,” and
the boisterous applause of the college boys when
he appeared in the college grounds, did not turn
Ted’s head. His examination was drawing near
and he meant to do his best. Though A.M.D.G. did
not appear on his exam, papers, it was written in
his heart as he carefully read, duly considered, and


painstakingly answered each question. Needless to
say he surpassed himself, and the most sanguine
expectations of his masters. But before his remark-
able successes were known or published, Ted had
chosen “the better part.”


CHAPTER VI.
Two days after the school had broken up Ted
had a long chat with his mother. He ascertained
from her that, though his father earnestly wished
him to go to the University, yet he would not stand
in his way if God called him to a higher life. And
Ted had heard the call. The Saviour had been
knocking at the door of his heart ever since the
blissful day that he received Him for the first time.
Of late, the knocking had been louder and more
insistent, and the response had also been more
generous. Ted would sell everything he possessed,
give it to the poor and follow his Saviour; but, in
what order?
The great Society of Jesus was the order he knew
best and he felt attracted towards it. It contained
saints and men of learning and eloquence. Now he
asked himself was it the reputation of sanctity or
that of science and eloquence that exercised this
magnetic influence over him. He tried to analyse
his feelings, but he became disturbed, so he said a
short prayer, took his hat and walked into the
garden. He heard visitors coming up the carriage
drive and as he wanted to be alone with his thoughts,
he got into the road by a side gate and walked
slowly towards the east. Being of an artistic turn
of mind, the beautiful scenery and bracing evening


air forced him to make a truce with his thoughts and
he walked listlessly on. The southerly breeze was
reviving after a very sultry day and the flowers in
the well-kept gardens that bordered the country
road were loaded with diamonds of beauty as the
tiny droplets fell from the gardeners’ sprays upon
them. After an half hour’s stroll, Ted noticed
a circular road to his left. He had never been
that way before, but he conjectured that this road
led to some wharf or other, and that by following
it he would eventually be able to get a boat up
the river which would land him within a few yards
of his present home, a pretty cottage overlooking
the Lane Cove River, which his father had rented
for a few months.
He walked a few yards forward, but another road,
as if by magic, appeared to his right—it was not
a main road by any means, and he was about to
pass on and dismiss it from his thoughts when he
remarked, not very far off, a gothic church to which
this rustic road evidently led. He felt an irresistible
desire to visit it. He had heard of a Catholic
Church being in this district, but he did not imagine
it was anything like this noble building. He turned
to the right, walked about ten yards forward—it
was unmistakably a Catholic church. He opened
the iron gate, entered the grounds—they were de-
serted. The porch door was open, he went forward
and entered the church, took holy water and signed
himself. It was one of the most beautiful churches


he had ever seen. A magnificent roof, marble altar,
stain-glass windows, a large statue of the Sacred
Heart on a side altar, which was tastefully decor-
ated, and on the opposite side altar was a statue
of Our Lady of Lourdes. Here again the floral
decorations were artistically arranged.
The sanctuary lamp was not alight. Evidently
the Blessed Sacrament was not reserved. There
was not a soul in the church, though there was
certainly somebody moving in the sacristy. The
sanctuary was spacious and beautiful; on each side
of the altar was an adoring angel of exquisite work-
manship. There were statues on brackets —St.
Joseph and St. Patrick. But, in a magnificently-
moulded niche over the high altar was a beautiful
statue (life size) the like of which Ted had never
seen. It must be the statue of the patron of the
church. The figure was that of a young priest
dressed in a cassock, surplice and stole, holding a
cross in his hand. The celestial beauty of his
countenance reminded Ted of St, Aloysius, but he
was sure he had never seen a picture or statue of
that saint before. It was such a perfect statue
that he could almost count the loops in the lace of
the surplice. The young man knelt for a while;
then he went right up to the altar rails, he wanted
to see if the name of this unknown saint was written
on the pedestal of the statue. Yes, there were gilt
letters standing out quite plainly—“Le Bienheureux
Chanel.” He had never heard of him. The cross


in his hand denoted that he was a missionary. lie
longed to know something about him. His desire
was soon satisfied, for a priest came out of the
sacristy, and, seeing a stranger in the church, ad-
vanced to the communion table to tell him that this
was not the Parish church, only a chapel of ease,
consequently the Blessed Sacrament was not in
the tabernacle. Nevertheless, holy mass was cele-
brated there three mornings in the week, and twice
on Sundays. Ted thanked the kind priest, then
timidly inquired about the statue over the high
altar. The priest looked up, smiled, and said, “Oh,
that is Blessed Chanel, a priest of our order, and
the first martyr of Oceanica. He was a missionary
m the South Sea Islands, and he died for the faith.
\ ou will find a little book in the repository in the
church porch which gives a short sketch of his
life. Ted was grateful, yes he would like to read
it. He thanked the priest again and took his de-
parture. The holy simplicity and gentle courtesy
of the priest pleased him. He took the book, de-
posited the price of it in the box, and hastened his
steps towards the wharf. It was getting late and
he was a stranger in this suburb, as they had only
been in the cottage a week. Their own home was
on the right bank of the Parramatta River not far
from the town of the same name.
He caught the business boat from town, met his
father, who was returning from a meeting of the
B.M.A, in Sydney, and went home in a peaceful


mood. His difficulties were unravelling and his
ideal was in sight.
When he reached home, the servant gave him a
parcel which had come during his absence. He
opened it and found that it contained two richly-
bound volumes —the life of Cardinal A aughan. He
opened the note that accompanied them. They were
from his old enemy, and new friend, Tom Smith.
He begged Ted to accept them from a grateful
friend, who had read them, studied them, and had
obtained permission from his father to be instructed
in the Catholic faith. He asked Ted to help him
to become more intimately acquainted with the
doctrines of the church that he already loved and
admired. Ted was happy to impart this piece of
news to his parents and there was general rejoicing
in the family circle that evening.
After the family rosary, this happy young man
retired to his room and took out his precious little
book. It related briefly and in simple language the
life and martyrdom of Blessed Chanel. Ted had
always a tender love for the Mother of God, but
his heart beat fast when he read how Blessed Chanel,
one day that he had wounded himself accidentally,
wrote with his blood this motto, “Aimer Marie 3t
la faire aimer” (“To love Mary myself and make
others love her too”). What a beautiful motto!
Yes, it would be his. Then he read the account of
the martyr’s missionary life, full of devoted suffer-
ing and disappointments, patiently borne. At last


the glorious martyrdom, and then the conversion
of the whole island of Futuna—even the conversion
of the holy man’s murderer. Verily the blood of
the martyr was the seed of Christians.
A missionary’s life was a hard one, but his work
was done wholly and purely for God. There was
no fear of losing one’s merit through the vain glory
produced by learning and eloquence. There is no
use for these accomplishments among the pagan
natives. The simple love of God; a spirit of prayer;
self-sacrifice; unction and sound theology are the
chief requirements of a good missionary. Then to
bear the name of Marist and march under the banner
of Our Lady! What a privilege !
He knelt down before the picture of the Virgin
Mother, which was hanging at the foot of his bed.
He prayed long and fervently, and there, that night,
in his little room in front of the picture of his
Heavenly Mother, Ted resolved to go to Jesus
through Mary.
FINIS.




IN THE ROSARY^




Billie’s Confidence in the
Rosary
CHAPTER I.
“Billie, take your geography home; please, draw a
map of the "Western Slopes of N.S.W., and shade the
wheat-growing districts.”
“Sis-t-er!” Billie uttered the word as if he had an
acute pain and frowned as if he had been told some-
thing very disagreeable.
“Well, you know, you must learn your geo-
graphy.”
“Oh, but I haven’t time, Sister!”
“Haven’t time! You have all the evening!”
“I want to practise football.”
“There is no obligation to play football from now
till bedtime. You know perfectly well your lessons
are more important.”
Now Sister did not know anything about foot-
ball, except that it was indirectly responsible for
the death of her brother at the age of twenty-two;


but she knew a lot about Billie. He had been a
pupil at Saint Leonard’s since he was four, and it
was mainly owing to this fact that he was still there
at eleven. The Brothers’ school was too far for him
to walk to, but Billie could now ride a bicycle, so
his days at Saint Leonard’s were about being
numbered. He and Herby were the only two boys
Sister ever kept after they had left the Infant school.
They were both polite, pious, intelligent, little lads,
and were favourites with everybody. Even Gertie
and Nancy deigned to notice them from the summit
of their sixteen summers. They were very happy
at school.
Now, Billie did not know quite as much about
Sister as she did about him, but he knew that she
loved her scholars next to her religion, and that she
was bubbling over with enthusiasm for anything
connected with her church and school.
The little chap acted as a professional diplomatist
without really knowing what diplomacy meant.
He told Sister that the boys of the Protestant
Sunday School class had challenged them—the Catho-
lic altar boys of the same age—to a football match.
Tommie Ryan, from the Brothers’ school, was the
captain, and he and Herby had two important “posi-
tions” in the team. They were going to play Rugby,
and he talked about rucks, and wings, and full-
backs, and goal-keepers, just as if Sister had seen
the last match played between St. Joseph’s College
and “Grammar.”


Sister had read “The Heart of the School” and
knew how boys love football, yet, she was not con-
quered, and she seemed to think that there should
be a time for lessons and play.
“Well, Sister, it is for the church, and you would
not like the protestants to beat us,” hazarded Billie,
with an anxious glance at the nun.
“I certainly would not, Billie, but, pray, work,
and play at the proper times and you will be more
likely to succeed.”
Pray! Billie had not thought of this before. What
a splendid idea! Surely Catholic prayers would beat
protestant footballers. His countenance brightened,
.he took his geography and said: “All right, Sister,
I’ll do both,” and he went off in search of his bicycle.
Sister smiled and thought of a day some four
years previous when the lad had asked her the mean-
ing of the word “gable”; how she had sent him out
to examine the ends of the school, and how, on his
return, he drew in his exercise book a gable to illus-
trate the meaning of the word. Six months later
she explained to his class how God, being eternal,
had no beginning, neither would he have an end, and
that hell was eternal in the sense that it had a be-
ginning, but would have no end. Billie’s face lit
up and he exclaimed, “I understand! Hell has only
one gable.”
Next day the little boy knew his lessons perfectly,
and his map was shaded correctly. He said his


prayers very piously and seemed in earnest about
the football match, for he and Herby went to prac-
tise during the lunch hour, and Gertie declared that
she saw them say their rosary on their way back to
school.
The prospective match was the general topic
amongst the pupils, and several girls went into the
neighbouring church to ask Our Lady to help the
altar boys, and, if needs be, send an angel to guard
the goal.
Billie told his sister, Agatha, that the rosary was
the best prayer she could say for them, because St,
Dominic, by means of the rosary, defeated the Alby
—something-or-other, who were the same kind of
religion as the challenging team, Agatha laughed
and declared there was a slight difference between
a religious war and his informal football match.
At last the great day (to Billie and Herby) ar-
rived. The teams were to try their strength in a
paddock belonging to the parents of one of the
Sunday school boys. It lay between the main road
and the river and ran parallel with the former. It
was likely both sides would have supporters.
After the Angelus had been recited, Sister said a
Hail Mary for a special intention. It was scarcely
finished, when Billie exclaimed, “Sister, please say
a ‘Hail Mary’ that we may win.” One of the big
girls could not repress a smile. Billie noticed, what
appeared to him, the irreverence, and murmured


BILLIE’S CONFIDENCE IN THE ROSARY. IQ7
under his breath for her benefit. “Well, it is for
the honor of our church!”
Sister did say the Hail Mary, and added “Sweet
Heart of Mary, be my salvation” three times. It was
not for the safety of the football either, but for the
safety of the precious limbs of the two little chaps
who were so eager for the fray.
The event was timed for 3.30 p.m. and the field
was quite near. At five minutes to three, Billie said,
“Sister, may we go, please?” And Sister answered,
“Yes, and God bless you both!” Nancy, who was
typewriting on the school verandah, cried out, “Good
luck! Beat them,” and Gertie, who was sitting on
the grass behind a clump of Watsonias studying
“The Deserted Village,” said, “We are coming to
cheer you directly. I shall ask Sister to let us out
at 3.20.” Both answered, “All right! Thanks!”
Mollie underlined a doubtful figure of speech, but
when she looked up from her book the young athletes
had disappeared. They certainly could not have
gone out by the school gate. She wondered what
had become of them—would they have gone into
church? She put down her book, walked softly up
to the main entrance, tip-toed into the porch, and in
front of Our Lady’s altar were the two little boys,
piously reciting the rosary. Without disturbing them
she returned and murmured a prayer also for their
success.
At 3.30 p.m. every child in the school was looking
into the paddock. Some were as far inside as was


allowed. The rector had come from the rectory,
the school master had come from the school with a
variety of other friends to support the Sunday
School boys.
The priest was at the Presbytery or on a sick call.
He had not been informed of the event. Tommie
Ryan and the other boys wanted to give him and
the Brother a surprise (if they won). They 'would
not have liked Father Geraghty to witness a defeat.
All the children from the Sisters’ school (except
the tiny tots) were there to support the altar boys.
Billie saw the star on Gertie’s school badge and re-
membered their motto, “Look at the star and call
upon Mary.” And while the toss was in the balance,
he found himself saying “Holy Mother, sweetest
best,” the beginning of his First Communion hymn.
His side won the toss —it was a moment of delight
for himself and his friends.
The game began and the altar boys, thanks to
Ryan’s clever tactics and Billie’s brilliant playing,
scored the first try. The children from Billie’s school
cheered frantically. A powerful electric current
seemed to be established between them and the
Catholic boys, for, though their opponents showed
great spirit, luck seemed to be on Ryan’s side, and
Cecelia whispered to Agatha, “Our Lady is helping
them.”
At half-time, Gertie and Nancy sponged Billie’s
and Herby’s faces with violet-scented pocket-hand-


kerchiefs —it was only a common paddock, there were
no dressing sheds —and Agatha and Mary cut up
oranges for them. As “nothing succeeds like
success,” they seemed quite fresh. Nevertheless,
Billie asked for his overcoat, took his rosary out of
his pocket, and tried to put it round his neck. The
chain with the five decades was too narrow, and
the boy’s head too large to enter into such close
alliance.
“What a nuisance!” said he, “This is only half-
time and we are not out of the wood yet.” As quick
as thought, Nancy drew from her pocket a little
leathern case and took out a rosary, the beads of
which were almost microscopic, but there were fif-
teen decades, and she put it round the little lad’s
neck.
During the second half the altar boys carried
everything before them, though the other team was
by no means disheartened, and tried their best to
lose as little as possible. When all was over, Mrs.
Ryan was heard to say, “Hail, Glorious St. Patrick,
but sure and they have won!” And so they had. I
do not know the scores exactly, but the children
from Saint Leonard’s thought the altar boys were
conquering heroes. As soon as Billie could disen-
tangle himself from everybody and everything, he
cycled back to school. Sister was just taking in the
wire mat preparatory to locking the door. She had
scarcely time to look up before a joyous, “We have
won, Sister!” greeted her ears.


“Thank God, Billie! Come in and say a little
prayer to thank Our Lady for her help.”
“Yes, Sister, it was the rosary that did it.” And
the little boy, not yet in his ’teens, and the nun, in
the Autumn of life, knelt before the statue of God’s
Mother and said a fervent Hail Mary of Thanks.
Later, Rev. Mother shook hands with Billie and he
felt very proud and happy.
Now, gentle reader, if you chance to see two little
boys saying their rosary very fervently in Saint
Leonard’s church during the month of October, do
not be surprised, for it is Billie and Herby. They
promised Our Lady that if they won the match, they
would not omit saying it one day during the month
of the Rosary. Saturday is not a school day, that
is why they meet in church.
FINIS.








7u. ~c. . " ~ f


' M//Z
A/ Ufj,
A #23.2
M-ir


