

gy |
AND,
: %
fin
:j
m |i
: (f\
%
i|l A RAY OF REASON BROUGHT TO BEAR
: |L ON CALVARY AND MECCA,
4
<ik
; .* "t i : _
pi
i|i y
: M y
I gi ) ns
ft . ,
'A ■ J. E. KELLY, PUBLISHER, 426 GEORGE STREET. V
i j so ’ \tf.
i R •; KDCCCUCXV.
J. E. KELLY, PUBLISHER, 426 GEORGE STREET.




PREFACE.
its first public appearance.
The matter of the following pages was originally
published in the Stockwhip ; and, at the request of
certain supporters of that journal, is reproduced in
a more convenient form than that in which it made
There are some things in these pages to which
the hypercriticism of spurious and simulated Religion
will raise objections. The professors of Christianity,
who are for ever striving to prop up the system whereby
they live : the charlatans who make pretence of piety,
and, less candid than stage conjurors, refuse to confess
that their performances are mere trickery : the worship-
pers of Plutus, who find constancy in church-going
remarkably fattening to their money-bags—will of
course express appropriate horror at the appearance
of this pamphlet. It is a kind of testhetic missile
aimed at their very livelihoods, and haunts. It saps
some of those citadels in which error and her desciples
sit scowling at the sunlight which is piercing the darkness
of their dens ; and no wonder that the feeble souls
which cling to shattered scraps of superstition should
regard with despairing hate the efforts of a power
whose might they recognise, but whose beneficence
they cannot comprehend.


Yet there is within these pages—few as they are —
some truths which even the dullest worshipper of
priest-craft might read with advantage. If there are
any who care to know what can be said for other
systems of religion, or for that grandest faith of all
which is founded upon the Book of Nature, they may
read here what may surprise, but cannot shock them.
The worst foe of Free Thought can charge upon the
writers of these two essays no virulence ol language,
no discourtsey of tone; nor can it be said that a
pamphlet which contains an analysis of the whole
scheme of the Mohammedan Theology, and a resume
of modern principles of Theism, contains nothing
that interests the general reader.
The Publisher thinks that in presenting these
pages to the Public, he is rendering good service to the
cause of truth ; and it is of that conviction, and of no
meaner parentage, that this present pamphlet is now
born.
Sydney, October 23, 1875.


The of the Matter.




THE ROOT OF THE MATTER.
♦
Whi;n a young journal comes boldly and ably to the front,
with the evident purpose of waging manfully the great
humanitarian war of the age against Old-World, outworn,
paralysing Creeds —to maintain which is like binding a young
vital body to an old corpse—it should be warmly welcomed,
and gladly supported, by all enlightened and thinking men.
In the earlier stages of the propagand of Philosophic
Truth, it may seem only a reasonable concession to conven-
tional habits of thought to halt for a while at the half-way-
house of Theism, however untenable that position may be
known to be.
But there are many amongst us, strong of mind, who
are weary and impatient of compromise and reticence and
vice- media, who hold that every man should make bold to
speak out all that he knows or believes that he knows to be
the truth, and who think that the time is come for an open
advance to the highest reach of modern thought —the terra
firma of pure scientism.
We all know that none of the great leaders of the
thought of the age would for a moment entertain the old
thoroughly anthropomorphic idea of a personal, presiding,


providential Deity. Not one of them deems that Old-
world notion worthy of attention or discussion —they simply
pass it by in silence.
Thinkers of the now comparatively old school of Posi-
tiveism refuse to discuss such questions, as being transcen-
dental, inscrutable and beyond the definite limits which
bound legitimate human enquiry. And the more modern
scientists all incline to the conception that the Universe is
pervaded by a Force of Life which is one constant, infinite,
and eterpal, but unconditioned by the merely human (or
animal) qualities of Consciousness, Intelligence, and Voli-
tion.
They who profess to believe in the government of the
Universe by an Intelligent Mind do not sufficiently enquire
of themselves what is here to be understood by “ Intelligent
Mind,” or whether they are not attempting to define the In-
finite and Unknowable in terms of the finite and known. Mind
is not an entity. It is only an abstract term conveniently
invented to signify the so-called psychological resultants of
brain, nerves, and flesh and blood. We have nothing to go
upon but Experience, which distinctly proclaims—“ No
brain, no mind.” No scientific psychologist can realise the
occurrence of a mental operation without a corresponding
change in nervous structure.
In the case of the individual man, what scientific per-
son seriously thinks that his mind (/.<?., a set of complex
energies) is something with an independent objective exis-
tence external to his body ? Mind, apart from a material
body, is experientially unknown to us, and is, indeed, incon-
ceivable. If our vagrant imaginations attempt to attach
elements of personality to this mere name and empty ab-
straction Intelligent Mind, then we sink at once into the
rude anthropomorphism of the fetishist. If we do not,
then the notion of a bare Mind, or a bare Will, busying
itself over the Kosmos, is simply and utterly without mean-
ing. (See Morley’s critique on Mill, Fortnightly Review'.)


So again with the once famous, but now effete, “ argument
from Design.” Every really educated man is now well aware
that they who profess plainly to discern the evidences of
design in Nature have fallen into two vitiating logical errors.
First—what they really see, and what is all that is possible
for them to see, is certain adaptations among external phe-
nomena which seem to bear some remote analogy to human
contrivance. When they treat these things as clear proofs
of intelligent design, they are begging the question, and they
are simply mistaking inference for observation. They make
an inference unwarrantable, incommensurable, transcen-
dental, and metaphysical, and then treat this inference as a
matter of plain observation. Secondly—they are guilty of
the illogicality of “ transferring to regions beyond experience
an idea which springs from experience, and is limited by it.
We derive from practical experience the notion that con-
trivance must come from a contriving intelligence—that is to
say, from one or more human beings exercising their facul-
ties with a view to procuring a given end. We know, from
experience, that in the case of the products of human inge-
nuity, the result may be traced to a provident intention in a
man. But how can we infer from this that non-human
adaptations are to be traced to a provident intention in—in
what ? We cannot complete the sentence. Whatever word
we may choose must be a word directly or indirectly of
human experience, and to use it would be to transport the
ideas of natural agency into a region where the agency is
unknowable and inconceivable.”* It would be pre-
sumptuous to endeavour to measure the Unknown by our
own known little bushels—to sound the depths of the Infinite
by our own little plummets. While, for all that man can
know, the idea of design and contrivance may be non-existent
throughout the Universe beyond the walls of his own brain,
or of the brains of beings similarly organized. And for all
*Morley’s Critique on Mill.—Fortnightly Review.


we can know, organic life may be the highest specialised
outcome of Matter and Force. It may be, as it were, the
efflorescence of the Kosmos. The flowers borne aloft by
some gigantic tree are, though so ephemeral, more finely organ-
ized, and more full of vivid activities, than the great trunk
of a thousand years growth.
And in these modern days of extraordinary advance in
scientific knowledge, and of the equally visible increase of
human reasoning power, the natural mental craving for expla-
nation of surrounding phenomena is adequately met by the great
theories of Evolution and Development, without the necessity
of going to such extremes and extravagances as to assume
that we can, from the few little phenomena which are indis-
tinctly known to us, confidently argue to the Infinite and the
Unknowable.
And, after all, are not the seeming evidences of Intelli-
gent Design enormously overbalanced by the much more
obvious evidences of the total absence of Intelligent Design ?
Is it a mark of intelligent and beneficent design, that, of all
the animals on the face of the earth, or in the depths of the
sea, none can live for more than a few days except by the
murder, the rending* the devouring, or crushing, of other
animals ? In the waters nearly all the animals are rapacious,
down to the very borderland where the animal verges into
the vegetal kingdom. On the land, and in the air, a large
proportion of animals are carnivores, whose one condition of
existence is daily to tear into pieces some other animals.
At the head of this class, and the most rapacious and
destructive of all, stands Man. The most refined lady, with
her three courses- of fish, flesh, and fowl, is a more deadly
and wasteful animal of prey than the lion, tiger, or shark.
Herbivorous animals are no less guilty, for they cannot set
foot to the ground, nor bite a herb, nor drink water, without
destroying thousands of organized beings. Nor does the
death-roll of mutual torture among animals end here. For,
while the stronger animals are busily devouring the


weaker, small parasitic animals are equally busy in devouring
the intestines of the strongest —dealing out far more prolonged
and terrible agony than the carnivores inflict on their
victims. Are the tapeworms, the hydatids, the trichinse,
which form huge nests and colonies in our livers, wombs,
lungs, and brains; or which swarm through all our muscles,
till a man resmbles a walking ant-hill—are these evidences
of a beneficent, intelligent, and contriving Providence ? or,
rather, of the boundless teeming-forth from the Inorganic
of Organic form, by the blind operation of Kosmic forces ?
Is cancer an alien growth, feeding on, and gradually and
most painfully destroying our bodies, a Providential institu-
tion ? Even between us and the vegetables an internicine
war prevails. We eat them ; while, on their side, the fun-
goids throw off into the air countless billions of spores
which devastate a whole continent by cholera, plague, or
fever.
Looking at all the general phenomena of Nature within
reach of our observation, no man with mind unpossessed by
prejudicate opinion can help confessing that the order of the
Universe seems to be what it could not possibly be under
the overrule of any Intelligent Mind. Nothing can we
observe but the colossal working of infinite but unconscious
material forces. Consider the phenomena of astronomy.
Regard, for instance, the daily falling into the earth of thou-
sands of meteors or bolides. These were small planets, such
as is the enormously-larger Earth; and, like her, revolving
round our central Sun. In the course of ages, owing to
retardation, the attraction of gravitation of the mass of the
Earth overbalances their centrifugal force, and they are
dashed against the Earth’s atmosphere, which, at their
planetary velocity, is to them nearly a solid. The violent
concussion and rapid friction brings them to a white heat
which usually explodes them into fine dust, falling imper-
ceptibly to the surface of the earth, but sometimes they
burst into huge fragments weighing several tons. Exami-


nation of these fragments has plainly revealed the former
existence on these little worlds of organic (vegetal) life.
Where vegetal life was, it is not unreasonable to assume that
there also was animal life. But does Providence move to save
these little worlds—containing perhaps intelligence equal
to ours —from the action of the mechanical and mathema-
tical laws of retardation and gravitation. Modern astro-
nomers are well aware that similar causes, necessarily leading
to similar results, are acting on the course of the Earth
itself, and of all the planets. The slow but never-ceasing
increase of the bulk and weight of the Earth by the contin-
uous infalling of Kosmical dust, and the slight but constant
friction which, in her rapid course round the Sun, she must
sustain from the thin medium which we call ether, filling all
space, cannot but have, in the rolling of ages, the effect of
retarding her revolutions. Which would be equivalent to
the continuous narrowing of her orbit. All the planets must
be drawing gradually nearer and nearer to the Sun. The
ages will come when the terrestrial conditions will necessarily
become unfitted for the maintenance of any organic life.
Then vegetable and animal, and Man with all his arts and
sciences, his affections and aspirations, will gradually perish
off the surface, leaving Mother Earth once more what she
has been —an inorganic blank. Be sure that no Intelligent
Mind, no Providence, will intervene —will interfere with the
blind action of the physical laws of retardation and gravita-
tion. Afterwards, by the same inexorable laws, our Earth
and all the planets will be absorbed into the huge solar
body, whereupon he will only sparkle out the more brightly
with his explosions of hydrogen gas. Then the Sun him-
self, after another inconceivable lapse of time, will fall into
the body of some other great Sun, round which he is now
probably revolving ; and there will be such a convulsion as
will violently dissipate the constituents of both Suns through
space, in the form of Kosmical gases, such as, from our
standpoint, we designate as Nebulae. Thereafter, these


Kosmical gases will gather into whirlpools, and begin to
circle and rotate —to crystallise into new World-systems in
their turn ; the history of the past repeating itself, to be des-
troyed and renewed, as it has been and will be through
past and future Eternities and Infinities. (See Herbert
Spencer’s First Principles.)
Such are the conceptions of the scheme of the Uni-
verse at which have arrived all the profoundest thinkers of
the age. But docs such a Universe seem indicative of a
supreme, intelligent, and providential mind ?
To a man of philosophic and rationalistic temper of
mind, there is, perhaps, nothing more wearisome and dis-
heartening than the dismal twaddle about Providence ?
What makes this “ Trust in Providence” feeble twittering
the more distasteful, is its palpable, though often unconscious,
insincerity. As a matter of fact, we all devote our utmost
energies to defending ourselves against Providence, and the
cunningest of us succed the best. Even the High Priests,
fully aware that Providence has a proclivity for making the
lightning strike the steeples of their holy fanes, employ the
most skilful tradesmen to thwart this hostility by the best
of patent lightning-conductors. How grand is the irony of
a conductor on a church-steeple !
Trust in Providence, indeed ! What! in the Provi-
dence which, in the words of J. S. Mill, “impales men,
breaks them, as if on the wheel, casts them to be devoured
by wild beasts, burns them to death, starves them with
hunger, freezes them with cold, poisons them by the quick
or slow venom of her exhalations, and has hundreds of other
hideous deaths in reserve, such as the ingenious cruelty of a
Nabia or a Domitian never surpassed.” Which perpetrates,
or permits to be perpetrated, horrors which, if men were or
could be the authors of them, we should regard as crimes of
unspeakable enormity ? What! trust with full faith in the
Providence which depopulates continents by an abundant
crop of some fungoid vegetable ? Which daily enters house-


holds and ruthlessly sweeps off the innocent children ?
Which, when two thousand women and children were
gathered together in a cathedral in Santiago—or Conception,
in Chili —to worship their God on the occasion of some great
Church festival, caused the gala-hangings of the vast building
to catch sudden fire ; and so, the doors being insufficient to
permit the rapid egress of the helpless multitude, burnt them
all to death ? Which, when fifteen hundred devout wor-
shippers were praying in a church in New York, caused the
six-storeyed wall of a neighbouring store to fall on the roof,
killing, crushing, and maiming ? Which, when a ship,
freighted with the most precious lives of wives, sisters, and
children, is bearing them homeward to their husbands, fathers,
brothers, and friends, permits them to cross half the world
of ocean, and then at the last moment, when all were elate
with hope and joy, suddenly, in the blackness of night, and
in the roaring of waters, dashes them all to death against
rocks at the threshold of their expectant homes, electing to
save only the life of one very stupid seaman ? What! fear
not, but trust in the Providence which, when the Cospatrick,
carrying nearly five hundred Tnen, women, and children,
caught fire at sea did nothing but bring into play, in its
harshest mode, the Darwinian law of the Survival of the
Fittest under the circumstances, preserving none alive of all
that unhappy multitude but the three physically strongest
and man-eatingest ?
Why don’t we cease prating to each other insincere
balderdash, in which neither the speakers nor the listeners
for a moment believe ? Are we not by this time well aware
that the physical forces of the universe take their course
wholly regardless and unconscious of human hopes and
prayers, of human lives, and, indeed, of the continued
existence of all animate beings ? In effect, it is Man who
has invented God and devised Providence.
In all speculations on things, or rather ideas, not ex-
perimentally verifiable, it is ever the wisest course to take


the negative side. It is seldom we can be certain that any-
thing is true, hut we can, how frequently, feel an absolute
certainty that this, that, or the other conception, or relation,
or tradition, or religion, or creed, is irrational and false.
It hardly requires much gift of prescience to foresee
that in the times that are approaching the world of the Euro-
pean race will be ranged into two, and only two, camps—
on the one hand, Vaticanism, or the rule of Superstition and
Unreason, of Error, Delusion, Intolerance, and Violence;
on the other hand, Science, or the enlightened and peaceful
domain of organised Common-sense. Between those two
camps there will be no pied-a-terre. No such temporary
roadside halting-places as Protestantism and Theism can
continue to be tenable. It will have to be Yes, or No —no
half Yes’s, no half No’s —Reason or Unreason. No one can
doubt which of the two camps will prevail. The light will
finally chase away Medieval Darkness and gloom, and Men-
tal Tyranny and Terror. As yet, the grandest of human
events has been the Reformation—the first successful public
protest against the tyranny of authority in matters of opinion.
Would that it had been led by Giovano Bruno, or the two
Socini, instead of poor old Luther, who had such perilous
personal combats with the Devil ! However, the Reforma-
tion has done its good work ; and has now become effete
and moribund. But an almost infinitely greater event than
tl% Reformation is now being born from the womb of Time
—the Emancipation, final and complete—the emancipation
for ever of the human mind from all supernatural and tran-
scendental ideas ; and the world-wide acceptance of the
peaceful reign of science, logic, and educated common-sense.
How many powerful and busy brains are now working day
and night for the Emancipation ! Why ? Surely not for
their own private advantage; for with mental powers such as
their’s worldly success and fortune would be easily attainable
by hypocritically chiming in with orthodoxy and black-coated
phariseeisra. With these pioneers of mental progress the


motive power is the enthusiasm of humanity, and an hon-
ourable repugnance to the False. They so ardently long to
help to free poor mankind from the horrible superstitions
which have so long crushed, warped, and distorted their
native intellects—to release men from that cruel and most
cynical doctrine that the best which the most sainted among
them can hope for after death is to enjoy perfect bliss in the
eternal contemplation of the eternal and ineffable torments
of the vast majority of their fellow creatures.
It is only the prevailing and comparatively new super-
stition that has thrown a factitious pall of awe and horrors
around the deathbed. Old Roman sages, philosophers, and
heroes, could accept death with calmness and equanimity, and
could regard it as Nature’s greatest boon —eternal and
dreamless cessation for the life-wearied and world-outworn.
What a blessing for all mankind, when the Emancipation,
once more, after so many sad centuries, restores such fear-
lessness and calmness to our final hours ! With the excep-
tion, perhaps, of a few fanatics, no man truly desires any
future existence in some undefinable and utterly inconceiv-
able state, apart from his own body, and from our Mother
Earth. The heaven of the superstition, so scantily and
indistinctly sketched, is only a little less gruesome, un-
comfortable, and repulsive than the more vividly limned
Hell. Happily, vain and shallow dreams both.
We have every good reason for the faith that the future
of our descendants on this earth will be vastly happier and
more prosperous, and peaceful, than have ever been the
times gone by. We cannot doubt, for we can plainly recog-
nise, that the culture of the mental (or cerebral) powers,
continuous through so many past generations, has been, and is
now, more rapidly effecting increase of brain-power, and
better balanced, and more logical habits of thought. Even
within the scope of the memory of only middle-aged men
there has been a striking and heretofore unparalleled ad-
vance. Hitherto, the great drag against humanity has been


Theology. The wholly unreal but terrible mankind-night-
mare called Theology has been mankind’s chiefest curse.
In one respect not so generally noted, which is this : While in
times (happily gone by) theology was unquestionedly as-
sumed to be something real —to be, as it were, a science
having relation to and corresponding with true objective
facts, entities and eternal verities, all the greatest minds bom
among us were naturally attracted to and absorbed in that
chimerical study, and thus abstracted from the service of
poor humanity. The finer a man’s intellect, the more cer-
tainly was he overmastered by the conviction that no other
study could be worthy of any wise man’s contemplation.
Right, too, was such conviction from the only possible point
of view in the old blind days, and under the suffering of a
delusion then believed to be divine.
So it came to pass that most of our best minds ex-
hausted their fine powers in bewilderments over unveracities,
or in building up countless tomes in the endeavour to make
contradictory divine narratives not contradictory, or des-
perately to wrestle with inspired statements irreconcilable
with physical laws, with common sense and common
morality, or to explain away the palpable fraudulencies
and idiotisms of the early Holy Fathers. Even men who
did not go so far as to give themselves wholly up to theology,
had their minds so twisted and depraved by it that they
were of no humanitarian use. But now that it has been so
fully disclosed that there was never any slightest element of
reality in this pseudo-science, it may be hoped that in future
our best intellects, abandoning chimeras, will devote them-
selves to the more useful and intelligent endeavour to
ameliorate the lot of mankind, and to make it happier,
brighter, more cheerful, and better regulated.
Very many lazy-going, but well-intentioned, educated
men, though quite in accord with modern thought them-
selves, and freely conceding in private circles that they well
know that all creeds and religions are no more than the


baseless fabric of a dream, still deem it a sort of duty, or a
prudence, or a conventional or political necessity, to
patronise and publicly uphold the Fetish among their less
enlightened countrymen —among the “ masses.” They
affect to believe it better for the people that they should re-
main in subjection to their Fetishes. Constitutional inert-
ness and a self-seeking kow-tow-ing to the conventionalities
have much to do with this mode of thought
But such a policy as this cannot recommend itself to
any dowright honest man —this keeping of an esoteric doc-
trine for our educated selves, while preaching or causing to
be preached to the general public doctrines which we know
to be false.
As for its being “ better for the people ” to uphold these
hollow religions, how can any student of history dare to say
so ? On History’s every page he finds it recorded that they
have been the immediate cause of the direst woes which
have ever fallen on man. Savage wars, massacres, sackings,
devastations, ten millions of innocent women burnt at the
stake, for the impossible, but Bible-coined crime of witch-
craft, bloody persecutions, expulsions, torturings, and deadly
hatreds handed down from generation to generation —tantum
Religio potuit suadere matorum! And under her most
baneful influence, even now we behold the European nations
banding together for a final death-struggle. The only hope
for us lies in the digging-up of the very roots of Superstition.
Eradicate that malign fungus-growth, and we have peace !
More: manly, and more honourable, by far, to take an
unflinching stand on the firm principle that knowledge of the
Truth must be always the best for all people, and that the
cultivation, however benevolently meant, of Error and Delu-
sion, must ever be disastrous in its results.
When men, in defending certain doctrines, descant
upon the attraction they possess for them, or upon what they
may choose to consider their desirability and utility, they are
simply not worth listening to, for such sentimentalities fly


wide of the real stern question—are those doctrines true, or
are they not ?
Let us take the Truth for our one Sacrosanct , and so
let every enlightened and honest man do what little he can
towards the forwarding of the Emancipation.
PHILALETHES.


A RAY OF REASON
BROUGHT TO BEAR Off
Calyery and JAkcca.
Reprinted from the “Stockwhip” of July 31.


A RAY OF REASON BROUGHT TO BEAR ON
CALVARY AND MECCA,
BAPTISM OF A MOHAMMEDAN AT MICALAGO.
(From the Queanbeyan Age.)
The following interesting particulars of the baptism of a convert from
the religion of Mohammed to that of Jesus Christ, were supplied to us by
the Rev. G. L. Nairn. There lives at Micalago, in the employ of
Messrs. Ryrie Bros., an intelligent native of Singapore named Adger
Bookees, son of Miassia ahd Ami Bookees, of the same place. Adger
has been but a short time out of his native land, but is making satis-
sactory progress with his English studies, particularly reading and
writing. On the 17th instant, on the occasion of Mr. Nairn’s visit to
Micalago, Adger came voluntarily to the rev. gentleman, and asked to
be admitted into the Christian Church by the rite of baptism. Upon
inquiry, it was ascertained that the candidate had been for some time
past under the tuition of Mr. John White, of Micalago, with wha t
results the following examination will show. Having explained the
nature and principles of the Christian faith, the candidate was ques-
tioned, and answered as follows ;
Who made you ? —God.
Who redeemed you ?—Jesus Christ.
Who sanctifies you?—The Holy Ghost.
Of what are you made ? —The dust of the earth.
What is within your body ?—My soul.
Will your body die?—Yes, and go to dust again.
Will your soul die ? —No.
Where will the soul go to, when the body dies ? —lf I am good,
my soul will go to heaven ; if I am bad, it will go to hell.


Will a lost soul ever come out of hell, according to the Christian
belief?—No, it will burn.
According to the Mohammedan belief? —Yes ; burn him up, burn
him up, burn him up ; then gather him up together ; then burn him up
again ; then get out.
Who is Jesus Christ? —God’s Son.
Where did Jesus Christ come from?—Heaven.
What to do ?—To save people round about.
Where did He die—in His bed ? —No ; on the cross.
Where is he now ?—Gone to heaven again.
Will he judge the world ?—Yes ; at the last day.
Does he love all men ? —Yes.
Can He alone save all men? —Yes.
Can Mohammed save from sin?—No; Mohammed no good, no good,
sir. None but Jesus Christ can do men good.
What do you think of Jesus Christ? —I love Jesus, and He loves
Why do you wish to be baptised ? —Because I believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ.
Will the sprinkling of water save you?—No; Jesus Christ alone
can save me.
When you are baptised will you be safe—will that secure your sal-
vation ? —No ; I must always trust in Jesus ; we are all sinners, we
need mercy.evcry day.
What is your duty when you are received into the Christian Church
by the sacrament of baptism ? —To try to be a good man ; not to swear
or tell lies, or drink,' or do anything that is wicked in God’s sight; to
pray to God, to Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, to make me a good
man ; to pray for all people, to make them good ; to pray for my
countrymen.for God to make them good, for God to turn them from
Mohammed to Jesus Christ.
Will you by God’s help try and lead a consistent life ? —I will cast
myself on God, and seek mercy through Jesus Christ.
These answers being deemed very satisfactory, Adger Bookees was
then baptised in the name of the Holy Trinity, by the name of James
Scott; and Mr. Nairn has promised to have further interviews with this
interesting convert, from time to time, as occasion may afford.
Had the rev. Mr. Nairn made his proselyte without at the
same time making a noise, the probabilities are that we never
would have heard of the occurrence. But—Tinkerlike—the
rev. gentleman seems anxious that the world shall witness


his work ; and, as the rattle of his hammer has attracted our
attention, we, taking a deep interest in everything calculated
to better man’s condition, are anxious to inspect his new
manufacture. Speaking plainly, we desire to subject his
apostate —whom we have, in some sort, to create, seeing that
to us He is a mere imaginary Being—to a further catechism.
We enter upon this question with the greatest sincerity, con-
ceiving that by doing so we are constituting ourselves critics
of the opinions held, or assumed to be held, by the largest
and most intelligent sects of the globe —the Christians and
the Mohammedans.
Mr. Nairn’s convert does not appear to possess a very
brilliant intellect. We shall, therefore, have to put the creed
of his class into language of our own —to give, as it were,
the words to his unspoken thoughts. This we will do with
the greatest possible regard to facts, defying either Christian
or Mohammedan to contravene our statements. We must,
however, claim exemption from this rule for some simple
questions and replies, which we are compelled, as it were, to
extract from the inner consciousness of an imaginary Mr.
Scott. With this brief preface we shall now introduce the
interesting convert: —
Well, Mr. Scott, have you really become a Christian ?*~
Yes; I understand the questions put to me by Mr. Nairn,
and have answered them.
Do you feel happier since your conversion?—-Yes; I
am not now haunted by terrible visions of hell—“ when my
body dies it will go to dust again , and come zip no more.”
What was your belief on this point before you turned
Christian ?—I believed in the resurrection of the body and
its reunion with the soul at the Day of Judgment; and that
body and soul, jointly, would be judged according to faith,
works, and deservings —the wicked punished, and the just
rewarded.
When did you expect the Day of Judgment to come ?
“ When anti-Christ appeared in Syria to lay waste all places


except Mecca and Medina; and, at the end of forty days, of
different lengths (one of them equal to a year), he would be
killed by Jesus himself. Mehdy an Iman, of Mohammed’s
family, would, at the time, govern all Arabia, and fill the
earth with righteousness. A general decay of virtue, and a
proneness to idolatry, wars, universal distress, and awful
appearances of Nature, would declare the necessity and cer-
tainty of some approaching change. Accordingly, Christ
would descend on earth, in order to calm, the agitated
elements of the natural and moral world, and to establish
universal tranquility. At the end of forty years creation
would return to its pristine chaos, but the “ blast of resurrec-
tion ” from the great trumpet would be sounded, and a
perfect restoration of angels, genii, men, and even animals,
would ensue. The bodies of mankind , scattered over all the
earth, and perished into impalpable dust, would then be
remoulded. These, at the command of the Almighty, would
be reanimated by their restored souls. “On the day wherein
the earth shall be changed into another earth,” and “ when
the heavens shall become like molten brass”—(it is the Koran
that now speaks)—“ and the mountains like wools of various
colours, scattered abroad by the wind,” the final judgment of
mankind shall take place. Unbelievers in Islamism shall be
condemned to the torments of everlasting fire; the abodes of
misery for the Christians, the Jews, theSabians, the Magians,
and the Idolaters —shall each, in the succession of their
names, be more dreadful than the other ; while, with laudable
justice, the extreme of punishment shall be reserved for the
hypocrites and nominal professors of every religious system.
The doom of the Infidel part of the world having thus been
sealed, the piety of the Mussulmans will be examined. But,
as the justice of the speculative tenets of a true believer,
concerning God and His apostle is, as it were, implied in the
very name of Mussulman—so his actions alone, and not his
opinions, will be examined. In a balance sustained by the
angel Gabriel, one scale over Paradise, the other over hell,


and sufficiently capacious to contain both heaven and earth,
the actions of the faithful shall be weighed. Retaliation of
injuries shall be made ; and, in the absence of all other
modes of satisfaction, the injurer shall forfeit a proportionable
part of his good works to him whom he has injured. In case
of any moral deficiency, the aggressor’s weight of guilt shall
be burthened with a portion of the crimes of his wronged
brother in the faith. On the preponderance of virtue or vice
will hang the lot of happiness or woe of every individual.
To the bridge A 1 Sirat, finer than a hair, and sharper than
the edge of a sword, both the guilty and the virtuous Moslem
will then proceed. The guilty will sink into hell, which
gapes beneath them —where even those who are least culpable
will have their feet shod with shoes of fire, the fervour of
which will make their skulls boil like cauldrons—yet, as it is
a great doctrine of Islamism that no unbeliever will be
released, nor any person who, in his life-time, has professed
the unity of God be condemned to eternal punishment, so
those to whom the passage of the bridge shall have proved
too difficult, will remain in misery for different periods of
time, and until “ the crimes done in their days of Nature ”
shall have been “ burnt and purged away.” The virtuous
Mussulmans, under the guidance of the prophet, with the
swiftness of lightning, will pass the abyss in safety, and reach
the groves and gardens of the Seventh Heaven, or Paradise,
where palaces of marble, and all the idle toys of worldly
luxury await them. Rut their most exquisite pleasure will
consist in their constant society with never-fading beauties,
formed, not from clay, but from the purest musk ; the fire of
whose large black eyes will be so sweetly tempered by
modesty, that, to use the expressive language of the Koran,
“ they resemble pearls hidden in their shells.” The more
pure, however, of the Mussulmans, those who have been
exalted in this life for eminence of virtue and learning, shall
be rewarded with higher gratifications than those of luxury
and appetite. Such mean pleasures will be lost in the mental


felicity of eternal truth, and in the daily contemplation of the
Deity.”*
Very good, Mr. Scott; we are delighted to find that you
are so well acquainted with the tenets of your former reli-
gion. But, pray what authority have you for believing that,
as a Christian, your body “will come up no more”? —Mr.
Nairn told me so ; besides which, I have the authority of
the Bible, endorsed by the Church of England and other
dissenting Churches.
We do not doubt what you say, Mr. Scott, but will you
kindly produce these authorities ? —Certainly —I will read
first from the burial-service of the Church of England :
Now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first-fruits of
them that slept. For since by man came death, by man came also the
resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ
shall all be made alive. But every man in his own order : Christ the
first-fruits : afterward they that are Christ’s at his coming. Then cometh
the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the
Father; when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and
power. For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet.
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. For he shall put all
things under his feet. But when he saith, all things are put under him,
it is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things under him.
And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also
himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God
may be all in all. Else what shall they do which are baptized for the
dead, if the dead rise not at all ? Why are they then baptized for the
dead ? and why stand we in jeopardy every hour ? I protest by your
rejoicing, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. If after
the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advan-
tageth it to me, if the dead rise not ? Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow
we die. Be not deceived : evil communications corrupt good mannem
Awake to righteousness, and sin not; for some have not "the knowledge
of God. I speak this to your shame. But some men will say, How
are the dead raised up? and with what body do they come ? Thou
fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die. And that
which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare
grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain ; but God giveth
* Abridged from Mr. Mills.


it a body, as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his own body. All
flesh is not the same flesh; but there is one kind of flesh of men, another
flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of birds. There are also
celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial; but the glory of the celestial is
one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of
the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars ;
for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resur-
rection of the dead ; It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorrup-
tion : It is sown in dishonour ; it is raised in glory : It is sown in weak-
ness ; it is raised in power : It is sown a natural body ; it is raised a
spiritual body. And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a
living soul ; the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. Howbeit,
that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural: and
afterward that which is spiritual. The first man is of the earth, earthy;
the second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, such are
they that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that
arc heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall
also bear the image of the heavenly. Now this I say, brethren, that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom .of God ; neither doth cor-
ruption inherit incorruption. Behold, I show you a mystery: We shall
not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye, at the last trump, (for the trumpet shall sound,) and the dead
shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this cor-
ruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put
on immortality. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorrup-
tion, and this mortal shall have put on immortality ; then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in
victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?
The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But
thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovablc,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that
your labour is not in the Lord.
Again, sir, I read from the Bible itself —
As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away ; so he that goeth
down to the grave shall come up no more. —Job, vii, 9.
For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one
thing befalleth them; as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they
have all one breath, so that a man hath no pre-eminence above a beast,
for all is vanity. All go unto one place, all are of the dust, and all turn
to dust again. Who knmveth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and
the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth ? Wherefore


I perceive that there is nothing better than that a man should rejoice in
his own works, for that is his portion, for who shall bring him to see
what be after him.—Eccles. iii, 19 to 22.
But your soul, Mr. Scott. Did you not tell Mr. Nairn
that it would not die?—Yes ; but I failed to fully compre-
hend the question in all its import. Of my soul I know
absolutely nothing; nor does anyone alive know more than
I do. My impression is, however, that it is my life—that
which animates my body. Epicurus, an illustrious Greek
philosopher, said of the Deity—“ Beware of attributing the
revolutions of the heavens and the eclipses, and the rising
and setting of the stars, either to the original contrivance or
continued regulation of such a being. For business, and
cares, and anger, and benevolence, are not accordant with
happiness, but arise from weakness, and fear, and depend-
ence on others. . . . ” Having proved in his psychology
that the dissolution of the body involves that of the soul,
he argues that the most terrible of all evils—death—is
nothing to us, since where we are death is not , and where
death is we are not. These words are borne out by what
I have just read from the Bible. My soul, if I have
one, other than that possessed by all animal creation—
viz., life—is beyond my comprehension. Nor can I con-
ceive how the invisible soul can realize pleasure or be sub-
jected to pain. In fact, the matter gives me little concern,
now that I am assured of the safety of my corporal body.
We sadly fear, Mr. Scott, that Mr. Nairn, instead of
making a Christian of you, has made you something very
like what Christians call “an Atheist.” Your present belief
is most undoubtedly ?—What, Mr. Stockwhip,
with the Bible before my eyes; dare you make such an
assertion ?
Yes, Mr. Scott, with the Bible before your eyes; and
Messrs. Nairn and Barry at your back, we do dare make
such an assertion—and, furthermore, to say that ninety-nine
per cent, of the whole Christian world believe not as you


now do, but subscribe —we should have said assent- —to a
belief very similar indeed to that which you have just aban-
doned, but which is certainly the least rational. Nearly
all Christians profess to believe that hell is one immense
burning lake of uniform heat, out of which there is no
redemption, and into which all who die in a state of mortal
sin—(telling one wilful lie, or being guilty of twenty cruel
murders, for example)—will be hurled indiscriminately.
Whilst Mohammedans appear to give God credit for more
justice. Their “ everlasting,” for example, means only, at
the utmost, “fifty thousand years;” which is not an instant
as compared with the Christian’s “ eternity.” Again, the
Mohammedans believe that “those to whom the passage
of the bridge of A 1 Sirat has proved too difficult, will remain
in misery” for different periods of time, and only until the
crimes “ done in the days of nature” shall have been “burnt
and purged away.”—But, Mr. Stockwhip, your bare asser-
tion that “ the great bulk of Christians believe that the body
will rise and unite with the soul at the Day of Judgment,”
is not sufficient proof to satisfy me, in the face of what I
have just read from the Bible. Besides, St. Paul says, “We
shall be changed, and have spiritual and glorified bodies, for
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven.”
In reply to this, Mr. Scott, we may read the Apostles’,
and part of the Athanasian, Creed :
I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and
earth:
And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, Who was conceived by
the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius
Pilate, Was crucified, dead, and buried, He descended into hell; The
third day he rose again from the dead, He ascended into heaven, And
sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty ; From thence he
shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
I believe in the Holy Ghost ; The Holy Catholic Church; The
Communion of Saints; The Forgiveness of Sins; The Resurrection of
the Body, And the Life Everlasting. Amen.
For there is one Person of the Father, another of the Son : and
another of the Holy Ghost.


But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, is all one: the glory equal, the Majesty co-eternaL
Such as the Father is, such is the Son : and such is the Holy Ghost.
The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate : and the Holy Ghost un-
create.
The Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible : and the
Holy Ghost incomprehensible.
The Father eternal, the Son eternal : and the Holy Ghost eternal.
And yet they are not three eternals : but one eternal.
As also there are not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated:
but one uncreated, and one incomprehensible.
So likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty ; and the
Holy Ghost Almighty.
And yet there arc not three Almighties: but one Almighty.
So the Father is God, the Son is God: the Holy Ghost is God.
And yet there are not three Gods: but one God.
So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son is Lord: and the Holy
Ghost Lord.
And yet not three Lords; but one Lord.
For like as we are compelled by the Christian verity: to acknow
ledge every Person by himself to be God and Lord:
So are we forbidden by the Catholick Religion: to say, r l here be
three Gods, or three Lords.
The Father is made of none; neither created, nor begotten.
The Son is of the Father alone: not made, nor created, but be-
gotten.
The Holy Ghost is of the Father and of the Son; neither made,
nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding.
So there is one Father, not three Fathers: one Son, not three
Sons; one Holy Ghost, not three Ploly Ghosts.
And in this Trinity none is afore, or after other: none is greater,
or less than another ;
But the whole three persons are co-eternal together: and co-
equal.
So that in all things, as is aforesaid: the Unity in Trinity, and the
Trinity in Unity is to be worshipped.
tie therefore that will be saved : must thus think of the Trinity.
Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting salvation: that he also
believe rightly the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For the right Faith is, that we believe and confess: that our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is God and man ;
God, of the substance of the Father, begotten before the worlds
and man of the substance of his mother, born in the world ;


Perfect God, and Perfect Man: of a reasonable soul and human
flesh subsisting ;
Equal to the Father, as touching his Godhead : and inferior to the
Father as touching his Manhood ;
Who although he be God and Man; yet he is not two but one
Christ ;
One, not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh: but by taking
of the Manhood into God ;
One altogether, not by confusion of substance: but by unity of
Person.
For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one Man: so God and Man
is one Christ;
Who suffered for our salvation: descended into hell, rose again the
third day from the dead.
He ascended into heaven, he sitteth on the right hand of the Father,
God Almighty : from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead.
At whose coming all men shall rise again with their bodies : and
shall give account for their own works.
And they that have done good shall go into life everlasting: and
they that have done ill into everlasting fire.
This is the Catholic Faith: which except a man believe faithfully,
he cannot be saved.
Then listen to this
And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that,, behold,
there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them
both asunder, and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven.—2 Kings,
ii, 2.
But, by the way, Mr. Scott, which sect of the different
Christian religions do you, under Mr. Nairn’s guidance, pro-
fess to belong to ?—To the Presbyterian.
Do you know that for every individual Presbyterian
alive there are some seventeen hundred Roman Catholics;
or, seventeen hundred times more Roman Catholics than
Presbyterians, Arians, and Baptists all put together? And,
farther, do you know that the nth Article of the Roman
Catholic creed teaches that “we (all mankind) shall rise
again with the same body at the Day of Judgment ?—lndeed,
I did not know it.


We can assure you that modern statistics prove the
correctness of our first assertion; and, as to the latter, we
will read the article itself, and its exposition :
/ look for the resurrection of the dead.
Exposition. —I am fully persuaded of this, as a most evident and
infallible truth, that, as it is appointed for all men once to die, so it is
also determined that all men shall rise from death ; that the souls sepa-
rated from our bodies, are in the hands of God, and live ; that the
bodies, dissolved in dust, or scattered in ashes, shall be re-collected and
re-united to their souls ; that the same flesh which lived before shall be
revived, and the same numerical body which did fall shall rise ; that this
resurrection shall be universal, no man excepted ; that the just shall be
raised to a resurrection of life, and the unjust to a resurrection of dam-
nation ; and that this shall be performed at the last day, when the
trumpet shall sound.
Furthermore, it is our impression that ninety per cent of
the Church of England are at one with the Roman Catholics
on this point. The Apostles’, and Athanasian Creeds, and
numerous texts of the Scriptures, will permit of no other
interpretation. Common sense also dictates either some
such belief, or no belief at all. Is it not monstrously blas-
phemous and irrational to suppose for an instant, that a just
God will punish a newly created body for the transgressions
committed by a body which has returned to dust ?—and
what does it signify to the dust even if He does ? Can you
not now see the absurdity, and worse, of Mr. Nairn’s doc-
trine ? The usages, the prayers, and the catechisms, of all
dissenting Christian Churches, justify a belief in the resur-
rection of the body. The sermons, in fact, of ministers,
without the horrors of hell (for the corporal body) being well
mixed up with them, would, indeed, be very tasteless things.
Scripture says —“ And I saw the dead, small and great, stand
before God; and the books were opened; and another
book was opened, which is the book bf life ; and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the
books, according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead
which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead


which were in them ; and they were judged every man ac-
cording to their works , and death and hell were cast into the
lake of fire. This is the second death. And whosoever was
not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake
of fire.”—Rev. xx,, 12-15.
It is clearly and distinctly asserted, by the sixth article
of the Roman Catholic Creed, that flesh and blood shall and
does inherit the kingdom of heaven.
It is as follows :
Why is he (Christ) said to sit at the right hand 0/ God the Father;
has God the Father hands ?—No; God the Father has no hands, because
he is a pure spirit ; but the meaning of these words is, that Christ, as a
man , occupies the next place to God in heaven ; being, as God, equal
to the Father in all things.
On what day did our Saviour go up to heaven ?—On Ascension day.
THE SEVENTH ARTICLE,
What is the seventh article of the Creed ? —From thence he shall
come to judge the living and the dead.
Will Christ ever come again ? —Yes, he will come down from heaven
at the last day to judge all men.
What are the things he will judge I —All our thoughts, words, and
works.
What zuill he say to the "'wicked ? —Go, ye cursed, into everlasting
What will he say to the just ? —Father, receive ye the kingdom
which is prepared for you.
In common justice, however, to the Catholics, we may
here observe, that they believe in a middle state —somewhat
similar to the Mussulman’s notion—where those who have
been guilty of merely venial sins will be punished, and thus
purged of their offences. Scripture often teaches that God
will render to every man according to his works ; and as
nothing defiled can enter heaven, some Christains shall be
saved—“ Yet so as by fire”—l Cor., hi., 15. Very great
stress is laid by Catholics on what God may deem mortal or
what venial sins. They do not know exactly where to draw
the line. The nearest approach to it that we have heard of


being that of bearing false witness against our neighbour—
in plain English, telling a wilful lie. A wilful lie is a mortal
sin; but even here, if the offence be committed that good
may come, that extenuating circumstance may render the
act venial. But dissenting Christian Churches, having no
middle state, when confronted by reason, and reminded of
the mercy and justice of God, finding themselves jammed,
as it were, in a corner, shuffle out of the dilemma by shifting
the responsibility of the body to the soul; or, as they have
it, “ spiritual bodyand this is what we apprehend to have
been done in your case, Mr. Scott.
Well, there is a great deal of reason in what you say;
I think I’ll turn Roman Catholic. Nothwithstanding the
great love that Church has for ignorance, it appears, after all,
to be the most rational of the lot. But, surely, the Bible is
almost as contradictory as the Koran.
Yes, assuredly, there would be no dissenting Churches
at all were it not. Every Jack, Bill, Tom, and Harry ;ah !
yes, and Peter, too, who can raise the price of a black coat
and white neck napkin, and who detests hard labour, con-
ceives himself to be better employed expounding, and
capable of understanding, the Scriptures. When, however,
fellows like ourselves “ fix” these canting imposters we aie
calmly told that “ we don’t understand the Bible !” that “to
the pure all things are pure and that “no does not mean
nay, anymore than yea means yes.” Demand for the Koran
the same supernatural reverence, human incomprehensibility,
and blind infallibility, and they will laugh at you, feigning not
to understand the question; or tell you that the first two
chapters of the book clearly prove that it cannot be of divine
origin, inasmuch as these two chapters assert that “God hath
sealed the lips, hearts, hearing, and covereth the sight of
some of His creatures, that He may punish them with a
grievous punishment.” In other words, that it so blas-
phemes the merciful Almighty as to accuse Him of punishing
a blindness which He Himself caused. They, of course,


wink at Calvin’s “ brotherly love,”* and his predestination.
What, however, frequently amuses us is, that brainless and
illiterate creatures arrogate to themselves the exclusive right
of interpreting the Gospel —a thing, do you know, that the
Pope of Rome has not assumed the power to do, notwith-
standing all that is said about his infallibility. In fact, the
Church alone possesses this power, and does not delegate it
to him, except as a member of the Council. The fourteenth
Article says : —“I do admit the Holy Scriptures in the same
sense that our Holy Mother Church doth, whose business it
is to judge of the true sense and interpretation of them.” Of
course you understand that the Pope is no more “ the
Church” than our Governor is our ruler. “ Individually he
may err ; but not as the mouth-piece of tiie Chur chi' Then
this Church arrogates to itself the exclusive right of inter-
preting the Scriptures; and may, if it thinks proper, make
black appear white.
It does not go quite so far as that. There must be a
semblance of reason, at least, in all it does. But I thought
that all dissenting Churches were far in advance, in every
respect, ot the Roman Catholic.
Certainly not, Mr. Scott, as regards orthodoxy.
What is the belief of Christians with respect to the souls
of Mussulmans, Hindoos, and unbelievers ?
It is exactly similar to that held by Mohammedans with
respect to Christians, Jews, &c. Baptism is held to be indis-
pensible by Christians. Without it no human being has
* See Calvin’s damnable writings, wherein' the following is con-
tained : —“ A declaration for maintaining the True Faith held by all
Christians concerning the Trinity of Persons in one only God against the
detestable Errors of Michael Servetus, a Spaniard; in which it is also
proved that it is lawful to punish heretics, and that this wretch was justly
executed in the City of Geneva.” “ Above all,” says he again, in his
letter to the Chamberlain of the King of Navarre, “do not fail to rid
the country of these zealous scoundrels who stir up the people to revolt
against us. Such monsters should be exterminated as I have exter-
minated Michael Servetus, the Spaniard.’’—(Signed) John Calvin.


been cleansed of original sin, which “ stands in the name of
Adam, and deserveth God’s damnation.” Some very insig-
nificant sects of the Christian Church endeavour to be more
liberal, however, and say—“ From him to whom much is
given, much shall be requiredbut that is simply
denouncing Christianity altogether. It rests on a false foun-
dation, if any human being who has not embraced its
doctrine can be saved by any other agency whatsoever.
I am in terrible doubt about the truth of such a doctrine,
considering that the Christian eternity means for ever and
ever; and, as hundreds of millions of human beings have never
had an opportunity of embracing Christianity, it is hard to
believe that a just God will damn them. What if Christians
are wrong, and Mohammedans are right, after all ?
In that case, Mr. Scott, Mohammedans would not deem
hell hot enough, or fifty thousand years long enough, for you.
Allah, il allah ! and is it not awful to be left in such doubt ?
I would gladly do God’s bidding, if I but knew His will. Do
you feel yourself so secure in your belief that you can afford
to smile at my agony ?
Yes, Mr Scott, we can afford to pity you, and must
apologize for smiling when discussing so serious a matter.
But, with your permission, we will defer relating our own
belief for a while, and leave hell and its horrors, whilst we
compare your former belief with your present. I scarcely
know what my present belief is.
Well, Mr. Scott, we shall endeavour to furnish you with
one before we part; and now, Mr. Scott, what were you
taught, in the way of morality, by your former religion ?
—I was taught to believe in the same God as the
Christians; that Mohammed was His prophet; that so,
also, was Christ, but a lesser one. He was, nevertheless, the
Word and the Spirit of God, and in the divinity of the Old
and New Testaments, by which Mohammed’s,mission was
proved. And further, in a future state of happiness, when all
mankind in their corporal bodies —even the most wicked,


lifter they had expiated in nell the crimes done on this earth
—would eventually meet and remain for ever, without
growing older, as it were; —that is, they would for ever
maintain the vigour of youth ; that every description of cor-
poral blessing and sensual pleasure would be enjoyed in
Paradise; “ that every man would have eighty thousand
servants, and seventy-two wives of the virgins of Paradise,
besides the wives he had in this world.” “And,” says the
Koran, “if any of the faithful in Paradise be desirous of
issue, it shall be conceived, born, and grow up, in the space
of an hour.”
What was required of you, Mr. Scott, according to
Islamism, to entitle you to the happiness of Paradise ? —I
was taught by the Catechism to believe the Koran had been
delivered from heaven to Mohammed, the Pentateuch to
Moses, the Psalter to David, and the Holy Gospel to Jesus
Christ; that Adam was the first prophet, and Mohammed
the last, till Christ should appear again on the earth, at
the day on which He would kill anti-Christ.
That was your faith, Mr. Scott; what of the works
required of you ?—I was taught to pray five times every day,
to give one-tenth of my possessions to the poor, and that it
was essential to salvation to visit Mecca once during my life.
Cleanliness is considered by Mohammedans one of the
greatest of all virtues ; “ the practice of their religion is
founded upon cleanliness, which is considered by them one-
half of faith, and the key of prayer.” Fasting they consider
a duty of great moment. Mohammed designated it “ the
gate of religion,” and said that “ the odour of the mouth of
him who fasteth is more grateful to God than that of musk.”
Charity, I was taught, was so pleasing in the sight of God,
that the Caliph Omar Ebn Abdalaziz used to say—“ Prayer
carries us half-way to God, fasting brings us to the door of
His palace, and alms-giving procures us admission.” The
last of these practical religious duties (charity), is deemed by
Mohammedans so necessary that, according to a tradition of


Mohammed, “ he who dies without performing it may as well
die a Jew or a Christian.” As to the NEGATIVE precepts
and institutions of this religion, the Mohammedans are for-
bidden the use of wine, are strictly prohibited from gaming,
usury, and eating blood or swine’s flesh, or whatever dies of
itself, or is killed accidentally.
Pardon us, Mr. Scott, for interrupting you—but do
Moslems comply with these prohibitions ?—They are, as a
body, the most temperate people under the sun ; but there
are, of course, exceptions, especially in Persia. As to
gambling, I never heard of such a thing in Turkey; (they
play chess, but except in rare instances, without wagering);
or till I came to Australia. “It is to be feared,” says Mr.
Mills, speaking of Mohammedans, “ that no individual Chris-
tian sect could stand the test so well of so severe an ordeal
as the trial of their faith as a body, by their works as indi-
viduals.”
The Koran teaches “ that it is the devil who threatens
you with poverty ij you bestow in charity to the poor ; and it is
he who orders us to pursue avarice; but God promises us
ple?ity in abunda?ice a?id His grace in return for charity Mr.
Mills very properly denominates this one of the most
abstruse subjects upon which man has ever exercised his
faculties ; and which has, more than any other, displayed
both the strength and the weakness of the human intellect.
On this very difficult subject, he says, Mohammed pro-
nounced with a positiveness consonant with the character of
a wild fanatic, or worthy of a messenger from heaven. The
doctrine of eternal decrees and absolute predestination—the
doctrine of fatalism—he inculcates in the strongest and
strictest terms. His companions, supposing that necessity
and responsibility were incompatible, naturally said—“ Oh,
prophet! since God has appointed our places, may we con-
fide in this and abandon our religious and moral duties.”
But he replied—“ No ; because the happy will do good works ,
and the miserable will do bad works P


Pray forgive us, Mr. Scott, for again stopping you, but
really we are commencing to like Mohammed the more we
hear of him. These last words strike us as entitled to rank
among the most truthful expressions that ever fell on human
ears. What did Mr. John White teach you on this subject ?
—He gave me a Bible, in which I find that Christ is accused
of saying (we use the word “accused” advisedly, and
invite refutation) —“ Take , therefore , no thought for the morrow:
for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself.
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.”
Do these words not bear a very sorry comparison with
what Mohammed said ?—Well, yes ; I think that “ want ”
does more towards filling gaols than the devil, or man’s
natural proneness to do “ bad works.”
Let us return to the Catechism, which you have
rejected, Mr. Scott. —Yes ; it teaches that there is an inter-
mediate state. “ This is held by the Koran as a solemn
truth—(see 47th and 79th chap.) Friday is the Moslem
Sabbath ; because the prophet disdained to be thought a
servile imitator of either the Jewish or the Christian systems.
On that day solemn prayers are offered to God in the
Mosques, and the Koran expounded by an appointed
preacher. But the general observance of the day is not
prescribed with that character of strictness which distinguishes
the Jewish Sabbath, for the Koran says —‘in the intervals of
preaching and of prayer, believers may disperse themselves
through the land as they list, and seek gain of the liberality
of God’ by pursuing worldly occupations and innocent
amusements.”
Mohammedans fast during the month of Ramadan, in
which the Koran was sent down. “ Therefore,” saith Mo-
hammed, “ a fast is ordained you, that you may fear God,
let him among you who shall be at home in this month fast
the same month ; but he who shall be sick, or on a journey,
shall fast the like number of other days.” During this conse-
crated month no gratification of the senses, or even support


of the body, are allowed from the rising to the setting of the
sun.” The duty of alms-giving is not considered to be per-
formed by donations given towards the erection of mosques,
or feeding idle fakirs, unless adequate donations be made to
the poor. Hassan, the Son of Ali, and grandson of Mo-
hammed, twice in his life divided his goods between himself
and the distressed : and the Caliphs Omar and Abu-Beker
every week distributed abroad in charity the difference be-
tween their expenses and revenue. The productions of
corn-fieids, olive-grounds, and vineyards, are not gathered in
the East with minute scrupulosity. To the poor are assigned
the gleanings. Job describes them as “ gathering the
harvest dew, even the vineyard of the unjust.’ Mohammed
permits his disciples to enjoy corn, dates, pomegranates,
olives, and all other divine blessings; but commands that in
the harvest and vintage the poor shall have their right.
Alms-giving, hospitality, and benevolence, are the character-
istics of the Turkish nation. The benevolence of the Mus-
sulman extends to the animal creation ; and it is an estab-
lished article in the Moslem belief, that the irrational
animals will be judged on the last day, and have mutual
vengeance for the injuries they have done each other in this
life. From feelings of compassion hunting is held in abhor-
rence by the Mohammedans ; and birds are seldom deprived
of their liberty. “ The Moslem law books,” says Mr. Mills,
“recognise three general classes of judicial officers — Muftis ,
Cadis , and Mujtahids. It is the duty of the Mufti to apply
the law, whether religious, civil, or criminal, to ■ particular
cases ; to resolve all doubts which may be put to him on the
written applications of individuals. But if the Koran and
traditions are silent on the subject, the Mufti must reply that
the sacred books afford him no information. The Cadi is
the officer who gives the law operation and effect. His de-
cisions are regulated by the Koran, or the traditions, or
esteemed commentaries on those books. When a novel case
occurs he exercises his own judgment, The Mujtahids are


men who are skilled in a more than ordinary degree in legal
matters ; and are a court of appeal from the Cadi, or ordi-
nary judge, in solemn and important causes.
The Moslem writers are earnest in dissuading people
from soliciting from their sovereigns the difficult and respon-
sible office of Cadi, and mention with applause the names
of those who have suffered imprisonment rather than accept
it. Some of the lawyers of old time even say, that the
acceptance of it without compulsion is abominable; found-
ing their opinion on the declaration of Mohammed, that—
“ Whoever is appointed Cadi (judge) suffers the same torture
as an animal whose throat is mangled, instead of being cut
with a sharp knife.” Nor is a Cadi allowed to put any ques-
tion to a witness in the following manner: —“ Is not that
which you wish to say to this or that effect ?”
Inside the mosque there is no distinction, the million-
aire and the pauper worship God side by side. “It cannot
be denied,” says Mills, “ that the Koran teaches the doctrine
of the divine unity of God in a most sublime and
energetic strain. The throne of Omnipotence is extended
over the whole earth. Creator of all things, his pro-
vidence is displayed in the vicissitudes of the seasons,
and the revolutions of the world. Neither slumber nor
sleep seizeth him .... the living, the self-sub-
sisting, the high, the mighty. He makes all subser-
vient to the good man ; and provides both for creation’s
lord, and the meanest creature that crawls upon the earth.
His rewards are ten-fold, and he is ever ready to pardon on
the least sign of repentance. He giveth life, and putteth to
death, and is Almighty. He knoweth that which is past,
that which is to come ; what the breasts of men contain ;
and the secrets of futurity. Such are the sublime sentiments
and language of the Koran on this awful doctrine of the
Divine unity, power, and magnificence. Some writers on
the subject of the Mohammedan religion have commended
Mohammed for his toleration. A few passages in the Koran


might, indeed, make bigotry blush. . . Of course, you
know, Mr. Stockwhip, that the established religion of Persia is
Mohammedanism, of the sect of Ali. Even fifty years back
travellers were astonished at the freedom with which religious
subjects were discussed. Colonel Malcolm heard a person
of high rank exclaim, in a mixed company, in which some
priests were maintaining the sacred nature of the claims of
Mohammed’s family—“ This is all very well for superstitious
fools, who know no better; but I have travelled and read,
and have more than once met with a dog of a Mohammedan
and an angel of a Jew.” This speech produced a very
hearty laugh at the expense of the holy man who had com-
menced the conversation. “ But,” says Mr. Mill, “ neither
terrors of the sword, nor thunders of the pulpjt, could estab-
lish that unanimity of sentiment which Mohammed professed
so ardently to desire. If the various characters of the human
mind produced so many different views of the same appear-
ances, and so many interpretations of the same truths, we
cannot wonder at the diversities of error and the wanderings
of fanaticism. The sects of Mohammedanism have been as
numerous as those of Christianity; and the history of the
Mosque presents as melancholy a view of the weakness of
the human heart, and the same moral lessons on the necessity
of charity and mutual respect, as are afforded by the annals
of the Church.” Mohammedans believe that war is an ordi-
nance of God ■ that success is a mark of Divine favour ; that
the souls of all Moslems killed in battle will be saved; that
if misfortune overtakes them, it is predestined; they say,
calmly—“lt was written,” and submit, without a murmur,
to the most unexpected transition from opulence to poverty.
There are many other peculiarities in addition to what I have
mentioned —among which may be included the injunctions
as to prayer. The faithful are forbidden to ask of God the
temporal blessings of this frail and perishable life ; the only
legitimate objects of the supplicatory part of the Namaz are
spiritual gifts and the ineffable advantage of eternal felicity.


Turks may pray, however, for the health of the Sultan, the
prosperity of the country, and division and wars among
Christians.
Now pray, Mr. Scott, who and what is your authority
for all that you have related ? —Principally the Koran itself.
Very good ; we dare say that if you have made any
mistake, some kind person will set you right?—lndeed, I
sincerely hope so, Mr. Stockwhip ; for, with the eternal
salvation or damnation of my soul and body at stake,
I would not, for the whole of the gold that has been up to
this day unearthed in Australia, remain in ignorance of the
best means of gaining eternal life.
But what induced you to embrace Calvinisim —of all
religions under the sun, there is none more absurd ?—I
believe it was the dexterity with which my teachers broke
down Mohammedanism, rather than a true appreciation or
correct knowledge of the belief that was to supplant it. In
the first place, Mohammed was proved, beyond doubt, to be
a bloodthirsty impostor, who propagated, with the sword, a
religion which is impracticable, and opposed to reason.*
“ How is his fast (which he ordained as necessary for the
salvation of all mankind), between the rising and setting of
the sun possible in the Arctic circle, where the sun neither
rises nor sets for six months together ? How would it be
possible for all mankind to visit Mecca? They could not
stand on the ground. And is it not monstrous to believe
that God created a mental blindness, in order that He might
torment the blind victims eternally ?—No, Mr. Stockwhip;
“ I am done with Mohammed ; him no gcod —no good, Sir.
NONE but Jesus —sweet Jesus —can do him man’s good."
What did you tell Mr. Nairn was your duty when you
were received into the Christian Church by the sacrament of
baptism ?—To try to be a good man ; not to swear, or tell
lies, or drink, or do anything that is wicked in God’s sighc;
*See “ Volney’s Ruins of Empires,” page 149.


to pray to God, to Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, to
make me a good man ; to pray for all people to make them
good; to pray for my countrymen for God to make them
good; for God to turn them from Mohammed to Jesus Christ;
and to cast myself on God, and seek mercy through Jesus
Christ.
Were you taught anything else? —Yes, I was taught to
“ take no thought for the morrowand if any man struck
me not to defend myself, but to turn my other cheek.
We sadly fear that you are too impetuous. We know
that it is but natural to hate what we have loved, when we
have discovered the object of our admiration to be a base
imposture ; but really we do not think Mohammed so great
an imposter as you now appear to believe him. His concep-
tion of the attributes of the Almighty are admitted by
Christians themselves to be most sublime. He taught all the
morality taught by Christ, inasmuch as he endorsed the list
of Christ’s teachings himself, in addition to which he taught
cleanliness, sobriety, and inculcated the practice of charity
as a virtue of the very last importance —“ the key of heaven,”
said he, “ a man without it might as well die an idolater.”
Truth he enforced —“ Slit the tongue of a liar after the
seventh degree,” said he. His love of animals knew no
bounds. Traditions say that he would get up out of his bed
at the dead of the night to caress his favourite horse and
cats. Hunting he prohibited; he held it in abhorrence as a
cruel and wanton amusement. Dogs even-'-which are held
by Turks to be the most repulsive of all animals —-he bade
his followers “be kind to.” These animals are considered
too unclean to touch. The prejudice of the Asiatic against
the dog frequently appears in the Scriptures of the Jews ;
his touch is deemed contagious; and his very name is the
Turk’s bitterest expression of contempt. But, although he
is not allowed to approach within the precincts of their
houses, or the courts of the mosques, yet thousands are,
from feelings of compassion, allowed to disturb the peace


and the cleanliness of the streets. They are fed by the
liberal inhabitants ; and Tournefort assures us that testamen-
tary donations even are often made for their support.”
He commended frugality as a great virtue ; and bade his
followers “take thought for the morrow,” for, said he —“The
happy will do good works, and the miserable will do bad
works.”
Speaking of alms-giving, said he —“It is the devil who
threatens you with poverty if you bestow in Charity to the
poor ; and it is he who orders us to pursue avarice; but God
promises us abundance in return from charity.”
So keenly did he realize the terrible responsibility
evolved on the magistrate and judge that, said he —“Who-
soever is appointed Cadi suffers the same torture as an
animal whose throat is mangled, instead of being cut with a
sharp knife.
As to prayer, he says^ —“Teqch your children their
prayers before they are seven years ot age ; at that age order
them to repeat them five times a day; and beat them if they
do not do so at ten years. And pray not to God for the
temporal things of this world, &c.” He also had the greatest
reverence for Jesus Christ, whom he asserted to be the Word
and the Spirit of God ; but not the Son of God, or, indeed,
so great a Prophet as himself.
Great minds, Mr. Scott, are never curious or jealous of
great minds ; nor are they ever slow to admit their admira-
tion of genius. Hence it is that Mohammed spake in the
highest praise of Jesus Christ, whom he reverenced. When
he took his famous journey on the Alborak from Mecca to
Jerusalem, and thence to heaven (of which we read in the
17th -chapter of the Koran) he found Jesus ruling the
Seventh, or next heaven to God himself; and instead of
requesting Jesus —as he did every other prophet whom he
passed —to recommend himself to his prayers, he recom-
mended himself to the prayers of Jesus. It may appear
strange to you, Mr. Scott, that, reverencing Jesus Christ, and


extolling his virtues as Mohammed did, he could designate his
(Christ’s) followers “ Unbelievers,” “ Infidels,” “ Idolaters,”
“ Man-worshippers,” and “ Forsakers of the True God.” It
behoves us, therefore, to explain to you how it was that Moham-
med did not believe “ Christians” to be followers of Christ,
but believed that they had “ perverted the Scriptures, and
the simple doctrines and discipline of their Teacher”
(exactly as Mr. David Buchanan thinks at this very day).
Mohammed accused Christians of substituting the worship
of Christ for that of the “ True God.” He held that Christ
was not God, any more than he himself, that it was dis-
pleasing to Christ as it was to God, to set up this system of
“manworship” called “Christianity.” In reply, as it were,
to the Christian conception—or, as we say, pretended con-
ception —of the Trinity, his doctrine was, “ La Ellah ellallah
Mohammed ref id ollah /” that is, “ There is no God but God,
and Mohammed is His prophet.” Thus it is that these words
are, to the present day, the “war-cry” of Mussulmans when
fighting the “infidel,” i. e., Christian, Jew, or Pagan. And
hence Mohammedans believe the “ maintaining the honour,
singularity , and glory of God to be the noblest of all good
works ; and that if they are killed by infidels whilst so
doing, their souls will at once —with the swiftness of an
arrow—proceed to Paradise.” Herein , we presume , lies the
necessity or object of St. Athanasius’ creed being “ maintained
whole and undefiled ” by Christians , although we can with
safety defy anyone to explain it. What, for example, do
you mean, Mr. Scott, by saying you “confide in Jesus,” you
“ pray to Christ,” you “ put your trust in your Redeemer,”
“ NONE but Christ can do man good,” etc. ?—I think that
Christ, possessing our human nature, more fully compre-
hends our human natures than God the Father. For this
reason —and that I can realize the human Christ, and not
the incomprehensible Father—l presume it is, that we are
requested by our ministers to “put our faith in Christ,” and
to “ pray to Him.”


Well, Mr. Scott, if such is your impression—and we
believe it to be a very correct definition of the impression
of Christians generally—we can call your belief nothing
other than a species of “ Manism.” Pray proceed, Mr.
Scott. Where did you say Jesus Christ now was?—Sitting
on the right hand of God the Father Almighty.
What do you mean by that; do you mean that there
are three seats —one for each of the Divine persons ?
You puzzle me now, Mr. Stockwhip. lam to
believe that both God the Father and God the Son are
invisible spirits.
How so ; does the Bible not teach that God the Father
created man in his own image and likeness ?—I am beat
again, Mr. Stockwhip.
We, if we were to take the Bible as our guide, should
certainly favour an opinion that God the Father was not
purely a spirit, finding it therein contained that He hath
eyes (Prov. xv., 3), mouth (Isaiah vi., 11), nose (Isaiah Ixv.,
50), lips (Isaiah xxx., 27), ears (Deut. xxvi., 7, and 2 Kings
xix., 16), feet (Ezekiel xliii., 7), arms and hands (Jer. xxi.,
and Isaiah liii., 10), loins (Ezekiel L, 27), bowels (Jeremiah
iv, 19), nostrils (Exod. xvi., 8), face and back parts (Exod.
xxxiii., 22, 23), hands (again Jer. i., 9, Isaiah lix., 1, xlviii,
13 ; Ezekiel xxi., 17), voice (Numbers xxv., 16 ; Gen. viii.,
15 ; Jonah ii., 10; Gen. xvii., 3), smell (Gen. ii., 7), breath
(Job. xxxvii., 10). Now, in ordinary man’s shape, see Genesis
xxxii., 24, 30, and some hundreds of other instances? —
Dear me, Mr. Stockwhip, I have turned up these passages,
and am positively surprised. Upon my word you have the
Bible and th6'Koran off by heart.
Yes, Mr. Scott —like yourself—we deemed,the few
moments, as it were, that we are permitted to stay on this
earth nothing as compared with eternity, and we determined
to accept no man’s dictum ; since no man could suffer for
us, and as we are held by God responsible tor our faith and
actions, we took very good care to examine all faiths and


select the most rational and best for all mankind. But we
have no leisure to devote at present to the teachings of
Zoroaster, Confucius, and other philosophers. We reserve
this pleasure until we hear the particulars of the converture
of a follower of either of these, to Christianity’s creed, then
we will take the same pains as we have done in your case.
We cannot, however, leave you with so cruel and so
erroneous an impression as that which you appear to enter-
tain of Mohammed. True enough is it that he did, for the
last ten years of his life, propagate his religion with the
sword, but this was after all reason and argument had failed
him, and after thirteen years of preaching peacefully, advising
men to turn to the worship of the “ True God,” and after
having been hunted like a wild beast from Mecca to Medina,
a distance of 270 miles over rough country, by four armed
bands, who sought his blood. On reaching Medina, finding
some eighty able men who had embraced his doctrine, he
turned on his pursuers, with these at his back, shouting.
“ La ellah, ellallah,” and he himself exclaiming in the face
of his enemies, “ Since you have declined argument and
have taken up the sword, so be it; die like dogs by the
sword.” And thus finding that the sword made more con-
verts than reason, he used it with the vengeance of a demon
rather than the tender-hearted man that he was. Christians,
Pagans, and Jhws called aloud to him to give them some
proof of his mission by performing miracles, and they then
would adopt his creed. To these entreaties he replied,
“ God had sent Moses and Jesus with miracles, and ye
would not hearken to their word; and, therefore, he hath
now sent me in the last place, without miracles, to force ye
by the power of the sword to do his will.” His re-
ligion spread through Asia and Africa with almost the
rapidity of lightning, and it is confidently asserted that
at the present day his followers form the most numerous
religious sect in the world. Mohammedans are now said to
number two hundred millions.


But, Mr. Stockwhip, did Christians ever turn Moham-
medans ?—Yes; tens of thousands in one day, and even
within the last century. “In the valley of Albania, watered
by the Yoioussa, the Aous of ancient history, is the district
of Caramouratadez, comprising some forty villages and
hamlets, from an early period peopled by Christians of the
Greek Church. Protected by their mountain fastnesses, and
by their inherent valour, the inhabitants had, for three cen-
turies, effectually withstood every attempt of the surrounding
Mohammedans to impose the yoke of their religion. In this
independent state the people of the valley persevered until
1760, when commenced a combined series of sanguinary
wars between themselves and the Mohammedans, which, in
the course of half a century, exhausted the endurance of the
unhappy Christians, and drove them to despair. Compelled
at last to submit to the furious Mohammedans, the Cara-
mouratadez Christians, actuated at last, not by that spirit
of patience which propitiates, but by that spirit of pre-
sumptive merit which estranges, Celestial favour, deter-
mined to make one effort more to draw down Supreme
protection. Should that effort be unavailing, it was also
determined at once to renounce their Christian pro-
fession, and to embrace the faith of their foes. In vain
did their pastors represent and remonstrate against the
extravagance, as well as the impiety, of this last determina-
tion. To defer its accomplishment until Easter should be
past, the festival to be solemnized by every imaginable act of
external devotion, was all the priests could obtain. But
Easter came, was most scrupulously celebrated, and passed
away without any relaxation of their sufferings. In the
evening of that festival, Christianity was universally and
formally abjured, the clergy were desired to withdraw from
the district; the patron-saints, whom the deluded people had
venerated with signal zeal and confidence, were reproached
for their regardlessness and ingratitude ; their carriages were
temoved from the churches; a Mohammedan Cadi and a


body of Imauns, or teachers, were called in from the neigh-
bourhood ; the brief creed of the Koran was recited; the
various initiatory rites, circumcision not excepted, were per-
formed ; —thus in Caramouratadez did the Crescent super-
sede the Cross.” [Vide Pouqueville’s “Travels in Greece,”
part IV., vol. IV.]
Really, Mr. Stockwhip, I did not possess so great a
knowledge of the prophet and the progress of his religion as
you appear to do. Tell me, does Scripture in any way
favour a belief in his mission?—Yes ; educated Mohamme-
dans assert that the Gospel of St. Barnabas, besides a great
deal of the MSS. rejected by the Council of Trent—-of
which circumstance, of course, you have heard —fully prove
his mission to have been of Divine origin. It is related in
the Gospel of St. Barnabas,*! which, I must remind you, “is
a moderate Quarto in Spanish, written in a very legible
hand, but a little damaged towards the latter end. It contains
222 chapters of unequal length, and 420 pages, and is said
in the front to be translated from the Italian, by an Arrago-
nian Moslem, named Mostasa de Arandd. There is a
preface to it, wherein the discoverer of the original MS., who
was a Christian monk, called Fra Marino, tells us that, having
accidentally met with the writing of Iremeus (among others),
wherein he speaks against St. Paul, alleging for his authority
ihe Gospel of St. Barnabas, he became exceedingly desirous
to find this Gospel, and that God, of His mercy, having
made him very intimate with Pope Sixtus IV., one day, as
they were together in that Pope’s library, his holiness fell
asleep, and he, to employ himself, reaching down a book to
read, the first he laid his hand on proved to be the very
Gospel he wanted; overjoyed at the discovery, he scrupled
not to hide his prize in his sleeve, and on the Pope’s
awaking, took leave of him, carrying with him that Celestial
*IV p '74. fin note 2nd, Cap. 3, p. 43. See Mohammedan


treasure, by reading of which he became a convert to
Mohammedanism.
[See George Sale’s “ Address to the Reader,” in his
translation of the Koran.]
And now, Mr. Scott, having recapitulated all that you have
told us, besides a little of what we already knew, concerning
Mohammed, we must admit that he was a very great person-
age. The very worst charge that can be laid at his door is
his denial of the Godhead of Christ, a crime—if it may be
so termed —that may, with safety, be brought against every
intelligent man alive who has considered the subject on its
merits. That no man alive can reconcile the problem of
there being three distinct objects, still but one distinct object
we feel positively certain. The hypothesis is beyond human
comprehension. Wesley, when taken to book on this point, said,
in effect —“ I know very well that what I have been preaching,
no educated man will accept; still I conceive it to be good
that the unlettered be kept in subjection by some sort of
superstition.” . . . “My teachings will be superseded by
something better.” . . . “Well, if Jesus Christ was
any other than God himself, I admit at once that Moham-
med was the better man.” (We quote the above from
memory, but believe the expressions to be sufficiently known
among educated men not to require reference.) Now, Mr,
Scott, what say you ?—That I will turn Mohammedan again;
I suppose that you are one.
No, indeed, Mr. Scott; although we find a number of
good things to have been uttered by Mohammed, we
cannot swallow that ride of his to heaven, and many other
absurdities adduced by him.
Then, Mr. Stockwhip, had I better remain a Chris-
tian? —Not if that means—“ Take no thought for the
morrow.” Not if that means that the blackguard and the
bully may assault the inoffensive with impunity—“ Who-
ever shall smite thee on the one cheek, turn to him the
other also.” Not if it means that you are to despise the


Almighty’s choicest gifts—the fruits of your own industry.
Not if it means that you are to abandon your business or
occupation, and become an idle vagrant caring not for your
own offspring (see Luke xii, 16). Not if it requires of you to
believe that the merciful Creator of all things has, amongst
these things, made a place called “ hell,” in which to burn
for ever and ever at least nine-tenths of the human creatures
whom He made with “all faults. Not if it demands of you
that you be an “ animated lie,” a hypocrite—one who pre-
tends to believe what one does not, nor cannot,' comprehend
—and which, if you persuade yourself that you have com-
prehended, is calculated to drive you mad, and, as it were,
out of the world. Not if it requires of you to conform to
customs so ridiculous that the greatest savages alive would
take fright at them. Not if it requires of you to take a leap
out of civilization backwards into superstition, ignorance,
poverty, and cannibalism. View, Mr. Scott, all such features
as we have narrated above, and which are assuredly promi-
nent ones in all Christianity’s Creeds, with loathing and con-
tempt. Modern Christianity has already, in practice,
rejected these injunctions, and is we think a mere political
institution, serving to foment the bad passions of men’s
hearts; and to create hatred and jealousy where good fel-
lowship should be supreme. There is no need for any
elaborate demonstration of this patent fact. We live, in an
age when the Gospel of Christ is made the pretext for every
kind of villainy; when even those very maxims which incul-
cate love and charity are made the war-cries of rabid bigots,
who —base double-dealers as they are —make nothing better
of. their religion than a weapon of offence ; praying and blas-
pheming, cursing and psalm-singing, slandering and sermon-
ising—“ fighting like devils for regeneration, and hating each
other for the love of God.” It is too late, Mr. Scott, to em-
brace a religion which has been brought down to such a depth
of degradation. Mark the texts on which Christians say
that their creed is founded —“ Glory to God in the highest,


and on earth peace good will towards men,” “ Do ye unto
others that which ye would they should do unto you.”
These are the principles which parsons are supposed to
preach ; but look abroad upon this Christian land, and
mark how slightly practice accords with precept. If these
principles were truly the foundation of Christianity, we
should advise you to accept it; but since its whole ten-
dency is to debase the Deity, rather than to exalt Him; to
breed strife, rather than to promote peace ; and to sanctify
the schemes of every swindler, we counsel you to pause be-
fore you declare adherence to so vile a creed. This re-
ligion has lost every vestige of goodness, and has become a
mere political instrument. The Apostles of this Gospel of
Peace, are rushing about the country slandering their fellow-
men, heaping abuse upon their comrade Christians, sowing
dissension and bitterness in every corner of tire land. What
creed must that be which produces such results —which
transforms its professors into foul-tongued savages, whose
chief delight is to blast a reputation, and whose choicest
triumph is to trample under foot the best teachings of their
Master ? Can any human being, not entirely bereft of rea-
son, imagine that Orangemen, who gather together for the
simple purpose of vilifying and abusing all persons who are
not Orangemen, and who make this announcement a part of
their religion, have derived their creed from any sacred
source? There is more of the Devil than of Divinity in
such malevolence. It is a political fanaticism without even
a shred of nobleness to elevate it. And so of all other
Christian sects. Each one is a mere political o-ganisation,
which makes its Church not the place of prayer and worship,
but the rallying point of faction, the place wherein
swindles are concocted. Viewing all these facts, Mr. Scott,
with a comprehensive glance, we say, unhesitatingly, that the
person who has sought to bring you within the pale of that
mass of foulness, lies, superstition, and strife, known as the
Church of Christ; has done you a grievous wrong. You


have been counselled to change one error for another —to
cast away the superstitions of the manly Mohammed and adopt
a more degrading superstition still, which has not vigour
enough within its veins to keep enthusiasm warm.
MR. SCOTT COME BACK FOR A RELIGION.
You, Mr. Stockwhip, have almost-bereft me of all religion.
By the way, you promised to furnish me with a belief —or,
rather, a religion before we parted?—Yes, Mr. Scott; but in
the heat of condemnation of the absurdities and wickedness
practised in the name of religion, we had, for the moment,
lost sight of the promise. We—without bombast —claim to
be as well acquainted with the Zadder, the Zendavesta, the
Vedas, the Chamans, Bonzes, Gonnis, Koran, and the Bible,
as most men. In the whole of these books we have dis-
covered many most excellent things, the one, as it were,
outdoing the other in beauty of sentiment, and sublimity of
truth ; but it is impossible for them all to be correct,
inasmuch as each creed condemns the other —in which case
we are compelled to condemn the lot. Thar is to say, we
are compelled to believe that none of them are of Divine
origin, notwithstanding their many beautiful teachings. Turn
up in the Bible, Thessalonians, chap. 5, v. xxi. You will
find that it teaches you to “prove all things; hold fast that
which is good. ” Now, Mr. Scott, in our opinion there are
not nine words strung together in any of the books we have
mentioned which can —as a piece of advice—compare at all
with these. They have ever been our guiding star, and they
have brought us to a belief that there is a God who punishes


every man for his vice, and rewards him for his virtue, ten-
fold on this earth, without going beyond it; and the religion
which we have to bequeath to you is—“ Do to all mankind
—yes, and all animals, likewise*—as you would that they
should do unto you.” We cannot give more to Christ than
His due ; and considering that one and all of the philoso-
phers whom we have named — i. e., Confucius, Zoroaster,
Mohammed, and Himself (Christ), besides some scores of
others —taught the same religion, it is difficult to say with
whom it originated. In order, however, to make yourself
happy in this world, Mr. Scott, you must work hard, that you
may be able to enjoy the extreme pleasure of being chari-
table. Speak truthfully, and you need never be ashamed to
look a man straight in the face. Act honestly, and you will
never have occasion to fear human laws. If you do all these,
you may be very certain of the respect of your fellow-man
and the approval of your God. If you are, at some future
day, called into His presence to render an account of your
works, and if any one of these church-goers be there to
prosecute you—all he can accuse you of is, that you did not
worship, or pretend to worship, something that you could
not comprehend. To which, plead your human ignorance;
and the just Judge who created that ignorance must
acquit you.
Printed by G. E. Hooke, 426 George Street, Sydney.






