



AUSTRALIA
♦
(


/ -
I a ■ ■
& c * c. u f, i
♦
*
«
/
1 * ' ,
ffj
'»0 p.
C''* I




AN ATTEMPT
TO, APPROXIMATE TO
TEE ANTIQUITY OE MAN
INDUCTION
WELL ESTABLISHED
FACTS,
SIR WILLIAM DENISON, KC-B-,
COLONEL, ROYAL ENGINEERS.
MADRAS:
J. HIGGINBOTHAM,
llafo 3i3ooTiscXTer anU PuWtefjer,
1865.


.
'
'
■


PREFACE.
Some two years ago the rate of increase of
population became a snbj ect of interest to me, as
I was then engaged in reading that remarkably
trashy work of Dr. Colenso on the Pentateuch.
I satisfied myself, after enquiry, that the com-
ments made by him on that part of the Mosaical
narrative which gave the numbers of the Jewish
nation at the time of the Exodus fiom Egypt
were as full of error, and perverse misconstruc-
tion of the text of the Bible, as were his other
objections to the correctness of the Bible nar-
rative, and I let the subject drop. Latteily,
however, my attention having been drawn to
the various speculations as to the antiquity of
the human race, it occurred to me that the facts
disclosed in the statistical returns of births,
deaths, and marriages, might form the basis of
an induction which would, at all events, give
such an approximation to the time of mans
residence upon earth, as would enable any one
to form an estimate of the value of the differ-
ent speculations as to “ The antiquity of Man”
which have been thrust upon the public, of late
years, as the necessary result of the acceptance
of some geological or physiological theory.


Having satisfied myself, after careful en-
quiry, that the difficulty in tracing man to his
origin in time is due, not in any way to the short-
ness of his life upon earth, but altogether to the
length of it, I have thought that a sketch of the
process by which I have arrived at such a con-
clusion may be interesting to others, lam not
aware that any attempt has been made to bring
statistical facts to bear upon a question which
has hitherto been dealt with as altogether
dependent upon certain arbitrary assumptions
based upon geological, physiological, or ethno-
logical speculations : a glance at the subject
from a totally different point of view may not,
therefore, be unacceptable.


Philosophers, if it be right to dignify by such a
title the loose speculators of the present day, have of
late been puzzling over the question of the “ Antiqui-
ty of Man”; their object being to vindicate for the
race a much longer period of existence upon earth
than that which has been deduced from the Bible
records.
The motive of some of these speculators, as, for
instance, of Dr. Williams in his review of Bunsens
Biblical Researches, appears to be to throw discredit
upon the Bible narrative generally, by questioning the
correctness of the chronology deduced from it.
That of others, as, for instance, of Mr. Darwin,
is to get rid of some of the difficulties which the
received chronology opposes to the establishment of
his modification of Lamarck’s theory of development,
by giving too short an allowance of time for the
series of transmutations by which the Gorilla is,
according to him or his followers, to be changed into
man.
Others again, as, for instance, Sir Charles Lyell,
have found some geological necessity for the length-
ened residence of man upon earth, and are willing
to play into the hands of the advocates of develop-
ment, who, although differing from themselves on
many essential points, do, by their theory, make a
present to the geologists of a cheque upon the Bank
of Time upon which these latter have been in the
habit of drawing heavily.


I do not mean, however, on the present
occasion, to question the evidence, stated by Dr.
W illiams to have been elicited by Bunsen from the
records of Egypt in support of theories as to the time
required for the development of Commerce, Govern-
ment and Language : neither am I disposed to enter
upon the question of our relationship to the Gorilla :
I prefer to reckon my descent from Adam and Eve,
but if Mr. Darwin wishes to dive into the African
Forests in search of his grandfather, much as I should
be disposed to question his taste, I in no way dispute
his right to indulge it: and although I should have
imagined that Sir Charles Lyell, in his speculations
arising out of the discovery of stone tools and wea-
pons in strata of acknowledged antiquity, might have
hazarded a conjecture that the men who made use of
such tools had found them, as he himself did, ready-
made to their hands, yet I shall not now attempt to
discuss the question of the existence or non-existence
of manufacturing establishments in the pre-adamite
times.
What I propose on the present occasion, is
to see whether, by a simple appeal to recognized and
established facts, I cannot show that the probabili-
ties are in favor of even a shorter period, than that
given in the margin of our Bibles, as that of man’s
residence upon earth, and, therefore, that all theories,
based upon extensions of this period, are in them-
selves so improbable as to justify their immediate
rejection.
The recognized facts, alluded to above, are


extracted from the statistical returns which many
individuals as well as Governments have been, for
many years past, collecting and collating.
These returns give, with reference to a great
many countries and localities, the number of births,
deaths, and marriages, the sexes of those who are
born or who die, the ages at which marriages are
contracted, and at which deaths take place, &c.
From data such as these, a variety of conclu-
sions can be deduced, bearing upon the life of man ;
such as the average length _of life, the chances in
favour of an individual attaining to any given age,
the rate at which communities increase under many
varied circumstances, the causes which operate to
produce this increase or to vary its rate, &c., &c.
The first of the simple facts disclosed by these
returns is the equality, or close approximation to
equality of the sexes.
The Bible says that God created man male
and female; and the returns show that, while the
births of males are slightly in excess of those of
females, the difference is not sufficient to counter-
balance the wear and tear of male life, so that the
number of females, at any given time, and in any
given country, is slightly in excess of the number
males. The general statement that for every man
there is a help meet for him is, therefore, sub-
stantially correct.
The next fact which the returns divulge is,
that, as a general rule, man finds his help-mate
early in life. The age at which men marry varies,


of course, according to the character of the climate,
and the facility of procuring means of subsistence.
In the warm countries of the East, the frame arrives
at maturity earlier than it does in the colder climates
of Europe, and marriages consequently take place
earlier ; it is no uncommon occurrence for a man to
be a father at the age of sixteen : while, in England,
the returns show that by far the larger proportion
of marriages take place when the parties are between
the ages of twenty and twenty-five.
The next fact established is that, unless under
very peculiar circumstances, the number of births
in any given year is in excess of the number of
deaths in the same year.
The returns of the English census show that
the births are 3*34 per cent., while the deaths are
only 2*247 per cent, of the population; the difference,
or T093 per cent, being the annual increase; so that
notwithstanding the close packing of the population,
and the constant exodus of emigrants, the rate of
increase is such as would double the population in
less than fifty years ; while similar returns from
North America testify to the fact that, previous to the
civil war, the rate of increase was nearly twice as
rapid as that of England, the time of doubling being
about twenty-five years.
In some of the healthy villages of the Andes,
Humboldt testifies to an increase of population
which doubles the population in nineteen years.
There are several other simple facts which are
disclosed by the returns of the Registrar of births.


deaths, and marriages, such as the average number
of children to each marriage, the proportion in which
the number of deaths is divided between persons
of different ages, &c. &c., but it is unnecessary
to notice more particularly other than those detailed
above. The inferences which may be drawn from
the facts above given are as follows :
Ist. The increase of the population of the
world is due altogether to the excess of births over
deaths. Locally, Emigration or Immigration must
tend to modify the rates of increase, though the
action of these, when the population is large, is but
trifling; but this transfer of people from one part of
the world to another can have no direct action upon
the numbers of the whole of the human race.
2nd. The rate of increase of population varies
very much in different countries, and even in dif-
ferent portions of the same country. The excess
of births over deaths, on which this increase mainly
depends, may result either from the prolificness of
marriages, or the paucity of deaths, and as either
of these causes may act independently of, or con-
jointly with the other, it is evident that local
peculiarities must have a very powerful action upon
the rate of local increase, and that a high or low
rate in any particular locality may be quite consistent
with the existence of a contrary rate as an average of
the country at large.
3rd. That population increases in a geometrical
ratio, doubling its numbers in periods varying in
different countries.


4th. That such increase, when it is not checked
either by the difficulty of obtaining subsistence,
which operates morally as a check on the natural
tendency to marry, or by the destruction caused by
wars or pestilence, would be, in all probability, at
a rate which would double the population in about
twenty-five years.
There are, of course, a variety of other inferences
which may be drawn from the facts stated, but it
is unnecessary to allude to more than these four.
Applying these facts and inferences to the data
in our possession as to the existing population of
the globe, I propose to attempt to trace mankind
back to its origin in time.
The present population of the world can only
be arrived at approximately ; but a careful analysis
of the estimated population of different countries
would seem to justify the assumption that it is in
excess of, rather than below, one thousand millions.
If this number be divided by two, and the division,
by the same number, of the successive quotients be
repeated, it will be found that the number of terms
of a progression, the first term of which is 2, the
ratio 2; and the last term somewhere about
1,000,000,000 would be 30.
In fact the formula I r n_l x a where n 30,
a=2, and r— 2 would give I or the last term of the
progression =1,073,741,824.
It may, then, be assumed that there have been
about thirty terms of this progression since the
appearance upon earth of the ancestors of the pre-


sent race of mankind, supposing these ancestors
to have consisted of a single pair. In case of a
multiplicity of pairs, a modification must of course
be made in the number of terms of the progression,
but to this allusion will be made hereafter. Under
these circumstances, the only element wanting to
the completion of the calculation of the period of
man’s life on earth is the average annual rate of
increase, or the average period in which the popu-
lation has doubled its numbers.
This, as has been shown, does not exceed twenty-
five years when the population is not densely packed
together, when subsistence is easily procured, and
when war, famine, and pestilence, do not sweep
away thousands upon thousands.
Under favourable circumstances, such as these,
the existing population of the earth would have
been produced in about seven hundred and fifty
years from the advent of the first pair.
We know, however, that this state of things can
only exist under very peculiar circumstances.
We know that vast tracts of country, formerly
thriving and populous, have been depopulated, and
laid waste by war, and its natural consequences,
pestilence and famine.
We know that even in England, the peaceful
and prosperous, the pressure created by the com-
petition of a dense population has such an effect
upon the rate of wages, as to reduce almost to a
minimum the power of the working classes to
provide for their families : the natural effect being


to lessen the rate of increase, so that the population
does not double its numbers in less than half a
century.
We know that in the countries occupied by tribes
which procure their subsistence principally by hunt-
ing, the numbers either remain stationary, or de-
crease ; while in those where the white man comes in
contact with the savage, the latter gradually disap-
pears. With reference, however, to the action of the
last upon the rate of increase of the world at large,
it must be remembered that the substitution of one
race for another, as in the case of the occupation
of the scantily-peopled districts of Australia by the
white man, only affects the mean rate of increase by
the additions made to the number of deaths, while
no corresponding addition is made to the number of
births among the coloured race. The general effect,
at present, at all events, is to substitute a more pro-
lific race for one which, either from constitution or
from habits, is less productive; the result being to
make the rate of increase eventually more rapid,
though it may, for a generation or two, add some-
what to the length of the period, during which the
population of that particular country will double its
numbers. In New South Wales, the difference be-
tween the number of births and of deaths is equal to
2-375 per cent, of the population, and the increase,
from this cause alone, would double the population
in about 29-| years.
Looking, then, to these facts, as bearing upon
and modifying the rule which would have given


only seven hundred and fifty years as the length of
man’s life upon earth, it may fairly be inferred that a
very great addition must be made to this number
that the rate of increase in the population of the
world at large, though subject, of course, to great
fluctuations, has been far more steady than the rate
in any particular country; and that, during the
earlier periods of the history of the present race of
mankind, the rules which have been shown to be
now applicable to people in analogous circumstances
would hold good, and the rate of increase would
be rapid.
Let us, then, see what would be the result of
applying the rules deduced from our present expe-
rience to the elucidation of the records in our
possession, which bear upon the question of the
length of man’s residence upon earth.
We learn, from the Bible, that God made man
male and female; that during the earlier period of
man’s history his life was prolonged to an age far in
excess of that which is now attained by his descend-
ants ; that after a period of 1656 years, God, on
account of man’s wickedness, “ the earth being filled
with violence,” sent a flood upon it, which destroyed
the whole of the existing population, with the excep-
tion of Noah and his family, eight people in all;
from which four pairs of males and females, the whole
of the existing population deduce their origin.
With regard, however, to the period before the
flood, though the number of years which elapsed
between the creation of Adam and Eve and the


destruction of the inhabitants of the Earth in the time
of Noah is clearly laid down, yet there are too
few particulars given as to the number of children
born to Adam, to Cain, to Abel, to Seth, and his
descendants, to justify any attempt to do more than
apply general principles in a manner which may
enable an approximation to be made to the number
of people on the earth when the flood came and
swept them all away. This question does not bear
upon the general one of the antiquity of man, in
any other way than by adding a fixed number of
years to that determined by the consideration of the
time which would be taken to produce the existing
population, starting from the period of Noah’s exodus
from the Ark. It may, however, be as well, while
discussing the general question, to ascertain whether
there may not be data sufficient to afford grounds
for a plausible guess at the numbers which may have
been swept away by the flood, with the view of
throwing some light upon a collateral subject, namely,
the universality of the Deluge.
In the fifth chapter of Genesis, the genealogy
of Noah is traced from Adam through Seth; and
the ages at which children were born to each of the
Patriarchs, and the length of the life of each being
precisely stated, it follows that the average of the
ages of the parents at the birth of the child
through which the genealogy is traced, the child
being supposed to be the eldest, (Cain being ex-
cluded, of the date of whose birth nothing is said)
would be about 117 years; while the average


duration of life, including that of Enoch, was eight
hundred and forty-seven years. At present, taking
the average age at marriage to be as low as twenty
years, the length of life to be three score and ten,
and the age at which women cease to bear children
to be forty-five, the number of years during which
children are born is about one-fourth in excess of the
average age at marriage, and about five-fourteenths
of the whole length of life. Applying these pro-
portions to the generation before the flood, assuming
one hundred and sixteen to be the average age at
which marriages took place, 116 + 116 + —p- = 261
years, would be the age at which the women ceased
to bear children; while taking the child-bearing
period at tV of the average length of life, that age
would be 116 + —'*^ 47 —4lB years.
It would seem, therefore, to be a fair inference
that the number of sons and daughters born to
Adam and his immediate descendants was proportion-
ably in excess of the families of the present day.
Taking this into consideration, and bearing in mind
that, owing to the length of life of the Patriarchs
before the flood, the increase of population during
the life-time of Adam, or during the first ten cen-
turies of man’s existence, was due to the actual
number of births, or, to speak more correctly, that
the deduction on account of deaths was probably
very trifling, it will be found that forty years will
be but a low average for the period which the
population took to double its numbers during the
first ten centuries; and under this supposition, the


population, shortly after the death of Adam, would
have amounted to upwards of sixty-seven millions.
For the next six hundred and fifty-six years, as
the earth was filled with violence, a period of two
hundred and eighteen years may be allowed instead
of forty years; that is, three doublings, which
would bring the population at the time of the Flood
to upwards of five hundred and forty-four millions,
or more than one-half of the number of the present
inhabitants of the Globe. Of course these esti-
mates, though based upon fair inferences from
ascertained facts, and from statements contained in
the Bible, must not be considered to express any
thing definite as to the actual number of those
living at the time of the Flood. They do, however,
afford a reasonable ground for a belief that the
population was too numerous to be crowded into
that small portion of Central Asia, to which the
advocates of a local deluge wish to restrain them.
The length of the period subsequent to the
Flood, and up to the present time, being that during
which the population has increased from eight indi-
viduals to one thousand and seventy-three millions
or thereabouts, has been variously estimated. The
greatest number of years allotted to it being 7,092
while the least is 3,824. The numbers given in the
margin of our Bibles would make the length of this
period 4,212 while the chronology of the Jews would
reduce it to 3,878. The actual number of steps in
the progression which has changed eight into one
thousand and seventy-three millions may be deduc-


edfrom the formular w—l xa = ? when 1— 1073741824,
a—B,r = 2;n would then be 27, and the number of
years in the different chronologies divided by 27,
would give the average length of the period during
which the population would have doubled itself.
Taking, then, the number of years from the Flood
to A. D. 1864, as deduced from the number given in
4212
the margin of our Bibles, or 4212 years, = 156
years would be the average length of each term in
the progression, while the chronology of the Jews
• 3878
would give for the same period = 143'6 years.
In the earlier periods after the flood there
would seem to be no reason to doubt that the rate
of increase was rapid, and that it was governed by
the same rules which regulate the rate of progression
in the present day under analogous circumstances.
Noah and his children were placed in far better
circumstances than the Mutineers of the Bounty
when they landed upon Pitcairn’s Island ; they had
the whole of the richest part of Asia before them,
and they had means and appliances sufficient to
enable them to avail themselves of the advantages
of their position.
The Mutineers of the Bounty were shut in by
the sea upon a narrow island, which, though it
furnished the earlier settlers with a sufficient supply
of food, was found, before long, incapable of supply-
ing the increasing population, without the unremit-
ting exertion required to enable them to supplement
the produce of the land by that of the sea. They


brought with them also those evil habits and
passions which had stimulated them to commit the
crime, of which they were seeking to evade the
punishment, and which passions soon showed them-
selves in the murder of the whole adult male
population with the exception of one individual. Yet,
under these appalling circumstances, the numbers
increased from twenty in 1800, to two hundred in
1854, in spite of disease and accidents, and a rest-
less desire to change their residence.
I think, then, that there is fair reason to suppose
that there were at least eight steps of the progres-
sion during the first century after the Flood ; so that
the population in the year 2248 B. C., according to
the Bible chronology, would have amounted to 2,048 ;
and that during the second, third, and fourth cen-
turies the rate of increase would have been equal to
that which has been shown to be the normal rate,
or four doublings in a century. This would give
the population in the year 1948 B. C. = 8.388608.
This, in point of fact, would be the minimum
rate of increase which could be allowed; for, as
Abraham went down into Egypt in or about the
year 1920 B. C., the population of the world would
only have amounted to about ten or twelve millions,
a number not more than sufficient to occupy the
country from which Abraham emigrated, as well
as that which he passed through in his way to
Egypt, and Egypt itself. The number of terms of
the progression absorbed in the four first centuries
was, therefore, twenty : leaving only seven terms for


would have been as shown in the following Table : —
1948 B. C
8,388,608
1339 B. C
16,777,216
730 B. C
.... 33,554,432
120 B. C
.... 67,108,864
489 A. D
.... 134,217,728
1098 A. D
.... 268,435,456
1708 A. D
.... 536,870,912
the whole of the period between 1948 B. C., and
1864 A. D., or 3812 years. From the account
which History gives us of the state of the world
during the decline of the Roman Empire, and gene-
rally, it may be said, up to the year 1500 A. D., it
may fairly be inferred that the rate of increase
during the last century or two has been very much
in excess of that during the middle period of history ;
and I think we may safely infer that the last double
has been made in the average period of one hundred
j nr, • 11 ,3812-156 3656 j
and ntty-six years, so that — 6 —= 5093
years would be the average period within which
the population would have doubled itself during
this middle time of history.
According to this the number of inhabitants of
the world at the end of each term of the progression
This allows but a very slow rate of increase
during the central period: in fact, but little more
than one per cent, in ten years, or one in a thousand
per annum. The adoption of the Hebrew chronology
would make the period of doubling about five hun-
dred and fifty-six years instead of six hundred and
nine; but it is evidently impossible to arrive at any


thing so definite as to admit of a comparison between
two periods differing only by a few centuries.
Enough, however, has been said to show that,
though it is difficult to explain the reason of a
change from the ordinary rate of progressive increase,
to one so very much slower, the difficulty would be
enhanced ten-fold were we to suppose that man had
been longer upon earth than the number of years
deduced from the Bible record. A brief sketch of
the result of the adoption of Bunsen’s theory, that
20,000 years would be required to explain satisfac-
torily the development of commerce, government,
and still more of language, will be sufficient to prove
this.
It will not be necessary to deal with the period
previous to the Flood, except by deducting it from
the 20,000 years demanded by Bunsen. It is but
fair to do so, for it is evident that Noah and his
children must have been the depositories of the
knowledge obtained during the previous 1,656 years
of man’s existence, and that they would transmit
this knowledge, with their own accumulations, to
their descendants. The balance, therefore, of 18,344
years, or thereabouts, represents the period in
which the human race would have increased from
eight persons to upwards of one thousand millions.
Assuming, as before, that this rate of increase
during the first four centuries was such as would
give twenty terms of the progression, or a population
in the year 400 after the Flood of 8,388,608, there
would remain seven terms to represent the period of


17 044
18,344—400=17,944 years and =2563*4 years
would be the average length of time, within which
the population would have doubled its numbers ; so
that if the numbers at the end of the fourth century
were eight millions, there must have been a stagna-
tion, or such a slow rate of increase as would amount
to this, for upwards of twenty-five centuries, before
the number would have reached sixteen millions.
The only mode of explaining this very, very slow
rate of increase is by supposing that every man’s
hand was against his neighbour, and that war, pri-
vate as well as public, everywhere prevailed. This,
however, though it might perhaps explain the change
from the Patriarchal system of government, to that
of an unrestricted monarchy, would be but a very
bad stimulus to commerce, and would hardly explain
the development of arts and sciences among the
Egyptians, or among any of the other eastern
nations. It is hardly necessary to speculate as to
the probable effect upon the manners and customs
of a people of such a course of training, or to point
out that this wholesale destruction of the popu-
lation is in no way calculated to promote that
civilization which is the offspring of peace and plenty,
and of which the surest evidence is the increase of
the number of the people.
I cannot, therefore, but consider that, even for
the purposes of his own argument, Bunsen’s plea for
a large addition to the length of man’s residence
upon earth is untenable. If this, then, be the case
with a claim for only twenty thousand years, what


must be said of the demand of the Geologists for
an odd million or two ? but that, in their anxiety to
support some pet theory, they have altogether
ignored, or neglected to investigate the effect of
their own theory upon man, either individually or
collectively.
■kefol e I conclude, I must say a few words as
to the bearing of these statistical inferences upon the
question of the “ Unity of the human race.” The
great majority of the Christian world is content
to accejDt Adam and Eve as the parents of every
variety of the species ; but there are several persons
who, judging from difference of colour and features,
are disposed to class the African, the Malay, the
Chinese, and the lied Indian of America, as descend-
ants fiom parents differing from those to whom
the European, or the Caucasian race generally,
trace back their origin.
Ihe latest advocate of the plurality of centres
of creation for the human race is Mr. McCausland,
who, in his work “ Adam and the Adamite,” is dis-
posed to dovetail this theory with that of develop-
ment, and to consider the Negro, the Chinese, the
Malay, and some other races to be the primary
result of the creative power of God as shown in the
formation of man, while the Caucasian, as repre-
sented by the Hindoos, the European and other
cognate races, he looks upon as the only fully
developed or perfect man, and, as such, the only
lineal descendants of Adam and Eve.
Here, again, 1 do not propose to analyse the


arguments brought forward by Mr. McCausland in
support of his theory ; 1 shall only test its pro-
bability by showing how it harmonizes with the
inductions from facts established by the statistical
tables.
According to Mr. McCausland, the descendants
from Adam and Eve amount, at present, to about
one-fifth of the whole of humanity ; and as I gather
from his book that he does not intend to contradict
but to support the Bible statements, I am entitled
to infer that he admits the descent of this number
from Noah and his children. Now the number of
terms of the progression deduced from the formula
l = r n ~ 1 % a where a= 8, r= 2, and 1= about 268
millions would be 24, and, as we have seen that in
the first four centuries after the flood the number of
terms of the progression could not be less than 20,
there would remain but four terms, for the whole of
period between 1948 B. C. and the present day.
Looking, however, to the rapid increase of the
population of Europe and America during the last
century, we have every reason to believe that the
Caucasian race has doubled its numbers in the last
150 years, so that there would remain but three terms
of the progression for the space between 1948 B. C.
and 1714 A. D., or for 3362 years = 1220
years, would under such circumstances represent the
average period within which the population would
have doubled its numbers. Now History, though it
deals principally with the Caucasian race, and is copi-
ous in its allusions to wars and pestilences, does not


load us to suppose that the destruction from these
causes has been so great, or so general, as to reduce
the rate of increase to so low an average as this :
the evidence in support of such a state of things
should be positive, and none is offered by Mr.
McCausland, but vague suppositions, based, I must
say, upon very forced interpretations of the Bible
record.
If, however, the theory as regards the existence
of the Caucasian race, as distinct from the African
and other varieties of the human species, is to be
maintained; and if these latter are not only to be
considered as children of different parents, but also
to have had a long priority of occupation of the
earth’s surface, the difficulty of accounting for the
paucity of numbers of the existing population of
the Globe becomes insurmountable.
We find that these races, except when subjected
to special pressure, are as fruitful as the European ;
that they multiply under favourable circumstances
as rapidly as the Caucasian race. The same rules,
therefore, which have been shown to regulate the
increase of population in Europe, v/ill determine the
rate of increase of the Turanian, and other races,
under analogous circumstances.
If, then, it has been difficult to explain the pau-
city of the present population of the Globe upon the
supposition that all were children of Adam and Eve,
and that a deluge had swept away the whole produce
of 1656 years, numbering about 500 millions, how is
it possible to believe that the children of three or
four other pairs of parents could have been propa-


gating their species for an indefinite number of years
previous to the creation of Adam, without let or
hindrance from such a catastrophe as the flood, and
should yet have only succeeded in producing so
scanty a number of representatives ?
I deal with the subject thus generally, because
it appears to me that the fallacy of the theory is
patent. I might, of course, have assumed a number
as representing the descendants of each pair of
parents, and have shown how curiously the rates of
increase had dilfered in each, and I might also have
shown that the supposition of a race descended from
pre-adamite parents, and who had not been subjected
to a catastrophe in any way analogous to that of the
'flood, involved such a departure from all the rules
which regulate the increase of mankind as to require
in each case a series of cataclysms, such as neither
history nor tradition hint at, nor, indeed, do they
afford the groundwork for even a guess. Such a
course, however, would, I submit, have involved a
waste of the time, and a trial of the patience of my
readers.
The simple statistical facts, and the inferences
drawn from such facts, as alluded to above, are suffi-
cient to throw the whole burthen of the proof of a
multiplicity of centres of creation, or of any exten-
sion of the received period of man’s residence upon
earth, upon the propounder of such theories ; and
such proof, as it is altogether opposed to the legiti-
mate induction from facts which we have it in our
power to verify, should be direct and positive, not,
as at present adduced, purely hypothetical.


I cannot, then, but believe that the Bible
contains the only reliable data upon which the
length of man’s residence upon earth can be calcu-
lated ; that these data admit of different interpre-
tations is true, but, from what has been said, it
would seem that the chronology which allows the
shortest period between the deluge and the present
day, is most likely to be correct. Asa corollary to
this it may be said, that the larger the addition
made to this period, upon whatever hypothesis this
addition is based, the greater will be the error, and
the more worthless the calculations based upon it.
■—©£>{CB®~


.
■
• •


X
, \




