

win
The State
Its Historic Role
FREEDOM
PRESS
Is.


THE STATE
Its Historic Role
by
Peter Kropotkin
FREEDOM PRESS


Printed in Great Britain by The Express Printers, London.
First Published - 1903
Revised Edition July 1943
Published by Freedom Press
27 Belsize Road, N.W.6.


Introduction
The State: Its Historic Role was written originally as a lecture
intended to be delivered at the Milles Colonnes Hail in Paris on
March 7, 1896. For some reason, the lecture was not given, and
it was later printed in pamphlet form. An English translation was
published by Freedom Press in 1903, and reprinted in 1920. The
present edition is a somewhat drastic revision of that translation.
The State was written in the third period of Kropotkin’s active
life, the period of mature reflection and creative elucidation of social
knowledge which followed his scholastic youth and his revolutionary
manhood. In 1886 Kropotkin was released from the French prison
to which he had been consigned for his activities in connection with
the French anarchist movement and the reconstituted International.
He attempted to settle in Paris with Elie Reclus, like himself a
scientist of considerable ability whose research into the life of humanity
and the evolution of human institutions had forced him irresistably
along the road to anarchism. But the French authorities would have
nothing to do with a man they considered to be so dangerous a
revolutionary, and Kropotkin was expelled from France.
He found a home in England, which at the time still gave refuge
to a great many of the exiled revolutionaries of the continent. Cut
off from the scene of active revolutionary work, he did not give up
interest and fall into the lethargy and disillusionment which had sub-
merged so many rebels under similar circumstances. Instead, he
applied his scholastic gifts, his scientific training and his revolutionary
enthusiasm to the task of erecting a body of anarchist theoretical
writing, and during the next thirty years he lived quietly in his cottage
at Harrow, among his home-made furniture, cultivating his own
garden and producing a great mass of theoretical books and pamphlets
which not only became classics of revolutionary writing but also had
a great influence on the development of sociological thought since
Kropotkin’s day. The influence of Mutual Aid, indeed, went beyond
both politics and sociology and was probably the major influence in
the recent changes in evolutionary theory which have tended to dis-
credit the Huxleyan and neo-Malthusian tendency of early Darwinism,
with its emphasis on the bloody struggle for existence, and to accept
in its place an evolutionary theory much nearer to that enunciated by
Kropotkin.
Indeed, it might be said of Kropotkin, as Hazlitt said of Godwin,
that ‘his works are standard in the history of the intellect’, just as they


live and maintain their vital influence in the growth of revolutionary
thought among mankind.
At the time when The State was produced, Kropotkin had
already written some of his most important works. The Conquest of
Bread appeared in 1888, In Russian and French Prisons in 1887 and
by the time of the composition of The State, Mutual Aid has already
been completed and had appeared in the form of a series of articles
in The Nineteenth Century.
The State and Mutual Aid were, therefore, composed at the same
period, and the theories that dominated Mutual Aid are evident also
in the smaller work. Indeed, The State might well be described as
an application of the mutual aid theory to a particular human institu-
tion. Kropotkin shows how human communities based on mutual aid
were successful and prosperous, and how, when they deserted that
principle and accepted instead the domination of authority, they failed
and eventually died while the individuals within them lived progres-
sively more unhappily under the domination of the State.
Much of this pamphlet repeats in condensed form the information
and arguments to be found in Mutual Aid, and readers would do well
to supplement it by reading the larger work, if they have not already
done so. (It was published by Penguin Books at 9d. and a few copies
may still be available). But The State differs from Mutual Aid in
that, while in the latter book Kropotkin set out deliberately to make a
completely dispassionate exposition of mutual aid as a scientific and
social fact, without drawing any political conclusions or making any
declaration for anarchism, in The State he draws such conclusions
from an examination of the evolution of human institutions and shows
that anarchy, the society without a state, is the only social form in
complete accordance with the beneficial and life-giving principles of
social co-operation. Thus, The State can in a way be regarded as
the final chapter of Mutual Aid.
The State contains a description of the free societies, primitive
and mediaeval, which existed before the development of centralised
power (or which, in the case of certain primitive societies in Kropot-
kin’s own day, even contrived to exist in a world for the most part
dominated by such centralised power), an analysis of the disintegration
of these free societies under the impact of the rising power of the
State, and a warning of the social death and the new dark age that
lie at the end of the fatal evolution of the State —unless that evolution
is broken beforehand by the intervention of the forces of freedom.
‘Either the State will be destroyed and a new life will begin in
thousands of centres, on the principle of an energetic initiative of the
individual, of groups, and of free agreement, or else the State must
crush the individual and local life, it must become the master of all
the domains of human activity, must bring with it its wars and
INTRODUCTION


internal struggles for the possession of power, its surface revolutions
which only change one tyrant for another, and inevitably, at the end
of this evolution—death!’
To-day we can find little fault in the forecast that culminated
Kropotkin’s essay. Indeed, for us the warning is more real than for
the people to whom it was spoken, for we have experienced a large
measure of its fulfilment in a world of centralised national states that
during the past fifty years have travelled with gathering impetus down
the primrose path to social destruction.
The degree and rapidity of this evolution can be seen by a com-
parison of the national states of Kropotkin’s day with those of our
own. We might even take his own country 7 , Russia.
Tzarist Russia was one of the most tyrannical States of its
time, a State that lived by terror and murder, by the secret police
and the knouting Cossacks. Yet even within that terrible State there
were many surprising interstices in which freedom and free co-opera-
tion could live and even thrive. Among the peasants the dominant
social form was still the Mir, a kind of village commune which united
co-operatively the lives of the villagers. As Kropotkin reveals in this
very pamphlet, under the tyrannical Tzarist system the peasants were
allowed to occupy Siberia in just such a manner as they thought fit
and to establish the communistic institutions which they desired.
Without wishing to minimise in any way the hard, toiling, oppressed
nature of the peasant’s life under the Tzars, we can say safely that
in spite of this he enjoyed more real freedom than he does now
under the Bolsheviks who turned to their own ends the revolution
which the peasants made possible. The forced collectivisations,
requisitioning of crops, the persecution of independent peasants and
the deportation and virtual murder of some millions of the peasant
population in the Arctic death camps are crimes beside which the
crimes of the Tzarist nobility and police officials seem milk-and-water.
Again, we might compare intellectual life of Tzarist Russia with
that of Soviet Russia to-day. In the latter half of the nineteenth
century considerable independence of thought flourished among the
Russian intelligentsia, and even men like Tolstoy, who denounced the
State, were often left untouched so long as they attempted no serious
political conspiracy. It is, moreover, impossible to deny the richness
of the achievement in writing, in music, even in science, of the
Russian intelligentsia of the time, an achievement which could not
have been reached without at least some freedom of expression and
a cultured and independent-minded public. When the new Russian
State, however, appeared in 1917, these very intelligentsia were taken
away literally in tens of thousands to the prisons which the Bolsheviks
took over from the Tzars. The State instituted a system of standards
to which art must conform—not only so far as its political content
THE STATE


went, but also in the matter of form. All art must be propagandist,
and all art must administer its propaganda by the same technique.
The consequence was that Russia declined to a State in which the
official standard of kitsch journalism kept all art down to the same level
of mediocrity. The Soviet ruling class denominated fine art what
even the Western bourgeoisie would have used only as advertisement
dope. Artists who would not conform disappeared, like Boris Paster-
nak, into the dungeons of the G.P.U. Conscientious artists who
attempted to conform found the conflict between inspiration and party
loyalty unbearable and many, like Yessenin and Mayakovsky, com-
mitted suicide.
What can be said of the influence of the State towards peasants
and artists in Russia can be said of its influence in every other respect.
The regime of the new bureaucracy exceeds the Tzarist government
perhaps not in the degree of its brutality, but in the fact that while
the brutality of the Tzars was sporadic and inefficient in its attacks on
the individual, that of the Bolsheviks is thorough and efficient, and
tends steadily to reduce the means by which the individual can live
any kind of life outside the State. The State has extended its scope
from political government to economic government, and in this way
the two forms of power which in the previous phase of the State still
existed apart have coalesced into the total State governed by a united
class of officials which regulates every aspect of the communal life
and steadily advances its net of regulation about the life of the indivi-
duals within it.
Russia is only one and by no means an extreme example of
political development in the world to-day. In Germany, in Italy,
in Japan, in China, the growth of State power into the totalitarian
dominion of the bureaucrats is obvious arid open. But in those
countries which still make some pretence to democracy this develop-
ment is no less evident to those who make even a general study of
political events and social tendencies. Recently James Burnham, the
American political writer, published a book called The Managerial
Revolution which caused a considerable stir in advanced circles on
both sides of the Atlantic. Burnham’s thesis was that capitalism is
in a state of decline, that the capitalist class is rapidly losing all real
power, and that virtual control is passing into the hands of a new
ruling class, ‘the managers’, by whom he means the administrators
of industry and government. There is no possibility, he contends of
old-style capitalism persisting. The managerial revolution which has
already passed through its early stages, will dominate world society.
This is a modem version of Kropotkin’s theme, supported by a
capable analysis of the of this revolution in the form of
the State. The State, as both Kropotkin and Burnham show, has
entered into its most complete and deadly form. The primary form
INTRODUCTION


of the State was the monarchical or aristocratic State of the 17th or
18th century, its secondary stage was the capitalist ‘liberal’ state of the
19th century, and its tertiary and fatal stage is the total State of the
20th century.
The way in which the power of the State has extended since
Kropotkin’s day can be seen by a reference to the condition of the
various peoples, such as Malays, Kabyles, etc., whom he mentions as
living in a manner based on the principles of mutual aid and opposite
to the life of the great States of his day. These statements are
obsolete, but this very fact is a proof of his contentions, for the
Malays, the Kabyles, etc. no longer live this independent life because
the spread of the various great European states has brought these
peoples more and more under the domination of colonial imperialism
and has in this way destroyed their independent communal ways of
living. The new states spread their tentacles over the whole face
of the earth, bringing within the orbits of their centralised power all
races and kinds and spreading their oppression and interference with
personal liberties into the remotest comers of the earth.
Where, however, Burnham and many others of his kind differ
from Kropotkin and the anarchists is in their pessimistic acceptance
of the inevitability of the triumph of the State in its extreme form.
The determinism that dominates their idea is, indeed, hardly tenable
on any grounds of logic or social experience. Nothing is inevitable
in society, either managerial revolution or social revolution. Only
tendencies can be described, and the tendency towards the social
revolution is just as much alive to-day, if less apparent, as that towards
the final consummation of the State.
The State may have gained control of all the power centres of
society through the operation of the managers and the bureaucrats.
But the real control rests, at the last resort, in the hands of the
workers who carry on industry, transport and other social functions.
Without the co-operation of a section of the workers and the tacit
acquiescence of the majority, no industrial society can continue in its
existing form. If and when the workers become aware of this fact
and decide to take their destiny into their own hands, without trusting
to leaders, then the total State will vanish just as the liberal State
and the old-style capitalism are vanishing to-day. The consolidation
of the State and the social death that will follow thereon will never
be completed if the workers once become aware of their power and
kill the State by the paralysis of direct economic action, to which
it will be more vulnerable than any society before.
The struggle against the state is the great task of mankind to-day.
A great controversy between the socialists and the anarchists in the
past centred round the fact that the socialists declared capitalism to
be the chief enemy of the workers whereas the anarchists declared
THE STATE


that the chief enemy was the State. Events have proved the rightness
of the anarchist contention. To-day capitalism is dying, not from
the action of the workers, but from the action of the State. The
expropriators are indeed being expropriated, but not quite in the way
Marx foresaw. But the State, gaining strength from its absorption
of economic power, becomes more menacing, oppressive and destruc-
tive than ever before. And gradually, as the power of the State in-
creases, so do we find the organs of political and reformist action
lining themselves up beside it, becoming part of its very fabric. The
trade unions become the State organisations for the regulation of
labour, the co-operative societies dovetail into the state-controlled
schemes of distribution, the Labour Party and the Communist Party
become the mouths through which the State attempts to speak to the
workers.
The struggle against the State is one which the workers must
fight for themselves. Leaders will only lead them back into the old
governmental ambushes. Only by their own attack on authority, by
using the power controls of society, the means of production and dis-
tribution which in reality lie in their hands, can the workers defeat
and destroy the State. And when they have destroyed it, their course
of action must lie not in the directions laid down by political parties,
of a centralised ‘ workers’ ’ State governed by a party bureaucracy,
which will bring back all the evils of government and exploitation in
an aggravated form, but in the direction pointed out by Kropotkin
and the other anarchists, towards a free society based on ‘the principle
of an energetic initiative of the individual, of groups and of free
agreement.’
G. W.
INTRODUCTION


The State
Its Historic Role
I.
In taking as subject the State and the part it played in history I
thought it would respond to a need which is greatly felt at this
moment: that of thoroughly examining the very idea of the State, of
studying its essence, its role in the past, and the part it may be called
upon to play in the future.
It is especially on the “State” question that Socialists are divided.
Amidst the number of factions existing among us and corresponding
to different temperaments, to different ways of thinking, and especially
to the degree of confidence in the coming Revolution, two main
currents can be traced.
On the one hand, there are those who hope to accomplish the
Social Revolution by means of the State: by upholding most of its
functions, even by extending them and making use of them for the
Revolution. And there are those who, like us, see in the State, not
only in its actual form and in all forms that it might assume, but in
its very essence, an obstacle to the Social Revolution, the most serious
hindrance to the growth of a society based on equality and liberty, the
historic form elaborated to impede this growth—and who consequently
work to abolish the State, and not to reform it.
The division, as you see, is deep. It corresponds to two diver-
gent currents which clash in all the philosophy, literature, and action
of our time. And if the prevalent notions about the State remain as
obscure as they are to-day, it will, without doubt, be over this question
that the most obstinate struggles will be entered upon, when—as I
hope soon—Communist* ideas seek their practical realisation in the
life of societies.
*ln order to avoid a certain confusion that may arise from Kropotkin’s use
of the terms Communism and Socialism, it is necessary to point out that the
application of these words has changed considerably in the last fifty years.
Communism, in Kropotkin’s day, meant the theory of the common owner-
ship of the means of production and distribution, and the sharing of the
work and goods of society on the basis of “from each according to his
ability, to each according to his need”. This theory of Communism was
adhered to by the Anarchists. The authoritarian Socialists of Kropotkin’s
day were not communist but collectivist, and stood for the ownership of the
means of production by the State, and the remuneration of the workers by
a system of wages based on the supposed social value of various types of
work. The term Socialism, however, was used to embrace all the various
types of social theory which envisaged the replacement of individual capital-
ism by some form of collective ownership and included both anarchism and
the various schools of Marxist social democracy. To-day, of course, it is
applied almost exclusively to the various parties advocating State ownership.
The present confusion regarding the term Communism arises from
Lenin’s appropriation of the term from the Anarchist-Communists, to cover
the essentially collectivist Bolshevik Party.—Ed.


It is therefore important, after having so often criticised the pre-
sent State, to seek the cause- of its appearance, to investigate the part
played by it in the past, to compare it with the institutions which it
superseded.
Let us first agree as to what we mean by the word State.
There is the German school that likes to confuse the State with
Society. This confusioA is to be met even among the best German
thinkers and many French ones, who cannot conceive society without
Slate concentration; and thence arises the habitual reproach cast on
Anarchists of wanting to “destroy society” and of “preaching the
return of perpetual war of each against all.”
Yet to reason thus is entirely to ignore the progress made in the
domain of history during the last thirty years; it is to ignore that
men have lived in societies for thousands of years before havinjg
known the State; it is to forget that for European nations the State is
of recent origin—that it hardly dates from the sixteenth century; it is
to fail to recognise that the most glorious epochs in humanity were
those in which the liberties and local life were not yet destroyed by
the State, and when masses of men lived in communes and free
federations.
The State is but one of the forms taken by society in the course
of history. How can one be confused with the other?
On the other hand, the State has also been confused with govern-
ment. As there can be no State without government, if has been
sometimes said that it is the absence of government, and not the
abolition of the State, that should be the aim.
It seems to me, however, that State and government represent
two ideas of a different kind. The State not only includes the exist-
ence of a power placed above society, but also a territorial concentra-
tion and a concentration of many or even all functions of the life of
society in the hands of a few. It implies new relations among the
members of society.
This characteristic distinction, which perhaps escapes notice at
first sight, appears clearly when the origin of the State is studied.
To really understand the State, there is, in fact, but one way:
it is to study it in its historical development, and that is what I shall
endeavour to do.
The Roman Empire was a State in the true sense of the word.
Up till now it is the ideal of the students of law.
Its organs covered a vast domain with a close network. Every-
thing flowed towards Rome: economic life, military life, judicial
relations, riches, education, even religion. From Rome came laws,
magistrates, legions to defend their territory, governors to rule the
provinces, gods. The whole life of the Empire could be traced back
to the Senate; later on to the Cassar, the omnipotent, omniscient, the
god of the Empire. Every province, every district had its miniature
KROPOTKIN


Capitol, its little share of Roman sovereignty to direct its whole life.
One law, the law imposed by Rome, governed the Empire; and that
Empire did not represent a confederation of citizens: it was only a
flock of subjects.
Even now, the students of law and the authoritarians admire the
unity of that Empire, the spirit of unity of those laws, the beauty—
they say—the harmony of that organisation.
But the internal decomposition furthered by barbarian invasion—
the death of local life, henceforth unable to resist attacks from with-
out, and the gangrene spreading from the centre—pulled that empire
to pieces, and on its ruins was established and developed a new civilisa-
tion, which is ours to-day.
If, putting aside antique empires, we study the origin and
development of that young barbarian civilisation till the time when it
gave birth to our modem States, we shall be able to grasp the essence
of the State. We shall do it better than we should have done, if we
had launched ourselves in the study of the Roman Empire, or the
empire of Alexander, or the despotic Eastern monarchies.
In taking these powerful barbarian destroyers of the Roman
Empire as a starting point, we can retrace the evolution of all civilisa-
tion from its origin till it reaches the stage of the State.
II.
Most of the philosophers of the last century had conceived very
elementary notions about the origin of societies.
At the beginning, they said, men lived in small, isolated families,
and perpetual war among these families represented the normal con-
dition of existence. But one fine day, perceiving the drawbacks of
these endless struggles, they decided to form a society. A social con-
tract was agreed upon among scattered families, who willingly sub-
mitted to an authority, which authority became the starting point and
the initiative of all progress. Must I add, as you have been told in
school, that our present governments have impersonated the noble
part of salt of the earth, the pacifiers and civilisers of humanity?
This conception, which was born at a time when little was known
about the origin of man, prevailed in the last century; and we must
say that in the hands of the encyclopedists and of Rousseau, the idea
of a “social contract” became a powerful weapon with which to fight
royalty and divine right. Nevertheless, in spite of services it may
have rendered in the past, that theory must now be recognised as false.
The fact is that all animals, save some beasts and birds of prey,
and a few species in course of extinction, live in societies. In the
struggle for existence it is the sociable species that get the better of
the unsociable. In every class of animals they occupy the top of
the ladder, and there can be no doubt that the first beings of human
aspect already lived in societies. Man did not create society; society
THE STATE


is anterior to man.
We also know to-day—anthropology has clearly demonstrated it
—that the starting point of humanity was not the family, but the clan,
the tribe. The paternal family as we have it, or as depicted in Hebrew
tradition, appeared very much later. Men lived tens of thousands
of years in the stage of clan or tribe, and during that first stage —let
us call it the primitive tribe—man already developed a whole series of
institutions, habits, and customs, far anterior to the paternal family
institutions.
In those tribes, the separate family existed no more than it exists
among so many other sociable mammals. Divisions in the tribe
itself were formed by generations; and since the earliest periods of
tribal life limitations were established to hinder marriage relations
between divers generations, while they were freely practised between
members of the same generation. Traces of that period are still
extant in certain contemporary tribes, and we find them again in the
language, customs and superstitions of nations who were far more
advanced in civilisation.
The whole tribe hunted and harvested in common, and when they
were satisfied they gave themselves up to their dramatic dances.
Nowadays we still find tribes, very near this primitive phase, driven
back to the least accessible regions of our world.
The accumulation of private property could not take place,
because each thing that had been the personal property of a member
of the tribe was destroyed or burned where his corpse was buried.
This is still done by gypsies in England, and the funeral rites of the
“civilised” bear its traces: the Chinese burn paper models of what
the dead possessed; and we lead the military chief’s horse, and carry
his sword and decorations as far as the grave. The meaning of the
institution is lost; only the form survives.
Far from professing contempt for human life, these primitive men
had a horror of blood and murder. Shedding blood was considered a
deed of such gravity that each drop shed—not only the blood of men,
but also that of certain animals—required that the aggressor should
lose an equal quantity of blood.
In fact, murder within the tribe itself was absolutely unknown;
you may see this even new, among the Inoits or Esquimaux—those
survivors of the stone age who inhabit the Arctic regions. But when
tribes of different origin, colour, or tongue met during their migrations,
war was often the result. It is true that men already tried to mitigate
the effect of these shocks. Already, as has been demonstrated by
Maine,* Post, and Nys, the tribes agreed upon and respected certain
rules and limitations of war which contained the germs of what was
later to become international law. For example, a village must not
•Maine’s Ancient Law, a 19th century sociological classic, is issued in the
Everyman Library.—Ed.
KROPOTKIN


be attacked without warning to the inhabitants. No-one would have
dared to kill on a path trodden by women going to the well. And,
to come to terms, the balance of the men killed on both sides had
to be paid.
However, from that time forward, a general law overruled all
others. “Your people have killed or wounded one of ours, therefore
we have the right to kill one of yours, or to inflict an absolutely similar
wound on one of yours”—never mind which, as it is always the tribe
that is responsible for every act of its members. The well-known
biblical verses, “An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth,” (but no more!)
thence derive their origin. It was their conception of justice, and,
we have no reason to boast, for the principle of “a life for a life”
which prevails in our codes is but one of its numerous survivals.
As you sec, a whole series of institutions and a whole code of
tribal morals was already elaborated during this primitive stage. To
maintain this kerne! of social customs, habit and tradition sufficed.
There was no authority to impose it.
Primitive individuals had, no doubt, temporary leaders. The
sorcerer, the rain-maker —the scientist of that epoch—sought to profit
by what they knew (or thought they knew) about nature, in order to
rule over their fellow men. Likewise, he who could best remember
proverbs and songs, in which tradition was embodied, became power-
ful. Later, these “educated” men endeavoured to secure their ruler-
ship by transmitting their knowledge only to the elect. All religions,
and even all arts and crafts began in “mysteries.”
Also the brave, bold, and cunning man became the temporary
leader during conflicts with other tribes, or during migrations. But
an alliance between the “law” bearer, the military chief and the
witch-doctor did not exist, and there can be no more question of a
State with these tribes than there is in a society of bees or ants, or
among our contemporaries the Patagonians or Esquimaux.
This stage, however, lasted thousands of years, and the barbarians
who invaded the Roman empire had hardly emerged from it.
In the first centuries of our era, immense migrations took place
among the tribes and confederations of tribes that inhabited Central
and Northern Asia. A stream of peoples, driven by more or less
civilised tribes, came down from the table-lands of Asia (probably
driven away by the rapid drying-up of those plateaux) and inundated
Europe, impelling one another onward, mingling with one another in
their overflow towards the West.
During these migrations, when so many tribes of diverse origin
were intermixed, the primitive tribe, which still existed among them
and the primitive inhabitants of Europe, necessarily became disaggre-
gated. The tribe was based on its common origin, on the worship of
common ancestors; but what common origin could be invoked by the
agglomerations that emerged from the hurly-burly of migrations.
THE STATE


collisions, wars between tribes, during which we see the paternal
family spring up here and there—the kernel formed by men appro-
priating women they had conquered or kidnapped from neighbouring
tribes?
Ancient ties were rent asunder, and under the threat of a general
breakup (that took place, in fact, for many tribes which disappeared
from history) it was essential that new ties should spring up. They
were found in the communal possession of land, on which such an
agglomeration settled down.
The possession in common of a certain territory, of certain
valleys, plains or mountains, became the basis of a new agreement.
Ancient gods had lost all meaning; and the local gods of valley, river
and forest gave the religious consecration to the new agglomeration,
substituting themselves for the gods of the primitive tribe. Later on,
Christianity, always ready to accommodate itself to pagan survivals,
made local saints of them.
Henceforth, the village community, composed partly or entirely
of separate families—all united, nevertheless, by the possession in
common of the land*—became the necessary bond of union for cen-
turies to come.
On the immense stretches of land in Eastern Europe, Asia and
Africa, it still exists to-day. The barbarians who destroyed the
Roman empire—Scandinavians, Germans, Celts, Slavs, etc.—lived
under this kind of organization. And, in studying the ancient bar-
barian codes, as well as the laws and customs of the confederations of
village communes among the Kabyles, Mongols, Hindus, Africans, etc.,
which still exist, it became possible to reconstruct that form of society,
which was the starting point of our present civilization.
Let us therefore, examine that institution.
III.
The village community was composed, as it still is, of separate
families; but the families of a village possessed the land in common.
They looked upon it as their common patrimony and allotted it
according to the size of the families. Hundreds of millions of men
still live under this system in Eastern Europe, India, Java, etc. It is
the same system as Russian peasants have established nowadays, when
the State left them free to occupy the immense Siberian territory as
they thought best.*
At first the cultivation also was done in common, and this custom
still obtains partially in many places. As to deforestation and clear-
ings made in the woods, construction of bridges, building of fortlets
*Kropotkin is referring to the Tsarist state and not to the more highly
organised Bolshevik state, under which such action would be more unlikely.
—Ed.
KROPOTKIN


and turrets which served as refuge in case of invasion, they were done
in common —as hundreds of millions of peasants still do wherever the
village commune has resisted State encroachments. But consumption,
to use a modern expression, already took place by family—each having
its own cattle, kitchen garden and provisions; the means of hoarding
and transmitting wealth accumulated by inheritance already existed.
In all its business, the village commune was sovereign. Local
custom was law and the plenary council of all chiefs of families—
men and women—was the only judge, in civil and criminal affairs.
When one of the inhabitants, complaining of another, planted his
knife in the ground where the commune was wont to assemble, the
commune had to “find the sentence” according to local custom, after
the fact had been proved by the jurors of both litigant parties.
All institutions of which States later took possession for the
benefit of minorities, all notions of right which we find in our codes
(mutilated to the advantage of minorities), and all forms of judicial
procedure, in so far as they offer guarantees to the individual, had
their origin in the village community. Thus, when we imagine we
have made great progress—in introducing the jury, for example—we
have only returned to the institution of the barbarians, after having
modified it to the advantage of the ruling classes. Roman law was
only superimposed on customary law.
The sentiment of national unity was developing at the same time,
by great free federations of village communes.
Based on the possession, and very often on the cultivation of the
soil in common, sovereign as judge and legislator of customary law—
the village community satisfied most needs of the social being.
But not all his needs: there were still others to be satisfied.
However, the spirit of the age was not to call upon a government as
soon as anew need was felt. It was, on the contrary, to take the
initiative oneself, to unite, to league, to federate, to create an under-
standing, great or small, numerous or restricted, which would corres-
pond to the new need. Society at that time was covered by a network
of sworn fraternities, guilds for mutual support, “con-jurations,” within
and without the village, and in the federation. We can observe this
stage and spirit at work, even to-day, among many a barbarian federa-
tion which has remained outside modem States modelled on the
Roman, or rather the Byzantine type. Thus, to take one example
among many, the Kabyles have retained their village community with
the powers I have just mentioned.
But man feels the necessity of action outside the narrow limits of
his hamlet. Some like to wander in quest of adventures, in the
capacity of merchants. Some take to a craft, “an art” of some kind.
And these merchants and artisans unite in “fraternities,” even when
they to different villages, tribes and confederations. There
must be union for mutual help in distant adventures or to transmit
THE STATE


mutually the mysteries of the craft —and they unite. They swear
brotherhood, and practice it in a manner that strikes Europeans: in
deed and not in words only.
Besides, misfortune can overtake anyone. A man, gentle and
peaceful as a rule may, in a brawl, exceed the established limits of
good behaviour and sociability. Heavy compensation will then have
to be paid to the insulted or wounded; the aggressor will have to
defend himself before the village council and prove facts on the oath
of six, ten or twelve “con-jurors.” This is another reason for belong-
ing to a fraternity.
Moreover, man feels the necessity of talking politics and perhaps
even intriguing, the necessity of propagating moral opinions or
customs. There is, moreover, external peace to be safeguarded;
alliances to be concluded with other tribes; federations to be consti-
tuted far off; the idea of intertribal law to be propagated. To satisfy
all these needs of an emotional and intellectual kind the Kabyles, the
Mongols, the Malays do not turn to a government: they have none.*
Men of customary law and individual initiative, they have not been
perverted by the corrupted idea of a government and a church sup-
posed to do everything. They unite directly. They constitute sworn
fraternities, political and religious societies, unions of crafts-— guilds
as they were called in the Middle Ages, sofs as Kabyles call them to-
day. These sofs go beyond the boundaries of hamlets; they flourish
far out in the desert and in foreign cities; and fraternity is practised
in them. To refuse to help a member of your sof, even at the risk
of losing belongings and life, is an act of treason to the fraternity and
exposes the traitor to be treated as the murderer of a “brother”.
What we find to-day among Kabyles, Mongols, Malays, etc., was
the essence of the life of so-called barbarians in Europe from the
fifth to the twelfth and even the fifteenth century. Under the name
of guilds, friendships, universitates, etc., unions abounded for mutual
defence and for solidarity avenging offences against each member of
the union: for substituting compensation, followed by the reception of
the aggressor into the fraternity, instead of the vengeance of an “eye
for an eye”; for the exercise of crafts, for helping in case of illness,
for the defence of territory, for resisting the encroachments of nascent
authority, for commerce, for the practice of “good neighbourship,”
for propaganda, for everything, in a word, that the European, educated
by the Rome of the Ctesars and the Popes, asks of the State to-day.
It is even doubtful if there existed at that time any man, free or serf
save those outlawed by their owm fraternities, who did not belong to
some fraternity or guild, besides his commune.
•In Kropotkin’s ■ day European Imperialism had not yet reached its zenith,
and many primitive peoples which have since come more or less under
white administration were still allowed to live according to their customary
law,— Ed.
KROPOTKIN


Scandinavian Sagas sing their exploits. The devotion of sworn
brothers is the theme of the most beautiful of these epical songs;
whereas the Church and the rising kings, representatives of reappear-
ing Byzantine or Roman law, hurl against them anathemas and decrees
which happily remain ineffectual.
The whole history of that period loses its significance, and be-
comes incomprehensible, if we do not take into account these unions
of brothers and sisters that spring up everywhere to satisfy the multiple
needs of the economic and emotional life of man.
Nevertheless, clouds gather on the horizon. Other unions—those
of ruling minorities—are formed; and they endeavour, little by little,
to transform these free men into serfs and subjects. Rome is dead,
but its tradition revives; and the Christian Church, haunted by
Oriental theocratic visions, gives its powerful support to the new
powers that seek to constitute themselves.
Far from being the sanguinary beast that he is represented in
order to prove the necessity of ruling over him, man has always loved
tranquility and peace. He fights rather from necessity than ferocity,
and prefers his cattle and his land to the profession of arms. Therefore,
hardly had the great migration of barbarians begun to abate, hardly
had hordes and tribes more or less cantoned themselves on their
respective lands, than we see the care of the defence of territory against
new waves of immigrants confided to a man who engages a small band
of adventurers, men hardened in wars, or brigands, to be his follow-
ers; while the great mass raises cattle or cultivates the soil. This
defender soon begins to amass wealth. He gives a horse and armour
(very dear at that time) to the poor man, and reduces him to servitude;
he begins to conquer the germ of military power. On the other hand,
little by little, tradition, which constituted law in those times, is
forgotten by the masses. There hardly remains an old man who keeps
in his memory the verses and songs which tell of the “precedents,” of
which customary law consists, and recites them before the commune
on great festival days. Little by little, some families made a speciality,
transmitted from father to son, of retaining these songs and verses
in their memory and of preserving “the law” in its purity. To them
villagers apply to judge differences in intricate cases, especially when
two villages or confederations refuse to accept the decisions of arbitra-
tors taken from their midst.
The germ of princely or royal authority is already sown in these
families; and the more I study the institutions of that time, the more
I see that the knowledge of customary law did far more to constitute
that authority than the power of the sword. Man allowed himself to
be enslaved far more by his desire to “punish according to law” than
by direct military conquest.
Gradually the first “concentration of powers,” the first mutual
insurance for domination—that of the judge and the military chief—
THE STATE


grew to the detriment of the village commune. A single man assumed
these two functions. He surrounded himself with armed men to put
his judicial decisions into execution; he fortified himself in his turret;
he accumulated the wealth of the epoch, bread, cattle and iron, for his
family; and little by little he forced his rule upon the neighbouring
peasants. The scientific man of the age, the witch-doctor, or priest,
lost no time in bringing him support and in sharing his domination;
or else, adding the sword to his power of redoubtable magician, he
seized the domination for his own benefit.
Much space would be needed to deal thoroughly with this
subject and to tell how free men became gradually serfs, forced to
work for the lay or clerical lord of the manor; how authority was
constituted, in a tentative manner, over villages and boroughs;
how peasants leagued, revolted, struggled to fight the advancing
domination, and how they succumbed in those struggles against the
strong castle walls, and the men in armour who defended them.
Suffice it for me to say, that towards the tenth and eleventh
centuries, Europe seemed to be drifting towards the constitution of
such barbarous kingdoms as we now discover in the heart of Africa, or
diose Eastern theocracies which we know through history. This
could not take place in a day; but the germs of those little kingdoms
and those little theocracies were already there and were developing.
Happily, the “barbarian” spirit, Scandinavian, Saxon, Celt,
German, Slav, which had led men for about seven or eight centuries
to seek for the satisfaction of their needs in individual initiative and
in free agreement of fraternities and guilds, still lived in the villages
and boroughs. The barbarians allowed themselves to be enslaved,
they worked for a master, but their spirit of free action- and free
agreement was not yet corrupted. Their fraternities flourished more
than ever, and the crusades only roused and developed them in the
iWest.
Then the revolution of the commune, long prepared by that
federative spirit and bom of the union of sworn fraternity with the
village community, burst forth in the twelfth century with a striking
spontaneity all over Europe. ' -■
This revolution, which the mass of university historians prefer to
ignore, saved Europe from the calamity with which it was menaced.
It arrested the evolution of theocratic and despotic monarchies in
which our civilisation would probably have gone down after a few
centuries of pompous expansion, as the civilisations of Mesopotamia,
Assyria and Babylon had done. This revolution opened up a new
phase of life—that of the free communes.
IV.
It is easy to understand why modem historians, nurtured as they
are in the spirit of the Roman law, and accustomed to look to Roman
KROPOTKIN


law for the origin of every political institution, are incapable of under-
standing the spirit of the conununalist movement of the twelfth cen-
tury. This virile affirmation of the rights of the Individual, who
managed to constitute Society through the federation of individuals,
villages and towns, was an absolute negation of the centralising spirit
of ancient Rome, which spirit penetrates all historical conceptions of
the present day university teaching.
The uprising of the twelfth century cannot even be attributed to
any personality of mark, or to any central institution. It is a natural
phase of human development; and, as such, it belongs to human
evolution like the tribe and the village-community periods, but to no
nation in particular, to no special region of Europe, and is the work
of no special hero.
This is why University science, which is based upon Roman law,
centralisation and hero-worship, is incapable of understanding the
substance of this movement which grew from below.
In France, Augustin Thierry and Sismondi, who both wrote in
the first half of the 19th century and who had really understood the
conununalist period, have had no followers up to the present time;
and only now M. Lachaire timidly attempts to follow the lines of
research indicated by the great historian of the Merovingian and the
conununalist period, Augustin Thierry. This is why in Germany,
the awakening of studies of this period and a vague comprehension of
its spirit are only now appearing, and why, in this country, one finds
a true comprehension of the twelfth century in the poet William
Morris rather than among the historians—Green alone having been
capable (in the later part of his life) of understanding it at all.*
The Commune of the middle ages takes its origin, on the one
hand, from the village community, on the other from those thousands
l of fraternities and guilds constituted outside territorial unions. It was
a federation of these two kinds of unions, developed under the pro-
tection of the fortified enclosure and the turrets of the city.
In many regions it was a natural growth. Elsewhere—and this is
the rule in Western Europe—it was the result of a revolution. When
the inhabitants of a borough felt themselves sufficiently protected by
their walls, they made a “con-juration”. They mutually took the oath
to put aside all pending questions concerning feuds arisen from insults,
assaults or wounds, and they swore that henceforth in the quarrels
that might arise they would never again have recourse to personal
revenge or to a judge other than the syndics nominated by themselves
in the guild and the city.
This had long been the regular practice in every art or good-
•Works by Thierry, Sismondi and Green are published in the Everyman
Library. A representative view of Morris’s social theories can be gained
from the selection of his works published by the Nonesuch Press.—Ed.
THE STATE


neighbourship guild, in every sworn fraternity. In every village
commune, such was the custom before bishop or kinglet succeeded in
introducing—and later in enforcing—his judge. Now the hamlets
and the parishes which constituted the borough, as well as ajl the
guilds and fraternities that had developed there, considered themselves
a single amitas. They named their judges and swore permanent
union between all these groups.
A charter was drawn up and accepted. In case of need they sent
for the copy of a charter to some neighbouring commune, (we know
hundreds of these charters to-day,) and the commune was constituted.
The bishop or prince, who had up till then been judge of the commune
and had often become more or less its master, had only to recognize
the accomplished fact—or else to fight the young, “con-juration” by
‘force of arms. Often the king—that is to say the prince who tried
to gain superiority over other princes and whose coffers were always
empty —“granted” the charter for ready money. He thus renounced
imposing his judge on the commune, while giving himself importance
before other feudal lords. But it was by no means the rule: hundreds
of communes lived without any other sanction than their good pleasure,
their ramparts and their lances.
In a hundred years this movement spread by imitation to the
whole of Europe, including Scotland, France, the Netherlands, Scan-
dinavia, Germany, Italy, Spain, Poland and Russia. And to-day,
when we compare the charters and internal organisation of French,
English, Scottish, Irish, Scandinavian, German, Bohemian, Russian,
Swiss, Italian and Spanish communes, we are struck by the almost
complete similarity of these charters and of the organisation which
grew up under the shelter of these “social contracts”. What a striking
lesson for Romanists and Hegelists who know no other means to obtain
similarity of institutions than servitude before the law!
From the Atlantic to the middle course of the Volga, and from
Norway to Italy, Europe was covered with similar communes—some
becoming populous cities like Florence, Venice, Nuremberg or
Novgorod, others remaining boroughs of a hundred or even twenty
families, and nevertheless treated as equals by their more or less
prosperous sisters.
Organisms full of vigour, the communes grew dissimilar in their
evolution. Geographical position, the character of external commerce,
the obstacles to be vanquished outside, gave every commune its own
histofy. But for all that, the principle was the same. Pskov in
Russia and Bruges in Flanders, a Scottish borough of three hundred
inhabitants and rich Venice width its islands, a borough in the North
of France or in Poland, and Florence the Beautiful represent the same
amitas. The same fellowship of village communes and of associated
guilds; the same constitution in its general outline.
Generally the town, whose enclosure grows with the population
KROPOTKIN


and surrounds itself with higher and higher towers, each erected by
a parish or guild and having its own individual character, is divided
into four, five or six districts or sections which radiate from the citadel
to the ramparts. In preference each district is inhabited by one “art”
or craft, whereas new trades—the “young arts”—occupy the suburbs,
which will soon be enclosed in a new fortified circle.
The street or parish, represents a territorial unit, corresponding
to the ancient village community. Each street or parish has its popu-
lar assembly, its forum, its popular tribunal, its elected priest, militia,
banner, and often its seal as a symbol of sovereignty. It is federated
with other streets, but nevertheless keeps its independence.
The professional unit, which often corresponds, or nearly so,
with the district, is the guild—the trade union. This union also re-
tains its saints, its assembly, its forum, its judges. It has its treasury,
its landed property, its militia and banner. It also has its seal and
remains sovereign. In case of war, should it think right, its militia
will march with those of other guilds, and it will plant its banner
beside the great banner or carosse (cart) of the city.
And lastly the city is the union of districts, streets, parishes and
guilds, and it has its plenary assembly of all inhabitants in the large
forum, its great belfry, its elected judges, its banner for rallying the
militia of the guilds and districts. It negotiates as a sovereign with
other cities, federates with whom it likes, concludes national and
foreign alliances. Thus the English “Cinque Ports” round Dover are
federated with French and Netherland ports on the other side of the
Channel; the Russian Novgorod is the ally of Scandinavian, Germanic
Hansa, and so on. In its external relations, every city possesses all the
prerogatives of the modem State, and from that time is constituted,
by free contract, that body of agreements which later became known
as International law and was placed under the sanction of public
opinion of all cities, while later on it was more often violated than
respected by the States.
Often a city, not being able to decide a dispute in a complicated
case, sends for “finding the sentence” to a neighbouring city, and
equally often the ruling spirit of the time—arbitration, rather than the
judge’s authority—is manifested in the fact of two communes taking
a third as arbitrator.
Trade unions behave in the same way. They carry their com-
mercial and trade affairs beyond the cities and make treaties, without
taking their nationalities into account. And when, in our
we talk boastingly of our international workers’ congresses, we forget
that international trade congresses and even apprentice congresses were
already held in the fifteenth century.
Lastly, the city either defends itself against aggressors and wages
its own stubborn wars against neighbouring feudal lords, nominating
each year one of two military commanders of its militias, or it accepts
THE STATE


a “military defender”—a prince or duke, who is chosen by the city
for a year and whom it can dismiss when it pleases. It usually delivers
up to him the produce of judicial fines for the maintenance of his
soldiers; but it forbids him to interfere in the business of the city.
Or, lastly, too feeble to emancipate itself entirely from its neighbours,
the feudal vultures, the city will retain a bishop or a prince as a more
or less permanent military protector, but it will watch with jealousy
that his authority shall not extend beyond the soldiers encamped in the
castle. It will even forbid them to enter the town without permission.
Even at the present day the King of England cannot enter the city
of London without the Lord Mayor’s permission.
I should like to discuss at length the economic life of cities in the
Middle Ages; but I am obliged to pass it over in silence. It was
so varied that it would need long development. Suffice it to remark
that internal commerce was always carried on by the guilds—not by
isolated artisans—prices being fixed by mutual agreement; that at the
beginning of that period, external commerce was carried on exclusively
by the city; that it only became the monopoly of the merchants’ guild
later on, and still later of isolated individuals; that no work was done
on Sunday or on Saturday afternoon (bathing day); lastly that the city
purchased the chief necessities (com, coal, etc.) and delivered them
to the inhabitants at cost price. The custom of the city making the
purchases of grain was retained in Switzerland until the middle of
our century. In fact, it is proved by a mass of documents of all kinds
that humanity has never known, either before or after, a period of
relative well-being as perfectly assured to all as existed in the cities
of the Middle Ages. The present poverty, insecurity and over-work
were then absolutely unknown.
V.
With these elements—liberty, organisation from simple to com-
plex, production and exchange by trade-unions (guilds), commerce
with foreign parts and the buying of main provisions carried on by the
city itself, the towns of the Middle Ages, during the first two centuries
of their free life, became centres of well-being for all the inhabitants,
centres of opulence and civilization such as we have not seen since
then.
If we consult documents that allow of establishing the rates of
wages for work, compared with the price of provisions (Rogers has
done it for England and a great number of writers have done it for
Germany) we see that the work of the artisan, and even of a simple
day-labourer, was remunerated at the time by a wage not reached
even by skilled workmen nowadays. The account-books of the Uni-
versity of Oxford and certain English estates and those of a great
number of German and Swiss towns are there to testify to it.
On the other hand, consider the artistic finish and the quantity
KROPOTKIN


of decorative work which a workman of those days used to put into
his beautiful work of art, as well as into the simplest thing of domestic
life—a railing, a candlestick, an article of pottery —and you will see
at once that he did not know the pressure, the hurry, the overwork
of our times; he could forge, sculpture, weave, embroider at his
leisure—as few artist-workers can do nowadays. If we glance over
the donations to the churches and to houses which belonged to the
parish, to the guild or to the city, be it in works of art—in decorative
panels, sculptures, cast or wrought iron and even silver works—or in
simple mason’s or carpenter’s work, we understand what degree of
well-being those cities had realized in their midst. We can conceive
the spirit of research and invention that prevailed, the breath of
liberty that inspired their works, the sentiment of fraternal solidarity
that grew in those guilds in which men of a craft were united, not only
by the mercantile and technical sides of a trade but also by bonds
of sociability and fraternity. For it was the guild-law that two
brothers should watch at the bedside of every sick brother, and that
the guild should take care of burying the dead brother or sister (a
custom which called for devotion, in those times of contagious diseases
and plagues) follow him to the grave, and take care of his widow and
children.
Black misery, depression, the uncertainty of to-morrow for the
greater number, which characterize our modern cities, were unknown
in those ‘.‘oases sprung up in the twelfth century in the middle of the
feudal desert.” In those cities, under the shelter of their liberties
acquired under the impulse of free agreement and free initiative, a
whole new civilization grew up and attained such expansion, that the
like has not since been seen.
All modem industry comes to us from those cities. In three cen-
turies, industries and arts developed to such perfection that our century
has been able to surpass them only in rapidity of production, but rarely
in quality, and very rarely in beauty of the produce. In the higher
arts which we try in vain to revive to-day, have we surpassed the
beauty of Raphael, the vigour and audacity of Michel Angelo, the
science and art of Leonardo da Vinci, the poetry and language of
Dante, or the architecture to which we owe the cathedrals of Laon,
Rheims, Cologne (“the people were its masons” as Victor Hugo said so
truly), the treasures of beauty of Florence and Venice, the town halls
of Bremen and Prague, the towers of Nuremberg and Pisa? All these
great conquests of art were the product of that period.
Do you wish to measure the progress of that civilization at a
glance? Compare the Dome of St. Marc in Venice with the rustic
arch of the Normans, Raphael’s pictures with the naive embroideries
and carpets of Bayeux, the mathematical and physical instruments and
clocks of Nuremberg with the sand clocks of the preceding centuries,
Dante’s sonorous language with the barbarous Latin of the tenth cen-
THE STATE


tury. A new world has opened between the two!
Never, with the exception of that other glorious period of ancient
Greece (free cities again) had humanity made such a stride forward.
Never in two or three centuries had man undergone so profound a
change or so extended his power over the forces of nature.
You perhaps may think of the boasted progress of civilisation in
our own century. But in each of its manifestations it is but the
child of the civilization which grew up in the free communes! All
the great discoveries which have made modern science—the compass,
the clock, the watch, printing, the maritime discoveries, gunpowder,
the law of gravitation, the law of atmospheric pressure (of which the
steam-engine is but a development), the rudiments of chemistry, the
scientific method already pointed out by Roger Bacon and practised
in Italian universities, come from the free cities which developed under
the shelter of communal liberties.*
But you may say perhaps, that I forget the conflicts, the internal
struggles of which the history of these communes is full; the street
tumults, the ferocious battles sustained against the landlords; the in-
surrections of “young arts” against the “ancient arts”; the blood that
was shed and the reprisals which took place in these struggles.
I forget nothing. But, like Leo and Botta, the two historians of
medieval Italy, like Sismondi, like Ferrari, Gino Capponi, and so
many ethers, I see that these struggles were the guarantee of free life
in a free city. I perceive a renewal of and a new flight towards pro-
gress after each one of these struggles. After having described these
struggles and conflicts in detail, and after having measured the im-
mensity of progress realized while these struggles stained the streets
with blood—well-being assured to all the inhabitants and the renovation
of civilization, Leo and Botta concluded by this thought which often
comes to my mind r
“A commune only represents the picture of a moral whole, only
appears universal in its behaviour, like the human mind itself, when
it has admitted conflict and opposition in its midst.” (Conflict, freely
thrashed out, without an external power, the State, throwing its
immense weight into the balance, in favour of one of the struggling
forces).
Like those two authors, I also think that “far more misery has
often been caused by imposing peace, because in such cases contra-
dictory things were forcibly allied in order to create a general politic
•Of course some of the discoveries such as the compass, printing, the principle
of the steam engine, etc., originated in China or Greece centuries before the
free cities of the Middle Ages, but it was through the initiative of these
free cities that they were actually developed and transmitted to modem
society. It should also be remembered that the circumstances under which
they first originated in the Greek and Chinese cities were similar in many
respects to those which obtained in the mediaeval city societies.—Ed.
KROPOTKIN


order, and by sacrificing individualities, and little organisms, in order
to absorb them in a vast body without colour and life.”
This is why the communes, so long as they themselves did not
strive to become States and to impose submission around them so as
to create “a vast body without colour or life”, always grew up, always
came out younger and stronger after every struggle; this is why
they flourished at the sound of arms in the street, while two centuries
later that same civilization was crumbling at the noise of wars brought
about by States.
In the commune, the struggle was for the conquest and main-
tenance of the liberty of the individual, for the principle of federation,
for the right to unite and act; whereas the wars of the States aimed to
destroy these liberties, to subjugate the individual, to annihilate free
agreement, to unite men in one and the same servitude before the king,
the judge, the priest, and the State.
There lies all the difference. There are struggles and conflicts
that kill. And there are those that launch humanity forward.
VI.
In the course of the sixteenth century, modem barbarians come
and destroy the whole civilization of the cities of the Middle Ages.
These barbarians do not completely annihilate it; they cannot do so,
but at least they check its progress for two or three centuries, and drive
it in a new direction.
They fetter the individual, take all his liberties away, order him
to forget the unions which were based formerly on free initiative and
free agreement, and their aim is to level the whole of society in the
same submission to the master. They destroy all bonds between men,
by declaring that State and Church alone must henceforth constitute
the union between the subjects of a State; that only Church and State
have the mission of watching over industrial, commercial, judiciary,
artistic and passional interests, for which men of the twelfth century
had been wont to unite directly.
And who are those barbarians? They are the State, the Triple
Alliance, constituted at last, of the military chief, the Roman judge,
and the priest, forming a mutual insurance for domination, united in
one power that will command in the name of the interests of society
and will crush that society.
We naturally ask ourselves, how these new barbarians could get
mastery over the communes, formerly so powerful? Where did they
get their strength for conquest?
That strength they first found in the village. As the communes
of ancient Greece did not manage to abolish slavery, so the communes
of the Middle Ages were not able to emancipate the peasant from
serfdom at the same time as they emancipated the citizen.
It is true that nearly everywhere, at the time of his emancipation.
THE STATE


the citizen—himself an artisan-cultivator—had tried to induce country
folk to help in his enfranchisement. For two centuries, the citizens
of Italy, Spain and Germany carried on a stubborn war against feudal
lords. Prodigies of heroism and perseverance were displayed by
citizens in that war against the feudal castles. They drained them-
selves to become masters of the castles of feudalism and to cut down
the feudal forest that enveloped them.
But they only half succeeded. Then, tired of war, they made
peace over the head of the peasant. To buy peace they delivered the
peasant to the lord, outside the territory which was conquered by the
commune. In Italy and Germany they even ended by recognizing the
lord as fellow citizen on condition that he resided within the commune.
In other parts they ended by sharing his domination over the peasant.
And the lord avenged himself on these common people, whom he
hated, by drenching their streets in blood during the struggles and
acts of revenge of noble families, that were not carried before com-
munal judges and syndics, whom the nobles despised, but were settled
by the sword in the street.
The nobles demoralised the towns by their munificence, their
intrigues, their great style of living, their education received at the
bishop’s or the king’s court. They made the citizens espouse their
family struggles. And the citizen ended by imitating the lord, and
became a lord’in his turn, enriching himself by the labour of serfs
encamped in the villages outside the city walls.
Thereafter, the peasant lent assistance to rising Kings, Emperors,
Tsars and Popes, when they began to build their kingdoms and to
bring the towns under subjection. When not marching by their
orders, the peasant left them free to act.
In the country, in fortified castles, situated in the midst of rural
populations, royalty was slowly constituted. In the twelfth century
it existed but in name, and to-day we know what to think of the
rogues, chiefs of little bands of brigands, who adorned themselves with
this title, which after all, as Augustin Thierry has so well demon-
strated, had very fittle meaning at that time; in fact the Norse fisher-
men had their “Nets’ Kings,” even the beggars had their “Kings”—
the word having then simply the meaning of “temporary leader”.
Slowly, tentatively, a baron more powerful or more cunning, suc-
ceeded here and there by force, money, sword, and poison in rising
above his fellows. The Church no doubt bestirred itself to support
him. But it was never in one of the free cities, which had their noisy
forum, their Tarpeian rock, or their river for the tyrants, that royal
authority succeeded in' constituting itself: it was always in the
country, in the village.
After vain attempts to constitute this authority in Rheims or in
Lyons, it was established in Paris, an agglomeration of villages and
boroughs surrounded by a rich country, which had not yet known
KROPOTKIN


the life of free cities; it was established in Westminster, at the gates
of populous London; it was established in the Kremlin which was
built in the midst of rich villages on the banks of the Moskva, after
having failed at Souzdal and Vladimir. But never in Novgorod or
Pskov, in Nuremberg or Florence could royal authority be consolidated.
The neighbouring peasants supplied them with grain, horses and
men; and commerce—royal, not communal—increased the wealth of
the growing tyrants. The Church looked after their interests. It
protected diem, came to their succour with its treasure chests; it
invented saints and miracles for their royal towns. It encircled with
its veneration Notre-Dame of Paris or the Virgin of Iberia at Moscow.
And while the civilization of free cities, emancipated from the bishops,
took its youthful bound, the Church worked steadily to reconstitute
its authority by the intermediary of nascent royalty, it surrounded with
its tender care, its incense and its ducats, the family cradle of the one
whom it had finally chosen, in order to rebuild with him, and through
him, the ecclesiastical authority. ,
Hardworking, strong in its State education, leaning on the man
of will or cunning whom it sought out in any class of society, learned
in intrigue as well as in Roman and Byzantine law—the Church
marched without respite towards its ideal, the Hebrew King, absolute
but obeying the high priest, the mere secular arm of ecclesiastical
power.
In the sixteenth century, the long work of the two conspirators is
already in full force. A king already rules over the barons, his rivals,
and that force will alight on the free cities to crush them in their turn.
Besides, the jowns of the sixteenth century were not what they
lad been in the twelfth, thirteenth or fourteenth centuries.
They were bom out of a libertarian revolution. But they had
not the courage to extend their ideas of equality, either to the neigh-
bouring rural districts or even, to those citizens who had later on
established themselves in their enclosures, refuges of liberty, to create
industrial arts. A distinction between the old families who had made
the revolution of the twelfth century and the others who established
themselyes later in the city, is to be met with in all towns. The old
“Merchant Guild” had no desire to receive new-comers. It refused
to incorporate the “young arts” for commerce. And from simple
clerk of the city, it became the go-between, the intermediary, who
enriched himself by distant commerce and imported oriental ostenta-
tion. Later, the “Merchant Guild” allied itself to the lord and the
priest, or it sought the support of the nascent King to maintain its
monopoly, its right to enrichment. Having thus become personal,
instead of communal, commerce killed the free city.
The guilds of ancient trades, of which the city and its govern-
ment were composed at the outset, would not recognise the same rights
to the young guilds, formed later by the younger trades. These had
THE STATE


to conquer their rights by revolution. That is what they did every-
where. But while that revolution became, in most large cities, the
starting of a renewal of life and arts (this is so well seen in Florence),
in other cities it ended in the victory of the richer orders over the
poorer ones —of the “fat people” ( popolo grasso) over the “low
people” ( popolo basso ) —in a despotic crushing of the masses, in num-
berless transportations and executions, especially when lords and
priests took part in it. And it was “the defence of the poorer orders”
that the king, who had received Macchiavelli’s lessons, later took as
a pretext when he came to knock at the gates of the free cities!
The cities had to die, because the ideas of men had themselves
changed perverted by the teaching of canonical and Roman law.
The twelfth century European was essentially a federalist, a man
of free initiative, of free agreement, of unions freely consented to. He
saw in the individual the starting point of all society. He did not
seek salvation in obedience or ask for a saviour of society. The idea
of Christian or Roman discipline was unknown to him.
But under the influence of the Christian Church—always fond of
authority, always zealous to impose its rule on the souls and especially
on the arms of the faithful, and, on the other hand, under the influence
of Roman law, which already, since the twelfth century, invaded the
courts of the powerful lords, the kings and the popes, and soon became
a favourite study in the universities, minds grew depraved in propor-
tion as priest and legist triumphed.
Men became enamoured of authority. If a revolution of the
lower trades was accomplished in a commune, the commune called in
a saviour. It gave itself a dictator, a municipal Ctesar, and endowed
him with full powers to exterminate the opposite party. And the
dictator profited by it, with all the refinement of cruelties inspired by
the Church or the examples brought from the desoptic kingdoms of
the East.
The Church, of course, supported that Ca;sar. Had it not always
dreamt of the biblical king, who kneels before the high priest, and is
his docile tool? Had it not, with all its might, hated the ideas of
rationalism which inspired the free towns during the first Renaissance,
that of the Twelfth century, and those “pagan” ideas which brought
man back to Nature under the influence of the rediscovery of Greek
civilisation, and, later on, those ideas which in the name of primitive
Christianity incited men against the Pope, the priest and Faith in
general? Whoever was the tool, pope, king or dictator, it was of little
importance to the Church, so long as the wheel and the gibbet worked
against the heretics.
Under the twofold teaching of the Roman legist and the priest,
the old federalist spirit, the spirit of free initiative and free agreement,
was dying out to make room for the spirit of discipline, organisation
KROPOTKIN


and pyramidal authority. The rich and the poor alike asked for a
saviour.
When the saviour presented himself, when the king, who had
become enriched far from the Forum, in some town of his creation,
leaning on the wealthy Church, and followed by vanquished nobles and
peasants, knocked at the city gates, promising the “lower orders” his
protection against the rich, and the obedient rich his protection against
the rebellious poor, the towns, which themselves were already under-
mined by the canker of authority, had no longer the strength to resist.
They opened their gates to the King.
The Mongols had conquered the devastated Eastern Europe in
the thirteenth century and an Empire was springing up in Moscow,
under the protection of the Tartar Khans and the Russian Christian
Church. The Turks had settled in Europe, and pushed as far as
Vienna in 1453,’ devastating everything on their path; and powerful
States v/ere being constituted in Poland, Bohemia, Hungary and in
the centre of Europe. At the other extremity, the war of extermina-
tion against the Moors in Spain allowed another powerful Empire to
constitute itself in Castille and Aragon, supported by the Roman
Church and the inquisition, the sword and the stake.
As the communes themselves were becoming little States, so
these little States were inevitably doomed to be swallowed up by the
big ones.
VII.
The victory of the State over the communes and the federalist
institutions of the Middle Ages did not take place straightway. At
one time the State was so threatened that its victory seemed doubtful.
A great popular movement—religious in form and expression, but
eminently communistic in its aspirations and striving at equality—
originated in the towns and rural parts of central Europe.
Already in the fourteenth century (in 1358 in France and in
1381 in England), two great similar movements had taken place. Two
powerful revolts, that of the Jacquerie and that of Wat Tyler, had
shaken society to its foundations. Both, however, had been principally
directed against feudal lords. Both were defeated; but the peasant
revolt in England completely destroyed serfdom, and the Jacquerie in
France so checked its development that it never attained the develop-
ment it subsequently reached in Germany and in Eastern Europe.
In the sixteenth century, a similar movement took place in
central Europe. Under the name of “Hussite” in Bohemia, “Ana-
baptist” in Germany, Switzerland and the Netherlands, and of
“Troubled Times” in Russia (at the beginning of the next century),
it was above all a struggle against feudal lords—a complete revolt
against Church and State, against Canon and Roman law, in the name
of primitive Christianity.
THE STATE


This movement, which is only just beginning to be understood,
was for many years travestied by State and ecclestical historians.
The absolute liberty of the individual, who must only obey the
commandments of his conscience, and Communism were the watch-
words of this revolt. It was only later, when Church and State suc-
ceeded in exterminating its most ardent defenders, and juggled with
it to their own profit, that this movement, diminished and deprived
of its revolutionary character, became Luther’s Reformation.
It began by Communist Anarchism preached, and in some places,
practised. If we set aside the religious formula;, which are a tribute
to that epoch, we find the very essence of the current of ideas which we
represent to-day: the negation of all law, both State and divine, the
conscience of each individual being thus his only law; the commune,
absolute master of its destiny, retaking its lands from feudal lords, and
refusing all personal or monetary service to the State. In fact. Com-
munism and equality put into practice. Moreover when Denck, one
of the philosophers of the Anabaptist movement, was asked if he did
not at least recognise the authority of the Bible, he answered that the
only obligatory rule of conduct is the one that each individual finds
for himself in the Bible. And yet these vague formula borrowed
from ecclesiastical slang, this authority “of the book” from which it
is so easy to borrow arguments for and against Communism, for and
against authority, and so uncertain to define what liberty is, these very
religious tendencies of the revolt contained already the germ of an
unavoidable defeat.
Originating in towns, the movement spread to the country. The
peasants refused to obey anybody, and planting an old shoe on a pike
by way of a flag, took back the lands which the lords had seized from
the village communities; they broke their bonds of serfdom, drove
away priest and judge, and constituted themselves into free communes.
It was only by the stake, the wheel, the gibbet, by massacring more
than a hundred thousand peasants in a few years, that royal or imperial
power, allied to the papal or reformed church, (Luther inciting to
massacre peasants more violently even that the Pope), put an end to
these risings that had for a moment threatened the constitution of
nascent States.
Bom of popular Anabaptism, the Lutheran Reformation, leaning
on the State, massacred the people and crushed the movement from
which it originally had derived its strength. The survivors of this
immense wave of thought took refuge in the communities of the
“Moravian Brothers”, who, in their turn, were destroyed by Church
and State. Those among them who were not exterminated, sought
shelter, some in the South-East of Russia, others in Greenland, where
to this day they have been able to live in communities and to refuse
all service to the State.
KROPOTKIN


Henceforth, the State’s existence was secure. The lawyer, the
priest and the soldier-lord, having constituted a solid alliance around
the thrones, could carry on their work of annihilation.
How many lies have been accumulated by State-paid historians,
concerning that period!
Have we not all learned at school and believed in manhood that
the State rendered great service in constituting national unions on the
ruins of feudal society; unions made impracticable in earlier times
by the rivalry of cities?
Nevertheless, to-day we leam that in spite of ail rivalries,
medieval cities had already worked during four centuries to consti-
tute these unions by freely consented federation, and that they had
fully succeeded in the work of consolidation.
The Lombard union, for example, included the cities of Upper
Italy and had its federal treasury in safe keeping in Genoa and
Venice. Other federations, such as the Tuscan Union, the Rhenan
Union (comprising sixty towns), the federations of Westphalia, of
Bohemia, of Servia, of Poland, and of Russian towns covered Europe.
At the same time, the commercial unions of the Hansa included
Scandinavian, German, Polish, and Russian towns throughout the
basin of the Baltic.
All the elements were there already, as well as the fact itself
of large, freely constituted, human agglomerations.
Do you wish for a living proof of these groups? You have it in
Switzerland. There the union asserted itself first between village
communes (the old Cantons), in the same way as it was constituted in
France in the Laonnais. And, as in Switzerland the separation be-
tween town and village was never so great as it was for towns carry-
ing on an extensive and distant commerce, the Swiss towns lent a
hand to the peasant insurrections of the sixteenth century, and the
union encompassed both towns and villages, and constituted a federa-
tion that exists to-day.
But the State, by its very essence, cannot tolerate free federa-
tion because the latter represents that nightmare of the legist: “The
State within the State.” The State does no recognize a freely adopted
union working within itself. It only deals with subjects. The State
and its prop, the Church, arrogate to themselves alone the tight of
being the connecting link between men.
Consequently the State must perforce annihilate cities based on
direct union between citizens. It must abolish all union within the
city, abolish the city itself, abolish all direct union between cities.
To the federative principle it must substitute the principle of sub-
mission and discipline. Submission is its substance. Without this
principle it leaves off being the State; it becomes a federation.
The sixteenth century —century of carnage and wars—-is entirely
summed up in this war waged by the growing States against the cities
THE STATE


and their federations. The towns are besieged, taken by assault,
pillaged; their inhabitants are decimated or transported. The State
is victorious all along the line. The consequences are these.
In the fifteenth century, Europe was covered by rich cities,
whose artisans, masons, weavers and carvers, produced marvels of art,
whose universities laid the foundations of science, whose caravans
travelled over continents, and whose vessels ploughed rivers and seas.
What was left of them two centuries later? Towns that had
numbered fifty and a hundred thousand inhabitants and had possessed
(as in Florence) more schools, and, in the communal hospitals, more
beds per inhabitant, than are possessed to-day by the towns best
endowed in this respect, had become rotten boroughs. Their inhabi-
tants having been massacred or transported, the State and Church
seized their riches. Industry was fading under the minute tutelage
of State officials. Commerce was dead. The very roads that formerly
united the cities had become impracticable in the seventeenth century.
The State spelt warfare, and wars were devastating Europe and
completing the ruin of those towns which the State had not yet ruined
direct. But had not the villages, at least, gained by State centralisa-
tion? Certainly not! Read what historians tell us about the style
of living in the rural districts of Scotland, Tuscany, and Germany in
the fourteenth century, and compare their descriptions of that time
with the misery in England at the beginning of 1648, in France under
the “sun-king” Louis XIV, in Germany, in Italy, everywhere, after a
hundred years of State domination.
Misery everywhere. Wherever serfdom had been abolished, it
was reconstituted in a hundred different forms; wherever it had not
yet been destroyed, it was shaped, under State protection, into a
ferocious institution, bearing all the characteristics of antique slavery,
or even worse.
Yet could anything else evolve out of this State-produced misery,
when the State’s chief anxiety was to annihilate the village community
after the town, to destroy all bonds between peasants, to give their
lands to be pillaged by the rich, and to subject them individually to
the functionary, the priest and the lord ?
VIII.
To annihilate the independence of cities, to plunder merchants’
and artisans’ rich guilds, to centralise the foreign trade of cities into
its own hands and ruin it, to seize the internal administration of guilds,
and subject home trade, as well as all manufactures, even in the
slightest detail, to a swarm of functionaries, and by these means kill
both industry and arts, to seize local militias and ail municipal admin-
istration, to crush the weak by taxation for the benefit of the strong
and to ruin countries by war, such was the nascent State’s behaviour
KROPOTKIN


towards urban agglomerations in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries.
The same tactics were employed towards villages and peasants.
As soon as the State felt itself strong enough, it destroyed the village
commune, ruined the peasants committed to its mercy and plundered
the common lands.
Historians and economists paid by the State have no doubt taught
us that the village commune, having become an obsolete form of land-
ownership obstructing agricultural progress, was bound to disappear by
the action of natural economic forces. Politicians and bourgeois
economists do not tire of repeating this even nowadays, and there
are revolutionists and socialists (those who pretend to be scientific)
who recite this fable learned in school.
Yet a more odious and deliberate falsehood has never been
affirmed by science, for history swarms with documents amply proving,
to those who wish to know (for France it would almost suffice to read
Dalloz) that the village commune was first of all deprived by the
State of its privileges, its independence, its juridical and legislative
powers, and that later its lands were either simply stolen by the rich
under State protection, or else confiscated by the State itself.
Plundering began as early as the sixteenth century in France, and
grew apace in the following century. As early as 1659 the State took
the communes under its superior protection and we need only read
Louis XlV’s edict of 1667 to learn what plundering of communal
lands took place at that period. “Men have taken possession of
lands when it suited them . . . lands have been divided ... in order
to plunder the communes fictitious debts have been devised,” said the
“Sun King” in this edict. Two years later he confiscated for his own
benefit all the revenues of the communes.
In the following century it is estimated that at least half the com-
munal lands were appropriated by the aristocracy and the clergy under
State patronage. Yet communes continued to exist until 1787. The
village council met under the elm, granted lands, appointed taxes (the
documents relating to this are to be found in Babeau —Le village sous
Vancien regime). Turgot, however, in the province of which he was
governor, found the village councils “too noisy” and abolished them
during his governorship, substituting assemblies elected among the
well-to-do. In 1787, on the eve of the Revolution, the State made
this measure general in its application. The mir was abolished and
thus communal affairs fell into the hands of a few syndics, elected by
the richest bourgeois .and peasants. The Constituent Assembly sanc-
tioned this law in December 1789, and the bourgeois, substituting
themselves for the nobles, plundered what remained of communal
lands. Many a peasant revolt was necessary to force the Convention
in 1792 to sanction what the rebellious peasants had accomplished in
the Eastern part of France. That is to say, the Convention ordered
THE STATE


the restitution of communal lands to the peasants. This took place
only when the land had already been retaken by revolutionary means.
It is the fate of all revolutionary laws to be put into action when they
are already accomplished facts.
Nevertheless the Convention tainted this law with bourgeois gall.
It decreed that lands retaken from nobles should be divided into equal
parts among “active citizens” only—that is to say among the village
bourgeois. By one stroke of the pen it thus dispossessed “passive
citizens,” that is to say the mass of impoverished peasants, who had
most need of these communal lands. Upon which, fortunately, the
peasants again revolted and in 1793 the Convention passed a new
law decreeing the division of communal lands among all inhabitants.
This was never put into practice and only served as an excuse for new
thefts of communal lands.
Would not such measures suffice to bring about what these
gentlemen call “the natural death” of communes? Yet communes
still existed. On August 24th, 1794, the reaction now in power,
struck the final blow. The State confiscated all communal lands and
made of them a guarantee fund for the public debt, putting them up
to auction and selling them to its creatures the “Thermidorians.”
This law was happily repealed on Prairal and, in the year V,
after being in force for three years. But at the same time, communes
were abolished, and replaced by cantonal councils in order that the
State might the more easily fill them with its creatures. This lasted till
1801 when village communes were revived; but then the government
took it upon itself to appoint mayors and syndics in each of the 36,000
communes! This absurdity lasted till the revolution of July 1830,
after which the law of 1789 was again put into force. In the
interval communal lands were again wholly confiscated by the State
in 1813 and plundered anew for three years. What remained of them
was only returned to the communes in 1816.
This was by no means the end. Every new regime saw in com-
munal lands a source of reward for its supporters. Therefore at
three different intervals since 1830 —the first time in 1837 and the
last under Napoleon lll—laws were promulgated to force peasants to
divide what they possessed of forests and common pasture-lands, and
three times the government was compelled to abrogate this law on
account of the peasants’ resistance. All the same Napoleon 111 was
able to profit by it and snatch several large estates for his favourites.
This is what, in scientific language, these gentlemen call the
“natural death” of the communal landed property under the influence
of economic laws. One might as well call the massacre of a hundred
thousand soldiers in a battlefield “natural death”!
What happened in France happened also in Belgium, England,
Germany, Austria; in fact everywhere in Europe, Slav countries ex-
cepted.
KROPOTKIN


The periods of plundering communes correspond in all Western
Europe. The methods alone vary. Thus in England they did not
dare enact sweeping measures; they preferred passing several thou-
sands of separate enclosure acts by which, in each special case, parlia-
ment sanctioned the confiscation of land (it does so still) and gave to
the squire the right tp keep common lands he had fenced in. Not-
withstanding that nature has up till now respected the narrow furrows
by which communal fields were temporarily divided among families in
the villages of England, and that we have clear descriptions of this
form of landed property at the beginning of the century in the books
of a certain Marshall, scientific men (such as Seebohm, worthy emula-
tor of Fustel de Coulanges) are not wanting to maintain and teach
that communes have never existed in England save in the form of
serfdom!
We find the same thing going on in Belgium, Germany, Italy and
Spain. In one way or another personal appropriation of lands
formerly communal was almost brought to completion towards the
fifties in this century. Peasants have only kept scraps of their common
lands. This is the way in which the mutual assurance of lord, priest,
soldier and judge—the State—has behaved towards peasants in
order to despoil them of their last guarantee against misery and
economic servitude.
But, while, organising and sanctioning this plunder, could the
State respect the institution of the commune as an organ of local life?
Obviously not. To allow citizens to constitute a federation
among themselves in order to appropriate some functions of the
State would have been a contradiction of principle. The State de-
mands personal and direct submission of its subjects without inter-
mediate agents; it requires equality in servitude; it cannot allow the
State within the State.
Therefore as soon as the State began to constitute itself in the
sixteenth century it set to work to destroy all bonds of union that
existed among citizens, both in towns and villages. If under the
name of municipal institutions it tolerated any vestiges of autonomy
(never of independence), it was only with a fiscal aim, to lighten the
central budget, or to allow the provincial well-to-do to enrich them-
selves at the people’s expense as is still done to this day in English
institutions and customs.
This is easily understood. Customary law naturally pertains to
local life and Roman law to centralisation of power. The two cannot
live side by side and the one must kill the other.
That is why under French rule in Algeria, when a Kabyle
djemmah —a village commune—wants to plead for its lands, every in-
habitant of the commune must bring his isolated action before the
judge, who will hear fifty or two hundred isolated actions sooner than
hear the collective suit of the djemmah. The Jacobin code of the
THE STATE


Convention (known under the name of Code Napoleon) does not recog-
nize customary law; it recognizes only Roman law, or rather Byzantine
law.
That is why in France when the wind blows down a tree on the
National highway, or a peasant prefers giving a stonebreaker two or
three francs to the unpleasant task of repairing the communal road
himself, it is necessary for twelve or fifteen employees of the Home
Office and Treasury to be put in motion, and for more than fifty
documents to be exchanged between these austere functionaries, before
the tree can be sold, or the peasant receives permission to deposit two
or three francs into the communal treasury.
Should you have any doubts about it you will find these fifty
documents recapitulated and duly numbered by M. Tricoche in the
Journal des Economistes.
This is under the third Republic, for I do not speak of the bar-
barous methods of the ancient regime that limited itself to five or six
documents. No doubt scientists will tell you that at that barbarous
period State control was only fictitious.
If it were only this, it would be but twenty thousand functionaries
too many, and a thousand million francs more added to the budget,
a detail for the lovers of “order” and levelling!
But there is worse beneath all this, for the principle kills every-
thing. The peasants of a village have a thousand interests in com-
mon: interests of economy, neighbourhood and constant intercourse.
They must unite for a thousand divers things. But the State
cannot allow them to unite! It gives them school and priest, police
and judge; these must suffice, and should other interests arise, they
must apply in the regular way to Church and State.
Thus till 1883 it was severely forbidden to the villagers of
France to unite, even to buy chemical manure or to irrigate their
fields. It was only in 1883-1886 that the Republic granted this right
when it voted the law of unions, hampered by many a precaution and
obstacle.
And we, with our faculties blunted by State education, rejoice at
the sudden progress accomplished by agricultural syndicates, without
blushing at the idea that this right of union of which peasants were
deprived for centuries belonged to them without contention in the
Middle Ages. Belonged to every man —free or serf. Slaves that we
are, we believe it to be a “conquest of democracy”!
This is the pitch of stupidity we have reached by our warped and
vitiated State education, and our State prejudices.
“If you have any common interests in the city or the village, ask
the Church and the State to look after them. But you are forbidden
to combine in a direct way to settle matters for yourselves!” Such
is the formula throughout Europe since the sixteenth century. Already
in an edict of Edward 111, issued at the end of the fourteenth century,
KROPOTKIN


we read that “all unions, combinations, meetings, organised societies,
statutes and oaths already established or to be established by carpen-
ters and masons, will henceforth be null and void.” But when the
defeat of the towns and of the popular insurrection of which we
have spoken was completed, the State boldly laid hands on all the
institutions (guilds, fraternities, etc.) which used to bind artisans and
peasants together, and annihilated them.
This is plainly seen in England where a mass of documents exists
showing every step of that annihilation. Little by little the State laid
hands on all guilds and fraternities. It abolished their leagues, their
festivals, their aldermen, and replaced them by its own functionaries
and tribunals, and at the beginning of the fifteenth century, under
Henry VIII, the State confiscated everything possessed by the guilds
without further ado. The heir to the great protestant king finished
his father’s work.*
It was open robbery, “without excuse” as Thorold Rogers has
put it. And it is this robbery which the so-called ‘scientific’ econo-
mists represent as the “natural” death of the guilds under the influence
of economic laws!
In fact, it was impossible for the State to tolerate a guild or cor-
poration of a trade, with its tribunal, its militia, its treasury, its sworn
organisation. It was, for the statesmen, “a State within the State”.
The State had to destroy the guild, and it destroyed it everywhere, in
England, in France, in Germany, in Bohemia, preserving only its
semblance as an instrument of the exchequer, as a part of the vast
administrative machine. Should we be astonished that guilds, trade-
unions and wardenships, deprived of everything that was formerly
their life and placed under royal functionaries, became in the
eighteenth century mere encumbrances and obstacles to the develop-
ment of industry, after having been the very life of progress four
centuries before?
The State had killed them. In fact it did not content itself with
destroying the autonomous organisation which was necessary for the
very life of the guilds and impeded the encroachments of the State;
it did not content itself with confiscating all their riches and property:
it appropriated to itself all their economic functions as well.
In a city of the Middle Ages, when interests conflicted in a trade,
or when two guilds disagreed, there was no other appeal but to the
city. They were forced to settle matters, to find some compromise
as all guilds were mutually allied in the city. And a compromise was
always arrived at —by calling in another city to arbitrate, if necessary.
Henceforth the only arbitrator was the State. All local disputes,
sometimes of the most insignificant kind, in the smallest town of a few
hundred inhabitants, had to be piled up in the shape of useless
•See Toulmin Smith’s work on Guilds.
THE STATE


documents in the offices of king and parliament. We see the English
parliament literally inundated with these thousands of petty local
squabbles. It then became necessary to have thousands of function-
aries in the capital (venal for the greater part) to classify, read and
judge all these documents, to regulate the way to forge a horses’s
hoof, bleach linen, salt herrings, make a barrel, and so on ad infinitum.
But this was not all. Soon the State laid hands on exportation,
in which it saw a means of enrichment. Formerly, when a dispute
arose between two towns about the value of exported cloth, the purity
of wool, or the capacity of barrels of herrings, the two towns made
remonstrances to each other. If the dispute lasted long, they address-
ed themselves to a third town to step in as arbitrator (this happened
constantly); or a congress of guilds of weavers and coopers was con-
vened to regulate internationally the quality and value of cloth or the
capacity of barrels.
Now, however, the State had stepped in and taken upon itself to
regulate all these contentions from the centre, in Paris or in London.
Through its functionaries it regulated the capacity of barrels, specified
the quality of cloth, ordered die number of threads and their thick-
ness in the warp and woof and interfered in the smallest detail of
each industry.
You know the result. Industry under this control was dying out
in the eighteenth century. What had become of Benvenuto Cellini’s
art under State tutelage? Vanished. And the architecture of those
guilds of masons and carpenters whose works we still admire? Only
look at the hideous monuments of the State period, and at one glance
you will know that architecture was dead, so dead that up till now it
has not recovered from the blow dealt it by the State.
What became of the fabrics of Bruges, of the cloth from Holland?
What became of those blacksmiths, skilled in manipulating irsn, who,
in each European borough, knew how to turn this ungrateful metal
into the most exquisite decorations? What became of those turners,
those clock-makers, those fitters who had made Nuremberg one of the
glories of the Middle Ages by their instruments of precision? James
Watt looked in vain during thirty years for a man who could make
a fairly round cylinder for his steam engine, and his machine remained
thirty years a rough model for want of workmen to construct it!
Such was the result of State interference in the domain of
industry. All that the State managed to do was to tighten the screw
on the worker, depopulate the land, sow misery in the towns and
reduce thousands of beings to the state of starvelings and impose
industrial slavery.
, It is these miserable wrecks of ancient guilds, these organ-
isms mangled and oppressed by the State that “scientific” economists
have the ignorance to confound with the guilds of the Middle Ages!
KROPOTKIN


What the great Revolution swept away as harmful to industry was not
the guild, nor even the trade-union; it was a piece of machinery both
useless and harmful.
But what the Revolution took good care not to sweep away was
the power of the State over industry and over the factory serf.
To the grievances of strikers the Convention answered (I quote
fronV memory): “The State alone has a right to watch over the
interests of all citizens. In striking, you are organising a coalition,
you are creating a State within the State. Therefore—death! ”
In this answer we see the bourgeois character of the French
Revolution. But has that answer not a still deeper meaning? Does
it not summarize the attitude of the State that found its most com-
plete and logical expression towards the whole of society in the
Jacobinism of 1793?
“If you have a grievance,- complain to the State! It alone has
the right to redress its subjects’ grievances. As to combining to
protect yourselves—never! ” It was in this sense that the Republic
Called itself one and indivisible.
Does riot the. modem Jacobin-Socialist think the same? Did
not the Convention, express his uttermost thought with the severe logic
peculiar to it?
In this answer of the Convention is summed up the attitude of
all States towards all combinations and all private societies, whatever
be their aim.
A strike is even now in Russia considered a crime of high treason
against the State. In a great measure this is so in Germany, where
young William* said the other day: “Appeal to me; but if you ever
allow yourselves to take action on your own behalf, you will make
the acquaintance of my soldiers’ bayonets! ” It is still almost always
the case in France. Even in England, it is only after straggling a
hundred years by means of secret societies, dagger thrusts for traitors
and masters, explosive powder under machinery (not further back
than i 860), emery thrown into axle-boxes, and so forth, that English
workmen have begun to conquer the right to strike. They will soon
have it entirely, if they do not fall into the traps that the. State is
already laying for them in trying to impose its obligatory arbitration
in exchange for an eight-hour law.
More than a century of terrible struggles and sufferings! Many
men have died in prisons, many more have been transported to
Australia, shot and hanged, to reconquer the right of combination,
which every man, free or serf, practised freely, before the State
laid its heavy hand on societies.
But was it the workman only who was treated in this fashion?
Think of the struggles the bourgeoise had to carry on against the
•Kaiser Wilhelm ll.—Ed,
THE STATE


State in order to conquer the right of constituting themselves into
commercial societies, a right which the State only conceded when it
discovered in it an easy method of creating monopolies to the advan-
tage of its creatures and to re-fill its treasury; and the struggles for
the right to write or speak differently from what the State orders
through its academies, universities or churches; and the struggles for
the right to teach, be it only reading; and the struggles even to obtain
the right of amusing oneself in common; not to mention those wars
which would still have to be fought for the right to choose one’s judge
or one’s law (which before the growth of the State was of daily
occurrence), or the struggles that separate us from the day when they
will burn the book of infamous punishments, invented by the spirit
of the inquisition and of the despotic empires of the East and known
under the name of penal code!
Then look at taxation, an institution of purely State origin, a
formidable weapon which the State uses in Europe as well as in young
societies in the United States to keep the masses under its heel, to
favour friends, to ruin the greater number to the advantage of those
who govern, and to uphold the old divisions and castes.
Then take war, without which States can neither constitute them-
selves nor stand —war that becomes fatal, inevitable, as soon as we
admit that a certain region (because it is a State) can have interests
opposed to those of its neighbours. Think of past wars and of those
we are threatened with before the conquered races will be allowed
to breathe freely, of wars for commercial markets, of wars to create
colonial empires. In France we know only too well what servitude
each war, whether victorious or not, brings in its train.
What is worse than all that I have enumerated, is that the educa-
tion we all receive from the State, at school and later on in our life,
has so vitiated our brains that the idea of liberty itself goes astray and
is travestied into servitude.
It is sad to see those who believe themselves to be revolutionists,
vowing their depest hatred to Anarchists—because the Anarchist con-
ception of liberty surpasses their own narrow and mean conception
culled from State teaching.
The spirit of voluntary servitude has always been artfully nour-
ished in young brains, and is so still, in order to perpetuate the slavery
of the subject to the State.
Libertarian philosophy is suffocated by pseudo-Roman and
Catholic State philosophy. History is vitiated from the first page,
where it lies about the Merovingian and Carlovingian dynasties, to its
last page, on which it glorifies Jacobinism and ignores the people and
their work in the creation of institutions. Natural sciences are per-
verted to the benefit of the dual idol Church and State. The psycho-
logy of the individual, and still more that of society, is falsified to
KROPOTKIN


justify the triple alliance of soldier, priest and executioner. Even
morality, which for centuries has preached obedience to the Church or
to some so-called divine book, emancipates itself to-day only to preach
servility to the State. “You have no direct moral obligations towards
your neighbour, not even a sentiment of solidarity; all your obligations
are to the State,” we are taught by this new religion of the old
Roman and Caesarian divinity. Neighbours, comrades, companions—
forget them! You must know them only through the intermediary
of an organ of your State. And all of you must practise the virtue
of being equally its slaves.
This glorification of State and discipline, for which Church and
University, press and political parties work, is so well preached that
even revolutionists dare not confront this fetish.
The modern radical is a centralizer, a State partisan, a Jacobin
to the core, and the Socialist walks in his footsteps. Like the Floren-
tines at the end of the fifteenth century, who could only invoke the
dictatorship of the State, to save them from the patricians, the
Socialists know only how to invoke the same gods, the same dictator-
ship and the same State, to save us from the abominations of an
economic system created by that very State!
X.
If you look still deeper into all the facts which I have touched
upon, if you see the State as it was in history and as it is in essence
to-day, and if you consider moreover that a social institution cannot
serve all aims indiscriminately, because, like every other organ, it is
developed for a certain purpose, and not for all purposes, you will
understand why we desire the abolition of the State.
We see in it an institution developed in the history of human
societies to hinder union among men, to obstruct the development of
local initiative, to crush existing liberties and prevent their restoration.
And we know that an institution, which has a past dating back
some thousands of years cannot lend itself to a function opposed to
that for which it was developed in the course of history.
To this argument, unassailable to anyone who has reflected on
history, what replies do we receive?
We are answered by an almost childish argument: “The State
is there, it exists, it represents a ready-made powerful organisation.
Why destroy it instead of making use of it? Admittedly it works for
ill, but that is due to its being in the hands of exploiters. In the hands
of the people, why should it not be utilised for a better end and for
the good of men?”
Always the same dream, the dream of Schiller’s Marquis of
Posa trying to make autocracy an instrument of enfranchisement, the
dream of the gentle priest Peter in Zola’s Rome, wishing to make the
Church a lever of Socialism!
THE STATE


Those who reason in this way either have not the least notion of
the real historical role of the State, or else conceive the Social Revo-
lution under such a tame and insignificant form, that it has nothing
more in common with Socialist aspirations.
Take a concrete example, France.
All of us have perceived that the Third Republic, in spite of its
republican form of government, has remained monarchical in its
essence. Everyone has reproached it with not having republicanised
France. Ido not speak of its not having done anything for the Social
Revolution, but of its not having even introduced the simple repub-
lican habits and customs and spirit. For the little that has been done
during the last twenty-five years to democratize customs, or to spread
a little enlightenment, has been done everywhere—even in the
European monarchies—under the pressure of the times through which
we are passing. Whence comes then the strange anomaly that we
have in France—a Republican Monarchy?
It comes from France having remained as much a State as it
was thirty years ago. The holders of power have changed their name;
but all the immense scaffolding of centralised organisation, the imita-
tion of the Rome of the Caesars which had been elaborated in France,
has remained. The wheels of this huge machinery continue to
exchange their fifty documents when the wind has blown down a
tree on the national route. The stamp on the documents has changed;
but the State, its spirit, its organs, its territorial centralisation, and its
centralisation of functions, have remained unaltered. Worse than
that; they extend from day to day over the country.
Sincere Republicans nourished the illusion that the State organi-
sation could be utilised to operate a change in a republican sense;
and here is the result. When they ought to have destroyed the old
organisation, destroyed the State, and constructed a new organisation,
by beginning at the very basis of society—the free village commune,
the free workers’ union, and so on—they thought to utilise “the
organisation that already existed.” And for not having understood
that you cannot make an historical institution go in any direction you
would have it, that it must go its own way, they were swallowed up
by the institution.
Yet in this case there was no question of modifying the whole
of the economic relations of society, as is the case with us. It was
merely a question of reforming certain points in the political relations
among men!
But, after this complete failure and in face of such a conclusive
experience, they obstinately continue to say that the conquest of
power in the State by the people will suffice to accomplish the Social
Revolution; that the old machine, slowly elaborated in the course of
history to mangle liberty, to crush the individual, to seat oppression
KROPOTKIN


on a legal basis, to lead the brain astray in accustoming it to servitude,
will lend itself marvellously to new functions; that it will become the
means of making a new life germinate, that it will seat liberty and
equality on an economic basis, awaken society, and march to the
conquest of a better future! What an absurd miscomprehension of
history!
To give free scope to Socialism, it is necessary to reconstruct
society, based to-day on the narrow individualism of the shopkeeper,
from top to bottom. It is not only, as they said sometimes in a vague
metaphysical way, a question of returning to the worker “the integral
product of his work,” but a question of re-modelling in their entirety
all relations among men, from those existing to-day between every
individual and his churchwarden or his station master, to those exist-
ing between trades, hamlets, cities and regions. In every street, in
every hamlet, in every group of men assembled about a factory or
along a railroad, we must awaken the creative, constructive, organising
spirit, in order to reconstruct the whole of life in the factory, on the
railroad, in the village, in the stores, in taking supplies, in production,
in distribution. All relations between individuals and between human
agglomerations must begin to be remodelled as soon as we begin to
reform any part of the present commercial or administrative organisa-
tion.
And they expect this immense work, demanding the full and free
exercise of popular genius, to be carried out within the frame-work of
the State, within the pyramidal scale of organisation that constitutes
the essence of each State! They want the State, whose very reason
for existence lies in the crushing of the individual, in the destruction of
all free grouping and free creation, in the hatred of initiative and in
the triumph of one idea (which must necessarily be that of the
mediocrity), to become the lever of this immense transformation!
They want to govern a newborn society by decrees and electoral
majorities! What childishness!
Throughout the history of our civilisation, two traditions, two
opposed tendencies, have been in conflict: the Roman tradition and
the popular tradition, the imperial tradition and the federalist tradition,
the authoritarian tradition and the libertarian tradition.
Again, on the eve of the great Social Revolution these two
traditions stand face to face.
Between these two currents, always alive, always struggling in
humanity—the current of the people and the current of the minorities
which thirst for political and religious domination—our choice is made.
We again take up the current which led men in the twelfth
century to organise themselves on the basis of free understanding, of
free initiative of the individual, of free federation. We leave others
to cling to the Roman, Canonic, and Imperial tradition.
THE STATE


History has not been an uninterrupted evolution. At different
intervals evolution has been broken in a certain region;* to begin
again elsewhere. Egypt, Asia, the banks of the Mediterranean,
Central Europe have in turn been the scene of historical development
But in every case, the first phase of the evolution has been the primi-
tive tribe, passing on into a village commune, then into that of the
free city, and finally dying out when it reached the phase of the
State.
In Egypt, civilization began with the primitive tribe. It reached
the village community phase, and later the period of free cities; still
later that of the State, which, after a flourishing period, resulted in
the death of the civilisation.
The evolution began again in Assyria, in Persia, in Palestine.
Again it traversed the same phase: the tribe, the village community,
the free city, the all-powerful State, and finally the result was—death!
A new civilization then sprang up in Greece. Always beginning
by the tribe, it slowly reached the village commune, then the period
of republican cities. In these cities, civilization reached its highest
summits. But the East brought to them it poisoned traditions of
despotism. Wars and conquests created Alexander’s empire of
Macedonia. The State enthroned itself, the parasite grew, killed all
civilization, and then came—death!
Rome in its turn restored civilization. Again we find the primi-
tive tribe at its origin; then, the village commune; then, the free city.
At that stage, it reached the apex of its civilization. But then came
the State, the Empire, and then—death!
On the ruins of the Roman Empire, Celtic, Germanic, Slavonian
and Scandinavian tribes began civilization anew. Slowly the primitive
tribe elaborated its institutions and reached the village commune. It
remained at that stage till the twelfth century. Then rose the Re-
publican cities which produced the glorious expansion of the human
mind, attested by the monuments of architecture, the grand develop-
ment of arts, the discoveries that laid the basis of natural sciences.
But then came the State.
Will it again produce death? It will, unless we reconstitute
society on a libertarian and anti-State basis. Either the State will
be destroyed and a new life will begin in thousands of centres, on the
principle of an energetic initiative of the individual, of groups, and of
free agreement; or else the State must crush the individual and local
life, it must become the master of all the domains of human activity,
must bring with it wars and internal struggles for the possession of
power, surface-revolutions which only change one tyrant for another,
and inevitably, at the end of this evolution—death!
Choose yourselves which of the two issues you prefer.
KROPOTKIN


HERBERT READ
THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANARCHISM. Fourth Impression i/-
TOM BROWN
TRADE UNIONISM OR SYNDICALISM? 3A
THE BRITISH GENERAL STRIKE 3d.
C. BERNERI
PETER KROPOTKIN—His Federalist Ideas 2d.
E. MALATESTA
ANARCHY. Eighth Impression, with new introduction 3d.
VOTE—WHAT FOR? 2d.
GEORGE WOODCOCK
NEW LIFE TO THE LAND. Second Impression 6d.
WILLIAM GODWIN
SELECTIONS FROM ‘POLITICAL JUSTICE’ 3d.
ALEXANDER BERKMAN
ABC OF ANARCHISM. First Publication in England, too pp. 1/-
On Russia
Subscription Rates: 3/-for six months: 6/- per annum
(Please add 2d. in the shilling on all orders for postage).
FREEDOM PRESS, Rdsize N.W.6.
FREEDOM PRESS PUBLICATIONS


Books and Pamphlets by Peter Kropotkin
KROPOTKIN —Selections from His Writings
Chosen by HERBERT READ
This volume, published on the occasion of the centenary at
Kiopotkin’s birth, contains fifty-five selections from his writing!
covering a wide range of subjects each of which is discussed with
the erudition and sincerity typical of Kropotkin the man of science
and the revolutionary. The first part Autobiographical gives a vivid
picture of Kropotkin’s life from childhood to the time of his escape
from the famous Peter and Paul fortress. The second part
Historical contains selections ranging from biographical sketches of
Marat, Robespierre, Turguentff and Bakunin to essays on Primitive
Man, the Medieval Guilds and the Commune. The third part
Economic and Political deals with Production and Consumption,
Agriculture and Industry, the Problems of Crime, Anarchism, etc.
■ The fourth part Philosophical includes selections from Mutual Aid
and Ethics, two of Kropotkin’s most important works, and the con-
cluding section is on Art and Society.
152 pages Demy Bvo. cloth Bs. 6d., paper as. fid.
(postage fid.)
REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT
In this essay Kropotkin shows by historical examples the impos-
sibility of creating any Government that will act in the interest of
revolutionary principles, that is, to transfer power and property to
the masses. Only the collective work of the masses of the people
in their own free associations can achieve and maintain a real
revolution.
A new and revised edition with a publisher’s postscript,
16 pages Demy Bvo. 3d. (postage id.)
MODERN SCIENCE AND ANARCHISM
The effort to give anarchism a scientific foundation, based on the
methods of the natural sciences, was Kropotkin’s chief concern, and
in so far as it succeeded, his most significant achievement. In this
pamphlet he described the principles of Anarchism in relation to the
tendencies away from metaphysics and towards physics.
112 pages Crown Bvo. 1/- (postage 2d.)
THE WAGE SYSTEM
This pamphlet is a chapter from Kropotkin’s Conquest of
Bread. It clearly and concisely destroys the learned Marxian
theories which try to demonstrate that there can be a wage system
based on justice, Kropotkin shows that the wage system always
exists in a class society and that its abolition would mean the
destruction of classes and therefore of the state.
24 pages. Crown Bvo. ad. (postage id.)
2 7 BELSIZE ROAD, LONDON, N.W.6
FREEDOM PRESS PUBLICATIONS
