

THU
ETHERIDGE
GOLDFIELD.
PAST, PRESENT, AND PROSPECTIVE.
by thi;
SPECIAL REPORTER Of THE TOWNSVILLE HERALD,
AUGUST, 1887.
—Subscription to “ Townsville Herald
per Annum in Advance ; or, 6s. per Quarter.
printed and i’uMisdicd by the
“ TOWNSVILLE HERALD ” NEWSPAPER CO.,
LIMITED.


MCPHERSON & CO,
LIMITED,
GENERAL HARDWARE AND IRONMONGERY
Merchants and Importers.
AGENTS FOR
Marshall’s Celebrated Engines and other Machinery,
Australian Lithofracteur Co. ’s Dynamite, &c.
M. B. Foster & Sous’ Renowned Bottled Ale and Stout.
William Ritchie’s Champion Colonial Ploughs.
Anheuser-Busch Brewing Association’s St. Louis Lager Beer,
CATALOGUES AND QUOTATIONS FURNISHED BY POST
ON APPLICATION.
Jlimi attS Jliml,
TOWNSVILLE.
APIiIN, BROWN, I 00, LTD,
MERCHANTS. BIMPORTERS,
a::S Jlfeihu, acS Simral
AGENTS,
TOWNSVILLE, BRISBANE, BURKETOWN,
AND PORT DARWIN,
AGENTS FOR—
Jno. Fowler & Co , Ltd., Engineers, Leeds.
Taugye’s, Ltd., Birmingham.
Langland's Foundry Co., Ltd., Melbourne.
Fender's Patent Wool Press.
Shaud, Mason, & Co.’s, Fire Engines.
Plans, Specifications, and Estimates o£ all kinds of Machinery can be forwarded
on application.
WINDING ENGINES, BOILERS, AND PUMP DUPLICATES. &c.
QUICKSILVER AND OTHER MINING REQUISITES KEPT IN STOCK.


THE
ETHERIDGE GOLDFIELD:
fAST, fRESENT, AND fROSPEeTIVE.
INTRODUCTORY.
C||YROiI the fact that over a quarter of
41k a million of English capital is about
Jjf to be invested in the purchase and
development of certain mining pro-
perties in this district, a great deal
of interest has been awakened in the more
important mining circles of the colonies
—and, of course, in England, whence
the money is to come—on the question of
the character of the Etheridge reefs generally
and of those on which the capital is proposed
to be spent, in particular. The comparative
inacessibility of the goldfield has, so far,
rendered it almo-t a terra incognita—George-
town, the capital, being nearly 400 miles from
Townsville, south-east ; 220 miles from
Normanton on the Gulf; and about 240 miles
from Cairns on the eastern coast.
Yery few people, therefore, visit the
district except on business of more than
ordinary importance. A trip to Gympie,
Charters Towers, or, in fact, to any of the
other considerable goldfields of the colonies,
is mere pleasurable diversion, and a cursory
examination of the mines even by casuals,
frequently results in substantial investments
being made, greatly to the benefit of these
more favourably situated districts. The
Etheridge has never benefited in this way.
Those who tackle the journey hitherward
either from Townsville, Hormanton, or the
north-east, regard it as a serious business,
requiring a special outfit. Had the district
been more easy of access; had it been located
as favorably as the Towers or Gympie, there
is not the least doubt but that it would have
given profitable employment to thousands of
miners from the time it was opened nearly
sixteen years ago until now, and for years yet
to come. But it has held its own amongst the
principal goldfields of the colony notwith-
standing, and produced large quantities of
gold without intermission, and it may be said
of it now, after sixteen years’ working, that,
except in the ease of the Cumberland, not a
reef on the field has been properly proved,
such as would be the case on any other field,
nor has anything in the shape of systematic
mining been persevered in for any lengthened
period. J
I have not been able to obtain full par-
ticulars of the different reefs up the river-
(between thirty and forty' miles from George--
town), where it is proposed to commence
operations with £70,000 as a basis; but the
Kopewalk (familiarly known as(“The Mile of
Gold”) is one of them. The reefs in this
locality are nearly all large, and many of
them (notably the Caledonian) have been
very productive, yielding large qauntities of
gold, and giving splendid profit to the share-
holders. But, unlike an enterprising com-
pany with capital at its back, the individual
miner gets discouraged at the occurrence of
a “ blank,” and its continuance for any
lengthened period frequently results in the
abandonment of the claim. But in what a
number of cases in this district were such a
thing has happened, a fresh party, taking-
up the ground, have come upon payable
stone again after a little perseverance and
hard work ! “ Blanks ” have occurred more
than once, even in the famous Cumberland
reef (O’Brien and Co.)—now floated for-
£lßs,oo0 —and the chances are that an
ordinary party of working men would have-
been obliged to throw up the sponge. Even
O’Brien and Co. once offered the mine to*
Messrs Clifton and Aplin (who then had a.
machine not far way) for £100; but
fortunately for the “ C 0.,” the offer was re--
fused, and, as a necessity, the owners went
to work again with renewed energy. It was;
not long before they were again on payable
stone; nor have they been off it since, not
less than £150,000 worth of gold having-
been taken from the reef since the
rence of the “ blank.” I cm see no reason
why any of the big auriferous reefs up the
river should not pay good interest on capital
if welland economically managed ; but good
practical management is a desideratum with-
out which the result cannot be other than
unsatisfactory, and disastrous to any con-
tinuous inflow of capital for the purpose oh
mining in the far North for years to cotne.
Seeing that in Victoria a yield of 3|dwt.
pays dividends, it is only fair to consider that
the big reefs up the river yielding lodvvt.
ought to pay well if the management is good*


and all unnecessary expenditure is carefully
■avoided, and there are very few of these
monster veins that will not average 15dwt.,
with stone ad libitum, the manager for any
of the new companies that may be formed
for -working reefs in this district could not
do better than to study the history and every
detail of the working of the Cumberland ; and
should he shape his own course on their lines,
he will, I am confident, be able to give a
fairly satisfactory account of his mine when
the day of reckoning comes. It may be
alleged that not a single mining venture on
the Etheridge (the Cumberland excepted)
has yet proved a success. That is so;
although the Durham has turned out a very
large quantity of gold, and Nos. 1 North and
South Cumberland may yet turn out right.
But the failure of these mines, so far, is no
proof whatever that, they would not pay if
properly managed, and their active working
has been perservcd with for a long period.
■Southern investors, as a rule, have not been
fortunate in their selection of managers for
their Etheridge properties. The first mana-
ger of the Overland Telegraph Co. (Sydney
company), was a Rockhampton butcher, and
his successor a shantykeeper from Grenfell,
(N.S.W.) The manager of the Papua Co.
squandered more than £30,000 for another
Sydney Co. and had little but empty bottles
to show for it ; the Mystery and Somerset
Co. spent all their capital in sinking ex-
pensive shafts, and succumbed just at the
time they should have pushed on the work,
when it was quite probable that
a small additional expenditure would
have enabled them to get at payable
stone. Perhaps the case of Nos. 1
and 2, North and South [Cumberland (Mel-
bourne companies), is the most unique on
record, for each of these companies spent
then capital in the erection of costly 10-
stamper batteries, and the construction of
magnificent dams for water storage before
they commenced work on their leases, or
knew whether they had a reef or not. The
amount of capital expended in proving their
mines since th-m has been comparatively
trifling, and the result in each case, as yet,
anything but satisfactory ; whde, of the two
machines, that of the No. 1 North has been
idle all the time, and the other idle also
except when engaged for a casual lot from a
neighbouring claim, or for a few tons’ crushing
from some of the Croydon reefs. A small
company (in which the Hon. P. Perkins was
a shareholder), was formed for working a
reef called the “ Struggle,” up the river,
and a small pumping and winding engine
put on it and worked fairly commenced under
what appeared to be favorable conditions.
The reef was there, carrying payable gold ; but
the Sydney people, who supplied the money,
couldn’t stand the almost daily wires that
came to them for a working shareholder, re-
porting the continued drunkenness of the
managei, and that things were going to the
Devill; and so they summarily stopped the
supplies, jfod very properly threw up the
enterprise. These are some of the reasons
why companies have hitherto proved failures
in thiis district. The distance from port, and
fromi pny great centres of population is
anotlher cause. Notwithstanding every draw-
back: I adhere to the opinion that if this
£70,(000 of English capital is expended on
the Ibig reefs in the neighbourhood of Gold*
smitlh’s, with good judgement, good machin-
ery, :and reasonable economy, a payable re-
sult may reasonably be expected. The Cum-
berland, floated for £185,000, tells its own
tale every month, and I am quite satisfied that
Mr McEarchen, who recently visited the mine
on behalf of the new proprietory, was sur-
prised and gratified at the thoroughly
practical and efficient manner in which the
mine has been opened up, down to the 350
feet level; at the great size and good quality
of the lode itself ; and at the splendid crushing
machinery and appliances in connection
with the mine.
Having generalised the district in the
above observations, I will proceed to
describe the reefs and matters in con-
nection with the past and present of the
goldfield, in detail.
Progress of the Reefs in Brief— George-
town, Past an d Present —Crushing
Machinery.
Acting on the Herald's instructions, I
have lately visited nearly every line of reef
nearly everv claim —in this vast scattered
district —from Georgetown to Goldsmith’s,
forty miles up the river, S. by E. ; the New-
castle Range, twelve miles east of George
town ; and the Cumberland, eighteen miles
west. Possessed of the advantage of having
chronicled the history of this goldfield day
by day for the first two or three years of its
existence, and of a three months’sojourn six
years ago (after an absence of seven years),
and knowing everyone. I had no difficulty
in “ finding my way aboutbut, alas ! " the
glory of the Etheridge has departed,” with-
out a chance of resusciation for years and
■ years to come, unless through the agency
of English capital. A population that once
boasted of over 2000 miners as its backbone,
is now so miserably thinned that it scarcely
reckons 150 miners in its numbers. Portions
of tt.be district that were once prosperous
miming centres are now utterly deserted
the machines are idle most of the time, or
beimg shifted to Croydon, while the few
worthing claims scattered about at wide in-
valss. are, as a rule, yielding but very in-
different returns. The twenty-five public
bowses that once dispensed “ fighting rum *
in tithe main street of Georgetown, are now
redtuced to three, and, of the two principal
storekeepers, Mr Kelly has taken bis goods,
and! even his signboard to Croydon, while
Mr Willmet, not long since, was compelled


to make an assignment to his creditors. The
only large store now in the whole district is
that of O’Brien and 00., at the Cumberland.
The Bank of New South Wales still remains,
but its late manager, Mr Kellaway, is now in
Croydon superintending the new branch on
that rapidly rising goldfield. John Thomas,
with his refrigerating drinks, his well-supplied
reading room, and his few bags of sugar and
flour for retail, is now about the most im-
portant personage, and the most sought after
in Georgetown. Sic transit gloria mundi.
The first reef on the Etheridge was opened
by Mudgee Jack and Berwick, in March, ’7l,
the surface appearance being a big outcrop
showing gold freely, and crushing well in the
•mortar. This was on the North side of the
river, and was quickly followed by
the discovery of the St. George,
Taps, and others on the same side,
while on what is now the Georgetown side,
the Better Luck was opened by the Brop-
heys, the Outward Bound by Peter O’Neill,
land several others, about the same time. Then
discovery followed discovery in rapid succes-
sion, and the rush set in properly. It was not
long before the “Eockey,” with its splendid
specimens and rich surface patches, was found
and rushed. Still further, in the same
direction, a score or two of reefs were opened
-on the Delaney ; then followed the Star of
the North (Long Joe), and a cluster of
promising reefs, at a place named the Light-
house. Finnigan’s came next, and still a
swarm of prospectors were pushing ahead,
until, within a few months from the starting
of the first reef, the whole country was pros-
pected (only superfioally, of course), and reefs
taken up and in full swing from Geo.getown
to Goldsmith’s, a distance of forty miles, and
for some miles down the river below George-
town. The reefs thus occupied and registered
reckoned by hundreds, and the surface shows
were the best I had ever seen in my ex-
perience. Within six months there must
have been upwards of 2000 men on the field,
and the number still continued increasing.
Many of the stacks of stone in the vicinity
•of Georgetown had soon quite a pretentious
appearance, and the miners and business j
people began to cast around for crushing
machinery. The first to make a practical |
he After the Black Dog disaster the next
is attempt was made by Messrs Sodon and
d. Bennet (the well known photographer), who
is, in November, 1871, brought up one of Milner
in Stephen’s new patent affairs, and proceeded
)n to erect it a mile above Georgetown. It was
s, the most contemptible burlesque on crushing
3d machinery that could possibly be conceived,
id The small hammers of about eight or ten
u- pounds weight, working in two boxes, were
er supposed to break the stone sufficiently small
to pass through screens with holes a quarter
id of an inch in diameter. The debris then
traversed one or two tables with quicksilver
ripples on to a pair of steel rollers, passing
through which it was supposed to fall on a
shaking table —a perfectly impalpable powder.
The motive power was a diminutive vertical
boiler and engine, and the crushing capacity
of this new revelation was estimated at sixty
tons per week. The erection of this flimsy
piece of engineering occupied several weeks,
and then commenced a series of futile trials
and alterations. At length, however, a final
start was made, steam was turned on, and
the hammers began to play (for it was play)
on the carefully-broken stone put in the hop-
pers. More steam was turned on, and the
hammers, which had commenced to work
merrily, now rattled away madly and
recklessly, The race became more furious,
and the hammers, ignoring the stone, com-
menced to hit out at one another. The con-
flict in the boxes was terrible ! At last one
hammer flew out through a screen, as though
shot from a cannon, and soon after another,
driving every soul from the front to the rear
in terror. Still the war was going on inside,
and the hammers were flying about in every
direction until nothing was left but the
half inch rods to which they had been
attached. It was the story of the Kilkenny
oats over again ! Bennett was pale as the
Ghost in Hamlet. He had lost all presence
of mind and was incapable of effort even to
the turning off steam ; and so the little rods
kept rattling away like drumsticks, until
some one compasionately stopped the engine
and led Bennett from the spot—just as
Napoleon was led from Waterloo, when
everything was lost, and every panic-stricken
soldier was crying “Save who can!” only
move in the way of supplying this desideratum Brigadier-General Bennett was not on horse-
were Messrs Collins and March, who, with | back and Napoleon was—that’s the only
Dr. Borch and Owen Cassady, had now be-[ difference. “Brown,” said the Brigadier to
■come the proprietors of the Overland Tele-
graph prospecting claim. But, unfortunately,
the vessel on which the ten stamper was
shipped—the Black Dog—came to grief off
Cardwell, and ship and machinery went to
the bottom.
Before entering on a description of the
•characteristics of the various lines of reef, and
of the work done from first to last, it may be
as well to recall a few of the incidents in
connection with subsequent efforts to
establish crushing machinery in the district.
Some of these are both instructive andamusing.
me next day, “write down that measly fraud
Milner Stephen. Curse him ! I’ve done with
his blasted abortion of a machine. It’s a
crusher, but it won’t crush quartz. It’s
crushed Sodon, and it’s crushed me, and will
crush everyone who may be fool euough to
have anything to do with it. Write him and
his machine down as a warning to others.”
Mr Bennett subsequently brought up a ten
stamper of the old pattern from Mornish
having Mr Patterson, then Deputy-Eegistrar-
General, for a partner, but notwithstanding
his untiring energy and good business


qualities, he was not successful, and finally
left the district, wiser probably, but not
picher than when he came.
The next was also a new patent Dr. Beer’s
—and was equally a failure. This was im-
ported (January, 1872) by Messrs Collins
and March, in connection with the Overland
Te egraph Reef, to take the place of that
lost in the Black Dog. The leading feature
in this machine was a strong spring over
each of the ten stamper rods, which, rising
with the lift of the stamper, was forced down
on the stone in the boxes with four-fold force.
The idea was, of course, that the extroardinary
weight of the fall would pulverise at least
double the quantity of stone expected from
the ordinary battery with the same steam
power. The start was successful during the
quarter of an hoar’s trial that preceded the
seventy-guinea banquet, and the whole affair
passed off right merrily. The rising moon
saw dead men scattered about on the ground
in every direction, as though it were a battle
field; and there was snoring inside and out,
both loud and deep. In the morning work
was commenced in earnest, and the useless-
ness of the springs soon made itself manifest,
for first one and then another snapped until
there was not one left, and the stampers being
light (being part of the patent) were power-
less without the springs. A local blacksmith
having boasted that he could turn out springs
that would stand any mortal amount of
strain, was allowed to try his hand, and
certainly his springs appeared strong enough
for anything. But it was no good. These
gave way like the others, and so, like Bennett,
Collins and March had to east their patent
aside, and fell back on a ten sfcam per of the
old pattern, with which several hundreds of
tons from the Overland Telegraph were put
through by them and the company that suc-
ceeded them in the proprietorship. The
moral contained in these two instances of
absolute failure is this You should never
bring new fangled patent machinery four or
five hundred miles in the interior to have its
qualities tested.
The first proper machine was Messrs
Nolan and Jones’s—a fine new fifteen stamper,
with Cornish boiler—which commenced
crushing at Georgetown in March, 1872, with
a splendid yard-full of stone to operate upon.
The Etheridge people were favored with
one great advantage “from the jump," such
as probably never happened before in the
case of any goldfields’ rush in the colonies ;
and which in part made up for many dis-
advantages under which it labored. The
Overland Telegraph line had been completed
only a short time previously, and when the
rush set in the Telegraph was in full opera-
tion right in their midst. I will give one
illustration of the benefit obtained from this
circumstance. Mr Martin wired to John
Belt, Georgetown, from Sydney, stating that a
complete sixteen stamper machine was ready
for removal in Langland’s foundry, and
tli;at his partner, with plenty of teams, was
theen in Townsville. Was there room for
succh a machine in Georgetown, and could he
gett a guarantee of stone? Belt broughtthe
tellegram to your correspondent, and we
tallked the matter over—the outcome of which
wars that we wired Martin there was ample
emiploymeut for three or four such machines,
and that there was no necessity for a guarantee.
M artin purchased and shipped the machinery
without a moment’s delay. His partner was
ready with his teams at the wharf on arrival
at Townsville, and before we could have got
a reply to a letter by post, the whole para-
phernalia—amounting to about forty tons —
was on the road up. This also was erected,
on the bank of the river at Georgetown, and
had a splendid innings for years, when it
was shifted to the Hodgkinson. Mr Hodg-
kinson subsequently had a ten stamper on
the Rockey, which was removed to the
Delaney. Baker and party had a fine ten
stamper at Finnigan’s, in connection with his
reef, the Nil Desperandum (since shifted to
the O’Donohue, thirty-five miles up the river
from Georgetown). WillmettandHof had the
Papa Company’s ten stamper at Georgetown,
when that company went to the bad ; while,
more recently, Hodgkinson and Brown
worked a ten stamper at the Aurora, a few
miles from Georgetowu (subsequently re-
moved to the Lighthouse). Owen Duffy
drove a light machine most successfully at
the Delaney (since taken to the Marquis reef,
a few miles away) ; and Goldsmith erected a
ten stamper at the creek named after him,
forty miles up the river. The Lord Nelson
Go. have a fine ten stamper at the Light-
house, the Marquis Co. alike machine at their
mine, and the Caledonian (Prince and party)
a light machine within a short distance of
Goldsmith’s. The Durham Co’s ten stamper
is close to the reef of that name, six miles
west of Georgetown.
The Cumberland p.c., which was taken up
in November ’72, and is one of the very best
mining properties in Queensland, with
machinery of the most perfect description,
must be a prominent feature of itself in this
report. Besides the p.e. machine there are
two other fine ten stampers connected with
this line of reef, as previously mentioned.
There are now eleven machines, with a
total of ninety-five stampers on the field
(including the Cumberland). One ten
stamper (Bice’s,) has just been transferred from
Goldsmith’s to Croydon.
This finishes the history of the crushing
machinery which, from time to time during
the last fifteen years, has played an impor-
tant part in the aeveloj ment of the Etheridge
Goldfield, and for some of which it is hoped
employment will be found for many years yet
to come.
The Reefs—The Cumberland Prospect-
ing- Claim.
The Cumberland P.C., lately floated in


London, with all its splendid machinery and
appliances, for .£185,000, is the premier gold
field of the Etheridge. It is in fact the only
thoroughly opened and systematically worked
mine in the whole district, and seeing that,
as a rule, one half of the gold sent down|by
escort (and frequently two-thirds) is the
product of this one mine, it is entitled to
precedence of all others in this report, not-
withstanding that its history does not go
back as far as that of the first cluster of reefs
brought to light by about twenty months.
The Cumberland lies about eighteen miles
west of Georgetown, and was taken up in
November, 1872, as four men’s ground, by
Messrs W. Steel, Hardie, Tom Parker, and
•Jack Smith. But for the last several years
it has been the sole property of Messrs Steel,
Hunt and O’Brien —Mr Steel having stuck
to his interest with a tenacity that can only
be begotten of an unshakable confidence,
through all the vicissitudes the claim has ex-
perienced from first to last.
The prevailing rock—or “country” as
termed by Cornishmen —traversed by the
reef is here, and in every other part of the
district, granite or granitic, and the strike
of the reef about north-east and south-west.
This also is the course of all the principal
reefs in this part of the colony.
The Cumberland is a twelve acre lease. It
has been proved almost from one extremity
to the other in three main levels at 150, 250
and 350 feet respectively, the width of the
formation throughout the mine varying from
three to sixteen feet. The whole of the
quartz within this formation is put through
the mill. These levels are broad and high ;
are most substantially timbered (Mr Shakes-
peare, the Mining Inspector, said, “ al most to
the point of extravagance”) with black-butt
props from fourteen to sixteen inches through,
and rails for trucking are laid from end to
end. There are two principal shafts, each
sunk to a depth of 250 feet (connected by
the 350 feet level), a contract for sinking 100
feet in No. 2 (from the 250 to the 350) having
lately been completed by Ford and party for
£4 10s. per foot, the contractors finding
candles, fuse and fraoteur, and the owners
whatever timber was required, and! the use
of the trucks and tramway for getting the
stone away ; the shaft to be not less than 10
feet by six feet and as much wider asjm'ght
be necessary to take in the whole formation,
however much it might Widen. I am in-
formed that in one place it widened out to
thirteen feet, but that the contractors yet
made good wages. The connection between
these two shafts at the differernt levels
provides for the ventilation of the mine which
is excellent. The principal working shaft is
No. 1 (tramway), which is 260 feet from the
southern boundary, No. 2 being 100 feet from
the northern. The southern end of the 350
feet level is seventy feet from the southern
■extremity of the claim, while at 250 feet the
drive from No. 2 is much nearer than this to
the northern end and on good stone. The
trend of the “ shoots ” of gold is north-east.
“ Passes ” for conveying the stone to the
trucks in the levels whence it goes to
the foot of the shaft for transit to the surface
by trams drawn by strong wire-rope and
steam power, are situated at convenient
intervals. Shaft No. 1 starts at an angle of
45 degrees, following the underlie, but after
about 100 feet or so the angle lessens by
degrees until the fall is almost verdical. The
loaded trucks on reaching to the surface
travel up a wooden staging, erected a few
feet high, within a few feet of the shaft,
where the stone is dropped into capacious
hoppers, which have an outlet at the bottom,
from which the drays are filled automatically.
The same with the trucks from the “passes ’
in the levels. The Mining Inspector, when
he last visited the mine, made the statement
that “ for labor-saving appliances and the
way in which the ground has been opened
up, and timbered and otherwise secured, he
had seen nothing supperior to the Cumberland,
either at Charters Towers or any' other
mining district in the colony.” To Mr Harry
Mullins, who has had the sole management
of the underground workings for a number
of years, the credit is due for the admirable
state of the mine from the surface to its
greatest depth. He is proud of the mine and
of his share in building up its prosperity,
and he has a right to be. Mr Steel says
that every handling of the stone costs Is 6d
per ton. In some mines, between raising and
crushing the stone is handled half a dozen
times. At the Cumberland the only handling
is underground, all the rest being done auto-
matically, thereby effecting a great saving of
labor, and materially economising the working
ing expenses of the mine. The mine makes
no water nor is there a possibility of any for
years. At the time I made my inspection
there were nearly 100 men employed on the
works altogether, including the machinery
and otherwise in connection with the mine,;
and something like £IOOO per month was
paid away in wages. The rate of wages has
been maintained throughout at £4 per week.
The first crushing from the mine was one
of 100 tons at Martin’s machine, Georgetown,
in August, 1873, which yielded 410 oz. ; but
subsequent crushings gave much smaller
returns, down to IGdwt.per ton —possibly less.
In April, 1874, a one-fourth share was
offered to Messrs Steel and Hardie for £3O,
and was not taken ; and even in 1878 or 1879
after a bad crushing at Clifton and Aplin’s
15 stamper, a few miles away the whole
claim was offered to that firm by the present
proprietary for £IOOO. This was before they
entertained the idea of erecting crushing
machinery for themselves in connection with
the claim, which was only decided upon about
seven years ago, when a fine 10 stamper was
imported, and put up within a few hundred
| yards of the mine, and convenient to an ex-
I cellent site for a dam —Mr Gilies being the


engineer. The returns, however, though
payable, were not good ; for ordinary ap-
pliances were of no avail for saving gold from
mundio-charged stone, and the Cumberland
was now well into the mundic. The owners
knew they were losing more than half the
gold—probably two-thirds. There was
nothing for it, therefore, but to cast around
for the most improved appliances for the
treatment of mnndie stone ; and so Mr Steel,
in 1879, started for Charters Towers first,
where he inspected the various methods of
treatment in operation there, and then pro-
ceeded to Sandhurst, “the metropolitan
goldfield of Victoria,” for the purpose of
examining the processes most in favor on that
venerable diggings The outcome of, this
expedition was Ihe introduction shortly after
of the “grinding ” appliances now in use at
the machine, and theperfecting, as far as may
be of one of the finest 10-stamper crushing
plants in the colonies. The result exceeded
their most sanguine expectations. Sixteen
pennyweight stone that had been, yielded
two ounces and over at once, while the pro-
duct of better quality atone improved in a
corresponding degree.
When I visited the mine a total of 20,323
tons of stone had been crushed for a return
of 50,500 oz. of gold. Since then the
claim Uas on one occasion, at least, been
crushing at two machines simultaneously, and
the totals now would be something like 25,000
tons for 62,000 oz, of the value, at £3 I
per ounce, at £186,000.
The yield of gold from first to last may
may be set down at from 16dwt. to 5 oz.
per ton —the average, 2J oz. I don’t
know that anything as poor as 15 dwt. has
been crushed since the new appliances were
introduced j but a fine patch of 5-oz. stone
amounting to hundreds of tons, was got out
at the 250 some time ago, and received the
benefit of the new appliances.
Close to the machine about 12,000 tons of
tailings from the original orushings is stacked,
the lowest assay of which (so Mr Steel in-
forms me) was 2oz. to the ton. How
this is to be treated for the extraction of the
gold had not been decided upon when I was
at the mine. Roasting and chlorination is
recognised as (he most effective process, but
it is also by far the most costly. It would
appear that the bulk of the gold contained in
the tailings cannot be saved without incur-
ring an expenditure that makes a big figure
on the debit side of profit and loss, and takes
much of the gilt off the gingerbread.
When I visited the mine ihere were thirty
men employed underground, the main body
of whom were engaged taking out stone
between the 330 and 250 feet levels, working
upwards. It was calculated that the stone
between the two levels would amount to not j
less than 12,000 tons, and that its removal [
would occupy a couple of years. The reserves i
of stone in the unworked ground within the i
limits of this lease are practically illimitable, I
as, having regard to the great depth of the-
Day Dawn at Charters Towers, and one ortwo
kindred mines which have been floated for
immense suras (Day Dawn ,£288,000) a
depth of 330 feet with tens of thousands of
tons yet to be taken out above that level, is a
mere trifle as effecting the resources of the
mine, and the Cumberland never showed to-
greater advantage, either in quality or bulk
than it does at the 350. It is considered by
those capable of judging that before the side
boundary is reached in any part of the lease,,
the reef, on the underlie will have to be
worked for over 2000 feet.
MrSteel informs me that with their present
appliances one ounce per ton pays, so that,
the average _being 2J oz. there is some-
thing like £5 per ton availablefor dividends.
By putting on the requisite number of hands,
therefore—and there’s ample room under-
ground for the required additional number—
a steady and permanent profit of £30,000 per
annum could be reckoned upon with almost
as much complacency and certainty as
interest for money invested in the funds. To
accomplish this a considerable addition would
also have to be made to the batteries and
other machinery in this connection. Even
now, with a comparatively limited number of
bands getting out stone, the crushing power
(150 tons per week) is insufficient, and only
recently, in consequence of this (as previously
stated,) a lot of 1000 tons was put through
No. 1 Sonth machine—known as the “ Three
Jacks.” In the event of the transfer of the
property to the new company being an
accomplished fact, no doubt the present
machinery will be removed to a more, elevated
site in the vicinity of its present site, another
fifteen stampers added, and the mine
altogether worked on a far more extensive
scale than at present.
The steadiness in the yield of gold from
the Cumberland for a long time past affords
satisfactory evidence of the stability and
permanence of the mine. The yield has been,
and continues to be, 1500 to 1600 oz. per
month, of the value of from £4500 to £4BOO,
or from £llOO to £l2OO per week.
The Cumberland Machinery, —The
battery is alO stamper of 8 cwt each. The
appliances consist of four of Brown and Stan-
field’s concentrators, eight Wheeler’s pans,
two Berdans, and three of Wheeler’s settlers.
These are driven by two 15-horse power
engines, one of which works the battery and
the concentrators and the other the pans,
Berdans, and settlers. Altogether the plant
appears to he as near perfection as crushing,
amalgamating, and grinding machinery can
be brought. Were it possible to improve upon
it, it would have been improved at any time
and at any cost. But there is nothing
superior to it, either in this colony or on the
New South Wales or Victorian goldfields.
The capacity of the battery is 130 tons per
week, and of the pans 60 tonspeiweek. There
is scarcely any perceptible vibration any-


where. Mr Harry Gilies, under whose
superintendence the whole of the machinery
■was erected, is acknowledgedly one of the
best engineers in the colonies, and has put
up several other machines in the Georgetown
district. But for the Cumberland machinery
he is deserving of special credit, because of
the elaborate and complicated character of
the details.
The winding engines are : —At No. 1 shaft
a 12 horse-power Robey’s “mining" engine ;
and at No. 2, a 10 horse-power Garrett’s
double-cylinder portable engine, with friction
gear.
The Dam has very large storage capacity,
and receives the water from a very large
surface area. With fairly moist seasons it
should carry water sufficient to keep the
machine going throughout the year, and I
think it has generally done so. It is fenced
in with a substantial fence. It’s greatest
depth is 13 feet, and it backs the water for
half a mile.
A smelter named Samuel has lately put up
smelting works on a small scale near the
machine, for the purpose of casting stampers,
shoes, dies, and other things that require no
particular finish. The power for the blast
is supplied by one of the machine engines.
No. 1 North Cumberland.
This is a 15 acre lease (32) and
belongs to a Melbourne Company,
A straight shaft has been sunk
150 feet south of the outcrop, which struck
the reef at 130 feet, the reef being from 5 to
6 feet wide, but poor. Then drove south with
the object of ultimately connecting the shaft
with the winze. Had a crushing of 70 tons
of quartz and granite dyke mixed, which gave
the not payable return of lldwts. per ton.
When I visited the mine there were only four
men in the company’s employ—the manager,
caretaker and book keeper, and two men
underground driving to connect the winze
with the main level —the mine at the time
being partially exempted from the labor con-
ditions. After having broken through from
the winze, it is intended to sink another ISO
feet on the underlie and continue stuping
north on the main level. The drive south is
now within 60 feet of the northern boundary
of the prospecting claim. The formation in
which work is now being slowly carried on is
very large, and from the fact that water
percolates freely through the rook, the
manager is of opinion that he is not far from
a big body of stone. About 150 tons is now
“ a t grass” waiting for crushing, which will
be put through the company’s battery when
the new concentrators (Brown and Stan-
field’s), arrive ; a great mistake having been
made in the first place, by sending concen-
trators of a new pattern with a motion quite
different to that of B. and S’s., which have
answered well in this district. The new con-
centrators were perfectly useless, and have
been removed. Similar concentrators were
sent with the Etheridge Company’s crushing
machinery, and also with the Durham’s, and
in every case they were condemned. These
three companies (whose mining property also
embraces the New Zealand and Lord Byron
lines of reef) are all mixed up in some way,
and the proprietors of one of the Melbourne-
foundries, being large shareholders, and
having, apparently plenty of these unfor-
tunate concentrators on hand, why, what
better opportunity of getting rid of them
could possibly occur than to send them to the-
Etheridge. It was a serious mistake on the
part of the Melbourne directors of No. X
North to erect expensive crushing machinery,
and a dam that of itself cost £llOO, before
they ma.de the slightest move in the direction
of opening their mine, proving the ground or
getting out stone. The idea was, of course,
that they were within a very short distance
of where the P.O. Company were getting
good stone and a big reef, and that they were
safe to strike the same reef at any time they
liked to sink. So far, they reckoned without
their host, although the prospects of the
mine yet turning out a good payable mining-
property, if competently and perseveringly
managed, are good enough to warrant the
expenditure of a few thousand pounds more
(if necessary) for its development, inasmuch
as the best of the p.c. stone runs north, and,
as previously stated, the shoots of gold
mainly tend that way. One thing is plain,
however—the management of the mine must
be left entirely to the judgement of the local
mining manager, and not emanate from the-
office of the directors in Melbourne. This
management by wire has been the cause of
no end of loss, contusion, and the ultimate
suspension and abandonment of Queensland
mines, which were not bogus concerns, but
legitimate mining properties under judicious
and economical management. I am informed
on the best authority that ,£IOOO would be
Sufficient to put the mine in good working
order. No extra machinery would be required,
as there is a good whim already erected,
which with the whip on the underlie, would
be sufficient for the purpose. The interest of
the money so f 'olishly spent on the battery
and dam would have kept at least three men
at work in proving the mine from first to last.
The battery consists of 10 stampers of 9owt.
each. There are five wheelers pans, and
Brown and Stanfield’s concentrators will
soon be in position. The driving power is
one of Marshall’s 11 horse-power portable
engines. The water is supplied by a powerful
Monitor pump. The clam is a splendid sheet
of water when full, and could, with a com-
paratively small additional expenditure, be
made to carry sufficient water forall purposes
during the whole year, however dry the
season. All that’s necessary is to heighten
the embankment another seven feet. The
dam is now 320 feet long and 100 feet broad
at its widest. The height of the embankment
is 24 feet, and it backs the water up, when


full, for a quarter of a mile. The mining
manager is Mr Dennis O’Doherty, who has
the repu ation of being an able, energetic,
and careful miner, and a good all-round man.
He has also the management of the New
■Zealand (within a short distance of the
Cumberland) for the same Company,
No. 1. South Cumberland.
This claim which is known as
the “Block” is also a lease and is likewise
the property of a Southern Company. As in
the case of No. 1 North the erection of a fine
machine and dam first occupied the attention
of the direction, the crushing machinery
(described below) being the most complete
and effective in the district (barring the
Cumberland) while'the dam is capable of
furnishing a sufficient supply for several
months without the assistance of a single
shower. The lease was first taken up by the
late F. H. Stubley, who I believe was partly
instrumental in forming the Company, which
has now been in the occupation of the ground
for more than seven years. They have
followed the formation on the underlie, for
•320 feet, and then driven North until they
are close to the O’Brien and Co.’s (N.C.)
boundary but without being successful, so
far, in showing payable stone. The shaft is
provided with excellent steam winding gear,
and altogether several thousands of pounds
have been expended on the mine without re-
sult. Different to some of the other southern
■companies who have speculated on the
Etheridge, the cheques of No. 1 South have
always been as good as gold. A lot of 30 or
40 tons was put through the mill some time
ago, but with a very indifferent result. Very
few men are employed in the mine just now,
nor have been for the last year or two ; but
it is very probable, either that work will be
carried on more vigorously before long, or
that the present company will dispose of the
property. Being so close to the southern
levels of the famous p.c., the mine ought to
be well worth the attention of an enterprising
company with plenty of capital, and were
the same property only on Charters Towers
without going further it would command a
large amount of money if offered as it now
stands, and work would be carried on in a
far different manner to what it has been on
the Etheridge. The crushing and grinding
machinery and dam are situated about a mile
from the mine, the machinery consisting of a
ten-stamper battery, four Wheeler’s and four
Berdans, with the requisite number of Brown
Stanfield’s concentrators. The machine
obtains partial employment by grinding
tailings from the Georgetown machines
occasional small parcels from Croydon until
recently ; and lately it put through 1000 tons
for the Cumberland Prospecting Claim. Now
that Croydon has machinery of its
own, of course, the small revenue hitherto
derived from the field will be lost.
The Mystery Co. (Cumberland).
This claim including the Sumer-
set—was another losing affair, several
thousands of southern capital having
been expended upon it, with scarcely a
fraction by way of return. It was first
owned by Curran Brothers, and after being
sold to the Company was managed by Mr
Robert Curran. I think it was on the faith
of some very rich returns having been
obtained from some small parcels of stone
and pyrites sent to England to be tested by
Mr Curran that the Company was formed,
and the capital subscribed. But tie
management of the mine, after all, appears to
to have lain with the southern directors,
who, if X am rightly informed, ordered the
sinking of a large, expensively timbered
straight shaft against the will of the nominal
mining manager, instead of following the
underlie in the old shaft, and other parts of
the reef from the surface, and getting out
crushings which would, at least, pay a moiety
of the expenses from the start. However,
after losing a good few thousands, the com-
pany got impatient, ana not satisfied with
the prospect ahead, they relenquished the
enterprise, since which the mine has never
been re-occupied.
Miscellaneous Mines.
In the palmy days of the Cumberland there
were a score or two of reefs working within
a radius of three or four miles of the p.c.,
some of which —the John Mitchell, Victory,
Three Jacks, Monkland, und others —were of
good width, well defined, and gave promise
of paying well. There were, in fact a
number of payable crushings, and the Monk-
land turned out very rich stone on several
occasions. But I can’t find that any of these
claims gave anything like a “ rise ”to any
party of men who worked them.
Of all these claims the Monkland and the
Warrior only are now being worked, each
about a mile from the town, south and east
respectively. The shaft in the Monkland,
(O’Brien and C 0.,) is now being worked at
the 120 foot level, and the stone raised is of
good quality, but charged with mundic in
an extroardinary degree. lam informed
there is 80 per cent, of mineral to 30 per cent,
of quartz in the stuff now sent to the mill.
It is as heavy as lead. One crushing of 40
tons last year gave a return of 6oz. 7dwt. per
ton, and before that a parcel of sixty tons
yielded a return of 7oz. per ton. Mr
VV. Antonie, storekeeper, of Georgetown got
out a crushing or two many years ago, even
better than either of these. But the claim
is expensive to work, and the mineral de-
mands extraordinarily careful treatment; so
that it may be a moot point whether it pays
Messrs O’Brien and Co. now, much over
wages, when all is said. The vein appeers
to average a width of from 18 inches to 2
feet.
The Warrior is a well defined vein of good


size, and the two men working are sufficiently
'satisfied with the yield from their crushings
to continue to work the ground after having
-given it a good trial.
THE REEES BETWEEN CUMBEHLAND
AND GEORGETOWN
The Durham P,C.
c The Durham P.C. is about twelve miles
from the Cumberland, on the Georgetown
road. For some time after its discovery it
was one of the richest reefs in the district.
Opened in 1871 by Ted Cook and a party of
three others (of which Owen Cassady was
'One), the mine for a year or two yielded
large profits, the crushings running as high
■as Boz. to the ton. It is now owned
•by a Melbourne Company, but between Cook’s
time, and its getting into the hands of the
company, other parties worked the mine with
more or less succes ; and altogether up to
that time, a very large quantity of gold was
taken out of the claim. Under the Com-
pany’s management a depth of 312 feet has
been reached in the main shaft, the reef
going down almost straight, and a drive of
316 feet north put in a little higher up, to-
gether with one of 25 feet south. At 260 feet
the reef has been driven south for 40 feet,
and at the 180 feet level a drive north was
carried in for 140 feet. The general width
of the reef varies from to 3 feet, but the
formation has widened out in places from
T 2 to 14 feet, with good stone through the
whole of it. Since the company’s occupation,
2000 tons of stone have been raised and
crushed, the average yield of which has been
H oz. per ton, of the value of c£3 Is to
2s per ounce clear ; there have been crush-
ingB that have produced ooz. to the ton
m the company’s time. A new shaft was
started some time since 230 feet north of the
engine shaft, in which the reef was struck
two feet wide crushing good gold. The mine
makes very little water, two hours with the
■engine every morning being sufficient to clear
the workings. There has been as many as
54 men (including engine drivers) employed
at a time on the mine since it has been in the 1
hands o£ the company, but at present it is I
registered, only Captain Mitchell and one or <
two assistants being in charge to look after 1
the property and to put through the machine 1
■any parcels of stone that may be brought in <
from claims in the vicinity, of which the ■
Aurora and Hawkin’s Hill were, not long ao o . 1
and Stanfield’s will take thmr place. The
engine at the main shaft is one one of Robey’s
double winding of 12-horse power. The dam
in connection with the machinery is a noble
sheet of water, one of the finest in the dis-
trict. The Company’s lease is one of 25 acres.
I believe that up to the time work was
suspended, notwithstanding the large quantity
of gold realised, there were no profits, but
that the balance was considerably on the
other side of the book. It is a great pity, for,
although an occasional hitch occurred in cash
matters it was soon rectified, and certainly
the company spent their money without stint,
and did a good for the district.
The New Zealand
is also the property of the Mel-
, bourne Syndicate, and like their other
properties, is a lease. It is located
about a mile further than the Durham, qn
the Georgetown road, and was originally
taken up by Riley and party in the early days
of the goldfield. The New Zealand was re-
garded for a long time as a crack claim and
before the prospectors sold out, had been
getting good gold all the ti.ne. Like the
Durham, party after party went into it, all
getting more or less gold, and, altogether a
great deal of work was done under ground
before it was taken up, in connection with
other mining properties, by the Melbourne
people. Under the company the bottom
level (about 170 feet) was driven north 130
feet from the shaft, when a break occurred
in the payable stone and a very large bulge of
inferior stone intruded itself. After getting
through this it was expected the previous
shoot of golden stone would be struck again,
but beyond the bulge there was a blank which
continued for 50 feet in the drive. Just
where the large body of duffer stone cut out
a small vein of particularly rich ore came in,
a small quantity of which, crushed with the
ordinary appliances, went 33| oz. to the
ton ; but there was very little of it. A sample
of this “Argosy ” was sent by Mr O’Doherty
—(who manages this mine in conjunction with
No. 1 North Cumberland) —to the Melbourne
directors who ordered that a crushing be
taken out at once from where the sample was
obtained. It was of no avail for the mining
manager to protest there was nothing of it—
only a “ bunch”—and that to get out a
crushing was impossible. The decree of the
Melbourne directors had gone forth. They
Aurora and Ha wkin’s Hill were, not long ago, were determined upon a crushing from the
contributing the greater quantity. The lurking place of that 330 z. patch, and
battery is one of 10 .stampers, driven by a if the manager disobeyed it was at his peril.
Robey’s engine of 18 horse power. The gold But he did disobey notwithstanding, and
saving appliances, other than the tables, are instead of committing to an expensive folly-
four Wheeler’s pans. The machinery in- that would certainly damage the prospects of
eluded the same useless, complicated, jerky the mine in a serious degree, he used his own
■concentrators that were supplied to No. 1 N.
Cumberland and the Etheridge Crushing Co.
These have been oast adrift, and in the event
of the Company resuming operations (which
they probably will do very shortly), Brown
judgement,and cleared out the southern level,
in which he had an idea there was good gold
to be got. In a week he had extended the
drive five feet, and stiuoka three-feet reef of
good looking stone, carrying payable gold.


This was just at the time I made my visit,
and consequently too soon for a sufficient
amount of work to be done to enable the
manager to form a proper opinion as to the
value of the discovery. But it appeared to
be a good thing, and the “ backs ” went right
up to the surface—possibly carrying thousands
of tons, as in that part of the lease the surface
had not been broken for a considerable dis-
tance. The active working of this lease, too,
like No. 1 North Cumberland, the Durham,
and the Lord Byron, in the same vicinity—
(all owned by the Melbourne syndicate)—is
suspended for the present. What they will
do ultimately, people in the district have not
the slightest idea. There are four miners and
One engine-driver at present employed on the
New Zealand, the engine (used for winding)
having been originally a traction engine with
vertical boiler. About 20 tons of stone from
the north drive is at grass.
The Lord ByronJ
On the same road, is within three
miles of Georgetown. It is now
a 10 acre lease, owned by the Melbourne
people, but little or no work has been done
in it for some time past. It was first taken
up in ’7l by the late Jesse Turner, to whom it
proved a profitable mine for some three years
or upwards. It is said that at one time he
had made a clear profit of more than £4OOO,
but things changed, and a big crushing that
brought him £L 00 in debt, followed by
others that were not payable, although not
equally disastrous, made a sad inroad into his
credit balance at the bank. Mr Turner after
a time got tired of this, and with what was
left of his small fortune he built a public
house at Port Douglas, and Mr William Kelly
and a few other local men took up the running
&nd spent a few thousands on the mine. This
little company had to succumb, too, after a
time, having lost as much as they felt
justified in doing, but they stuck to it bravely
while there was hope. The new company
have done some work in the bottom level,
South, at 180 feet, where the drive is in 60
feet, and in the 130 foot level, where they are
in between 40 and 50 feet. This part of the
mine is where they worked, following a course
of stone 3.j feet wide that gave 15 dwt. per
ton. At the 180 feet theie are two reefs, with
(together) six or seven feet of stone, between
which is a mullock vein. Eighty tons of this
stone crushed at the Durham went 15 dwt.
to the ton. The idea is, that the shoot in
the earlier days turned out “ hatsful ” of
gold is further south, and the first thing the
Company will do, in all probability, when
they resume work (should they do so) will
be to drive further south in search of it. The
main shaft is furnished with a 12-horse power
winding engine and gear.
Miscellaneous Mines.
Within a very short distance of the Dur-
ham, New Zealand, and Byron, there was
formerly a score or more other reefs actively
at work, and, for a time at least, turning out
payable crushings. The Never Mind
(McDermott), Hibernia (Riley), Hart’s
Content (Frank Hart), Black Snake,
Royal Standard, and others were at one
time regarded with great favor, and the
majority had numbers upon them. The
time will come, but not yet, when most of
these lines will again be at work, and, under
more favorable conditions than formely, will
no doubt in very many cases pay for the
working. Hart’s Content was opened in
January’72, by Frank Hart, Paddy O’Mara,
and James Watson. Their deepest sinking
was 52 feet, when they were beaten by the
water (which they struck pretty heavy at 46
feet) and the remarkable stench which it
omitted. The reef averaged 10 inches in
width, and was 20 inches wheie they left off,
not having touched the mundic. There were
three crushings from the claim with the
following result : —66 tons, 2140 z.; 80 tons,
1970 z. ; and 80 tons, 161 oz. The value of
the gold was £2 18s. After Hart and party
abandoned the claim several other parties
parties had small crushings of surface stone,
some of which went as high as 3| oz.
Latterly, a local company, of which the late
Dr. Sharp was the principal, took up 800 feet
along the base line of the reef, sunk a shaft
60 feet from the eastern peg of the old pros-
pecting claim, and put up a whim. But the
result was disappointing and the company soon
broke up. Riley and party sold the Hibernia
to Nolan and Jones, (machine owners) after
the first crushing, which yielded 3oz. sdwt.
per ton, and their successors worked it to the
water level (38 feet), getting out several
payable crushings—the reef averaging a width
of 15 inches; after which they gave it up.
The Hibernia is supposed to be a continuation
of the Durham line of reef. On the same
line, on the other side of the Durham P.C., a
claim named the Flying Cloud looked well at
one time, the first crushing having yielded
3£oz. to the ton, but afterwards the stone got
poorer and the claim was abandoned. Other
parties worked it since {hen and got out
small crushings, but it has long since been
idle. Hawkin’s Hill, in the vicinity of the
Durham, has turned out considerable quan-
tities of stone from time to time principally
| from the surface. Mr Peter Hansen was the
last who attempted to make the hill pay, but
although he “ deserved success” he, unfor-
tunately, did not “ achieve ” it. After work-
ing for some time with two or three white
wages men, he crushed a big lot at the
Durham machine, which only yielded lldwt.
per ton, and was consequently a long way
from payable. He next got a gang of China-
men, and had another crushing or two of
surface on the cheap labor ticket, but it was
no use. The stone only went half an ounce,
and therefore wouldn’t pay for tucker and
working expenses—leaving “wages” out of the
! question, whether to Chinamen or Europeans,


THE REEFS UP THE RIVER PROM
GEORGETOWN TO FINNIGAN’S
(CHARLESTON).
About s quarter of a mile from Georgetown
the Delaney River junctions with the Etheri-
dge, and beyond that, right up to Goldsmith’s
(forty miles from Georgetown) all the reefs
are on the south side of the Delaney, or be-
between that river and the Etheridge, north-
erly. I may add that the Etheridge, further
west, flows into the Gilbert, which after
receiving the waters of the Lynd, the Einas-
leigh, Robertson, Percy and several other
rivers, enters the sea at Van Dieman’s Inlet
on the north-west coast.
The Overland Telegraph. coi
Starting with the Overland Telegraph, the ma
first reef opened in the district (March 1871), Mi
I will endeavor to give a brief description of mi
some of the vicissitudes which have attended on
the several efforts made from time to time in goi
the direction of developing the mine. For nei
some time after it passed from Mudgee Jack sta
and Berwick, to Messrs. Cassady, Brook, pic
Collins and Marsh, the reef was between two wa
and three feet wide, and turning out huge rec
blocks of stone that showed "gold right the
through, and the rubble also showed good for
gold. The reef went invery fiat, and so was he
followed for a time in a wide excavation giv
rather than a shaft. Nothing particularly ths
rich was struck until sixteen feet on the the
underlie had been reached, at which point mil
there occurred a remarkably rich patch. It rac
was probably not more than two or three cwt thi:
weight but the gold was evenly and thickly leg
distributed throughout the whole of it, and anc
on every broken particle. Collins’ had In
already started for Sydney with theobject of erh
floating the mine for a comparatively modest unt
sum, and was at Cardwell when the lucky the
strike was made. The Etheridge Telegraph poi
Office was fortunately open for business by uos
this time—(one of the stations of the overland mei
telegraph from Cardwell to the Gulf) —and out
so the good news was at once wired to the his
delegate, who was desired to Wait at Cardwell pan
until a bagful of specimens reached him. The peg
specimens were good enough to float anything coir
if speculators would only be content with the!
specimens. But it is not so with sensible fron
people as a rule, although many a duffer it ir
mine has been floated on the faith of sped- by 1
mens without either inquiry or inspection, grea
However, a firm of Sydney brokersplaeed the couj
mine in the market for 480,000, and issued a Mar
very highly coloured prospectus in which fori
there was a good deal of “ blow ” mingled Cou:
with a not very large modicum of fact. The that
prospects of the reef turning out a good lawj
mining property were very fair, independent ever
of the “patch”; but the prospectus was a vietc
most extravagant composition. The Sydr
“treasure” was cutout, just like a huge of g
tumour might be, and the reef again presented takei
its original appearance of a two or three J (the
I ounce vein. Thus it was when an expert
from the Sydney brokers came up to inspect
and report upon the mine, and as this
report did not bear out the state
n ments made by Collins, and printed
- in _ the prospectus, the brokers were
s not inclined to push the venture as they
s- otherwise would have done, while the
- majority of those who would have gone into
- it largely turned their back on it altogether,
r Shares went off very slowly indeed, and both
r the brokers and the owners saw plainly
- enough that if the company was to become
r an established fact, at all, the present owners
t must take up by far the greater portion of
the shares themselves. This at last, they did
receiving some money, but not much, aiid the
company took possession of the mine and
i machinery. For some time past Collins and
, Mai sh were in constant attendance on the
1 mine and crushing machine, hands were put
1 on galore, and everything appeared to be
i going on swimmingly, the mine turning out
f nearly suflieient stone to keep their ten-
t stamper going of itself, while there were
, plenty of other working claims in the vicinity
> waiting to crush whenever a slackness occur-
; red. Your correspondent was on the spot at
; the time, and frequently called at the machine
I for information respecting the crushings, but
> As soon had reason to suspect these were not
‘ g iren correctly, and having satisfied himself
that such was the case, he refrained from
i then from publishing anything about the
; mine further than he could vouch the aoou-
; racy of. The mine did not pay, and every-
thing connected with it—mining managers
legal managers, Sydney and local directors’
and shareholders, were all alike dissatisfied.
In every quarter there was blame and re-
crimination, and change succeeded change,
until, after a time, Mr Patterson, brother of
the great Rockhampton butcher, was ap-
pointed mining manager, and Mr Marsh’s
nose was, through this and other disappont-
ments, put out of joint. It was so much put
out, in fact, that (the machine site being in
his name and never transferred to the com-
pany) he went over one day, put in fresh
pegs, and served the representative of the
company with a written notice to remove
their crushing and other machinery forthwith
from the ground ! There was a law case over
it in the Warden’s Court, presided over by
by Mr St. George, which was conducted with
great ability on both sides, and lasted for a
couple of days. There were no lawyers, Mr
Marsh acting for himself, and Mr Patterson
for the company, each bringing with him into
Court a large bundle of documents to which
that carried by the typical Philadelphia
lawyer would sink into insignificance. How.
ever, the company ultimately obtained the
victory. But while this was pending and the
Sydney broker and directors were in a state
of great irritation at the state things bad
taken, my friend Brigadier-General Bennett,
(the eminent photographer), who, in con-


junction with Mr Petersen, then Deputy
Registrar General, had a 10-stamper machine
on the Delaney, within a short distance of a
large partially worked mine called the Spero
Meliora, went to Sydney with the object of
floating that reef together with his crushing
plant, for .£25,000. The broker (I forget his
name), had received intellegence of the
“jumping” on the very morning Mr Bennett
called on him at the Exchange for the pur-
pose of securing his assistance in floating the
Spero. There was a crowd of people “ on
Change ” that morning, and he was walking
about in the most savage temper imaginable,
brooding over the news, when Bennett came
up and told him his business. “ Damn you
and the Etheridge,” was the excited rejoinder
of the broker ; “ I’ll wash my hands out of
it from this day,” and in another moment he
was in the rostrum denouncing the whole
district and the people in the strongest lan-
guage he could command. “ This very
morning,” he said, “ I have received a mes-
sage that they have not only jumped a claim
upon which I, and those with me, have spent
several thousands of pounds, but they have
actually jumped the machine ! They are a
pack of scoundrels altogether up there.” This
was not exactly the tact, as the machine was
not jumped, although I think an attempt
was made on the claim. However, the state-
ment effectually prevented Mr Bennett from
getting off the Spero, which, notwithstanding,
Co.’s agent being in ossession, stopped all'
further work and registered the claim.
Certainly a large quantity of gold has been
taken out of the ground, but I have reason
to believe that best it never paid a party
of men <£4 per week at any time from the-
start, while the Sydney Company lost very
considerably. No. 1 North, on the same line
line was taken up shortly after the p.c. by
Hudson Bros., a pair of careful, hardworking
men who knew by prospectiug exactly what
they were doing every day they worked. They
had a number of crushings during the two or-
three years they worked the claim, every one-
of which was payable, and when they left the-
claim and the district they must have cleared
more than .£6OO each, over all expenses, out
of it. They were remarkably saving in their-
ways. During the whole time were in
Georgetown every particle of waste candle-
grease was religiously saved and put into an*
old kerosene tin. This was full when they
were ready to leave, and they offered it for-
sale to Mr Willmett, as being suitable, if’
“ rendered ” down in a proper manner, for-
lubricating his crushing machinery ! Some
good gold was also got near the surface of No..
2 North by James Williams, vho hired a
number of men, and got out one or two.
crushings that gave him a small rise, but it
soon ran out, and was abandoned after a
short time
In 1873 Mi James Sutherland (lately
"'I -'J " *■— V J
was one of the most legitimate mining deceased), put up a 10-stamper near the Lords
ventures ever placed in the market. It was Byron reef, depending principally on springs;
subsequently worked by Crapp Bros, and
party, who did extremely well out of it; since
which it has been taken up by Harris and
party (Billy Mutton) who have erected a
winding engine on the claim. The company
stuck to the Overland Telegraph with
creditable pluck for a year or more after the
attempted jump, always receiving small con-
signments of gold, and hoping for better
things, but the claim never paid expenses,
and the “ better thing ” never came. A man
named Hansen, who had kept houses at
Grenfell and Eurongilly, in New South
Wales, succeeded Patterson, and under his
management several thousand tons of surface
were crushed, which went half an ounce and
under, but was never payable. Ultimately
the company threw it up, and some crushings
were afterwards taken out of it from time to
time by different parties, with varying results,
until within the last two or three years, Mr
Willmett, storekeeper, went into it with a
strong party, and, after a time, furnished the
claim with an eight-horse power Tangye
pumping and winding engine. When I visited
the claim, stone (probably paying) was being
raised from one of the shallower levels, but
the manager was of opinion that he would
have to drive another sixteen feet before he
reached the proper shoot of good stone. Mr
Willmett, unfortunately, fell into difficulties
just when the claim was getting into proper
working order, and Messrs Burns Philp and
for his supply of water. But like the Com-
pany’s mill, Croydon, the spring’s supply was;
but as a drop in the bucket for a crushing:
machine, and so, no rain having fallen for about
eight months after the machine was ready to.
start, it remained idle the whole of the time.
After the rain came a few hundred tons from,
the Byron, Golden Crown and other reefs im
the vicinity were put through, but ultimately
the machine was removed to Cloncurry,.
where it has remained ever since.
The Papua,
The “ Papa,” a few hundred yards down
the river from the Telegraph, was taken
up shortly after the last named reef, and has;
been worked and abandoned and re-worked
again by several parties since its original,
owners, Mich. Myne (“ Little Mick ”) and
Charley Teichart left it. “ What shall we-
name it Mick ?” asked Warden St. George
when the claim had been laid off. “Well,.
Mr George ” replied Mick, “this is the ‘daddy’
of all the reefs about here in my opinion.” 1
“ Suppose we call it the ‘ Papa,”
then” said Mr George, and the Papa
it was called accordingly. Myne and Teichart
s.ot several payable crushings out of the
claim, during the two yeais or so they stuck
I to it, and the reef maintained a good thick-
[ ness, varying from a foot to feet. But
| neither they, nor anyof those who succeeded
I them, made anything like a “ rise ” out of it,.


so far as I can ascertain. It was a good
“ stringer,” and some of the crushings put
money into the pockets” of Myne and others,
but not much. About five years ago Mr
Peter Hansen (formerly of Ravenswood),
who had been for some time prospecting
about the Etheridge without much success,
and until his funds had become too aDenuated
to carry on much further without replenish-
ment, took up the “ Papa ” as a lease, and
started for Sydney with the object of floating
it. The idea of Hansen succeeding in floating
a company was considered a good joke, and
when he left Georgetown carrying his swag
and with scarcely a sou in his pocket —(re-
marking, as he bid farewell to everyone,
“ that he would be back again soon with
plenty of money ”)—he was laughed at all
round, and Mr O’Brien told him “ he’d better
take a flock of sheep.” But Mr Hansen did
succeed, and that too with a number of the
most monied, influential, and shrewdest men
in Sydney—amongst whom the names of Mr
James Burns (Burns, Philp and Co.) figured
prominently. Mr Hansen had floated the
Papa (it was now the Papua ” —another
name for New Guinea) for £25,000 ; and when
he returned to Georgetown it was not as an
itinerant nfiner carrying his swag, but more
in the character of a millionarire. He drove
his hooded buggy and pair, and was dressed
like a gentleman ; wore driving gloves ; and
was bedecked with gold and jewels from stem
to stern. He had any amount of money “in
his clothes,” and apparently unlimited credit
at the bank. He spent money freely, for
Peter is one of the best hearted fellows in the
world; and very soon the local stocks of
champagne had run out, while supplementary
supplies of the exhilirating tipple, ordered by
urgent wire, were being pushed forward from
the spot wit all possible speed. Those who
laughed at Mr Hansen now courted him.
“Nothing succeeds like success,” and for a
time be was the lion of the town, and, by a
long chalk, the greatest man in it. A
manager named Muir was sent up, who was
also a great man—for spending the company’s
mon y. Hands ad libitum were set to work
on the mine ; Hot’s old ricketty ten-stamper
machine was purchassed by the Company for
twice its value; parcels of stone and tailings
were bought up at owners prices ; and horse
teams for which a fabulous price was paid by
the company were added to the company’s
conveniences for working the mine to advan-
tage and (of course), increasing the profits.
Thousands of pounds passed through the
fingers of the manager like water, and for
more than a year the “ Papua ” kept George-
town not only alive, but in a state of never
ending Jubilee. If it was not all beer and
skittles,” but was all champagne and billiards —
which was even better ; and all this time what
about the interests of the company ? This
question was often put in a whisper when
month after month passed away with little ;
to show for the information of the directors |
or the benefit of the company, but a heavy
expenditure and consequently a very ominous
melting away of the company’s capital. There
were plenty of strange stories going about,
and there are still, and ever will be until the-
days of our grandchildren, to whom they will
be handed down in the language of tradition
—between £30,000 and £35,000 of Sydney
money was spent in and about Guorgetown
by the local management of the Papua in
right princely style in less than a couple of
years, and how that when the supplies wrnre
exhausted the Etheridge sun was once more
totally eclipsed, and a subscription was got
up to enable the manager to leave the
district; while Mr Hansen, the great promoter
and local director, now again plain “Peter, ”
was once more reduced to the swag stage, and
looking out for some new enterprise on which
to exercise his genius. Whether during the
reign of Messrs Muir and Hansen the wages
sheets were stuffed, or whether double the
figure asked was sometimes “ paid ” for stone,,
mining material, and stores, or whether pay-
ment was made for goods never supplied on
certain understood conditions. I cannot say,
and sincerely hope that nothing of this sort
was practiced. The unavoidable expense
connected with the working of mines so far
in the interior is sufficiently great to justifiy
every manager in studying the most rigid
economy consistent with efficiency in the
working of his mine. That the Papua
management did not do this is patent to every
man and woman who was in Georgetown at
the time, but whether they are properly
chargeable with anything beyond injudicious
expenditure I cannot affirm. Certain it is
that the company’s original capital, and some
in addition was spent, while the value of the
gold realised from this claim, and from
purchased stone, was also absorbed; after
which the lease was registered ; but, being
unrepresented for several months, it wa*
taken possession of by Winden, b'ord and
party, who, however, after two or three
crushings, registered it for machinery. Since
then they abandoned the claim, and I am
just informed that the irrepressible “ Peter”
has re-pegged the lease, and is about to make
another effort to form a company to work it.
During the company’s term a straight shaft
was sunk ICO feet, and driven 100 feet south
and 40 feet north, the greatest depth at which
the mine has been worked being 130 feet on
the underlie, at which depth there is now a
large g.dd-bearing reef. Whether payable
or not depends very much on the manage-
ment of the mine, supposing it to be again
occupied, which no doubt it will be ; but to
make it a success the management must be
efficient and vigorous; and some capital will
have to be expended in machinery. I think
the pield of the Papa (or Papua; from first
to last may be set down as ranging from
19dwt. to 3£oz. to the ton, the average
| probably being about two ounces.
In connection I may add that, after the


break-up of the Papua Company, Mr Hansen
imported machinery for the treatment of
tailings, which he erected under a capacious
iron shed on the banks of the river at George
town, and proceeded to purchase tailings at
all the machines and wherever else stored by
the owners. On this machinery he borrowed
£5OO from the bank, but in consequence of
certain financial difficulties in which Mr
Hansen was involved becoming conspicuously
apparent, the bank closed on him before his
machinery was complete and he had had time
to realise upon the large stack of tailings
which he had now by him. The result was
that the plant and shed was sold by the
bailiff, and was knocked down for (I think)
£7O, and the bank being the purchaser. The
Police Magistrate’s son was the bailiff at the
time, but his father acted for him. It would
appear, however, that there was undue haste
and some informality in connection with the
sale—whether the sale was illegal altogether
or not —and consequently Mr Hansen brought
an action against the Bank of New South
Wales for a very large sum—several thousands
of pounds—for damages. The case was heard
before Mr Justice Cooper and a jury, in due
course, at Charters Towers, and after a trial
extending over three days the jury gave a
verdict for £l6OO odd and costs. The Judge
fully concurred with the finding of the jury,
and commented on severe terms on the action
of the bank manager (Mr Kellaway) and the
Police Magistrate in matter. It appears to
me, however, that Mr Kellaway only did his
duty to the bank, under whose direction he
was acting throughout the whole business.
The Bank appealed to the Full Court, and
the case was re-opened—Chief Justice Lilley.
presiding, and Mr Griffith and Mr Lilley junior
appearing for the bank, the plaintiff being
also fairly well represented by counsel. The
end of it all was that the Full Court reversed
the verdict of the jury and the judge, and
Northern Miner, and the Press and popular
opinion generally, and so there was nothing
for it in Mr Hansen’s altered circumstances,
but to seek the protection of the Insolvent
Court, which he did. As will be seen in
earlier portions of this history, Mr Hansen
nowise discouraged, and as vigorous as a two-
year-old, is still pushing his researches for
something good on the Etheridge, and is full
of confidence that it will erewhile come to
him.
Miscellaneous Mines.
The St. George is almost on a line with the
Telegraph, a little higher up the river. It
once had numbers on it, but neither p.c. nor
numbers ever paid anything better than
wages (except, possibly, a patch at wide in-
tervals), and generally failed to reach even
the wages standard. It was also one of the
first opened, and in its time it has had many
masters. The present working party are said
to be getting wages stone at about 100 feet,
the stone at surface indicating a width of
about nine inches of reef. It was in this clam
that a man named Tommy Anderson was
killed many years ago. He had fired a charge
and retreated to the foot of the shaft to-
await the explosion, leaving an open cask of
blasting powder not far from where the
burning fuse was slowly eating its way to the
powder. The hole and the cask of powder
exploded almost simultaneously, and Anderson
was blown a good way up the shaft. He
didn’t feel greatly hurt, however, but climbed
the ladder and walked to his tent without
assistance. But he died almost immediately
after.
The aforementioned reefs are close
to Georgetown, on the oppside side
of the river. On the Georgetown
side, within a few hundred yards of the
town, and extending principally south and
south-west, are some scores of reefs, many of
which have been famous in their day, but
only a few of which are now working.
One belt starts from Sandy Creek, near the
town, and takes in the City of Sydney, Vic-
toria, Paxo, and one or two others ; the
Spero Meliora not being far away.
The City of Sydney is right on the bank of
the creek, and makes some water. It is a
mundic reef, rich in gold when properly tested
but scarcely payable with the ordinary
tables. There was a crushing from it some
months ago at the Etheridge Co.’s battery,
with no appliances other than the tables, and
the result was as foreseen—the mundic and
the gold went into the river together, leaving
b t scant payment in the remnant saved for
the men’s labor. Th° reef is stated to be from
to sometimes 4 feet wide, is down nearly
40 feet, and has been driven for some dis-
stance with encouraging prospects, were the
stone properly treated. The Victoria is a
“ stringer ” fir*t opened by Mr Kirker (the
Native Dog) who got out for two or three
j crushings, more or less payable ; and was
ceeded by othe T s who did likewise ; but no
party stuck to it for any time. It is now
down to the mundic, and no doubt there is
plenty of gold in the stone to pay if it could
only be extracted at reasonable cost. The
Paxo was opened by Spero Daliatto in the
early days, but it never turned out anything
payable, and consequently has never had
much work done on it. The Spero Meliora I
have previously referred to incidentally in
the course of my Overland Telegraph observa-
tions. It has always been a large reef, carry-
ing good gold, and is so still, the vein varying
from two to four feet, and I think the
greatest depth 150 feet. But the reef has
been followed in long drives at different
levels and with a payable result as a rule.
Crapp Bros., who worked the claim for along
spell from five to seven years since, did well
out of if, and, as previously mentioned, when
I visited the claim not long ago, Harris and
party had put a winding engine upon it, and
were sinking a fresh shaft.
I think two or three of the above batch are


now registered, but they will all (barring
perhaps the Paxo) be actively worked again
in time to come.
A little further up the river, on the same
side, and within a mile or so of the town, are
the Better Luck (Brophy), Harp of Erin
(Curran), Outward Hound (P. O’Neil and
some others), all in active work many years
ago ; the Harp of Erin and Better Luck not
many months ago, but all are idle just now.
Those mentioned were amongst the first
claims taken up more than fifteen years ago,
and were for some time reckoned amongst the
best, but it is questionable whether either
the Better Luck or the Outward Bound paid
more than wages, except in an occasional
crushing ; while by more than one party the
Harp was worked for bare tucker. The
Harp was taken up as a lease a few months
back, and was worked for a short time by
half-a-dozen men in two shifts. They were
.getting out mundic stone at 35 feet from a
reef from 12 to 18 inches wide, and were very
sanguine about it when I called upon them.
But things changed for the worse afterwards,
and the men (who were all shareholders) re-
ceded one after the other, until at last, work
was suspended. It cannot be said, however,
that in this case, the reef had anything like a
fair trial. You cannot properly test a reef
without perseverance, and, if necessary,
spending some money upon it.
Not far from here, on Sandy Creek, and
within five miles of the town, is another group
of reefs, known as the Caledonia, the Teutonia,
Enterprise, and some others long since
defunct, which have sometimes turned out
fair quantities of gold. Only the p.c. Cale-
donian (Willmettand party), No 1 Caledonia,
known as the Saxon (Tidy and party), the
Enterprise, and the Teutonia (tribute) are
now at work. The Teutonia was one amongst
the early batches of reefs opened, and, for
a time, paid Jacob Weitzel and party at least
good wages ; but they ultimately got tired,
and left it. Within the last twelve years
it has changed owners many times, but with-
out bringing wealth to any of them. It was
latterly held by Messrs Willmett, Clough and
party, and what appeared (judging from the
retorted gold) to be a first rate yield from a
crushing of about 50 tons was brought into
‘the bank from the Cumberland Co.’s
machine. This retorted “gold” weighed
noj less than 3330z.—0r about 7oz.
to the ton, but when smelted it told
a different tale. The retorted subs! ance was
more than half lead, or other heavy foreign
metal, which, after smelting, returned Ifiloz
of gold—being less than one half.
Such an unexpected denoument brought
bewilderment and consternation and indigna-
tion into the camps of those who had been
paying in or working in the claim for a long
time, and were confident of a dividend, and
legal proceedings were actually initiated by
Mr Kelly against Burns, Philp and Co, for
the unusual responsibility their representa-
tive had taken upon himself in bringing the
gold from the machine without the authority
of the other shareholders, &0., &c. Possibly
the irritation having subsided, the action has
been allowed to drop, but respecting this I
have no positive information. The reef is,
however, sufficiently attractive to induce a
new party to work it, and to give the owners
a moiety of the gold they produce for the
privilege for working. The greatest depth is
50 feet.
The P.O. Caledonia was taken up many
years ago by Mr John Swan (big Swan) and
has been held by himself and party continu-
ously, until lately, when he sold out for
about i£7o. The mine is furnished with a
pumping and winding engine, formerly in use
on the City of Glasgow, up the river. Some
time since a continuation of the old shoot
was struck at about 180 feet, carrying good
gold. The vein is two feet wide in places,
but averages about a foot. The value of the
gold is about iB3 per oz.; but some parcels
have been of higher quality. The Saxon
(No. 1. Caledonia,"East), is an excellent claim
and manag'ed by a first-class miner—Mr
William Ikly—who owns half the claim. It
has 600 feet along the line of the reef, and
when X visited the mine they were down 85
feet, and sinking, driving and sloping at that
depth. Fifty tons of stone, *heavily charged
with mundic, were then at grass ; and were
being carted to the Three Jacks (No. 1 S.)
machine, Cumberland, to be crushed. The
carriage, crushing, and “grinding” would
cost about £3 per ton. A crushing of stone,
taking from the shaft down to 53 feet, had
yielded 7oz. per ton from 8 tons of mundic
stone, and 2Joz. per ton from 30 tons of
“ brown” stone. The 50 tons at grass, above
referred to, crushed Boz. per ton; and
very lately another crushing of about the
same quantity of stone gave a return of 7oz.
The thickness of the vein vanes
from a few inches to three feet —averaging
about nine inches. Value of the gold,
i£3 os. fid. The Enterprise is down 80 feet,
and sinking. The vein is hard and narrow,
but carries good gold.
Another group of reefs which, many years
ago turned out considerable quantities of
gold, lies a short distance back from the fore-
going, the principal of which in times gone
by, were the Golden Crown line and the Sur-
prise Reef. The P.C. Golden Crown was
taken up by Sandy Grant and party the
latter end of ’7l. The cap of the reef which
could be traced for a long distance showed
gold freely, and the surface stone lying about
was also" payable over a large area. Mr
Grant took out three large crushings from
the claim—one of 360 tons crushed at Suther-
land’s machine, which yielded 25dwt, per
ton. One of 127 tons also crushed at Suther-
land’s, 3oz. fidwt. per ton ; and the other 270
tons, (principally surface), crushed at
Martin’s, loz. per ton. The width of the
reef varied from ten inches to two feet. After


Grant’s time Dave Pyle took a l£oz. crushing
which left him in debt. The strike of the
reef was almost east and west, with only a
slight underlie, and three claims were worked
west of the prospectors. No. 1 was held by
Dan. McLaughlin and his mate, whose first
crushing went and he had some other
crushings, more or less payable. Steve Mc-
Can, Christie Barber, and mates were in No.
'2, and had a first crushing of loz. 14dwt. to
the ton. This and the other claims on the
line were worked by several parties after-
wards, and crushings got out. Only two
years ago Charles McCarthy and party took
a crushing from No. 2, which gave them
to the ton ; and Ned Donovan and party sunk
the p.c. shaft an additional depth of 60 feet,
having erected a whip on the claim ; but the
stone only went 18 dwt. No 3 was originally
worked by John Downey and party, whose
first crushing went only 18dwt.; but Mick
Gahan, just before he left for the Palmer,
took out crushing from the same claim.
A crushing of 34 tons of surface stone from
the line of reef, collected by Jack Campbell
produced 660 z. of gold. It is estimated
that, altogether, considerably over 2000 tons
were crushed from the Crown line, the yield
varying from 18 dwt. to 3^ (i z. per ton.
The Surprise was laid off shortly after the
•Crown, and for a time looked well, giving
more than one'payable crushing; but the
general result was not sufficiently good to
induce men to do any great amount of work
upon it.
A reef called the Root Hog or Die, not far
from the above produced some good crush-
ings for a time, but was ultimately abandoned,
None of these claims are at present occu-
pied.
Still further back from the river and about
seven miles from Georgetown, is the Aurora
reef, ou which a great deal of work had been
done at intervals, by different parties, since
its first opening in May 75. The gold is the
poorest on the field, being worth no more
than from 355. to 455. per ounce. The greatest
amount of work was probably done by Mr
William Kelly and a small local company,
by whom a large quantity of gold was obtained,
but I doubt whether they were much the
richer in the end, the expenses being very
considerable and the value of the gold so
small. Seven years ago Messrs Hodgkinson
and Brown put a five-stamper machine in the
vicinity of the reef and put through several
thousand tons of surface and some reef stone,
but although the returns were sometimes
more than payable and indicative of good
profits in time, I think these profits
were never realised, and, Brown dying,
the little machine was shifted to the Light-
house, where the widow (now Mrs Hely, of
the Transcontinental Hotel, Normanton)
made money with it by crushing for the few
claims in the vicinity. The reef has for
months passed owned solely by Thomas Cole
(better known as “ Happy Tom ”), his mate
in the claim having diel. He has had wages-
raen employed, and last year put through
several crushings, at the Durham and
Georgetown mills, which looked extremely
well on paper, and I believe paid a fair thing
in reality. I imagine that scarcely less than
1500 tons of stone have been crushed from
this claim, independent of the surface. It
is rumored that Cole will shortly make an
attempt to float the mine for not a very high
figure, and certainly not much worse ventures
than the Aurora have been offered to the
public.
pUU ilO.
This finishes what may be termed the
Georgetown reefs proper.
The Rocky TVtstrict.
Ten miles up the Delaney River from
Georgetown, following the road, the “Rocky’*
is reached, a little to the south of the river,
or one of its tributaries. Here the richest
patches of surface specimens and reef gold
that were ever unearthed in the district were
got, and that too, generally, without much
difficulty.
The Rocky, about six miles South by East
of the Caledonia line, was opened not long
after the rush set in, and for a time was one
of the liveliest and most prosperous sections
of the district. It is ten miles up the river
from Georgetown, on a tributary of Sandy
Creek, a branch of the Delaney. In the
early days the principal features of the
miningindustry here was “specimen hunting,’*
and for a year or two a fair proportion of the
two or three hundred men, who were scouring
the ranges and gullies with tomahawk and
tin dish were well rewarded in the shape of
nuggets and specimens—some of great value.
Graham and Russell got one specimen of
201 b. weight gross, that yielded 90oz.
of gold, with the pestle and mortar,
besides several of smaller size in a shallow
paddock which they sunk on the spot where
the specimen was picked up. They worked
in this paddock for several months, followed
a poor reef, and at last were beaten by water.
Alf. Murray, another old identity, was also
lucky both as a specimen hunter and a reefer.
After bagging a goodly number of remarkably
rich specimens, he struck a quartz vein (the
Blackall) from which he netted £250 the first
crushing, and then sold a share for <£3o. He
and his mate cleared £6OO a man in six weeks,
when the gold appears to have run out.
Specimens containing from lOoz. to 40oz.
of gold were frequently got from surface
“ tapping,” and it has been estimated that as
much as 2000 oz. have been obtained in
a single gully in this way. These richly
charged pieces were frequently got by the
side of reefs of which they must at some time
have formed a portion, which reefs —strange
to say—on being worked proved in nearly
every case, all but valueless. A large number
of reefs were opened within a radius of a
couple or three miles of the “ waterholes ” in
the vicinity of the first finds, and an excellent


10-stamper machine was soon placed on the
ground on the ground by Mr W. O. Hodg-
kinson. Public houses, stores and shanties
were not long in putting in an appearance, as
a matter of course, and for a time O’Dowd.
Lynch and Alf. Murray (who had retired
from mining and turned dispenser of “ nips ”)
did a roaring business. But the reefs as a
rule, did not turn out well, and the time
came when the game of specimen-hunting
•ceased to be a profitable occupation.
In the matter of the reefs, however, there
'was a splendid exception in the case of the
“Try No More,” owned by Alec. Mann, Mich.
AL Davis, Ned Downes and Peter the Italian.
This reef was wonderfully rich in patches
If tons of the golden stone having yielded 9340 z.
-of the precious metal. The bulk ot
'the stone, from which the smaller quantity
■was packed, -was subsequently crushed at
Martin’s machine, Georgetown, when 306
tons produced 31270 z. of gold or, alto-
gether, over 13 oz. per ton, the value of
the gold being from <£3 2s. to £3 ss. But
the “glory” of the Try-No-More “de-
parted” soon after this supreme effort, and
after a few more crushing and a good deal of
prospecting, the golden stone ran out alto-
gether. The prospectors had discovered the
reef by tracing surface specimens up to it, and,
on sinking, good gold was got in about one
inch of stone on the foot wall for ten or
twelve feet, after which the vein opened out
to a foot in width. At the water-level (35
feet) drives were carried in from two shafts j
190 feet apart until communication was i
opened between them, and with No. 1 W.
(who were also driving at that depth). At i
this time the Palmer rush broke out, and the
claim was abandoned in favor of the new
Eldorado. I should add, however, that be- |
fore finally giving up the mine, the party had
sunk alO foot shaft a few feet east of the
old shaft out of which the gold came, but
with no better result than cutting a small
reef containing no gold. One bf the mates,
too (Ned Downes) subsequently put up a
whim, and sunk 30 feet below the water level
on another part of the line ; and then drove.
He, however, got nothing payable, nor was
there any mundic in the stone at this depth.
Some time after a Townsville Company got
possession of the mine, and went pluckily to
work. They cleared out the SOfeet shaft and
sunk it to 180 feet then drove along a leader
at that depth and put in a cross cut, but
found nothing payable. They afterwards
drove at several depths, and in one of those
drives (at 60 or 70 feet) got fair specimens,
but nothing of consequence. Having worked
the mine at a dead loss for eighteen months,
they registered for six months, at the ex-
piration of which they sent up Mr Lock as
manager to make one more effort. Mr Lock
put in drives in several places in some of the
old shafts, and a few specimens were again
got a 60ft., but nothing payable. Continuing
work for six months without receiving the
faintest semblance of a smile from the fickle
goddess, the manager went in for another six
months registration, which proved to be
abandonment. Ned Downes and Italian
Peter went into the ground again, about seven
years ago, and did some work, and gave it up
as a bad job, after having expended considera-
ble labor and money without obtaining any-
thing like a satisfactory result. The mine is
now lying idle, but about this latter period of
its history Bob Graham and his mate got
some splendidly rich specimen stone from the
same line. Such is the fortune of gold
mining ! Several numbers were originally
worked on the both sides of the prospectors,
but none of them got anything.
Another sensational reef at the Rocky was
the Internationalist (1873), opened by Ned
Stanley, McCable and party, some buckets of
specimens from which I inspected shortly
after it was opened, and before any depth had
been reached. These were surpassingly rich,
and high figures were offered for shares in
the mine by local people, and refused. But
it was a mere “ flash in the pan,” a rich patch
in a body of stone that scarcely carried the
color of gold; sufficient, however, to cause
men to work month after month in the hope
of a “ glorious resurrection ; ” fondly nursing
the two frequently misleading axiom that
“ Where that came from there must be
more!” .
The prosperity of the “ Rocky ” was a
short and a sweet one. There being no
| employment for the machine, it was removed,
i and the once busy little township and the
! neighbouring ranges and gullies, were, after a
| year or two, left entirely to a few fossickers
and isolated. When I lately visited the
locality, only three reefers remained, and
these were “ old identities” of fourteen years
ago, Alf. Murray, Bob Graham, and the
youthful Bell. Bob had a silver lead mine,
or some other kindred mineral or mixture of
mi nerals; Murray was fossicking for specimens,
but unfortunately without digging them out
like potatoes; and Bell had sent in a single
waggon-load of reef stone to be crushed at
Turner’s mill. “ Wait until I come back to-
morrow,” said Bell, good naturedly; “ I shall
have a few more pounds them, and we’ll ’*
pointing in the direction of the Delaney
Hotel, five miles away. I didn’t wait, but
found afterwards that, after paying for
carting and crushing his tons, poor Bell
had only £1 to receive for his two months*
work —not half a “ shout” for him when
times were different and money plentiful.
Between the Rocky and the Delaney—
about a mile east of the Try-no-More, of
which it is possibly a continuation—is a reef
called the Parnell, out of which Jack
M‘Culloch and party cleared £450, about the
same time as the Rocky was going ahead.
The water level was reached at 20 feet, and
the claim was given up after being sunk 10
feet below that depth.
From the Rocky to the Delaney is but a


short five miles. This also was a lively little
reefing hamlet in times gone by, and even
within the last two or three years it was sur-
rounded by a reefing population capable of
keeping a five stamper machine going day
and night. But the supply of stone from the
reefshaving fallen off latterly, the owner of the
machine (Mr Owen Duffy) accepted an advanta-
geous offer from Messrs Adamson, McKenzie
and party of the Marquis reef, a few
miles away, and so removed to that locality.
He is said, however, to have cleared over
£l5OO a year during the time he was at work,
on the Delaney, with the funny little five-
stamper battery and patched up engine that
had formerly belonged to Messrs Hodgkinson
and Brown of the Aurora, and subsequently
to Browns widow of the Lighthouse. Mr
Me Alpine, of the Delaney Hotel, informed
me that the little machine put through an
average of 60 tons per week at the lowest
estimate, having no gold saving appliances
other than the tables ; except a Berdan dur-
ing the last eighteen months. The reefs by
which the machine was most used latterly
were the City of Glasgow and North Star
(from 4oz. to 7oz. per ton), Ironclad (30z.)
Mitchell’s (loz. to 50z.), Just-in-Time pc.
(100 tons. 2|oz.), ditto, a number (2£oz ), Lalla
Kookh (last crushing lOOoz. for 20 tons),
Black Diamond (Corbett, 2oz. to 30z.), Comet
(Webster and Goddard) 3|oz.), Aurora (180
tons, over 30z.). Ye v y few crushings pro-
duced less than Hoz. per ton, and the number
of reefs in the vicini y, from which casual
crushings were brought to this machine,
“ was legion.” Very few of these are now i
occupied, and I had, consequently, no other
means of acquiring information but through j
the publican (who is leaving) and the machine
owner (who has left). Mr McAlpine con-
siders there are 2000 tons of good tailings
below the bank of the river that would pay
well (with casual crushings from reefs, which
would be again taken up were the means of
crushing available) for putting through alight
five-stamper battery with Wheeler’s Berdans
attached. The venture might be worth the
attention of any enterprising person having
such a plant on hand, and the cost wouldn’t
amount to much.
The City of Glasgow and Ironclad
Line.
Between the Delaney and the Lighthouse
reefs —on the Etheridge fall—is a group of
reefs which, at different times since ’73 have
turned out considerable qualities of
gold, the principal being the City
of Glagow, and the Ironclad. The
latter has been lately re-occupied
after a long registration. Until recently the
Glasgow was regarded as an excellent property,
and was furnished with a powerful pumping
and winding engine, and worked in a syste-
matic manner, one of the principal share-
holders and the “life and soul ” of the enter-
prise, being Mr Willmett, storekeeper, of
Georgetown. But, notwithstanding a large-
yield of gold on several occasion, the mine
did not pay, and ultimately the machinery
was removed to the Caledonia (near George-
town), and the claim rigistered. Of the par-
ticulars of the first workings in the Glasgow,,
the cockroaches deprived me, but some six.
years ago Billy Simpson and party got out a.
crushing of 50 tons from a drive 100 feet
along at a depth of 40 feet which realised
9oz per ton—the thickness of the vein being,
from nine inches to a foot. It was on the-
strength of this crushing that Willmett
joined Simpson, and pumping and winding;
machinery were placed on the claim forth-
with. Several more crushings were taken out
of the old shaft up to a depth of 80 feet, when'
the water being heavy, a new shaft was.
started 90 feet south to catch the underlie—
the strike of the reef being east and west.
The reef was struck at 120 feet, containing a
fair quantity of mundic, but it was here split
into two veins of 6 or 8 inches each, with,
granite or porphery intervening. Sinking;
was then discontinued, and a drive put in 40-
feet higher up on a “ clean stone ” reef from,
a foot to fifteen inches thick. This drive was;
carried in 300 feet east and 200 feet west,,
giving a number of crushings that averaged
loz. 16dwt. per ton, the value of the gold
being £3 ss. But the increasing difficulties,
and the heavy expenses attached to the work-
ing of the claim swallowed up more than the-
value of the yield ; so the claim was registered
nearly a year ago and the machinery shifted
to the Caledonia, the owners receiving one-
half of the latter claim in return. The lash
crushing from the Glasgow was 180 tons,,
which produced Ifoz. to the ton. The*
Ironclad (the only at present wmrking reef) is.
about 400 feet from the Glasgow, running-
nearly parallel with it; but the reefs get nearer-
to each other going east, and dip towards,
each other rn the sinking. The p.c. is owned
by Mr Frank Hart, by whom it had been
registered for six months as not payable. It
has an area of 200 feet of base line by 400»
feet, and in times gone by was worked by
several parties for between six and seven years*
—yielding from Hoz. to 4oz. per ton from
a very narrow vein. The present depth is.
30 feet at which there are two reefs, each
from 12 to 18 inches wide, which will pro-
bably junction at a deep level. Just previous,
to the registration a crushing of 15 tons from
one end of the shaft produced 24dwt. per
ton. Frank is now getting out a crushing at.
a drive at the bottom of the shaft. No. 1 W.
(O’Mohney and Sexon) is down 56 feet
without any sign of mundic. Three crush-
ings had been taken out of the ground at the
time of my visit, the last of which (50 tons)
yielded 2oz. per ton. The reef in this claim
also is very narrow. Probably the Glasgow
and Ironclad will come together at a depth,
and should "this be the case a large lease of
the country here would be well worthy the
attention of a company possessed of a fair


amount of capital. A good deal of work has
been done on the Brandy Smash, the course
of which appears to be tending between the
Ironclad and Glasgow. The p.c. has been
worked from peg to peg 30 feet below the
water level (85 feet) in the course of live
years, during which several shafts were sunk
on the reef, the orushings varying from 2oz.
to soz. per ton. It was given up in
consequence of two much water, but is sup-
posed to carry rich stone below the mundie
level. A “ number” was worked for a time
until 20 feet below the water level, the last
crushing from which yielded loz. 16dwt. per
ton. This line is now also abandoned.
Several other claims in the vicinity, from
which good orushings were taken from time
to time, are now idle. The Maohioness, 600
yards west of the Ironclad (of which it is
supposed to be a continuation) gave several
orushings up to soz. per ton. It was very
narrow, however, and was never sunk on
deeper than 40 feet, the water being too
difficult at that depth. The Black Diamond
(abandoned) is about two miles S.W. of the
Glasgow, and when Jack Davis and poor
Bolton first worked it many years ago, it was
regarded as an excellent reef and gave more
than one payable crushing to the prospectors.
After they left it Downes and party took it
up, and erected a whim, but were beaten by
water. Bill Boon subsequently took out two
or three payable orushings by driving at a
shallow level on a vein about nine inches wide.
The Overland Route (abandoned), and some
other gold bearing reefs not far away, have
been also prospected and worked at various
times, but without any signal success.
The Lighthouse Beeps.
The Lighthouse Reefs are five or six miles
further on towards a branch of the Etheridge,
and this place too was once the scene of busy
activity over a considerable area of country
carrying auriferous reefs, all but three or
four of which are now deserted, and these
are but languidly worked. The North Star
maD y years ago when “Long Joe” bad it
was regarded as a crack claim and turned
out good crushings. But when I went my
rounds lately it was occupied by Ned Prior.
He has just gone into it, and told me he
intended to clean out the shaft, and if satis-
fied with the bottom he’d take out a crush-
ing, if not, he was off for the Macarthur
River en route to Kimberley The greatest
depth attained on the reef was 62 feet, the
water level, after which it was “good day, for
the poor man,” as he expressively put it.
Prior was cleaning out a 40 foot shaft, in
which the reef was of good size. No. 1 W.
had just previously bren worked by Fox and
party, who had lately got out a crushing of
15 tons which realised soz. 18dwt. per (on,
but they were beaten by the water and bad
to give in although they had then a reef
eighteen inches wide and the stone as good as
t he parcel they had crushed.
A man named Christie, who had been
fossicking about these reefs for years past,
had a crushing lately that yielded 4oz.
per ton. David Turnbull and party, who
were still working a reef about two miles from
the North Btar, were having a crushing put
through the Lord Nelson mill when I called.
Except in the Nelson and in the Comet, no
mundie has yet been struck in any of the
Lighthouse reefs. The Lalla Rookh in this
vicinity was lately registered for machinery,
but was getting good gold at the time of
knocking off.
The Elektbon, The Etheridge Company,
&c.
We are now approaching the reefs in-
cluded in the three leases which have lately
been floated in London under the names of
the Elektron Co., the Etheridge Co., and the
Canadian Co., with a capital of £70,000 the
three companies being apparently but one
syndicate except in certain matter of detail.
At the time of my tour the subject of floating
some of these reefs was only talked about,
but nothing had been decided upon. I am
not yet in possession of all the particulars
concerning the reefs embraced by the re-
spective companies, nor of certain other in-
formation of interest concerning this large
transaction. But I soon shall be, and will
make it appendix to this general report.
The Lord Nelson reef, (half mile of the
Lighthouse), is probably the principal line in
what is called the Etheridge Co. A great
deal of work has been done on it both by
private individuals and by companies, and a
large amount of gold taken from the mine
from first to last, but lam not aware that,
with the means at their disposal, either
private parties or public have ever realised
any large profits. I found the mine at work,
but in a transition state—one company going
out and a new one taking its place. The
company’s crushing mill —a fine ten-stamper
was idle at the time, but would start in a day
or two on Turnbull’s stone above referred to.
The Nelson had six men at work sinking on
a two foot mundie reef, carrying good gold,
the shaft then 80 foot down.
Einnigan’s (or Charleston) lies about four-
teen miles S.E. of the Nelson and twenty-five
from Georgetown. It was once a stirring
mining centre, with its hotels, stores and
steam engines, and all the various et catenas
of a prosperous mining settlement'. The
famous Nil Desperandum reef was turning
out gold ad libitum , and had its own ten-
stamper machine for crushing its stone, and
that of its neighbors. Thus it was a dozen
years ago ! The machine is now removed to
the O’Donohue ; the Nil Desperandum is
registered, and of the score or so of reefs that
were working in the early days of the rush,
only the Havelock and two or three others
are now showing any signs of life. One of
the old originals, however, has nailed his
colors to the mast and will never leave


Charleston until the dream of the last twelve
or fourteen years of his life is verified—until
the Nil Desperandum has been proved to be
one of the most prolific and profitable mines
in the Southern Hemisphere. Mr John
Baker took up the p.c. on this reef, in con-
junction with Henry Sylvester, George Har-
man, and Billy Sharp, in July ’72, subse-
quently annexing the block; and after all
the viscissitudes that have marked the inter-
vening period between then and now, there he
still is, within sight of the N. D. whim, sole
owner of the claim, landlord of the only
hotel, and local postmaster-general. Charles-
ton is a police station, in charge of a single
constable), and a place where Courts of Petty
Sessions may be held. The strike of the reef
is east and west, as is that of the majority of
payable reefs in this quarter. The first
crushing was one of 345 tons, which produced
9910 z. of smelted gold (value £2 16s), This
stone was got in one shaft, from surface to
50 feet down, the reef being from two to four
feet wide. Fifty tons were then raised on
contract, which gave 3oz. 7dwt. per ton; after
which 120 tons was taken from a shaft 50
feet east of the first workings. Subsequently
80 tons w j ere crushed at Cassady’s mill for Hoz.
per ton, and then 200 tons tons, which
yielded 2oz. lldwt. at their own mill. The
total quantity crushed up to the end of ’76
was about 8000 tons and the yield about
12,000 oz. The mine and machinery
were then sold to O’Brien and Co. From first to
last the quantity of gold that passed through
the bank —the product of this mine—is said
to be about 15,000 oz. The deepest shaft
on the prospecting claim was 120 feet, and on
the “ block ” 200 feet—the average width of
the lode being three feet. The mundic level
is reached at 50 feet, and is rich in gold—Bo
tons from the p.c. having yielded 2oz.
to the ton with only blankets and Denny and
Roberts’s amalgamator as extra appliances
after the first ripple table. There is no water
yet to contend with other than than surface
water. The last crushing took place more
than five years since. No. 1 E. (extended)
on this line, was sunk to a depth of 85 feet
and had a last crushing of 200 tons which
produced loz. 16dwt., with only the aid of a
single Wheeler for grinding the pyrites. This
claim (400 feet by 400) is also registered.
The P.C. is now a five acre lease, and
the “ block ” a 200 x 400 feet claim.
Whether this line is included in either of
the new companies I am unable to say at this
moment; but it is in itself a property worth
spending money upon, the chances of a fair
return for capital invested being much better
than is usual in mining ventures.
Mr Baker has an idea of his own as to the
proper method of treating the Nij Desper-
andum mundic stone, viz., supposing the
battery to be a five-stamper, he would have a
16 h p engine, four Wheeler’s pans, four
Berdans (or two Chilian Rollers), and one
Brown and Stanfield’s concentrator. The
crushed stuff would be run from the battery
direct into the wheelers without silver, the
pans to do the “scouring” without amalga-
mation, the latter to be left to the Berdans
(or the Chilian rollers) clear water to be used
in the wheelers during the “scouring”
process. Mr Baker refers to the experience
of an old New Zealand reefer, whose mundic
stone with ordinary crushing appliances
would go only sdwt. but yielded 4oz.
when carefully scoured and otherwise
properly tested.
About miles W. of the N.D. is the Q.ueens-
lander—a large reef which, many years ago,
had its own ten-stamper machine, and from
which a large quantity of stone was raised,
But the returns, although frequently payable,
were not good enough to satisfy
the owners (Harry Lewis, Dick Radigan and
party) in these days ; so work was suspended
after about a year, and the machine removed.
Since then, however, it has been tried again,
more than once, but without any noteworthy
success. It is now deserted, but will, no
doubt, be worked on more economic lines
some day, with a possibly different result. I
was informed by Mr Baker that five tons
from the claim, taken the whole width of the
reef, and tested in a Wheeler’s pan, yielded
2foz. to the ton, everything being run
through the pan.
The Havelock miles S. of the N.D.)
was, in ’74-5, a famous claim, and, likely
enough, may be again so. It is one of the
few claims at present working in this neigh-
borhood, and that only recently again, and
just now with but two men. The reef aver-
ages a width of three feet, and can be traced
for a long distance, there having been at one
time ten ordinary claims, and the prospectors
occupied. Over 5000 tons are said to have
been taken from the p.c. alone, the average
yield being about l|oz. One parcel of 200
tons produced over IOOOoz. ; and
more recently a lot of 47 tons of mundic
stone, crushed by Mr gave a return of
loz. 12£dwt. using blankets only for amal-
gamation, and Denny and Robert’s appli-
ances for concentration. Another long line
(deserted), not far from the Havelock, is the
Foiget me Not, but the water is heavy and
the gold difficult to save by ordinary treat-
ment, being evidently coated with some sub-
stance that carries it over the ripples, without
amalgamating. Crushings have, however,
realised from l|oz. toooz. per ton; the mundic
level being reached at between 40 and 50
feet.
The Struggle (about two miles from the
N.D. on the Townsville road) was re-taken
up, within the la-t two years, under very
favourable auspices, by a small Brisbane com-
pany, of which Mr P. Perkin’s was a leading
shareholder ; Mr Luke Morris, being appoin-
te mining manager. A four-horse power
engine was placed on the shaft and the
company appeared desirous to develops the
mine in a proper manner without regard to


expense. But, I understand, they were not
well served, and I am personally aware that
complaints of the manager were generally
being sent to head-quarters by one of the
shareholders who was working tor wages on
the claim. The natural result was that
the supplies were stopped and work sus-
pended ; not to be resumed again, f r the
present. The “ show” is a very fair one—
the reef at 55 feet being two feet wide. The
four or five tons of stone raised on the com-
pany’s behalf is estimated to have cost
£IOO per ton under the late management.
The reef was cut on the underlie by a
straight shaft. It was re-named the “New
Victoria.”
The Marquis line —fi r e miles due W. of
the N.D., on the right hand branch of the
Delaney—exhibits more vigor, and has a
more substantial air of prosperity about it
than any part of the district, except perhaps
the Cumberland. It whs first worked by
Harry Morris and party (in conjunction with
the Queenslander) thirteen years ago, and it
is estimated that not less than £25,000 worth
of gold was taken out o; the hill, before the
present company came into possession. The
pres nt company may be termed a local one,
the principal shareholders being Messrs
Lacey, Battersby, Forbes a d other residents
in the district. They have a ten-acre lease,
the original prospecting claim (4000 x 400
feet —now the property of Adamson,
McKenzie and party)being sPuated In the
centre of their ground. A fine ten-stamper
machine with Cornish boiler forms a portion of
the company’s property, connected with
which is the most capacious dam in this part
of the district. The gold saving appliances,
other than the tables, consist of one Wheeler,
one Berdan, and two concussion tables. The
engine consumes only five cords of firewood
per week. The Marquis is a peifeot
hill of auriferous quartz not rich
as a rule, but ea ily got and easily
crushed, the machine having put
through as much as 170 tons in a single
week. When I visited the mine, stone was
being quarried from a flat reef, open from
the surface and conveyed by tramway to the
hoppers of the machine only a few yards
away. At the same time a tunnel was being
driven to cut this reef say thirty feet below
the present workings. The tunnel was in
60 feet; a second tramway being here in use
for emerging the debris of the work to the
outside. The deepest ground tested, was
in a straight shaft sunk to a depth of 37 feet,
through a number of flat reefs and “ coun-
try” in layers. The whole of the stuff
taken out of the shaft was crushed together
and yielded 7dwt. per ton. A crushing
from a vertical vein near the entrance to the
tunnel went over 3oz. per ton. What the
average returns are now is not made public,
but are understood to be amply pay aMe
and satisfactory. The machine is kept con-
stantly at work, and the supply of stone is
illimitable. The claim can be worked more
economically than any other in the district,
and the automatic principle being largely in-
troduced a small average yield of gold per
ton will pay large dividends. The manager
of the claim, W. Finlay Forbes—an old
identity—is a thoughtful, competent and
most energetic practical miner.
McKenzie, Adamson and party hold the
p.e. (4000 x 400 ft.) in the centre of the com-
pany’s lease, and a ten-acre lease north of
it. Besides these they hold a SJacre lease in
the same neighbourhood. No work has yet
been done on the leases. A crushing taken
from the claim some years ago gave a return
of 2oz. l?dwt. and not long since there was
a 2oz. crushing. The deepest shaft is
20 feet, passing through alternate layers of
quartz and granite, as in the case of the
other claim. For a couple of years more,
the stone will all be taken from the surface,
where thousands upon thousands of toes can
be got by simply backing in the cart and
loading it, the whole of the stone, as tested
by the pestle and mortar containing
payable gold. But as these horizontal
quartz veins get into the flat
beneath the hill, they will, in all pro-
bability, “ take the ground ” more vertically,
and, likely enough, form one large reef at a
depth. The five stamper machine of Owen
Duffy (lately from the Delaney, and form-
erly from the Aurora, Lighthouse, and else-
lately been erected in connec-
tion with this claim, about half-a-mile distant,
Mr Duffy and the reef proprietors having
joined issue on certain terms. A single Ber-
dan is the only gold saving appliance after
the tables.
The line of reef can be traced beyond the
leases for half-a-mile to what is called the
Potatoe Paddock (Tansey and Anderson).
The Kidney (Frost, MoGinnerty, a d party),
adjoins, from which several orushings have
been taken, averaging 2oz. with
plenty of stone. In the olden time Several
crushings at Finnigan’s, from the Potato
Paddock, yielded about 2oz. per ton.
Retracing my steps to the main
road between the Nil Desperandutn
(Charleston), and Goldsmith’s Creek,
(the end of my destination) —• via
O’Donnghue’s, or the ” Big Reef’’ —I strike
the Victory (formerly the Ellenborough)
about four miles from the N.D. and two
from the Havelock the Victory’s
nearest neighbour. Here Bob Walker
and his mate Gronow are working
an extended claim, and when I saw it, had
83 tons ready for the mill. They have three
shafts sunk to a depth of 50 each (the
mundio level) all which are connected by a
drive. The length of reef opened is 93 feet,
and the average width of the vein a foote
The stone looked well and prospected in the
mortar for about 3oz It has since
been crushed at Bice’s machine (Goldsmith’s)
but I am not aware of the result.—Mr


Walker has also a prospecting area close
at hand and fourteen tons raised from a
small leader which carries good gold.
Two miles further in the direction of
Goldsmith’s is the O’Donoghue—belter
known as the “ Big Reef.” There is an im-
mense body of stone in this reef, which can
be traced by surface outcrop for a mile or
more, the strike being about East and West.
The principal claim at present is a ten-acre
lease owned by a private company, Mr
Cairns one of the shareholders, being man-
ager. The lease includes what was formerly
the p.c., and Nos. 1,2, and 3 East, the
area running right down to the
company’s machine (lately removed
from the Nil Desperandum), the
stone everywhere carrying gold from
say 12dwt. upwards. The reef was
originally taken up some thirteen or
fourteen years ago, and a vast amount
of labor has been expended upon it from
time to time. The lode goes down straight
and has been sunk upon to a depth of 150
feet—the crushings varying in the yield
from 3oz. per ton to less than loz.
There never has been any under-
ground water of consequence, and the mun-
dic level is reached in 80 feet. When I
visited the mine the new company were
crushing surface rubble, which was going
about 15dwt. per ton—there being any
quantity of stone of this quality on the lease
only requiring carting to the machine—some
of the stone consisting of huge blocks, but
gold-bearing th oughout to this extent, so
the manager informs me. A short tramway
to the battery, which could be easily and
cheaply constructed, would reduce the cost
of carriage to a mere bagatelle. The machine
is a a ten-stamper, but only a box and five-
stampers were in position when I made my
inspection ; but the other battery was soon
to be added. Two wheeler’s pans and a
Berdan (witfi blankets) form portion
of the plant, and aB. and S. concentrator
was shortly to be added. No dam worth
mentioning had been built or excavated, and
for a time, at least the want of an adequate
supply of water would seriously militate
against the success of the enterprise—in
spite of the vast extent and value of the re-
sources of the mine, if vigorously and
systematically worked. No. 1 W. is an
extended claim held by Jack well and party
and is down 80 feet on the reef, which at that
depth is about 18 inches wide. They were
carting 150 tons to Bice’s machine when I
called, which was expected to yield from
25dwt. to 30 dwt. per ton.
The New Republic on the opposite side of
the gully is a supposed continuation of the
O’Donoghue.
The next cluster of reefs is in the vicinity
of Goldsmith’s, six miles further on—the
direction, being no less than 40 miles from
Georgetown, the capital.
GOLDSMITH’S CREEK.
AMONGST THE NEW COMPANIES* PROPERTIES.
Six or seven miles over a good hard road
brings the traveller to Goldsmith’s —the
ultima thule of the Etheridge Goldfield in
this direction. Although the country is
auriferous right through to the Robertson,
the Percy, Gilberton, and the Woolgar—
embracing tens of thousands of square miles
of territory, a great deal of which has been
prospected and worked with more or less
success since the early days of the Gilbert
(’69, ’72), and from which, in time to come,
there is not the slightest doubt a very large
amount of gold will yet be extracted. Gold-
smith’s is forty miles from Georgetown. The
principal portion of the ground leased by
two out of the three companies—the Elekton
and Canadian —appears to lie about here,
although, as previously stated, these com-
panies had no existence when I visited the
locality. There were then two crushing
machines in the neighbourhood —Bice’s ten-
stamper and the five-stamper battery
attached to the Caledonia reef—the two
being about a mile apart.
The Canadian is a big reef—a perfect
quarry of quartz —upon which a great deal of
work has been done at intervals by various
parties. The stone is not rich, yielding on
an average from 12 dwt. to to an ounce (the
last crushing only 5 dwt.) —but the quantity
is there. When I called two claims were
occupied. No. 1 W. by Luke Morris and
mate, and what was formerly the prospecting
claim by a coloured man known as Black
Jemmy, who has been sticking to the ground
single-handed for the last five or six years.
About a mile west Pyne and Barry
were working a claim on a supposed con-
tinuation of this reef. From No. 1
W. large quantities of stone had been ex-
cavated before the present party took it up,
from a huge cutting down to 25 feet in
depth, towards one end of which the present
occupiers have sunk a shaft on the reef
(which goes down straight) 25 feet, making a
total depth from surface of 40 feet; the reef
at the bottom being about two feet wide.
They had a large stock of stone raised, which
has since been crushed —198 tons for 450 z.
The last previous crushing yielded 12dwt.
per ton. Black Jemmy has a large quantity
of water in his shaft, but was getting out a
little stone by degrees from a shallow level.
The last crushing from this claim, so I am
informed, gave a return of 2Joz. Pyne and
Barry were down about 40 feet on a two-foot
reef and had about 70 tons raised.
The Caledonia (which I understand has
been purchased on behalf of one of the three
companies for £BOOO since my
extreme point to which the Etheridge visit), had just previously changed hands,
-lining District has yet extended in this j Haycock Bros, being the vendors, and Prince


■and party the purchasers of the property
consisting of a 15 acre lease, the five stamper
battery and a six-horse power engine, with
•stores, materials, and tools. The reef, too,
has been worked for a great number of years,
with few interruptions. It enters the ground
very flat, and varies in thickness from two to
sixteen feet, in many places allowing a person
to walk upright without touching the
superincumbent “ wall.” It has been
worked on the underlie for a distance of 140
feet from the cap, without striking mundic.
‘The best crushing was one of 315 tons which
yielded 9300 z gold being worth
from £2 10s (at a depth) to £3 (surface).
The total value of gold produced in the
mine from first to last was roughly estimated
at £35,000. The strike of the reef is east
•and west. A block claim was sunk upon to
a depth of 80 feet, about 250 feet from the
cap‘of the reef, but without cutting it, nor
was there any water. It is supposed the reef
would have been struck in another 20 feet.
A cross reef between three and four
feet wide was worked to a depth
■of 18 feet, a crushing from which
of 200 tons was got out, which, however, was
hardly payable. When I left, Prince and
party were preparing to clean out the mine,
and repair and add to the machinery, pre-
vious to commencing operations in earnest.
The Just-in-Time, in the same vicinity, is
in the side of a big hill, and has been worked
down to 120 feet by Prince and others, at
which depth the stone ran out. Subsequently
a tunnel put in 270 feet cut the same reef,
carrying mundic : a large, “ bulgy ” forma-
tion ; but not good enough to work, although
patches of the mundic prospected well. The
principal crushings from the mine were : 60
tons, 2oz. 14dwt. per ton ; 150 tons, oz.;
160 tons, If oz.; and 120 tons, Ifoz. There
were several smaller crushings. The mine
was abandoned at the time of my visit, but
the above particulars were furnished to me
'by Mr Prince.
The Ropewalk Extended (now I
suppose the Elektron) was held by
Messrs Hankey and Nicholls (the
now general manager for the three com-
panies) when I saw it, and had a crushing
of 89 tons of. good-looking stone in the yard
of Bice’s machine. The Ropewalk is a long
line of reef, and for some time past has been
jocularly styled the “Two Miles of Gold,”
from the fact of its having been so described
by Nichols in a letter to his father, who, it
w T ould appear, fills some position in the
British Museum, London, and who, having
a friend connected with the Globe newspaper,
the contents of the letter was
to him. The result was that the story of the
“ Two Miles of Gold” appeared in all its
sensationalism one fine morning in the
columns of the newspaper aforesaid, together
with a lot of jlummy doodle about the savage
blacks who infest the neighborhood of this
golden dyke, and much more “ stuffing” of a
Munchausen-like nature. A copy of this
particular number of the Globe found its way
to the “Two Miles of Geld” by some means,
and afforded much amusement to the miners,
amongst whom it was passed from one to
another. Mind you, I am saying nothing in
disparagement of the mine itself. It has
paid well in patches, having crushed
as high as 3oz. to the ton. The
last lot, 106 tons, yielded oz. per ton. It
has been proved to a depth of 80ft., and the
muudic level not yet reached. Besides the
large heap in the machine yard awaiting
crushing there was another of 40 or 50 tons
of poorer quality still stacked on the claim.
There are several o f her reefs (abandoned
save in one or two instances) in the same
neighbourhood, which no doubt will be re-
oc'upied and vigorously worked some day,
and, with the improved appliances, for gold
saving which they had not the advantage of
in days gone by, will likely enough pay well
for the working.
The latest crushings at Byce’smill previous
to my visiting the locality were : —Republic,
20 tons, 18 oz ; Northampton, 15 tons, 29
oz.; Republic, 40 tons, 34£ oz .; Canadian,
13. tons, 12 oz.; ditto, 37 tons, 58 oz.
NEWCASTLE RANGE.
A large reef was opened some time ago in
the Georgetown side of this range, about
twelve miles east of the town. Two crush-
ings have been brought in, but in neither
case did the yield exceed loz. per ton.
About seven years ago when Bob Sefton
and party (four men), were prospecting for
alluvial in this vicinity (and with a fair
amount of success in two gullies), they came
across a remarkably rich quartz leader close
to their alluvial workings. They had plenty
of rations in the shape of flour, tea, sugar,
potatoes, tobacco, &c., and when they wanted
beef—well, there were plenty of “ clean
| skins ” about, the descendants of Bobby
; Towns’s flocks and herds, so they determined
|to keep matters quiet. The blacks were bad,
: and had speared a horse or two, but still they
| made no report at Georgetown, as, had they
done so, they would have had to apply for a
prospecting claim or area, and the crowd would
be down upon them like an avalanche. But
one day, when two of the party were working
the alluvial and the other two the leader, the
niggers entered the camp unseen and
regularly cleared it of flour, sugar, beef,
clothing, axes, tomahawks, pannikins, blan-
kets —everything; including a new canvas
bag containing about £lOO worth of rich
communicated specimens, half gold. This compelled my
file story of the friend Sefton to come in and report to the
Sub-Inspector of black police, and apply for
a prospecting claim. A rush set in as a
matter of course, and a host of reefs and
leaders were opened up, but none of any
promise ; so the place was soon abandoned
again.
its Sub-
the a p


But with regard to the stolen specimens.
Warden Hodgkinson and myself accompanied
Inspector Thomson and his sable troopers as
far as the claims and then left them to pur-
sue the raiders on their own hook. It was
not long, however, before one of the troopers
was seen galloping back in quite an excited
state, and as he approached we could hear
him shouting “ Got ’em specimen ! Got ’em
specimen ! ” The niggers had only taken
the specimens fcr the sake of the bag, and
whesi they got about a mile away they
emptied the contents in a heap at the foot of
a tree, where they were found intact.
Thomson’s niggers and the myalls had a
fight next day in which the latter stood their
ground manfully.
In the event of two or three more reefs of
good size, and equal to an ounce to the ton
being opened in this vicinity there
is a fine site convenient for a crush-
ing machine, by the side of which is an
unfathomable and inexhaustible water hole.
CONCLUDING MEMORANDA.
The perusal of the foregoing plain des-
cription of the Etheridge goldfield will
enable the practical reader to form a pretty
correct idea of “what it is made of” and of
its eligibility as a field for investment of
capital in the prosecution of mining enter-
prise on an extensive scale I have previously
stated that I can see no reason why the reefs
included in the Elektron, the Canadian, and
Etheridge Companies leases should not pay
dividends, if they are well and economically
managed and economically and vigorously
worked. They are large, and the returns
from them hitherto have been, at the poorest,
four times greater than those of scores of
mining properties down South that have
been paying companies handsomely for more
than 20 years, and are just as like’y to do so for
twenty years more. But it must be remem-
bered that, be as economical as you may,
there can be no comparison in the cost of
developing a mine on the Etheridge and on
Charters Towers or Gympie ; or in the old-
established mining districts of Victoria.
Miners’ wages at Georgetown are £4 per
week, as against half that rate in Victoria,
and three-fourths at Charters Towers; besides
which the mining manager has not the same
cope for selecting really competent and ex-
perienced workmen as he would have in the-
vicinity of the coast, and with the advantage
of railway communication, local foundries,
and everything he requires to his hand at a
moment’s notice, and at a moderate cost. On
the Etheridge everything is different. The,
high rate of carriage, the time occupied in
communicating with directors down
south other than by wire, and
their total ignorance of the sur-
surroundings, the difficulty of securing the
services of competent and trustworthy
managers, and other drawbacks, have hereto-
fore mditated sadly against the success of'
mining ventures supported by outside capital
in this far away inland section of the colony.
But the marked success that has attended
the working of the Cumberland p.c., ought
reasonably to stimulate mining enterprise in
the vast auriferous region ; and the future
working of the big reefs of the Upper Ethe-
ridge (Goldsmith’s, &c.,) the whole history
of the working of the Cumberland, the-
alternations of absolute despondency and
triumph in the case of its earnest, energetic*
and intelligent proprietary, until its per-
manent success became an established fact-
sufficient to justify a foreign company in,
taking it off their hands for the sum of
£185,000, this should be well studied by
the Etheridge mining manager and by
Etheridge Mining Companies of the future •
and its lesson profited by and improved upon.
Should a fair amount of success attend tfi o
opening of the three Upper Etheridge Com-
panies, it would no doubt induce further in-
vestments in the district, and bring back a,
semblance of its old days of prosperity when
its population reckoned by thousands and its.
escorts showed a greater averagj per head,
than any other goldfield in Australia.
The Bank of New South Wales established
a branch of their corporation at Georgetown,
in ’72; Mr Waraker being the first manager.
It has continued its operations there ever
since; no second bank having at any time-
put in an appearance.
A small newspaper was published in the-
town for a year or two about ten years since*
but the plant was subsequently sold rnd taken
to the Palmer.
The quantity of gold produced last year
was—from the reefs 22,7000 z. ; alluvial
500 oz.—total 23,2000 z. ; being 51450 z.
less than the previous year.
Printed by the Townsville Herald Newspaper Company, Limited.


JAMES LAHG & GO.,
'Wholesale and Retail
Glass, Oil, Color, 1 Varnish Merchants
Beg to call attention to their large and varied Stock of
House-Painters’, Coach-Painters.’, & Boat-Builders’ Varnishes.
COLORS—Dry, in Oil, Water, and Mixed Ready for use.
GENUINE WHITE AND RED LEADS,
GENUINE RAW AND BOILED LINSEED OILS,
WALL PARERS, GOLD AND SILVER LEAF, BRONZES,
GLAZIERS’ DIAMONDS AND CUTLERY,
KENT’S & HAMILTON’S PAINTERS’ BRUSHWARE,
WINSOR & NEWTON’S ARTISTS’ MATERIALS.
PLATE, SHEET, AND ORNAMENTAL GLASS
Of every Description, Cut to any Size, Carefully Packed and Forwarded to any
part of the Colony.
ALL OUR GOODS ARE OF THE VERY BEST QUALITY
JAMES LANG- & CO, Execute and give Estimates for House, Ship, and
Office Painting, Sign Writing, Gilding, and High-class Decorating, in
Town or Country.
JAIMES LANG & CO.,
AND AT ] FLINDERS STREET, TOWNSVILLE. [ Brisbane.
T. WILLMETT & CO. ?
Wholesale and Retail
BOOKSELLER S, STATI ON ERS, NEWSAGENTS,
PRINTERS, PUBLISHERS,
Account Book manufacturers, kithograpliers,
Paper Rulers,
AND GENERAL IMPORTERS OF COMMERCIAL. LAW, AND FANCY
STATIONERY, MAGAZINES, MU-UC, BERLIN WOOLS, TOYS,
AND MISCELLANEOUS FANCY GOODS.
Town and Country Buyers tv ill find this the Cheapest Establishment
in. the North.
The lowest Cash Prices only are Charged, with a I.iheral
Discount for l*arge Parcels.
T. W. & CO. receive Regular Monthly Shipments of NEW NOVELS, NEW
MUSIC AND NOVELTIES, By the Itireet English Mail Steamers.
Subscriptions Received for English, American, and Colonial Magazines and
Newspapers.
Advertisements Inserted in any Newspaper at Lowest Scale Prices.
LETTERPRESS AND LITHOGRAPHIC PRINTING
Executed in First-class Style, equal to any of the Southern Houses, at Reduced
Rates consistent with good Workmanship.
COUNTRY ORDERS BY LETTER RECEIVE SPECIAL ATTENTION.
—Note the Address—
Willmett's Stationery Warehouse, Flinders-st,, Townsville


BURNS, PHILP, and CO., LTD.,
MERCHANTS AND IMPORTERS,
Shipping, Insurance and Forwarding Agents,
TOWNSVILLE.
BRANCHES AT LONDON. SYDNEY, BRISBANE, CHARTERS TOWERS,
OOOKTOWN. CAIRNS, THURSDAY ISLAND, NORMANTON,
and NEW GUINEA.
AGENTS FOR-
Gillespie Bros. Steel Roller Flour
Mcllwraith. McEachern & Co., London
Adelaide Milling Co., Adelaide, com-
prising Wm. Dufileld & Co.’s Steel
Roller Flour, John Hart & Co.’s
Hornabv & Sons’ Grantham Engines
SHIPPING.
“ Scottish ” Line of Sailing Ships
British India Steam Mavigatimi Co.
Australasian United Steam Navigation
Co.
Eastern and Australian Steam Naviga-
tion Co.
“ Gibb” Line of China Steamers
Superfine Flour
Bass’s Bull Dog Ale aud Stout by Read
Bros.
Mackie & Co.’s Islay Blend Whisky
Bisquit Du Bouche & Co.’s Brandy,
bulk and case
Morowood & Co.’s “Lion” Brand Gal-
INSURANCE.
North Queensland Insurance Co.(Marine)
Liverpool, London, and Globe Insurance
Co. (Fire and Life)
Mutual Insurance Co. of Victoria
vanised Iron
Colonial Sugar Company, Herbert River
Nobel’s Dynamite
Hilfers & Co.’s Steel Roller Flour
Standard Insurance Co.
North Australian L'oyds
Queensland Lloyds.
Clausen’s Lager Beer
Contractors for New Guinea
Mail Service between Cooktown,
t Moresby, and East Cape.
Thursday island, I*ort
LIONEL FAIRLEY,
Auctioneer ,
MINING, GENERAL COMMISSION,
AND
FUMBIRS STREET. TQWNSVI t-LE.,
IMPORTER OP THE VERY
BEST FLOUR FROM
MELBOURNE.
BLUB BRAND.
Best Windsor Corn
other Produce.
Pure Roller Patent*
