









NOTE ON THE CAUSE OF THE FIRST SOUND OF
THE HEART. By GERALD F. YEO, M.D., and J.
W. BARRETT, M.B. {Melbourne). From the Physiological
Laboratory of King's College, London.
Feeling sure of the accuracy of the conclusion drawn by Halford
concerning the causation of the first heart-sound, one of us wished to
O
convince the other, who was sceptical, of the soundness of these views.
With this object it was proposed to demonstrate, as Halford is said
to have done, directly on the living animal, that when the veins
leading to the right auricle were clamped outside the pericardium,
after a beat or two the first sound ceases although the contraction
continues, i.e. there is muscular contraction but no sound.
Since the experiments have disproved this statement, and resulted
in effecting complete unanimity between two observers previously preju-
diced by opposite convictions, it may be worth while to publish our
experiences in the hope of adding some truthful evidence upon a vexed
question.
Experiment I.
A lai'ge well-nourished male cat was thoroughly chloroformed, and supplied
with artificial respiration; the thorax was then opened by an extensive medial
incision, without injury to the pericardium. The superior and inferior venae
cavje were seen on pushing the heart gently to the left side, and the fingers
and thumbs were placed in such relationship to these vessels that they could
be easily compressed. A binaural flexible stethoscope was then gently applied
to the anterior surface of the pericardium. Three observers having familiar-
ized themselves with the cardiac tone, the veins were repeatedly compressed
for each of them; they all noted that the sound became gradually slightly
diminished, but compression of the veins could not be continued sufficiently
long to cause the sound to become inaudible —indeed as long as the heart
continued to beat, the tone remained distinct.
1 The operative procedure was executed throughout by Prof. Yeo.
PH. VI.


This failure to reproduce Halford’s results, it was suggested, might be
attributed to the fact that the great azygos vein had not been tied, and it was
conjectured that sufficient blood could enter by it to produce tension of the
valves. Further evidence was therefore sought for, as follows :
The heart was rapidly removed from the animal, while the veins were
kept compressed, by cutting through all -the gi-eat vessels at some distance
from the organ. It was held in the hollow of the hand surrounded by warm
salt solution, in which position it continued to beat vigorously for eleven
minutes. Each of three observers again satisfied themselves that the charac-
teristic tone of the first heart-sound was audible, and could not be confounded
with the noises produced by the friction of the heart against the hand,
or the occasional shifting of the stethoscope, which were also distinctly
heard.
It could hardly now be argued that sufficient fluid remained in the
ventricles to enable the valves to be made tense during the systole.
The conclusions drawn from Ludwig and DogielV classical work may be
thus readily confirmed with the advantage that the vessels not being ligatured
no fluid was retained for any length of time in the ventricles, and thus an
objection which has been urged against their method was removed.
The only point requiring special attention in removing the heart is, that
the larger veins should be so held that no air be allowed to enter them when
they are severed. This can be easily done by gently clamping their union to
the auricle between the opposed surfaces of the first and second fingers of the
left hand during the removal of the organ. The ventricles thus naturally fall
into the hollow of the hand, and are guarded from injury from the cutting
instrument applied at the dorsal aspect of the fingers.
Experiment IT.
A strong young active mongrel of the bull-terrier type was put under
chloroform, supplied with artificial respiration, and the thorax opened by a
medial incision extending from the manubrium to some distance below the
xyphoid process. The heart in the uninjured pericardium was held gently
towards the left side, the upper lobe of the right lung was slightly adducted
and depressed, and a ligature placed on the azygos vein at its entrance into
the auricle. The venae cavae were now compressed as before, and the heart
was observed to empty itself completely, as far as could be judged from
without. A flexible binaural stethoscope was now applied to the anterior
surface of the pericardium, just as in the former experiment.
] Berichte ii. d. Verhandl. d. k. Sachs. Gescllschaft d. Wissenschaften. Leipzig, 1868,
p. 89.


Four independent observers 1 were then able to satisfy themselves that the
diminution in the first heart-sound did not at once accompany the clamping of
the veins.
For the first two or three beats after the compression had been applied a
very gradual and slight falling off of the tone could be recognised; not until
about the sth or 6th beat was the tone considerably lessened in intensity, and
though always audible it continued to diminish as long as the ventricles were
deprived of their blood. When the pressure was removed from the venae
cavse the heart was rapidly filled from the turgid vessels, and the maximum
intensity of the first sound was arrived at in the 2nd or the 3rd beat after
they were let free, that is, rather sooner than the tension in the left ventricle
could have attained its normal height, for the vessels of the anaemic lung had
first to be filled before the left side of the heart was thoroughly supplied with
blood.
The veins could not be kept closed for longer than 10 or 15 beats without
producing considerable disturbance of the heart’s action and of the arterial
blood pressure. A more or less diminished tone was distinctly heard with
every ventricular systole.
The heart was then rapidly removed from the body, and held in the hollow
of the hand, surrounded with warm salt solution ; it beat vigorously while the
four observers satisfied themselves that the peculiar tone of the first heart-
sound was distinctly audible.
As it was deemed possible that a small quantity of blood might yet be
retained and pressed against the valves, it was determined to eliminate this
possibility in the following way. The auricles and auriculo-ventricular
openings were rapidly separated from the ventricles by a stroke with a sharp
knife. The separated apex continued to beat, at first automatically, and
subsequently in response to a light touch of the handle of a finder. The tip
of the forefinger being placed in the cavity of the left ventricle, and the apex
bathed in clotting blood, the stethoscope was applied to its surface. Each of
the four observers was assured that a sound like the characteristic heart-tone
was audible, when the valveless apex contracted. The character of this tone
was easily distinguished from the other sounds which accompanied the
external friction.
The feeling of pressure communicated to the finger tip, by this little
thimble-like portion of muscle during its failing contractions, was very slight
and could not have given rise to such tension of the mass of soft tissue as
would be sufficient to produce a tone.
1 One of these observers, though familiar with the use of the instrument and accustomed
to form accurate judgments on scientific subjects, was quite unaware of the question under
discussion. His independent description of his sensations exactly corresponded with that
of the other observers.
\2 2


In all stages of these experiments the quality of the tone was not
heard to vary under the most diverse circumstances, even when its
intensity was materially influenced. This unchanging character seemed
to indicate that the sound depended upon a constant cause, possibly
some occurrence inseparable from the contraction of the muscle tissue.
No marked change in quality was observed in the sound accom-
panying the Ist or 2nd beats that followed the closure of the veins, and
the diminution in intensity seemed rather to depend upon the disturb-
ance of the blood pressure and nervous mechanisms than to follow the
diminution of the amount of blood in the cavities of the heart.
The latter fact alone was not sufficient to justify the exclusion of
the valves from participation in the causation of the tone, since the
powerful left ventricle must have received a considerable quantity of
blood from the lungs after the right side was empty, and the mitral
valves could therefore have been made tense; but the gradual diminu-
tion of intensity of the systolic tone reminded one of the slow fading
away of the first heart-sound observed in fever patients, which was
long ago put forward by Stokes 1 as evidence that this heart-sound
owed its production to the muscular contraction, and therefore varied
in intensity with the vigour of the heart. It no doubt diminishes
remarkably under malnutrition, and disappears while the heart is still
able to overcome the arterial pressure and pump the blood onward,
tightening the auricular valves. Though the loss of suddenness in con-
traction and consequent slower tension seems hardly sufficient to account
far the complete loss of the first sound, the “ silent heart beat ” of mori-
bund typhus cases, even where no trace of the first sound can be heard
for days together, while the second may yet be distinguished, is by no
means conclusive evidence that the tension of the auriculo-ventricular
valves takes no part in the production of the first sound.
In the present unsettled state of our knowledge concerning the tone
said to be produced by the continuous contraction of voluntary muscles
no attempt can be made here to give an explanation of the sound heard
during the single beat of the ventricular apex.
The following conclusion may be drawn from this observation.
A definite and characteristic tone similar in quality to the
first sound is produced by the heart-muscle under circum-
stances that render it impossible for any tension of the valves
to contribute to its production.
1 The Diseases of the Heart and the Aorta. Dublin, 1854, p. 129.


At a meeting of the Physiological Society 1 , an attempt was made to
demonstrate this apex-tone. Though not as successful as the former
experiment, owing to the accidental admission of air into the heart
cavities during the removal of the organ, several members were able to
satisfy themselves of the similarity of the tone produced by the apex
with that heard with the naked heart in situ or when cut out.
The want of accord between these observations and those of Halford
probably may be attributed to his using the old form of rigid stetho-
scope, with which the motions of the heart rendered accurate contact
impossible and auscultation difficult.
1 Cambridge, May 9, 1885.






