

‘Reid the Wriggler
OR THE
FALSE PROPHET OF FREETRA
TRIED AND CONVICTED ON HIS
PROFESSIONS, PROMISES AND PERFORMANCES
JOHN ENGLISH.
“There, ye wise Saints, behold your Light, your Star—
Ye WOULD be dupes and victims, and ye are. ’
PRICE , ONE SHILLING.
SYDNEY:
T. J. Houghton k Co., Printers, 70 Druitt Street.




‘Reid the Wriggler’
OR THE
FALSE PROPHET OF FREETRADE
TRIED AND CONVICTED ON HIS
PROFESSIONS, PROMISES AND PERFORMANCES.
“There, ye wise Saints, behold your Light, your Star—
Ye would be dupes and victims, and ye ARE. ’
JOHN ENGLISH.
< G-T n O'^
SYDNEY:
T. J. Houghton & Co., Printers, 70 Druitt Street,




With JOHN NORTON’S
COMPLIMENTS.
Changes which are sudden and precipitate—changes accompanied with
a light and contemptuous repudiation of the former self—changes which
are systematically timed and tuned to the interest of personal advance-
ment —changes which are hurried, slurred over, or denied —for these
changes, and such as these, I have not a word to say ; and if they can
be justly chai'ged upon me, I can no longer desire that any portion,
however small, of the concerns or interests of my countrymen should be
lodged in my hands. — Gladstone, “ Chapter of Autobiography,” 1868.
It is a grand thing to have power if you use it honestly, but it is a
disgraceful thing to have it if you use it dishonestly ; and this elevation
that has come to me will be the greatest misfortune that has ever come
to me, unless I show you all that I shall be true to the promises I have
made to you.—G. H. Reid, Protestant Hall, August Bth, 1894.


AYANT-PROPOS.
The purpose of this pamphlet is plain ; it is to brand George-
Houston Eeid, Prime Minister of New South Wales, as a political
impostor. This is a serious accusation ; but the process of proving
it is simple. It will, in the main, be established on the evidence of
the culprit himself, and that of his friends. Their evidence will be
corroborated by that of Freetrade politicians, Freetrade journals*
and the impartial columns of Hansard. No Protectionist testimony
will be called in support of the charge ; neither will evidence be
sought in musty Parliamentary pigeon-holes. It will be culled from
the’records of the last five years, and strictly confined to what may
be properly termed “friendly Freetrade’’ sources. On such
unimpeachable evidence it will be demonstrated how richly our
present Premier deserves the nickname of Reid the "W ligglti ,
conferred upon him, to his face, amid the derisive cheeis of a big
Sydney audience. It will, moreover, be proved, beyond all or
cavil, that during the past four years, while frantically scrambling
for office, George Houston Reid, in addition to renouncing and
reviling his venerable leader, has betrayed his party, pawned his.
principles, flouted his pledges, and broken his promises, with a
cynical recklessness without parallel in Australian annals. Further-
more, it will be shown that, after conspiring and fighting with the
Protectionists for four years against Federation, on the plea of
defending Free-trade, he is no sooner safely secured in office by
Freetrade support, than he begins to cabal with the enemy. He
concedes Protection to Farmers, who constitute the real Protection-
ists in this province, and suddenly turns round and pretends to
espouse Federation, which he but recently denounced as fatal to
Freetrade. If all this, and more, can be made out; if it can be
shown that in each of these sudden and contradictory changes he-
has been rash, reckless and insincere, then must Mr. Reid bear the
brand of arrant imposture. All this, and much more, the author
undertakes to prove, on pain of himself being branded as a
scurrilous libeller. It is for a discerning and fair-minded public to.
judge between Mr. Reid and his accuser,
THE AUTHOR.
Sydney, February 28th, 1895.
r Y
J r >


PART I
REID; THE RADICAL TARIFF REFORMER.
The real enemy of Freetrade is now addressing the House.— Pakkes on Reid, December
Bth, 1891.
But the tariff of 1891 has put us as a party upon our metal. If we get the power we
must repeal as soon as possible that abominable tariff, which violates every right
principle, and cripples commerce without creating manufactures.—G. H. Reid, Mount
Kembla, December 28th, 1893.
You want honest pilots at the helm, and if they steer the public affairs of this country
honestly, there is no community more generous. (A Voice: “ Give us your policy.”) My
policy is as strong as the sun in the heavens; I published it throughout the length and
breadth of the land in hundreds and thousands of newspapers; it can be seen in the
public newspapers of the city, and during the past month a column and a half of it.
I have already announced to the people the principles on which I am going to act, arid I
am happy to say my colleagues, with whom I went through that manifesto line by line,
have determined loyally to support me in carrying it out.—G. H. Reid, Protestant Hall,
August Bth, 1894.
At the conclusion of his farewell lecture at the Protestant Hall,
over which Mr. Reid presided, Henry George, in the course of an
eloquent peroration, said : “ Let us have free land, let us have free-
trade, let us have a free people. At all events, whatever you do,
fight loyally and faithfully, and endeavor to get the whole of the
duties removed from the tariff, and introduce the Single Tax and,
finally, turning abruptly round, and fixing his flashing eye on Mr.
Reid, who sat in the chair smiling approval, exclaimed: “ Do, for
God’s sake, endeavor to wipe out these duties !” He then sat down,
whereupon Mr. Reid jumped up and called for “ Three hearty
ringing cheers for Henry George, and another for Mrs. George, and
another for the little Georges,” all of which were cordially given,
our own George leading the cheering with his shrillest treble shriek.
This was late on Saturday night, May 31st, in the year of our Lord
1890. By an almost fatal coincidence—as though the Nemesis of
humbug were determined that there should be no delay in exposing
the insincerity of George’s last chairman in Australia —a motion to
take the duty off tea was moved in the Assembly by Mr. W.
N. Willis, one of the members for Bonrke, three days later, the 3rd
of June, 1890. Of course, Mr. Reid was in his place, with the
earnest exhortations of the Prophet of San Francisco ringing in his
ears, ready and willing to join in helping “to take the burden of
taxation off the backs of the poor ?” Not a bit of it. He was
there, it is true, in evening dress, fresh and flushed from a club
supper, but in the capacity of a sturdy opponent of the removal of


the 3d. a pound tea duty, and as the eloquent and earnest advocate
for such a tax on “the poor man’s breakfast table.” Was this in
the interest of the “poor working man” to whom this duty of 3d.
per pound meant a tax of 80 per cent., tea being his common
beverage, the working classes consuming 20lbs. of cheap tea to every
lib. of dear tea consumed by the wealthy classes 1 No ; it was in
the interests of the Freetrade party, which is quite a different matter
and far more important. He said : “I am here to oppose the
motion straight out.” Why V Simply because the motion came
from the Protectionist side of the House. The oratorical wrigglings
by which he attempted to justify his position were at once ludicrous
and contemptible. His main reason for refusing to take off the
duty was of the lucus a non lucendo type, viz., that Victoria had a
Protectionist tariff under which she oppressed and plundered the
people ! Listen to his lachrymose lamentations over “ the hard lot
of the toiling and down-trodden masses of Victoria ” :
Under this ideal tariff, which my hon. friends opposite want to fasten
on the necks of the masses of this country, is “ Medicine,” a thing used
by the suffering poor of the country, “25 per. cent, ad valorem.'’’ . . .
They tax the common carts that the working men use. . . . They
cannot even let leather alone, but charge a duty of 20 per cent, upon
it ; leatherware, harness, saddles, carriage harness, poor man’s harness, 25
per cent. ; on the poor man’s buckets and tubs, there is a duty of 25
per cent.
Thus did this fat, well-fed, and highly-protected barrister depict
the terrible sufferings of the Victorian masses under a Protectionist
tariff, and with maudlin, muddleheaded logic make those alleged
sufferings a reason for continuing to tax the poor man’s tea at 80
per cent, under an alleged freetrade tariff in New South Wales. He
had to admit that in Victoria, that degraded and tariff-ridden
country, that his peculiar protege, the “pore working man,” paid 60
per cent, less for his tea than he did in New South Wales, the duty
in Victoria being only Id per pound !He would take the duty off
if we could afford it; he had no sympathy with taxation, and would
remit every duty if we could afford it; forgetting that Protectionists
were actually proposing the remission of the tea duty, because it
was a tax on a healthy national beverage , which the State ought
to remit. Then listen to this connoisseur of “ temperance drinks,”
who never takes tea, except by way of physic, argue in favor of a
a tax on temperance :
With all due respect to the teetotallers, if there is one class in the
community which is prosperous, thriving, and—let me add—industrious,
it is the teetotallers. Surely they can pay a little share of the contri-
bution towards the public services of the country I do
not want to disparage the teetotallers ; but if the lovers of intoxicating
drinks and tobacco smoke can pay a million into the Treasury, the
teetotallers of the country need not mind if they have to pay £30,000
or £40,000. But they do not mind. This is one of those hollow little
bids for popularity with which we are becoming accustomed.


Thus does the paid legal agent of the Licensed Victuallers
read the temperance folk a lesson out of Bevill’s hible. The most
sober, thrifty, industrious and law-abiding members of the
community were, in effect, told that they ought to patiently submit
to have their very virtues taxed, in the shape of an HO per cent,
duty on tea, in addition to hearing more than their share of“ the
burden of providing police and judicial machinery, prisons,
asylums, and hospitals, which are not required primarily for
themselves, hut are rendered necessary principally by the vice and
crime and misery brought about by indulgence in strong drink,
which cheap, untaxed tea would tend to diminish. And this is the
sort of man who poses as the friend of the poor, and postures as a
patriotic statesman. Such arguments degrade those who use them.
Talk about a “few spots on the face of this glorious Freetrade sun,”
why his whole political countenance is blotched and disfigured by
the deep scars of flagrant inconsistency! We have seen this
champion of the Tea Tax only three nights previously playing the
part of the poor man’s friend at the Protestant Hall, under the
patronage of Henry George ; let us now observe how he figured a
week prior to that when opposing “ for the sacred cause
of freedom and Freetrade.” Speaking in the Assemhy on the 21st
of May, ten days prior to his scandalous speech in favour of the
Tea Tax, he said, in reply to an interjection from Mr. Copeland,
“ Every country taxes wine, because it is a thing a man can do
without. . . . It is a thing which most men can dispense
with. It is one of the luxuries of life —it is not a necessity ;
which, if it meant anything logical at all, meant that tea being an
absolute necessity of every-day life to at least 7 5 per cent, of the
population, should not he taxed, which is precisely contrary to the
argument he used ten days later in the same place in favor of the
80 per cent. Tea Tax, when he was propounding the astounding
social and economic doctrine that sober people ought to he taxed
for their very virtues ! During the course of this same anti-
Federation and pro-Freetrade speech, this delightfully democratic
80 per cent, tea-taxing Freetrader observed ;
Here is the dilemma in which the Freetraders are placed. For many
years we have spoken —I have spoken—to the people of this countiy in
this way. I have told them again that I do not want any of their
half-and-half Freetrade.
It could be shown how in 1888 he opposed Mr. Cope-
land’s motion to impose duties- on agricultural produce, and
in 1889 spoke and voted for Sir J. P. Abbott s motion to
take the duties off butter, bacon, cheese and kerosene ; and now
we see him in 1890, three days after cheering George and the
Single Tax, speaking and voting against the removal of the Tea
Tax. This is the same Mr. Reid who, but ten days previously, in


the same place, had declared that he would have nothing to do with
half-and-half Freetrade, and solemnly asseverat d :
I believe in Freetrade as I believe in freedom. I cannot tamper with
Protection, because I believe it is slavery and restriction ; that is
the ground I stand upon.
Yet Ananias is dead ; and Reid survives and thrives, and publicly
boasts that he gets “ jolly and fat ” on this sort of Freetrade. It
will not, therefore, come as a surprise to find him lauding in this
same speech the provincial protective systems of the other provinces
which, as we have seen above, he had denounced as “ slavery and
restriction.” Here is his glowing eulogy of the results of Protection
throughout Australia :
In working out their destinies, the different colonies for many years
past have thought more of their individual interests and more of
advancing their own prosperity and importance, than of advancing
what is called the cause of Australian unity. In doing that, it
appears to me, they have pursued a course which might seem selfish,
which at first sight might seem to injure one or other of the Austra-
lian colonies; but a course which in my mind has had this effect :
vastly stimulated the remarkable growth of the whole of the Australias.
These rivalries animating each have stimulated all, and I look upon the
past history of the country as the history of a progress which has
been possible in these lands, under what is called a separate government
of the various colonies.
Having seen him deny himself twice by first condemning Protec-
tion as slavery, and then praising its effects as “a subject of
gratification and pride to every Australian,” to see him denying
himself thrice on the same subject in the following astounding
fashion (vide Daily Telegraph, February 3rd, 1892) only confirms
his claim to the Political Peter’s palm of Australian public life :
Protectionists might multiply their army until it included every
man in this country, and then they would find him standing up to say
that their policy was one of robbery. The 'policy of Protection was one
of those base, crawling survivors of barbarism—the time when every man
sought to become strong by robbing his neighbor. Protectionists said
that no nation could become strong without Protection; but if that
argument counted for anything, no nation had become great without
tyranny, superstition, and slavery.
Scores of similar instances of his flagrant inconsistency in regard
to Freetrade and Protection could be cited, but the foregoing must
suffice, as space is required to depict this Janus-faced politician’s
position vis-a-vis the farmers and the question of tariff reform.
After declaring on a hundred different platforms that “that
fiscal abortion the Dibbs’ tariff must be swept away at once and for
ever,” Mr. Reid, with that political pot-valiancy for which he is so
remarkable, went to Wagga in March, 1893, to “knock the bottom
out of that rotten old tub of Protection, and to sink it in the


Murrumbidgee along with Dibbs.” Well, when he got to Wagga,
what did he do ? Why, finding himself among Protectionist
farmers, he simply promised, if he got into power, to protect
Protection. He was asked: “If you occupy the position of
Premier, will you immediately remove the duty on wheat ?” He
answered, “ Ho, not if their crops were put in under the present
tariff ;he would not do so till they sold their wheat.” Here was a
man aspiring to the Premiership on the strength of Freetrade
■promises to reform the tariff, pawning the future political honor of
the Government of the country to Protectionist farmers, fifteen
months before he came into power. Was ever such impudent
political bribery and corruption witnessed in this or any other
country ? Hever.
After “ dishing Dibbs,” as he cynically termed this scandalous
proceeding, Ire went off to the Illawarra district (December
.:28th, 1893) to explain to the Mount Kembla miners (then
but partially employed and actually fighting against a further
reduction of wages) the mysteries of Yankee “shoddy” manu-
facture under “ the iniquitous M'Kinley tariff,” and to show them
how he, Reid, was “ the chap to save the country.” Talking to
these under-paid and suffering miners, he tried to fill their bellies
with the usual platitudes about the “ big, cheap Freetrade loaf.”
Forgetting, or impudently ignoring, what he had told the Protec-
tionist farmers at Wagga only nine months before, he said :
Protection may stimulate, if unhealthily, forms of production which
nature has the most to do with ; but the more difficult forms of
manufacture prove, for the most part, exotics which no degree of
■encouragement “will persuade to exist under natural conditions. The
expenses of hot-house cultivation may be within the means of persons
■of large fortune ; but it is a cruel drain upon the poorer classes who
have, under protective measures, to bear the brunt of industrial
forcing. To handicap all, in order to employ a few, is not a good
road to general prosperity. The best forms of enterprise are those
which employ labour without cramping its freedom, and which make
profits out of boundless natural resources rather than the limited
means of the mass of consumers. Under Freetrade national industries
advance in the best order, that of spontaneous profit, putting no
class under contribution and advancing the welfare of all.
In this way did he wriggle out of his Wagga pledges, and, in
so many words, promise to break away from them as soon as he
got into office. But as will soon be seen, the only public pledge he
ever kept has been the perfidious promise to break his pledges and
to basely betray the party to whom he made them. This recanta-
tion of Protectionist heresy was a premeditated preliminary to the
anti-Parkes raid into Eiverina, which he had been contemplating for
some time, and which was to commence in a few days.
Reid knew, or thought he knew, that the Border farmers, as
ardent Federationists, were intercolonial Freetraders and Protection-


ists against the outside world—hence the political lyre had to be
prepared and tuned for the occasion. Mark the contradiction
between his Protection promises to the wheat-farmers at Wagga,
and his Freetrade utterances to the wheat-growers of Riverina, there
being barely nine months intervening. After cautiously feeling the
(farmer’s pulse at Narrandera and Jerilderie, he spoke at Berrigan,
January 6th, 1894, and delivered himself thus on the wheat duty,
which at Wagga he had promised not to take off for the sake of the
farmer :
He dwelt upon this aspect of the question reluctantly, because it was
a miserable way of appealing to the selfish instincts of farmers, but
Protection was nothing else than selfishness. He had far greater
admiration for farmers who had admitted, as many in this district had
done to him, that they were in Victoria and tried Protection, but came to
New South Wales and got better land, more wheat per acre, and
were now ready to fight any man on equal terms. The real pioneers
were men who were not crawlers.
And again at Mulwala on the Bth of January, according to the
Sydney Morning Herald, the following interesting dialogue between
Mr. Reid and his audience took place :
All the farmers knew that the price of wheat was down to starvation
level in Victoria. (Voices: “It is.”) It was now down to 2s. 2d. per
bushel. (A voice : “It will be the same here ; we are suffering from over-
production.”) Did that not show what a sham Protection was ? If it had
played the fool with Victoria, would it not do the same here ? (Loud
cheers.) It was all very well for the farmers if they did not suffer from
over-production, but now they were in Victoria and were swimming for
their lives. (A voice : “ The same in New South Wales.”) It was nearly the
same under this beautiful policy of that blooming statesman, Sir George
Dibbs. (Laughter and cheers.) (A Voice : “What will men on the soil
do ?”) They ought to live like men, and not skulk like crawlers. (Cheers.).
Every other man had to live on his own earnings exposed to competition.
Did the Government protect the laboring man against outside labor? Were
Sydney politicians thinking of the farmers when they put a duty on wheat ?
No, of course not. The farmers were the last people they thought of for a
long time. (Cheers.) When politicians found they could not ride any other
donkey but the farmer, they rode him. (Laughter and cheers.)
Finally, speaking on the following day, January 9th, at Corowa, the
Herald special reporter reports him thus ;
In these times of cheap wool, farmers were finding it much more profitable
to turn their land into wheat fields. In many cases they received a return
equal to 15s per acre per annum from land used in this way, and it seemed
probable that before many years were over these vast districts would show
waving crops for hundreds of miles at a stretch. No doubt members of the
present Government were inclined to attribute the present developments to
their tariff—(laughter)—but he had received replies wherever he went that
there was only o'e cause, namely, the ruinous price of wool which had forced
the large landholders into these newer methods of realising a return from
their estates. In the districts visited by him he had been very much struck
with the universal admission as to the fallacy of -Protection as a permanent
means of helping the farmers. Many thought that for one or two years


more there might be an advantage so far as prices of produce were concerned,,
but it was admitted that this advantage was only of the most fleeting
character. The moment duties ceased it would be a real benefit to the
farmers. They would turn their backs on Protection, and that process was
going on rapidly at present.
Why, the man is not of the same mind on any one subject twenty-
four hours together. Only two days before he had told the farmers
at Berrigan one story ; the next day at Mulwala he tells them
another; and the following day at Corowa yet another, and winds
up by calling farmers who want their industry protected “crawlers.”
A pretty sentiment indeed for this “jolly and fat” smiling specimen
of the most highly and closely protected profession in the world to
express to the faces of honest tillers of the soil. Protection could
help his business but not that of farmers ; competition was good
for them, but not for him ; with them, protection “ was nothing else
than selfishness ” ; “ they ought to live like men and not skulk like
crawlers or lawyers, for instance, who take fees from clients for
whom they never appear ! Surely in talking this twaddle to the
farmers of Riverina, Reid must have thought he was astride the
bucolic donkey. If they had accepted such asinine brayings as these
for words of wisdom and statesmanship, they would deserve to be
ridden and treated like donkeys all their lives. But they didn’t, as
they proved by returning two Protectionists to Parliament shortly
afterwards, in the persons of the Hon. W. J. Lyne, member for the-
Hume, and Mr. J. Hayes, member for the Murray.
But this was not the end of this “ farmers’ farce the final act was
to be played in Sydney a few months later by Mr. Reid in his new dual
role of opportunist and Premier. The “ crawlers,” as he called the
Protectionist Farmers, soon gave him to understand that they did not
intend to allow him to make political donkeys of them. Hot long
after his first accession to office, early in October, an influential
deputation of farmers waited on him and wanted to know whether he
meant to stick to the solemn promise made at Wagga nearly 18
months before. He squirmed and shuffled, and tried to wriggle
around and away from the question, but at last promised to lay the
matter before his colleagues in Cabinet, and have a proposal to keep
the duties on till July, 1895, favorably considered. But he did
nothing ; in office, this redoubtable tariff-reforming radical became a
paltry political Aguecheek ; his valiant heart had sunk to the lowest
depths of moral cowardice. On the 23rd of October last, Mr.
Rose, the member for Argyle—a thorny rose to “ Wriggler ” Reid
—jogged his memory by a question in the Assembly, only to find
that Reid, after four months of office, had not made up his mind to
fulfil the solemn promise made to the farmers at Wagga. By this
time the farmers began to see that Reid would make political
donkeys of them, indeed, if they did not metaphorically take him by
the throat and compel him to keep a faith publicly pledged, and on


the strength of which they had invested hundreds of thousands in
labor, time, and money. Accoidingly, on December 6th, 1894,
accompanied by Messrs. F. A. Wright, Gormly, Hayes, Chanter,
O’Sullivan, Miller. Barnes, Hassall, Donnelly, Cruickshank, Carroll,
Loughnane, Rawlinson, A. Chapman, Travers-Jones, and Dr, Ross,
Ms.P., these “crawlers” of Protectionist farmers, from the Northern,
Southern, and Western districts of the colony, waited upon the
Premier as Treasurer. They told him, without any circumlocution,
that they wanted the duty retained, not only upon wheat and all
■other cereals, but also upon all farm produce which had been pro-
tected by both the protectionist and freetrade tariffs of the late and
preceding Governments. The upshot of this deputation was that he
practically promised that the duties should remain in force till the
end of December, 1895. Thus did all his theoretical raving about
the tyranny, oppression, and fraud of protectionist duties, vanish
into thin air before the irrefutable logic of hard facts and practical
common sense. But he could not execute this disgraceful back-
down without ungratefully snubbing the Single Taxers who had put
him into power. He said :
There was an advanced section of Freetraders who did not agree with this
thing at all. They looked upon the whole thing as fraud and robbery. In
•one sense it was. But when it was carried out by Act of Parliament, those
who unmade Acts of Parliament must to some extent have an eye to the
mischief which had been done.
Why none had been more advanced than he in denouncing Protection
in every shape and form as a fraud, both before and after the
general election. He now seemed bent upon demonstrating, in his
own person, that there were other frauds. Returning thanks for his
re-election as Premier, at the Protestant Hall, on August Bth, 1894,
he had said :
I always thought that the people of New South Wales would give me a
chance, and they have given me a chance ; and instead of elating me, or
filling me, with any sort of pride, I feel a great obligation to the people of
this country, and I feel determined to show you all that I shall use the
power that is in my hands for the benefit of the whole people of this
country. (Cheers.)
And again, dilating in all the enthusiasm of his newly-acquired
importance, like the frog in the marsh imitating the ox in the
meadow, he grandiloquently exclaimed :
We have not been so wonderfully well managed in the past —(cheers) —
that a new man ought not to have a fair trial, and when I took the position
of leader of the Freetrade party I took that position determined to breathe
a new soul into it. (Hear, hear.) For many years we had flourished all
those magnificent mottoes of justice and fair play to humanity, but it has
been too much show, too much talk, too much empty promise, too many
broken promises ; and now, although I have been known to you up to this
time as a maker of speeches, I shall begin now to be a maker of history.


(Cheers.) There never was a time when the great mass of the people have-
had to go through greater suffering ; there never was a time when want was
more rampant in the homes of honest working men of all classes—(hear,
hear) —and one of the greatest indictments against the late Government is
this, that they allowed that want to go on year after year, and the only
remedy for the distress was to pile fresh burdens on the struggling people
who lived from hand to mouth, turning their backs on the right source of
taxation —the wealth of the country. (Cheers.) I know this, that those-
who are honestly determined to reform our institutions, so that the burden
of the people shall fall heavily on the strongest shoulders, and lightly on the
weaker shoulders, will have a great battle to fight. (Cheers.) But,,
strengthened as I am by that magnificent verdict of the people of this
country, I won’t allow intrigue in any place to baffle my determination.
Then he proceeded to tell his hearers how he intended to carry out
his promises ;
I believe a simple Customs tariff of half a dozen articles, yielding about
a million and a half a year, is all that can be fairly taken from men of all
classes within the level of subsistence.
Here a sepulchral voice, proceeding from the hack of the hall, and
sounding suspiciously like that of a distrustful Single Taxer,,
solemnly and slowly asked ; “ Are you a Freetrader ?” Then
came Eeid’s jocular rejoinder :
Yes, but lam like the glorious sun with a few spots on it. There will be-
a few spots on the glorious sun of Freetrade. As far as the struggling
classes* are concerned a million and a half through the Custom-house is
sufficient.
A few spots, forsooth. Why, within a year, he had become
positively pock-marked out of all semblance to consistency!
Exactly a year before—a year almost to a day—on the 7th of
August, 1893, he had stood on the same platform and in tearful,
heartrending tones, bewailed the hardship and sufferings of the poor,
overtaxed washerwoman, and the hardy, humpy-dwelling pioneer.
Here is what he said, as reported in the Daily Teleyraph next day ::
There was nothing inquisitorial about Customs duties. They did not
discriminate in any way. In the matter of starch—(laughter)—they found
that the poor washerwoman who worked 12 hours a day to provide bread
for a family of 12 persons had to pay Id duty, just the same as the laundress
who used the starch to stiffen the garments of the richest man in the land.
Then again, in the matter of milk, the pioneer, who went hundreds of miles
out into the country, had to pay just as much duty as the party of men who
bought a tin of condensed milk to take with them on a picnic party.
(Laughter.) Coffee paid fid per lb. duty, no matter whether it was used by
the pilgrims of the night who came to a coffee stall at 3 a.m. for a cup of
coffee, or by the richest gentleman in the land. (“ Hear, hear.”) As to
timber, if a poor man went out into the wilderness and bought timber for
the purpose of putting up a hut to shelter his family, the duty was the same-
as if it were wanted for a travelling circus. There was, however, no duty on
arsenic. (Loud laughter.) But if they wanted a useful patent medicine,
they were heavily charged for it through the Customs. If a ton of axle-
grease were imported the importer must pay fiOs duty for it, but if a diamond


worth £1,000.000 were imported it came in free. (“Hear, hear, and
laughter.)' If there was anything in the world that was iniquitous in its
incidence it was Customs taxation, which taxed the necessaries of life.
A “travelling circus” would be a tame show beside such a
political pantomime, with such a crafty, cozening clown as this
“ chap,” who was playing at making history and saving the country.
It was an enormity to levy a Id a lb on the starch of the char-
woman with twelve children, to tax the picknickers’ tinned milk, the
park dosser’s coffee, and the settler’s slabs, while Reid was bidding
for place and pay, but it was right and expedient to tax the tea of
these poor folk 80 per cent. ; and, now that Reid was securely
-entrenched in office, it is just and proper to tax their daily bread by
a duty of lOd per lOOlbs on wheat, and Is per lOOlbs mi flour, in
order to placate the Protectionist farmers whom this friend of the
washerwoman had denounced as “ selfish crawlers !” Well did the
Evening News know the man it was writing about when, in criticising
Mr. Reid’s profuse Protestant Hall promises, it said: “If the
people want a land tax instead of a tax on the small necessaries of
the poor, they will have to keep their eyes on the Freetrade
veterans, and see that those veterans really aim at something more
besides, settling themselves comfortably on the Government benches.”
But what have the influential Freetrade morning papers to say to
this spotted specimen of a free-tection farmer’s friend ? Well, so far
as fhe Sydney Morning Herald is concerned, it sees no reason for
censure, simply because in thus backing down Mr. Reid is receding
from a rabid rack and ruin policy which the Herald never approved,
and pursuing the more reasonable one laid down in its columns, and
propounded by Mr. M‘Millan at Hewtown, which it does approve.
With the Daily Telegraph the matter is quite different. That organ
extended its support to Mr. Reid on his distinct promises of a
swingeing land tax, and radical tariff reforms, to be promptly
■enforced without demur. He has badly requited the trust and
confidence reposed in him; and the Telegraph in its issue of 7th
December last tells him so in these plain set terms :
It is to be regretted that the Premier was not able to assume towards the
deputation which waited upon him yesterday, asking for a respite from the
mandate of the general election, an attitude more consistent with the
one great reason of his being in fhe position that he now occupies. It is
scarcely necessary to remind anybody of the effect of that mandate. The
country declared that all classes privileged under the Dibbs tariff to put
their hands into the public pocket should be peremptorily ordered to_ take
them out. What yesterday’s deputation asked was thaf the execution of
this order should be stayed in its application to grain growers, as, if it were
not, the flourmakers would get some advantage over the men who raised the
wheat. . . . And anyone who has sowed wheat or maize because of that
assumption is to be spared the “ hardship ” of experiencing a disappointment.
This is about all there is to be gathered from Mr. Reid’s reply to yesterday’s
deputation, except an implied reprimand to those Freetraders who are so
far “advanced” as to demand absolute impartiality in dealing with the


claim of classes to be supported by the masses. This was not the sort of
talk which carried him to victory in the late elections ; nor will it help to
strengthen the position then won by him.
This is very creditable plain-speaking, of which we do not get too
much from the Sydney press. But it is not the full limit of the
Telegraph's censure of its spotted political pet. Outis, the Single
Tax standard-bearer, in his “ Notes,” thus rubs the salt into Reid’s
lacerated political back :
There seems every probability, judging by what the grain duties
deputation said to Mr. Reid, and what Mr. Reid said to them, that the will
of the country must play second fiddle to the will of the country party.
Stated in the simplest form, the present prospect is that for the sake of this
party’s favor the Premier will sanction the wrong which he took office to
overthrow. There was no misgiving in the public mind that such a militant
Freetrader as Mr. Reid would become a Protectionist just to oblige a few
of his supporters. He is talking of doing so, however, and, worse still, a
Protectionist “ behind the back of the country.” For nothing is more sure
than that if the country knew Mr. Reid would forswear his Freetrade
principles, so as not to subject farmer’s to the injustice of being able to
collect the duty on maize that isn’t yet sown, he would have met with a
very different reception at the polls. He will meet with it next time if he
continues to buy Parliamentary support with fragments of his promises to
the people. If he doesn’t, the people will only have themselves to blame
for the taxes screwed out of their earnings to subsidise this class, that class,
and the other.
If it is well to give the farmers and millers a six months further chance
of levying toll upon the people, surely the sugar growers can take heart of
grace and hope to be, at least, as considerately treated by the Government
at somebody else’s expense. So, also, may all other persons engaged in
industries from which Mr. Reid was employed by the public to abolish
protective duties. We may look forward, it seems, to Government by
deputation for interests capable of protection, and strong enough to frighten
Freetrade Administrations.
The sugar growers are all right: their industry is as safe from
disturbance under Reid, as under Parkes or Dibbs. Now he has
“dished” both Dibbs and Parkes, Mr. Reid has become a very
reasonable sort of a radical reformer, and a very nice man for
Protectionist deputations to interview. He is not only not going to
knock off the sugar duties, but he will try to further foster the sugar
industry by considering the feasibility of subsidising a co-operative
sugar mill, having asked a deputation of sugar growers, whom he
received very kindly on the 6th of December last, to put their
proposals before him in writing, which has been done. The butter
man is also to receive consideration from this genial radical tariff
reformer, in the shape of a 2d drawback on butter-boxes, pending
the accomplishment of Mr. Reid’s purpose of “ sweeping away all
taxes on industry, and the necessaries of the poor.” The poor can,
of course, better afford to wait than Mr. Reid can to hasten his fiscal
millenium : and while they are waiting they must be content with
the sweet but unsatisfying savour of his unfulfilled promises. Asked


what the people would be likely to say concerning a certain ukase, a
Czar of Russia scornfully swore, “ the people ? The people be
damned !” Mr. Reid neither scorns the people nor swears at them;
he smiles, simply smiles, which is often much easier than performing
one’s promises, and much more polite than swearing, though
Hamlet did set it down in his tables,
“ That one may smile, and smile, and be a villian.”
But then Hamlet was mad; and his acute observation referred to a
mendacious usurping villian in Denmark, which is a long way oft
from New South Wales. Those enthusiastic Single Taxers and
radical tariff reformers who acclaimed and supported Reid as the
only sincere, trustworthy politician in the country, and who now
declaim against him as the betrayer of their cause, and “the biggest
humbug in Australia,” must be patient and give him time to finally
make up his mind and screw up Ids courage to the sticking point.
Rome wasn’t built in a day, and lawyers as reformers are proverb-
ially slow. Besides, they ought to recognise that Reid in office, and
Reid out of office, are two totally different persons, and therefore
they must make allowances for this jolly-fat breaker of political
promises in his official capacity, remembering that
Power, like a desolating pestilence,
Pollutes whate’er it touches ; and obedience,
Bane of all genius, virtue, freedom, truth,
Makes slaves of men, and of the human frame
A mechanized automaton.


PART 11.
REID : SINGLE, DOUBLE AND TREBLE TAXER.
When the hare is once caught and killed cooking him will follow as a matter of course
... We may safely leave them the shell if wo take the kernel. It is not necessary to
confiscate land ; it is only necessary to confiscate rent.— Henry George, “ Progress and
Poverty.”
The teachings of his (Henry George’s) wonderful books had already created a host of
disciples to welcome him to these shores.—G. H. 11 kil >, Protestant Hall, May 31st, 1890.
The single tax in the country was like this: It would be the sheerest robbery and
repudiation. (Cheers) He believed in a land and income tax, but was not prepared to
definitely announce himself in favour of a progressive land tax. —G. H. Reid, at Mulwala,
January Bth, 1894.
On the question of Land Taxation, as on those of Freetrade and
Federation, Mr. Reid has no fixed opinions. On this, as on every
o the/question, he has shown himself to be a veritable “Mr. Facing-
four-ways,” and sometimes forty ways, changing his views to suit
the cry current with the mob, or presently popular with any power-
ful newspaper, with all the agility of an accomplished political
acrobat. At one time he is an undefined land-taxer waiting for a
puff of the popular breeze to trim his sail to ; at another he
simulates a deep conviction of Single Tax, without exemptions; at
another he is a 4d. in-the-pounder, with exemptions ; and at yet
another a mild Id. in-the-pounder, with or without exemptions, just
as the “ sweet voices ” may happen to be heard. Now lie is a
combined sort of Land-Income-Customs-Local Government Taxer,
waiting on political providence before he commits himself finally.
All these changes he has achieved in the short space of three years.
His shameless shiftiness on this great problem of Land laxation
proves him to be without settled convictions or honest intentions.
The story of his scandalous tergiversations is interesting and
instructive, as tending to show how little principle or consistency it
requires to become Premier of New South Wales.
During the Single Tax craze of 1889-90, Mr. Reid ivas coyly
coquetting with the disciples of Henry George. When George
made his famous raid in 1890, Mr. Reid was found triumphantly,
yet cautiously, straddling a rail. He attended all George’s lectures


at the Protestant Hall, taking care to occupy a prominent front
seat, and to make his voice heard in approval whenever the prophet
of San Francisco with scathing scorn denounced revenue tariffism as
a fraudulent imitation of Freetrade. While the craze lasted, his
conduct and utterances were artfully timed and tuned to lead the
public to believe that he had become a convert, and was ready to
■“go the whole hog” of the “confiscation of rent” policy, which
George had so eloquently and forcibly propounded in “Progress and
Poverty,” thus:
To extirpate poverty, to make wages what justice commands they should
be, the full earnings of the laborer, we must substitute for the individual
ownership of the land, a common ownership We must make
land common property.
At all the lectures at which Mr. Reid was present, George made it
plain that the fundamental principle of the Single Tax was, “To
abolish all taxation save that upon land values,” and pointed out, as
he does in his book, that,
That is the first step upon which the practical struggle must be made •
When the hare is once caught and killed cooking him will follow as a matter
of course I do not propose to purchase or confiscate private
property in land. The first would be unjust, the second needless. Let the
individuals who now hold it still retain, if they want to, possession of what
they are pleased to call their land. Let them buy and sell, and bequeath and
devise it. We may safely leave them the shell if we take the kernel. It is
not necessary to confiscate land ; it is only necessary to confiscate rent.
Such are the principles with which Mr. Reid seemed to proclaim
himself to be in full sympathy. In this he was neither better nor
worse than most of the other revenue tariffists of the Cobden Club
type. Many of the leading Freetraders agreed to publicly glorify
George, whom they secretly distrusted, in order that he might help
them to curse and politically damn Protection, which was then
making great headway.
Reid had so ingratiated himself with the disciples of George, by
artfully inducing them to regard him as a convert to Single-Taxism,
that from the day of George’s arrival until that of his departure,
they were incessantly booming him as “ Reid the Radical Reformer.’’
He was their “white-haired hoy,” who was to push Parkes from the
political pedestal, and take his place as Premier. Parkes had been
invited to preside at the Single Tax banquet given at the Town Hall
in George’s honor. For reasons best known to himself, that “ old
Parliamentary hand ” was not there to do honor to the man whom
Mr, Plumb, the Single Tax member for Carcoar, with almost
blasphemous enthusiasm, declared was, “ As truly inspired as Jesus
•Christ was 1800 years ago !” The chairman of the banquet was
Mr, C. L. Garland, M.P., President of the Single Tax League, who,


in proposing George’s health, twitted Parkes, “the greatest Aus-
tralian Freetrader,” for not being present to do honor to “ another
and greater Freetrader who was present that evening”: “Ecce
Homo,” exclaimed Mr. Garland, dramatically placing his right hand
■on the shoulder of the Yankee guest, “ Ecce Homo—Henry
George!” Mr. Reid, who Avas closely dogging Parkes’ political
footsteps in the hope of catching the veteran tripping, determined
not to miss an opportunity of placating the Single Taxers, Avhom he
has been suspected of cunningly inciting against Parkes. He not
only attended George’s lectures, but he presided at his farewell
lecture at the Protestant Hall, on which occasion he eulogised “ the
teachings of his wonderful books, which had already created a host
of disciples to welcome him to these shores,” craftily adding that he
did not know whether he could yet claim the distinction of being a
disciple, thus insinuating that, like Agrippa, he was almost, but not
quite, persuaded. There was a reason for this seeming hesitancy.
Reid had already determined to wriggle away from Single-Taxism.
He was cute enough to see that the day for “confiscating rent” had
not yet come. His political supporters in East Sydney, among the
hankers, warehousemen, brewers, publicans and civil servants, were
beginning to resent Georgian attacks upon their enormous metro-
politan land-values, and eligible scrub and sand lots in the suburbs.
Hence his sudden desire to play the part of a doubting .Didyrnus on
the very question that he had bee iso busily booming e\ r er since
Geoj-ge’s arrival in Sydney. He had been playing a double game
Ml along. The comedy commenced with George’s arrival, and ended
with his departure. The craze over George declined even more
lapidlv than it had arisen. One of the most direct and immediate
•results of his social filibustering expedition was to prejudice
Australian czedit abroad, and to thus create a commercial and
industrial crisis Avhich was one of the precipitating causes of the
great maritime strike. Geoz-ge commenced his crusade on the 7th
•of March, 1890, and after stumping Australia from end to end,
terminated it in Sydney under Mr. Reid’s auspices on the 31st of
May following, and then went off with well-lined pockets to
America. Two months later the biggest and most disastrous Labor
war of modern times began, lasting from August to November, dur-
ing which brief period the Australian workers lost millions in Avages,
and suffered terrible privations. Of course, that Avas no concern of
Henry George, or for the matter of that, of George Houston Reid,
who seemed znore concerned about checkmating Parkes, and block'
ing F ederation, than about the suffezlngs of the todevs, over whose
woes and wrongs he can become so tearfully eloquent on propitious
occasions. Nevertheless, both he and George must shai’e the
’responsibility of that widespread industrial and commercial depres-
sion caused by that gigantic strike, from the effects of which the
whole continent continues t© suffer. Their propagandum in favour


of “ sweeping away the customs’ houses,” and “ confiscating rent,”
at one fell swoop, by inducing the belief that the Preetrade party in
New South Wales was identifying itself with a policy of repudiation,,
caused millions of home and foreign capital to be withdrawn from
investment, precisely at a time when it could least be spared.
Of course, it would not suit either Mr, Reid, or those who are now
assisting him to bungle legislation, and muddle the affairs of the
country, to admit any part of this formidable indictment ; but the
fact remains that it is he above all others who has been mainly
instrumental in branding Preetrade as the cause of a turbulent and
credit-destroying faction. From a solid and respectable party, with
a liberal and historic policy, the Freetraders have degenerated,,
mainly through Mr. Reid’s disloyal disintegrating party vagaries,
into a disunited crowd of reckless politicians, ready to espouse any
cause, or to advocate any fad, so that it but seems to promise place
and pay. Public opinion expressed itself on Mr. Reid and his
doings during 1890, by placing him at the bottom of the poll at
East Sydney in 1891, and in returning his party to Parliament with
such diminished numbers that it could only retain office for a few
months. When Sir Henry Parkes could no longer suffer the
squeezing tactics to which Mr. Reid incessantly incited the Single-
Tax section of the new Labor Party, Sir George Dibbs and the
Protectionists stepped into office, which they retained with the
warm approval of thousands of sincere Freetraders, for nearly three
years, in spite of Mr. Reid’s thirteen desperate attempts to eject
them.
Finding that Single Tax was “a cock that would not fight” on
an East Sydney platform, Mr. Reid commenced to diligently
cultivate a mob popularity by abusing Parkes, and denouncing
Federation as Imperial militarism. Meanwhile Mr. Pulsford had
put up the Freetrade shutters, by announcing that there was no more
work for his branch of the Cobden Club to do, “ the cause of
Freetrade in New South Wales having been finally won.” So,
perhaps, he thought ; but many shrewdly surmised that the collapse
of the old Freetrade and Liberal (?) Association was due to lack of
enthusiasm, and want of funds, more than to anything else. But
the Single Taxers declared that the “ fight for freedom ” had only
just begun. They formed themselves into a veritable “ Cave of
Adullam,” which comprised malcontent representatives of all the
economic “ isms that haunt us,” including, besides rabid Single Tax
rent confiscators, land taxers of every degree, malcontent Free-
traders of every shade, with a strong sprinkling of Maritime Strike
leaders and Trade Unionist representatives, who deluded themselves
by the belief that in supporting Single Tax they were supporting
Socialism. This “ cave ” was called the “ Freetrade and Land


Reform Electoral Committee,” it being considered prudent to mask
the real purpose of the organisation by dropping its Single Tax
name. This, indeed, was necessary, in order to enable such allies as
Messrs, Reid and Wise to join it, and to secure the active support
of one section of the metropolitan Press, and the benevolent
neutrality of the other. But the true character and intent of the
new organisation remained the same, as may be divined from the
fact that it comprises some of the most prominent members of the
celebrated Labor Defence Committee which organised and directed
the calamitous Strike of 1890 ; notably Mr. Joseph Cook, the
present Postmaster-General, one of the founders of the old Single
Tax League, who represented the Western miners on the Labor
Defence Committee; T. M. Davis, M.L.A., who represented the
■Seamen’s Union; G. Herbert, of the Coal-himpers’ Union; Frank
Cotton, of the Trades and Labor Council; J. Mooney, of the
Shearers’ Union ; all of whom, and many more, were prominent
Strike leaders, and some of them active promoters of the “ Hew
Australia ” pilgrimage to Paraguay. There was also in this case a
numerous foreign element, with unpronouncible Dutch, German,
Polish and Russian names, who, though estimable as citizens in
many respects, were neither born nor naturalised British subjects,
although they claimed to participate in a movement to tax the
property of British subjects, and to confiscate Australian rent.
The‘secretary of this organisation was a Mr. Wm. Harding, a sort of
unemployed caucus wire-puller from England, who had not been in
the country two years before he wanted to tax the “unearned
increment,” none of which is due to his exertions, or ever likely to
be. This was the kind of alien organisation to which Australian
citizens were to bow the knee.
The political campaign was opened at the Protestant
Hall on Monday, August 7th, 1893, when Mr. B. R. Wise,
the President of the Association, delivered the inaugural
address, having with him on the platform Sir Henry Parkes, G. H.
Reid, J. H. Carruthers, together with a whole brigade of
Parliamentary candidates who, significantly enough, were nearly all
defeated at the last general election, among them being : J. C.
Nield, Alfred Allen, Daniel O’Connor, A. H. Sampson, A. H.
Conroy, E. W. Foxall, James Wilshire, H, Dahms, and J. A.
Dobbie. Mr. Wise’s address was able, eloquent and logical, from a
Single Tax point of view. He moved the principal resolution,
which Mr, Reid seconded, in the course of a fiery speech in
denunciation of landlords and Customs duties. That he knew well
enough what he was about is proved by the fact that before the
proceedings began, the framers of the resolution had distributed
among those on the platform and in the body of the hall, a circular
signed by “W. Harding, General Secretary of the Freetrade and


Land Reform Electoral Committee,” in which the meaning of the
resolution was explained in the following unmistakable terms .
A tax of 4d in the £ on this amount (i.e.. on the land values of the
colony, exclusive of improvements), or only If per cent., would bring in
£3,211,903, or more than the whole of the revenue obtained through the-
Custom House last year.
Evidently suspecting the sincerity of Mr. Reid, who was to second
the resolution in support of this proposal, Mr. Wise in moving it
was careful to commit Mr. Reid, and to pin him to the point, by
observing :
In considering this question they would undoubtedly have many
difficulties to face, and as Mr. Reid pointed out in his address at Redfern on
Friday last, in taking this firm stand they must not expect to carry all their
former friends with them. There was a certain section of the 1 reetra e,
party, whom Mr. Reid described as “ our fashionable friends, but it they
would not come with the advanced guard of the party, they would not be
carried on the shoulders of that party. The Freetrade party had been,
saddled with these people like an incubus for many years, but it would
carry them no longer.
Thus admonished by the words of his own mouth, Mr. Reid
decided there and then to march with the “ advance guard.
It is just to state that the result of this Single Tax demonstration
was not to secure for Mr. Reid the undivided and unqualified suppoit
of the big metropolitan Freetrade newspapers. Of course, the Daily
Telegraph , which had prepared the way for Henry George by
publishing a series of ten long articles, occupying nearly forty
columns, on the “ Philosophy of the Single Tax,” from the
persuasive pen of Mr. John Farrell, boomed the meeting as a gieat
democratic demonstration in favour of ‘‘freeing the land, and taking
the burden off industry by a tax on land values, which, as
propounded by Mr. W ise, and supported by Mr. Reid, meant the
confiscation of “ £132,000,000 of unearned increment.” To this a
tax of 4d in the £ seems to be but a mere preliminary, as at
this very meeting one of the most ‘"advanced membeis of the
“advance guard ” moved an amendment to Messrs. Wise and Reid s
motion to the effect that the proposed tax on this unearned
increment should be “at least Is in the £, which meant laising
nearly ten millions sterling per annum on land values alone ! The
Evening News was less enthusiastic in its approbation of the part
played by some of the principal performers at this meeting, and in
its leading article next day, while in the main approving of the
meeting, insinuated a charge of insincerity against Mi. Reid and
others in the most sarcastic and cynical terms, warning the people
that:
If the people want a Land Tax instead of taxes on the small necessaries
of the poor, they will have to keep their eyes on the Freetrade veterans, and
see that those veterans really aim at something more besides settling
themselves comfortably on the Government benches.


Parkes saw that he had “ put his foot in it ” by attending this
meeting, and promptly repudiated the Single I’ax programme two
days later at Albury, in the following terms :
I do not think I can adopt the platform of the Freetrade and Land
Keform Electoral Committee. I am in favour of a Land Tax, but only as
forming part of an equitable scheme of taxation. I don’t believe in
sweeping away the Customs’ houses altogether.
The reason that Parkes so promptly repudiated sympathy with
the Single Tax schism, is the fact that the Sydney Morning Herald,
the recognised organ of orthodox Freetrade, and the keeper of the
conscience of Capital and Commerce, had promptly and
emphatically stigmatised the Protestant Hall programme as “a
monstrous injustice, the association of which with the principles of
Freetrade, or with the teachings of political economy, we wish
earnestly to repudiate.” In its leading article published on the
morning after the meeting, the Herald deprecated this new-born
enthusiasm for fresh taxation, merely as such, and insisted that
what was required was more economy and retrenchment rather than
new burdens, observing :
For ourselves, we must say that, without questioning the propriety of the
adoption of a system of direct taxation, including a tax on land, we do not
find it easy to ascend to enthusiasm with regard to taxation of any kind.
Probably enthusiasm of this sort is usually to be accepted as the measure of
the enthusiast’s clearness of perception that the taxation over which he is so
jubilant will fall upon somebody else. We can only regard taxation as a
necessary evil, can only consider it justified by the need for additional
revenue. We can see no reason—certainly none was attempted to be shown
last night—for departing from the contention which we have maintained
throughout our present financial difficulties, that our most pressing need at
the present time is not so much taxation as rigorous retrenchment.
Referring to the same subject in another leader a week later, the
Herald made a terrific onslaught on the programme of the Single
Tax “ advance guard ” of the Freetrade Party with which Reid was
marching, and thus called upon him to retrace his steps :
If those who undertook to speak for the Freetrade Party are not
committed to the views of the, committee which acted to them in the
capacity of political sponsor, the earlier they make this clear the better for
the party and for themselves.
This -was on the 14th of August, 1893 ; and Parkes, as we have
seen, publicly renounced Single Taxism and all its works two days
afterwards at Albury, as the Evening News had prophesied he
would do. Parkes having been brought to reason, Reid had to be
dealt with. He squirmed and wriggled, and backed and filled, but
the Herald and Mr. M‘Millan kept at him until he, too, finally
recanted. He went to Newtown with Mr. M‘Millan to address a
big public meeting on August 22nd, 1893, and there got well hooted
and howled down for his manifest determination to abandon the


Single Tax programme, which he had so warmly espoused only a
fortnight before at the Protestant Hall. Amidst hooting and
jeering this supreme shuffler, with a smiling cheek, thus attempted
to bamboozle the irate Single Taxers :
Because a man would only sign 38 out of 39 articles of their faith, it was
better to let him go with them as far as possible, rather than drive him over
to the enemy. Surely it would be better to remove all the spots but seven
or eight off the face of the glorious sun of Freetrade rather than allow the
thousand spots to remain, because they could not be removed all at once.
It was better to have men with them for half a campaign rather than drive
them over to the enemy, and it was their duty as I reetraders to sink all
differences until they had extinguished Protection.
Mr. M‘Millan, who is always as courageous as he is clear-beaded,
followed, and thus laid the lash across Reid’s renegade shoulders :
He failed to see the principle of Democracy that would tax a man who
spent £IOO,OOO in buying rhe public estate and putting the people on it,
and the Democracy that would allow a man with £IOO, OjO on fixed deposit
to go free. (Cheers and uproar.) Every man should be taxed according to
the strength of his own shoulders, and he had not the sublime intellect of
some people who thought that by one principle they would be able to do
away with everything of immorality, poverty, and political prostitution.
“ Political prostitution !” Lord, how the audience did cheer when
they saw Reid wince, and afterwards leave the platform, looking as
though Freetrade, as preached by Mr. M'Millan, was not conducive
to jollity. Yet was his recantation not complete. Still did the
Herald and Mr. M‘Millan stick to him, and drag him through the
humiliating mire of his own making. Reverting to the fatal
Protestant Hall meeting, two days after Reid s Yewtown
castigation, the Herald , in a third leader on the 24th of August,
after admitting that Sir Henry Parkes, “ with the wariness of a
veteran politician,” had not irrevocably committed himself,
addressed xhe following string of ugly questions to Reid :
What the Freetrade party in Parliament and in the electorates of the
country is now entitled to know is, what in precise terms is the policy to
be submitted on its behalf to the country ? A second question of not less
importance is, who are the authors of
lenders of the party ? or are they the unknown members of an organisation,
who, though they now call themselves by the ill-fitting name of '‘land
reformers,” not long ago presented themselves to the public under another
■designation ?
Meanwhile Mr. McMillan had, and still has, Reid s political soul in
pawn. He laid down the law for his protege at Whverley on
October 28th, 1803, having with him on the platform Mr. J. H.
Want, the present Attorney-General. He declared the programme
of the Freetrade party to be “ Local Government, and direct
taxation consisting of an Income Tax and Land laxation, and the
abolition of the new ad valorem duties ; ’ and repudiated the


Protestant Hall programme in terms of strong condemnation.
After remarking that “ Mr. Wise was now almost a Single Taxer,”
Mr. M‘Millan said :
The men who formed that land league in its inception were extreme
followers of Henry George, and believed in a Single Tax, and a Single Tax
alone. (Hear, hear.) At a meeting which was subsequently held it was
said that Income Tax or no Income Tax, Local Government or no Local
Government, they were determined to have Land Taxation. (Hear, hear.)
Well, he said that no man with any sense of justice, no man who was fit to
call himself a democrat, which meant justice to all classes, would give his
adhesion to a one-sided system of taxation. (Hear, hear,)
This was a plain intimation to Mr. Reid from head-quarters that
he would never get the Premiership unless he consented to revert
to a rational Freetrade policy. Hereupon the “ Wriggler ” went
off to Woollahra, and worked off another recantation of Single
Taxism, more abject and fuller than that at Newtown. But it was
not long before this political Cranmer had another partial relapse,
and recanted his recantation. Finding it necessary to toe the line
marked out at Waverley by Mr. M‘Millan, he went away into the
Riverina, and at Narrandera said: “He believed in a Land Tax as
payment for services rendered by the State to landowners, but
they would not get more than Id in the £ from him and,
•obedient to the mandate from Mr. M‘Millan, pledged himself to
raise not more than a quarter of a million “ from lands, incomes,
&c.” Having thus obeyed his masters, but fearful that he might
have / alienated his old Single Tax allies, he threw them a sop in
the shape of a fulsome eulogy of Single Tax Labor Member Rae,
the well-known shearers’ strike leader, and promoter of a
shearers’ strike and the pilgrimage to Paraguay. As was pointed
-out in the correspondence columns of the Herald two days latei .
Now we find him (Mr. Reid) at Narrandera repudiating his own repudia-
tion, and once more coquetting with the Single Tax and Labor members.
To cajole the first he dangles the discarded Land Tax before them, and to
placate the second he heaps fulsome flattery on Labor Member Rae. Does
Mr. Reid fancy that the country will mistake this political Crammerism for
statesmanship ! There is neither policy nor patriotism in such weathercock
shiftiness. It is decidedly demoralising to political life, and the populai
ban ought to be put on the politician who dares declare that he has as many
different opinions on a large public problem as there are parties and
factions in the State or months in the year.
Even the Daily Telegraph (without the loyal and sturdy support of
which paper Mr. Reid would probably never have been heard of as
Premier) could not tolerate such shameless dodgery. In a leading
article, headed “ Party Truckling,” published a few days after the
Narrandera speech, the Telegraph thus vigorously denounces Mr.
Reid’s latest exhibition of consummate wriggling :
We have recently seen Mr. Reid trimming his political sails to catch
votes from every point of the compass, and Sir Henry Parkes angling in


strange waters At Narrandera the other night he went out of
his way to laud Mr. Rae. There is, of course, no harm in that, although
the Premier points out that Mr. Rae once voted against a message of
condolence to the Queen, and himself tries to make capital out of it. 0 But
it is a pat on the back inferentially for the Labor party, and Mr. Reid’s
political stock-in trade consists largely of such pats, which are shed around
where they seem likely to be appreciated.
This was early in January, 1893. Thirteen months have past,
and Mr. Reid has been in power fully six months. During that
time he has not condescended to take Parliament or the country
into his confidence concerning his views and proposals on Land
Taxation. True, he has made some show of providing machinery
for collecting a Land Tax, but what is to be the amount, or when
it is to be imposed, he either does not know, or does not care to
say. Meanwhile, he has promised farmers “ perpetual Protection,”
and delayed Civil Service reform and retrenchment pending receipt
of a report from a Royal Commission. This commission has all the
appearance of one of those delightfully delusive dodges for
indefinitely delaying what there is no real intention of seriously
performing, so dear to the heart of “radical reformers” of the
stamp of Mr. Reid, whose motto ever is :
To promise, pause, prepare, postpone,
And end by letting things alone;
And so to earn the People’s pay,
By doing nothing every day.
m t—
/ W X


PART 111.
REID : THE FREETRADE PROVING lALIST.
The people of Victoria and the people of New South Wales are equally bound to-
remember that so long as the issue between Protection and Freetrade continues to divide-
them, Australian unity must be deferred.— G. H. Reid, “Five Fretrade Essays, Ist
April, 1875.
Now, the beginning of this movement was not an impulse of brotherly love. It was
not that sort ol outpouring of fraternal affection which might bring brothers together.
It is the old story—at the heart of this movement is the military spirit- - • ■ _ I can
look with no satisfaction upon any kind of Federation which will drag this country into
the mire of Protection. I am not prepared to give up the whole loaf of freedom I am,
not prepared to erect across Port Jackson barriers against the world —I am not prepared
to turn my back on the mother country, which is the ever bright example of freedom—l-
am not prepared to do that for all your Federation. G. H. limn, in the Assembly, May
21st, 1891.
lii that curious compilation entitled “ Fifty Years in the Making
of Australian History,’’ Sir Henry Parkes stigmatises Mr. Reid
as “ the arch-plotter against Federation.” This fairly describes
Mr. Reid’s antagonistic attitude towards Federation, though it is-
due to him to say that he has been for a longer time the avowed
opponent of Federation than Sir Henry Parkes has been its
recognised advocate. Even before he entered Parliament he opposed
it. In a peculiarly ponderous literary production entitled, “An
Essay on New South Wales, the Mother Colony of the Australias ’
—printed at the Government Printing Office at the taxpayer’s
expense, and then appropriately, and “ most respectfully inscribed
to the Colonists of New South Wales” on the Ist of April (All
Fool’s Day)—he enters his first public protest against Federation in
the following terms :
We advise the advocates of a Federal Parliament to begin with the
experiment on a smaller scale. Let a score of parishes in different parts
•of the empire be incorporated. If this Federation would make a happy
family, then we might begin to believe in the idea of pegging out the
territorial marvels of the British Empire into a series of parishes. . . .
It would be well if the energy of the advocates of Australian Federation
were bestowed on the one great subject upon which the progress of the
colonies depends—emigration !
There is Mr. Reid’s opinion expressed in 1876. He is a true
and sincere Cobdenitish Freetrader, and an honorary member of that
now defunct English commercial Cobden Club;


-■and the winner of one of its money prizes for the essay in which he
thus declares his preference for emigration over Federation. Mr.
•Reid at that time did not believe either in Imperial or Australian
Federation, but in a loose, undefined sort of political union,
dependent on oversea or foreign trade, with a steady importation of
labor to keep up the exportation of raw material. That is the
Cobdenitish ideal of Australian progress and prosperity, from an
•English manufacturer’s point of view. In holding that view, Mr.
Reid is consistent. He held it up to the beginning of the year
1891 and later, and if he has since changed it he must have done
so under an impulse almost as sudden as that which celestially
converted Saul of Tarsus on his way to Damascus. Religious
miracles may no longer be produced, but political “oracles” are,
and, at the prospects of office, these work wonders, as we shall see
in the case of Mr. Reid.
It would be as untrue as unfair to attribute his denunciation of
the Draft Bill of the Federal Convention of 1881 to personal
• animosity against Sir Henry Parkes, because his attitude towards
'that measure is, as we have seen, consistent with his Freetrade
professions, and Cobden Club membership, dating back twenty
years. His criticisms constitute the most damning indictment yet
formulated against Federation by any man. His dislike of
Federation was bitter and sincere, and he pretended to base it
on Sir Henry Parkes’ declared willingness to sacrifice
Freetrade “to the sacred cause of Federation,” by leaving the
■decision of the fiscal question over for final settlement by the
Federal Parliament. The “ Australian Federal Conference ” met
•at Melbourne early in February, 1891, at the invitation of Parkes,
and adopted certain resolutions in favor of calling a Federal
Convention to draft a Constitution. It had scarcely concluded its
deliberations, when Mr. Reid commenced his famous anti-Federation
crusade. Addressing a big meeting at the Protestant Hall during
the same month, he made a most masterly yet virulent attack on
Sir Henry Parkes, who, he said, “ had been in office twenty years,
and Premier for twelve years of that time. He had come there to
his history and career during that period. . .. He
had come there to point out the crying wants of the people, and
'to pronounce Sir Henry Parkes an utter failure, and he did not
use those words lightly.” Mr. Reid then went on to compare
Parkes with a confidence trick man, and to an old cuckoo, who
never built a nest of its own, but wandered through the woods
laying its eggs in the nests of other birds, adding pungency to this
•clever comparison, by giving instances of Parkes’ alleged
kleptomaniacal tendencies for appropriating the political proposals
of other -people. He even ventured to flippantly designate the
'“Step-father of Federation,” a “brain-sucker, a plagiariser or


pirater of other people’s ideas, in order to pass them off as the fruit
of his own fertile brain.” Federation was one of the numerous
dodges by which Parkes had deluded the public for many years ;
and, according to Mr. Reid:
When Sir Henry Parkes was approaching his political deathbed, he showed
every kind of remorse, and trotted out all those ancient political promises
with which he had bamboozled them for twenty years.
Alluding to Sir Henry Parkes’ readiness to subordinate Freetrade
to Federation, he said, “ Sir Henry Parkes, instead of being the
champion of Freetrade, had stabbed it to the heart.” He concluded
thus :
He disapproved of Imperial Federation, and had always raised his protest
against ayiy system which would tend to hind the colonies and the mother
country closer together. He would, however, watch the proceedings of the
Federation Convention closely, and would call a special public meeting at
which he would express his views on the matter.
Meanwhile Parliament had been convened for the 19th of May,
on which date Sir Henry Parkes moved his famous set of
Federation resolutions, of which he had given notice. The last of
these resolutions nominated Sir Henry Parkes, Sir J. P. Abbott
(the present Speaker), and Messrs. Wm, M‘Millan and J. P.
Garvan, as delegates to the Convention, the last-named being
nominated as a personal snub to Sir George Dibbs, the leader of the
Opposition, because Sir George had declared that “ He would not
allow Sir Henry Parkes to ignore Protection in his scheme of
Federation.” Mr. Reid applauded Dibbs’ attitude ; and perceiving
that his opportunity for carrying out his threat to “ stiffen Federa-
tion ” had come, he promptly seized it, and effectually fulfilled it. It
should be stated that an open and avowed anti-Federation coalition
had been entered into between Mr. Reid and Mr. J. H. Want—the
late Sir John Robertson’s lieutenant, who has since become the
wearer of that lamented knight’s “ Dead as Julius Caesar ” mantle—
on the one side, and Sir George Dibbs’, on the other. Mr. Reid
was chosen to lead the coalition attack against Federation, and he
justified the confidence reposed in him by his Protectionist allies by
doing the job in his most thorough and dashing style. The debate
occupied several nights, extending over a month. On the third
night Mr. Reid rose amid the loud cheers of the Opposition, and in
one of the most forcible speeches ever delivered in Parliament,
proceeded to pull Parkes’ proposals literally to pieces. After
'praising the political freedom and material progress achieved by the
various colonies under their respective separate institutions, he
threw the onus of proving the desirability of Federation, “ Upon
those who wish to change the current of our Rational growth, who
wish to discard the existing Constitution, who wish to turn their
back upon experience, upon actual prosperity, and to engage in


political and irrevocable experiments.” Then alluding to the
celebrated Chinese Fleet letter of Major-General Edwards, from
Hong Kong, the date of which marks the beginning of Parkes’
new-born zeal for a Federated Australia, Mr. Eeid by a bold
inuendo, accused Parkes of conspiring with the Imperial authorities
to bring about Federation by creating a military scare. He
• emphatically declared, amid loud Opposition cheers :
Now the beginning of this movement was not an impulse of brotherly
dove. It was not that sort of outpouring of fraternal affection which might
bring brothers together. It is the old story ;at t'.e heart of this movement
is the military spirit.
He averred that the military spirit had been at the bottom of all
Federal movements ; and alluding to the attempts of Federal
■orators to gull the average Australian by vague and frothy rhetoric
about unity and brotherly love, he satirically observed :
When you talk to him about precipitating us into a nation, his shrewd
common sense tells him that you are pretty much telling him to take a leap
in the dark. It is the fashionable way of invitin? you to shut your eyes and
■ open your mouth and you will get something very nice.
Referring to the fiscal aspect of the question, Mr. Reid spoke out
plainly and unmistakably, leaving no room for doubt or quibble as
to his opinion in this regard :
I have always been in favour of intercolonial Freetrade, and I have always
talked about it; but I have never dropped the other half of Freetrade : and
it does appear to me that if there was one country in the world which we
should not expose to the retaliation to which my hon. friend (Mr. Deakin
■of Vic.), as one of the curses of Protection, it is the mother country. She
may be very foolish in her Freetrade policy, but even the most bigoted
Protectionist will admit that in her trade she has never retaliated. We tax
her goods heavily—at least, some of the colonies do—and all our products
pass into England, which is the market of the world, duty free.
Here spoke the consistent Cobden Club prize essayist of fifteen
years agone, who regards the right to buy in the cheapest, and sell
in the dearest market, as the sole aim of economic philosophy.
Pursuing this line of argument, he went on to say that it would
not do for Freetraders to talk about the advantages of a free border
when they can get the advantage of having their harbours free to
all the commerce of the world. “ But that is only one side of it,”
interposed Mr. John See; to which Mr. Reid replied by the
following prophetic admission :
1 have always been one-sided on that question. I MAY. PERHAPS SIT
ON A RAIL SOME DAY. ’
Was ever such candour known in politics before, A turncoat in
prospective predicting his own apostasy. What an admirable


innovation in the methods of political poltroonery ! Here is
another specimen of Mr. Reid’s singularly confiding nature:
1 have no hesitation in saying that I will never be a party to any
Constitution that is framed on Canadian lines. I, perhaps, should not say
that I shall never be a party to it, became, in the course of time you do not
know what changes may take place ; THIS IS A WORLD OF CHANGE.
Reverting to the fiscal aspect of the question, as though he thought
he had been too candid in thus hinting at the possibility of his
selling his principles and deserting his party in this world of
change, in which it is becoming so fashionable for aspiring
politicians to “sit on rails,” Mr. Reid, with all the fervour of
which a sincere Freetrade soul is capable, exclaimed :
I believe in Freetrade as I believe in freedom. I cannot tamper with
Protection, because I believe it is slavery and restriction—that is the ground
I stand upon. I may be wrong I have no hesitation in saying,
without going any further just now, that—believing all I have uttered on
this question, believing as firmly as ever that this country should hold aloft
the flag of freedom—l am not prepared to erect across Port Jackson barriers
against the world—l am not prepared to turn my back on the mother
country, which is the ever bright example of Freedom—l am not prepared to do
that for all your Federation. I will not federate until I have a better idea
—a more natural idea—that my principles will not be sacrificed ; and I
say that the man who believes that JVetv South Wales handing over these
powers to a Federal Parliament of the Australias will result at once in
Freetrade is a madman. Some of my hon. friends candidly admit what I
say, because they are already prepared to bow their heads to the stroke of
the executioner. But I am not prepared to bow my head to the stroke of
the executioner Perhaps I shall be left in solitary grandeur,
■quite alone ; but I believe too strongly in freedom. I have fought too long
for Freetrade to be prepared to hand over the destinies of this, the best part
of the Australian colonies, to men who, I believe, will fetter our people and
injure our commerce. Now I have been frank with my friends in the
Government I tell them at once that no Government will have
my support the moment that I feel Freetrade is being lost in New South
Wales. The men who will bring in any sort of Protection whatever shall
never be my friends ; they shall be to me the Opposition.
This gallant defence of “ Freetrade and freedom ” was received
with tumultuous cheering by the Protectionist Opposition, and Mr.
Reid showed his appreciation of their applause by battling for
their chief, and defending Sir George Dibbs’ Republican resistance
to Federation, which Sir Henry Parkes had urged as one of the
unanswerable arguments against his nomination as a delegate to the
Convention. He demanded and defended his election to the
“Convention as “ the leader of a great political party,” declaring
that Dibbs was “ the mouthpiece of a great political party,” and he
was mainly instrumental in getting Sir George elected to the
Convention, which he was so much afraid would “ shackle this fair
land with the fetters of Protection.” If he was not consistent in


this, he was, at any rate, generous. This was in 1890 ; where now
are Bibbs’ pro-Protection Republican fervours, and Reid's
anti-Federation “ die in the last ditch ” Freetrade devotion f
Gone, and “melted into air, into thin air.’ An Imperial title
rewards the Republican zeal of the one; the Premiership, the fiscal
fervour of the other, who now displays his grateful devotion to.
Freetrade by presenting “ skulking crawlers ” of Protectionist
farmers with a fifteen months’ prolongation of the Grain Buties,.
which means their permanent maintenance. But this fascinating
subject of Freetrade has caused us to digress.
The Convention duly met, deliberated, and drafted a Federal
Constitution ; and it still remains in the draft, thanks to the combined
efforts of Reid, Bibbs, Want, Slattery, and Co. True to his word,
Mr. Reid called a special meeting at the Protestant Hall to express
his views on the proceedings of the Federation Convention. Sir
John Robertson, the leader of the anti-Federation party, presided,.
and on the platform with him were Messrs. Bibbs, Want, Slattery,
Abigail, Walter Bradley, Hutchison, Gormly, Levien, and F. A.
Wright, M’s.L.A., and that determined Bemocrat, the Hon. John
Lucas, M.L.C., all but three of whom were avowed Protectionists,
and special representatives of those “ skulking crawlers ” of
farmers to whom Mr. Reid, probably in recognition of their
powerful political support on this and other occasions, has just
granted, in the name of a Freetrade Government, fifteen months’
protection! Mr. Reid was in fine form; and after accusing
Parkes of taking up with Federation because he thought “ the
Freetrade ship was sinking,” and with being “ a confirmed but
discredited old logroller,” literally demolished the draft Constitution,
and concluded by declaring :
He would bring him before the bar of the House, and ask the representatives
of the people to tell the whole of the people of Australia at once that they
need not expect Parliament to comply with the insolent demands of the
Convention to take the Bill a? it stood ; and he was sure that when the Bill,
was submitted to the judgment of the people, it would be torn in shreds.
His speech roused much enthusiasm, and he resumed his seat
amid an ovation ; whereupon Mr. “Ad Valorem” Want moved,
and Mr. “ Protectionist ” Bibbs seconded, a most cordial vote of
thanks to Mr. Reid, which was carried by acclamation. This
was on the 4th of May, 1891. Parliament reassembled on the
19th of the same month, “forty days after the rising of the
Convention.” Here was another splendid opportunity of
“ stiffening Federation,” of which Mr. Reid was not slow to avail
himself. After consulting with the Opposition, he determined to
move an amendment to the Address-in-Reply, which he did in
another rattling “ die in the last ditch ” pro-Freetrade,. anti-


Federation speech. The first clause of his amendment was as
follows ;
That, in the opinion of this House, it is not desirable to form a union
under one legislative and executive Government as resolved by the
Australasian Federal Conference held on February 13th last year, at
Parliament House, Melbourne.
Mr. Eeid, who was as brilliant and effective as ever, banged the
Convention’s Draft Constitution about badly, to the intense delight
of the Protectionist Opposition, who encouraged him with tremendous
cheering. He was never more fluent, or more funny, and sent the-
House into fits of laughter when, in allusion to certain comments
on his conduct, he described Sir Henry Parkes as “ the venerable old
Christian patriot talking slang—this grand, heroic figure that
makes such beautiful speeches at Protectionist Conventions—talking
vulgar slang and stigmatised Parkes and the framers of the
Draft Bill as “ bastard Freetraders.” But when he proceeded to
compare Parkes to a reformed drunkard, who had relapsed into
intemperance through going to live with five confirmed boozers,
the House- became convulsed with roars of laughter. Here is a
report of the incident from the Daily Telegraph :
Freetrade was the only great principle which he (Mr. Reid) had
endeavoured to befriend, and his leader (Parkes) was now prepared to hand
over New South Wales to be fettered with the shackles of Protection,
(Opposition cheers.) His attitude on this question reminded him of some
people who resided in a remote village. There were six of them, and five
were drunkards. The other, although he had had a little partiality for
strong drink in his young days, had become a teetotaller, and was one of
the leaders of the teetotallers. He used to speak of the neighbours as being
(i in tb6 dai’k,” and all that sort of thing, but one day he proposed to go and
live with them. The drunkards were astonished. They did not know
what to make of it. Some suggested that the teetotaller might be afraid
of a Chinese invasion—(laughter)—while others hinted that it might be
excess of military zeal. (Renewed laughter.) When it was suggested by
the five drunkards that their style of living might not suit him, he said he
would be quite prepared to take a vote on the style of living when he
became housed with them. (Laughter.) Well, he went to live with them,
and soon after the whole six of them were picked up drunk. (Loud
laughter.) When reproached on the matter, the ex-teetotaller said that he
had proposed a motion that nothing but cold water should be drunk in
the house, but was defeated by five to one ; and a motion that nothing but
strong drink should be used was carried. (Great laughter.) He further
explained that it was his duty to abide by the wishes of the majority.
(Renewed laughter.) That was exactly the position of the Premier of this
colony in reference to Freetrade. (Hear, hear.)
This amusing parody of Parkes’ early Protection proclivities, and
•his conversion to Freetrade, and his subsequent readiness to
subordinate that question to Federation, which he had been
impelled to take up under the impulse of a pseudo military scare,
for which Major-General Edwards’ letter about the Chinese fleet
afforded a convenient pretext, was, of course, keenly felt and


savagely resented by Parkes, who is now entitled, on the “ Pot
calling the kettle black” principle, to be heard concerning Mr.
Reid. Referring to this memorable incident in his book of “ Fifty
Years,” Parkes thus endeavours to pay off old scores :
On the same day, when the Address-in-Reply was moved in the Assembly,
I gave notice of a motion for the consideration of the Draft Federal
Constitution, which would have brought on a regular debate on the work
of the Convention, and afforded every opportunity for members to propose
amendments. But this did nut suit the arch-plotter against Federation, Mr.
Oeorge Houston Reid, who had made up his mind not to allow, so far as he
had power, an open and unprejudiced discussion of the momentous question.
In the previous session, Mr. Reid, after endeavoring to elicit opposition,
and failing in his endeavors, had voted for the delegates to the Convention;
but he had made no secret afterwards—first, of his cynical doubts, and then
of his open hostility. His position would have been trying to a sensitive
nature. He nominally belonged to the Ministerial side ; he Talked bitterly
against the Protectionists on the Opposition benches ; he professed to be
anxious for a Local Government Bill—indeed, he had lately threatened the
Government in a noisy public meeting if they did not produce a measure
of that kind. But he could not restrain himself sufficiently to wait for my
motion, which he knew would be the first business. I was the leader of the
House, and I had been the duly elected President of the Convention ; even
if it had not been my rightful place, common courtesy would have allowed
me to introduce this particular business, which I was prepared to do the
first moment possible. But Air. Reid calculated that, if he took a course
which would embarrass the Government, he was sure of the assistance of
the Protectionist opposition. So Mr. Reid moved an amendment on the
Address. He knew that if his amendment was carried, Ministers would
either resign or advise a dissolution. But neither his anxiety for the Local
Government Bill, nor his sense of duty, was powerful enough to hold him
back. He had brooded over his amendment for days past, had exhibited it
to admirers, male and female, and had dreamed of the laurels of victory.
In making his motion, Mr. Reid was fluent, as he always is—fluent as a
waterspout after a heavy rain ; but his speech was barren of thought, and
where not vituperative, simply dull. Mr. Reid was mistaken in his
calculations ; a large number of the Opposition, knowing well the sentiments
of their constituents, voted against him, and his amendment was lost by 67
votes against 35. What was Mr. Reid’s next act ? The Opposition, thinking
they saw an advantage in the excitement of the moment, took the extreme
course of voting against the Address itself, which of course, if successful,
would have been the severest vote of censure, and Mr. Reid, mastering his
intense anxiety for the Local Gouernment Bill, joined in that purely
factious vote The leader of the Opposition, Mr. Dibbs. now
came to the front with a direct motion of want of confidence, No one could
complain of this as a party move, but the case was different with Mr. Reid ;
he, according to his own profession, was a Freetrader of Freetraders ; he had
personally concurred in the formation of the Government, having first
been invited to join it; he now walked boldly over with one or two other
disunionist Freetraders, to swell the solid vote of Protectionists. In that
division the two sides were equal, the Speaker giving his casting vote
against the motion. This lost to that Parliament all chance of dealing with
the cause of Australian union. A few days afterwards the Assembly was
dissolved.
This description of Mr. Reid’s marplot proceedings with the
Protectionists defines, with tolerable accuracy, his political position


at this particular juncture. It cannot be denied that he was just
then playing the part of a reckless Parliamentary rowdy, bent upon
“ downing” Parkes by “stiffening Federation,” as he himself
elegantly termed it, even at the risk of putting a Protectionist
Government in power, which he ultimately did. It must be
admitted that at this time Mr. Eeid had forgotten both his manners
and his principles. In his mad scramble for the Premiership he
trampled on friend and foe alike. As Mr. Ewing recently pointed
pointed out in the Assembly, he so far forgot himself as to speak of a
man of Mr. Wm. M‘Millan’s mental calibre and political status, as
“ that politically rotten creature M'Millan,” “ that unhappy man
M‘Millan,” “this politically corrupt man who had entered into a
-conspiracy to prevent the people of the country realising the issues
involved in the draft Constitution Bill of the Convention.” True,
he has had the temerity and dubious decency to deny having
spoken thus of his colleague in the representation of East Sydney,
as he has denied having scurrilously satirised Sir Henry Parkes in
his old age, but the Parliamentary and press records, as well as the
evidence of reliable witnesses, are against him. He soon had
reason to see that such pranks don’t pay, and what does not pay is
not pleasant to politicians of his stamp. In the columns of the
Daily Telegraph, the journal which has since taken Mr. Reid up on
the assumption that he is the best of a bad lot, gave him one of the
most drastic drubbings ever administered to a politician in this
country. Referring to his “ Freetection ” vagaries in the Assembly
on the Federation question, the Daily Telegraph, in a leading
article on the 21st May, 1891, declared that Mr. Reid’s attitude is
not capable of honest explanation :
That gentleman with fair words of Federation on his lips, clumsily plots
provincialism in his heart; and under the pretence of advocating a just form
of union, moves a resolution which, if carried, would prevent the
consideration of any form whatever.
Then again on the 16th of June, during the general election, the
Telegraph, in allusion to Mr. Reid’s action in voting with the
Protectionists against a Freetrade-Federation Government on the
Dibbs’ want of confidence motion, which wrecked the Parkes’
Ministry, said :
Having commenced to hobble clumsily along behind Mr. Dibbs as the
newest recruit of the political party headed by that eccentric leader, he
upbraids the whole Freetrade regiment for having got out of step with him.
Referring in the same article to Mr. Reid’s complaints that there
was a conspiracy among Freetraders to trample him out of public
life, the Telegraph “ deals it out ” to its present pet politician in the
following ding-dong style :
There is no doubt that we accused Mr. Reid of fighting in this election to
assist Protection, while professing to be acting the part of what he calls ‘ an
uncompromising Freetrader.” . . . . It is a singular thing that u an


uncompromising Freetrader ” should go to “ uncompromising Protectionists >
for support in a contest in which the fiscal issue is vitally at stake. In one
of his addresses the other night, he specially thanked that party for the
manner in which they are standing by him, and taking his part against the
Freetraders. We may be pretty sure that the Protectionists are not
assisting him in this election because he is “ an uncompromising Freetrader,”’
or because they apprehend than any injury to their cause will result from
his successes. As a matter of fact they recognise in Mr. Eeid a very much
compromi ed Freetrader , one mho hag already given himself away by both
action and speech. In the House he not only expressed his willingness to;
put a Protectionist Government in power, as a means of blocking the present
Federation movement, but he actually voted to do so. Mr. Reid may call
himself “ an uncompromising Freetrader,” or whatever else he likes, but that
is what we call “an aggressive, and militant Protectionist ,” and we venture
to say that the latter definition is the one which the more intelligent electors
will generally accept. The Freetraders show that they accept it by, as Mr.
Reid says, trying “to trample on him,” which means, preventing him from
trampling on them; while the Protectionists indicate the same thing by
coming to his assistance in the handsome manner which he has alreadj felt
constrained to acknowledge.
The appearance of such onslaughts against Eeid in the journal
which now hails him as a sort of compound social and political
saviour, did him a lot of damage, besides nearly scaring him out of
his wits. He pleaded and implored the electors not to “ trample on
him,” as he was the victim of a foul Freetradeplot. At the eleventh
hour many of the irate East Sydney electors relented (the writer
among the number), and gave “ poor George ” a vote. But it w r as
a hard task to save him, and, as it was, he was only saved by the
Protectionist vote. When the poll was declared Reid, who had
always been first or second, was found to be a had last among the
four elected, he being nearly a thousand votes behind Mr.
M‘Miilan, who was first; nearly six hundred behind Mr. Edmund
Barton; and exactly 397 votes behind Mr. Yarney Parkes. The
reed, however, was not broken, but only badly bruised. This
election intimated to Mr. Reid that if he was to keep his place in
politics, and come to the Premiership, he must abate his
anti-Federation fervour. He accepted the warning, and acted
accordingly. There is an old English proverb, which says, that
“ Hungry dogs will eat dirty pudding,” which that quaint old
lexicographer, Noah Bailey, thus interprets: “This pro Verb is used
by way of satire against those persons whose impetuous lusts make
them demean themselves beneath their quality ; for tho’ ’tis true
dirty water will quench fire, and a mean punk satisfy or cool a
burning lust, yet those who use them are either very needy , or not very
nice." Mr. Reid soon showed that though he was not nice, he was
very needy, and prepared to eat any quantity of dirty political
pudding in order to satisfy his ravenous hunger for place and pay.
This will be seen from the story of his degrading scramble for the
Premiership, during which he has demonstrated the truth of
Sheridan’s saying; “ Conscience has no more to do with politics
than it has with gallantry.”


PART IV.
REID: THE “ FREETECTION ” FEDERATIOiNIST.
I have always been one-sided on that question; I may, perhaps, sit on a rail some
day I, perhaps, should not say that I shall never be a party to it, because in
the course of time you do not know what changes may take place ; this is a world or
change. —G. H. Reid, in the Assembly, May 21, 1890,
Mr. Reid’s attitude is not capable of honest explanation.— Daily Telegraph, May 21st,
1891.
In this colony there are at the present moment, perhaps, a larger number of urgent
reforms pressing for settlement than in any other. But my colleagues concur with me
in the opinion that methods for promoting Federal union can be adopted without prejudice
to the performance of those pressing obligations. This Government is prepared, therefore,
to take up with genuine earnestness the question of a United Australia. Indeed, it
appears to us that even from the most provincial point of view the establishment of a
Federal compact is of commanding interest to every Australian State, for it is clearly
impossible that any one of them can have full scope for the development of its resources
until the whole continent is freed from provincial trade restrictions.—G. H. Reid, Letter
to Australian Premiers, August 22nd, 1894.
When this political “ perliapser ” thus cynically qualified his
declaration of undying hostility to Federation, for the sake of saving
Freetrade, he must have been meditating the very acts of treachery
which he then predicted. We have seen how and when, and in
what terms, he denounced Federation, and declared war against its
advocates and defenders in 1890-91. How comes it then that he is
to-day figuring as the convener and spokesman of a Federal
Conference at Hobart ? Let us see. For this ludicrous anti-climax
Parkes himself is primarily to blame ; he, the Premier prestidigitateur
of public life, has, chiefly through pique, allowed himself to be
beaten at his own business of political bluff by an inferior trickster.
The difference between the two “ jugglers ” has been thus stated in
the Bulletin :
The only difference between the two is this : that whereas Parkes, when
“ turning his hack upon himself,” has the audacity to declare that he always
thought and spoke the same ; Reid, with the innocent air of the Heathen
Chinee, apes the sincerity of a saint when in the very act of perpetrating the
most transparent tricks of political poltroonery.
The contrast be further extended to the advantage of Parkes
by pointing out, that whereas Parkes would have the people believe
that his changes of opinion are sincere, and in the public interest,
Reid impudently turns his coat in full public gaze, and pokes fun at


those who are watching the performance. The manner in which he
came into the place of Parkes was worthy of him, and indicative of
the quality and quantity of “ dirty political pudding ” he is prepared
to eat. He says he was elected to the leadership : so he was, but
in much the same way that a domestic drab is elected to do the
dirty work of the scullery. Better and worse men were offered and
refused the position for which he snivelled, and scrambled, and
schemed, and was proud to fill when none other could be found to
accept it. This is said to be his sole title to occupy Sir Henry
Parkes’ place. After the leadership had been successively refused
by Messrs. M‘Millan, Bruce Smith, Brunker, Wise and Carruthers, it
was flung at Mr. Reid, as a bone is thrown to a dog, at a small meeting
of the Freetraders, by a minority of fourteen out of thirty-six votes,
only fourteen voting for him. Let us see what Parkes says about his
leadership. Speaking in the Assembly on December 10th, 1891,
on the first of Mr. Reid’s long string of futile motions to oust the
Dibbs’ Government, Sir Henry Parkes, after observing that leaders
are neither elected, nor do they grow like Topsy, but generally
develope by force of circumstances, said :
Now, I am told that the hon. gentleman, up to this moment, has never
had more than fourteen supporters —I am told that this is the case; I
was not present ; I did not disturb the election ; I did not disturb his
chances, All sides are here, and I appeal to every side whether I have
interfered, or made suggestions, or inquiries in any direction. I was not
there ; but I am told by some of the most influential men who were there,
that nearly the whole of the speeches were dead against him ; that only
fourteen hands were held up for him ; but there he sits, the leader of the
Opposition. Well, that is a leadership which, if he had a spark of manhood,
he could not have accepted. I have gone through the ordeal of being elected
leader ; but I have been elected with all the speeches in my favour, and no
hand held up against me. I was elected without the slightest word of cavil,
and if any voice had been raised I should very soon have retired from the
position of candidate With regard to my hon. friends sitting on
the Opposition benches, I cannot understand the position in which they
place themselves. If I might be considered the fitting master of the ship,
and I could hold my post no longer and had to retire, it was not necessary
for them to elect a pirate in my place. It was not necessary for them to
elect to my place, if they have elected him, the person who was the most
deadly enemy to the greatest part of our political policy ; and it was not
necessary to elect him when he had done his utmost to render everything
that we attempted to do abortive.
The force of Parkes’ speech lay not in its savage spleen, but in its
absolute truth. Yet, noth withstanding all the contumely and
scorn which Parkes had heaped upon him, within a few months
after this episode, Reid was running about the country tearfully
praying Parkes to resume the leadership, and obsequiously laying
it at his feet. Such is the moral metal of a man who is “ going
to make history.” Surely it must be a history of personal
humiliation and political degradation !


It was soon made apparent to Reid that unless he recanted his
anti-Federation views, he could neither lead the Freetrade or
Federation party, nor secure the Premiership. In Parliament and
in the country he was without any real following. The Freetrade
metropolitan press looked on him askance, and the Sydney Morning
Herald made no pretence of disguising its hostility to his pretensions,
owing to his rabid opposition to Federation. His repeated attempts
to defeat the Dibbs Government failed, and he had no hope of
gaining over even the metropolitan and suburban electorates to
his side without the aid of the Sydney Press. The Herald told
him so much in plain terms. This decided him to the execution of
another volte face, which he perpetrated with all the easy abruptness
so typical of truculent turncoats. Under the Federation lash of the
Herald he determined to suddenly perform in a new character—
that of an,advocate of Federation. In August, 1894, Parkes made
an extended and successful Federation tour in Riverina. Reid
determined to follow him, and did so in the following January, and
there, as was stated in the Bulletin at the time, he “ established
his claim to succeed ‘ Janus ’ Parkes as the two-faced ‘ Jim Crow ’
of Australian public life.” To trace him all along the tortuous
course of his Riverina recantation would be wearisome. We have
already seen how, when opposing Federation in the Assembly in
1890, he declared, in one breath, that under Protection the
neighbouring colonies had progressed and become great and free
and glorious, and in the next that he would never surrender foreign
trade by putting a barrier across Port Jackson ; that he would have
nothing to do with Federation involving Protection, which, on
February 2nd, 1892, and on scores of other occasions before and
since, he described as “ a policy of robbery, a base, crawling survivor
of barbarism, of tyranny, superstition and slavery.” Because he
believed that Protection was all this, and worse, he was opposed to
Federation in 1890-91-92-93. But in 1894, “ the glorious sun
of Freetrade ” became overcast by the shadow of Federation,
which left not a mere spot, but a big black blotch, on the face of
that bright orb. Speaking at Corowa January 9th, 1894, he no
longer stood as an opponent of Federation, but as a friendly critic,
anxious to bring it about in the best possible way. Touching the
terms of union, he said :
That while he did not wish at all to bargain for the benefit of his own
colony, it seemed to him that the least concession that can be made to this
colony was that it should contain the capital of the group in return for
practically handing over to the adjacent colonies the advantages of
intercourse with huge slices of our territory. There were other features of
the hill open to criticism, but he could not at that time enlarge upon them.
The truest service which Australian patriots could render at this time for
the benefit of the Australian people was to give perfectly candid and
thorough examination of the basis of union. State constitution might be
the easiest thing in the world to modify, but federal compact was the most


difficult of alteration. In this deed of national partnership everything
necessary to be provided for must be set out in the clearest terms.
Thus he no longer denounces Federation, but favors it so far as to
discuss and stipulate the terms of union, without condescending to
explain the reasons which had converted him in so miraculous a
manner. He had already, within the brief space of one week, told
the Riverina farmers at one place that wheat-growing is a curse,
in a second that it is a blessing, in a third that it is neither, and
in a fourth that it is both, but he now tells these “ Protectionist
crawlers ”in a fifth, that Federation is their only remedy. This is
a fair summary of his speeches at Jerilderie, Harrandera, Mulwala,
Berrigan and Corowa, in January, 1894. Yet this is the same Mr.
Reid who at this very time was railing at Parkes as insincere,
denouncing Dibbs as a humbug, and sneering at Baiton as a
•conundrum. To try to follow him in his rapid and chameleon-like
changes, or to pin him down to any precise line of definite policy
■either on Freetrade, Protection or Federation, would be as futile as
to try and hold the proverbial eel, such a slippery political wriggler
does he prove to be. But political wrigglers often manage to
wriggle themselves into tight places, from which there is no escape.
This is what Reid did in Riverina, and he has never since been able
to wriggle out again. As Sir Henry Parkes would say, his position
would have been most painful to a sensitive nature, because, if he
had become a sincere believer in that form of Federation favored by
the farmers of Riverina, then all his oratory about Freetrade,
freedom and progress, and Protectionist slavery, robbery and
oppression, was mere bunkum and balderdash. If, on the other
hand, he still adhered to the views he held and expressed in
1890-1-2-3, then was his pretentious advocacy of Federation in
1894 a delusion and a snare. The attitude of this protean
politician in regard to Federation was plainly portrayed in the
Bulletin at the time :
Is there less of the military spirit at the bottom of the movement to-day
than three years ago ? Does Mr. Reid dare to say that there is any better
chance of getting international Freetrade now than then ? Has not the
cause of Protection been advanced rather than retarded in Australia by the
adoption of that policy in New South Wales, and by the imposition of
further border duties and stock taxes? Wriggling won’t save Reid from
one or other of the horns of the dilemma in which these questions place
him. If he was sincere in opposing Federation for the sake of Freetrade in
1890, he cannot be sincere in supporting it while still advocating Freetrade
in 1894. When was the fit of sincerity upon him, first or last ? Perhaps he
will ‘endeavour to wriggle out of the difficulty by denying that he ever
suffered from that complaint. Probably he never did, as it is of rare
occurrence among Australian politicians. Besides, we have Mr. Reid’s own
authority for doubting his sincerity, because during the speech from which
the foregoing pieces de conviction are taken, he was reproached by Mr. John
Bee with only arguing one side of the question, to which he cynically
rejoined : “ I have been always one-sided on that question. I may perhaps


■sit on a rail some day.'" This candid warning of his possible future
insincerity is about the only sincere thing worth recording about Mr. neias
politically insincere career, except it be that he was on a rail then, is on
rail now, and will be on a rail to-morrow.
As if anxious to demonstrate his skill as a rail-rider, and to prove
the insincerity of his screechy philippics against Federation and
militarism, Mr. Reid, on being called upon to form a Government
after the last general election, chose for his colleagues in the Cabinet
the majority of the members of the former Parkes’ Administration,
which he (Reid) had himself been mainly instrumental in wrecking
on account of its Federation policy. His colleagues—Messrs. G.
B. Simpson, Q.C., J. H. Brunker, Sydney Smith. J. H. Foung,
A. J. Gould, J. H. Carruthers, and W. H. Suttor—are all avowed
Federationists, who had supported their former chief, Sir Henry
Parkes, in his policy of “ sinking the fiscal question.” They had made
eloquent speeches in and out of Parliament in support of h ederation,
and bitterly denounced Mr. Reid for his opposition to it. Fac i o
them enthusiastically spoke and voted for Parkes celebra e
Federation resolutions, so effectually opposed by Mr. Reid, a,nd
sturdily stood by their chief in every step he took in the Federation
movement. Mr. W. H. Suttor, M. L.C., was a co-delegate witi
Parkes on the Federal Convention, as was Mr. Win. M‘Millan, who
now acts as wet-nurse to the Reid Ministry, Besides these, Mr.
Garrard, the new Minister for Labor, though not in the last Parkes
Administration, is a professed Federationist, and a Protectionist
too, who firmly supported Parkes’ Federation proposals, and severely
censured his present chief for his opposition to them. These
are the chosen colleagues of the man who has rightly been denounced
as the “arch-plotter against Federation.” There is not a tittle or
evidence to show that Mr, Reid had so radically modified his
views on Federation either to justify him in choosing these ardent
Federationists for Cabinet colleagues, or to warrant them m
accepting portfolios from the man, who above all others, had
frustrated the best and most serious effort yet made to federate
Australia. But these patriotic portfolio-snatchers will probably
reply, that they have as much right in Reid’s Cabinet as either
Mr. Joseph Cook, the Single Tax Postmaster-General and
ex-Maritime Strike Leader, or Mr. J. H. Want, the fanatical anti-
Federationist. They may argue that they, as Federationists, are
no more out of place in an anti-Federationist’s than a
r rabid Republican like Cook, or a fanatical Freetrade provincialLt
like Want, who was Reid’s main backer, and Parkes most savage
attacker in the successful anti-Federation crusade which he and
Reid carried on both in and out of Parliament during 1890-91-92-93.
Speaking in the Assembly on May 20th, 1891, in defence sf Mr.
Reid’s anti-Federal vagaries, and in denunciation of Sir Henry
Parkes’ attempts to consummate Australian unity, Mr. J. H. Want


declared that he was prepared to wreck and ruin any Government,
and to bring about “ unutterable consequences,” rather than submit
to see Federation accomplished. He said :
Although I am desirous of seeing this Government continue in office, and
although 1 have been their supporter, I would sooner see chaos take the
pmce ot order in their ranks, I would sooner see a Protectionist
government in power, I would sooner see almost anything than see this
ydra-headed monster, called Federation, basking in its constitutional
beastliness. I shall certainly give my vote for the amendment, though it
may bring unutterable consequences in regard to the government of the
From such an assortment of antagonistic anti-Federal elements it is
foolishly presumed that something like a harmonious policy in
favour of Federal unity can come. Not if “Jack” Want "'can
prevent it. His views are known ; and from what is known of his
character, he will endeavour to enforce his views, in the secret
conclave of the Cabinet, with the same fearless courage as he has
publicly avowed and advocated them with Reid in Parliament,
and on the platform at Paddington, and at the Protestant Hall
He is the most masterful man in the Ministry, who, having the
courage of his opinions, will bend a paltering Premier to his will,
like a reed shaken in the wind.” His other colleagues don’t
count ; they are a set of cyphers, “ round pegs in square holes,”
who, before ant’s courage, tact and experience, dwindle down to
mere nonentities, to be used by Reid as dummy automata in the
Federal farce he is now playing. Consequently, it is plain to be
seen that the “ Conf rence of Premiers ” so suddenly convened by
Mi. Reid before he was fairly settled in the Premier’s chair, was
intended for what it has proved to he, merely a part of this Federal
force. It is another item in Reid’s programme of opposition to
Parkes’ Federation policy, which he has sworn to “stiffen.”
Hitherto he has successfully done this openly ; in future he will
continue his “ stiffening ” tactics, treacherously. Out of office he
opposed federation with hot-headed and malicious bravado ;in
office he will do it by stealth, and with all the cunning of a
cowardly, spiteful foe. Those who know him well, and have heard
him often declare himself in private, attribute to him the intention
of reviving and building up the old and practically defunct Federal
Council, as a bulwark against real Federation. That Council
which is an unrepresentative creation, without national “ soul or
body, has hitherto been used as a contrivance for catching
Imperial titles lor colonial flunkies, and for cheating Australians
out of their right to national independence broad based on the sure
foundation of genuine Federal unity. It is a combination of time-
serving social toadies, and political renegades, -whose energies are
directed towards the conservation of every law and custom which
tends to promote Imperial Federation. There never has been, and


never will be, a true Australian patriot among them : he would be-
out of place and useless among such social “ bounders,” and
political “ rounders.” Their whole time and efforts are devoted to
proposing and discussing schemes for increasing the military and
naval expenditure of the provinces they pretend to represent, and
in devising dodges for “ strengthening the bonds which bind us to
the dear old Mother Land.” This is the body which Reid would
restore and strengthen ; these are the sort of men whom he calls
together to assist in promoting Federation, almost before the echoes
of his anti-Federation denunciations have died away. Is he not an
arrant humbug ?
Speaking at Benigan on January 6th, 1894, he ridiculed the
Grain Duties (which he has since promised to keep on for more
than a year for the farmers’ particular benefit), because he said they
made wheat plentiful and cheap, which was not a good thing for the
farmer. When in Sydney and the suburbs he invariably says that
the Grain Duties makes bread dear, which is not a good thing for
“ the poor working-man,” who wants the “ big, cheap Freetrade
loaf.” He conveniently forgets that under Protection here, as in
Victoria and elsewhere, wheat has been lower in price, and
consequently the 41b loaf cheaper than it ever was under Freetrade.
These facts Cobdenitish cranks of the Reid Prize Essay type either
forget, or don’t understand ; because if Cobden’s ideal is to destroy
all protection to trade and industry, by abolishing all tariffs, his
disciples ought not in one breath to preach that Protection gluts
the market with cheap wheat, and in the next that it oppressively
taxes/the food of the poor, as Mr. Reid did during his farcical
Federation tour through Riverina during 1894. But here again the
“Wriggler’s” fiscal writhings cause us to digress. What is
required to be shown now is the contrast between Reid’s utterances
on Federation in Riverina, in January, 1894, and his utterances on
the same question in Melbourne, in January, 1895, so that some
fair idea may be formed of his sincerity as a disinterested Federal
patriot. Thus, speaking at Berrigan on January 6th, 1894, he
gave expression to the following fine feelings of fraternal affection
towards Victoria and her leading public men:
He could understand farmers down there on the border being
Protectionists, as on the other side of the river (in Victoria) they had the
most unneighbourly policy which ever cursed an enlightened community.
They had a Victorian statesman —Sir Graham Berry—who had the audacity
to talk of Australian brotherhood. (A Voice: “How have you come?’)'
On the Freetrade ticket, and that was Australian brotherhood. What he
blamed Sir Graham Berry for was coming here and representing things as
though New South Wales had been the sinner in creating this unfriendly
feeling. He, of all others, deliberately established the policy of aggression
against the farmers on the borders of this colony and South Australia, which
had led to the spread of this Protectionist feeling. Was it a neighbourly
Federal thing for Victorian statesmen to treat Australians on this side as


though they were foreigners and enemies ? Was that last miserable grasping
expedient of Protection, the Stock Tax, a display of amity and good feeling!?
Did they not see how the poison was spreading ? But now Victorians mere
leginning to stem in their omn gravy. The paradise of a few years ago had
broken down. The hum of prosperity had disappeared. Factories mere
falling about their ears, and the farmers emigrating to other countries.
There had been a big decrease during the past the three years in the hands
employed in the factories in Victoria, and how much did the farmer pay for
these industries ?
A Voice : Very little.
Mr. Eeid : During the last ten years they paid perhaps over two millions
sterling into the public treasury in order to make the great woollen
manufactories.
A Voice : What about Victorian farmers over here ?
Mr. Reid : They were doing much better here than in Victoria. Did they
not think it high time to give up these sham industries ? The infant of
twenty years, with its expensive bottle, ought to be put out of the way as
soon as possible. He had often wondered as to why the Phoenix Foundry
in Ballarat got on, and asked Mr. Allison Smith, of Melbourne (a fanatical
Freetrader), and found that the Victorian people paid £7500 a year more
for work done there than they could get it done elsewhere. That was how
it came about. The people of Victoria had had to pay to keep it going.
They found things getting desperate now, and were trying to get a royal
princess out to cheer them up. That -was a curious thing for Protectionists
to do. Why not produce some young Victorian instead? Mr. Patterson,
the Victorian Premier, ought to be ashamed of himself. Was that the way
the colony was going to get out of its difficulties, to expend vast sums that
might be spent in relieving its starving citizens in entertaining a royal prince
and princess ? There never was in the present struggling state of the
colonies a more infamous proposal made. What would be said of a
Parliament in Australia that would vote large sums to indulge in a royal
pageantry in times when people were in the keenest distress ? The idea
seemed to show what men of infinitely poor resource Australian statesmen
were.
Thus did this ramping, roaring, “ die-in-the-last-ditch, dear-old-
motherland ” international Freetrader fan the Federal flame of
brotherly love among the Border farmers. The whole speech, from
which the foregoing extract is taken, is typical of the mendacious
loquacity with which he denounced Victorians, and the way in which
they choose to manage Iheir own affairs. His personal references to
the two leading men in Victoria, Sir Graham Berry and Sir James
Patterson, were at once puerile and offensive, while his reference to
Victorian Customs’ Duties and the Stock Tax sound absolutely
absurd from the lips of a member of the New South Wales
Parliament which had just adopted a Protectionist tariff and a
Stock Tax. Besides, had not this same Freetrade radical-tariff-
reformer, Reid, himself sat for fifteen years in an alleged Freetrade
Parliament, which had imposed Protective duties on butter, bacon,
cheese, biscuits and sugar, on kerosene and candles, and a host of
other articles of daily consumption among the poor, without ever
once protesting against their imposition, or making one effort to


diminish them or to effect their entire removal ‘I Decidedly he had ;
and what is more, this same ranting, raving, rail-riding Freetrader,
who tells Protectionists, like Sir Graham Berry and Sir James
Patterson, that they ough tto be ashamed of themselves fur
consistently giving effect to a Protecfionist policy in accordance
with the mandate of the people, himself votes to retain an 80 per
cent, tax on tea, and, directly he gets into power, concedes fall
Protection to farmers, contrary to his own Freetrade professions,
and in direct opposition to the Freetrade mandate which he,
himself, and the Freetrade press, declare he has received from a
majority of the electors of New South Wales. Yet this is the
perfidious politician who, but a year ago, was posturing on Border
platforms as a paragon of political honesty and consistency. A
more transparent and preposterous humbug never yet palmed
himself off as a serious statesman either within or without the
borders of New South Wales. His ill-timed and uncalled for
reference to the proposed visit of the Duke and Duchess of York to
Australia w§re in as villainously bad taste as his reference to his
Victorian political rivals in royal affections for a tinsel title. They
have out-distanced this raucous, dear-old-motherlaud demagogue,
who, while nearly choking with emotion when referring to his own
loyal sentiments towards “ Her Most Gracious Majesty, the Queen,
the Prince and Princess of Wales, and all the Royal Family,”
nearly bursts himself with rage at the thought that any political
tuft-hunter on Australian soil should out-do him in walking the
lip-loyalty tight-rope, at the end ef which dangles the lickspittle’s
reward/ which transforms pseudo-Australian patriots into real and.
visibly branded “Sir’’-vile sycophants of an alien Imperialism,
But it does not do to pause too long over one or a few phases of
Reid’s inconsistency in Riverina. His whole political career, both
in and out of Parliament, in office and out of office, has been one
long list of such inconsistencies, the coping stone to which is the
political imposture of his present Ministry. One or two more
instances of his method of smoothing the way to Federation must
therefore suffice. On Monday, January Bth, 1894, he spoke at
Mulwala, from Camplin’s pub. balcony—an appropriate platform
for the spouting of such a politically befuddled Federationist as
Reid—when he delivered himself of the following choice specimens
of Federal sentiment and Australian brotherly love :
He had often been accused of saying hard things about Victoria, but he
yvished it to be understood in the following remarks that he did not mean
to say anything against the Victorians themselves, but against a certain
policy which had unfortunately prevailed in that colony for many years.
Here is “ Jim Crow ”on the jump again. It was a little more
than twenty-four hours prior to this, when speaking at Berrigan,
that we found him scurrilously abusing Victorian public men, and


mendaciously misrepresenting Victorian policy. How is this sudden
and sensitive anxiety for the feelings of Victorians to be accounted
for 1 Simply enough. At Berrigan, he was speaking to a
gathering composed almost solely of New South W ales farmers; at
Mulwala, he was faced by a mixed audience, a majority of whom
were Victorians —hence his cunning, hut cowardly, regard for
Victorian sentiment. Carefully minding his p’s and q’s, Mr. Reid
went on to roar from the Mulwala pub. balcony :
It was strange that people should imagine that they were going to grow
rich by taxing themselves, and if he was asked: “Do you think the
Victorians are fools ?” he must say frankly that in the matter of Protection
they were.
“ What’s that, and who says it ?” the astonished reader may well
exclaim. “It was strange that people should imagine they were
going to get rich by taxation.” Those are the exact words, and
the man who uses them, and further says that Victorians are fools
for believing in Protection, is George Houston Reid. This is the
same man who, now he is in office, is such a firm believer in the
maxim that “ Taxation is Wealth” that he has not only conceded
the grain duties to farmers, hut is going to raise two millions a
year by Customs’ duties, and, besides imposing an Income
Tax, proposes three forms of Land Taxation all at once,
viz., a Land Tax for Consolidated revenue purposes, a
Land Tax for Local Government purposes, and a Land Tax
for Federal purposes—when Federation comes. This is the
sort of tax-mad crank who twits Victorians—who tax themselves
under Protection nearly three millions less a year than Reid’s dupes
are taxed under alleged Freetrade in New South W ales—with
being overtaxed and protected fools ! On the presumption that
the bulk of his hearers were really the fools he pretended to think
they were, Held continued :
What carried Protection in Victoria more than anything else I Why, the
hope of crushing the Flinders Lane magnates ; but it did not do so. They
made five or ten per cent, more for the articles imported, and did more ;
they employed sweaters, and sweated the poor Victorians, both men and
women. There were now duties put on clothes so that the workers would
get fair wages, but what did they find ? Men and women working for
starvation wages! while the big importer made all the money.
A Voice : What about the factories in Freetrade England ?
Mr. Reid : Some were not nearly so bad.
A Voice : What about New South Wales ?
Mr. Reid : According to a special inquiry by the Government Statistician
sweating was absolutely unknown in New South Wales, but put on fifty per
cent, duties and we should have lots. What a queer remedy for distress, to
put on duties on clothes for people who were in rags.


This charge of wholesale and deliberate sweating against Victorian
protectionists was as false as it was impudent, and came witli the
worst possible grace from the mouth of the man who, above all others
in Australia, praises the fiscal policy of England, under which half
naked and wholly starved women and children are worked to death
in the chain factories of Cradley Heath, and English-born men,
women and children are starved and stifled slowly out of their
painful existence, while competing against their Austrian, German,
Polish and Russian Jew competitors in the poisonous, pestiferous
dens of the clothing sweaters in the East End of London. When
Reid declared that “sweating was absolutely unknown in Hew South
Wales,” he thought he was speaking to a lot of ignorant country
yokels, who would swallow his most monstrous mendacities without
a murmur. Therefore, he was somewhat abashed to find his sweating
yarn received with loud and long-continued laughter, followed by
prolonged derisive cheers. Thus warned, he hopped heavily off his
fiscal perch, and clumsily mounted that of federation :
He was not now afraid of a protective tariff under a Federal Government,
they had sufficient justice and fair play to make the trade of all the colonies
free, and to put the burden of taxation upon the shoulders of those who
ought to bear it.
This was the same Mr. Reid who, as we have seen, had but three
years before declared that he would never give up international free-
trade for intercolonial freetrade, who would not surrender the other
half of the freetrade loaf by putting a barrier across the harbour of
Port Jkckson against “ the dear old mother-land, the ever-bright
example of happiness and freedom.” Consequently, there is no
room for astonishment at the action of this same man in going to
Melbourne just a year later and posing before Victorians—whom he
had denounced and ridiculed as heartless sweaters of half-starved,
ragged, deluded fools—as the apostle of Australian brotherly love
and unity, and that, too, in the presence of Sir James Patterson,
whom he had so scurrilously abused at Berrigan and Mulwala just
twelve brief months before. Compare his federation utterances,
from the platform of the Melbourne Town Hall on the 23rd of
January, 1895, with his ravings on the same subject, from back-block
pub. balconies, in January, 1894, and then realise what an incom-
parable charlatan this “ Wriggler” really is.
Reid began his Melbourne speech by a very ill-mannered and uncalled
for sneer at the melancholy early history of the “ Mother Colony of the
Australias,” of Avhich he is the unworthy Prime Minister, observing
that when he landed as a boy-immigrant in Melbourne “the cry was
for separation, and many present must have taken part in the
rejoicings which celebrated their deliverance from the fetters of New
South Wales ” Of this abominably gratuitous raking up of “old


lag memories,” the Melbournians showed their appreciation by
loud laughter and ironical cheers. Encouraged by this delightful
exhibition of federal feeling, Reid went on to say :
Separation had wonderfully quickened the development of the Australian
colonies • but one evil had come out of it in the shape of hostile tariffs.
Every year these irritating distinctions continued, and a bad feeling was
engendered. Surely subjects of the same Crown, brethren of the same race,
and neighbours bound together by so many ties, could strike down the
Customs barrier which made foreigners of Australians in Australia ! Why
was it that the craze for separation had so rapidly died away and given
place to a desire for union? He might be allowed to say that the former
was the restlessness of boyhood, and the latter betokened the coming man.
Small and prosperous countries, like children, were always dying to make a
stir in the world ; but as their immature strivings for uncontrolle i initiative
gave place to manlier nature, and young countries were forced into touch
with more serious problems of humanity, as the vista of destiny open to their
united millions began to dawn, the ambitions of village and province rose to
laro-er proportions and nobler objects. It had often seemed to him that a
vital defect of the efforts of the last few years in the direction of Federation
was that they never seemed to come quite home to the hearts of the masses
of the people. The first essential of a thoroughly successful Federal
movement was popular enthusiasm. If not that way it could only come by
a popular panic. It was the great privilege of their position that unlike
most nations of the past they had a grand chance of working out quietly
and thoroughly the inevitable problem of national existence. Let them take
care they were not some day compelled to do that in mad haste which had
better be done at leisure.
Fooled to the top of his bent by our cunning Victorian neigh-
bours who for a thousand perfectly valid reasons —are all hearty
Federationists to a man, Mr. Reid proceeded to beslobber Sir Henry
Paikes with the most fulsome flattery for “his great work” in the
cause of Federation, the very work for which, but three brief years
before, he had reviled and ridiculed the “father of federation,” and
threatened to drag him before the people of the country, and the bar
of Parliament, for conspiring against the liberties of the people,
< an( i stabbing Freetrade to the heart,” by his efforts to promote
federal unity, which Reid was now so fervently eulogising. He
praised the draft constitution of the Convention, which in May, 1890,
he had declared the people of New South Wales would “tear into
shreds.” In December, 1891, he wrote in a Sydney periodical that:
The President of the Convention, who began well, by laying down a
thoroughly sound basis for the union, was “ flattened out ” on several vital
points yet, strange to say, was just as enthusiastic after the process as
before! . The unmistakable collapse of the ambitious scheme of
the Convention to induce Australia to accept their Bill as it stood is not at
all to be regretted.
In January, 1895, he declares from a Melbourne platform : “Much
of the draft constitution framed by that Convention would be
acceptable in the future.” Then, forgetting all his wild and frenzied
shrieking in and out of Parliament during 1890-1-2-3, about the-


military spirit being at the bottom of the Federal movement, Mr.
Reid -wound up with the following carefully prepared “impromptu”
peroration on the urgency and glory of Federation ;
There was one great question only thundering in their ears, and that was
would they rise to the magnificent career open to them, or would they
remain disunited settlements in the history of nations ? There were three
alternatives—Federation, conquest, or chaos. Was the destiny of Australia
To be chaos? No ! Were they to become the helpless victims of conquest?
A thousand times No! Then they must Federate. God would smile on
the union, and the auspices of nature stood ready to dower the compact
with stupendous wealth—ceaseless energy in our towns, busy pioneers in our
plains, and a free Commonwealth over all. That was a dream, but a dream
that could be realised. Then unite, as he believed they would, to secure as a
glorious heritage for their children—that grand destiny fortified by the
perpetual league and covenant of Australian patriotism.
But where was International Freetrade, and “that ever-hright
example of freedom, the dear old mother land”; where was the
“ other half of the Freetrade loaf” ; where was the appalling spectre
of Imperial militarism, amid all this display of Federal fireworks ?
Vanished, as completely as Mother Mellon’s spooks. Yet there was
just “one small fly in the Federal ointment,” in the shape of a
recriminatory voice, which made itself heard in the midst of Mr,
Reid’s glowing periods about “ taking down those customs barriers
which made foreigners of Australians in Australia,” by calling out;
You are on a Freetrade mission ! ” “ No,” retorted the ever-ready
Reid,
No, he was speaking for something higher—of the desirability of bringing
the colonies together, and thus abolishing the hateful and artificial barriers
to trade which existed.
But what could be higher in the estimation of the man who had
over and over again declared that international Freetrade, “ the
other half of Freetrade,” was the grand goal of human happiness
and freedom, which he would not surrender “for all your
Federation ?” Mr. Reid, who, when opposing Sir Henry Parkes’
Federation resolutions in the Assembly, in May, 1890, had declared
that “ any man who believed that Federation would result in
Freetrade must be a madman,” must now either he mad himself, or
believe that it will result in Freetrade. The only logical conclusion
to be come to is that he is either mad or dishonest in his present
attitude, because the Age newspaper, a sturdy and consistent
' advocate of “ Federation at any price ” —which Victoria won’t have
to pay—made it quite plain in its issue of the day following Mr.
Reid’s speech, that Federation will abolish that form of Freetrade
for which Mr. Reid was ready to die three years ago, and extend
to national Aiistralian limits, against the whole of the outside world,
that form of Protection which he declared was “ slavery, oppression,


restriction, and a base survival of barbarism.” The Age was very-
honest and outspoken in its endeavours to make this plain. It
said :
Mr. Reid said that although he is a Federationist, he is not a Fe ierationist
at any price. Nor is anyone in this colony. Victoria is quite willing to
leave the Fiscal question to the decision of the whole Australian people. She
does so, the more readily, of course, because while New South Wales is about
equally divided upon the question, the other colonies are Protective, so that
Protection against the outside world will unquestionably be the main plank
in the platform of any Australian Federation. Unless Mr. Eeid and the
Freetraders of New South Wales are willing to accept the inevitable, in the
shape of a Protectionist tariff for the Dominion, they can have no object in
forwarding the Federal movement. They have a reasonable quid pro quo in
Intercolonial Freetrade, which Victorians of all parties are willing to accept,
as they regard an extended protected market as more than an equivalent for
the intercolonial duties After all, any union to be lasting must
be based on business principles, and not on sentiment alone.
What has Mr. Reid to say to this straight, honest talk ‘I The
main basis of his virulent attacks against Sir Henry Parkes was
that he had “ stabbed Freetrade to the heart ” by openly avowing
his readiness to do what the Age now tells Mr. Reid he must do,
viz., be willing to remit the decision of the fiscal question to the
whole Australian people represented in a Federal Parliament.
Is he willing to leave the question of Freetrade and Protection
over for settlement by the Dominion Parliament 1 If he is, then
he must have made up his mind to “bow his neck to the
executioner,” and to surrender “ the other half of Freetrade,” and,
thereby, to abandon “ the dear old mother-land, that ever-bright
and glorious example of freedom.” Is he prepared to do all this 1
Has he made up his mind ? If he has, the people of Hew South
Wales are entitled to know it. At present they are in the dark
as to his opinions on Federation. Ever since his reckless assaults
on Federation, and his repeated attempts to “ flatten out ” Sir
Henry Parkes, and his dark and dastardly intrigues with the
Protectionists to “ stiffen ” the whole Federal movement, he has
not said one word or done one thing to lead the public to believe
that hehas materially altered his views. He has never condescended
to tell the people of Sydney so much as he told the people of
Melbourne. The people who employ and pay him have surely some
call upon his political confidence ; and it is about time that he
began to recognise their paramount claims in this respect. When
Sir Henry Parkes began the Federation movement in 1890, he did
not go outside the colony of Hew South Wales to declare his
views :he went to the border town of Tenterfield—a place having
peculiarly strong claims upon his political and personal regard—
and there made known his opinions and intentions. Mr. Reid
seems bound by no such decent respect for the people of the
country whom he pretends to serve, but goes off to Melbourne, the


rival capital of Sydney, to deliver himself of a long string of
elegant and eloquent platitudes, so vague and general in their terms,
that they might be made to apply as directly to Imperial as to-
Australian Federation. It is time that Mr. Reid spoke out, and
took the people of New South Wales into his confidence, and told
them in what direction and to what extent he has changed his
opinions on Federation, and how much or how little they are in
accord with the notorious anti-Federation views of his most recent
and most influential Cabinet colleague, Mr. J. H. Want, Q C the
new Attorney-General. ’ ’’
If fui ther evidence is required to prove the imposture which
Reid is endea\ curing to palm off on the people as “ a sincere desire
to serve and aid the cause of Federal unity,” it is to be found in a
compaiison between his previous frantic ravings against militarism
when out. office, and the fond and foolish manner in which “he
dotes upon the military ” when in office. Whatever may he said
01 thought of Sit George Dibbs as a politician, even his enemies
must admit that he is “ a manly man.” It will not be denied that
he rendered the State and the people a lasting service when he
summarily clipped the claws of that Imperial military helot, Major
Hutton, who, in the position of a glorified and over-paid drill
sergeant, pretended to play the part of a pinchbeck despot in the
midst of the people who tolerated and paid him. Dibbs promptly
put ]aim back into his proper place. Reid no sooner comes into
office than he raises and praises Hutton, dines and junkets with him
and Ins officers at the Union Club, and publishes an absurd report
which Dibbs had suppressed as unwarranted and insubordinate.
This report was nothing better than an impudent attempt to
promote public expenditure by creating a bogus military scare, and
a special plea for an Easter Encampment at a cost of something
less than fifty thousand pounds. Reid tried hard to get Hutton’s
encampment hobby sanctioned by Parliament, and, notwithstanding
the widespread depression and the growing deficit, and with the
country swarming with thousands of starving unemployed, he put
down a sum of £26,500 on the Estimates, though he knew that the
cost of the encampment would be nearer £40,000 than £26,000.
Besides this, he largely increased the military Estimates for 1895
over those of previous years, just to spite “that devil, Dibbs,” and
to please his Imperial friend, Hutton. Of course, Parliament would
not vote such scandalous concessions just to placate the military and
club cronies of Reid, but knocked out £26,500 for the encampment,
and £7OOO for officers’ “allowances,” notwithstanding Reid’s
attempts to wheedle them through Committee of Supply by all
manner of subterfuges and paltry pretences. This is the man who,
but a brief time before, had been ranting and raving up and down
the country against Federation, declaring that it did not mean


<< brotherly love,” and that “ at the heart of this movement is the
military spirit!” But no sooner is he in power, with his clutches
on the public purse, than he pretends to be an ardent Federationist,
no longer in dread of militarism, but anxious to cajole Parliament
into further extravagant expenditure on military pageantry and
parade, and that, too, at the very time when he pretends that his
heart is bleeding and breaking for the sorrows and sufferings of the
unemployed, who are roaming about the country in thousands in a
state of abject destitution and absolute starvation. This is the
sort of vacillating popinjay Premier who proclaims himself to be
“ the chap to save the country !” The people who would continue
to trust for salvation to such “ a pettifogging, cozening rogue,”
deserve to he politically damned. He is as plainly poking fun at
the people as the clown who grins at the crowd through a horse
eollar at a country fair. Yet he has the cool impertinence to lecture
Englishmen—statesmen like Lords Salisbury and Rosebery—in the
Review of Reviews on “ Conscience in Politics.” What must these
noble lords think of the conscience of the man who can, in the
course of a dozen lines of print, blow hot and cold on several
subjects, now tootling on the bugle of Imperialism, then beating
the tom-tom of Republicanism ; next praising peace, after glorifying
war ; and, after extolling Imperial unity, winding up with a cowardly
threat of Australian separation ? Here is a chunk of this
conscientious chap’s conscience, as exhibited by himself:
Those who wish well to Great Britain —who desire to see Australia a
member of the Imperial group of states for many years to come—will unite
in the fervent hope that war, when it comes upon us, will see us called
upon to take part in a righteous struggle. At such a time, and in such a
case, the colonies of the empire will be ready to form in line with their
brethren in all parts of the world, to acquit themselves in a manner worthy
of their ancestors. But for a crooked purpose, or in an unworthy cause,
there can be no abiding enthusiasm in Australia. Here, the glamour of
military adventure, the prospects of military glory, have no charm for the
masses. We love peace. We hate war. If Australian blood must be shed,
we wish at least to shed it in a cause that will find favor in the sight of
Heaven. The first declaration of an unrighteous war which stains the
history of Britain will do more injury to the integrity of the British Empire
than can be repaired by many victories.
What does it mean; what is it intended to convey 1
Like most other things which its author says or indites,
it has the false and empty ring of “ sounding brass and
tinkling cymbal,” and is merely intended to bamboozle
those who read it, and to convince Lords Salisbury and Rosebery
that our newly-fledged Premier Reid, the “ Duff Duckling,” is a very
cunning “ chap ” indeed, capable of “ saving,” not only this country,
but the whole of the British Empire. Their Lordships, if they
ever read it, will be sadly puzzled as to whether a man who can
cringe and crawl for a title in such abject fashion is really


worth bribing at all. That’s what Reid’s lecture on
“ Conscience in Politics ”is intended to achieve—a title. If not,
why was it written 1 If it is not a broad hint for a title, it is
meaningless; because, as Lord Macaulay said of Mr, Robert
Montgomery’s poetry, it has no reference to anything else in the
heavens above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under the
earth. Reid is Scotch enough to be canny ; and while he has
Governor Duff, and “ his friend the Majah,” to interpret his
meaning at Imperial headquarters, he can afford to be vague, and
still to pose as the enemy of militarism, while hobnobbing with
Hutton and his staff at the Union Club, and strenuously striving
to get them a .£40,000 encampment and extravagant “ allowances ”
Smuggled through Parliament. 2STot long ago he declared on the
public platform, in reply to an insinuation that he was after a title,
“ I hope I shall never be knighted. ’’ Well, he need not be
knighted unless he likes ; not even if he has changed his mind, and
suddenly conceived a hankering for a title. But George Houston
Reid is now a married man, and he is as surely after a title now as
he was after the Premiership at the very time he was declaring that
he did not desire office. This is the key to his Federation
conversion, which on any other hypothesis is inexplicable. With
this explanation much that was mysterious becomes plain.
Reid in his callow days seems to have studied the ethics of the
physically lame, and mentally crooked, Abbe' de Perigord. In a
pamphlet published in June, 1873, on the “ Diplomacy of Victoria
on the Postal Question,” he applied to our Victorian countrymen
language which has since become peculiarly applicable to himself.
He said:
Talleyrand’s saying that “ Language was given to conceal thought,”
is by no means a maxim of Australian diplomacy. In all our negotiations
the moves soon become public. A good idea of policy is thought to be far
too good to keep. We do not say that we prefer to this open style the
finesse of the clever diplomats who manipulate the destinies of Europe;
but we do say that the former, to be respectable, should be honest. The
statesman who acts from a questionable motive is expected to veil the
truth, if not the better to serve his purpose, out of respect for propriety,
and in justice to those who will be called upon to support his measures.
There was, indeed, a period when might was right, and success the standard
of virtue, but that is past for ever.
“ The devil can cite scripture for his purpose ” as readily as
politicians can prevaricate and act a lie. In his youth, Mr. Reid
seemed to be an adept in citing moral maxims against the perfidious
politicians of Victoria. Since then he has grown into a “ jolly and
fat ” young man of 50, for whom those moral maxims seem to
have somewhat of their flavor. He himself has taken a leaf out
of Talleyrand’s book, and by carefully concealing his thoughts, by
wrapping them up in an abundance of unmeaning words, has come


into the Premiership. As a Freetrade Premier, and a patron of
Protection, a sudden convert to Federation, and a newly disarmed
opponent of militarism, he is progressing rapidly along the devious
paths of diplomacy, wherein
He finds, with keen, discriminating sight,
Black’s not so black nor white so very white.
This discriminating sight is essential to that far-seeing diplomacy
that conducts to a title. George Houston Reid has shown that he
possesses both. It will not be long before he will have demonstrated
to Downing-street that he is much more worthy to be dubbed and
decorated than any of the Imperial sycophants who have preceded
him in the Premiership. His perfidious predecessors took years
to tergiversate themselves into titles. Reid ripens in political
treachery much more rapidly. He has not been in office more
than six months; but in that short time he has managed to
betray his principles, break his pledges, and desert his paity. A
fledgling Premier of such versatility may be trusted to win his
way to the “highest honors” in the gift of those who regaul
treason against Australia as loyalty to Imperialism. By the time
Mr. Reid has outraged a few more principles, and broken the rest
of his promises, he will be ready for the renegade s reward. At
one of his famous Protestant Hall meetings, the following doggerel
lines were hastily written, and handed up to Mr. Reid on the
platform :
“ This little round, fat, oily man of law,”
Six months ago ’gainst Federation ranted ;
Now. grov’ling low to grab the gay gewgaw.
Yells from the stump, “ We must be federated !
This is “ most damnable doggerel,” to be sure ; but though it
makes bad rhyme, it gives good reason for regarding “Wriggler”
Reid’s present attitude on the Federation question as the most
outrageous exhibition of despicable dodgery that has yet degraded
our public life.


PART V.
REID: THE LAND REFORMER.
If Igo Straight I shall do what the hon. and learned member (Mr. Reid) never did in
his hie. —Sir Henry Paßkes, in the Assembly, December Bth, 1891.
If he ever had the power he would endeavour to run into agricultural districts like this
all over the colony something infinitely better than roads-light railways. That was what
men hundreds of miles from the markets wanted above everything. He would first raise
a loan to construct about a thousand miles of lines to act as feeders, and put a sinking
fund on this, so that the expense would be wiped out in ten or twelve years, and then run
tor mere workmg expenses. He would then go on until he extinguished the whole railway
debt of the colony. Then the railways might be worked suitably to pay wear and tear and
expenses, and farmers would then be in a position to compete with the farmers of other
parts of the world. In some countries railways were owned by private companies, and this
was a great block to productive industries.— G. H. Reid, at Berrigan, January Gth, 1894,
The leader of the Opposition (Mr. Reid) does not appear to have any fixed place of
political residence, or reliable means of political support. Some months ago he came out
Dolaly in tavor of land value taxation as a means of replacing revenue sacrificed bv
JJI Customs duties to something like a Freetrade basis. Ever since then he has been
letting I dare not wait upon I would.” He hasjhad democratic phrases and abuse of the
Government for the popular ear, and cautious Assurances that is he not going to do half
as much as anyone might think, for that of monopolistic vested interests.— Daily
Telegraph, January Bth, 1894.
Mr. Reid’s reputation as a land reformer is on a par with that
which lie has acquired as a tariff reformer. To his land policy (if
his hap-hazard, blind-groping experiments can be dignified by such
a name), Disraeli’s famous description of Gladstone’s domestic and
foreign policy aptly applies—“ It is a policy of plundering and
blundering.” Over the question of tariff revision he has blundered,
by first promising, next delaying, then but partially performing, and,
finally, winding up by delivering the farmers, bound hand and foot,
over to the tender mercies of the Miller’s Ring, who cabal and pull
the wires between the Chamber of Commerce and the Colonial
Treasurer’s office in Sydney. On the even larger and more vital
question of land reform, he has begun by badly blundering, and is
now preparing to make bad worse by proposing a legalised system of
plundering, by taxing the Country Peter to "pay the Sydney Paul.
John Bright once declared that the effect of England’s land legis-
lation in Ireland had been “ to legislate Irishmen off the face of their
native earth.” In New South Wales the object of the alleged land
■reformer seems to be to tax the settlers off the soil. But apart from


his proposals for exorbitant class taxation, Reid’s claims to be
regarded as a land reformer are fictitious. To admit them would
be to reverse the old maxim, ex nihilo nihil fit , and to recognise in
Reid a knowledge and capacity in land legislation which he has
shown that he does not possess. His acquaintance with the
intricacies of our complicated code of land laws, with their confusing
administrative regulations, is just sufficient to make his utterances
in regard to them absolutely assish. So limited and purely
theoretical is his knowledge of the manifold grievances which
surround the settler, and the practical difficulties of soil and climate,
and access to markets, which beset the general body of the country
producers, that he has only to open his mouth, to merely refer to
them, in order “to put his foot in it-” The most that he knows
about land law and settlement is that he knows practically nothing.
His ignorance is so notorious that it has become a standing joke
among practical men in Parliament, and the laughing stock of
country audiences before whom it has been displayed. Numerous
ludicrous instances of the manner in which he has bewrayed himself
on the land question could be cited, but one will serve the purpose
of a thousand. Referring to the futility of expecting any practical
land legislation or genuine reform from Reid, the member for West
Macquarie (Mr. Crick), during the debate on the Address in Reply
in August last, told the following amusing and authentic anecdote
in illustration of his crass ignorance of even the common terminology
of our land laws ;
How can we expect practical land legislation from a Government headed
by a Premier, who lately condescended to pay a political pilgrimage to the
Southern part of this colony in order to convert the Protectionist farmers
there to a policy of Freetrade ? The hon. gentleman, the present Premier,
was asked on that occasion : “Are you in favour of reducing the price of
special areas ?” With that natural astuteness, which so well becomes him,
he at once thought, “ Oh, this is something against democracy,” and he said,
“I am not; I will vote against it.” This remark was received with hooting,,
while the hon. gentleman expected cheers,and he thought to himself, ‘‘l am
on the wrong line,” So he said, “ X have not given the question the study it
deserves, but I will do so.” I suppose the hon. gentleman has brought a
special area along with him, and is looking into it now. (Mr. Eeid ; The
hon member has brought a special area of fabrication.) The person who
told me was a gentleman who drove the hon. gentleman some 20 or 30 miles
Mr Kirk. The law of Parliament will not allow me to doubt what the
hon. gentleman says, but still, I cannot entirely eradicate from my mind
that little correspondence about the remarks ve Mr. Oxenham and the Upper
House.
It must, of course, be conceded that a Premier cannot be expected
to he deeply versed in all the nice and intricate details of every
difficult question with which his Government is pledged to deal.
But it may reasonably be expected that a politician who, when
bidding for office, proclaimed himself to be tbe chap to save the
country,” and to reform creation, and who placed in the forefront


of his programme “ Land Reform,” should, at least, have a
colloquial acquaintance with the phraseology of the laws which he
has undertaken to reform. A land-reforming Premier who, while
proposing to ■ bring in an Amending Land Bill, and to impose a
swingeing tax on land, cannot tell the difference between a Special
Area and an ordinary Conditional Purchase, is somewhat of a solecism
in politics. A wise fool would seek wisdom where it was to be
found ; and Reid, in the face of his own lamentable ignorance, would,
had he been wise, have entrusted the administration of the Land’s
Department, and the formulation of land reforms, to hands more
capable than his own. But what has he done ? Given over the
control of this, the biggest and most important department of the
State—in the efficient control and enlightened reform of which is
intimately and irrevocably bound up the future progress and
prosperity of the whole country—to whom ? To another mediocre
lawyer like himself : to Mr. J. H. Carruthers, a Sydney solicitor,,
whose knowledge of our land laws has been chiefly confined to
jobbing in suburban sand-lots, and in surveying the scrubby shores
of Botany Bay while on fishing excursions. This is the same Mr.
Carruthers who represents the non-producing civil servants massed
in the suburban electorate of St. George (Canterbury), and whom
Sir Henry Parkes once denounced in the Assembly as “ The
champion log-roller of New South Wales.” He is the same Mr.
“ Civil Servant ” Carruthers who has never been able to rebut the
charges openly made against him in Parliament of having
unconstitutionally spent £92,000 for the Technical Education of the
children of his own electorate, and of the other suburban and
metropolitan electorates, and of unconstitutionally engineering the
construction of a costly suburban tramway in direct contravention
of the Public Works Act. All this “the champion log-roller” has
done, while the children of country settlers had either to go without
the most elementary kind of education, or else walk or ride on
horseback many miles in all weathers, because the city-and-suburbs
dominated Parliament in Sydney refused to give the country
producers their share of the public expenditure in the shape of votes
for school-houses, or for railways, or ordinary roads. Is this the
type of a city member whom the great body of the country producers
wish to see entrusted with the administration of our lands, even if
he had the requisite knowledge and experience ? Hardly. His
appointment is all the more a crying scandal, in view of the fact
that the present Ministry includes Mr. J. N. Brunker, than whom
no man is more respected for his personal character and political
integrity., Mr. Brunker is one of the very few men in Parliament
having a thorough knowledge of our land laws, and a practical
acquaintance with their administration. He has approved himself
to Parliament and the country as a competent land administrator ;
conseqirently, his supersession in the Lands Department by such a


witling as Mr. Carmthers is the most mystifying of the many
mysteries which surround the formation and the working of the
Reid Cabinet. True, it has been stated that Mr. Brunker was
offered the portfolio of Lands, but declined it, and only consented
to join the Government after repeated earnest solicitations, and on
being given the choice of offices. But why was this ; why did Mr.
Brunker refuse to accept or select the office of Lands ? Simply
because he is opposed to a Land Tax, and did not believe in either
the ability or sincerity of Reid to carry out all the wild promises of
radical land reform, concurrently with heavy land taxation, which lie
made from a hundred different Sydney and suburban platforms.
Mr. Brunker knew, better than most men could know, that any attempt
on Reid’s part to effect his threatened land revolution must end in
failure and confusion; and he declined to share in the direct or
immediate responsibility, by refusing to assume the office of
Minister for Lands. Hence we have the ludicrous spectacle of an
alleged land-reforming Government, whose Chief does not know
a Conditional Purchase from an Occupation License, and in which a
Sydney solicitor, like Mr. Carmthers, fills the chair of Minister for
Lands, while Mr. Brunker, one of the leading land legislators in the
country, secludes himself in the Colonial Secretary’s office. A pretty
sort of a political combination to present itself before the country as a
land-reforming administration ! What better proof could be wanted
of the allegation that the Reid Government is merely a makeshift
contrivance designed for grabbing and keeping office, and not a
Ministry specially formed for the purpose of carrying out any
particular reforms. As a matter of fact, Reid’s Cabinet is nothing
more than the shattered pieces of the last Parkes Administration,
clumsily put together. The distinguishing characteristic of the
majority of its members is mediocrity—the minority possessing a
modicum of ability, being absolutely destitute of party loyalty or
principle, with but one solitary exception.
The composition and character of Reid’s Cabinet being understood,
its farcical achievements in the sphere of land legislation need not, and
do not, cause any surprise. Deprived of the supreme guidance of
Mr. Brunker in the Lands Department, Messrs. Reid and Carmthers,
like two pettifogging town attorneys, have had to substitute for a
sound policy of land reform, a most mischievous system of tinkering
and tampering with our land laws and settlers’ rights. Mr,
Carmthers’ competency to draft a measure of radical land reform
may be measured by his own admission, made when introducing the
Crown Lands Bill on September 13th last:
I may say at once that I have had a very short time at my disposal for
the preparation of this measure. I have had advisers in the press and
■elsewhere, who told me that there is one great matter of urgency which
might well have been dealt with by itself.


What that great matter of urgency was he did not condescend
to explain.. Who his advisers were, “on the press and elsewhere,”
is well known, On the press it was the Single-Tax-teaching and
Grain-Duty-denouncing Daily Telegraph ; “ elsewhere ” must mean
those banks and other financial institutions who had hold of the
little solicitor’s ear while he was supposed to be bursting his brains
over the task of framing a measure of radical land reform —save
the mark ! In Parliament he had for chief confidential advisers two
newly-elected members—Mr. S. W. Moore, the member for Bingara,
and Mr. E. D, Milieu, the member for Bourke. The ability of
either of these gentlemen to act as land-law adviser to any
Government is doubted most by those who know them and the
land laws best. They are both already known in the House as
land-reforming, alias land-taxing, cranks, whose sole aim seems to
be the annihilation of the pastoralist, and the ruin of the selector,
by a summary rack-renting process. Some idea of the nature and
extent of Mr. Moore’s knowledge of the laud laws of the country
may be gathered from the fact that he declared in his speech, in
moving the Address-in-Reply to the Governor’s Speech, at the
opening of the present Parliament, that, “ We know that whatever
the policy of the Government may be in regard to the Central
Division leases, in less than twelve months some few million acres
will become available for selection whereas, as was pertinently
pointed out to him during the same debate,
He cannot be aware of the decision given in the Pupreme Court the other
day ; there will be no millions of acres falling in next year ; the decision of
the Supreme Court the other day decides exactly what several members of
this House, in the last Parliament, stated was the intention of the law. On
motions of adjournment in the last Parliament, on more than one occasion,
the late member for The Bogan, Mr. Booth, and other members, myself (Mr.
Crick) among the number, pointed out that the matter was entirely away
from the Minister, that it rested with the recommendations of the land
boards, subject to appeal to the Land Court; that matter has now been
decided by the Supreme Court, and there will be very few leases falling in
next year.
As regards Mr, Milieu, the other laud law adviser of the Govern-
ment, his knowledge of the land laws is derived from the leaflets
issued by the Labour Electoral League, of which he was a member
and delegate, before he joined the Single Tax League. He is a fussy
faddist, whose busy “ buznacking ” propensities have earned for him
in his own district, where he is best known, the significant sobriquet
of “ The Bogan Mosquito and in Parliament, where he is better
known than appreciated, the equally significant nickname of “ The
Bourke Blow-fly.” Hardly had the returning officer declared him
elected than he addressed a long peremptory letter to Mr. Reid,
informing him of the kind of Land Bill he required to be introduced,
suggesting, among other things, that it ought to provide for irrigation


farms on the banks of the Darling, near Bourke, or around some
water-bore in or about the neighbourhood of that place. Such are
the types of legislators whom this land-reforming Government
choose for its advisers. Those portions of the Land Bill which are
not due to their suggestion, Mr. Carruthers cribbed from Mr.
Copeland’s measure holus-bolus, almost without acknowledgment,
and sadly marred in the process of cribbing. All that is good in
the new Land Bill—and it is but very little—is entirely due to the
constructive and administrative ability displayed by Mr. Copeland in
the measure which Mr. Carruthers has copied ; and all that is bad
or dubious—which is the bulk of the bill—is due to the present
Government. The bill was hastily constructed in less than a month,
out of piecemeal scraps, and immature suggestions, scraped together
from all sources, and borrowed from everybody, and then rushed
through the Assembly in less time than it had taken to “ slap
together.”
Mr. Carruthers in introducing the measure oracularly declared that
“ The main test of a land system is to be found in the political
feelings of the people.” This is worthy of Cap’n Cuttle’s nautical
friend Jack Bunsby, or of “Wriggler” Reid when finessing over
Federation. If “the political feelings of the people” are expressed
by the great body of the settlers on the soil (the only portion of the
community competent to express a practical opinion on the land laws)
then is this Sydney concocted Land Bill —the special handiwork of
city solicitors and “ bush ” lawyers—doomed in public estimation
even before it can be fairly brought into operation. But what cares
Reid for the country producers and pioneer settlers ? If he cannot
settle on the soil, he, at least, seems determined to tax them off it
or under it. His troubles about the selectors ! According to him,
they are all lucky Tom Tiddlers, literally picking up gold and silver.
In 1888, when Sydney was a free and open port, through which
the outside producers swamped with their over-production the
markets of our own struggling producers, Mr. Copeland moved a
resolution in favour of imposing a duty on all articles that could be
locally produced, and on agricultural products , but which Mr. Reid
succeeded in getting defeated by a majority of 18 votes. Reid
accomplished this feat of friendship towards the farmers by one of
the most cruel and reckless misrepresentations of the position of the
free selectors, and of the condition of the general body of country
workers, which has ever been perpetrated in Parliament. He
said :
I say that all the systems of the age show that we are on the brink of a
reversal of this policy of Protection When we talk about the
Free Selectors, who are the men who hold free selections ? The rich men in
the country Why this is one of the most glorious countries ; a
country in which men refuse to starve on less than six shillings a day, when


they are at the lowest ebb of their fortunes There can be no
better policy for a young country such as this, whose resources are
undeveloped, than the sagacity of private enterprise.
There is Reid’s opinion of the country selector and country producer
in 1888. Then, as now, he thought that, like him, they ought to
grow “ jolly and fat” on a one-sided system of Freetrade, which left
their own markets open to be swamped, while closing those of the
“swampers” against them. What they require is not so much
cheap land, secure tenure, and a guaranteed home market, but an
increased dose of laissez-faire, and a more vigorous application of
the competitive scourge of private enterprise, in order to compel
them “to live like men and not skulk like crawlers ! ” What sort
of land legislation can be expected from a man holding such views
of the condition and claims of the country producers ? Precisely
the sort that he is preparing : a minimum of land reform, with a
maximum of land taxation. It matters little to him and his party
what the settlers on the soil think of his policy, or what may be its
•effect upon them. His chief concern is about Sydney and its
suburbs, where is massed the voting power of the country. He, and
other champions of Centralisation, have less need than ever to
trouble themselves about the claims of the country districts to
consideration. Since the passing of the new, but monstrously muddled
Electoral Act, the voting strength of Sydney against the country
has been increased by 25 per cent. That Act reduced the number
of Parliamentary representatives from 144 to 125, but in doing so
enormously increased the political power of Sydney and its suburbs,
by lopping off nineteen seats from the country representation, and
giving the metropolis eleven additional seats. This means an
enormous increase of strength and vitality to the accursed system of
Centralisation, because on a division as between Sydney and the
Country, it gives the former some twenty-two votes above and
beyond the preponderating influence which it already possessed in
P arli ament.
Under these circumstances, Reid is not so much concerned
about the country as about the town, where his strength lies,
among the thousands of civil servants, the professional classes,
the importers, the middlemen, and the whole great army of non-
producers who now fat fatten and thrive under the existing
centralised system of Government. “Wriggler” Reid, an ex-civil
servant himself, is the political pet of that great army of State
officials, whose barracks are the Sydney Government offices, and
whose votes turn the scale in almost every city and suburban
constituency. These are Reid’s political Praetorian Guards, who
have put him into power,' and who will keep him there so long as he
proves himself willing and capable of maintaining Centralisation, in
•all its bloated proportions, by taxing the struggling settlers on the


soil in the country, instead of retrenching the overpaid and over-
manned Civil Service in the city. With these are leagued importers
and middlemen —the sweaters of industry—represented by the great
importing warehouses and the Chamber of Commerce, who favour
no policy which does not make of Sydney the distributing
emporium for imported products, and the reservoir of the internal
production and commerce of the country. These are the men
who have captured the State railways from what they term
“the corrupt political control of Parliament,” and handed them
over to Reid’s friend, “ My Dear Mr. Eddy,” who runs them
in the interest of the big importers and exporters of Sydney.
“ My Dear Mr. Eddy” so manages the people’s railways that the
producers in the country are unable to use them ; they are mere
conduits for distributing' and collecting the imports and exports of
a score or so of big Sydney warehouses, many of which are owned
and managed by foreigners, who are not even Englishmen.
As Minister for Railways, Mr. Reid could do more for the settlers
on the soil by compelling Eddy to reform the Differential Rates
system, than he can ever hope to do by allowing Mr. Carruthers
and the “ Bogan Mosquito ” to bungle, boggle and botch our land
laws under the pretence of reforming them. But that would not
suit the commercial rings, the club coteries, and society cliques who
run Mr. Reid, and through him, the country. They demand that
the State railways shall be run on private commercial principles,
and be made to pay, if only on paper. If this system does not pay
the people as a whole, it pays Mr. Eddy and his social and
commercial backers, at whose bidding Reid proposes to ask
Parliament to give “ My Dear Mr. Eddy ” an extra thousand a year,
or £4OOO a year for'another seven years, together with liberal
allowances for a long holiday. This is to be done, in order that the
railways may continue to be run on a system which enables
bullock teams to profitably compete with them, and by which
thousands of settlers are shut off from all access to their natural
markets. The absurd system of management set up, and the
exorbitant freight rates maintained by Eddy, have had the effect of
intensifying the evils of Centralisation, and instead of tending to open
up the country and develope its resources, have retarded settlement
and cramped production. All this, and a great deal that is much
more serious, concerning Centralisation, will soon be proved publicly,
and in print; or, if Mr. Eddy prefers it, in a court of law, to his
utmost confusion and of those who have supported and profited by his
baneful regime. Meanwhile, “ Reid the Wriggler” leaves the great
body of the producers absolutely at the mercy of this alien autocrat,
who, while Carruthers and Co. are blundering over land reform, and
Reid drivelling about Federation at Melbourne and Hobart, is literally
crushing the industrial life, energy and enterprise out of thousands of


. L f set^iers 011 the soil. These, while heavily taxed to pro\ ide the
interest on enormous loans borrowed for the construction of railways
are debarred from the use of those railways by outrageously exorbitant
treights, and an abominably absurd scale of Differential Rates
y lucii is nothing less than a systematised means of making the*
railways a method of “bleeding” the country producers for the
benefit of a Sydney ring of foreign importers, who are the chief
supporters of “ My Dear Mr. Eddy,” and of his political sponsor
and parliamentary champion, “My Dear Mr. Reid.” What is
e\e n mo re urgently wanted than land reform, is railway reform,
ihe last would ensure the first, because, with proper access to their
markets, at reasonable rates, the country producer would have
little to complain of, and the land question would almost insensibly
settle itself. But a paltering politician like Reid has no more
the courage to undertake the one, than he has the ability to
accomplish the other. Being a mere paltry political cheap-Jack or
showman, be believes and practises the maxim of his business
prototype, T. P. Barnum—“ The people like to be humbugged.”
He is the perfect and finished type of that class of politicians who
find it profitable to flatter the people in order to lead them.
M ithout fixed principles, or firm convictions, he will espouse any
cause, adopt any fad, and shriek any shibboleth one day, provided
it promises to be popular : and be equally ready to oppose, reject
and denounce one and all, the next day, should they in the
meantime become unpopular. Popularity to him is what gas is to
a balloon , it inflates and carries him into the clouds, where sooner
or later he must lose his mental ballast, and the control of the valve
of his own verbosity, and collapse and come tumbling down “ with
hideous ruin anti combustion.” Then the deluded mob, which
yesterday laughed at his forced wit, cheered his mock democratic
heroics, and acclaimed his stale platitudes about Freetrade and
freedom as the very gospel of liberty, will relentlessly rend his
bruised and broken carcase, and give his flesh to the political
crows.


PART VI.
THE “ WRIGGLER’S ” REWARD.
The task undertaken has been accomplished; every count
in the indictment formulated has been sheeted home by
five-fold proof, in the form of five convincing chapters ; _ and
“Reid the “Wriggler” stands convicted of impudent political
imposture. It now remains for the public to pass judgment. But
it is usual, after the trial and conviction of a prisoner with a bad
record, to produce the culprit’s cahier, in order that the judge,
before’ passing sentence, may know what an unmitigated and
incorrigible scoundrel the prisoner really is. This is doubly
necessarv in Reid’s case, not only to ensure his due of condign
punishment at the bar of public opinion, but also to show how
utterly baseless are his claims to be regarded as a law reformer, and
•“A Lover of Labor.” Unfortunately, this cannot be done
thoroughly on the present occasion, owing to the number of
platform and Parliamentary impostures which he has perpetrated
within the past five years ; therefore the following must suffice :
Reid neither spoke nor voted in favor of Mr. Alfred Allen’s
Early Closing Bill, either on second reading or in Committee. —
December 14th, 1891.
Reid voted against Mr. A. J. Kelly’s motion, “ That no system
of Federation of the colonies will be acceptable to this House until
the electoral system provides for the principle of One-man-one-vote
at the election for members of the proposed House of Repre-
sentatives,” first introduced 11th January, 1893. Reid now yells
for the Referendum on Federation. His present colleagues,
Messrs. Brunker, Gould, S. Smith, and Cook, and Mr. M‘Millan,
also voted against it.
Reid has frequently declared that our civil and criminal code is a
disgrace to our civilisation ; and in moving a series of resolutions in
the & Assembly, December 2nd, 1890, declared that a poor man could
not get justice, owing to complicated and slow procedure, and cost of
law. On October 6th, 1891, he opposed Mr. Thomas Walker’s
“Reduction of Cost of Litigation Bill,” with Mr. Bruce Smith, a
lawyer, and his two present lawyer-colleagues, Messrs. J. H, Want
and A. J. Gould.


Reid spoke, and voted against Mr. E, W. O’Sullivan’s resolutions
in favor of Mining on Private Property, October 12th, 1891, by
which the State’s rights to all minerals beneath the surface were
recognised ; and also, under proper restrictions, the right of the
working miner, or poor fossicker, to mine for gold and other minerals
on private lands, and Church and School Lands, after their being
temporarily reserved for such purpose by the Warden. Mr. Reid’s
present colleagues, Messrs. Brunker, J. H. Want, A. J. Gould, J.
H. Carruthers, J. Garrard, and J. H. Young, voted with him
against this wise and moderate proposal for the relief of working
miners.
Reid neither spoke nor voted on the Mini ig on Private Property
Bill introduced by his present colleague, Mr. Sydney Smith,
October 14th, 1891.
Reid neither spoke nor voted either in the House or in Committee
on Mr. W, F. Schey’s Eight Hours’ Bill, November 18th, 1891.
Reid voted against Mr. J. L. Fegan’s motion, “That in view of
the depression throughout the colony, the Government should secure
the coalfields, and work them for the benefit of the people,’’ May
8 th, 1891.
Reid ridiculed and opposed the “Camels and Dromedaries
Impounding Bill,” introduced by the Hon. W. J, Lyne, May 31st,
1893, in spite of the fact that these scare-crow, fractious, Afghan-
driven brutes wore a prolific source of annoyance and damage—
sometimes resulting in loss of life—to carriers on the roads, and
settlers in up-country townships. Just a year later, May 29th,
1894, he voted for Mr. Waddell’s “ Camel Restriction Bill,”
prohibiting camels to come within two miles of municipal boundaries,
his reason being that : “ Haring once nearly lost my life through
coming within 500 yards of one of these animals in the Bourke
district, I feel a great deal of sympathy with the people who are trying
to pass this measure /”
Reid spoke in favour of Mr. T. J. Houghton’s motion to refer the
Fiscal Question to a plebiscite, hut did not vote ; when the division
bell rang, he skulked behind the bar, and allowed the Labor Party
to he defeated. He now bellows for the Referendum on a bastard
scheme of Imperial Federation.—October 12th, 1891.
Reid neither spoke nor voted on Mr. McMillan’s motion to
re-commit Coal Mines Regulation Bill, over penal 8-hours’ clause,
although that motion, if defeated, meant the resignation of the
Parkes’ Government, which actually did resign.—October 12th, 1891.


Reid declared, February 11th, 1892, in the Assembly, in regard
to the New South Wales Stock Tax : “ Personally I do not think
this is half so objectionable as hundreds of taxes which we have
already passed’’ ; but at Berrigan, January 6th, 1894,he denounced
the Victorian Stock Stock Tax thus : “ Was that last miserable,
grasping expedient of Protection, the Stock Tax, a display of amity
and good feeling ? Did they not see how the poison was spreading I
Reid moved the following first of a series of resolutions for Law
Reform, “ That in the opinion of this House, many of the methods
)f legal procedure in New South Wales, especially in the Civil
Jurisdiction of the superior Courts, are antiquated in form,
complicated and uncertain in their operations, and unnecessarily '
expensive to all persons seeking justice, whether at law or in equity,
in the Assembly, on December 2nd, 1890. On October 24th, 1893,
he neither spoke nor voted in favour of Mr. Thos. Rose s
“ Reduction of Cost of Litigation Bill.”
Reid neither spoke nor voted in the House or in Committee on
Mr. E. W. O’Sullivan’s “ Imprisonment for Debt Abolition Bill.’
—December 6th, 1892.
Reid neither spoke nor voted for Mr. T. M. Davis’ “ Marine
Board Reconstruction Bill,” when Leader of the Opposition ; but
now that he is Premier, he tries to steal the credit for that
democratic measure by putting it in the Government programme
without apology or blush.
Reid neither spoke nor voted for Mr. W. N. Willis’
“ Agreements Validating Acts Repeal Bill,” read a second time on
11th September, 1894, but promised to get a member of the
Ministry to take charge of it in the Upper House. He was
reminded of this promise on the 29th of November, and again on
the sth of December, and yet again before Parliament adjourned,
when he finally backed down with the impudent reply that
(although the Council had kicked this measure out three or four
times already) the Government could not touch it with the
traditional forty-foot pole, while it was in the Upper House—or
words to that effect.
Reid, on the introduction of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Board Act on 16th November, 1892, denounced the suggested
arbitration as “ Not even common justice.” In December, 1894,
he almost dares to ask Parliament to vote thousands to keep a
worthless Arbitration Board in existence.
Reid, during the long years that the fight for Payment of
Members lasted, opposed the principle in and out of Parliament, and


declared., June 14th, 1889, that Sir J. 13.I 3 . Abbott in supporting 1 the
rights of the Assembly against the Council had, “Put a political
revolver of many barrels loaded up to the muzzle at the head of the
Legislative Council if they dare to do what? If they dare to
exercise those rights as legislators which we are so careful to claim
for ourselves in the exercise of our legislative functions .” In the
same speech he sneered against Labor Members thus : “ Payment
of Members would be a very easy way of paying a miners’ lodge
secretary for his services, by paying him out of the coffers of the
State. . . . Would it not be a very convenient arrangement
for paying your miners’ lodge secretary £3OO a year by making him
a Member of Parliament?” He voted against the Bill, with his
present colleagues, Messrs. Brunker and Gould and Mr. Bruce-
Smith, and declared that he would not take payment for his
services because the country had not sanctioned it. Nevertheless,
he has continued to regularly “ grab the pelf,” and is now ready to
fight the Upper House, in order to keep it ; and even goes so far as
to say that if the Courts declare Payment of Members illegal, he
will, notwithstanding, continue to pay himself and them.
Keid spoke and voted for a clause in the “ Matrimonial Causes
Procedure Amendment Bill,” which empowers the judge to practically
hear cases in camera , by making it contempt of court to publish the
evidence if the judge has seen fit, without explaining his reasons
and solely on his own discretion, to forbid its publication. Is this
a law for the poor and weak, or for the rich and powerful ? Does
it tend to promote public and private morality, and the sure and
even-handed administration of justice ?
Reid, on 15th November, 1892, voted in favourof the introduction
of the Penny Postage system throughout the colony; so did his present
colleagues, Messrs. Brunker, Carruthers and Cook. Now he and
they are comfortably and safely ensconced in office, they neither say
nor care anything about such paltry questions, having more
important matters, in the shape of “ picnics ” at Hobart, to occupy
their mighty intellects, or rather their capacious stomachs, where
the brains of some of them are suspected to be securely hidden.
Reid, in March, 1892, when in Opposition, very properly
denounced extravagance in military expenditure, and advocated a
reduction of the Military Estimates by, at least, £30,000, “in order
to force on a radical reform of our military system.” Reid, as
Premier, in August, 1894, very improperly opposes military
retrenchment, and proposes to expend at least £26,500 for an
encampment, refused by the preceding Government, and to increase
officers’ salaries and allowances by £7OOO, although in the previous
Parliament he had denounced the extravagant salaries paid to
officers at the expense of the privates.


Reid, as the champion Freetrader, in the last Parliament voted
for Mr. Johnston’s motion to manufacture all Government dredges,
punts, &c., in the colony ; for Mr. Scott’s motion, that all ironwork
required by Government should be made in the colony ; for Mr.
Crick’s motion, that all rolling stock, &c., for the Government
railways should be made in the colony ; and for Sir George Gibbs
Bill providing that the Railway Commissioners should not make
contracts outside the colony for more than £20,000 without the
express sanction of Parliament. These he voted loi apparently on
the ground that, if given effect to, they would benefit Sydney and
its suburbs, and thus enable the Freetrade citadel to thrive on
Protection. But he denied the same Protection to the country
producers whenhe supported the abolition of the Dairy Produce Duties
on April 2nd, 188!). and opposed the imposition of Import Duties
on Agricultural Products on 12th June, 1888; also when he voted
against Mr. M‘Farlane’s motion for the Duty pn Imported Timber,
and against his amendment in favour of colonial timber being used
in Government contracts as recommended by Government architects
and engineers. This he does, apparently, because the practical effect
of such motions would be to assist the settlers on the soil, and the
country producers generally, including timber-getters (who have to
pay a license to cut timber), timber teamsters, saw mill proprietors,
and their numerous but partially employed hands. In this manner
does this Protean politician make himself, when it suits him, a
Protectionist in the Freetrade city, and a Freetrader m the
Protectionist country. Yet he flourishes like Jonah’s gourd
for a day.
Reid delivered a red-hot radical speech in favor of the Single
Tax resolution at the Protestant Hall, August 7th, 1893. He
posed then as a land-reformer, and took credit for the stoppage of
land sales by auction, by which successive Freetrade Governments
had alienated the people’s patrimony wholesale, year after year,
during many years. Mr. Reid’s claim was utterly groundless, and
while°he was denouncing Sir George Dibbs, and claiming the
credit due to him as a land reformer, he forgot to inform Ins
hearers that it was the Stuart Government, in which Sir George
Dibbs was Treasurer, that put a stop to the ruinous system ot
auction sales, the effect of which Mr. Coghlau, the Government
Statistician, thus describes:
The fact had forced itself upon the attention of the authorities that
this wholesale alienation of Crown lands was not due to the demand
created by the normal progress of settlement, but was the outcome ot an
unhealthy rivalry between the two principal classes of settlers—the pastoral
tenants and the free selectors. Besides this the estate of the country was
being parted with without any conditions as to improvement or settlement,
and as the great object of land sales was to promote settlement, it was


deemed advisable by the Government to temporarily suspend land sales by
auction, and ultimately it was decided to sell only a maximum area of
200,000 acres during any one year.
The magnitude and urgency of this great reform in the
administration of the public lands will be understood,
when it is stated that successive Freetrade Governments,
from 1873 to 1882, a period of ten years, had received
an aggregate revenue of nearly twenty millions sterling
from unconditional land sales, in addition to ordinary
Customs and Excise duties, and nearly ten millions of borrowed
money raised on loans. Now mark the change, which, according
to Coghlan, was immediately wrought by the Stuart- Dibbs Ministry,
which assumed office in January, 1883 : “In 1883, auction sales
were almost completely suspended, the receipts therefrom
immediately falling from £1,125,309 in 1882, to £96,539 in 1884.”
This is the reform, the credit of which Mr. Reid had the impudence
to claim, at this Single Tax meeting, while abusing the men to
whom it really belonged. The Stuart-Dibbs Government lasted
from the sth of January, 1883, to the 6th October, 1885, nearly
three years. In that Ministry, Mr. Reid held the subordinate
position of Minister for Public Instruction for a little over a year,
resigning his position on the 6th March, 1884. While in the
Cabinet, he had little or no influence on either the financial or the
land policy of the country, he being regarded by his colleagues
as an authority upon neither. Doubtless, he acquiesced in the
salutary stop of stopping the land sales, by auction, but he has long
since forfeited all claim to credit for approving a reform which he
had not suggested, and could not prevent, by persistently denouncing
and misrepresenting in Parliament, and on the platform, the very
men to whom the credit of that reform was solely due. Ever
since he was compelled to resign his seat in the Cabinet in 1884.
he has never ceased accusing Sir George Dibbs as the manufacturer
of deficits, although he, better than most men, knew that he was to
a great extent [the saviour of the people’s estate from the grip of
the jobber and syndicate!*. Such is this fat and flatulent protected
lawyer’s sense of political honor and fair play.
Another sample of Reid’s power of prevarication was the impudent
manner in which he played the political “ Codlin not Short ’’
comedy at this Single Tax meeting. While bound to admit that
the late Dibbs Government, in its ministerial manifesto, and by its
vote in the Assembly, had supported the principle of Land Value
Taxation against the rank and file of the Freetraders, lie sought to
brand them with insincerity, because six years previously Sir George
Dibbs had tried to inaugurate a fair and equitable system ol
taxation, consisting of light five per cent, ad valorem duties, with
a land and income tax, which just scheme was defeated by the


Freetraders in the Assembly. What was then a demerit in Dibbs,
is now a merit in Reid, who is amusing Single Tax cranks by
tinkering and paltering with a similar proposal of Customs’ Duties
and a Land and Income Tax, yet dare not venture to even state
the proportions in which he proposes to levy these several imposts.
What can be thought of the consistency of a man who, while
advocating Land Value Taxation in August, 1893, which he
opposed by his voice and vote in Parliament in October, 1892,
condemns his opponents for voting for what they had previously
advocated, and which he was advocating while condemning them,
and yet when he comes into office in 1894, has neither the
courage to remove Customs’ Duties he promised to sweep away,
nor the honesty to impose taxation to which he is solemnly
pledged ? Referring to Reid’s manifest Land Tax wrigglings
on the Protestant Hall platform, on this occasion, the
Evening News of the following day (August Bth, 1893), made
the following cynical comments on his conduct:
No sooner had Mr. Wise formulated with fresh force the doctrine in favour
of opening up the land, and not throwing the bulk of the public burdens on
those least able to afford to bear them, than other Freetrade politicians,
notably Mr. Reid and Mr. Carruthers, hastened to fall into line with their
colleagues.
This is the kind of man who postures before the country
as a fearless democrat, and from whom the people are told
in the press to expect pure and honest Government. In any
country but New South Wales he would be denounced as a
political pirate, who had captured the Parliamentary ship by
sailing under false colors.
Similar specimens of his political treachery and moral turpitude
could be multiplied, ad nauseam , from Hansard and the columns of
the Freetrade press. This is the delightfully consistent radical
Reid, who after failing to inveigle the Protectionist-Labor members,
at a private tea-party, into supporting him in his conscienceless
factious opposition to a Protectionist Government, wont up and
down the country howling at Labor members as traitors, who had
been bought over, in the secresy of Ministerial ante-rooms, to sell
their principles, and betray their constituents. He is the same
frothy-mouthed stump-orator Reid, who promised the hungry
workers, who waited on him from the Statue, to settle the
Unemployed Question in a fortnight, if he could only get the run
of the Government Offices.” How fare the unemployed to-day,
after six months of his regime ? Worse than ever; so badly,
indeed, that Reid dare not walk within a mile of the Statue, for
fear of sharing the fate of the Gracchi, which one is almost tempted
to think he richly deserves. While mouthing the maxims of a


spurious Democracy, he works the will of a genuine Autocracy •
because, although pretending to govern “ by the people and for the
people, he is really in league with the enemies of the people. If
a man s character can be told by the company he keeps, Reid’s must
)e , a vei y shady one indeed, seeing that his political confidants,
social chums, and club companions are Governor Duff, Major
Hutton, and Commissioner Eddy. This is the Imperial triumvirale
who are now running this country in their own interests, and those
ot their class, at the expense of the general body of the people.
Each of them is an alien importation—lmperial birds of passage
who, while leathering their own nests, take good care that no loyal
Australian shall earn a decent livelihood in his own land, or win
honorable promotion in his native country’s service, if they can prevent
it. This Imperial trio manipulate the present Prime Minister of New
South Wales, like the veritable Imperial mannikin that he is. In their
hands, Reid is moulded to their will as so much wax. This chap,
who was going to save the country, and make history, permits Duff
to unconstitutionally play the political autocrat; Hutton to mimic
the military dictator : and Eddy to absolutely run our railways, as
though he were some Indian Rajah, and the taxpayers of New South
Wales his half-naked, starved ryots. These three Imperial hirelings
personify the three chief evils from which New South Wales is
suffering at present time—lmperialism, Militarism, and
Centralisation. Under Reid’s regime , this threefold scourge is being
laid across the submissive shoulders of the people more heavily
than ever. May it lash them into the exasperation of resistance.
At present they seem to be held in abject awe by this trio of
Imperial incubi, and to blindly worship their servile satellite,
Wriggler Reid, as a sort of fiscal fetish. Their infatuation can
only be paralleled by that of the deluded victims of the Veiled
Prophet of Khorassan, who, after following Mokanna, their false
Messiah, to ruin and despair, through seas of blood, in order to
win the paradise, were suddenly and cruelly undeceived
by that hideous ifnpostor exclaiming, with fiendish mockery, as he
threw aside the veil, and disclosed his repulsive features to their
horrified gaze :
There, ye wise saints, behold your light, your star ;
Ye would be dupes and victims—and ye Are !
A similar, though perhaps, somewhat slower awakening awaits the
dupes and victims of “Reid the Wriggler—The False Prophet of
Freetrade.”
For Important Notice , See Other Side,


Important Notice.
Persons desirous of abating the evils of Centralisation, and of
promoting Land Law Reform, and a more rational system of State
Railway Management, in the interests of the settlers on the soil and
the general body of country producers, can do so by affording
information on the following points:
Public expenditure as between Sydney and the Country.
Instances of lack of local requirements in the shape of railways,
roads, bridges, post and telegraph offices, and other Government
offices, schools, magistrates, police, and other State-supported
institutions.
Facts concerning unfair system of railway management, especially
as regards rates of carriage for goods, and the want of facilities for
loading or storage of same.
Examples of defective Land Laws and bad administration.
Opinions and facts respecting Local Government, Land Taxation,
Freetrade and Protection, having especial reference to the proposals
of the Reid Al inistry.
General information affecting the interests of country producers
should be sent to:
Mr. JOHN NORTON,
70 Druitt Street,
Sybney.






Freetrade Demonstration,
Company at a Demonstration, to be held
at the Town Hall, on Tuesday, 26th March, the
Right Hon, G. H. Reid in the Chair,
ARTHUR MOORE,
11 LYNDHUR9T CHAMBERS,
ELIZABETH STREET.
General Secretary.
N.B.—This Ticket must be presented at the.
door before 7.30 to ensure a seat.


Freetrade Demonstration*
<os©?g)
e^s> Company at a Demonstration, to'be held
at the Exhibition Building, on Thursday, 28th March,
the Right Hon, G. H. Reid in the Chain
ARTHUR MOORE,
General Secretary.
11 LYNDHURBT CHAMBERS,
ELIZABETH STREET. N.B.—This Ticket must be presented at the
door before 7.30 to ensure a seat
, _
