



SOME RELIGIOUS BOOKS
On Sale at COLE’S Book Arcades, Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide.
NOTE,—E. W, Cole has the Largest and Most Varied Stock of Religions Books
in Australia. Every department of Religious Thought is impartially represented.
Why are the Churches Neglected?
Being the correspondence between His Grace Archbishop Clarke, John Urquhart
and “ Cleon,” reprinted from ” The Age.” 24 pages. 3d, or 2/6 per dozen.
Murray's Illustrated Bible Dictionary,
Edited by the Rev. William C. Piercy, M.A., with coloured maps and 365 illustra-
tions. Price 25/-, postage 1/9.
Old Beliefs and Modern Believers. By Percy Ansley Ellis, 4/6, postage 4d
The Bible Doctrine of the Sacraments.
Six Lectures in Westminster Abbey, by Canon H. C, Beeching, M A., D.Litt.
Price 3/-, postage 4d.
The Doctrine of the Last Things :
Jewish and Christian, by the Rev. W. O. E, Oesterley, D.D. Price 4/6, postage Od
The Universal Elements of the Christian Religion:
An attempt to interpret comtemporary religious conditions, by Charles C. Hal!
D.D., LL.D. Price 4/i>, postage yd.
Christ and Science.
Jesus Christ regarded as the Centre of Science, by Francis 11. Smith. Price 4/6,
postage Bd.
Boys of the Street and How to Win Them.
By Charles Stelzle. Price 2/-. postage 4d.
The True Church.
A Study, Historical and Scriptural, by Allan M. Dulles, D.D. Price 4/6, postage yd.
Problems of the Town Church,
A Discussion of Needs and Methods, by Geo. A, Miller, B. A. Price 3/-, postage 3d.
Messages to Working-Men. By Charles Stelzle. Price i/g, postage 3d.
Peace with God. By Rev, Fergus Ferguson. Price gd., postage 2d.
The Open Church for the Unchurched,
Or, How to Reach the Masses, by James E. M'Culloch. Price 4/O; postage 6d.
The One Volume Bible Commentary.
By various writers, edited by the Rev. J. R. Dummelow, M.A. Price 9/-. postage.x/i.
The Bible and Modern Criticism.
By Sir Robert Anderson, K.C.8., LL.D. Price y/6, postage gd.
Pseudo-Criticism,
Or, the Higher Criticism and Its Counterfeit, by Sir Robert Anderson. Price 3/6,
postage 6d.
Daniel in the Critics’ Den.
A Reply to Professor Driver and the Dean of Canterbury, by Sir Robert Anderson,
K.C.8., LL.D. Price 4/6, postage 6d.
In Defence.
A Plea for the Faith, by Sir Robert Anderson, K.C.8., LL.D. Prices/-, postage Bd.
E. W. COLE, Book Arcades, Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide.


Why are the Churches Neglected P
First Letter published March 20th,
1909.
WHY ARE THE CHURCHES
NEGLECTED?
To the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir, —The churches are constantly
complaining about the want of in-
terest in religion which is manifested
by the people, as illustrated by their
non-attendance at church services.
They are all assigning causes for this
indifference which invariably miss the
mark, while they all, with remarkable
unanimity, shirk the real cause.
People stay away from church be-
cause they have ceased to believe in
the dogmas still taught there, in spite
of the fact that they are known to be
unfounded and consequently untrue.
Taking the report which you publish-
ed yesterday of Archbishop’s Clarke’s
Lenten sermon as a fair sample of the
unfounded platitudes which church-
goers are expected to accept as Gos-
pel truths upon which their eternal
salvation or damnation depends, we
have in it a clear evidence of the truth
of our assertion. He tells us that
“the church was failing at the pre-
sent time largely in consequence of
keeping in the background the great
fact that everyone was by nature born
in sin.” We must take it for granted
that the preacher, in using the word
church, intended to include all sec-
tions, at least, of the Protestant
church. Accepting this view of the
question, it would be interesting to
know in what particulars, and to
what extent, the church is failing to-
day beyond its failure at any other
period of its history. Comparing the
public life or private life of to-day
with that of the past, the result, we
are satisfied, must be in favour of the
present. It would be hard to prove
that the church has had much to do
with the conditions in either case.
Supposing, however, that on this
issue we are wrong, and that the con-
ditions of public life and private life
are, from the churches’ standpoint,
worse than they have been in the past,
in what way can the Archbishop make
good his assertion that this retrogres-
sion is due to the keeping in the back-
ground the dogma of “original de-
pravity”? The reverse would appear
to us to be the more probable result.
If by keeping the dogma persistently
to the front a people became really
so convinced of the idea, that it to
them became a fact, “that everyone
was by nature born in sin,” that peo-
ple would despair of escape from the
inevitable, and would cease from any
effort for improvement. But in any
case, if this dogma has been kept
back, who is responsible for that?
Surely the leaders and teachers of the
people, the professors, the parsons,
the presidents, the presbyters, the
bishops and the archbishops. This
leads us to ask why these learned
guides and teachers have adopted this
course, and have kept in the back-
ground this important doctrine?
There can be but one answer, which,
while it suffices to account for their
action, at the same time vindicates
their characters as pastors and teach-
ers. That answer is that they have
ceased to believe in the dogma. The
discoveries of science have effectually
destroyed the only foundation upon
which it rested, and, as a conse-
quence, they have ceased to believe it,
or teach it. They have a further step
to take yet, of so momentous a charac-
ter that they hesitate as yet to make
it. They must before long openly de


nounce the dogma, and many others
equally unfounded, and give their
reasons for so doing. When that time
comes we shall, as Dr. Fitchett the
other day said, “have a new Bible.”
Then we shall have also a new re-
ligion founded upon facts and reason,
and the churches will be full. —-
Yours, etc.
CLEON.
Rssendon, 16th March
Second Letter published March 22nd.
SIN AS A DEFECT OF OUR
NATURE.
To the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir, —Your correspondent “Cleon”
writes from evident conviction, and
dogmatically, though in the language
of courtesy, and therefore his letter
deserves a reply. I have no objection
to his use of the term “dogma,”
which means, on one side or the other,
no more than an assertion in a con-
densed form of what each man holds
to be the truth.
Let me try to summarise his argu-
ments. (1) Dogmas are taught in the
church, in spite of the fact that they
are known to be unfounded, and' con-
sequently untrue. (2) Christian
teachers have ceased to believe that
each of us is by nature born in sin.
(3) They now hesitate to do, what be-
fore long they must do, and denounce
this doctrine, and many others
equally unfounded. (4) Then we
shall have a new religion founded up-
on facts and reason. These statements
pass beyond the region of reason and
just argument, and enter that of
morals, for they imply and impute
insincerity and false dealing. It will
be enough, however, for me now to
inquire whether our church’s teaching
upon sin is contrary to facts and rea-
son.
“Cleon” remarks that the dis-
coveries of science have effectually de-
stroyed the only foundation upon
which it rested. I know not in what
sense I am to understand his word
“science,” whether as physical
science or moral; the former deals,
amongst other things, with the ob-
served laws of the universe and the
constitution and physical workings of
the human body; the latter with
moral actions, with character and
conduct, and especially with the vari-
eties of religious experience. How-
ever, I confine myself to the latter,
because moral and physical facts and
seasons move in different planes. I
begin with a quotation from Professor
James Gifford’s lectures (1901-1902)
upon Human Nature. Speaking of
the healthy mindedness of optimism
and its desire to ignore evil, he says ;
“Some evils are ministered to
higher forms of good, but it may be
that there are forms of evil so ex-
treme as to enter into no good system
whatsoever. . . . Since the evil
facts are as genuine parts of nature
as the good ones, the philosophic pre-
sumption should be that they have
some rational significance, and that
systematic healthy mindedness, fail-
ing as it does to accord to sorrow,
pain and death any positive and ac-
tive attention whatever, is formally
less complete than systems that try
at least to include these elements in
their scope.”
Christianity is not so unreasonable
as to exclude the facts of human life,
and these facts show the world to be
full of imperfections, faults, pas-
sions, pride, injustice, lust and many
other such like things.
1 do not suppose that “Cleon”
would deny facts so obvious as these,
and if so it only remains to ask by
what name we are to call these things,
and what is their original source ? In
Christian teaching we use the name
“sin,” and we say that this is present
from the earliest days in each life.
Baby’s crying and peevishness are
often due to pain or mismanagement
in food or dress. We all know baby’s
moods —his courage in the bath, or his
abject fear; his early assertion of
self-will and his contentment when
he is happy and pleased; but we
know also his fits of downright
naughtiness, which are premonitory


symptoms of that which is in him by
nature, and which will in the future
develop into the spirit of rebellion
and lawlessness. Happy the child
blest with parents who can read each
mood, and act accordingly.
If “Cleon” does not like the theo-
logical term “Original Sin,” I will
speak of the subject under another
name, “Heredity.” Like begets like,
and imperfection cannot produce per-
fection. “The fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the children’s teeth
are set on edge.” God visits the sins
of fathers upon their children to the
third or fourth generation. lam told
that physiology has reached a state of
verification of this last truth in the
fact that defects of mind and body
can be eliminated in a family after
three or four generations of healthy
marriages. I give one more quota-
tion from Professor James :—“The
completest religions would seem to be
those in which the pessimistic ele-
ments are best developed. Buddhism,
of course, and Christianity are the
best known to us of these. They are
essentially religions of deliverance;
the man must die to an unreal life be-
fore he can be born into the real
life.”
Also a statement by Dr. Church,
late Dean of St. Paul’s, London :
“The fact of what is meant by orig-
inal sin is as mysterious and inexpli-
cable as the origin of evil, but it is
obviously as much a fact. There is a
fault and vice in the race which,
given time, as surely develops into
actual sin as one physical constitution,
given at birth, does into sickness and
physical death. We are obliged by
facts and Scripture to acknowledge
sinfulness and sin.”—Yours, etc.,
H. L. MELBOURNE.
Bishopscourt, East Melbourne,
21 st March.
Third Letter published March 27th.
WHY ARE THE CHURCHES
NEGLECTED?
To the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir,- —The above was the subject of
the letter which you did me the favor
of publishing in your last Saturday’s
issue. In that communication I criti-
cised certain statements made upon
this subject by Archbishop Clarke in
his Lenten sermon. The rev. gentle-
man has honoured me with what pur-
ports to be a reply. Instead, however,
of dealing with my criticisms he
starts a wide theological discussion
upon “Sin as a Defect of Our Na-
ture,” a subject far too extensive to be
dealt with in the space you can af-
ford.
Coming back to the sermon which
gave rise to my former letter, it now
appears that when the Archbishop in
that sermon spoke of our being all
“born in sin,” he was not referring
to the results of the “fall of man,”
as universally understood, but was
dealing with an entirely different sub-
ject— a new doctrine, according to
Gifford. It is a pity he failed, at
least as far as the published report
of his sermon informs us, to tell his
audience that when he used the fami-
liar term “born in sin” he did not
mean what 999 out of every 1000 per-
sons understand it to mean' —a curse
and a doom, which can only be re-
moved and escaped from by faith in
the atoning sacrifice of the Son of
God. In this case it appears, how-
ever, that the preacher referred merely
to the inherited defects of mind and
body, which can be “eliminated by
three or four generations of healthy
marriages.” With such a creed I have
no concern in this connection.
The doctrine of original sin, or
original depravity, as taught to me in
my youth, was based upon the apple
story in the garden of Eden, as re-
lated in Genesis, and on that story
all the dogmas and doctrines of the
church have been built. Geological
research and the theory of evolution
have effectually proved that story to
be a myth, without the shadow of
foundation in fact. With the collapse
of the foundation the whole super-
structure of scholastic subtleties,
falsely called Christianity, falls in
ruin to the ground.


The following quotation from W.
R. Greg’s “Creed of Christendom”
puts the case fairly, forcibly and
fully : —“Christianity was not in its
origin a series of sententious proposi-
tions, nor a code of laws, nor a
system of doctrine, nor a ‘scheme’ of
salvation. The very phrase ‘scheme
of salvation,’ as applied to Christian-
ity, strikes us as offensive. A scheme
is a contrivance for attaining an ob-
ject or getting out of a difficulty ; and
in the popular orthodox view the
Christian dispensation is, in plain
words, a contrivance concocted be-
tween God and His Son (or, as we
should say, between the Creator of
all worlds and Jesus of Nazareth, ‘a
man of sorrows and acquainted with
grief’) for enabling the human race to
escape from a doom and a curse
which certain scholastic theologions
fancy (as an inference from particu-
lar texts of Scripture) to have been in
some way incurred, either from the
offences of each individual or from
the offence of a remote ancestor. The
‘scheme’ first asumes that the original
sin of our first parents (to say noth-
ing of our own) cannot be forgiven,
nor the taint inherited by their inno-
cent descendants wiped out, without
the rigid exaction of a penalty (‘dam-
nation,’ eternal fire or the like) alto-
gether disproportioned to the offence
—that the attributes of the Deity im-
ply and involve this ‘cannot.’ Then,
since this doom is too horrible, and
the doctrine laid down in the above
assumption too repellent, alike in its
basis and its consequences, to be en-
dured or accepted, the ‘scheme’ then
imagines the only Son of God (one
hour’s pain of whom, as a partaker
of the Divine nature, is an equivalent
to the eternal sufferings of all human
beings) agreeing to bear this doom in-
stead of the myriads of the offending
race. An impossible debt is first in-
vented, necessitating the invention of
an inconceivable coin in which to pay
it. A God is imagined bent on a de-
sign and entertaining sentiments
which it seems simple blasphemy and
contradiction to ascribe to the Father
in heaven, whom Jesus of Nazareth
came to reveal to us —and then He is
represented as abandoning that design
in consequence of a sacrifice in which
it is impossible to recognise one gleam
of appropriateness or of human
equity. What looks very like a legal
fiction, purely gratuitous, is got rid
of by what looks very like a legal
chicanery, purely fanciful. To use a
terse simile of Macaulay, the ‘scheme’
resembles nothing so much as a
forged bond with a forged release en
dorsed on the back of it.’ ”
The people are rapidly becoming
acquainted with such writings as
these, and in proportion to such ac-
quaintance are refusing to accept the
old doctrines of the church, or to be-
lieve in the preachers who still uphold
them. The churches, therefore, are
rapidly becoming empty, and the
preachers despised. This state of
things will not be altered until the
leaders in the theological world face
these facts, and deal with them ac-
cordingly, instead of ignoring them as
they are now doing.—Yours, etc.,
CLEON.
Essendon, 22nd March.
Fourth Letter published March 29th.
SIN AS DEFECT OF OUR
NATURE.
To the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir, —In my reply to “Cleon’s”
first letter I set down a summary of
his statements, and showed that one
of these to which he objected, viz.,
the fact that man is born in sin, is
based upon reason and facts. When
“Cleon” speaks of “a new doctrine
according to Gifford,” he does not
seem to be aware that the Gifford
Lectures were founded in Edinburgh
and elsewhere by Lord Gifford for
“promoting, advancing, teaching and
diffusing the study of natural theo-
logy.” The lecturers have not been
theologians, but the most eminent
scientists, historians, philosophers and
teachers of morals to be found in the
British Isles and America. This in-
valuable series of lectures deals only


incidentally with Christian teaching,
though much confirmation of it is to
be found in these books, and the sub-
ject of the depravity of human nature
meets with frequent recognition.
I do not know that geological re-
search has anything to do with the
moral questions raised in the Story of
the Fall. This research has taught
us much about the antiquity of the
human race, and has given us some
insight into the conditions of primi-
tive civilisation.
Evolution has established itself as
a method of divine working and a
law of human progress. The anti-
quities of Egypt, Assyria and Baby-
lon, as well as the records of the
Jewish people, show an evolution in
civilisation and morals, and a grad-
ual advance through the ages in men’s
knowledge of the world and his con-
ception of the workings of the uni-
verse in which he lives. It has not
proved anything beyond the fact of
the acknowledged progress of human
thought and conduct.
The early chapters of Genesis con-
tain definite statements which some
theories of evolution have denied, but
these theories are constantly varying,
and their deductions are inferences
from facts which men variously inter-
pret. The foundation facts of Chris-
tian teaching are found in the Book
of Genesis, and these proclaim that
man is made in the image of God
that God intended him for, and made
him capable of, living a life of obedi-
ence to his Creator, which life al-
ways brings peace, happiness and the
realisation of every power of his na-
ture. Further, man in the exercise
of his free will rebelled, and chose
the evil and refused the good.
“Cleon” thinks that he can dispose
of the story of Eden by calling it a
“myth.’ ” Does he not know that
the Greek word “myth” may repre-
sent something eternally true.
Whether, however, a “myth” or not,
and there is nothing in the Old Testa-
ment corresponding to the classical
myth, the story of the Fall contains
the profoundest psychological truth,
and the simplicity of its language is
equally adapted to the childhood of
the race and to the maturity of human
thought in the present century. In
exact detail this story corresponds
with our daily experience, and repro-
duces minutely the course and conse-
quence of every act of sin. It shows
us the physical and spiritual desires
in man responding to the suggestion
of temptation from a spiritual power
of evil. It represents sin as a thing
to be desired, to make us wise; God’s
laws, which are holy and just and
good, as limitations upon our free-
dom. It shows the shame and hiding
ourselves from God which follows
upon sin, and the inevitable seeking
us out by God with the question,
Where art thou? It exhibits men’s
miserable excuses for wrongdoing,
when they blame anyone any anything
but themselves, and the banishment
from God which follows upon rebel-
lion against Him. These are the
very foundations of Christianity, and
they stand firm to-day on the rock of
reason and fact.
Sir Oliver Lodge has drawn up a
catechism upon “The substance of
Faith Allied with Science,” in which
he writes:—“Sin is the deliberate
and wilful act of a free agent who sees
the better and chooses the worse. The
essence of sin is error against light
and knowledge; sin is a disease.”
Again he writes : —“Our highest as-
pirations and longings for something
better are a sign that better things
exist. It is not given to the creature
to exceed the Creator in imagination
or in goodness.” To these aspirations
and longings Christianity even makes
its appeal. Let me quote Sir Oliver
Lodge once more: —“Vicarious sin is
a legal fiction; so is vicarious punish-
ment ; vicarious, suffering is a reality.
The mother of a ne’er-do-well knows
it; it is undergone by the children of
vicious parents; the highest souls have
felt it on behalf of the race of man;
but it is not artificial, or imputed suf-
fering, it is genuine and real, and ex-
perience shows that it can have a re-
deeming virtue.” One word in this


quotation requires comment. Suffer-
ing is punishment to the innocent, and
the sight of suffering innocence must
sooner or later melt the hardest heart.
The greatest act of suffering and
sacrifice is that full and perfect one
which the Divine Jesus suffered and
offered on the Cross, and this we
preach, appealing to every instinct of
justice and love and holiness in our
hearers. “Cleon’s” extract from W.
R. Greg’s “Creed of Christianity,”
published in 1851, and written, I un-
derstand, by a Unitarian, deals with
a supposed “scheme of salvation”
rather than with the reality of it, and
so far from stating Christian teaching
“fairly, forcibly and fully,” is noth-
ing less than a travesty of that teach-
ing.
The natural tendency of the human
heart to selfishness and every form of
sin is one of the most incontrovertible
facts of our nature. It is there in
earliest childhood, and, as even good
men know, is present as long as life
endures. I am not concerned to de-
fend every extravagant doctrine or
fantastic interpretation, but, whether
in terms of evolution or not, the
thing is always there, and always
true. —Yours, etc..
H. L. MELBOURNE.
Bishop’s Court, Melbourne, 27th
March.
Fifth Letter, published April 2nd.
WHY ARE THE CHURCHES
NEGLECTED ?
To the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir, —His Grace the Archbishop
again evades the real issue, which the
above heading plainly sets out, and
prolongs the discussion of an entirely
different subject, which it is useless to
discuss at all at the present stage of
our correspondence. In support
of this assertion it is only necessary
for me to point out that before any
such a discussion be entered upon,
it would be requisite to discuss and
determine the preliminary question
whether it is possible for man to sin
against God, a question answered by
many in the negative. If God made
man, they say, God is responsible for
man’s acts. These issues are far too
wide to be discussed in your columns,
at least, so I imagine. I will leave
them, therefore, and as shortly as
possible reply to several other matters
introduced by my critic.
In his former letter, the reverend
gentleman propounded a new theory
of the doctrine of original sin, and in
support of that theory quoted Pro-
fessor Gifford. In referring to that
new theory, I spoke of it as a “new
doctrine, according to Gifford.” This
appears to have somewhat annoyed my
correspondent, as he altogether ig-
nores the only important matter to be
considered —the “new doctrine”—and
launches out upon a eulogism upon
Lord Gifford, Gifford lectures and lec-
turers, and speculations regarding my
knowledge of the same. I would re-
spectfully submit that this is all be-
side the mark, and in order to centre
attention upon the doctrine itself, I
will call it a new doctrine, according
to Clarke.
It may be quite true, as his Grace
asserts, that he does not know that
geological research has anything to do
with the moral questions raised in the
“Story of the Fall.” I have not said
that it has. What I say is this, that
geological research has proved that
the story of creation, and the story of
the fall, as given in Genesis, are ab-
solutely untrue, and that consequently
the whole superstructure of so-called
Christian theology and doctrine, which
through successive centuries has been
erected thereon, crumbled into dust
and ruin. •
The paragraph in which reference
is made to evolution is just on a par
with the tactics of all Christian apolo-
gists. The church opposed, ridiculed,
and damned the theory, until, in spite
of all it could do, it was accepted by
all scientists and thinkers. When that
stage was reached, the church turned
round and accepted the theory “as a
method of Divine working.” But ac-
cepting it even in this belated fashion,
how can it believe in the fall ? When


did man fall? Was it before nr atler
he ceased to be a monkey ? Was it
in the stone age, the bronze age, or
the iron age? There never was any
fall. Evolution proves that so far
from having fallen man has constantly,
but slowly, risen.
The Archbishop next finds fault
with my use of the word “myth” as
applied to the story of the garden of
Eden. This is a matter which can
easily be remedied. Some Christian
apologists call it an allegory, others
use the definition of legend or fable,
either of which terms we are willing
to accept. It matters not in the least
which of these words may be used to
define the character of that story, as
long as the vital fact is clearly recog-
nised, and constantly remembered
that the story is not historical, that it
is not a divine revelation, and that it
is not to be believed. In support of
this view of the case I venture to
make the following quotations:—
From. “Our Sun God,” by Mr. J. D.
Parsons, I can take the following;.—
“To commence with, it is well known
to those acquainted with the remains
of Assyrian and Babylonian civilisa-
tions that the stories of the creation,
the temptation, the fall, the deluge,
and the confusion tongues, were the
common property of the Babylonians
centuries before the date the alleged
exodus under Moses. Even the word
Sabbath is Babylonian; and the ob-
servance of the seventh day as a
Sabbath, or day of rest, by the Ac-
cadians thousands of years before Ab-
raham or Adam himself could have
been bom or created, is admitted by,
amongst others, the Bishop of Man-
chester” (a predecessor, in this city,
of his Grace’sil
From that bishop I quote as fol-
lows: “Who does not see that such
facts as these compel us to remodel
our whole idea of the past, and that
in particular to affirm that the Sab-
batical institution originated in the
time of Moses, 3500 years after it is
probable that it existed in Chaldaea,
is an impossibility, no matter how
many fathers of the church have as-
serted it. Facts cannot be dismissed
like theories.”
From Professor Sayce’s “Ancient
Empires of the East,” I quote the
following;—“With the deluge the
mythical history of Babylonia takes a
new departure. From this event to
the Persian conquest was a period of
36,000 years. Xisuthros, with his
family and friends, alone survived the
waters, which drowned the rest of
mankind for their sins. He had been
ordered by the gods to build a ship,
to pitch it within and without, and to
stock it with animals of every species.
Xisuthros sent out first a dove,
then a swallow, and lastly a raven to
discover whether the earth was dry;
the dove and the swallow returned to
the ship, and it was only when the
raven flew away that the rescued hero
ventured to leave his ark.”
My next and last quotation is from
Dean Farrar, who' says:—“The man-
ner in which the Higher criticism has
slowly and surely made its victorious
progress in spite of the most deter-
mined and exacerbated opposition is
a strong argument in its favour. It
is exactly analogous to the way in
which the truths of astronomy and
geology have triumphed over universal
opposition. They were once anathe-
matised as ‘infidel’; they are now ac-
cepted as axiomatic. I cannot name
a single student or professor of any
eminence in Great Britain who does
not accept, with more or less modifi-
cation, the main conclusions of the
German school of critics.”
What Sir Oliver Lodge says upon
the question of sin does not matter
much to anybody, as it is well known
that he is one of the small, and fast
dying out, party of scientists who aim
at reconciling science and clericalism.
The last point in the Archbishop’s
letter which requires notice is his
method of dealing with W. R. Greg
and my quotation from his work.
What does it matter whether that
writer was a Unitarian or a Trini-
tarian? or what difference does it
make whether the book was published
in 1851 or whether it was published


last month? The only question re-
garding it is whether the quotation I
made from it be a correct representa-
tion of the teachings of the church
(that is, the whole Protestant church),
upon what is called Christianity? My
critic denies that it is a truthful repre-
sentation of Christian teachings. I,
on the other hand, assert without fear
of refutation that it is an absolutely
true presentation of Christian doc-
trine as expounded, at any rate, by
every evangelical denomination. I
appeal to my own experience, and to
the creeds of all such sections of the
church, and to the experience of every
adherent of such denominations. His
Grace, I know, from his direct ad-
mission does not teach these doctrines
in their completeness, as his theory
of original sin differs entirely from
that taught by all these denomina-
tions. His theory is that three or four
generations of healthy marriages are
sufficient to eliminate the inborn evil.
But then, I may be allowed to point
out, that it is not the theories and
teaching of one here and there which
constitute the “creed of Christendom,”
but the aggregate teaching of the
Christian church everywhere. This is
now, and has been for many genera-
tions, what W. R. Greg has stated,
and what we know to be the fact, from
our own experience.
I now repeat the question, with
which I started —Why are the
churches neglected ? Because the
people have ceased to believe in the
“Creed of Christendom” inexact pro-
portion to their knowledge of the
truths of science, and have no faith in
teachers like the Archbishop, who
water down their creed in the vain at-
tempt to make it agree with its old
enemy, science. Further, the more
the history of the past of all churches,
more especially State churches, be-
comes known to the masses, the more it
becomes evident to those masses that
they, the churches, have always been,
and still are, inimical to the interests
of the people. The rich support such
churches, while ignoring their teach-
ing, for two objects, namely-—first,
to secure for themselves their enor-
mous revenues; second, to make use
of them as a kind of moral police, to
keep the masses subject and subser-
vient, so that they, the rich, may be
left in undisturbed possession of their
wealth and privileges. —Yours, etc.,
CLEON.
Essendon, 29th March.
The Archbishop did not attempt to
reply to this letter. Another corres-
pondent took his place, John Urqu-
hart, to wit.
Sixth Letter, published April 7th.
WHY ARE THE CHURCHES
NEGLECTED?
To the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir, —When a man undertakes to
discuss so grave a question as the
above, he is supposed to write under
a due sense of his responsibility for
his statements. But how any man, even
with the slightest smattering of
science, can permit himself to make
the astounding assertions published
over the name of your correspondent
“ Cleon,” I fail to understand. He
speaks of Darwinism as having been
“accepted by all scientists and
thinkers.” That was never true at
any time; it is not true now. For the
science of to-day Darwin’s Darwinism
is dead, and it is the opponents of it,
and not its apostles and prophets, who
have been justified by further obser-
vation and discovery.
He is equally wrong when he as-
serts “ that geological research has
proved that the story of Creation and
the story of the Fall, as given in
Genesis, are absolutely untrue.” Re-
cent science has increasingly justified
the opening words of the Bible, and
the objections which used to be urged
against them can no longer be adduced
by any man who is acquainted with
the facts. This has, indeed, long
been evident to scientists. Even
Haeckel, in his History of Creation,
has said :—“ We can . . . bestow
our just and sincere admiration on the
Jewish Lawgiver’s grand insight into


nature.” When Huxley attempted to
crush Gladstone’s defence of the First
Chapter of Genesis, he declared in
the “ Nineteenth Century ” that there
was no one to whose authority as a
geologist he was more ready to bow
than to that of Professor Dana. The
controversy was brought to Dana’s no-
tice, and his reply, that in all essen-
tial points he was at one with Mr.
Gladstone, and that in his belief there
was no conflict between Genesis and
science, was afterwards published in
the same journal.
But it would seem that “ Cleon ”
cannot be trusted to interpret facts
even when he has got hold of them.
He does not see that the discovery
that the seven-day week and the
seventh day Sabbath were institutions
of ancient Babylonia is -wholly con-
firmatory of the Bible. He forgets
that the Scripture declares that the
seventh day rest was the first institu-
tion possessed by man; and he is
equally oblivious of the fact that the
very form of the Fourth Command-
ment (“ Remember the Sabbath day
to keep it holy ”) shows that it was a
pre-Mosaic institution.
Among all his quotations there is
only one from a genuine authority,
and him he misunderstands. I might
show how recent discovery has proved
the utterly historical character of the
Scriptures; but the above will satisfy
your readers that the statements of
“Cleon” and his school must be
taken with something more than the
proverbial grain of salt.—Yours, etc.,
JOHN URQUHART.
3rd April.
(Seventh letter published April 12th.)
WHY ARE THE CHURCHES
NEGLECTED ?
To the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir, —It would appear that my
courteous critic, his Grace the Arch-
bishop, has abandoned the field in
despair, finding the position he had
taken up utterly untenable. In so do-
ing I think he has displayed a want
of tactics, seeing that his place has
been assumed by another champion, a
regular Boanerges, a hot headed, rash
subaltern who cannot have the least
chance of victory where his general
has failed. This new “ Daniel come
to judgment ” fails to understand how
I can speak of Darwinism as having
been accepted by all scientists and
thinkers. I beg his pardon, I am
sure. When I made that statement, I
was in ignorance of my critic’s exis-
tence. With his permision I will ex-
clude him from my assertion. That
Darwinism, or rather evolutionism,
has been accepted by all scientists and
thinkers, with the exception of Mr.
John Urquhart, is so well known and
so fully recognised that it is not neces-
sary to enforce the assertion by argu-
ment, or authorities. There are, how-
ever, so many “ John Urquharts ” in
the world that I will give just one
quotation from an author accepted—
nay, paraded—by my instructor as an
authority whose pronouncement is
finai. In his greatest work, “ The
Riddle of the Universe,” Haeckel
says ; —“ It is true that there were
philosophers who spoke of the evolu-
tion of things 1000 years ago; but
the recognition that such a law dom-
inates the entire universe, and that the
world is nothing else than an eternal
‘ evolution of substance,’ is a fruit of
the nineteenth century. It was not un-
til the second half of this century that
it attained to perfect clearness and a
universal application. The immortal
merit of establishing the doctrine be-
longs to the great scientist Charles
Darwin.”
This new “ defender of the faith ”
assures us that “ recent science has in-
creasingly justified the opening words
of the Bible. ’ ’ This is so very vague
an assertion, without an atom of proof,
that it has no claim to the attention,
or belief, of even the most simple-
minded Bible enthusiast. Haeckel is
a recent scientist, and he has the merit
of being approved by John Urquhart.
On the question of man’s descent, he
says : —“ The most important of all
the recent palaeontological discoveries


which have served to elucidate the ori-
gin of the placentals relate to our
own stem, the legion of primates. . .
The most famous and most interesting
of these discoveries is the fossil ape-
man of Java, . . . found by a Dutch
military doctor, Eugen Dubois, in
1894. It is, in truth, the much-sought
“ missing link,” supposed to be want-
ing in the chain of primates, which
stretches unbroken from the lowest
catarrhinoe to the highest developed
man. . . . Thus, by the discovery of
this fossil man-monkey of Java, the
descent of man from the ape has be-
come just as clear and certain from the
palaeontological side as it was pre-
viously from the evidence of compara-
tive anatomy and ontogeny. We now
have all the principal documents
which tell the history of our race.” If
my censor has any authority, of equal
reputation and of more recent date,
which refutes these facts and proves
the mythical story of Genesis a real-
ity, now is the time for its produc-
tion.
The last two paragraphs in his let-
ter are too puerile to warrant any no-
tice. The real question in this con-
troversy stands at the head of this let-
ter. His Grace the Archbishop de-
clared in a recent sermon that the an-
swer to that question was to be found
in the fact that the doctrine “ that
everyone was by nature born in sin ”
has been kept in the background. In
criticism of that statement I asked his
Grace several pertinent questions, none
of which have been answered, either
by the Archbishop or his henchman.
As an answer to the statement of his
Grace’s, I ventured to put forward
several other reasons,' which to me
appeared more conclusive, as to why
the churches are neglected, neither of
which have been refuted, and which
therefore the public may fairly con-
clude are unanswerable. To place
this fact beyond dispute, I will make
a further quotation from John Urqu-
hart’s chosen authority, Haeckel.
“ Religious faith,” he says, “ always
means belief in a miracle, and as such
is in hopeless contradiction with the
natural faith of reason. In opposi-
tion to reason it postulates superna-
tural agencies, and therefore may be
justly called superstition. . . . The
Christian belief in creation, the Trin-
ity, the inftnaculate conception, the re-
demption, the resurrection and ascen-
sion of Christ, and so forth, is just as
purely imaginative as the belief in the
various dogmas of the Mahometan,
Mosaic, Buddhistic and Brahmanic re-
ligions, and is just as incapable of re-
conciliation with a rational knowledge
of nature. . . . All these different
forms of faith are equally false and
irrational, mere creatures of poetic
fancy and uncritical tradition. . . .
The incalculable injury which irra-
tional superstition has done to credu-
lous humanity is conspicuously re-
vealed in the ceaseless conflict of con-
fessions of faith. Of all the wars
which nations have waged against each
other, the religious wars have been the
bloodiest. . . . Think of the millions
who have lost their lives in Christian
persecutions, in the religious conflicts
of Islam and the Reformation, by the
Inquisition, and under the charge of
witchcraft. . . . The official confes-
sion of faith becomes most pernicious
of all when it is associated with the
political aims of a modern State, and
is enforced as 1 religious instruction ’
in our schools. The child’s mind is
thus early diverted from the pursuit
of truth, and impregnated with super-
stition. Every friend of humanity
should do all in his power to promote
unsectarian schools as one of the most
valuable institutions of the modern
State.”
Such teachings and such teachers
as these are becoming more widely
known and appreciated by the masses,
and just in proportion as they become
known are the churches neglected and
ecclesiasticism rejected. All such im-
pudent assumptions as are patent in
John Urquhart’s contribution to this
correspondence only hasten the time
when the churches will be empty of su-
perstition and its teachers, and truth


shall be at last victorious.—Yours,
etc.,
CLEON.
Essendon, April yth.
At this stage of the controversy an-
other correspondent appeared upon the
scene. His contribution is the eighth
letter, also published April 12th.
To the Editor of the “ Age.”
Sir, —Mr. Urquhart asserts that
“ Darwin’s Darwinism is dead.” For
the sake of argument only, let us grant
that it is so, and that the great doc-
trine of natural selection has passed
to the limbo of exploded hvpotheses.
What follows? Would the doctrine
of organic evolution be much affected ?
Let Herbert Spencer reply :—“ Mr.
Darwin’s doctrine of natural selection
and the doctrine of organic evolution
are, by most people, unhesitatingly
supposed to be one and the same
thing.” After showing the difference,
he goes on to say : “ Whether it were
shown that natural selection is inop-
erative, or whether it were shown that
though a partial cause it is inadequate
to explain all the facts (the inheri-
tance of functionally wrought modifi-
cations being a co-operative cause);
or whether it were shown that no cause
hitherto alleged is adequate; the gen-
eral doctrine that organisms of all
kinds have arisen by the continual su-
perposing of modifications upon modi-
fications would maintain its place,
though it would not be fortified so
strongly.” Mr. Urquhart, however,
in common with the immense majority
of men, assumes that the hypothesis
of organic evolution must stand or fall
with its causal agencies. After hav-
ing contemplated the observed facts
which indirectly support the hypothe-
sis of evolution, he (Spencer) asks for
the observed facts which indirectly
support the hypothesis of special crea-
tion. “ There are none. Neither in
the air, nor on the earth, nor in the
water, do we find anything implying
special creation. Nay, indeed, not
only do we see no facts favouring the
supposition, but we see a world of
facts conflicting with it. From hour
to hour incidents showing the unifor-
mity of law and the constant relations
of causes and effects generate in us
convictions so incongruous with it as
to produce instant disbelief of an al-
leged special creation now occurring.
Should anyone say that, having taken
into his room a bowl containing no-
thing but clear water, he saw a fish
suddenly appear in it; or should he
say that he had seen near the ground
a mass of cloud which, contracting
and getting more dense, assumed the
form of an unknown animal; what
comment should we make ? Simply
that he was either deluding himself
or trying to delude us. We should
show by our ridicule that the idea of a
special creation, when brought dis-
tinctly before us by alleged cases, is
too absurd to be entertained.” See,
then, the antithesis. While the hypo-
thesis of organic evolution is indi-
rectly supported by great masses of
observed facts, the hypothesis of spe-
cial creation is not only without in-
direct support from observed facts,
but is indirectly contradicted by the
enormous accumulation of observed
facts constituting our daily experi-
ence.
“ The Cosmos as a whole and all its
parts has reached its present state,
either supernaturally or naturally, and
if naturally, then, not living things
only, but all other things have come
naturally to be what they are. A doc-
trine which alleges evolution for the
animate world and assumes creation
of the inanimate world is absurd.”
“ With the authority of science be-
coming greater, contrast now the op-
posed authority. Have the proposi-
tions constituting current theology
been rendered more certain with the
passage of time and the advance of
knowledge, or has the contrary hap-
pened ? Assyrian and Egyptian re-
cords, discovered of late years, have,
indeed, served to confirm certain state-
ments contained in the Bible, and so
have tended to verify the natural part
of the Hebrew story. But this yields


no more reason for accepting its su-
pernatural part than does proof that
there occurred the feuds and conquests
described in the Norse sagas yield rea-
son for believing in Thor and Odin.
Apart, however, from historic state-
ments, thus proved true, investiga-
tions, scientific and literary, have
served more and more to disprove, or
to make doubtful, those parts of the
biblical narrative which constitute its
theology. It needs but to contrast
past confidence in them with present
doubts and disbeliefs to see that state-
ments of this class have not, like
those of science, become gradually
clearer and more certain, but the re-
verse. Nor is confidence increased
when we ask whether its guidance has
been successful. After nearly two
thousand years of Christian teaching
and discipline, how near are we to
that ideal life which Christian leading
was to bring us to? What must we
think of the sentiment implied in the
saying of a glorified prince, repeated
by a popular emperor, lauding “blood
and iron—a remedy which never
fails?” What restraint do we find
upon the passion of international re-
venge—revenge by the great mass in-
sisted upon as a duty? How much
moralisation can we trace in the con-
trast between the practice of savages,
whose maxim in their inter-tribal
feuds is, “ Life for life,” and the
practice of Christian nations, who in
their dealings with weak peoples take
as their maxim, “For one life many
lives?” Towards the foretold state
when swords shall be beaten into
ploughshares, how much have we pro-
gressed, now that there exists bigger
armies than ever existed before? Very
curious it is to observe how a doc-
trine which Mr. Darwin has spent a
life in elaborating, and which has
been under examination and discus-
sion by the whole biological world for
a generation, has suddenly been dis-
covered to be false by a certain few
supernaturalists. Yet the discovery
has not made the slightest impression
upon the present high priests of evo-
lution ; a serene disregard showing
that its irrelevance is tacitly recog-
nised by all.—Yours, etc.,
DEMOCRITUS.
April 7th.
Ninth Letter, published April 15th.
WHY ARE THE CHURCHES
NEGLECTED?
To the Editor of the “ Age.”
Sir, —“Democritus” will kindly
excuse me. I entered upon this cor-
respondence solely because of
“Cleon’s” self-confident ignorance
and stupendous misstatements. He
writes in the name of scienee, and
nevertheless acknowledges that he
knows nothing of the history of scien-
tific opinion regarding Darwinism. He
confesses to your readers that, when
he declared that Darwinism “ was ac-
cepted by all scientists and thinkers,”
he was ignorant of John Urquhart’s
existence. But really he w r as ignorant
of his own ignorance. Has he never
heard of Dr. Etheridge, of the Brit-
ish Museum, or of his well-known
pronouncement against evolution? “In
all this great museum,” he said,
“ there is not a particle of evidence
of transmutation of species. Nine-
tenths of the talk of evolutionists is
sheer nonsense, not founded on obser-
vation and wholly unsupported by
fact. This museum is full of proofs
of the utter falsity of their views.”
Is “ Cleon ” utterly ignorant also of
the existence of my friend Professor
Lionel S. Beale, the foremost biolo-
gist of the day? Not only has he
never accepted Darwinism, but he de-
clares that there is not a shadow of
proof that man ever descended from
an ape. His words, delivered upon a
noteworthy occasion, were these: —
“ The idea of any relation having been
established between the non-living and
the living by a gradual advance from
lifeless matter to the lowest forms of
life, and so onward to the higher and
more complex, has not the slightest
evidence from the facts of any section
of living nature of which anything is
known. There is no evidence that


man has descended from, or is, or
was, in any way specially related to,
any other organism in nature through
evolution or by any other process. In
support of all naturalistic conjectures
concerning man’s origin, there is not
at this time a shadow of scientific evi-
dence.”
But to chronicle the names and
opinions of the scientists who have re-
pudiated Darwinism would require a
volume. A concluding word or two
on the attitude of the German scien-
tists must suffice. Where has “Cleon”
been that he has never heard of Vir-
chow, of Berlin, the greatest physiolo-
gist and chemist of his time? As a
young man he was an ardent follower
of Haeckel. But fuller knowledge
corrected a mistake which he was hon-
est and manly enough to confess.
Speaking of evolution on a great oc-
casion, he said :—“ It is all nonsense.
It cannot be proved by science that
man descends from the ape or from
any other animal. Since the announce-
ment of the theory, all real scientific
knowledge has proceeded in the op-
posite direction.” One of the most
determined opponents of evolution is
Professor Fleischmann, of Erlangen,
who declares that Darwinism “is not
the result of scientific research, but
purely the product of imagination.”
It is clear, too, that “ Cleon ” is not
a thorough reader even of Haeckel,
or he would have saved himself from
this exposure. In one of his more re-
cent utterances Professor Haeckel
mentions a number of leading German
scientists, who not only oppose him,
but who actually denounce his theory
as “ a disgrace to the philosophy of
Germany,” and accuse him and his
school of “ playing false with the
public and with the natural sciences.”
The present state of scientific opinion
has extorted from him the following
confession :—“ Most modern investi-
gators of science have come to the con-
clusion that the doctrine of evolution,
and particularly Darwinism, is an er-
ror and cannot be maintained.”
I regret that I have now to com-
plain of something worse than ignor-
ance. “ Cleon ” is guilty of gross
and persistent misrepresentation.
When I said that “ even Haeckel ”
had expressed his admiration for “the
grand insight into nature” shown by
Moses, would a child ten years old
have supposed that I acknowledged
Haeckel as an authority ? Was it
within the bounds of common sense or
common decorum to represent me,
when taking advantage of Haeckel’s
admission, as proclaiming him an
oracle to whose every word mankind
must bow? Yet such are “ Cleon’s ”
tactics and his sole justification for
quoting from- Haeckel’s pages the rub-
bish which forms half his letter !
I am leaving Melbourne for a num-
,ber of weeks,, and this second letter
must, in the meantime, be my last.
Let me commend your correspondents
to place the stories of “ the Java man-
monkey,” etc., by the side of the
marvellous history of “ Jack and the
bean-stalk.” Science believes quite as
little in the former as in the latter.
“ Cleon ” calls for proofs that inves-
tigation has confirmed the historical
character of Old Testament Scrip-
ture, as well as the scientific accuracy
of the first chapter of Genesis. I have
fully furnished the public with proofs
of both in works which I commend to
“Cleon’s” attention. The first is
“The New Biblical Guide” (8 vols.),
and “The Bible and How to Read
It” (4 vols.). Let me also advise him
to read the appendix to Professor
Dana’s great “ Manual of Geology;”
the works of another highly distin-
guished geologist, Sir J. W. Dawson,
of Professor Sayce, of Dr. Pinches,
and of Professor Flinders Petrie. The
fact cannot be questioned that recent
research has established the historical
character of the Scripture in the judg-
ment of all who are entitled to ex-
press an opinion upon the subject.—
Yours, etc.,
JOHN URQUHART.
April 13th.


Tenth letter, published April 16th.
WHY ARE THE CHURCHES
NEGLECTED?
To the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir, —My critic, Mr. John Urqu-
hart, is quite wrong when he says that
I write in the name of science. No
claim to be a scientist has been made
by me. My object in writing has
been to obtain an answer to the ques-
tion which stands at the head of this
letter, and which, as far as I am con-
cerned, has been consistently and per-
sistently kept in the foreground dur-
ing this discussion. In support of my
answer to this question I have quoted
from various authors, scientists or
non-scientists indiscriminately. As 10
this, the main issue of this correspon-
dence, no answer has been made or
attempted either by the Archbishop
or his factotum.
On the outside question of the re-
spective number of acknowledged
authorities upon scientific conclusions
who repudiate the Bible story of the
Creation, and those who accept it,
there is no need to waste words or
space. In my last letter I gave a quo-
tation from Haeckel’s “ Riddle of the
Universe,” which was published in
1899, and I requested Mr. Urquhart
to produce any evidence of equal au-
thority and of more recent date- which
would confirm his statement “ that re-
cent science has increasingly justified
the opening words of the Bible.” In-
stead of producing any such evidence,
he characterises Haeckel’s work and
teaching as “rubbish.” For this defi-
nition of a great man’s life studies,
however, we have only the opinion of
Mr. LTquhart, which will hardly be
accepted as of much value when com-
pared with the following extract from
the preface to a later work of
Haeckel’s “The Wonders of Life,”
by the translater, Joseph M'Cabe:—
“Of Professor Haeckel’s eminence in
zoology it is unnecessary to speak.
Reckless as has been the attempt to
destroy his prestige with the unscien-
tific readers of this country, this has
not been called into question. There
was rather a tendency to say that his
authority on zoological questions was
so great that it could not extend far
beyond his peculiar province. One
cannot help noticing that, neverthe-
less, most of the critics of the ‘Riddle
of the Universe ’ fastened with a dis-
creet, if inconsistent, ardour upon
points in the work which were not
only not biological, but not even essen-
tial, to the general theory of the
work. . . . To his unchallenged
command of zoology he united a mas-
tery of botany and protistology; he is
equally at home in anatomy, physio-
logy, and embryology, and has a
large acquaintance with the facts of
palaeontology.” The public can
make its choice between this record
and Mr. Urquhart’s estimate. For my
part I have no hesitation in pinning
my faith to Joseph M'Cabe’s record.
Instead of producing a more recent
authority than Haeckel of 1899 to
support his statement, this author of
twelve volumes goes back to Vir-
chow, who, in 1856, said, “I am con-
vinced that I shall never find myself
compelled to deny the thesis of ‘ the
unity ’ of human nature ” —that is,
Haeckel’s theory. In 1877, he de-
nied that theory. Referring to this
fact, Haeckel in his work, “The
Wonders of Life,” published in 1904,
says : —“When he afterwards (subse-
quently to his removal to Berlin,
1856) devoted himself chiefly to poli-
tical and social questions, he lost
sight of the great advance made in
other branches of biology. He com-
pletely failed to appreciate its greatest
achievement —■ the establishment of
the science of evolution by Darwin.”
In any case, this German scientist and
others, such as Wundt, Baer, and Du
Bois-Raymond, are all Agnostics,
whatever their opinion upon Haeckel’s
monistic theory may be, and we are
assured by Haeckel himself “ that in
Germany the clerical writers call them
1 atheists.’ They lend no support
whatever to even the most advanced
and liberal form of theism.”
It would appear that in the estima-
tion of my opponent Haeckel, and


for that matter it may be assumed any
other writer, is an authority only when
he supports the case against me.
When he supports my argument what
he says is rubbish. This method of
conducting a controversy may com-
mend itself to a Christian apologist,
but not, I imagine, to an/one else.
As regards the scientific accuracy
of the first chapter of Genesis, the
position taken up by Mr. Urquhart is
too absurd to demand serious con-
sideration. If he believes either of
the two stories, or both of them, of
the Creation, the serpent, the tempta-
tion, the fall, the personal God walk-
ing, talking, and sewing in the gar-
den of Eden, to be true historical
facts, just as they are related in the
Bible, he is past redemption, and all
serious discussion is wasted upon him.
So there, as regards that issue, he
may be left.
On the issue as between these
fables or myths, and the record of
creation as revealed by the rocks, one
quotation must serve. In 1876 Hux-
ley delivered three lectures upon
Evolution, at New York. From the
first of these lectures the following ex-
tract is taken: —-“Let me now try to
state the effect of the circumstantial
evidence bearing upon the past history
of the earth, which is furnished with-
out the possibility of mistake, with no
chance of error as to its chief features,
by the stratified rocks. What we find
is that the great series of formations
represents a period of time of which
our human chronologies hardly afford
us a unit of measure. I will not pre-
tend to say how we ought to estimate
this time, in millions or in billions of
years. . . It is perfectly certain
that, at a comparatively recent period
of the world’s history—’the cretaceous
epoch—none of the great physical
features which at present mark the
surface of the globe existed. It is
certain that the Rocky Mountains
were not. It is certain that the Hima-
laya Mountains W'ere not. It is cer-
tain that the Alps and the Pyrenees
had no existence. The evidence is
of the plainest possible character, and
is simply this: —We find raised up
on the flanks of these mountains, ele-
vated by the forces of upheaval which
have given rise to them, masses of
cretaceous rock which formed the
bottom of the sea before these moun-
tains existed. It is therefore clear
that the elevatory forces which gave
rise to the mountains operated sub-
sequently to the cretaceous epoch.
. . . . The inspection of these
changes gives us no right to believe
that there has been any discontinuity
in natural processes. , . . That
there is no absolute break between
formation and formation, that there
has been no sudden disappearance of
all the forms of life and replacement
of them by others. ... So that
within the whole of the immense
period indicated by the fossiliferous
stratified rocks there is assuredly not
the slightest proof of any break in the
uniformity of Nature’s operations, no
indication that events have followed
other than a clear and ordinary se-
quence. That I say is the natural
and obvious teaching of the circum-
stantial evidence contained in the
stratified rocks. I leave you to con-
sider how far by any ingenuity of in-
terpretation, by any stretching of the
meaning of language, it can be
brought into harmony with the Mil-
tonic (Biblical) hypothesis.”
If Mr. Urquhart will accomplish
that task, with or without his twelve
volumes, he may safely reckon upon
an archbishopric as his reward. In
the meantime, the masses believe in
Huxley and Haeckel, and will not
go to the churches where the absur-
dities of Urquhart are taught as
truths. —Yours, Etc.,
CLEON.
Essendon, April 15th.
Eleventh Letter, published April 19th.
WHY ARE THE CHURCHES
NEGLECTED ?
To the Editor of the “Age.
Sir,—-I am no “factotum” of the
Archbishop, as “Cleon” declares in
his last letter, nor a “henchman” as


he dubs me in the former. Perhaps
the best reply is to put on record
my own speculations as to “Cleon’s”
pensonality. From certain indica-
tions I had concluded that he is the
barber’s assistant at Essendon; but
the combined volubility and persis-
tent illogicality of the last production
incline me to believe that “Cleon” is
no other than the barber’s better
half.
Giving ‘Cleon” the benefit of the
doubt, however, I shall still speak of
him in the masculine gender. He
now confesses that he is no scientist;
but his all too liberal use of the six-
penny editions of the Rationalist As-
sociation made that plain enough. I
need not follow him in his attempt
to belittle Virchow’s work during the
last 40 or 50 years of his life. These
were the very years which won for
him his world-wide fame. But let me
ask your readers to note the issue of
this controversy so far.
1. I showed that the fact (which he
misinterpreted against the Bible) that
the ancient Babylonians cherished as
one of their most sacred institutions
the seventh day Sabbath, confirmed
the Scripture statements. This was
instantly dropped by “Cleon” like a
hot coal, and no further reference has
been made to' it.
I challenged his statement that Dar-
winism had been “accepted by all
scientists and thinkers.” His reply
was a mocking acknowledgment of my
existence. I then produced my proofs
that at no time was that statement
true, and that its absurdity as a des-
cription of present opinion was shown
by Haeckel’s own confession. And
what now follows? A manly admis-
sion of error? By no means. No. 2
is dropped like No. 1, and “Cleon”
hurries off to seek a new point of
attack.
In reference to his denunciation of
the first chapter of Genesis as un-
scientific, I reminded him of a remark-
able incident in the Huxley-Gladstone
controversy in the “Nineteenth Cen-
tury.” There Huxley, not a geologist,
declared that he was ready to bow to
the authority of his friend, Professor
Dana. Dana, the greatest geologist of
the day, gave his decision, and it was
dead against Huxley and his hench-
man, “Cleon.” It was fully and
heartily in favour of the Bible. He
said that in all essential points he was
at one with Mr. Gladstone, and that
he believed that there was no con-
flict between Genesis and geology.
This fact “Cleon” has utterly ig-
nored. As if I had done nothing
whatever, he still presses for any ar-
gument in favour of the claims of
the first chapter in Genesis. This
may be magnificent, but it is not war.
Nevertheless I shall endeavour to
meet him. I referred him to the ap-
pendix to what Huxley called Dana’s
“great work”—his “Manual of
Geology.” There Dana expresses his
gratitude for the first chapter of
Genesis, and declares that it proved
two things—(l) that the world was
created, and (2) that the Bible is the
Word of God. There is no higher
geological authority than Dana’s.—
Yours, Etc.,
JOHN URQUHART.
Terang, April 16th.
Twelfth Letter, published April 21st.
WHY ARE THE CHURCHES
NEGLECTED ?
To the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir, —The first two paragraphs
of Mr. Urquhart’s letter of to-
day are so utterly beside the
subject in debate as to be unworthy
of notice. Regarding the question of
the Sabbath, which he refers to in
his third paragraph, I may inform
him that I refrained from noticing it
previously because the ground he took
up was so absurd that no one but
Mr. Urquhart himself would think it
required it any answer. The Sabbath
was observed in Babylon 3000 years
or more before it is said to have been
Divinely appointed, and revealed, to
the Jews. Mr. Urquhart says that the
Babylonian fact confirms the Bible
story of a Divine revelation.
Setting aside the very obvious


conclusion that what was, and
had been for at least 3000
years, in existence, needed no Divine
revelation for its establishment, we
are confronted with the fact that the
antecedent Babylonian Sabbath does
not in any way confirm the claim set
up in the Bible and taught by the
church, that the subsequent Jewish
Sabbath is a Divinely appointed insti-
tution. The most it can, by the ut-
most stretch of the imagination, be
said to confirm, is the historical fact
that the Jews kept a Sabbath just as
the Babylonians had been doing for
3000 years, although it is hard to see
even this connection. The brazen
attempt of John Urquhart to mislead
his readers into the belief that the
Babylonian Sabbath confirms the
theory of the inspiration, and conse-
quent infallibility, of the Bible is just
on a par with the tactics of all his
class. A Christian apologist who is
not a prevaricator is a rarity.
His next complaint, that my esti-
mate of the number of scientists and
thinkers who accept the theory of
evolution was wrong, is well founded
if my critic insists upon adhering to
the literal interpretation of my state-
ment. My statement was not literal,
however, but figurative; and for the
sake of the intelligence of my readers
I would fain hope that John Urquhart
is the only one of them who failed
to SO' understand it.
On the question of the unscientific
and unhistorical character of the first
chapter of Genesis, he complains that
I took no notice of his statement re
a verbal conflict on this issue between
Huxley, Gladstone, and Dana in the
“Nineteenth Century.” My reply to
this involved imbroglio was given in
a quotation from Huxley’s own words,
which words do not leave the shadow
of a doubt as to Huxley’s opinion of
the story of creation as recorded in
the Bible. That story he absolutely
and entirely rejected, and nothing that
Dana, or twenty Danas, can say to
the contrary can alter that fact in the
least. Sir Charles Lyell and Huxley
are known, followed and trusted upon
this question by thousands who never
heard of Dana outside of that maga-
zine article to which reference has
been made.
It is my turn now to criticise the
methods of my opponent. He,either
in ignorance or wilfully to mislead,
declares that science rejects the testi-
mony of the Java bones. The follow-
ing extract from S. Laing’s “Prob-
lems of the Future” will serve to
prove how unreliable this self-consti-
tuted authority is when one succeeds
in pinning him to a matter of fact.
Laing in his work has a chapter on
“The Missing Link,” and, after deal-
ing with the various discoveries of
human remains which have been
made in different quarters of the
globe, he deals with the Java dis-
coveries as follows: —“But a far
greater advance was made by the dis-
covery of a few fragments of what is
now' known as the Pithecantropus
erectus. In 1894, Dr. Eugene Dubois
found in Java the skull cap, a femur,
and two teeth of some man-like
animal. They were submitted to the
International Zoological Congress at
Leyden, and, although they naturally
gave rise to a heated discussion at
first, they are now' generally recog-
nised to be relics of some ancestral
form almost midway between man and
his Simian progenitors. . . Pro-
fessor Keabley, in the ‘Popular Sci-
ence Monthly’ (February, 1902), says:
—“These remains have been subjec-
ted to the strictest scientific scrutiny,
and pronounced genuine.” This, I
imagine, settles the issue without any
necessity to call upon “Jack and the
beanstalk.”
Anybody who has read Huxley’s
great work, “Man’s Place in Na-
ture,” can hardly refuse to accept this
conclusion in relation to man’s des-
cent from the ape. One or tw'O ex-
tracts from this remarkable book
must suffice. “It is only,” he tells
us, “in the later stages of develop-
ment that the young human being pre-
sents marked differences from the
young ape, while the latter departs
as much from the dog, in its develop


ment, as the man does. Startling as
the last assertion may appear to be,
it is demonstrably true, and it alone
appears to me sufficient to place be-
yond all doubt the structural unity of
man with the rest of the animal world,
and more particularly and closely with
the apes.” After a close and minute
comparison of the two structures—
man and the ape—he proceeds thus:
—“As if to demonstrate by a striking
example the impossibility of erecting
any cerebral barrier between man and
the apes, Nature has provided us in
the latter animals with an almost
complete series of gradations from
brains little higher than that of
a rodent to brains little lower
than that of man. And it is a
remarkable circumstance that though,
as far as our present knowledge ex-
tends, there is one true structural
break in the series of forms of Simian
brains, this hiatus does not lie be-
tween man and the man-like apes, but
between the lower and lowest
Simians.” In conclusion, he sums up
the whole argument as follows: —
“Thus, whatever system of organs
be studied, the comparison of their
modifications in the ape series leads
to one and the same result—that the
structural differences which separate
man from the gorilla and the chim-
panzee are not as great as those which
separate the gorilla from, the apes.”
Edward Clodd as late as last year,
in his preface to the sixpenny
edition of this work, says:—“Forty-
five years have passed since it ap-
peared. Not a statement therein has
needed any material qualification;
biology and psychology bring their
‘great cloud of witnesses’ to its un-
challengeable accuracy and abiding
value.”
Coming back once again to the
question which underlies this corres-
pondence, I venture to assign yet an-
other reason why the churches are
neglected. The contradictory creeds
and doctrines which are taught is a
potent cause of the emptiness of the
churches and the futility of the
preachers. Everybody knows that out
of the scores of conflicting theories,
not more than one —if even one—can
be true. Consequently, the thinking
portion of the community leave them
all severely alone. That I am war-
rented in coming to this conclusion my
antagonist himself affords a striking
proof. He affirms that the Bible is
a revelation from God, given to man
in order to save him from enternal
torture in hell. Yet this Divine mes-
sage, the outcome of infinite wisdom,
upon which the eternal condition of
untold millions of human beings is
to depend, is so hard to understand
that it requires no fewer than twelve
volumes of John JJrquhart’s directions
to instruct humanity how to read it.
The humour of the situation—John
Urquhart coming to the assistance of
the Deity—would be side-splitting,
did not the presumption and blas-
phemy of the proposition overshadow
every other consideration. If, how-
ever, he will answer Huxley’s chal-
lenge, and earn that archbishopric
he will be better employed than he is
at present.—Yours, Etc.,
CLEON.
Essendon, April 19th.
Thirteenth Letter, published April
To the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir, —For a refutation of the Rev.
John Urquhart’s misleading state-
ments regarding the death of Darwin-
ism, published to-day, it is not neces-
sary to go further than an able lead-
ing article which appeared in “The
Age,” of 27th March. In that article
it is pointed out that Professor Ray
Lankester shows that to say that Dar-
winism is even losing its hold is a
radical misconception. And Pro-
fessor Lankester, unlike the minor
scientists of our friend’s acquaintance,
is a man whose word may be taken
as authoritative on this subject, as
may be seen by the repeated refer-
ences to his authority in the “Encyclo-
paedia Britannica.”—Yours, Etc.,
JAS. A. LAMBDEN.
Nathalia, April 16th.


Fourteenth Letter, published April
To- the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir, —I have followed with some in-
terest the controversy between Mr.
Urquhart and “Cleon.” In the ap-
pendix to Dana’s “New Text Book of
Geology,” I could find no such allu-
sion as referred to by Mr. Urquhart,
but in the chapter on the Progress of
Life, I find the following:—“The
evolution of the system of life went
forward through the derivation of
species from species.”—Yours, Etc.,
LOVER OF THE TRUTH
April 19th.
Fifteenth Letter, published April
24th.
WHY ARE THE CHURCHES
NEGLECTED ?
To the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir, —“Cleon’s” two friends, no
doubt perceiving signs of distress,
have rushed to his assistance. But
let me ask them in the name of com-
mon fairness to- master their emotion
and to wait with what calmness they
may the not distant finish of this en-
counter. In any case, my affair is
with ’’Cleon,” and his attempts to
mislead the public on matters of vital
concern.
(1.) He is still unconscious, appar-
ently, of his blunder in regard to the
Sabbath. Let me attempt once more
to enlighten him. The Scripture re-
cords that the seventh day rest was
instituted at man’s creation; that it
was the earliest institution of human-
ity, and that it preceded by long ages
the inclusion of that law in the Mosaic
Decalogue. That statement was de-
nied, ridiculed, and cast away by
“Cleon’s” friends. And now an an-
cient Babylonian calendar and other
documents have been found which
show that the seventh day Sabbath
was one of the most sacred institu-
tions of the primal civilisation of
humanity. It bore this very name,
“the Sabbath,” and a very ancient
description of the day shows that it
was rejoiced in as a day of spiritual
refreshment. Is not that a confirma-
tion of the Scripture ? Has it not
overthrown infidel opposition and
swept away the imaginary infidel tri-
umph ? And what confidence can be
placed in a man who describes my
insistence upon this as “the brazen
attempt of John Urquhart to mislead
his readers into the belief that the
Babylonian Sabbath confirms” the
Scripture. Could anything be denser
than “Cleon’s” intellect, or more
brazen than his attempt to escape a
manly acknowledgment of defeat ?
(2.) Yet more deplorable is the at-
tempt to wriggle out of the fatal
meshes of his statement regarding
Darwinism. He wrote and published
that it had been accepted by “all
scientists and thinkers.” The univer-
sality of that acceptance was empha-
sised by the context. Resting upon
that as a basis, he accused the
churches of having ignored this uni-
versal change of attitude, and thus
missed their opportunity. When I
challenged the statement, and de-
clared that at no- time had it been
true that Darwinism was accepted bv
“all scientists and thinkers,” not a
hint was given that he did not mean
what he said. Silence was maintained
as to this, even after I had shown its
utter inaccuracy by the citation of con-
demnations of Darwinism by leading
scientists, both of the recent past and
of the present. But now, when I
point to this second defeat of this
advocate of unbelief, he replied that
his words were not to be literally in-
terpreted. “My statement,”" he
writes, “was not literal, but figura-
tive.” And this from a man who has
a horror of “prevaricators”! Put
plainly, “Cleon” blundered in his
ignorance; and now, when he is
pressed to confess his blunder, he
tries to escape by asserting that his
language was figurative! In other
words, when it is proved that what he
said was untrue, he implies that he
did not mean what he said.
(3.) Let me deal with the third
point at issue before I turn to the
rest of his letter. He challenged me


to produce any proof of the scientific
accuracy of the first chapter of Gene-
sis. I gave him Dana’s decision,
mentioning Huxley’s memorable re-
ference to him. What does this ec-
centric “Cleon” now do? He rushes
off to show that Huxley never ad-
mitted the scientific accuracy of
Genesis. Did I say that he did ?
He then proceeds to scoff at Dana,
“and twenty Danas,” and to inform us
of “thousands who never heard of
Dana,” no doubt including himself
among the number. But will his and
their ignorance obliterate the fact
that the greatest geologist of recent
times has declared that geology con-
firms the Scripture account of crea-
tion ? Let me once more give Hux-
ley’s reference and Dana’s decision.
In his reply to Mr. Gladstone, Hux-
ley wrote: —“There is no one to
whose authority on geological ques-
tions I am more readily disposed to
bow than that of my eminent friend,
Professor Dana.” Dana’s decision
was as follows-“I agree in all es-
sential points with Mr. Gladstone,
and believe that the first chapters of
Genesis and science are in accord.”
(The “Nineteenth Century,” August,
1886, p. 304.)
And now let me ask who are
“Cleon’s’ authorities? Sir Charles
Lyell’s works are out of date. Hux-
ley was a passionate opponent of
Christianity. He has placed it on
record that when Gladstone’s article
was published, he went “cursing and
blaspheming” through every room in
his house. Clodd belongs to the same
school of militant unbelief. As to
Samuel Laing, I regret to have to say
that his is discredited testimony. He
refers to Huxley’s imaginary dis-
covery of “Bathybius” as an unchal-
lengeable fact long after it was laughed
out of existence by the scientists of
Europe, and disowned by Huxley
himself. Two facts will show the un-
reliability of the whole flock. I
counselled “Cleon” to place the Java
man-monkey by the side of Jack and
the Beanstalk. But he will not be ad-
vised. Here, then, are the facts.
In September, 1901, Dubois, a Dutch
physician, discovered a tooth in the
island of Java 45ft. beneath the
earth’s surface. A month later he
found the top of a skull about 3ft.
distant from where he discovered the
tooth. About a year afterwards, he
got a thigh bone 45ft. away, and,
some time after, another tooth.
These were afterwards laid before 24
leading zoologists at Leyden. Ten
concluded that they were the bones of
an ape. Seven believed them to be
human remains. The remaining seven
held that they belonged to a form
intermediate between man and the
ape—a conclusion set aside by 17
out of the 24 scientists. Such is the
“pithecanthropus erectus”! It has
been cited by no recent scientist; and,
nevertheless, “Cleon” tries to foist
upon your readers Laing’s legend that
the remains “are now generally recog-
nised.”
The remaining myth is that there
is no great gulf between man and the
monkey. Huxley and Clodd are
quoted in support of this monstrosity.
As was pointed out long ago by Pro-
fessor Owen, the gulf between man
and the monkey is physiologically im-
passable. The teeth in man appear
in an entirely different order from
that followed in monkeys. The bit-
ing muscles in man are attached to
the temples: in apes they are fixed to
a ridge on the top of the skull. The
gulf is also anatomically impassable.
There is not a bone in the human
body that is not fitted for the erect
position. The human brain is be-
tween two and three times larger than
that of the highest ape. No gulf be-
tween the jabbering ape swinging
along the branches of the forest and
man, with his industries and arts and
science, with his trade and commerce,
with his steamships, his railways, his
telegraphs and telephones, with his
homes, his mighty cities, his com-
plicated society, his laws, his mar-
vellous civilisation, his religion—
all that makes him man! The con-
tention is an outrage upon common
sense.


One thing more. For the science
upon which he leans, “Cleon” is in-
debted to the Bible. There is no
science outside of Bible lands. There
has been no science where the Bible
has not enlightened human thought
with its revelation of the universality
of law and the manifold wisdom, of
the Creator.—Yours, Etc.,
JOHN URQUHART
Hamilton, April 23rd.
Sixteenth Letter, published May Ist.
WHY ARE THE CHURCHES
NEGLECTED ?
To the Editor of the “Age.”
Sir, —Another answer to this ques-
tion is to be found in the fact that
so many of the so-called leaders and
teachers are counterparts of John
Urquhart, as he has shown himself in
his correspondence. It appears to be
all but an impossibility for a Chris-
tian apologist to fight fairly. As re-
gards the question of the Sabbath, we
are afforded another example of his
unscrupulous methods. In my pre-
vious letter, I said, and again repeal,
“the brazen attempt of John Urquhart
to mislead his readers into the belief
that the Babylonian Sabbath confirms
the theory of the inspiration
and consequent infallibility of the
Bible is just on a par with
all his class.” In quoting this
passage, presumably for the pur-
pose of refuting it, he deliberately
omits from, it the most material words,
and in their place substitutes two
words of his own, which manipulation
has the double effect of making me re-
sponsible for a statement which I did
not make, and enabling him to escape
from the task of answering the state-
ment I did make.
Against the Scriptures as the work
of man, and taken as such, I have
made no protest, it is against their
claim to inspiration set up by ecclesi-
astics that I protest; and it is to John
Urquhart’s claims, that the Baby-
lonian Sabbath confirms that theory
of inspiration that I record my insis
tent and persistent denial.
There is something diverting in the
idea of a Christian apologist, whose
main stock in trade is the facility
with which he can convert the plain-
est literal passages of Scripture into
figures of speech, when the exigen-
cies of controversy render it requisite,
declaring that to use figurative lan-
guage is to be untruthful.
Coming now to the Dana episode,
one is struck with the poverty and
futility of the argument, if it may be
so termed, which this apologist
labours to make out of this incident.
The facts are these:—Mr. Gladstone,
in his reply to Huxley’s article, “Gene-
sis and Its Interpreters,” challenged
the latter to discuss the “Nebular Hy-
pothesis,” which, for reasons assigned,
Huxley declined to do. In the course
of his statements of his reasons, he
said:—“l understand that Professor
Dana is prepared to prove that the
‘Nebular Hypothesis’ is in accord with
the story of creation in Genesis.”
Then follows the statement which is
again quoted by my opponent in to-
day’s letter. Unfortunately, or is it
designedly, the quotation stops short
before its conclusion. Huxley goes on
to say that he knows fully what Dana
had said on the question—the Nebu-
lar Hypothesis—in his former works;
that this later production he had not
read, but that unless they were con-
trary in their teaching to his (Dana’s)
previous productions, he (Huxley)
was not likely to get much assistance
in his difficulty. This was published
in the “Nineteenth Century” for Feb-
ruary, 1886. In August of the same
year, Dana’s statement re his opinion
on Genesis appeared. It is perfectly
clear from these facts that while
Huxley accepted Dana’s views on
geology, as far as he w r as acquainted
with them up. to the time of his writ-
ing that February article, he entirely
repudiated Dana’s, dictum of the
August following. John Urquhart
must be hard driven for facts
to support his outworn fictions when
he ventures to offer such twaddle for


the acceptance of thinking people.
It will be noted by all who are
interested in this discussion that in
his reply to my statements re the
Java relics, he carefully abstains from
any mention of the testimony in their
favour of Professor Keably in the
“Popular Science Monthly.” He ad-
mits quite enough, however, to fully
expose his unreliability, to use no
harsher term, when dealing with facts
which can be tested, and that his for-
mer statement was unfounded.
On the question of Man’s Place in
Nature, I think I may safely assert
that no l one in their senses, except,
perhaps, John Urquhart himself, will
accept that gentleman’s opinion in
preference to that of Huxley, Darwin,
Clodd, and the rest. In iB6O, Hux-
ley propounded his theory on this sub-
ject in a course of lectures, which were
published in 1863. In opposition to
this great authority, my opponent
quotes Professor Owen. This is un-
fortunate for my opponent, and also
for Owen. The latter denied the
presence in the skull of apes of cer-
tain formations which Huxley affirmed.
This was a dispute upon a matter of
fact, which was capable of demon-
stration either one way or the other.
The demonstration was made by
Huxley, and proved absolutely that
he was right, and Owen wrong. Since
then I am not aware that any other
scientist has disputed Huxley’s posi-
tion. —Yours, Etc.,
CLEON.
Essendon, April 24th,
[This correspondence is closed.—•
Ed. “The Age.”]
Of this last letter of “Cleon’s,”
more than half was not published. It
is here supplied with additions as near
as may be from memory:—•
On the question of the Java relics,
there are other well known facts in
addition to those given already, of
which I will not insult my censor by
supposing him ignorant, and that,
more completely even that I have al-
ready done, demonstrate his unscru-
pulous mendacity. Professor’s Haec-
kel writes concerning it in vol. 2, p.
633, in his “Evolution of Man.”
“There were very interesting scien-
tific discussions upon it at the last
three International Congresses of
Zoology—Leyden, 1895 (I have pre-
viously referred to?, Cambridge, 1898,
and Berlin, 1901. Then we have,
further, Professor Packhard writing in
1902, that these relics are now gen-
erally recognised.”
On the reliability of Huxley’s dic-
tum, re “Man’s Place in Nature,” we
have this letter from him to Mr. Ed-
ward Clodd, thirty years after his
views were published : —“I was looking
through ‘Man’s Place in Nature’ the
other day. Ido not think there is a
word I need delete, nor anything I
need add, except in confirmation and
extension of the doctrine there laid
down.”
As regards the “monstrosity” of the
doctrine a better reply to those who
urge such a plea, could not be given
than that given, in a celebrated de-
bate by Huxley himself to Bishop
Wilberforce. The Bishop wound up
a great declamatory speech on the
question by asking Huxley whether
he was related on his grandfather’s or
his grandmother’s side to< the ape.
Huxley demonstrated his case thereby
refuting Owen; and then replied to
Wilberforce thus; —“ I asserted, and
I repeat, that a man has no reason to
be ashamed of having an ape for his
grandfather. If there were an ances-
tor whom I should feel shame in re-
calling, it would be a man—a man of
restless and versatile intellect, who,
not content with success in his own
sphere of activity, plunges into scien-
tific questions, with which he has no
real acquaintance, only to obscure
them by an aimless rhetoric, and dis-
tract the attention of his hearers from
the real point at issue by eloquent di-
gressions and skilled appeals to re-
ligious prejudice.” From that day to
this there have never been wanting
John Urquhart’s to feebly follow his
shocking example.


It is astonishing how this Christian
gentleman, nay Christian minister, as
I have now found him to be, can per-
sist, from his first letter to his last,
in charging me with making a state-
ment, which I have not made; and
this for the sole purpose of, as he
calls it, exposing my “stupendous ig-
norance”; instead of which he only
succeeds in exposing his own untruth-
fulness. He has continually asserted
that I have said that “Darwinism”
had been accepted by all scientists and
thinkers. This is absolutely contrary
to fact. I have never made such a
statement; and I am bound to be-
lieve that John Urquhart knows that
I have never made such a statement.
“ Evolution ” was the term I used.
I can only suppose that a Christian
apologist is of opinion that the ob-
ject he has in view, the support of the
tottering edifice of Churchianity, justi-
fies a resort even to falsehood, and
the bearing of false witness, against
opponents. I challenge him to pro-
duce my statement, or withdraw, his
fabrication.
Reverting to. the question of the
record of the rocks, versus the record
of Genesis—which was the main issue
in the celebrated controversy between
Huxley and Gladstone, and in which
Gladstone was thoroughly worsted—l
restate here, three of Huxley’s propo-
sitions for the serious attention of your
readers and of John Urquhart in par-
ticular. On page 20 of Macmillan’s
sixpenny edition of Huxley’s essays,
are the following statements:—
1, “According to the Miltonic (Bib-
lical) account, the order in which ani-
mals should have made their appear-
ance in the stratified rocks would be
this—Fishes, including the great
whales and birds; after them all varie-
ties of terrestial animals except
birds. Nothing could be further from
the facts as we find them; we know of
not the slightest evidence of the exist-
ence of birds before the Jurassic, or,
perhaps, the Triassic formation; while
terrestial animals occur in the carbon-
iferous rocks.”
2. “If there were any harmony be-
tween the Miltonic (Biblical) account,
and the circumstantial evidence, we
ought to have abundant evidence of
the existence of birds in the Carbonif-
erous, the Devonian, and the Silurian
rocks, I need hardly say that this is not
the case, and that not a trace of birds
makes its appearance until the far
later period which I have mentioned.”
3. “If it be true that all varieties of
fishes and the great whales, and the
like, made their appearance on the
fifth day, we ought to find the re-
mains of these animals in the older
rocks—in those which were deposited
before the Carboniferous epoch.
Fishes we do find, in considerable
number and variety; but the great
whales are absent, and the fishes are
not such as now live. Not one soli-
tary species of fish now in existence
is to be found in the Devonian or
Silurian formation.”
If my assailant can refute either
of these propositions, or can produce
any author who has refuted, or who
can refute them, he will have made
one step towards establishing the his-
torical accuracy of the Biblical record,
but not an inch towards demonstra-
ting its Divine origin. That super-
stition has been exposed and exploded
by other forces and other methods;
Bishop Colenso and his works, for in-
stance, unfortuately, not to be had in
a sixpenny edition. In this case it
must be a real refutation fully proved
by chapter and verse. A slip-shod,
half and half, assertion about “essen-
tially” agreeing with the Biblical re-
cord, such as Dana’s, for instance,
will not be of any use. It will be
laughed out of court.
Anyone who has followed this con-
troversy with the least attention can-
not have failed to observe the very
cavalier fashion in which my antagon-
ist has dealt with the characters, and
reputations, of those authorities whom
I have cited in support of my opinions
and arguments. This is nothing but
the repetition of the old proceed-
ing-—“No case abuse the other side.”
Such a method on the part of a mas-
ter like Huxley (if we can even


imagine him stooping to such a petti-
fogging action) might be excusable;
but employed by John Urquhart, it is
simply an impertinence. It appears
that this rev. gentleman published a
little pamphlet in England, or per-
haps it was Scotland, called “Roger’s
Reasons,” its purport being to recon-
cile science to the Bible. Since he
thrust himself into the discussion, 1
have come across the following esti-
mate of its value —“In this” (pam-
phlet) “there is a resurrection pie of
;he old arguments, dished up again
in such a guise as to take in the un-
wary and ill-informed, who- would have
no suspicion that the food thus given
them for their refection was not only
stale, but had been condemned as un-
fit for mental consumption by the
whole of the scientific faculty.” As
there is no doubt but that this pam-
phlet was written for the very purpose
thus set out, this critic should not be
surprised at the result, that the un-
wary and the ill-informed are “taken
in.”
Coming now to- the last paragraph
of the last letter, we have the crowing
effort of my opponent’s genius for
misrepresentation. It is a gem of its
kind. It exactly and completely re-
verses the facts of history during the
past rpoo years.
When John Urquhart declares that
science is indebted to the Bible, he
either knows what he is writing about
or he does not. If he does know,
then he is deliberately stating what he
knows to be untrue. If he does not
know, he is as the blind man leading
the blind, whose fate is so graphically
described in the well-known book. I
would advise my would-be instructor
and your readers generally, to read
Buckle’s “History of Civilisation,”
Draper’s “Conflict between Science
and Religion,” Winwood Reid’s “Mar-
tyrdom of Man,” and Hallam’s
“Middle Ages”; none of which are,
as yet, published for sixpence, more’s
the pity! When he has got through
this course, he will then know, if he
does not now, what a sorry figure he
cuts outside the circle of pious ladies,
to whom “Roger’s Reasons” are com
forting and edifying.
Surely Dean Farrar must have had
this rev. gentleman in his mind’s eye
when he penned this passage; “There
are a certain number of persons, who,
when their minds have become stereo-
typed in foregone conclusions are
simply incapable of grasping new
truths. They become obstructionists,
and not infrequently bigoted obstruc-
tionists. As convinced as the Pope of
their own personal infallibility, their
attitude towards those who see that
the old views are no longer tenable
is an attitude of anger and alarm, . .
Those whose intellects have been thus
petrified by custom and advancing
years are, of all others, the most hope-
less to deal with. They have made
themselves incapable of fair and
rational examination of the truths
which they impugn. They think they
can, by mere assertion, overthrow re-
sults arrived at by the life-long in-
quiries of the ablest student, while
they have not given a day’s serious or
impartial study to- them. . . Off-
hand dogmatists of this stamp, who
usually abound among professional
religionists, think they can refute any
number of scholars, however profound
and however pious, if only they shout
‘lnfidel’ with sufficient loudness.” If
to this admirable portrait, so- far as
it goes, are added several prominent
features as drawn by himself in this
correspondence, a fair likeness of
John Urquhart, and of the present-day
parson will be obtained. With such
men in the pulpit, is it any wonder
that the churches are neglected ? The
wonder would be if they were not
neglected. The people have no con-
fidence, to put it mildly, in either the
knowledge or sincerity of the
preachers. The pew despises the pul-
pit; and in that fact is found the an-
swer to the question with which we
set out—“ Why are the Churches
Neglected ?”
CLEON.
Essendon, May rjth, igog.


CHRISTIAN EVIDENCE BOOKS.
The Bible and Its Inspiration, With some reference to the Higher Criticism.
By Geo. S. Barrett, D.D. Price. 2/-: postage, 4c!.
Harmony of the Gospels, Explanatory Notes, Parallel References, Illustrative
Passages. Edited by Benjamin Davies, Ph. D. Price, i/- ; postage, 2d.
1)0 We Believe ? A Record of a great Correspondence in the Daily Teltgraph,
London. Introduction by W. L. Courtney, Price, 3/6; postage, 6d.
Why We Believe. Essays on Brotherhood and Religion. By P. W. Wilson.
Price, 3 1 ; postage, 3d.
Can We Believe? Reasonable Words for Reasonable Men, By Rev. C. H.
Garbett, M.A., and Rev. F, O. T. Hawkes, M.A. Price, 3/6; postage, 3d.
Notes Oil Ingersoll. By Rev. L, A. Lambert. Price, 6d., postage, id.
The Devotional Use of the Holy Scriptures. By J. M. Gibson, M.A., LL.D..
Price, t/3; postage, 2d.
The Bible and Working People. By Alexander Wallace, D.D. 1/3; postage, 3d.
“The Clarion” or The Bible. By Rev. Thomas Waugh. Price, gd.; postage, 2d.
A Godless Socialism. By Frank G, Jannaway. Price, 3d.; postage, id.
God, Prayer, and the Mystery of Pain. By Frank Ballard, D.D., M.A.
B.Sc., F.R.M.S., Etc. Price, gd.; postage, 2d,
Popular “Determinism ” By Frank Ballard, D.D., M.A., B.Sc., F.R.M.S.
Etc. Price, gd.; postage, 2d.
How We Got Our Bible. By J. Paterson Smyth, 8.D., LL.D. gd.; postage, 2d.
Does it Matter What a Man Believes? By Frank Ballard, D.D M.A.
B.Sc., F.R.M.S., Etc., Price, 3/-; postage, 4d.
The Bible a Missionary Book. By Robert F. Horton,, D.D., M.A. Price i/v
Postage, 2d.
Foundations of Belief. Talks to Thinking People, By Rev R. Ditterich.
Price, 3d, ; postage, id.
The Baptism of The Holy Ghost and Fire. By Minnie F, Abrams, Price,
3d.; postage, id.
Why lAm What 1 Am. By Fourteen Clergyman of Different Denominations.
Price, i/-; postage, 2d.
The Inspiration and Authority of Holy Scripture. By J. Monro Gibson,
M.A,, LL.D. Price, 3/- , postage, 3d.
Tite Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures. By Robert Jamieson, D.D. Price,
7/6; postage, Cd.
Inspiration and the Bible. By Robert F. Horton, M.A. Price, 3/6; postage, 4d.
Our Churches, and Why We Belong' to Them. By various Clergymen.
Price, 6/-; .postage, 6d,
The Bible. Its Origin, Growth and Character, and its place among the Sacred
Books of the World. By J. T. Sunderland. Price, 6/-; -postage, yd.
The Spirit in the Word. By David M. Mclntyre. Price, 4/6; postage, 3d,
BOOKS by JOHN URQUHART.
The Inspiration and Accuracy of the Holy Scriptures. Containing a Reply
to Dean Farrar on "Daniel.” Price, 4/6.
The New Biblical Guide, or, Modern Discoveries and the Bible. Volumes I. to
VIII. Price, 4/- each.
The Bible and How to Read it. Vol. I, Genesis, 1. to ix.; Vol. 11., Genesis,
x. to L. Price, 4/6 each.
The Bible and How to Read It. The Book of Exodus. An Answer to the
Critics. Price, 5/6,
What are we to Believe ? or, The Testimony of Fulfilled Prophecy. Price, 3/-
The Oracles of God: Shall we Surrender the Trust ? Price, gd.
What is the Bible? Price, 2d.
Is the Higher Criticism a Science? Price, id.
The Case for the Higher Criticism; Is there Anything in it? Price, id.
What is Gold ? A Talk about Scripture Symbolism. Price, id.
Roger’s Reasons; or, The Bible and Science, id. Roger’s Reasons, No. 2. id.
Present Day Christianity: What is it? Whither is it going? The Lord’s Reply.
E. W. COLE, Book Aread®. Metafile;


"He that will not reason is a bigot; he that cannot reason is a fool;
he that dares not reason is a stave,”— Sir II 7 , Drummond.
Philosophical & Advanced Thought
: ; Sixpenny Publications : :
Posted Bd. Or in CLOTH, 1/-! Posted 1/3.
£S<e;p>r*irsLt;js .
17. A Modern Zoroastrian, by S. Laing.
18. An Introduction to the Philosophy of
Herbert Spencer, by Prof.W. Hudson.
19. Three Essays on Religion, by J. S. Mill.
20. Creed of Christendom, by W. R. Greg.
21. The Aposlles, by Ernest Renan.
x. Huxley’s Lectures and Essays. (A selec-
tion). With Autobiography.
2 The Pioneers of Evolution, by Edward
Clodd.
3. Modern Science and Modern Thought,
by Samuel Laing, with Illustrations.
4. Literature ard Dogma, by Mat. Arnold.
5. The Riddle of the Universe, by Ernst
Haeckel,
6. Education : Intellectual, Moral, and
Physical, by Herbert Spencer.
7. The Evolution of the Idea of God, by
Grant Allen.
8. Human Origins, by Samuel Laing.
9. The Service of Man, by J. C. Morison.
10. Tyndall’s Lectures and Essays (a sel-
ection), with Biographical Sketch,
11. The Origin of Species, by C. Darwin.
12. Emerson’s Addresses and Essays.
13. On Liberty, by John Stuart Mill.
14. The Story of Creation, by E. Clodd.
15. An Agnostic’s Apology, by Sir. Leslie
Stephen.
16. Life of Jesus, by Ernest Renan.
22. Problems of the Future, by S. Laing,
23. Wonders of Lite, by Ernst Haeckel.
24. Jesus of Naiaielh, by Edward Clodd.
25. God and the Bible, by Matthew Arnold.
26. The Evolution of Man, by Ernst Haec-
kel. Vol. I.
27. The Evolution of Man. Vol. 11.
28. Hume’s Essays : I.—An Inquiry Con-
cerning Human Understanding.
ll,—An Inquiry Concerning the Prin-
ciples of Morals.
29. Herbert Spencer's Essays (A Selection).
30. An Easy Outline of Evolution, by Dennis
Hird, M.A,
31. Phases of Faith, by F. W. Newman.
32. Asiatic Studies, by Sir Alfred C. Lyall.
33. Man’s Place in Nature and Other Essays,
by Professor Huxley.
Kxtra
1. Jesus Christ: His Apostles and Dis-
ciples in the Twentieth Century, by
Count de Renesse.
2. Haeckel’s Critics Answered, by Joseph
McCabe.
3, Science and Speculation, by G. Lewes.
4. New Light on Old Problems, by John
Wilson, M.A.
5, Ethics of the Great Religions, by C. T.
Gorham,
Series.
8. The Fundamental Principles of the
Positive Philosophy, by Aug. Comte.
9. Ethical Religion, by W. M. Salter.
10. Religious Persecution, by E. S. Haynes.
11. The Oldest laws in the World, by
Chilperic Edwards.
12. The Science of Education (The Secret
of Herbart), by F, H. Hayward,
D.Lit., SLA., B.Sc.
13. Concerting Children, by Charlotte Per-
kins Gilman.
14. The Bible in School, by J. A. Picton.
6. A New Catechism, by M. Mangasarian.
7. The Religion of Woman, by J. McCabe.
Various.
Christianity and Rationalism on Trial. The
Christian Defences Answered. By
Joseph McCabe, Charles Watts, J. M.
Robertson, C. T. Gorham, Geoffrey
Mortimer, F. J. Gould, W. B. Colum-
bine, John T, Lloyd, & Vivian Phelips.
The Children’s Book of Moral Lessons, by
F. J. Gould. First Series.
On the Nature of Knowledge; and Kindred
Inquiries, by Frances Wright.
Sunday Observance ; Its Origin and Mean-
ing, by W..W. Hardwicke, M.D.
Do We Believe? An Analysis of a Great
Correspondence, by J. A. Hedderwick.
The Truth About Secular Education: Its
History and Results, by J. McCabe.
On Sale at COLE’S BOOK ARCADES,
Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide.
011 Any Subjects.
Send for Catalogues
