





-A. IST ATIOISTAL
AND
PRACTICABLE UNDERTAKING.
>—•
Republished from the “Queenslander.”
Smlnmr:
Printed by J. H. Reynolds, Machine Printer, George Street.
MDCOCLXXIX.


YAWJ ODBMi
XX
<1 Yxl
.OHIMAT i UI/.'iiiAii'l
" " m\\ «\oa\ V>9A&\\
—>• ■<»<» <-■


PREFACE.
The following article, published originally in the Queenslander ,
summed up the main arguments that had been used in that journal both in
the advocacy of the project set forth in it, and in answer to objections
raised at various times against it. It does not purpose to cover the whole
ground, but only to show the salient points of the scheme. Nor is it
intended to serve as the prospectus of a definite project, but rather as a
broad indication of the manner in which the interests of the colony—and of
the continent generally—can be opened up for settlement without involving
the colonists in too great public liabilities.


.a o a r i a si c t
,v.W\«v»«Q ni '<lU'.iiiyho boikildmi ,slo|}iß -'1(1
ni ,Dod Umuoi JirfJni baau load bi jnwmijfi* nil m ’ i: ' tommu
snoil»jdo ol tnmtM but .Ji ni AM »* 1o 'P‘» ovbt 3,41
■slodw 9» lavoo ol aaoqiuq Jon asob il .Ji J«m*B* M»h« »« b3a,El
a toVI smodx a* 1< ■ )ni< < « »* wo* -' n< ‘ 1
lo bne—'(noloDsH) 1° f. - JBi 5( ibidw ni
gnivlovni Juolttiw JnsnrelJJ >z id) q» bansqo sd n»>
r.)ijilidi.il oilduq Ji/Jip 009 n JainO.'o ■


AN AUSTRALIAN
TRANSCONTINENTAL RAILWAY,
A NATIONAL AND PRACTICABLE UNDERTAKING.
Republished from the “ Queenslander
Queenslanders want to develop their
colony ; they have full confidence in its
resources ; and they know that it contains
unbounded natural wealth. But they
know also that they can starve in the
midst of plenty, and that something is
needed to unlock the resources of their
country. That something is capital and
population. Hitherto we have been bring-
ing both by the direct agency of the Go-
vernment. As a community we have
raised successive loans and spent the
money in bringing out immigrants and
opening the country by means of railways,
providing at the same time a stock of
working capital by the process. The
policy is good, but it has its limits, and
chief among these is the taxpaying capa-
city of the community, for the interest on
national loans has to be provided from the
revenue ; and even reproductive works do
not give a return from the moment of
commencement. At the present time we
owe to the public creditor £10,192,150.
On the 31st December our population, ex-
clusive of Chinese and Polynesians, was
190,331, so that it was equal to £53 10s.
per head. This is a heavier debt than is
borne by any other colony. In New South
Wales, the public debt only amounts to
£14,938,119, which, on a population of
693,743, equals £2l 10s. Bd. per head.
And yet we are only at the beginning of
our task. The number of projects before
the public is endless,, and the additional
loan of £3,000,000 which is pro-
posed by the Government will not pro-
vide funds to carry out one half of them.
There are the railways to Roma and Stan-
thorpe, and from Maryborough and Rock-
hampton, in course of construction. Lines
from Bundaberg and Townsville are autho-
rised. Branches to Fassifern and the
Logan are projected, besides others on the
Darling Downs. It is not expected that
Roma or Stanthorpe will be the final
terminus of the line approaching either
town; and the Rockhampton people, be-
sides urging the continuation of their
trunk lines, want a branch to Clermont;
one to Tambo has been mentioned, and
another to Springsure is asked for.
Bowen cherishes hopes, and the Townsville
people expect a continued extension of the
line about to be commenced there until at
least it reaches theDiamantina. Cooktown
also is determined not to be left, in a meta-
phorical sense, out in the cold. Besides
these projects, which have assumed definite
shape, there are many others unde rgi him the
process of incubation. And each of the u
has its knot of champions determined to
maintain their cause against all assailants.
Evidently we should reach the end of
our financial tether long before we could
carry out or even make a good commence


ment of a quarter of the projects enume-
rated ; we should become hopelessly bank-
rupt by attempting enterprises individually
profitable but in the aggregate too great
for our means. By even setting aside
most of them and concentrating our atten-
tion on a few we could only make very
slow progress. And yet we have in the
interior a country which would rapidly
repay the cost of bringing it within reach
of railway communication. Figures fail
to convey an idea of the almost endless
downs and plains covered with the richest
pasturage contained within our borders.
There is little doubt that the problem of
finding a profitable market, outside of
Australia, for the carcasses of our stock
will be successfully solved, although the
practical solution has yet to be found.
But there is no such doubt concerning
wool. We know that our Western interior
will produce the finest wool, we know that
for this staple the civilised world is our
market, and the production of it in our
Western territory can be increased with
great rapidity and to a practically un-
limited extent. It is simply, then, a matter
of carriage. We have the country for sheep
right to our Western border, but they can-
not be profitably kept beyond a certain
distance from market unless railway com-
munication be provided. For that reason
our leading public men, whatever their
political differences, are in complete accord
as to the necessity of penetrating the in-
terior. Hence the three trunk lines from
Brisbane, Rockhampton, and Townsville.
But we can only advance very slowly in
this manner. Extending our three trunk
lines by loans borrowed on the general
credit must necessarily be a slow process,'
and not only slrall we make little progress
inland year by year but it will demand all
our energy and absorb all our money.
And-it is not likely that the inhabitants
of those parts of the colony not directly
interested in the trunk lines will forego
their expect itions for an indefinite time.
They will claim a share of the loans raised
on the common creelir, and n then claim
is allowed—and we cannot see how it is
to be altogether disregarded—-the trunk
lines will creep westward at a rite not
much exceeding a long dray stage each
year. The present generation would be
gray-headed before the heart of Queensland
was fairly reached.
But there is a way out of the dilemma.
We have certainly
NO MONEY BUT PLENTY OP LAND.
There is a limit to our power of borrowing
money as a community. But we have a
magnificent public estate, almost un-
touched, and this gives us an opportunity
of getting a railway right through the in-
terior without adding a sixpence to our
public burden. The land is valuable; it
can be converted into money; we who
possess so much of it can exchange at least
a portion for a few of the many millions
seeking investment in the old country.
As a community, acting through our Go-
vernment, we cannot do this. When a
Government enters the Loudon money
market to raise a loan it can only borrow
on the security of its revenues. The
lenders may take into account the public
estate in the possession of the borrowers,
but only as a secondary consideration;
they look mainly to the revenue from
which they expect to get their interest.
.New South Wales and Queensland have
both floated loans lately. The former
borrowed at 98£ ; the latter, with territory
twice as large and acre for acre as good,
only obtained But private indivi-
duals can do what a Government is unable
to attempt; they can exchange the laud
of which we have so much for the money
of which we have so little.
And now, what is our public estate 1
Most of us are in the habit of repeating
glibly enough the familiar figures, and can
tell readily how many thousands of square
miles and millions of acres the colony con-
tains. But how many have realised what
these figures convey 1 Queensland con-
tains 669,520 square miles, or 428,492,800
acres of land, and it is more than twice as
large as New South Wales, which contains
323,437 miles, or nearly 200,01)0,000
acres. Of this public estate of ours wo
have alienated in fee-simple about
3.442.389 acres. The area of free selec-
tion on which conditions have notyetbeen
fulfilled is as nearly as can be computed
3,800,000 acres. Together the total area
of land sold and applied for is thus about
7.242.389 acres. In New South Wales
the alienations in fee-simple amount to
16,051,821 acres, the amount of condi-
tional purchases is 15,068,555 acres, giving


a grand total of 31,120,376 acres. Thus,
although we have more than twice as much
land as our neighbors in New South Wales,
they have sold or agreed to sell 23,880,37 6
acres more than we have disposed of.
Of this great country of ours very
little is desert, nearly all can be
used for one purpose or another ; acre
for acre, we can unhesitatingly declare
that it is as good as the country of New
South Wales. If we regard the freehold
value of this land as a capital for the de-
velopment of its resources we are almost
justified in speaking of it as practically
inexhaustible. At an all-round sum of
6s. Bd. per acre it represents an amoumt
of £142,830,933. As a matter of fact,
however, there is very little country which,
when provided with the means of access,
would not be worth the sum named, while
much of it would sell in the open market
for four or five times the amount. And
only about one-hundreth part of the whole
area has been already alienated.
This being the extent of our public
estate, what do we, as a community, get
for it ? All but the minute fraction
already alienated is either unoccupied or
held under squatting lease; in the first
case it returns nothing to the revenue, in
the second the leaseholders pay, in the
unsettled districts,,a rent of from ss. to
15s. per square mile, or from about one-
fourth to three-fourths of afarthingper acre
annually. It is very evident that, as a
business transaction, the sale of that land
at 6s. Bd. per acre would be a very good
bargain for the community which occupies
the position of landlord. And the bargain
would be a still more favorable one if the'
landlord— i.e., the people of Queensland
—could sell at that price a very small
portion of his possessions, and with the
purchase money improve the value of the
remainder. It is by no means an uncom-
mon thing for the private owner of a piece
of waste land to grant a portion of it to a
speculator who is prepared to use it in
such a manner as to improve the value of
the whole property ; no landowner would
hesitate a moment to sell at a reasonable
rate under such circumstances. The
people of Queensland have also a great
property, and they cannot do better than
follow a plan which the business instinct
of each man among them would lead him
to adopt in dealing with his own private
property. And this is the
LAND GRANT PRINCIPLE
which it is proposed to apply to the con-
struction of a railway across the colony.
Certain capitalists who have made their
money in Australia, and who know both
the value of Queensland land and the
amount of Queensland resources, can, we
believe, be found to undertake the work
of traversing the continent and opening
up the interior. In such an enterprise
they would risk their own hard-won
money, and with this guarantee of good
faith they might well be confident of
securing as much additional capital as
might be required from English investors.
They would ask from the public of Queens-
land nothing but a little of that Western
land which at present gives them such a
trifling return. In assenting to the de-
mand the public would assume no liability
and incur no risk; under no conceivable cir-
cumstances could they be pecuniary losers,
for if even the enterprise broke down the
failure would still leave certain length
of completed railway ful 1 value for the
land alienated. The manner of alienation,
the size of the land grants, and other de-
tails may be left as matters for future
bargain; we are now concerned only
with the principle of the thing. And it
must be confessed that by consenting to
it the public would gain an undoubted
advantage. It is very certain that
the Western lands will be of little
value to the public as landlords, and only
partially used by the leaseholders until
railway communication is established
between them and port. It is equally
certain that to do so a very large sum of
money will be needed, which we might
perhaps borrow as a Government, but
which would pile a crushing interest charge
on our already overburdened shoulders.
And if we could endure the strain it
would, as has been already pointed out,
engage all our strength. For years we
could not hope to spend loan money on
any other kind of public works, and we
should have hard work to meet even the
ordinary expenses of Government after
finding money to pay the public creditor.
By giving land instead of money we shall
gain all that there is to be gained, and
escape the penalty entirely.


Let us see for a moment what that such branches or coast lines as might be
gain would be. Say that the Queensland
share of such a railway cost four millions,
that the bargain between the contracting
parties had been arranged and work begun.
The money spent in the work would be
capital imported into the colony from
outside. Not a penny would be diverted
from the ordinary channels of trade, but
month by month great sums of money,
paid for wages and material, would find
their way into general circulation and
seek investment. There is not a corner
of the colony into which this stream of
imported capital would not penetrate, nor
an industry which would not feel its stimu-
lating effect. We can only guess at the
probable development of trade, but we
cannot pretend to estimate how far this
accession of capital would carry it. This
we know, that from the commencement of
colonisation in Queensland to the present
day there has been a never-ceasing cry for
more capital, that on all sides we can see
promising industrial projects which lie
untouched because there is no money to
put into them. Each reader of these
pages can doubtless speak from personal
experience of such projects; throughout
Queensland the want of capital is the
common complaint; and by consenting to
the alienation of a fraction of our Western
lands we can have capital in a full stream
poured into the country.
And while this stream of money is
flowing the Government could continue to
carry on all other public works which Par-
liament saw fit to sanction on loan ac-
count. The progress of such a great work
would not diminish our borrowing power
as a community, it would greatly increase
it. The increase of trade, the rapid addi-
tions to population, would make the gene-
ral revenue, elastic to a degree that we
have not yet experienced; and permit of
loans being safely raised to an amount
that we dare not at present contemplate.
And our credit would improve as the
public estate, the ultimate security for
for our debt, became more valuable.
Thus, while the one great trunk line was
being cons tructed across the colony, at no
expense to the taxpayers, the Government
would be placed in a position to complete
the projected lines from Rockhampton and
Townsville, as well as to proceed with
deemed expedient. In short, not only
would the general revenue be relieved
from a burden which now threatens to
break it down, but it would be strengthened
to bear fresh tasks which we could not,
under present circumstances, impose upon
it. Under such a stimulus it would be
hard to put a limit to the possible pros-
perity of the country. Capital to work
our mines and carry on our industries
would give profitable work to thousands
of working men; and expanding trade
would increase our towns. In these the
farmer would find a ready market for his
produce, and agricultural settlement would
extend wherever soil and climate per-
mitted. The pastoral industry of the
interior would develop to an extent that
we can hardly estimate. As the line pro-
gressed, the magnificent grazing districts of
the West and North-west would be used to
the full extent of their great capacity. The
cattle that now occupy most of the country
would be replaced by sheep, for which
it is admirably adapted. The com-
mand of capital and cheap carriage would
enable the holders to render available the
whole of their pasturage, and the produc-
tion of our main staple, wool, would in-
crease indefinitely. In short, the pros-
perity of the country, advancing now
fitfully and in feeble spurts, would . swell
like the flowing tide—a tide without an
ebb.
Against this advantage what is to be
set —what price shall he have to pay for
it ? That is easily calculated. Take the
figures we have already quoted, £4,000,000
as the capital required and 6s. Bd. as the
value of the land granted for it. That
would necessitate the alienation of
12,000,000 acres, which with what has
been already sold and selected would still
leave about 409,000,000 acres untouched,
not a very important deduction in area.
And what revenue would be sacrificed ?
At 10s. per square mile—the rent we are
receiving for it—just £9375 per annum.
Not a heavy price to pay for a railway
that would open up a large portion of the
interior, that would pour working capital
into the country, and that would give us
a fair prospect of speedily doubling our
revenue, population, and trade. The land
given would be represented by only a


narrow track across our map, the revenue
sacrificed would hardly make a perceptible
difference in the Treasurer’s budget, and
the laud would not run away—it would
still remain part of Queensland ; only it
would have passed into the hands of men
who, by the very magnitude of the sum
they spent in acquiring it, would be com-
pelled to make the most of its natural
capabilities to repay themselves, and in
doing so would necessarily swell the trade
and production of the community of which
they would form part.
So great and manifold are the advan-
tages of the proposal that it would seem
as if the public could take up but one
attitude with regard to it—that of hearty
approval. But whenever a novelty is
brought forward there always will be
OBJECTIONS TO THE PLAN.
This proposal affords no exception to the
rule. Objections have been freely made,
but these have evidently arisen, for the
most part, from ignorance of its real
nature. For instance, it has been sug-
gested that these grants would lock up, in
large estates, lands that might be needed
for agricultural settlement by men of
small means. But between the latitude
in which they would begin and the coast
there must be from 100 to 150 million
acres of land, and that surely is enough
to meet the demands of small settlers for
some generations at least. In any case,
the small settler could do nothing with the
Western country. It is undoubtedly of
great fertility, consisting for the most
part of open plains and downs bearing the
richest pasturage. But nature has limited
the manner in which it can be used. The
air is dry, very dry in certain seasons, the
rainfall is heavy, but occurs only at irregular
and often lengthy intervals. Those who
know it best are very doubtful whether the
grazing capacity of a given acreage can be
actually increased, and, although when
fairly treated i: will keep sheep and cattle
rolling fat, it cannot bear a heavy stock.
And water is scarce. Certainly it can be
easily stored by means of dams and
reservoirs; in fact it is in this manner that
the full capabilities of the country can be
brought out. But these works demand
capital. They must be on a large scale ;
a reservoir must contain a sufficient body
of water to stand the evaporation of long
hot and windy months, or it will be use-
less. Evidently this is not country for
the homestead selector, or the settler
seeking for a moderate-sized conditional
purchase. The agricultural settlers will
not lose anything of which they could
possibly avail themselves, and there is
more than enough to supply their needs in
the vast coastal and intermediate districts
which it is not proposed to touch.
Other objections have been made as
evidently arising from ignorance of the
nature of the proposal. It has been
represented that it would engage the
whole energy of the country, whereas we
have shown that it would set it free ; and
it has been plausibly argued that it would
swallow up the land revenue by casting so
much private land upon the market.
Even if there were some force in this last
objection, it is evident that the great
general increase in State income would
cover the deficiency. But the leasehold
value of the whole Western country
would be so greatly enhanced that
very much higher rents could be
fairly demanded from runholders, and
that increase would much more than
cover any possible deficiency in ordinary
Government land sales. And we doubt
the probability of a deficiency. The class
of small selectors would continue to seek
for homesteads in the Eastern districts of
the colony, where soil, climate, and proxi-
mity to market combine to attract them,
and the great increase in general prosperity
would doubtless produce its full effect in
stimulating this description of settlement.
But, in the forefront of the objections,
there is placed the supposed danger to the
commonwealth arising from the formation
of a
MONSTER LAND RING.
This difficulty has been brought forward
in a manner that shows some little con-
fusion of ideas. It has been assumed
that American “ rings” have acquired the
influence which they undoubtedly exer-
cised—and as undoubtedly abused—by
the possession of large tracts of land. This
is a complete mistake. Neither here nor
there does the possession of land give in-
fluence. In the thickly peopled countries
of the Old World, where the land is all pri-
vate property, the man who owns any large
portion of it must be an influential man.


He holds that on which so many hundreds
of people must live; there is no room for
them elsewhere. Not so here. If one
man owned the whole, say, of the Gregory
district, it might make him a wealthy man,
but his land alone would not enable him
to influence a soul. No man would be
induced to seek his favor for permission
to reside on his estate, while all Queens-
land was open to his choice; if he
wanted tenants he would have to seek for
them. But his wealth might give him a
power which his land did not. That pro •
bably is what objectors to land grants
mean. American “rings” obtained power
by having the control of much money in
a country where the administration of the
law and the conduct of public affairs is
susceptible of influence by direct bribery.
Land was the basis on which some rings
operated ; but others, such as the “ silver
ring,” rose to political importance by ob-
taining possession of a number of rich
mines. The worst of all, the Tammany
ring, reigned by obtaining control of the
municipal funds of the city of New York.
In short, an American ring is simply a
combination of men having the control of
capital, who occasionally use their money
to influence public affairs ; and the asso-
ciation of some of these combinations
with land grants was purely accidental.
No doubt, in a society like ours, the
possession of capital does give a man
influence ; and an association of capitalists
uniting their funds may also unite their
influence. We may go further and admit
the possibility that such a combined influ-
ence might be used to the detriment of
the body politic. But what then 1 Do we
object to the formation of banks or other
joint stock corporations because they are
wealthy 1 Would we object to an associa-
tion of capitalists clubbing their funds to
work a group of mines 1 Why then
should there be an objection to a corpo-
ration raising enough capital to make a
railway 1 Granting that a wealthy cor-
poration may also be influential, are we to
forbid its formation 1 If so, we ought to
be prepared to take another step in the
application of Communistic principles,
and legislate to prevent individuals ac-
quiring more than a certain capital, and
to stop citizens from becoming rich men
lest they might grow too powerful. The
objection when analysed appears puerile.
Of course there is some risk : there is risk
incurred in taking a trip by a steamboat.
We cannot gain any advantage without
risking something; and in this case the
advantage is so great and the risk so small
that the one is as dust in the balance
compared with the other. What! We
are to decline to develop the resources of
this colony lest, being so great, they may
create among us a class of wealthy men
who may possibly acquire too great an
influence in the State 1 That is what
the argument comes to, and it is only
necessary to strip it of the vague language
in which it has been clothed to demon-
strate its futility.
There are a number of evil deeds which
it has been suggested such a corporation
might do. It has been hinted that they
might raise money on their land grants
and enjoy their plunder, leaving the rail-
way uncompleted ; they might undersell
Government in the land market; swamp
the country with Chinese laborers, &c.,
&c. These suggestions all implj- a very
poor opinion of the Parliament of Queens-
land and whatever Ministry it may accord
its confidence. Surely such obvious diffi-
culties would be met by the terms of the
contract. Is it likely that the Govern-
ment would transfer the freehold of
the land —the payment for the railway
•work —before that work itself was com-
pleted ; neglecting a precaution taken by
evary man who gives out a contract 1 Or
is it probable that a Government, pledged
to exclude Chinese, would neglect the
obvious precaution of inserting a clause in
the agreement with a corporation about to
undertake so great a work, forbidding
them to employ Asiatic laborers 1 As for
the possibility of the corporation undersell-
ing Government in disposing of their land
grants, that eventuality could be guarded
against, as it has been in America, by
a mutual agreement on a certain mini-
mum price per acre. But where even
would the harm be if the company did
undersell the Government ? Have we not
long ago agreed hat the price obtained
for the land was a secondary consideration
compared with the settlement of the
country ? If the company could by cheap
land sales get rid of every acre of their
grants, settling a band of freeholders across


the interior of the colony, would that be a
loss or a gain to the community 1
And this leads straight to the next
branch of the subject. There has been much
vague talk about what a corporation of
capitalists would do with their land grants.
Here is some information taken from the
evidence given by the hon. John Douglas
before the Railway Commission, in
January, 1872. He had just returned
from England and America, after acting as
Agent-General for the colony, and while in
the United States had made some enquiries
concerning the system of giving land
grants to induce private corporations to
make railways through the waste lands of
the Republic. After describing the
manner in which the grants are made
there, he spoke of the effect these com-
panies produced in peopling the country.
He said ;—“ From what I saw of their
operation in England, I believe they are
the most effective means of encouraging
immigration of the best kind, both from
the Eastern States and from European
countries. I believe that a similar system
applied to Australia, through possible
American agency in the first instance,
could be made to work —I mean without
real difficulty. They (the Americans) are
now so thoroughly conversant with the
mode in which these operations are con-
ducted that it only requires us to know
the manner to apply them here on similar
conditions. And as the great inducement
to these land companies is the settlement
of population, so here, I think, they will
prove the great medium of effecting that
result.” We agree entirely with Mr.
Douglas’ conclusions, but we believe that
the work can be done without American
agency. Such a company would un-
doubtedly be the best immigration agency
we have ever had for Queensland, and one
that would cost us nothing to maintain.
To use their land grants the company
must bring people out here, people who
will buy their land and use it. That is
what we have been trying to do these many
years past. To attain that end we keep
up an expensive general agency, and we
spend money at the rate of something like
.£IOO,OOO annually. In the manner de-
scribed we should have an unpaid agency
doing the same work, and doing it with
the increased activity and efficiency which
always distinguishes the efforts of men
transacting their private business from
those of officials acting under the direc-
tion of a Government.
And now, having stated the reasons
why the construction «f a railway across
the colony on a system of land grants
would be a public benefit, the next step
will be to show the reasons for adopting
the particular route advocated for the
TEANS-CONTINENTAL LINE.
It is evident that such a railway must
follow a route that will enable it to form
part of the general railway system of the
continent, and allow of the lines already
in course of construction in the colony to
fall into the general scheme. For that
reason it is proposed to continue in the
direction of the line now being con-
structed to Roma. From that town the
route would lie north-westerly to Blackall,
on the Barcoo, following the level country
and passing through the easy gaps that
pierce the southern watershed of that
river. From there it would continue in a
north-westerly direction, crossing the
western border of the colony at the
21st parallel. The line to Roma
has already passed through all the
difficult country that intervenes between
the coast line of the colony and the
interior plateau; there is, therefore, nothing
to delay its rapid extension through the
interior, while, by pursuing an oblique
course, it would reach a greater extent of
country than any line running directly
east and west. The railways from Rock-
hampton and Townsville would naturally
junction with this main trunk linp, thus
bringing nearly the whole interior within
reach of railway communication with the
three main ports of the colony. The ex-
tension to Stauthorpe, now in course of
construction, will no doubt be eventually
carried on to the New Sou'h Wales border
and effect a junction with the railway
system of that colony—or a connection
via Cunnamulla and Burke might be made
—while the north and south line projected
from Adelaide would naturally junction
with our line at a convenient point inside
South Australian territory. Thus, while
forming the main trunk line of Queens-
land, and uniting the railways we have
projected or are constructing, it would
also form an important link in the grand


chain of railway communication which
must eventually connect the various colonies
of Eastern, Northern, and Central Australia.
To Queensland and South Australia such
a work would offer the immediate advan-
tage of rendering available the almost
limitless extent of good country which
they possess but cannot at present use ; to
the colonies at large it would afford
interior lines of communication for
general intercolonial trade. These advan-
tages are evident and may be calculated
on as certainties. There are other pro
babilities which may also be fairly
noticed. By establishing railway com-
munication with a port on the north coast
of the continent, an admirable channel for
trade with Asia would be provided. Of
course, we cannot tell what such a trade
might be worth, but it may fairly be
included among the contingent advan-
tages of the project. There is one
advantage, however, which cannot be
regarded as problematical. A route would
be open for speedier communication with
Europe than we can hope to attain at
present. Steamers starting from Port
Darwin can reach Europe in less time, by
several days, than from any other Aus-
tralian port. There are many descrip-
tions of goods in the transport of
which rapidity of carriage is essential,
and these at least would be conveyed
by railway to avoid the delay of cir-
cumnavigating the continent. To pas-
sengers, the speedy transport would be
of great service, while for the conveyance
of mails the railway would be of incalcu-
lable .service. Indeed it might be made a
condition of the company’s concession
that they should convey mails free, and a
mail centre would then be created at
Port Darydn and much expense spared,
not only to Queensland but all the colonies.
But it is hardly necessary in these days to
dwell on the many benefits to be derived
from rapidity of communication. In Aus-
tralia we have always felt the disadvan-
tage of our position, at so great a dis-
tance from the centre of the world’s com-
merce. To facilitate and increase the
speed of our intercourse with Europe, we
have spent and are spending large sums
of money. It may therefore be assumed
that in this respect the utility of a traus
continental line will be generally and
readily appreciated.
By following the route marked out
very great incidental advantages would
be obtained. For the most part
rivers would be crossed near their
sources. To those who know the
interior and are aware of the formidable
bodies of water which, in wet seasons,
pass down the great watercourses, this
will be understood to be no small gain
from an engineering point of view. The
high average excellence of the country to
be traversed is another important point.
It is not pretended that on a line of such
extent no sterile patches will be traversed,
but these are remarkably few in number
and of comparatively limited extent. For
the most part the country is extremely
fertile, covered with fattening grass and
herbage. The value for grazing of good
Western Queensland country has long been
known, and most of that which lies along
the line is good. It must be remembered
that the wide flat plains subject to inunda-
tion which border the great waterways of
the interior at some distance down their
course are, on this line, for the most part
avoided. Of course there is at present the
counterbalancing disadvantage of a com-
parative scarcity of permanent water. It
is rare indeed that abundant water is
found on the best country, and the defect
is just the one that can be most certainly
remedied. By water storage, millions of
the most fertile acres of the back country,
at present useless, can be made avail-
able ; but water storage demands the in-
vestment of capital, and some relief from
the crushing taximposed on pastoral indus-
try by the present heavy carriage rates. The
railway would introduce capital and
diminish, the expenditure on carriage,
leaving the sum saved to add to the money
available for improvement. In fac:, it is
in this manner the company would make
a profit from their land grants. They
would pay for their land at the rate of 6s.
Bd. an acre. At present, of course it is
not worth anything like that sum; the
highest rent paid for it is about half
a farthing, and the holders would probably
throw it up rather than submit to any
considerable increase. But by making it
accessible a value not before existing would
at once be created. The system ut grants


would probably be on the principle of
alternate blocks. Some blocks, consisting
of good country and well watered, would
no doubt be immediately saleable for more
than the price named; others might be
poor and not worth the money ; but the
greater part would probably be excellent
country badly watered. Such country
would either be improved— i.e., have water
stored on it by the grantees, or be let on
improving lease. It must be remembered
that the yearly rainfall in Western Queens-
land reaches a respectable total. Only,
the country being for the most part high
above the sea level and the rain
coming in heavy downpours at long
intervals, the water runs rapidly
off, and there are few springs. But it is
everywhere possible to increase the depth
of natural waterholes or to make dams
and reservoirs, thus bringing every acre
into permanent use. At present it is not
an uncommon thing for stock on a station
during a bad season to be starving on the
patches of country surrounding one or
two permanent waterholes, while there are
miles of good nutritious grass and herb-
age on the run too far from water to be
used, yet intersected by creek channels in
which the expenditure of a little capital
would have stored a permanent supply.
And sheep suffer most severely in such
seasons, for they cannot travel the dis-
tances to and from water that cattle
contrive to go in a dry season. This is
one of the reasons why the depasturing
of sheep will not be extensively carried
out in the West until the country is
opened. A man can put a herd of cattle
on a piece of country and contrive to get
along with little capital, for his expenses
are few, and his stock can use country in
a wide radius round his waterholes. But
to stock the run with sheep he must have
plenty of working capital at his com-
mand, and he is also greatly dependent on
the ruling rates of carriage; and in
Western Queensland capital is scarce and
cheap carriage unattainable at present.
When the interior is pierced by a rail-
way, carriage reduced to a few pounds per
ton, and a sufficient supply of capital is
brought into the country, it is hardly
possible to set a limit to the amount of
its produce. There are few Queenslanders
who have not heard of the Riverina dis-
trict as one of the most valuable posses-
sions of New South Wales. It may
almost be said that the railway policy of
the two leading colonies has been
mainly a struggle for the privilege of
carrying the produce and doing the trade
of that district. Well, in no respect is
Riverina country superior to that of
Western Queensland, save that it enjoys
naturally greater carriage facilities, and in
extent it is as a parish to a county. At pre-
sent New South Wales has 21,521,000
sheep, and Queensland 5,417,526. We have
the country to reverse the proportion
without diminishing the present total of
New South Wales. It is merely a ques-
tion of carriage and the rate of natural
increase. Few who are not acquainted
with the country can fully appreciate the
value of its pasturage; but the number
of experienced squatters from the Southern
colonies who are now numbered among
our Western runholders—in spite of the
long and expensive inland carriage—may
give some idea of the manner in which
capitalists will flock to it when a
railway remedies the defect. Any
company that will undertake the
work with sufficient oapital may
certainly count on recouping their
outlay and making a handsome profit
by selling or leasing their grants. But, if
they grow rich by the use of blocks of
country having a frontage to the line,
what about the community of Queensland,
which will retain the alternate frontage
blocks and all the country behind them,
equally valuable, for at least a hundred
miles 1 The calculation will be, at least,
interesting.
The land company will take the land at,
say, 6s. Bd. per acre—that is, they ask
three acres for every pound spent in mak-
ing a railway; the average cost of the
line may be estimated at £5OOO per mile,
and the length of railway in Queensland
may be taken at 750 miles. Assume,
also, that the land, when the railway has
been made, is worth only the 6s. Bd. per
acre estimated, and that the blocks have
each ten miles frontage to the line. For
ten miles of railway, at £5OOO per mile,
and at three acres for the pound, 150,000
acres would be granted to the company.
To do this, a belt of 23| miles back, on
each side of the line, would have to be


surveyed, and one-half of the included
country, in alternate sections, conveyed
to the railway-makers. On a line of
750 miles, at £5OOO per mile and
6s. Bd. per acre, this half would
represent a realisable value of
<£3,750,000. That would be the limit of
the company’s gain. But the community
would retain the other half, which would
be of equal value, and the rest. It is not
likely that a distance of even fifty or sixty
miles back from the railway would make
any difference in the value of the land for
pastoral purposes. Therefore, there would
be a belt of country on each side of the
railway, equal in size to the one from
which the grants were taken, of similar
value; and of this the community would
retain the whole. This would give
.£3,750,000 for the alternate blocks in the
frontage band and £7,500,000 for each
of the outside belts, in all £18,750,000
as the value of the country remaining in-
side these limits at the disposal of the
community. Of course this on the sup-
position that the average value of the land
does not exceed 6s. Bd.—a most impro-
bable supposition, as good pastoral country
within reach of railway communication
has never yet sold at so low a figure. Nor
is any account taken of the general in-,
crease in value of the country lying out-
side the band, 140 miles wide, which we have
imagined as following the line of railway.
It may be remarked that this band of
country, of which five-sixths would remain
at the disposal of the Crown, would only
include about 68,000,000 acres. It could
be wiped clean out of the map of Queens-
land, and still leave us .158,000,000
acres more than New South Wales pos
sesses altogether. And yet there are people
who speak of the proposed land grants
as a sacrifice of national property, likely to
embarrass the community in the future !
It is as if a boy were to refuse to eat his
dinner for fear that there might not be
enough meat left for him when he reached
middle age.
In short, on
SUMMING UP THE WHOLE AFFAIR,
there seems no reason why the project
should not be carried into effect, or why
the people of Queensland and South
Australia should not consent to it. In
England there is much more money than
there is profitable employment for. The
accumulation of capital during the last
decade even has been prodigious. As the
London Times said concerning it, the only
way which an English manufacturer could
find of using his accumulated profit was
to pull down his old factory and build a
bigger one. To this process there was an
inevitable limit. The world could not
consume the produce of British industry
as fast as that produce itself could in-
crease, and other nations were learning not
only to supply their own wants but to
compete for custom in the general market.
Thus, when a check to general prosperity
occurred, caused by war and famine, there
came great distress in the mother-country.
Money had accumulated and people
had increased, but men could not
eat money, and the ordinary channels
for the employment of British capital
were closed. And it became evident that
even if all temporary obstructions were re-
moved they would not continue to find
room forthegolden stream at therate it had
been swelling. New channels must be found.
Englishmen have lent money to every
nation that is sufficiently civilised to know
what a public loan means, and to ask for
one. Their experience of foreign borrowers
has not been of late encouraging, and yet
an outlet must be found for their capital,
or they must be content to live by con-
suming it. Wherever an enterprise, offer-
ing a probability of profit, has been intro-
duced to the notice of the British capitalists,
they have engaged in it. In every part of
the world mines are being dug, soil culti-
vated, railways built, and commerce ex-
panded by the use of British capital. But
outside of the Empire there are risks
against which no precaution avails. The
British investor feels that his money is
exposed to other dangers than the vicis-
situdes of trade when invested in places
where war or revolution may sweep away
in a month the fruit of years of patient
industry. Therefore, their attention is
being more and more directed to the
British colonies, and especially to Aus-
tralia—a land lying beyond the reach of
a foreign enemy, free from the risk of in-
ternal disturbance, and everywhere sub-
ject to the peaceful rule of law.
That attention has borne its fruits.
When an Australian colony enters the


money market it borrows on easy and
favorable terms. But we have explained
the limits under which colonial Govern-
ments can borrow-—limits clearly under-
stood by the British investor—and these
cannot be overpassed. But there is no such
limit to private enterprise. The fertile
wilderness in which we colonists are living,
so few 7 in number as hardly to disturb the
solitude which reigns over it, is like the
enchanted city of the fairy tale ; it needs
but the proper spell to waken it to active
and abundant life. That spell is a very
simple one ; it is only the introduction of
men and money. But, like other spells, it
must be complete or it is useless. Bring
men without money into the wilderness
and they are helpless ; bring money with-
out men and it is as water spilt on the
sand. By the project shadowed forth in
these pages both will be brought together.
By parting with a small portion of the
greatest, and yet the most intangible, of
our present possessions, the freehold of
tl e great interior, we can set going a
movement which will certainly not stop
till, in this quarter of the globe at least,
it has “ subdued the earth and replenished
it for the successful inauguration of
this work will break the dam that walls
out from us the whole sea of British
capital. A loan to a Colonial Govern-
ment is like any other State loan.
The investor may be satisfied with
his security, but he does not become
better acquainted with the country to
which he lends his money; the deben-
tures are simply shares—safer than others
perhaps, but still shares. But a company
like this would give to a great number of
individual capitalists a much fuller know-
ledge. They would learn what this
wonderful country of ours is really
capable of producing, the soil and all that
can be grown on it, the minerals that lie
beneath its surface, the multiplicity of
products that lie around ready to the
hand of whoever comes with the neces-
sary means for taking possession of them.
Is it likely that they would rest content
with the construction of one railway and
not rather go on to occupy the great field
for investment that it would open to
them 1 They would learn the great truth
that it is here—not among the savages
and barbarians of South Africa, nor even
in the frost-bound forests and prairies of
the Dominion of Canada—that the most
fruitful field for British energy and capital
lies.
But, without speculating on remoter
contingencies, the certain and immediate
advantages of the project are sufficient.
From the commencement of active opera-
tions these would be felt. The work
would be rapidly pushed on, for the
country is level and the company
would for its own sake lose no
time. As it proceeded, in fact from
the moment it was definitely agreed
on, the holders of country anywhere within
reach of its route would prepare to take
advantage of the approaching benefit.
Sheep would take the place of cattle,
water storage would be undertaken, im-
provements of all sorts commenced. Capi-
tal, assured of ultimate profit, would flow
into the work. And, through a thousand
channels, this money would find its way
into general circulation. Meanwhile, there
would be no hesitation in the prosecution
of such public works as the Government
might have on hand, for improving trade
would swell the revenue, and relieve
the fear at present entertained that it
may prove too weak to bear the burden
laid upon it. And in the prosecution of
the Government railways there would be
what is now lacking, a definite aim and
plan, so that they could be carried out
with determination and energy. The
money thus set afloat would seek invest-
ment, and would find it in a thousand
different way—mines would be opened,
plantations formed, and industries estab-
lished. Thus the demand for labor
would be constantly increasing, and would
probably keep well ahead of any possible
supply, and the market for agricultural
produce would continually expand. And
this progress would not be a flush of
speculation ; it would be sound, cover-
ing only solid ground. For it would
depend, first, on a continuous increase in
the production of our main staple for ex-
portation—wool, and probably meat. The
capital set free would go to the produc
tion of other staples, metals and sugar, for
which we can also find a foreign market.
And the constantly increasing population
engaged in the production of staples which
can be sold outside of the colony would


consume the agricultural products raised
by the settlers on the land. The progress
would be solid, because it would be
founded on a direct increase in the actual
production of exportable staples, and not
a mere trade spurt stimulated by an acci-
dental influx of money.
But this progress would be forced, to
we are told ! Of all the objections which
have ever emanated from that dullness
which apes wisdom, this is the most
empty. Of course it would be forced.
When a tiller of the soil, abandoning his
hoe and spade, acquires enough capital to
put a horse into a plough, and thereby
gets a very much larger breadth of land
under crop, he is also forcing his progress.
Should he therefore leave the plough
alone, and stick to his spade ? And,
when getting still more capital he
manages, by the use of improved
machinery, to increase further the area
of his cultivated land, he continues
the forcing process. This is exactly what
it is now proposed to do. We want to
get more land into production, and the
project now laid before the public is one
framed on a rational plan for effecting
that end. Are we to abandon all hopes
of progress by our own efforts 1 Are we
to sit under our gum-trees till in the
course of years they die and rot, leaving
a vacant space for us to dibble in potatoes 1
Are we, in short, like the old woman in
Sir Walter Scott’s story, to decline the
use of winnowing machines to clean
our wheat under the belief that it would
be more proper to wait for a “ dispensa-
tion of wind on the threshing floor.”
We cannot believe that the public of
Queensland are of this mind. That they
should scrutinise with care every detail of
this project we can understand ; it is right
and proper that they should do so. But,
having once understood its scope, having
fully grasped the immense advantages it
offers to them, the boundless career it
opens to Queensland, the impetus it will
give to the progress of all Australia,
we are convinced that they will put aside
the frivolities advanced against it, and
admit that, whatever few real objections
actually exist, they are as nothing to weigh
in the balance against it. It has been
claimed for this projected work that it
might be called a national undertaking.
The claim is a just one, for from its com-
mencement it would stimulate the de-
velopment of every part of the colony, and
before it was finished it would have
launched Queensland on a career of pros-
perity which would bid fair to equal the
wildest hopes of the most sanguine indivi
dual amongst us.
EXPLANATION.
This plan shows the proportionate area of land
grants in a band of country 140 miles wide. It
represents roughly a section of the railway, in-
dicated by the double line =. The blocks would
be each ten miles frontage, with a depth of 23J
miles. Those marked a would be grants to the
railway company ; the rest would remain in the
possession of the Crown.
Printed by J. H. Reynolds, Machine Printer, George Street, Brisbane.




