









to ({Mgtianitij
WHAT I LEARNT ON THE WAY-
A Popular Defence of Christianity and a Refutation
of the Fallacies of Secularism.
ISAAC SELBY,
JTORMBRIY FrkETHONGHT LECTURER, HOW ChRISTIAJT
Minister.
Cmbhtian Pioneer Publishing Company,
MELBOURNE, VICTORIA.


ip o 3 m
TO MY KIND AND CHRISTIAN
BENEFACTOR,
DR. JOSEPH KINGSBURY,
THIS LITTLE VOLUME,
WHICH BUT FOR HIS MEDICAL SKILL, WOULD NEVER
HIVE BEEN WRITTEN, IS GRATEFULLY
INSCRIBED.
THE AUTHOR.


PREFACE.
Were I to make this little volume but a reeital of personal remini-
scences, it would be but an exhibition of vanity, and devoid of
value to the reader. Therefore, in sketching my path from Atheism
to Christianity, I have endeavoured to repeat arguments and expla-
nations that assisted me in my mental development. In doing this,
I hope to warn the reader of the shoals and whirlpools that lie
hidden in the treacherous ocean of Infidelity, and furnish the
“ Soldiers of the Cross with some little ammunition ” that may be
useful to them in their combats with Freethinkers. John Stewart
Mill wrote the story of his own life, not because he was a vain man
and wanted to tell the world of his intellectual triumphs, but
because he had received a unique education, and he hoped that in
relating how he had acquired it, he might help others in the attain-
ment of useful knowledge. If my Freethought friends grant that
this great champion of one of their schools did wisely, they cannot
complain of my striving to show men the way of salvation under the
guise of an autobiographical topic. In writing this work lam executing
a sacred duty that I owe to the cause of Christianity. For ten long
years I was associated with the Freethought party ; the great portion
of this time I peregrinated up and down Australasia as a professional
lecturer, administering the poison of Infidelity. Ther fore, now that
I have more light I feel it incumbent upon me to supi ly the antidote
—hence this book—much what it contains ha- previously been
delivered in my lectures.
August Ist, 1890. Isaac Selbt.


*; <■)*;. ' - - ■ -h ■ • |
W
v
/ .\ . i ,•


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I— Pages 9-14.
Some Sceptics who recanted, and why.
The early unbelievers, Paul and Thomas—Benjamin Franklin—
Chateaubriand—Joseph Barker—Thomas Cooper—Dr. Sexton-
William Hone—Auguste] Compte—Mrs. Besant—Robsrt Owen—Mr
Greenwood.
CHAPTER lI— PAGES 14—20.
The Creed of the Secularist.
The one world at a time dogma—Father Damien, the Lepers’
friend—Samoan Christianity—Anthony Collins and Voltaire—
moral effects of Theism—Atheism as a comforter to the afflicted—
Atheism at the grave—Christianity the safe side.
CHAPTER 111— Pages 20—30.
Secularism an Ignominious Failure.
The Sectarianism of Secularism —Sensuous andiScientific Materialism
—English Secularism—Bradlaugh, Saladin and Holyoake—Free*
thought in New Zealand—Failures in New South Wales—Troubles
of the elect in Melbourne—Anarchy and Atheism.
CHAPTER IY— Pages 30—36
Utility the test of Morality.
Christianity the only true Secularism —Lecky’s testimony—Morality
of Divine Origin—The Testimony of Buckle and Mill—The Golden
Buie before Jesus—Utility—Christ a Unique Object Lesson in
Morality—ls Honesty a Matter of Pol icy—A Pysiological Basis of
Morals.


CHAPTER V— PAGES 37—43.
Christianity the Friend of Progress.
Freedom of Thought the Birthright of Man—Priestcraft the-
Enemy of Progress—Knowledge the Handmaid of Religion—The
Church and State an Unholy Alliance—Christianity a Peaceable
Religion—How Christ Dignified Labour—Social Salvation in Christ.
CHAPTER VI PAGES 43—50.
Obstacles to Belief.
The Nature qf Christian Evidence—The Good Physician—The
Counterfeit Proves the Real—Meekness a Virtue—Moses, Socrates,
and Newton—Non-resistance a Wise Policy—The Evils of Anxiety—
Spencer and George—lndustry—The Difficulties of Science—
Talraage’s Illustration—The Testimony of Pagans—Slavery—The
Emancipation of Woman—Saints and Sinners.
CHAPTER Vll— Pages 50—55.
Retribution.
The Inquisition and Ingersoll—What is Christianity ? —Christ’s
Instructions not to Resent Injury—The Medieval Idea of Hell—The
Larger Hope—Thomas Paine—Social, Political, and Commercial
Damnation —Evidence of a Just Providence—The Secular Society’s.
Almanac —Faith and Progress.
CHAPTER Vlll— Pages 55—59.
The Verity and Value of the Miracles.
The Freethinker’s Method of Attack—The Request for Miracles
to-day—An Illustration from Geology—The Dock Labourers’ Strike
—The Object of Miracles—Hume’s Famous Argument—The Contra-
dictions of Atheism—lgnorance and Speculation—The Value of
Historical Testimony—His Miracles Labours of Love.
CHAPTER IX— Pages 59—64.
The Grimes of Secularism.
An Unsavory Task —The Need of it—Slander—Our Solar System
—Loose Literature —Elements of Social Science—Phallic Worship—
Joseph Barker —Besant and Symes on Marriage—Two Revolutions,,
the English and French.


CHAPTER X— Pages 64—72.
Great Infidels.
Gladstone on Great Men —Bradlaugh—Paine Byron Shelley
“George Henry Lewis and George Elliot—Darwin Carlisle—Voltaire
—Tyndal Renan Mill Leclcy Straus Gibbon Colenso—
•Colonial Scepticism.
CHAPTER XI— Pages 72—81.
A Leaf from My Life.
My Last Freethought Lecture—My Wife becomes a Christian —
The Collins and Selby Debate— Penury and Sickness—Good Samari-
tans—Enmore—My Career as a Lecturer—Seven Debates with
Representative Christians—The'.Green and Selby debate—Melbourne
Lygon street—My Reply to Symes—Money no Object—Swanston
street —Answers to Slanders.
CHAPTER XII— Pages 81—88.
Primitive Christianity, the Roch on which I Stand.
Our Plea, and how we arrived at it —Our Creed —The Brotherhood
■of Man—Christian Union with Liberty—lnfidelity a Disease oc-
casioned by Corrupt Teaching—lllustration from the lives of
Bradlaugh, Voltaire, Gibbon, Gilbert West, and Lord Lyttleton—
Human Creeds.
CHAPTER XIII— Pages 88—94.
The Conclusion: A Summary.
Christ the Light of the World.
Prior A Co., Printers, 542 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.




FROM ATHEISM TO
CHRISTIANITY.
CHAPTER I.
Some Sceptics who Recanted and Why ?
There are many brilliant examples on tlie Page of
History of men who have violently assailed Christianity
turning i*ound and becoming zealous defenders of it.
More than one-fourth of the entire New Testament is
fi’om the pen of the Apostle Paul, and portions of the
remainder is devoted to the story of his life. Yet this
man in his youth was a bitter opponent of the disciples ;
he persecuted the early Christians, but at length, realiz-
ing that he was in the wrong, he became the “ Apostle to
the Gentiles,” and we now go back to his writings to ascer-
tain the wishes of our divine Master. He said “I
obtained mercy in that I did it ignorantly in unbelief.”
•Christ was more lenient with scepticism than with
hypocrisy; he strongly denounced the Pharisees, who,
under the cover of religion, spent their lives in the ruin of
their fellows. Yet in rebuking the Sadducees, he used
milder terms saying, “Ye do err, not knowing the scrip-
tures, nor the power of God,” and condescended to
give to the doubting Thomas ocular demonstration of
the verity of the resurrection.
Since the time of Thomas, Christianity has had to
face many sceptics, and its career has been a triumphal
march, as history attests, by furnishing many incidents of
converted sceptics. A few examples will suffice. Benjamin
Franklin, the illustrious friend of Thomas Paine, was in
his youth a Heist. In his autobiography he says he
made three great mistakes in his life, and one of them
was the scepticism of his youth, and he warns his son
.against falling into similar errors. When Thomas Paine


sent him the manuscript of a sceptical work he was
about to publish, for perusal, Franklin returned the
manuscript, with the following letter of admonition—-
“ Dear Sir.—l have read your manuscript with some at-
tention. By the argument it contains against a par-
ticular providence—though you allow a general provi-
dence, —you strike at the foundation of all religion. For
without belief in a providence that takes cognizance of,
guards and guides, and may favor particular persons,
there is no motive to worship a Deity, to fear his dis-
pleasure, or pray for Lis protection. I will not enter into
any discussion of your principles, though you seem to
desire it. At present I shall only give you my opinion,
that though your reasonings are subtle, and may
prevail with some readers, yet you ivill not succeed so as.
to change the general sentiments of mankind on that
subject, and the consequence of printing this piece will
be a great deal of odium drawn upon yourself, mischief
to you, and no benefit to others. He that spits against the'
wind spits in his own face.
But were you to succeed, do you imagine any good
would be done by it ? You yourself may find it easy to
lead a virtuous life without the assistance afforded by
religion. You, having a clear perception of the advant-
ages of virtue and the disadvantages of vice, and possess-
ing a strength of resolution sufficient to resist common
temptations; but think how great a portion of mankind
consists of weak and ignorant men and women, and of
inexperienced and inconsiderate youth of both sexes, who
have need of the motives of religion to restrain them
from vice, to support their virtue, and retain them in
practice of it, till it becomes habitual, which is the great
point of its security.
And perhaps you are indebted to her originally, that
is to your religious education, for your habits of virtue
upon which you now justly value yourself. You might
easily display your excellent talent of reasoning upon a
less hazardous subject, and thereby obtain a rank
with our most distinguished authors. For among us
it is not necessary, as among the Hottentots, that a youth
to be raised into the company of men should prove his.
manhood by beating his mother.


I would advise you therefore not to attempt unchain-
ing the tiger, but to bum this piece before it is seen by
any other person, whereby you will save yourself a great
deal of mortification by the enemies it may raise against
you, and perhaps a good deal of regret and repentance.
If men are so wicked with religion what would they be without
it ? I intend this letter itself as a proof of my friend-
ship and thereby add no professions to it, but subscribe
myself,
Yours,
B. Franklin.”
Taken from Sparks’ “Life and Works of Benjamin
Franklin.” Vol. X, page 281.
Franklin became a Unitarian by conviction, but he
liberally subscribed to uphold Christianity generally, and
never gave expression to his dissenting convictions, save
under pressure, such was his intense faith in the benefi-
cent influence of that system. He strongly supported a
motion in the Pennsylvanian Assembly, to open their
meetings with prayer. In his eighty-fifth year, on being
solicited to give expression to his religious convictions,
he wrote to a friend a letter setting them forth, from
which I cull the following extract, taken from John
Bigelow’s biography of him : “ As to Jesus of Nazareth,
my opinion of whom you particularly desire, I think his
system of morals and his religion as he left them to us, the
best the world ever saw or is likely to see. I apprehend it has
received various corrupting changes, and I have with
most dissenters in England some doubts as to his divinity,
though it is a question I do not dogmatize upon, having
never studied it —and I think it needless to busy myself
now, when I expect soon an opportunity of knowing the
truth with less trouble, I see no harm however in its
being believed, if that belief has the good consequence,
as probably it has, of making his doctrine more respected
and more observed.”
Chateaubriand is another distinguished example of a
Rationalist ” returning to the bosom of the Church.
He was pxiled from France during the perilous times of
the great French Revolution. During his expatriation he
wandered over America and other parts of the world,


finally settling for a time in London. While there he heard
of the death of his mother, who was fondly devoted to
him. Her last days were embittered with grief at her
son’s infidelity. This caused him to seriously reflect on
his position, he became convinced of the truth of Christi-
anity, and wrote one of the most eloquent works extant
to-day, in the French language —aye in any language —in
defence of Christianity. The work is written from a
Roman Catholic stand-point, and is entitled “ The Genius
of Christianity.”
In more recent times we have heard of the secession
of Joseph Barker from Secularism. He was co-editor with
Charles Bradlaugh for some months on the National
Reformer , and a powerful exponent of Freethought on the
platform as well as through the press. In his auto-
biography, “ Lessons of Experience,” he gives his reasons
for becoming a Christian. In this book he casts serious
reflections upon the lives of prominent secularists, and
contends that infidelity is the fruitful parent of im-
morality.
Thomas Cooper is another gifted man, who was seduced
by the sophistries of scepticism, and lived to repent of his
mistakes. He is well known to the student of Christian
evidence as the author of that famous little book, “ The
Bridge of History over the Gulf of Time.” There is a
small library of Christian Evidence literature from his
pen.
Dr. Sexton, who is even now, or was till recently, doing
great work on the Christian evidence platform, was
formerly a pronounced Freethinker ; one of his poems I
remember was introduced into the Lyceum Guide for the
children in the Dunedin Freethought Sunday-school.
His poems I have frequently heard recited from the Free-
thought platform ; hut this is not at all surprising, con-
sidering the Freethinkers still trade on the reputation of
William Hone, and sell his “ Apocryphal New Testa-
ment,” although he renounced infidelity and became a
minister of the Christian religion, and regretted the
publication of that book.
How Atheism fails to satisfy the spiritual hanger of
mankind is seen in the case of Auguste Compte, who for
years devoted his life to scientific pursuits, contending


that science had nothing in common with religion. He
continued in Scepticism till somewhat advanced in life,
when he fell in lore with a bright young woman, seven-
teen years his junior. She died after a friendship of one
year, but bequeathed to him an affection and influence
that lasted till the end of his days. He went back on
his former teachings, and advocated the necessity of
religion. He started a new system, called it the religion
of humanity, placed man in the position of God, and then
worshipped this figment of his own imagination. He
felt the necessity for bread, but tried to satisfy himself
with a stone. Only recently we heard of Mrs. Besant,
who for so long a time had been a partner with Mr.
Bradlaugh in the National Reformer embracing Theo-
sophy, a species of Pantheism. She tells us that it
explains certain problems in psychology that Atheism
failed to touch. Pantheism, although resembling Atheism
in sorhe points, is really its antipodes, for it affirms that
everything is God. Thus, though formerly Mrs. Besant
saw God nowhere, now to her he is everywhere. Some-
what similarly the urbane and benevolent Robert Owen,
who in his debate with Alexander Campbell affirmed
“ that all religions of the world originated in error,”
became in his old age a confirmed Spiritualist. Brief as
has been the History of Rationalism in these Colonies, it
has not been without examples of this. In substantia-
tion of which I have only to cite the name of Mr. Green-
wood. The Sydney Protestant Standard of Saturday,
February Bth, 1890, gives the following sketch of him:
“ Mr. Greenwood was an able man, and while a Christian, a
Baptist minister, in conjunction with Rev. Dr. John Gibbon
and Rev. Dr. Zachary Barry, and others, was one of the
leaders of the great agitation, which, after its leaders had
fought hard and suffered much opposition and abuse, has
resulted in- the present unequalled system of National
Education in New South Wales, which even Mr. Skinner
admires. Mr. Greenwood, full of promise and ability,
entered parliament, and being exalted in popular estima-
tion, triumphant in the fight he had ably assisted in,
he fell. Drink claimed him for a victim, and degraded him.
He lost caste, his splendid talents were dimmed and wasted,
aiid he sank into a miserable failure, despite the bright


promise of his former years. Mr. Greenwood. had them
become a Secularist, and lectured for Secularism as a
means of livelihood. With his life as a Christian all that
redounds to the credit of his memory is associated ; with
his life as an infidel was associated his lamentable deg-
radation. From the time he lapsed from Christianity,
he did nothing for the good of his fellow man, that lives
to-day; but the building that he has assisted to erect
when he was a Christian, is to-day one of the noblest
edifices in the country, the Public Instruction Act; which
even Sir Henry Parkes was coerced by public opinion
into passing; after he had for years headed the struggle
against the principle of national education, on behalf of
the Denominationalists. Prosperity was fatal to Mr.
Greenwood. When he had been degraded by Secularism,
and had lost the former influence he had with his fellow-
men, and their confidence; after a thorough experience
of Secularism ; in his adversity he again turned to the
Lord, renounced Secularism, and bitterly repented of his
falling away. He re-established daily family prayer in
his household ; and before his death, he confessed that he
had to stimulate himself with spirits before he could go
on to the platform at the theatre, and speak against
Christ. He died trusting to the redeeming blood of
Christ, in hope of forgiveness and of blissful resurrec-
tion.” When thus we see so many who have missed
their way coming back repentant to the throne of God
or crying for light in some dark superstition of theii* own,
surely we should cling more closely to the cross of Christ,
realising that it is the symbol of life. To do this it
would be well for us to be thoroughly furnished with a
knowledge of its advantages over all other systems, and
to help in this direction, I proceed to deal in my next
chapter with the “ Creed of the Secularist.”
chapter 11.
The Creed of the Secularist.
A popular dogma of the Secularist is stated in the
words of Ingersoll, “One world at a time and try to


make the most of it.” Any system that tries to make
the most of mundane affairs, without considering the
influence the belief in another world has, in assisting to
-do it, depends on but a short-sighted policy. Another
world has been, and still is, the Archimedean lever for the
•elevation of this one, just as in material matters, to
understand natural phenomena, and to perfect some
Secular pursuits, we have to take a wider range of thought
than that given us by our own planet; so also must we
in the realm of ethics be guided by consideration of a
future life. We navigate our ships by the stars ; our
tides are guided in their ebb and flow by phases of the
moon, and our vegetation that carpets the world with
green derives its coloring properties from the sun. So
in the moral world must we look beyond this life to find
man’s highest incentive to right living. Christianity, by
teaching the immortality of the soul, leads men to make
sacrifices here for the benefit of their fellows. Take by
way of illustration the case of Father Damien, who went
on a mission to the lepers of the Sandwich Islands. He
knew full well that while ministering to the Spiritual
and secular wants of these unfortunates he was risking
his life, sooner or later he would fall a victim to the
dread disease; yet actuated by higher motives than present
pleasures, and knowing that his reward was beyond the
grave, he went forward with his noble work, until
disease and death claimed him as their own. Had
he believed in one world at a time, he would naturally
have sought for worldly advancement, and left the lepers
to look after themselves. It is no use telling us that
the creed of the Secularist offers the best encourage-
ment for continued work in this life. Our most eminent
men have been religious men. The tall trees that have
grown up in the forest of mankind, took their life from
the sunlight of another world. In music there are no
greater names than those of Hadyn, Handel and Mozart.
In poetry, no genius surpasses Shakespeare, Milt#n or
Longfellow. In philanthropy especially has the Christian
religion played its part by teaching that “ Faith without
works is dead.” The heroes of the anti-slavery party
came with books like “ Uncle Tom’s Cabin,” that stirred the
pulses of mankind. They taught that we were all one in


Christ. In like manner the Peahodys, Plimsolls, Howards,
Frys and Nightingales, all found encouragement in their
benevolent work by the belief that their labours were-
acceptable to a higher power that man. Secularism deals
in general principles only. Christianity is vital with,
examples of its teachings. The literature of the world
is full of illustrations of the advantages of having object
lessons in morality. When men believe that Christ
sacrificed himself for the world, they will make sacrifices-
of their own ease and comfort, for the benefit of those
around them. The moral effects of the atonement appeals
even to the minds of the savage. In the March of 1889,
the hurricane swept over the island of Samoa, stranding
the vessels in the harbour, and causing havoc and ruin
to the shipping. Among the vessels wrecked was the
G erman war vessel. At that time Mataafa, the Samoan
chieftain was at war with Germany ; yet having learnt the
simple story of Christ, he, as he gazed on the ruin worked
by the hurricane, forgot his enmity to the Germans, and
said, “ did not Jesus die to save us all, and shall not we
try to do something to save these people ?” Actuated by
these Christian sentiments, he set his followers to work
to save the lives of the very men who were at war with
him. In that supreme moment in his mind there were no
Germans and no Samoans, no savage and no civilised,,
they were “ all one in Christ Jesus.” Had these Germans
been wrecked on that coast a few years before, the savages
might have rescued them; but if they did so, it would
have been to fatten and eat them. This change in the
savage mind is an illustration of the benefits flowing from
a system that puts before its votaries the picture of a
model man who is a personal Redeemer.
Secularism claims to be devoid of all supernaturalism,
hence it has nothing to do with a belief in the existence
of God. Yet this belief is essential to the moral advance-
ment of the race. Voltaire is reported to have said, “If
there were no God, it would be necessary to invent one
in the interest of morality.” Anthony Collins, one of the
ablest of English Deists, used to send his servants to-
church for fear they might rob him. Theism must neces-
sarily have a greater influence for good than Atheism, for
it teaches that when no human eye sees, the infinite mind


is fully cognisant of our every act. It teaclies that
there is a continuous scrutiny of our lives ; believing this,
we will not sin even in secret. A beautiful illustration
of this is given in the old Testament in the case of Jeseph.
When tempted by Potiphar’s wife to do wrong, he said,
“ How can I do this great wickedness and sin against
God ?” and he fled from temptation. Had he been a
Secularist, he might have seen in this woman’s affection
a stepping stone to worldly advancement, and blinded by
passion have entered on a career of sin. Therefore
Theism has an immense advantage over Atheism, in that
it purifies the mind, by impressing it with the thought
that nothing is done without God’s knowledge.
Secularism claims that that only is moral which tends
to human happiness. If I can then show that Atheism
offers no comfort in the hour of affliction; if it never
dries a tear or s#othes a sorrow, then I show that it
fosters misery, and according to the morality of Secularism,
is immoral. How can it further human happiness f The
business of Atheism is to bring an indictment against the
goodness and wisdom of God ; hence it dwells only on the
dark side of human existence, seeking in the crimes and
miseries of life something to give plausibility to its cold
negations. It glories to tell of Cholera, Small-pox,
Leprosy, and other scourges that befall our race. It in-
terrogates nature that it may be able to picture her in
her morbid moods. It loves to tell of earthquakes, of
hurricane, of nature’s war between tooth and nail. It
even questions the insect and the reptile, and dives down
into the darkest and most uncanny places of the earth
for weapons for its armoury. Its disciples, living in this
atmosphere of censure grow morose and hypercritical;
they feel that they are in the forlorn hope, and are ever
preaching that man was made to mourn. Therefore they
cannot be happy, and not being happy according to their
own teachings, are immoral.
How different is the picture of human life offered by
Christian Theism. It is sunny aiid full of social beauties.
It fills the atmosphere of our life with the light of love.
Its firmament is full of stars of hope and signs of promise.
Heath is but the portal through which we pass to ever-
lasting day. It comes to us when our hearts are sad


with bereavement, with a handful of loving foi’get-me-
nots, reminding us of a sweet communion beyond the
grave. By faith can we in fancy step beyond this globe,
look higher than the stars, and see the very beacon lights,
aye, hear the sweet hosannas from the headlands of
eternity. It explains all, shows us how pain and trouble
are but the means to strengthen and discipline our lives,
fitting us for that bright abode beyond the shades of
-death. It interrogates nature for vastly different purposes
to those of Atheism. It is to study the handiwork of
God, to gaze on His pictures of the sublime and the beauti-
ful, to revel in His treasures of design. Like the bee that
gathers from dangerous plants its honey, so does Theism
■ extract from every ill a joy, and scatters roses in the
pathway of mankind, from the cradle to the grave. It
gives us “ sermons in stones, books in the running brooks,
-and good in everything.” It says, “ come unto me all ye
that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest.”
What comfort can Atheism offer to a mother weeping
oyer her sick babe, the first fond pledge of her husband’s
love ; a mother whose affection for her little one surpasses
all other feelings; Avho wakes instinctively at midnight,
that she may suckle her child, who if need be would go
through fire and flame, contend with embattled armies,
and overcome a world of trouble for the life of her infant
Let Atheism go to this woman in her affliction, and try
its hand at consolation with its barren negations. Let it
tell her that her offspring is only a fortuitous concourse
■of atoms, controlled by the laws of cohesion, affinity and
other properties of matter. With a wise look it discourses
on the problem of life, explains to the parent that the
youngster has no more immortality than the blown out
flame of a candle, and the only comfort it can offer is that
when the babe ceases to live, it ceases to weep. Will all
this make the woman happy ? Is it not a thousand times
better to tell that woman that Jesus loved the children,
that he took the little ones in his arms and blessed them,
for of such is the kingdom of heaven.
Atheism has no comfort at the mouth of the open grave;
even the eloquence of an Ingersoll, cannot wipe away its
.dread melancholy, it but intensifies it. Speaking at his


brother’s grave, he says, “ life is but a narrow vale between
the barren peaks of two eternities ; we strive in vain to
look beyond the heights; we cry aloud, but the only
answer is the echo of our wailing cry.” He speaks of it
in terms of despair. While he melts us with his touching
pathos, he holds out no hope. Mr. Holyoake, in his
burial service contradicts him, and says, “ Death is the
soothing anodyne to all our woes.” “The end of life’s
fitful fever.” His burial service, written not as Ingersoll’s
oration was prepared, when the heai't was full of grief,
is full of the cant platitudes of the Secularistic School,
and instead of consoling the bereaved, it but carries the
controversy to the verge of the open grave. The depres-
sing influence of Atheism on the mind of the aged is seen
in the case of David Hume’s mother; carried away by
the brilliant achievement of her son, she was led to
renounce her faith in Christianity, and wrote from her
death-bed the following :
“My dear Son. —My health has failed me, I am in
deep decline. My philosophy affords me no comfort in
my distress. I am left without the consolations of
religion, and my mind is sinking into despair. You can
afford me some substitute for the loss of the hopes of
religion. I pray you hasten home to console me, or. at
least write to me the consolations that philosophy affords
at the dying hour.”
Clearly the creed of the Secularists, with its “one
word at a time ” dogma , does not satisfy the spiritual
cravings of mankind, nor does it offer the highest incentive
to self-improvement. Christianity is the safe side. If the
Atheist is wrong his position is terrible to contemplate.
If the Christian is wrong he has lost nothing. His
religion ennobled his life, and left him as well off at the
end of the chapter. To quote the words of Robert
Burns;
"If there’s another world, he lives in bliss,
And if there’s not, he did his best for this.”
Religion gives us support, Atheism takes it away. Here
is the ivy ! it has grown for years over the face of a stout
wall, and with its feeble tendrils it clings to the solid
mass for support. It is the ivy of mankind clinging to


the stout wall of faith. The sceptic says, “ down with the
wall, it is useless.” The ivy says, “ no, it is my sustainer
and upholderand clings the more closely to it.
CHAPTER 111.
Secularism an Ignominious Failure.
In my last chapter I dealt with the leading dogma of
the Secularist. This is not sufficient. I mean to criticise
their platform in detail, but here we are confronted with
a great difficulty; there is no platform upon which they
are unanimously agreed. The Sectarianism of Secularism
is unique, inasmuch as Secularists disagree about matters-
of primary importance. In 1870 a debate was held in
London between George Jacob Holyoake, the father of
Secularism, and his former pupil, Charles Bradlaugli,.
to determine whether Secularism was based on Atheism.
Mr. Holyoake said, “If Secularism must be based on
Atheism, what better helpers of humanity are we than
the priests P They have to wait until they have con-
vinced an enquirer of Theism before they can give him
a foundation for moral duty ; and the Atheistic Secularist
has to wait in like manner until he has furnished to the
human mind a satisfactory map of the untraceable path
to nothing.” Clearly Mr. Holyoake does not believe that
Secularism involves Atheism. Mr. Bradlaugh says in
the same debate, —“ Although at present it may be per-
fectly true that all men who are Secularists are not yet
Atheists, I put it to you as also perfectly true that in
my opinion, the logical consequence of the acceptance of
Secularism must be that the man gets to Atheism, ‘if
he has brains enough to comprehend.’ ” This shows us that
the aims and objects of Secularism are differently stated
by different champions of it. I purpose, however, dealing
with the platform of the Secularists, as stated by the
National Secular Society, of which Mr. Bradlaugh was
formerly president, and of which Mr. Geo. W. Foote is-
now president. It is the most representative organisa-
tion they have, and that is not saying much. Secularism
has always been a failure. The Secularism of George


Jac@b Holyoake was but the effort to weld to the organi-
sation the scattered elements of the bankrupt Socialism
of Robert Owen. In thus writing against Secularism I
am not vilifying my former associates. If I refer to
individuals it is to illustrate principles, and to show that
this system is incapable of socially saving the world.
There are good and bad among Freethinkers as among
most classes. Although I am confident that there is
more evidence of human depravity in Freethought societies
than in Christian chui’ches for this reason that a
shady life is a barrier to continuance in the Christian
church, but it is not in a Secular Society. Repentance is
necessary, .before one enters the Christian church, and a
continuance in “ well doing,” is obligatory on every citizen
of the kingdom of Christ. I found in the Freeth ought
party two distinct classes of men. The one class had
rejected Christianity on what they believed to be philo-
sophical grounds; the other class were anti-theological
bigots, many of whom were Atheists, because they were
either too mean to pay for a clergyman, or too immoral
to be admitted to the membership of a church. Prof.
Haeckel, the celebrated German materialist, candidly
admits this in his work on the “ Natural History of
Creation,” and designates the two classes by the respec-
tive titles of sensuous and scientific materialists. My
first introduction professionally to the Freethought plat-
form was owing to the delinquencies of one of these sensuous
materialists. One of our lecturers was in the habit of
imbibing over freely, and this evening he was too intoxi-
cated to take his usual place on the platform at the
Theatre Royal, Sydney. I was asked to act for the even-
ing, and the manner in which I acquitted myself so satis-
fied the members of the Sydney branch of the Austra-
lasian Secular Association that when Mr. Bright vacated
the Gaiety Theatre (another theatre then in the hands
of the Freethinkers) for a trip to New Zealand, the associa-
tion took it up, and offered me their platform, which I
filled till the arrival of Mr. Thomas Walker in Sydney.
There is a danger in young men being captivated by the
sophistries of the intellectual class, and then led on to
associate with the depraved ones, whose influence for evil
would corrupt their good manners, and reduce them to


their own level. Owing to this and the heterogeneous
characteristics of Secularists, Secularism has always-
failed to hold its own as an organized movement. Its
history is a record of anarchy and dissension, of follies
and of failures. While on the Freethought platform I
could not help contemplating this, and feeling that there
was something radically wrong. Scripture latterly came
to my aid, saying, “If this council or this work be of
man it shall come to nought, but if it be of God it can-
not be overthrown.”
Whether we contemplate the cause of Secularism in
England or Australia, it has the same story to tell and
the same moral to point. Between the Secular Review
edited by Saladin, and Mr. Bradlaugh’s paper, the
National Reformer there has been an internecine war.
One of the writers to the Secular Review (Lara),, wrote
a pamphlet, entitled “ Peter versus Ananias,” in which he
depicts Mr. Bradlaugh as the champion liar. Another
opponent of Mr. B s published a biography of him, com-
posed of such malicious slanders that he was compelled
to prosecute him for libel.
Mr. Holyoake, who was noted for his polished method!
of address, in the debate I have already mentioned, con-
fesses that Secularism was a failure in England. I quote
his own words:—“Mr. Bradlaugh wanders through this
country proclaiming the principles of Secularism as
though they were Atheism, and arguing with the clergy.
Why, when I go now to Glasgow, to Huddersfield, to
Liverpool, to Manchester, I find the Secularists there
unadvanced in position; even in Northampton, which
Mr. Bradlaugh knows, I found them, lately meeting on a
second floor of a public house , where I found them twenty or
twenty-five years ago. In Glasgow they are in the same
second-rate position they were in twenty-five or thirty years
ago. What have we been doing ? Does not this show
an obsolete policy ? Ranters, Muggletouians, Mormons,
and men of their stamp, are superior to acting so ; any
party in the present state of opinion in the world could,
with thought, have done more ; the most ordinary sects
build or hire temples, and other places, where their people
can decently meet. Mr. Bradlaugh, with all his zeal and
appeals, finds to-day that all London can do is to put up


this kind of a place in which we now meet, opposite a
lunatic asylum, where people, so the enemy says, natur-
ally expect to find us.”
Twenty years has made no perceptible improvement in
the party in Britain, and now that it has lost its figure-
heads, Mr. Bradlaugh having drifted into politics, and
Mrs. Besant having plunged into Theosophy, its future
existence is a very doubtful matter indeed. The reports
of its last two conferences in England were like wails of
despair. Its history in Australia contains just as pitiable
a tale as that which comes from Britain. I remember
the time when in every important town in New Zealand
there was a little Freethought Association; now they are
as dead as last autumn’s leaves. In Dunedin when Mr.
Stout (now Sir Robert Stout) was president of the local
association, the Freethinkers built a splendid hall
on the site of the first church in Dunedin. This
was considered ominous, and they boasted that,
just as they had erected their temple of liberty on the
site of a church, so would the standard of Freethought
yet float over the ruin of Christianity. Some of the
clergy, however, took a different view of it. Professor
Salmond, a Presbyterian divine, shortly after the erection
of the building, addressed a meeting in it, and quoted the
old saying, “ They did not intend the devil to have all the
good things.” He then predicted that the hall would
eventually fall into the hands of the Christians, and that
it would make a good mission hall. Since that time the
Freethought Association has become defunct, and the
prediction of that divine has been fulfilled to the letter.
I have read that the very house that Voltaire lived in
has been converted into a book depot for the Genevan
Bible Society, and that the printing press employed to
print his works has since been used to print Bibles.
Surely this and kindred other things should be proof to
Freethinkers of the folly of throwing away their ammu-
nition on the Gibraltar of Christianity.
The only hall in Australia that for years Freethinkers
could call their own was that in Newcastle, N.S.W., and
they would not have had this one if I had not-urgedit on
them, pointing out that every petty sect had a meeting-
house except themselves. I invested in the venture a


portion of my receipts from a debate with the Rev. John
Evans, Baptist minister. This started the project, and
finally they raised sufficient to build a small hall on
leasehold property. It is now, however, in a very delapi-
■dated condition, and the Freethought movement in New-
castle is in a flickering state. Freethought virtually
received its quietus in New South Wales when Sir Henry
Parkes threatened to take away the license of those
theatres that were let on Sunday evenings for lectures.
It withered and died under this blow. Mr. Symes
wrote in the Liberator at that time a few words of
counsel toßie Sydneyites, and he said, “ Were there no
crowbars P He says he believes in “ reason, not riot,”
so I suppose he wanted the Sydneyites to reason with
crowbars. No wonder that some of the clergy won’t
■debate with him when these are the arguments he
proposes to employ. Tertullian said that “ the blood of
the martyrs was the seed of the church.” Out of the
persecutions instituted by the pagans came a sturdy
phalanx of Christians ready to do and to dare all that
became a Christian for the cause of Christ. They
willingly faced death for their views—
“ Dying as their fathers died
For the faith their foes denied.’
Freethought can never brave persecution. Ingersoll
■candidly admits that had he lived in the times of perse-
cution, and they proposed to torture him, if they asked
if he would believe what was currently taught, he would
say “ Yes, anything you like, but stop that infernal
machine.”
Freethought, with but few exceptions, has hid its head
before the petty persecutions of Colonial Governments,
thus signing its own death warrant by proving its inability
to hold its own in the struggle for existence. Here in
Melbourne for some years back a most pitiable condition
of things has prevailed in the Australasian Secular
Association. Some of the members of this body developed
different political views to those of Joseph Symes, conse-
quently they were ostracised. They were driven from
the executive of the association; their leaders solemnly
tried and found guilty of heresy. A dark conspiracy was


unearthed, having for its object the dethronement of the
immaculate Joseph Symes. To-day we do not hear of
men being expelled from our churches for their political
views; that form of refined liberty is only found iu
Secularistic societies. These rebellious spirits have been
dubbed Anarchists. Some of them were so, and formed
an Anarchist Clnb in Melbourne, which Mr. Symes
facetiously designated the “den of thieves,” “ the "Mel-
bourne lunatic club.” He described the characters of the
men opposed to him in his own choice language. I find
that he has called them “ vermin,” “ sharpers,”
“rogues,” “wi*etches,” “asses,” &c. —in fact, a little
slang dictionaiy or pocket encyclopedia of vituperation
might be culled from the vile, unclean pages of the
Liberator. Yet this man, unable to govern his pen, whose
stock-in-ti’ade is slander of the grossest kind, is the
champion of Secularism in Melbourne. When Fryer
(one of the leaders of this dark conspiracy), in consort
with others, left the association, Mr. Symes says they
cleared out with a portion of the funds. This act of
peculation so incensed the “ lionhearted” Joseph, as Mr.
W. W. Collins once called him, that he denounced the
ringleaders of the “ gang” as worse than Judas Iscariot,
for Judas after betraying his Master did return the
money and go away and hang himself, but these fellows
neither returned the cash nor yet did they go away and
hang themselves. But why should Mr. Symes object to
anarchy ? It is but the atheism of politics. If the Uni-
verse is run without intelligence, why shouldn’t Society
be managed without brains P Clearly anarchy is but the
logical outcome of Atheism in politics. The Melbourne
association continued in a chronic state of ill-health. On
Thursday evening, May 29th, the disease came to a crisis
and the association took a fit. A pitched battle was
fought between ladies and gentlemen of the movement,
with such missiles as tables and chairs. Scarcely a month
later the anarchist again invaded the Hall of Science;
they captured the building, and held it for several hours,
but were eventually driven from it after a serious fight.
It is said history repeats itself, and so it seems. In
medieval times the Church of Rome was torn in twain by
the contentions of rival pontiffs; one took up his residence


at Avignon, in France, and the other at Rome, in Italy.
The Pope of Rome ex-commanicated the Pope of Avignon
and the Pope of Avignon ex-communicated the Pope of
Rome. This papal quarrel is known in history as “ The
Schism of the West.” To-day we find the Rationalists
trying to imitate the Romanist. And so Mr. Symes
denounces those who have set up a rival shop, as “ Rogues,
Asses, and Wretches,” and they retaliate in the same
refined spirit. These are the people who are going to
teach the world how to settle their disputes by arbitra-
tion, and who claim to be heralds of Light and Love.
I have put into the following verses a little of their
doings:—
Come list to me, and I’ll tell you a story of our times,
About a savage rumpus in the camp of Joseph Symes ;
They called each other ugly names, they labelled each a rogue,
They’ve had a really lively time, for anarchy's in vogue.
Hard names were insufficient, for I’m told by one who knows
They reasoned with each other by exchanging heavy blowsl
With a table did a big one knock a little fellow down—
A creature of St. Joseph's, by the common name of Brown.
The room was left in darkness, for some scamp turned down the-
light,
And anarchist and atheist were in a sorry plight,
They pride themselves on reason, and loudly talk of freedom,
The world would surely rue it if e’er it were to heed ’em.
The malcontents, Symes tells us, are a savage “ den of thieves,"
Composed of rogues and lunatics, he verily believes ;
For in the Liberator he calls out in loud complaint
That compared with these arch-traitors, why, Judas was a saiut l
This fight occurred some months ago, and might have been forgot
If it were not that fresh troubles are brewing in the pot.
This new hubbub, ’tis sad to state, commenced with a dear friend,
Whose devotion seemed so lasting, Joe thought it ne’er would end.
But there came into this city a rival to their Joe,
A little tom-tit lecturer, who brought about this woe ;
He came to fill the platform, just for only a few times,
To let the friends in Sydney hear the eloquence of Symes ;
And while he pranced and shouted here, he won Tom PhillipV
heart,
Till with that little lecturer he was very loathe to part.
But now a dark conspiracy to hoist the iron Joe,
The mighty man of law-suits, the herculean blow ;
So when from Sydney he came back, he found that things were
changed,
And some of his old backers, in his absence were estranged.


The loud murmurs of his children, cantankerous and bad,
Quite upset his even temper, and sent him ramping mad,
These turncoats told him to his face, they didn’t want him back:
They got on well without him, and he’d better take the sack.
When six or more long years ago he came unto these shores.
He never thus expected to be hunted out of doors ;
And he and Tommy Phillips worked together, hand in hand, v
Unitedly resolved to sweep the Bible from the land,
these long years he plodded on, and not a word was said, v
For Tommy said his prayers to Joe before he went to bed ;
The anarchists he fought against, and did as he was told,
Assisting to extinguish the rebellion in the fold.
But now, alas ! ’tis sad to state, no harmony exists,
For Tom no longer worships Joe, but in heresy persists.
The Chr.stian foes of Joseph can now atford to smile
At the way his friends are fighting and have been all the while.
Now sadly Tommy learns that Joe is not the man to clear,
For there’s money in the business, and he means to stay right here •
And now they fight and wrangle as to who shall lead the van. ’
Symes the iron Atheist, or Collins, the foppish man.
Men still love to worship, and adore a higher power,
From savage in his cavern, to sage within his bower ;
If they do not worship God, they flatter some poor fool,
Who wastes his time in preaching the vagaries of their school.
How grander far in worship to sing our Master’s praise,
By faith to live in Jesus, to imitate his way ; ’
To be by love inspired in a calm and Christian state,
Far from anarchist squabbles and Atheistic hate.
In confirmation of what I have written, I will let the
rival parties speak for themselves. Mr. Symes, in the
Liberator for the first of this month, says: “ Poor Phillips
has become the head, tail, or one of the heads, or one of
the tails, of a gang of larrikins and larrikinesses. On
May 29th he broke into the Hall of Science, smashed the
door fastenings, and behaved in a most disgraceful
manner for two or three hours. How these Freethinkers
love one another! Again, in a previous issue of the same
paper for April 19th, in an article on “ The meanest
people in the world,” he wrote of Phillips: “No explana-
tion of his sudden change of front has been given \ he
took one hour and a half to pour out endless streams of
Billingsgate upon me, but instead of injuring me he pro-
duced blood spitting.” In reply to this and other asser-
tions of Mr. Symes, Mr. Phillips and fourteen members
of the executive council of the A. S. A. issue a manifesto,


defending themselves, and setting forth serious charges
against Mr. Symes. As samples of which I quote the
following extracts : “ ‘Billinsgate !”’ You sir, know well
the story of the great Daniel O’Connell and Biddy
Moriarty. Biddy was more than a match for any man or
woman in Ireland before she met O’Connell, and in the
encounter with him, it was declared by her backer that
she was defeated. Sir, if Biddy Moriarty and the great
Daniel O’Connell were living in Melbourne this day, I
would back you against the pair of them, for a Billingsgate
contest. And as a proof of this I would refer your
readers to your Liberator , especially the last two months.
Sir, my opinion of you is that your mouth is so foul, that
you have no right ideas of its out-put.” In the same
article Mr. Phillips also writes: “If Moses was in Mel-
bourne and was short of brass , if he only got you melted
down, he would soon have material enough for another
serpent .” Mr. Symes had sneered at the education of those
opposed to him, and this is the way Mr. Phillips replies :
•“ I well remember when a boy in the old country, in the
Wesleyan Church there was a quarterly collection for
Kingswood and Woodhouse Grove school. The poor
people who could not afford to educate their own children
were requested to put their money into the collection
plates so as to educate young parsons, and parson’s sons ;
after that they boast of their education and sneer at their
dupes.”
In the Liberator for April 26th, Mr. Symes has an article
entitled A plain statement,” in which he sets forth the
condition of Secularism in Melbourne :—“ The present
condition of things in the Melbourne A. S. A., though far
from what it ought to be, is somewhat improved.
“ For three years a small knot of sharpers have been
plotting the destruction of the association, and this small
knot of sharpers is backed up by a small mob of dumb-
driven cattle, with neither will nor intellect of their own.
To these have joined a few respectable and sensible indi-
viduals who know nothing of the character of the clique
they side with, and are quite ignonant of the merits of
the qurrrel.”
“ This central group of persons, incapable of leading
and too stupid to follow, whose only talent is a well-


developed capacity for mischief, made a dead set about
three months since to get me out of the presidential
chair. The post is one of trouble and disquiet to me. I
would not fill it for £5 a week; Iknow the very existence of
the association depends on my doing so”
It is evident from the last passage that Secularism in
Melbourne has sunk lower than its bitterest detractors
would have you believe, when, if Mr. Symes were to
vacate the chair, it would dissolve. Mr. Symes claims
that it is a one-man affair, and this is the outcome of his
boasted six years work in Melbourne. This is Freethought
priestcraft! Why, let all our clergy betake themselves
from these shores and still Christianity will remain fresh
and green, “ a thing of beauty and a joy for ever.” Mr.
Symes says the association has been composed partly of
“sharpers and dumb-driven cattle, &c.” Then for the
past few years he has been using his powers to bring the
young men of this city into the company of these question-
able characters. No wonder that he confessed in a recent
number of the Liberator that he had not been able to
reform the vicious. It would seem that he was assisting
in the spread of vice by upholding an institution com-
posed of sharpers and what not. The word of Mr. Phillips
is, in my opinion, more worthy of credence than that of
Mr. Symes for these reasons. He has “no axe to grind;”
he is not in the receipt, as Mr. Symes is, of £4OO a year,
for giving one lecture a week; and he faithfully served
the Freethought movement for years past, both before
and after Mr. Symes’ arrival in this country “ without
money and without price.” Mr. Symes has his billet to
keep—Mr. Phillips has no such sordid motives.
From what has been written, it will be clear to the
reader that infidelity can never have an abiding place in
the world’s affections; it comes and goes like the plague,
and is never likely to exist long in a community that
looks well to the mental health of its members. If it is
going to reform the world, it would be well for its leaders
to make a start at once, and make less row about it.
At present all our educational and benevolent institu-
tions are in the hands of Christians. We have Sunday-
schools and Bands of Hope to entertain and brighten
the leisure time of our children. Dorcas Societies for


providing clothing for the poor; Temperance organisa-
tions for encouraging sobriety ; Rescue homes and other
institutions designed to make the world better than we
found it. The Salvation Army, which as an organisation
is several years the junior of Secularism, is yet able to
p lint to a hundredfold more secular results from its
efforts for the reclamation of mankind. The true
Secularism is in Christianity alone. Scepticism is a
failure; Christianity a glorious triumph. It has
been assailed over and over again in its infancy.
Hercules, like it, had to strangle the serpents of infidelity
that coiled around the cradle. Celsus, Porphy and Julian,
attacked it with many of the same arguments used against
it to-day., Yet still it lives “a thing of beauty and a joy
for ever.” In no age of the world was there so much
religious activity as now. The age of Reason is the age of
Faith. Science but aids us to preach the tidings of
peace and goodwill to the sons of men.
CHAPTER IY.
Utility the test of Morality.
Ihe first clause in the principles and objects of the
National Secular Society is, “ Secularism teaches that
comduot should be based on reason and knowledge. It
knows nothing of divine guidance or interference; it
excludes supernatural hopes and fears ; it regards hap-
piness as man s proper aim, and utility as his moral
guide.” Secularism in thus denying the divine origin
of morals, and concentrating man’s attention solely on
this world, enters into direct conflict with Christianity,
which teaches, “ Seek ye first the kingdom of Heaven,
and afterwards all things shall be added to you,” or
again, “ What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole
world and lose his own soul, or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul.” While Christianity thus places
our spiritual affairs before our temporal prosperity, still
it teaches Secularism; a Secularism based on reason and
knowledge—by making our future welfare dependent


■upon our conduct here. To use the words of James,
“ What doth it profit, my brethren, if a man say he hath
faith, but have not works ? Can that faith save him ?
If a brother or sister be naked, and in lack of daily food,
and one of you say unto them, Gio in peace, be ye warmed
and filled; and yet ye give them not the things needful
do the body; what doth it profit ? Even so, faith if it
have not works is dead in itself.’ Jesus in his figurative
description of the judgment gives expression to the same
sentiments. In rewarding the good, the Master said,
“ I was an hungered and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty
and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me
in: Naked and ye clothed me: I was sick and ye visited
me : I was in prison and ye came unto me.” Then shall
the righteous ask, when did they do all this ; “ and the
King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto
you, inasmuch as ye did it unto one of these my brethren,
.even these least, ye did it unto me.” The Sermon on the
Mount is largely an address on Ethics, teaching that
chastity, peacefulness, charity and other virtues are in-
dispensable to the Christian life. Thus Christianity
embraces all that is good in Secularism, but puts before
us a higher motive for right living. Christ insisted on
chastity in an age of sensuality. Even Lecky in his
history of European morals, said that it was ages after
the time of Christ before society, even in the most
enlightened centres of the world, regarded chastity as a
virtue, yet Christ taught it in an age of social impurity,
and explained how its safeguard was in purity of heart.
The beauty of Christian morality is that it is subjective
.as well as objective. It cleanses our desires, and thereby
fortifies us against temptation. Clearly a system that
does this teaches the true Secular gospel, a gospel that
-enables us to make the best of both worlds —the one
that is and the one that is to come. Secularism contains
no lessons in the beautiful and -true that are not found in
‘Christianity; while its deformities and vagaries are
antagonistic to Christ’s teachings. Secularism bears the
same relation to Christianity that the moon bears to the
sun; its lightis but reflected from the Sun of Righteousness.
The ethics of Christianity are the ethics of progress, as
I will demonstrate in a later chapter. The clause I have


cited from the principles of the N. S. Society says that
utility is the test of moi’ality; it endeavours to divorce
morality from religion, yet they are as closely wedded as
man and wife. The Secularist contends that morality is
the science of conduct and like other sciences of human
origin. Just as philology is the science of language,
Geology the science of the formation of the earth, so is
morality in like manner the science of conduct. If this
were so, naturally we would expect that it would be sub-
ject to the same law that governs these products of man’s
observation and thought—the law of progress. It would
commence from early beginnings and grow with the
intellectual advancement of the race. Take Geology and
we can trace it back to the time of Cuvier. Prior to his
time it was unworthy the name of a science. Similarly
in seeking the genesis of any science we can trace it back
to simple beginnings. Chemistry goes back beyond the
days of Cavendish, until it is lost in the wild superstitions
of the alchemist. Astronomy climbed up from the rude
astrology of our primitive forefathers, who pretended to
divine the destiny of man from the stars. The follower
of Hippocrates, can trace the science of physiology back
to the soothsaying of the old Augurs. Our ideas on
Biology have been revolutionised since the time of
Aristotle. But morality has not been subject to these
mutations ; it is the same yesterday, to-day and forever.
The moral maxims taught by Jesus are precisely the
same as those taught by the latest moral philosopher.
This impossibility to improve on the morality of the
New Testament seems to me to demonstrate that it is
from a perfect source —from God. If it were not so it
would be subject to the same law of change that prevails
in other sciences. Henry Thomas Buckle, whose name is
included in “ Half Hours with the Freethinkers,” and is
claimed as a Freethinker, says in his celebrated “ History
of Civilisation in England,” “ For there is unquestion-
ably nothing to be found in the world which has under-
gone so little change as those great dogmas of which
moral systems are composed. To do good to others, to
sacrifice for their benefit your own wishes, to love your
neighbour as yourself, to forgive your enemies, to restrain
your passions, to honor your parents, to respect


those who are set over you. These and a few others, are
the sole essentials of morals ; but they have been known
for thousands of years, and not one jot or tittle has been
added to them by all the sermons, homilies and text-
books which moralists and theologians have been able to
produce.”
John Stewart Mill, in his work on Utilitarianism, con-
cedes that no advance has been made on the golden rule.
He says, “In the golden rule of Jesus of Nazareth we read
the complete spirit of the ethics of utilitarianism; to do as
you would be done by, and to love your neighbour as
yourself, constitutes the ideal perfection of utilitarian
morals.”
It has been objected to this that there are other things
we cannot improve on; the multiplication table, for
instance. A Freethinker writes to me saying, you cannot
improve on a square or a circle. Certainly you cannot
improve on elementary truths ; but you can improve on
systems built upon human endeavour. Elementary truths
are from God; when you discover them you are simplv
finding certain truths concerning his works. A square*
circle, &c., is not an invention, but a discovery. We can-
not improve on oxygen, but we can on chemistry ; we
cannot improve on the multiplication table, because it is
a statement of facts, but we can on systems for teaching
arithmetic. You cannot improve on a square or a circle,
but you can on geometry; and we have done so. The
argument for the divine authorship of morals is that we
have not been able to improve on that system of morals
taught by Jesus.
It has been urged that Christ was not the first to teach
morality; that in some respects he was anticipated by
Guatama Buddha, an Indian sage, and Confucius, a
Chinese philosopher. The golden rule, it is said, was
taught before Jesus uttered it. This is true. Christ
never claimed that it was an original utterance, but dis-
tinctly and emphatically says that it was taught by the
law and the prophets—“ Do unto others whatsoever ye
would that others should do unto you, for this is the law
and the prophets .” This spirit of reciprocity was taught
by Moses; he said, “Thou shalt not avenge or bear a
grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt,


love thy neighbour as thyself Again it is taught in regard
to strangers—“ But the stranger that dwelleth with you
shall be unto yon as one born among you, and thou shalt
love him as thyself, for ye were strangers in the land of
the Lord your God.” The golden rule was
therefore taught in Judaism before it was taught in any
other system. A study of the history of India and China
will show that the Hebrew traditions and morality were
introduced at the dawn of their life, and it is probable
that from these traditions their sages got their inspira-
tion. Christ was the first teacher, because even the
morality of, Judaism came from him—“ Before Abraham
was I am.” He was the contemporary, in his divine
character, of all ages.
When we come to contrast the ethics of Christianity
with those of Secularism we discern that its great weak-
ness is that it is content to enumerate certain broad prin-
ciples of morality that it borrowed from Christianity, and
then leaves their application in individual cases to the
untutored intellect of man, thus making morality simply
a matter of expediency and of public opinion. The
Utilitarian says that “we must judge an act by its
lesults; bad acts lead to misery ; good conduct to happi-
ness. This is really only another way of stating the
I auline aphorism, “ As a man sows so shall he reap,” or
the statement of Christ, “ Wherefore by their fruits ye
shall know them.” Christ and his servant Paul, however,
did not leave the matter there; they were not content to
indulge in mere generalities, but they specified the nature
of those acts that led to misery. They taught morality
m details as well as in generalities. They not only told
us of the favourable and unfavourable winds, but they
gave us a chart of the sea of life, specifying the whirl-
pools and hidden shoals upon which our frail barques
may be wrecked in our voyage through it. They gave
us an abundance of moral maxims, beautiful pictures and
parables, illustrating the evil of wrong and the benefits
of right living. Christ himself is a glorious object-lesson
in morality, a perfect model of what a man should be.
Strange it is that although his teachings and conduct as
a teacher are so minutely described, there is no record of
his personal appearance left us. We know not whether


lie was a tall man or a short man; whether he had silken
tresses of white, or the dark hair of the Oriental; whether
his eyes were of azure blue, or brilliant brown. His
outward appearance is left undescribed, but we have a
perfect photograph of his moral character. Had it been
otherwise, the woman with her golden tresses would have
said (had such been like our Saviour’s) to her less
favoured sisters, “ I am more like Jesus than you are
the boy with his blue eyes would have grown vain of
qualities not the outcome of his will; the man of tall and
sinewy frame would have imagined that he was especially
blest for having a form like that of our Master. Now,
however, he only resembles Jesus whose life is devoted
to the welfare of his brother man.
Christianity therefore puts before us an unfailing and
unfluctuating guide to morality: while Secularism offers
us a mere “ will-o’-the-wisp,’’ that can be endorsed as
readily by the sensualist as the saint. Of what use to
the masses of mankind are the elaborate treatises on
morals written by Spencer, Mill. Bain, or Clifford, replete
with ponderous sophisms and uninviting abstractions P
Nor are the popular tracts of Bradlaugh andßesant of any
more advantage. These speakers recite to their congre-
gations the aphorisms of Bentham, “ The greatest good
for the greatest number, with the least injury to any.”
But this maxim to the majority of people is utterly
useless to them. If Igo to the savage of the Pacific
Islands, with his views on polygamy and marriage by
capture, and preach this doctrine to him, he will tell me
-that he regards his method of living as consonant with
human happiness. Buchner in his work on “ Matter and
Force” tells a story of a savage who was asked to define
"the difference between right and wrong. The savage at
first seemed unable to make any distinction, but after
further explanation he said, “It is good for me to steal
wives of other men, but very wrong when they steal my
wives.” Let Atheists explain their Utilitarianism to
him and he would say that it was the principle upon
which he always acted. It was the pursuit of happiness
that led him to adopt marriage by capture. The poly-
gamist upholds polygamy on the same grounds. There-
fore, leave morality to this test, and it will be dependent


for its basis upon the changing character of humatt.
caprice.
Robert Ingersoll advises us to say to our children,
“ Honesty is the best policy; I have tried both ” That’
after all, is only Mr. Ingersoll’s opinion. Many a thief
has tried both, and has come to the opposite conclusion.
Christianity teaches that honesty is not a policy, but a
principle enforced by divine authority. It does not leave
each individual to settle the expediency of it, but insists
upon it as a matter of conscience.
At the last meeting of the Australasian Association for
the Advancement of Science a paper was read by Mr.
Sutherland contending for a physiological basis for
morals, and maintaining that the accepting of such would
necessitate the giving up of the popular belief in the
divine origin of morality. The writer seemed to overlook
the fact that Revelation had long before taught what
Science is only now revealing to us, that every ungodly
act is attended with physical as well as spiritual ruin.
This idea of a physiological basis of morals is no new
thing, but a crude rendition of the teachings of Paul —
“As a man sows so shall he reap,” “ For he that soweth
to the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption.” The law
of inheritance was taught in the Old Testament—is, in.
fact, among its earliest instructions. Is not this a powerful
argument in favour of the claims of Christianity when we
find, although it was established in an age of superstition,,
yet it is abreast of all the latest discoveries in Science ?
It teaches, as Science teaches, that righteousness tends to-
life and happiness, while sin brings death and ruin to the
race. The highest aim of Utilitarianism, it is said by its
advocates, is to perpetuate and improve the species. This
was first taught man upon the day of creation by God
when he instructed him to “ Be fruitful, and multiply and
replenish the earth.” Secularism is like the proverbial
jackdaw. When it appears in a presentable costume, it
is because it has decked itself out in the plumage of
another. Naturally it is an ugly bird that tries to hide
its hideousness under the ethical drapery of religion.


CHAPTER Y.
Christianity the Friend of Progress.
“ Secularism affirms that progress is only possible
through liberty, which is at once a right and a duty, and
therefore seeks to remove every barrier to the fullest
equal freedom of thought, action and speech.” “ Secu-
larism declares that theology is condemned by reason as
superstitious, and by experience as mischievous, and
assails it as the historic enemy of progress.”
“ Secularism accordingly seeks to dispel superstition;
to spread education; to disestablish religion ; to rationalise
morality ; to promote peace ; to dignify labor; to extend
material well-being; and to realise the self-government
of the people.”
Each article hei*e set forth in the platform of
the National Secular Society, I now proceed to
examine and show how Christianity has anticipated
Secularism in every theme of practical good contained in
its programme, and has gone further than Secularism in
promoting the material well-being of mankind. Liberty
of thought is the birthright of humanity. Christianity
encourages it; it asks no one to surrender their reason
on accepting it. It declares that the “ truth shall make
us free.” Let us see if it does so. Did freedom of
thought exist in the primitive churches. I contend that
it did from the aphorisms that have come down to us.
Paul said, “ Prove all things, hold fast that which is
good.” Peter in the same spirit said, “Be ready always
to give to every man that asketh you a reason for the
hope that is in you with meekness and fear.” Paul in
his Epistle to the Romans pleads for liberation, and
deprecates making the observance of the Sunday and
other questions matters of faith ; he said, “ Let every man
be fully persuaded in his own mind.” The most pro-
nounced Freethinker could not demand more than this.
Who have really been the men who have done most for
liberty. Has it not been men of the Martin Lather type,
who came forward with the Bible as the charter of liberty,


and with that book in their hands, they pleaded for the
rights of private judgement in matters of religion. When
Secularism affirms “that Theology is condemned by
reason as superstitious, and by experience as mischievous,
and assails it as the historic enemy of progress” it
makes the mistake of confounding theology with priest-
craft ; let it substitute for the word theology, that of
priestcraft, and I will endorse its statements.
The history of priestcraft has been a history of tyranny
and crime, and the world will never have done its duty
till it has purged itself of the last vestige of it. “ For
there is blood upon the hand still and all the perfumes
of Arabia will not sweeten it.” Christ fell a victim to
its treachery, and it has ever stood in the way of the
extension of his kingdom upon earth. Christianity as
taught in the New Testament only mentions one priest to
whom we are to bow the knee and that is Christ, who
demands from us no surrender of our manhood but who
explicitly teaches, “ Call no man your father upon the
earth, for one is your Father, which is in heaven; neither
be ye called masters, for one is your Master, even
Christ, But he that is greatest among you shall
be your servant.” Among the early Christians this
instruction was respected, priestcraft was unknown
among them, they enjoyed the fullest freedom having
equal rights as citizens of the commonwealth of Christ.
T here were in the church then men of the most diverse
characters from the Ethiopian Prince to the Roman
proconsul from the slave to the wealthy merchant.
Yet they met around a common table, broke bread to-
gether, and enjoyed the fullest freedom compatible with
the like privilege to others. Paul said in his epistle to
the Galatians, and in effect affirmed the same in nearly
all his writings, “ There is neither Jew nor Greek ; there
is neither bond nor free ; there is neither male nor female,
for ye are all one in Christ.” Christianity, in an age of
superstition and dark oppression, by the affirmation of
the brotherhood of man, commenced to sweep away all
unfair social distinctions in the human family even of
race, color, country, class or sex ; it proclaimed unity in
Christ, teaching as emphatically as could be taught the
brotherhood of man and the fatherhood of God, and


in pleading for Christianity, I plead for it as it was in
the beginning. 1 have not come out of infidelity
to uphold any creedal crudities, but have engraven
on my banner the words “In matters of Faith
Unity, in matters of opinion Liberty, and in all things
Charity.” When the aim of Christianity is to promote
brotherly kiudliness, how can any man who has rationally
examined its claims declare it to bo the enemy of human
progress? No, the truthful verdict must be, it is its
best friend.
Lot us now pass on to the education question,
the next item in the Secularists programme. Here I find
that Christianity lias also been before it. Solomon taught
“ Train up a child in the way he shall go, and when he
is old he will not depart from it.” Solomon advocated
the education of the young ages before Robert Owen.
Scattered throughout his Book of Proverbs are copious
and profuse instructions to acquire knowledge. It is one
great plea for education. “The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of knowledge, but fools despise wisdom and
instruction;” “Happy is the man that findeth wisdom
and the man that, getteth understanding.” The commis-
sion given by Christ to his disciples was “ Go and teach
all nations.” They were to become the spiritual school-
masters of the world—and when they went forth in
accordance with the Master’s instructions they visited
the most enlightened centres of antiquity. They
wandered over the populous portions of Asia Minor,
Northern Africa, and Southern Europe. They
preached where Homer sang, where Euclid worked out
his problems in Geometry, where Socrates had discoursed
on Philosophy. Paul visited the famous City of the
Seven Hills, and taught on the verge of the Forum that
had echoed with the voices of the masters of Roman
oratory. Science and Learning have been the handmaids
of true religion. Follow down the history of this faith,
and you find that just in proportion as mankind became
enlightened they became Christianised. The great
Reformation of the sixteenth century was heralded by an
intellectual upheaval. The study of Astronomy received
an impetus from the works of Copernicus and Galileo;
Geography from the discoveries of Christopher Columbus,


Vasco da Gama, and Ferdinand Magellan. The Renais-
sance in art was helped forward by the genius of Michael
Angelo and liis contemporaries. The new learning,
headed by Erasmus, revived the study of the Classics.
Politics began to be studied even by the peasantry. And
with all this revival in the intellectual world came the
invention of the printing press, that sent all this new
knowledge throughout the civilised world, carrying light
and love alike to the cottage of the peasant and the palace
of the king. Right in the midst of this intellectual
revival came Martin Luther and his brother reformers
preaching the Bible as the rule of faith, and denouncing
the errors of priestcraft. He and his colleagues were
•educated men. Froude calls him the Shakespeare of the
German people, and declares that his Bible has been
translated into such beautiful German that it is now the
criterion of that language. Was there nothing in this
wondrous combination of circumstances that seemed to
conspire to bring the Reformation to a successful issue ?
to render rational the belief that “ there is a divinity that
shapes our ends, rough hew them how we will ?” The
Reformation was the sweetfaced babe of the Gospel, and
Knowledge was the tender nurse who waited at its
birth. To-day we live in an age of Science, and although
Christianity has been bedimmed by the glare of the sun
of knowledge, aud at times the timid theologians have
taken alarm at the destructive criticism of Science: yet
as Newman Smyth in his “Old Faiths in a New Light”
aptly observes, it is the rising of the sun which in the
morning creates a mist that it dispels later on in the day,
so with the rising sun of knowledge at times it seems to
have beclouded our mental vision, but only that we may
have clearer light later on. The Bible to-day is read
more and discoursed on more than at any other time. It
has been translated into 250 different languages, and the
account of the yearly output of our Bible societies reads
like a romance. The British and Foreign Bible Society
alone issue 10,000 Bibles and parts of Bibles every day.
From what has been written the reader can see that
Christianity is the friend of learning.
Let us now pass to the next article—the Secularist’s
Confession of Faith, “To Disestablish Religion.” If


by this is meant the separation of Church and State,
I say Amen. Christ said, “My kingdom is not of
this world,” and it has always suffered from introduction
into politics from the day when Constantine sought to
make it the dominant religion in Rome. This ambitious,
cruel; and vicious monarch saw in the growing power of
the Christians a force that he might utilise for his own
cause : so he patronised them, and then commenced that
paganising of Christianity, with all its concomitant evils,
as illustrated in the Church of Rome to-day. Even Dr.
Draper in his “ Conflict Between Science and Religion”
grants that Romanism is but a caricature of Christianity,
begotten of this contact with paganism. To make it
acceptable to a people habituated to priestcraft, with all
its pomp and ritualism, the very statues of the gods were
converted into images of saints, and the statue of Venus
made to do duty as a representation of the Virgin Mary.
Therefore we can join hands with the Secularist in
divorcing the Church from the State, and making it
self-supporting.
“To Rationalise Morality.” This I have treated with in
my chapter on “ Utility the test of Morality.” The next
clause is “To Promote Peace.” This of all things i»
taught by Christianity. The Quakers were before Thomas
Paine in the advocacy of a peace policy. That well-
known infidel compared a commercial nation that went to
war to a shopkeeper who put a dog at his door to
frighten away his customers. When he uttered these
sentiments he was preaching a gospel that Christ taught
at the very dawn of our era—“ Blessed are the peace-
makers” Isaiah and Micah in the self-same words pre-
dict that the effect of Christ’s teachings will be
“ that the swords will be beaten into ploughshares and
the spears into pruning hooks, nation shall not lift up
sword against nation, neither shall they war any more.”
On Christ has been conferred the title of the “ Prince of
Peace.” When he was born the temple of Janus was
closed. This was only done in times of peace. The Romans
for the first time for centuries were at perfect peace with
their neighbours and themselves. The mission of Christ
was essentially and thoroughly one of peace and good-
will to men. Let the authority of Christ be recognised


and the day is not far distant when the words of Tenny-
son will be fulfilled :
*< When the war-drum throbs no longer, and the battle flags are
furled.
In the parliament of man, the federation of the world.’
No monarch could enter into aggressive warfare if he
realised the import of t he teaching, “ Love your enemies,”
&c. He could never address his soldiers on the eve of
battle with words culled from the Sermon on the Mount.
Of all things, Christianity is a peaceable religion.
“To dignify labour, to extend material well-being.”
Was not labour dignified when the Monarch of the Universe
was incarnated as a. workman and the son of a peasant?
Did he not dignify labour when he chose working men
for his apostles. All of them avere working men with the
exception of «7udas, who proved to be a traitor. Paul was
a tent-maker, and worked at his trade while preaching
the gospel. He indicted the words, “ Let him that stole
steal no more but labour with his hands,” and again,
“ For even when we were with you, this we commanded
you, that if any would not work neither should they eat.”
Clearly Christianity teaches that everyone “ should be
usefully employed for their own and the general good.”
Paul in his Epistle to the Colossians, chap. 4, says,
“ Master render unto your servant s that which is just and
equal; knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven.”
He also gives splendid advice to the servant. “ Servants
obey in all things your masters according' to the flesh;
not with eye-service, as men-pleasers ; but in singleness
of heart fearing God.’’ Clearly Christianity teaches
diligence on the part of the workmen and justice on the
part of the employer.
The closing clause is “to realise self-government of
the people.” Christianity imposes no barrier to this.
It says, “ honor all men,” thus preaching the rights of
man. It inculcates submission to the powers that be,
thus pleading for constitutional reform and not revolu-
tionary upheavals of society. I think I have thus far
step by step examined the creed of the Secularist, and
demonstrated that it contains nothing that is for the
perpetuation and improvement of the race that is not
taught by Christianity, and the elements in it that are


antagonistic to that system are fatal to human welfare.
It emphasises the gospel of benevolence, liberty, in-
dustry, education and good government; but it teaches
-that they are but divisions of the great gospel of Christ,
/and, to insure their unanimous acceptance, ours is the
task to labour, to hasten the day when the beautiful shall
be the true, the good, the Christ-like, and when our
Divine Master, enthroned lipon the intellect and affections
of the world, shall be universally adored as the King of
Lings and God of gods.
CHAPTER VI.
Oestacles to Belief
There are three important lines of Christian evidence,
•each of which are invulnerable—the External, Internal,
and Experimental. This kind of evidence one would
•expect would satisfy the mind of any truthseeker on any
topic, and ought to be sufficient to convince the most
rabid unbeliever. But however satisfactory evidence is,
there are always some who, being insufficiently educated
in it, or coming to it with diseased judgment, decline to
acknowledge its force, and will submit many objections.
We need not wonder at this when for a long time some of
the most learned of men declined to accept our estab-
lished conclusions in regard to the heliocentric doctrine
of our solar system. Amongst the objectors to it we find
no lesser lights than Francis Bacon and Martin Luther.
Knowing this we need not be surprised at the number of
apparently intelligent men who to-day are opposed to
Christianity : and it is with a few of their objections that
I purpose dealing with in this chapter. I would illustrate
Christianity and its evidence in this way : —An excellent
physician provides an infallible cure for a certain com-
plaint, but some of the patients decline to take it until
conclusive evidence is advanced that it will do them good.
The good doctor is Christ; the medicine he provided,
•Christianity; the doubtful patient, the Sceptic. To con-


vince this sick man that the medicine is good, I first of
all introduce him to an analyst, who has analysed it, and
found it composed of great curative properties. The-
analyst is the Biblical Critic, whose business is to deal
with the internal evidence of Christianity. He shows
how the Bible is welded together like a beautiful piece of
machinery —how, although composed by thirty or forty
different authors, who have left sixty-six different works,
who wrote, many of them, at different periods of time,
and who were of very diverse characters, for there are-
writings there, both from the pen of the peasant and the
king, from high and from low, yet there is a complete-
design running through the book, showing that there was
but one Mind at the back of it, directing the pens of the-
various writers. In it we find—
“ That nothing useless is, or low,
Each thing in its place is best
And what seems but idle show
Strengthens and supports the rest.*’
This Analyst, or Biblical Critic, points to prophecy
fulfilled, to wonderful miracles wrought, and to a unique-
morality, as evidence of the wisdom of accepting of this
saving medicine.
A second witness is then called to the bedside of the-
patient. He is a Collector of Herbs. He tells where the
ingredients were grown, when they were collected, and
by wbom. He testifies to the characters of the persons;
who attended to the doctor’s prescription in the manufac-
ture of the elixir of life. This is the Christian Historian,
who deals in the outward evidence of Christianity, culled
from the works of pagan and Christian writers, who
testified to the truth of Christianity, some of them
unconsciously, since its infancy in the first century of era.
From the writings of Josephus, Tacitus, Suetonius, Pliny,
and others does he bring evidence of the existence of
Christianity in their times, and shows that the books of
the New Testament, as we have them now, were then
regarded as canonical. From the “bridge of history
over the gulf of time” does he bring evidence to corrobo-
rate that of the Biblical Critic. The last witness gives
evidence of a most conclusive character. He is a man
who took the medicine and was cured with it, and from


personal experience testifies to its efficacy. This is the
-experimental evidence. He is the man who says, “ I was
a drunkard, but the Good Physician took me in hand,
and now lam a respectable citizen.” He says he can tell
of many others who have been similarly cured of the
leprosy of sin. On this kind of evidence the majority
-of intelligent people are made to accept Christianity.
However, some are reluctant to receive it. Let us hear
their objections, and answer them. One says —“ Foir
years I had the bottles of Mormonism on my shelf, and
regularly dosed myself with their nostrums, and T found
they were only poisoning me.” Another said—“ T had
my stomach impaired by the horrible drugs of Sweden-
borgianism, and it has seriously impaired my digestion, so
lam done with your theological quackeries.” My reply
is, if there were no gennine medicine there would be no
counterfeit. The very existence of the quack is an argu-
ment for the doctor. Because poor medicine has been
vended that is no argument against the genuine.
Let us now consider some of the popular objections to
the internal evidence. They tell us that the morality of
the New Testament is defective. The -Sermon on the
Mount exhorts us to meekness, non-resistance, poverty of
■spirit, and to take no thought for the morrow. This, they
contend, is not moral. Mr. Bradlaugh quotes the words,
“He that courts oppression shares the crime,” and
protests against the spirit of the Sermon on the Mount,
it is argued that it is absurd to talk of non-resistance.
No Christian country in the world adopts the peace policy.
As for taking no thought for the morrow, why it has been
thought for the morrow that has set the million wheels
of trade in motion. “ Before we entrust ourselves to the
care of this physician yon will require to clear up these
difficulties.”
“ Softly, my friend,” says the kindly-faced benevolent
friend of the Physician ; “ I can sympathise with you. I
know how men have tortured their spiritual digestive
organs with the drugs of Sectarianism, and the poisons
of the religious world; hut this I offer you is not only
medicine for your infirmities, but it’s the “ Bread of Life,”
and the very sermon you object to is one of the most
nutritious portions of it. First, you object to the Ser-


mon on the Mount, because it inculcates meekness and 1
applauds “ the poor in spirit.” Now, what is meekness ?
It is not necessarily self-abasement, but is the opposite
term to that of tyranny, and surely you would not favour
imperiousness. The meek is defined in the Book, Moses
was in his time “ meeker than all men,” yet he liberated
a great people from the bondage of Egypt, and led them
by an arduous journey to a better land, and there he-
established a nation with laws in regard to their social
welfare that outrival any we have to-day. The lesson
of history prove that “The meek inherit the earth.”
Socrates, one of the wisest men of antiquity, was
essentially a meek man. He stood barefooted in the-
market place in Athens, conversing with the youth of
that famous city, and giving utterance to those wise and
beautiful sayings that have rendered his name so.dear to
the student of philosophy. He compared himself to the-
midwife that assisted at the birth of a child. He assisted
at the birth of an idea; it was not his, but he helped
others to give expression to it. In like manner
Isaac Newton, of whom England may justlv be-
proud, compared himself to a child standing on
the sea-sliore picking up pebbles, while the great ocean,
undiscovered, lie before him. The great Bard of Avon
sings : “In peace there's nothing so becomes a man as
modest stillness and humility ” The poor in spirit need
not court oppression, but the proud in spirit will bring it
on themselves. If there were an age when meekness-
should be inculcated it is now, when the self-sufficiency
of man is a barrier to association. Man is a social animal,
and to successfully carry out his mission here he must
not intrude his individuality to the injury of others.
The men who combine and hold together are the meek
men. There never was a successful Atheistical associa-
tion.
When Christ inculcated the peace policy he advocated
that which would prevent our commerce from beingruined
by the blockading of our ports, our accumulations of the-
souvenirs of art, science and letters being destroyed by
the bombardment of our cities. The police of non-
resistance as taught in the sermon is the policy of the
future both among nations and men, “A soft answer


turneth away wrath,” but rebellion breeds the poison of
hate. Enough, however, has been said on this in the
previous chapter.
“ Take no thought for the morrow.” This is translated
in the revised edition “ Be not anxious, &e.” and where
there is the least anxiety, there is the most careful
thought. This feverish thought about the affairs of the
morrow leads us to neglect the things of to-day, and loose
much of the pleasures of life. Herbert Spencer when he
went to America pointed out this as a defect in their
civilization ; everybody seemed in a hurry. Go to our
lunatic asylums and inquire what sends so many there, and
among the causes, they will tell you “ That worry and not
work ” kills the brain. “Be like the lilies of the field.”
Henry George in his “ Social Problems ” but paraphrases
this thought when he contrasts man with a herd of
buffaloes ; and shows how differently society would be
if much of this race for individual wealth was checked,
and man lived ntore on Socialistic lines. While thus
pleading for more leisure in life, Christianity does not
encourage idleness, but distinctly says in the words of
Paul, “ But if any provide not for his own, especially
those of his own house, he hath denied the faith and is
worse than the infidel.’’
I have thus far answered your objections to the Sermon
on the Mount, and pointed out that what you have called
defects, are beauties deeply prophetic of the work “ This
gospel of peace and goodwill among men” will yet accom-
plish. Ido not say that there are no difficulties in con-
nection with Christianity, but show me a system where
you do not find them. The geologist, arithmetician,
mathmetician, and astronomer, will tell you that each of
their schools are possessed of problems that no human
mind can solve ; but where would be the man who would
deprecate the acquisition of these branches of knowledge,
or decline to accept the conclusions of science on those
grounds ? Mr. Talmage illustrates the difficulties of
faith in this way. He reads the Bible as he eats fish, when
he finds a bone he puts it aside on his plate, and goes on
eating the flesh ; so when he stumbles on a difficulty in
the Bible he places it aside for future solution, and finds
sufficient without it to build up his spiritual manhood.


Now, having disposed of your objections to internal
evidence, let me hear yon on the external. The patient
says —“ I must say that you have made things appear
much more palatable, and if you can clear up all objec-
tions in the way you have done this I will put myself under
your physician’s care. My chief objection to the external
evidence is that most, if not all, of your witnesses are
Christians, while the Pagans and Jews are silent. Take,
for instance, Josephus. The only passage in his works
that corroborates Christianity is now very generally
recognised to be spurious.” “ I must object to the state-
ment that the pagan world is silent; they by many of
their admissions substantiate Christianity. The testi-
mony of Pliny, Suetonius, Tacitus, Julian, Celsus, and
Porphyry is so much unintended evidence in favour of
Christianity. That this kind of evidence is inferior to
what we get from early Christian writers is true;
because if these men testified to the truth of Christianity
they would at once cease to be Pagans and become
Christians, and then their evidence would not be taken
by you because of their Christian characters. You must
therefore acknowledge that as soon as one gives complete
evidence to the truth of Christianity he becomes a
Christian. It is therefore to Christians that we must go
for the History of Christianity, just as we expect a
Frenchman to write the most correct History of France,
or an Englishman that of England. Now then for your
objections to the experimental evidence in favour of
Christianity. Does it not make better men and women ?”
“ Yes, but how long has it taken to do it. Eighteen
hundred years of bloodshed and slavery; eighteen
hundred years in which woman lias been robbed of her
place in society. Tell me how this history experimentally
supports Christianity.” In regard to slavery the earliest
known legislation against it is found reported in the Bible.
If a master mutilates a slave, knocks out an eye or a
tooth, the man receives his freedom. In Exodus 21, we
read, “ And he that stealeth a man and selletli him, or
if he be found in his hand shall surely be put to death.”
Kidnapping is made a capital offence. Christianity com-
pletely undermined slavery by proclaiming the brother-
hood of man. Even Becky in his “History of Rationalism”


admits this. He says in vol. 2nd, page 259. “ But when
the fullest allowance has been made for these influences,
it will remain an undoubted fact that the reconstruction
of society was mainly the work of Christianity ; other
influences could produce the manumission of many slaves,
but Christianity alone could produce the profound change
of character that rendered possible the abolition of slavery.
There are few subjects more striking, and at the same
time more instructive, than the history of that great tran-
sition. The Christians did not preach a revolutionary'
doctrine. They did not proclaim slavery altogether
unlawful; at least not until the Bull of Alexander
111, in the twelfth century; but they steadily
sapped it at its basis by opposing to it the
doctrine of universal brotherhood, and infusing a
spirit of humanity into all the relations of society.
Under Constantine, the old laws for the protection of
slaves were enacted with additional provisions, and. the
separation of the family of the slave was forbidden. At
the same time the servile punishment of crucifixion was
abolished, but not so much on motives of humanity as
on account of the sacred character it had acquired. Very
soon a disposition was manifested on all sides to emanci-
pate slaves, and that emancipation was invariably asso-
ciated with religion. Sunday was especially recommended
as the most appropriate day for emancipation, and the
ceremony almost invariably took place in a church.” In
the same way has Christianity brought about the gradual
and certain freedom of the slave, so in like manner has it
exalted the character of woman. It has said to men,
“ Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ loved the
Church,” &c. (see Ephesians). It proclaimed that in
Christ there was neither Jew nor Creek, bond or free,
male or female , but they “were all one,” or, in other
woi’ds, had equal rights. As slaves were tolerated in the
early times of Christianity, so were women excluded from
taking too prominent a part in public matters; but
just as slavery was swept by the underlying principles of
Christian ethics, so in like manner has the elevation of
woman to man’s equal been slowly but surely effected.
The plea that we have taken eighteen hundred years to
accomplish it comes with poor grace from a Sceptic, who


be eves in Evolution, which teaches that in the lapse of
ages man by a slow process evolved from an ape. Need
they then complain _ that in a few generations all
sinners have not been made saints of ? As Mr. Simpson,
observes, give us but the time you require to convert
one species into another, and we will by that time have all
men at the foot of the cross.
CHAPTER VII.
\ "*■** S
Re tributiox.
Christianity has been called a persecuting 1 religion,
Robert Ingersoll eloquently pictures the horror of the
Inquisition in his lecture on “ Heretics and Heresies,” and
describes how the Spaniards burnt the bodies of heretics
here, and “ Then prayed to Cod to finish the holy work
in hell.” If such were the outcome of Christianity, truly
it would be a diabolical system, but Christianity gives no
man authority to torture his brother here ; nor yet, so
far as my reading of the New Testament goes, it appor-
tion hell-fire to any one hereafter ; both persecution here
and hereafter is alien to the genius of Christianity—-
which is love. It was the persecuted and not the per-
secutors who exhibited the Spirit of Christ.
once said, “ Christianity has been tried for nearly two
thousand years, it is now time that the religion of
Christ should be tried.” If Christianity is a name given
to the corruptions of priestcraft, then certainly it is the
“Religion of Christ,” only that I plead for. But I con-
tend that it is the misuse of the term Christianity, when
it is applied to the superstitious hierarchy that so long
held the minds and bodies of men in bondage. I use the
term Christianity as connoting the religion of Christ,
and only in that sense is it used in this little volume.
Used in that sense no one can say it is a persecuting


religion for they would have to show when and where
Christ authorised persecution. On all seasonable occa-
sions-did Christ denounce force. When Peter drew his
sword in defence of his master, the first occasion on
which a Christian resorted to it, he reproved him. He-
warned his disciples that those who resorted to the sword
should perish by it. He counselled them to forgive their
erring brother seventy times seven, to pass undue censure -
on none ; to judge not for fear they might be judged;
that accordingly as they meted out it would be measured
unto them. Some Sceptics say, did he not declare that he-
would bring dissensions into families ? Did he not
declare “ I came not to bring peace but the sword ?
Yes, but this was not a command but a prediction that
his disciples would be persecuted ; that their own family
and friends would despise ; that the sword should be used
against them, not by them. This prophecy has been ful-
filled to the letter ; the extermination of the Abbigenses,
and the innumerable cases of the persecution of Christians
recorded on the pages of history. Christ taught his
disciples that they would be persecuted and warned them
against retaliation; he said, “ Love your enemies, pray
for them that persecute you,” or again, “Love your
enemies ;do good to them that hate; bless them that
curse you; pray for them that despitefully use you.”
They were therefore to bear with persecution, never to
resent it, and never to practice it against others.
The opponents of Christianity frequently contradict
themselves in the one discourse, frequently averring,
nearly in the same breath, that Christianity is a humiliat-
ing religion, citing such passages as “ Blessed are the
poor in spirit &c.,” which I treated with in the
last chapter. If it be a persecuting system, it is not a
humble one, and if a humiliatingly humble one, certainly
it isn’t a persecuting 1 system. Continuing their line of
argument, they aver that the belief in future punishment
is a further proof of the revengeful character of the
Christian system. This argument, when directed against
the medieval belief that the wicked are to be for ever
tortured in a penal settlement of fire and brimstone, seems
to me to have considerable force. I contend, however,
that this is not the teaching of the New Testament, but


is a mythological growth, the fiendish offspring of Satanic
ignorance and blind superstition, it seems to me to have
been one of the artifices of the evil one to bring disgrace
on Christianity, under pretence of upholding it, and has
been the means of producing more Infidelity than any
•other cause. It was my first step to Infidelity. The
. doctrine seemed to me so hideous and repulsive that I
held that a»y system that taught it could not be a true
system, and believing it to be part and parcel of
Christianity, I sooo surrendered my entire faith in the
system. When Infidelity assails this doctrine it simply
sticks up a straw man for the amusement of knocking it
down again. Christianity undoubtedly teaches future
punishment; but it is righteous retribution —punishment
adequate to the wrong done, the sins committed. The
nature of this punishment I am not in a position to
determine, nor is anyone. It is always referred to in a
figurative manner, and for anyone to attempt to give a
picture of hell would be as absurd as for them to attempt
to describe heaven. On these matters we should be
Agnostic, remaining silent where the Bible is, and trust-
in the mercy and justice of God. Jesus, in liis pictorial
teaching, tells how the unmerciful servant should be cast
to the tormentors until lie paid all that wan due. Here the
idea of adequate punishment is set forth. Again in
Luke 12, verses 47-48, we read, “ And that servant, which
knew his Lord’s will, and made not ready, nor did accord-
ing to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes; but he
that knew not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be
beaten with few stripes. And to whomsoever much is
given, of him shall much be required ; and to whom they
commit much, of him will they ask the more.” This
tseems to me to give the key-note of future punishment.
It is in accordance with the principles of justice as taught
in the New Testament. It shows that there are degrees
of punishment, that we are to be judged according to our
responsibility, and punished proportionately. To me th«
■doctrine of the larger hope, as taught by such an eminent
divine as Cannon Farrar, comes nearest to the genius of
the teaching of Christianity. The future punishment in
that light becomes a rational belief; even Thomas Paine
in his ** Age of Reason” grants that it is so. He says


that he conjectures that there is a future state, and that
there men will be held responsible for their conduct here.
He conjectures that the people will be divided into three
classes; the wicked who will be punished, the good who
will be rewarded, and a third class, the indifferentists,
whom he deems to be too insignificant for either con-
demning or saving. These, he believes, will be com-
pendiously blotted out. Thus Paine, reasoning purely
from nature, and disbelieving in all revelation, was thus
compelled, by virtue of the evidence around him, to believe
in the reasonableness of future punishment. The viola-
tion of any law of our being is attended with serious
consequences, and can we expect that other than bad
results will follow our violation of the laws of God. If a
man neglects his business, he is punished by commercial
damnation ; if he violates the rules of society, disregards
the laws of etiquette, he is socially damned ; if he be a
politician, and is inattentive to the wishes of his consti-
tuents, he is politically damned. As in every sphere of
life, too, we see the words of Paul exemplified—“ As a
man sows shall he reap.” Therefore if we trifle with
iniquity and neglect the commands of God we must expect
to be excluded from happiness. The scriptural saying,
“He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved; and
he that believeth not shall be condemned,” is but a parallell
utterance to many in common use, such as “Take poison
and you will die,” “Trifle with fire and you will be
burnt,” “ Get out of your depth and you will be drowned.”
Nature has ever attached a penalty to wrong doing; all
the world over bad actions lead to misery, and good ones
to happiness, and it is but reasonable to believe that the
same law obtains in the spiritual world that prevails in
the natural.
Society lias the law of retribution written upon the face
of it. The Old Testament has many illustrations of this.
Jacob outwitted his brother and deceived his father, and
was in turn outwitted by Laban and deceived by his sons ;
Daniel s accusers were thrown into the lion’s den intended
for Daniel; Haman hung upon the scaffold he intended
for Mordecai. In history we read of Pope Alexander VI
being poisoned by the wine he prepared for others.
Nearly all those who instituted and upheld the guillotine


in France during the great French Revolution fell victims
to it. These are special and striking iustances, and they
are cited as illustrative of a retributive providence. Nor
can we deny that this fact has a salutary influence
on conduct, an elevating effect on human life ; even the
Secularists unconsciously furnish us with evidence of
this. Thus, for instance, “In the National Secular
Society’s Almanac for 1872,’’ on page 12, appended to the
date October 12th, is the following note, “ 1712, great
fear in England of a comet which was to burn the world
up, 7,000 kept mistresses married in consequence.” Clearly
the fear of meeting God, of facing the future, had the
effect of deterring these women from continuing a life of
shame, and induced them and their lovers to substitute for
it a life of honorable wedlock. While the'penalty of sin is
punishment, by faith in Christ we are enabled to over-
- come it; and although the efficacy of faith has been
ridiculed more than any other doctrine, yet I contend it
is reasonable to believe in its power, and outside of the-
ology all men more or less are guided by faith. Tnger-
soll defines it as an unhappy mixture of “Ignorance and In-
sanity,” and Mrs. Besant, commenting on the passage,
“ That faith as a grain of mustard seed will remove
mountains,” declared that a mountain of faith would not
shift a mustard seed. Nevertheless, in spite of these sneers,
a thoughtful consideration of this matter will convince
us that faith will remove mountains of difficulties. If
Columbus had not an intense faith in the rotundity of
the earth, he would never have gone on that memorable
voyage of discovery, never certainly have overcome the
difficulties he did, and the march of geographical know-
ledge would have been retarded. Similarly, faith was
behind the expedition of Ferdinand Magellan and Vasco
da Gama. It was faith that prompted Palissy, the
French Protestant potter, to persist in his work, when
after enduring intense hardships, having ridicule and
abuse heaped on him from all sides, he discovered the
lost art of making pottery. Faith has been the motive
power behind the world’s progress ; every invention, dis-
covery, and advance that we are now proud of was due
to its influence. It has inspired the poet, the philosopher,
explorer and philanthropist. The proudest scions of


humanity—nature’s noblemen—have all had it for their
favorite star. Faith is the primal cause, works are the
effect; they are wedded together as closely as man and
wife. “ Action, ” says Joseph Parker, “is but the practical
expression of belief.’’ As Tennyson sweetly sings :
“ Howe’er it be, it seems to me, ’tis only noble to do good ;
Kind hearts are more than coronets, and simple faith that Norman
blood.”
CHAPTER VIII.
The Verity and Value op the Miracles.
IVfost Secularists in dealing with Christians prefer to
assail Christianity rather than elaborate and defend their
own system. Such being- their tactics, it is necessary
that we should be equipped w r itli satisfactory answers to
their arguments, and in this chapter I will deal with
some of their objections to the supernatural. Christianity
is rejected on the grounds that the belief in miracles is
unreasonable. It is said, if Christ fed five thousand people
on a few loaves and fishes 1800 years ago why doesn’t
he feed the myriads dying- from famine ? A gentlemen at
the close of one of my lectures asked why, when so much
sympathy was excited over the distress caused by the
strike of the dock labourers in London, didn’t God work
■ a miracle and feed those men ? These objections arise
from a misunderstanding of the object of miracles. John
tells it in these words, “ Many other signs therefore did
•Jesus in the presence of the disciples, which are not
written in this book ; but these are written, that ye may
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and
that believing ye may have life in his name.” Clearly
the reason for working miracles, was that they afforded
unanswerable evidence of Christ’s power over the forces
of nature, and thereby demonstrated his divinity. They
"were the credentials to the people of the apostolic age of


his Messiahship; they were essential at that time.
Christianity was but beginning its career, and its advo-
cates could not then, as we can now, point to its marvellous-
history as evidence of its truthfulness; they wanted
something startling to arrest the attention of the world.
In starting a new enterprise to-day, the promoters will
advertise it in a more attractive manner than they would
an old and established firm. So Christianity required
credentials at the outset that were superfluous in later
times, hence miracles were confined to the apostolic age.
To say, that because miracles are not wrought to-day,,
that therefore they, never occurred is obviously absurd.
How many features have the various ages of the past
possessed that we cannot parallel now ? Why, geology
shows that in different epochs different faunas and fleros-
prevailed. To-day we have not the vegetation of the-
carboniferous era, or coal period; nor the Saurians of the
Jurassic age. Yet it would be as reasonable to look foe
these forms of life to-day, as to expect to find the
peculiarities of the apostolic age in the nineteenth
century. The question to which I have referred, which
was put to me at one of my lectures, Why did’nt Christ feed
the men on strike ? has been answered by the foregoing
on the object of miracles ; were they only wrought for
the immediate benefit of those healed and fed, the argu-
ment would be allowable, but the primal object was to
demonstrate the divinity of Christ. Moreover, it was
better for the men that the strike was settled without
direct divine intervention, for it taught the workers a
lesson in self-reliance that cannot fail to have a good
influence for their permanent benefit.
David Hume s argument against miracles is supposed
to be unanswerable by Sceptics, yet it was satisfactorily
■answered in Hume s own lifetime by Dr. George Camp-
bell. Campbell s manuscript was shown to Hume before
it was published, but he declined to answer it, averring
that he had made a “ fixed resolution in the beginning of
life,” not to enter into controversy. Hume and his fol-
lowers are firm believers in the “ Reign of Law,” so
firmly that they hold that there can be no exception to
it. Their faith in the Materialistic dogma of the
“ Uniformity of Nature’s Laws,” is greater than in that of


the paternal character of God. They maintain that under
like donditif ns, like results always follow, such is the
observed order of nature. Any exception to this, such
as raising the dead, is a miracle, and they won’t believe,
because they affirm that, it is opposed to the uniform
•experience of the race. The weakness of this argument
lies in the fact that, after all, our experience is but fimited,
a nd although things have gone on with unvarying regu-
larity in our own lifetime, it does not follow that they
always have done so. I feed my dog regularly at 8
o’clock every morning, with almost unerring regularity.
The dog, not knowing the why and of the
matter, but observing the regularity with which his meals
are prepared, has come to the conclusion that his meals
are placed there for him in accordance with an inexorable
law of nature; like the Sceptic, he declares that he has
experience and observation on his side. It would be a
mil acle to that dog to find that his breakfast was not
ihere; and he would also discover the absurdity of trying
to tot up the universe from a day’s experience. Yet the
•conclusions of that dog were no more irrational than that
of the human being who declines to accept the facts of
history because they have not in some way been paralleled
In his own lifetime.
It is rather amusing to observe the tactics of Atheists.
They are great on the question of the order of nature
when arguing against miracles; but when taking the
negative on the question, “Is there a God ?” they swear
that there is no order at all, the solar system is out of
.gear, and the whole universe is in a semi-chaotic con-
dition. This argument of David Hume’s is the argument
-that, ignorance brings against speculation, and has been
one of the weapons that the Powers of Darkness forged
to keep back the Light of Learning. For instance, when
the ancient Phoenecians declared that they had travelled
Africa, and that in their journey they noticed as
they tiavelled south that the sun pursued a different
•course round the heavens, Herodotus, the Greek historian,
pursuing a similar line of argument to that of David
Hume, said it couldn’t be, for it controverted human
•experience.. Yet we now know that the Phoenecians were
right, and that Herodotus was wrong.


Every day of our lives we are called upon to accept
statements upon mere testimony, tlie importance of which
has never been tested in our own experience. VVe
believe that they have equal days and equal nights at the
Equator, yet only a small proportion of us have livet
there; the rest accept it on the testimony of others, w e
believe unnumbered things about historic personages
that are altogether outside the range of our experiences.
Were there anything strained in the records of the
Miracles of Christ there would be grounds tor much
doubt, but his miracles are in keeping with his character.
We believe him to be a divine personage, and it is but
reasonable that he was ushered into this life m a miracu-
lous manner, the forces of nature bending to his will, and
that he would take his exit from it in this triumphal
way; if it were not so, what would there be, save the
surpassing greatness and goodness of his life to attest rns
divinity ? The drama of his life is sustained. His mission
commenced with a miracle, and throughout, Ins teachings
were illustrated by it. His miracles were not useless ex-
hibitions of power, but they were examples of love or
lessons in morality ; even those that have been condemned
by Sceptics as showing a malevolent spirit have been con-
sistent with his teachings. For instance. Freethinkers
have traded much on the cursing of the fig tree - lha
fig tree, although exhibiting a fair exterior, although
clothed with rich foilage, yet it was barren—and he
cursed it; just as he hated and denounced hypocrisy on
all occasions. He was saying over again m miracle,
* Woe unto ye Scribes and Pharisees ; ye hypocrites, &e.
Clearly he was denouncing the designing wretches who,,
under the cover of the foliage of religion, pretended
goodness to the world, yet were barren of good works.
In cursing that tree did he emphasise his hatred of mwai d
depravity disguised under a fair exterior. He told us to
heal the sick, and he set an example by miraculously
curing the deaf, dumb, lame and enfeebled. The people
whom he brought to life were themselves arguments m
favor of love One was an only brother, another the
only daughter, and the third an only sister. He said feed
the hungry, and he himself practised what he preached,
and fed five thousand on a few loaves and fishes. Wlion


we build our lighthouses, man our life-boats, we know that
we are doing ©ur Master’s work, for he stilled the tempest.
When we build a lunatic asylum w r e have before us his
example of curing the lunatic. His power, when mani-
fested, was combined with beneficence, as if to attest the
truth that God is love.
CHAPTER IX.
The Crimes op Secularism.
I now commence the unsavory task of exposing the
vices and crimes of Secularism. I would not pursue this
line of argument, were it not for the assaults that have
been made on the lives of Christians by Secularists. The
American Freethinkers have issued a book called the
“Crimes of the Preachers,” in which some man has set
for himself the task of culling from the newspapers for a
number of years all the recorded incidents of the clergy
going wrong, which came under his notice. Mr. Ceo. W.
Foote, (now the president of the National Secular Society)
has issued a book called the “ Crimes of Christianity
he has searched the pages of history for records of
ecclesiastical abuses, and labelling them Christian ; he
seeks by that means to bring an indictment against
Christianity. Similarly, Mrs. Besant in the “ Freethinkers’
Text Book,” an ill-digested assortment of quotations, asks
the question, “If the bishops and clergy and mission-
aries were ignorant, sensual, tyrannical and superstitious,
they are none the less representative of Christianity;
and if these are not true Christians, where are the true
Christians ?” From a.d. 324 to a.d. 1500 she extracts
from the ecclesiastical history of that period all the most
unpleasant episodes she can collate.
Mr. Symes heads an article in the Liberator with an
offensive title, “Religious Brutes,” and from the time


that paper was started* he has published in it, any ac-
count that might appear in the “ Dailies ” concerning the
shortcomings of the advocates of Christianity. When
Atheists thus descend to gutter warfare, and hurl at us
their obnoxious stink-pots ; when they abandon all the
recognised methods of intellectual warfare, aud seek to
gain an advantage by vilifying those opposed them;
when their weapon is “ The dagger of assassin rather than
the axe of the Roman Lictor,” they must be prepared to
bear the consequences. They have provoked retaliation
and therefore cannot complain of the unmasking of the
infamous lives of some of their champions. The mildest
and perhaps most prevalent vice among Secularists is
slander. Spurgeon, in his little book, “John Plough-
man’s Pictures,’’ has a sketch of a hunchback walking
behind a round-shouldered gentleman, and scornfully
pointing to his crooked back, forgetting that he has a
larger hump on his own. Mr. Spurgeon remarks, “He
points to the man in front of him, but he is a good deal
more of a guy himself.” That is a fair illustration of
the average Secularist. He is everlastingly finding fault
with Christianity, and at the same time forgetting to
amend his own conduct. Jesus probably had such a man
in his mind’s eye when he counselled us to first cast the
beam out of our own eyes before we attempt to take the
mote ou,t of others. Let us take as an example of this
class the redoubtable Mr. Joseph Symes. He is so anxious
to find fault that in some articles in his inelgant paper,
he criticises the Solar System. I presume that he was a
little weary of firing away at the Bible, and therefore by
way of recreation had a shot at the Solar System. He
declares that the whole thing is out of gear, and leads
one to infer that if the Almighty had only been possessed
of his knowledge of astronomy, he would have made a
much better job of it. It is a pity that Mr. Symes
wasn’t present at the making of it, he might have given
his Creator the benefit of his knowledge and inventive
genius. A writer said, “An undevout astronomer is mad.”
If so, we can excuse Mr. Symes’ presumption on the
grounds of lunacy. Watching the moon not infrequently
affects the mind, and possibly our astronomer has fallen
a martyr to his studies. If egotism is a symptom of


insanity, certainly lie is a little gone. He calls to my
mind a little narrative I once read concerning President
Grant. Someone mentioned to liim that a certain Senator
noted for his conceit, hadn’t much faith in the Bible.
Grant made the laconic reply, “ Why should he, he didn’t
write it ?” The same might be truthfully said of Mr.
Symes. He believes in no one but himself, as witness
his slanders in the disputes with his former colleagues.
And he is not likely to applaud a Solar System that he
hadn’t manufactured or suggested.
Another damaging feature in connection with Secu-
larism, is that it fosters a love of loose literature, which
it scatters broadcast over the world. Take, for instance,
such works as “The Elements of Social Science,” “The
Ex*uits of Philosophy,” and “ Phallic Worship,’ another
pernicious production from the pen of Mr Symes. These
books, circulated indiscriminately among young people,
cannot fail to do great injury. I remember that Sir John
Lubbock, in his work on the “ Origin of Civilisation,”
after dealing with various phases of religious belief, makes
a passing allusion to “ Phallic Worship,” but declines
either to discuss or elaborate it in a work that will prob-
ably fall into the hands of all classes, This man of
science, by no means a friend of the theological school,
declines to discuss this matter in a work which, by the
very price of it, would not fall into the hands of the
generality of young people. Mr. Symes, however, has
not the delicate feelings that characterise a man like
John Lubbock. He publishes his pamphlet in a cheap
form, and states that he intends young people to read it.
After describing the male and female organs of genera-
tion in a very crude manner, he writes —“ Now, my young
readers of either sex, which of you is the worse for read-
ing that ?” Let children read this abominable book, and
as they enter a chapel and look at the architecture of the
building, they will find in some of its most attractive
features food for impure thoughts. The stories of the
Bible are twisted to bring to the mind evil suggestions, as
this book on “ Phallic Worship,” and those books on the law
of population can. Some of those books were evidently
w ritten with a benevolent purpose. Their authors pleaded
that it was their desire to ameliorate the condition of the


poor, and although I believe they have failed in their
object, yet they had no snch unworthy motive as exciting
a morbid curiosity for the purpose of gain. “ Phallic
Worship” is a vile, unclean publication, tb*at possibly may
give a few pence to its publishers, but will only impair the
morality of its young and weak readers. Indeed, when,
to make a few pence, the leaders of Secularism have to
degrade themselves by producing such publications as
these, Christianity need not fear anything from the attacks
of this form of Infidelity. Joseph Barker, formerly co-
editor with Mr Bradlaugh on the National Reformer^ says
that the reason why he severed his connection with that
paper was because it approved of such books as I have
named. On page 1*23 of his book he writes, “In August
my wife and children arrived in England. They were
sorry to find me in connection with a paper, and a paper
of so objectionable a character, and they set themselves
quietly to work to bring about a change, and it was not
long befoi’e they succeeded. A book written by a leading
Secularist was sent to me for review. When I read it I
found that its object was to undermine marriage and
bring it into contempt, and to induce men to substitute
for honorable wedlock unbounded sensual liceuce. It was
the most horrible and revolting production I ever read.
This book had been advertised in the paper of which I
was one of the editors, and in the part of the paper over
which I had no control had been strongly recommended.
I found, too, that it had been very extensively circulated
among the readers of the paper, and that the Secularist
leaders were adopting measures to promote its still more
extensive circulation. lat once exposed the filthy pro-
duction in my portion of the paper, as far as a respect
for decency would permit. I laid its loathsome, horrible
abominations before my readers. This led to a total
separation between me and the friends of the loathsome
book. Joseph Barker here tells that his experience
taught him that Free-thought tended to loosen the
marriage tie. Abundant evidence can be brought to
.prove this from their own literature. Mrs. Besant writes,
in her phamphlet on “ Marriage ! What it is, and What it
Should be, Mary Wolstonecraft acted on the same
theory in her own life, and her daughter was united to


(the poet Shelley while Shelley’s first wife was living, no
legal divorce having severed the original marriage.
Richard Carlisle’s second marriage was equally illegal.
In our own days the union of George Henry Lewis and
•George Elliot has struck the key note of the really moral
marriages.” George Henry Lewis lived with George
Elliot (Marian Evans) while his own wife was living, and
lie had obtained no legal divorce from her. This, accord-
ing to Mrs. Besant, is the key-note of the really moral
marriage.
The views of Joseph Symes on marriage are just as
•obnoxious. He says in the Liberator of April 11th, 1886,
page 311, “ Society has its choice either to have prosti-
tution as a permanent thing, increasing in proportion
with all its concomitant evils, or to introduce variety of
marriage— marriages for short periods , for long ones, for
life, as each couple may prefer, or monogamy or poligamy,
as the parties concerned may desire for themselves.
Again, in a previous issue of the paper, July 28th. 1886,
page 212, he wrote, “In Egypt under the Ptolmies, it
was quite common, in fact the rule for the king to marry
his own sister, and it is open to doubt whether those
restrictions still existing respecting marriages, might not
better be left to education and custom —much stronger
forces than laws —than to be dealt with by acts of Parlia-
ment. The state which forbids brothers and sisters to
marry, might command them to do so if its whims
prompted.”
This is just the way the Anarchist argues. Mr. Symes
(repudiates Anarchy, yet says that custom and education
are stronger forces than laws, and incest should be dealt
with not by acts of Parliament, but with these other
forces; if this be so, why not treat all crimes in the same
manner ? If custom and education are stronger forces
than law and sufficient for the suppression of incest,
why not for theft, for murder, or any crime ? If cus-
tom and education are stronger that law, why have law
.at all ? Why not be an Anarchist ?
Mr. Symes repudiated the statement that he was a
Freelover, and declares he never advocated Freelove ; yet
he advocates “short-time m images,” as “the parties
may decide.” What is that bat Freelove ?


Much more might be written on the licence, dissension
and evil influence of Infidelity. Sufficient, however, has-
been cited to show what an undesirable thing it is,
although Freethinkers indulge largely on an attack on
private characters, as is shown in “ Crimes of Preachers.”
In this chapter I have dealt almost exclusively on the-
views advocated by prominent Secularists ; in my next
chapter, on great Infidels, I will show how they illustrated
their teaching in their lives.
In closing this chapter I would ask you to contrast two’
great revolutions, both of which were begotten of similar
causes —dark oppression. But the one, the English Revo-
lution, was tempered by religious sentiment; its leaders-
were men famed for their piety, and it is one of the:
noblest epochs in our history; its story is a tale of great
wrongs redressed with moderation and firmness. The
other, the French Revolution, had for its leading" spirits,
Freethinkers ; it came a century later than the English
one, and its story is a tale of terror and horrible cruelty.
When the power of the monarchy was broken and the--
serfs of kingcraft were liberated, they forget the lesson
of liberty, and unrestrained by the kindly influence of
religion, they rushed into the wildest excesses, and by
their extravagance destroyed the very fabric that the
wisest, most moderate, and most religious amongst them
had built up.
CHAPTER A.
Great Infidels.
“ Talk about questions of the day; there is hut one
question, and that is the Gospel. It can, and will correct
everything’ needing correction. All men at the head of
great movements are Christians. During the many years
I was in the Cabinet, I was brought into association


with sixty master-minds, and all but five of them were
Christians. My only hope for Hie world is bringing the
human mind into contact with divine revelation.” So,
recently, spake Mr Gladstone. It would seem from this
that those who are doing the most for the promotion of
human welfare are Christians. I know of no great move-
ment to benefit mankind that Secularists have been iden-
tified with, that has not been initiated and carried to a
successful issue by Christians. Take, for instance, the
work of Mr Bradlaugh. It is his boast that he has been
the means of partially sweeping away the prevalent
system of oath-taking. Here, however, he has been
working on Christian lines, and has had Christian sym-
pathy in his enterprise. Christ said, “ Swear not at all,
neither by the heaven, for it is the throne of Grad ; nor
by the earth, for it is the footstool of His feet; nor by
Jerusalem, for it is the city of the Great King; neither
shalt thou swear by thy head, for thou can’st not make
one hair white or black. But let your speech be yea !
yea ; nay ! nay ! for whatsoever is more than these is of
the evil one.” The Quakers, long before Mr. Bradlaugh
commenced his crusade against oath-taking, persistently
refused to swear, maintaining that if their word was not
their bond, nothing else would bind them.
Thomas Paine said, “ The world is my country, man-
kind my brethren, and to do good my religion.” What is
this bat a paraphrase of Paul's teachings ? He proclaimed
the brotherhood of man in Christ. There was neither bond
nor free, neither male nor female, neither Jew nor Greek,
but they were all one in Christ. Thomas Paine, although
he assailed Christianity, received better treatment
from the Christians of his own time than he did from his
fellow-thinkers. He was imprisoned in a French dungeon
for his moderate views, by order of a French Government,
chiefly composed of Freethinkers, and only by an acci-
dent escaped being guillotined by them. After the fall!
of Robespierre, when Christians again came into positions
of authority, through their leniency, Paine was liberated.
All that is beautiful and true in Paine’s writings can be
paralleled in the New Testament. He says, “ Any system
of religion that contained that which shocks the mind of
a child cannot be a true system and Christ tau„ht


this seventeen hundred year* before Paine’s time, “ Suffer
the little childron to come unto me, and forbid them not,
rfor of such is the kingdom of heaven.” The child, in its
innocence and purity, was held up as typical of what a
■Christian should be. Paine advocated a peace policy, and
yet some of his admirers to-day declare that the peace
policy of Christianity is one of the assailable planks in
-our platform. Paine declared, however, that it was just
.as uni’easonable for a commercial nation to go to war as
rifor a shopkeeper to put a dog at his door to frighten away
.Iris customers. All that we can admire in connection
with the writings of Paine is that which re-echoes the
.sentiments of Christ; and that portion of his life and
writings which it would be well to bury in oblivion was
antagonistic to the teachings of the great Master. Byron
.-and ‘Shelley may be taken as representative of the Free-
thought poetical school, both men of great genius, and
fboth of them put the loose views held on the marriage
.’relationship by many prominent Freethinkers into prac-
tice. Byron separated from his wife, or she left him,
r.shortly after marriage. He left England to reside on the
shores of the Adriatic, where he led a most profligate
life. Some have argued that the story of Don Juan
is but a poetical sketch of his own life. Percy
Shelley united himself to Mary Godwin while his
first wife was living; with her he travelled on
'the continent, deserting Harriet Westbrook, his legal
wife, who, broken-hearted, committed suicide. George
Henry Lewis, the sage of modern Agnosticism,, lived
with George Elliot, the novelist, while his own wife
was living. As I have mentioned in my previous chapter,
this couple, Mrs. Besant tells us, has given the key-note
of the truly moral marriage; if so, then George Elliot
grew immoral in her latter days, for on the death of Mr.
Lewis, she was married, according to the forms prescribed
by law, to Mr. Cross. George Elliot, although an Agnostic,
• evidently did not believe it was a good thing for the
world, for her grandest characters were Christians. Her
■books, such as “ (Scenes from Clerical Life,” trade on the
religious feelings. Whatever may have been her views
on religion, she seemed to realise that they were not
:sufficient to gratify the heart hunger of mankind.


Richard Carlisle, whose name is included in the list of
the “ Martyrs and Heroes of Freethouglit,” seemed to
entertain similarly loose ideas on the marriage tie.
George J. Holyoake, in his biographical sketch of him,
page 28, makes this reference to Carlisle's domestic life.
“ Carlisle left six children —Richard, Alfred and Thomas
Paine by his wife, Mrs. Jane Carlisle; and Julian, Theo-
phila and Hypatia by “Isis,” the lady to whom he united
himself after his separation from his wife.”
Voltaire, whose writings proclaim him the foremost
thinker of his age, led a most disgraceful life. I quote
the following from Dr. Newman’s account of him, which
I have verified from other sources. Parton, in his life of
this philosopher, although trying to palliate his short-
comings, records the facts stated by Newman. “ Voltaire’s
private life was a scandal even to his own corrupt age.
When Secretary to the Marquis Chateauneuf, at Hague,
in the United Provinces, he ruined the young daughter
of Madame Dunoyer, and was compelled to fly the Hague
to escape the fury of an enraged mother. When he fled
from Paris to escape the officers of the law, he found a
retreat in Cirey, on the borders of Lorraine, where he
was kindly received by M. Chatelet, whose hospitality
lie violated by a liason with the wife of his host, the
famous Madame Chatelet, and which continued while she
lived, and that too while her husband was yet alive, and
he boasted that he was the favorite of Madame Pompa-
dour before she became the favorite mistress of Louis
XV!”
Many men it may be said have adopted Atheism, and
«till continue to perform their social and family duties
with unerring exactness. Tyndal has paid a splendid
tribute to the conduct of these men, (which has been pub-
lished in support of Atheism by nearly all the Free-
thought periodicals in the world), but these isolated
eases in no way give sanction to their system. We
will sometimes find flowers near the tops of the
highest mountains that have survived through the wither-
ing blasts of winter; but that will not give us the right
to say that those conditions are suitable for the growth
of vegetation nor will the few noble examples of Infidelity
prove that it is suited to the mental and moral require-


Wbm Tu mm l hare the!r maahooJ
i i- j ~ v v er, these, the good men, have left
behind them ,n their writings admissions which are suf
to prove that Christianity is the religion of mat
Of bWogy hast?; h t J>® eil i us *l7 called the Newton
Journal of a Voyage round the Wm*ld ” -7
tt Tahi thins?
mnrelity £ SgUytedf
table There are many who attack even more acrimo
pare the presen? sta?etiSf that o
years ag„ ; nor even with that dSZitl?
Si h rr ;t wi ‘ h ‘ he - hi ? h st “ darf »f «°4ei
ex pect the missionaries to effect that
which the apostles themselves failed to do T * th '7
as the condition of the peopfo Ms short of th, ™,M
standard, blame is attached to • • . s m ß h
credit for that 1"
these have been abolished, and that dishonesty intern
be at the point of shipwreck on some unknown coast be
XC “ y d??:Vf^. th ?tX\ of th T?
as Dai wm only stated what he observed, the passao-e
Btatement of his »‘ h o p s;
Chrislan^ a, Tnts n 0 Th from
y xn nis essay on Iheism,


Theological Essays,” he says, “It is the God incarnate,
more than the God of the Jew or nature, who being
idealised, has taken so great and salutary a hold on the
human mind, and whatever else may be taken from us
by rational criticism, Christ is still left, a unique figure,
not more unlike all his precursors than all his followers.”
In his “ Dissertations and Discussions,” when criticising
a production of Guizot’s, he acknowledges the benificent
influence of Christianity, and even goes so far as to give
Roman Catholicism credit for more good than evil; he says,
“ Enormous as have been the sins of the Catholic church
in the way of religious intolerance, her assertion of the
principle (separation between temporal and spiritual
authority), has done more for human freedom than all
the fires she ever kindled have done to destroy it.” Thus
Mill acknowledges that ecclesiasticism with all its faults,
has curbed the power of the tyrant, and saved Europe
from much political oppression.
Similarly, Ernest Renan commences the first chapter
of his “ Life of Jesus” with the words, “ The great event
in the history of the world is the revolution by which the
noblest portion of humanity have passed from the ancient
religion, comprised under the vague name of Paganism,
to a religion founded on the Divine Unity —the Trinity—
and the incarnation of the “ Son of God.” It has taken
nearly a thousand years to accomplish this conversion.
The new religion had itself taken nearly three hundred
years in formation, but the origin of the revolution in
question is a fact which took place in the reign of
Tiberious and Augustus. At that time there lived a
superior personage, who, by his bold originality, and by
the love which he was able to inspire, became the object,
and fixed the starting point of the future faith of
humanity.” After dealing with this prediction of his
coming, he closes the chapter with the words, “ This
confused mixture of clear views and dreams, this alterna-
tion of deception and hopes, these ceaseless aspirations,
driven back by an odious reality, found at last their in-
terpretation in the incomparable man, to whom the
universal conscience has decreed the title of the ‘ Son of
God,’ and that with justice, since he has advanced religion
as no other has 1 done or probably ever will be able to do.”


Lecky, m his _ History of European Morals,” also passes
a eulogy on Christianity, showing that it has been the chief
iactorm developing. European morality. In volume II
on page 9, he says, “The Platonist exhorted men
imitate God, the Stoic to follow Reason, the Christian to-
e love of Christ. The later Stoics had often united
their notions of excellence in an ideal sage, and Epictetus
had even urged his disciples to set before them some man
surpassing excellence, to imagine him continually near
them; but the utmost the Stoic ideal could become Las a
model for imitation, and the admiration it inspired could
never deepen into affection. It was reserved for Christi
anity to present to the world an ideal character, which
tWgh all the changes of eighteen centuries, has inspired
ctnable r of oned love, has shown Leif
capable of acting on all ages, nations, temperaments and
conditions; has been not only the highest nXLLf
virtue, but the strongest incentive to its practice, and has
exercised so deep an influence that it may be truly said
that the simple record of three short years of actual lift
h J S n °“ e m< > r e to regenerate and soften mankind than
a the disquisitions of philosophers, and all the exhorta-
tions of moralists. This has been the wellspring of
whatever is best and purest in Christian life. AmTd all
the sms and failings amid all the priestcraft, persecu-
tion and fanaticism that has defaced the church it has
preserved, m the character and example of its founder
an enduring principle of regeneration. Perfect lov4
nows no right; it creates a boundless, uncalculating
self-abnegation that transforms the character, and is the
parent of every virtue.”
Edward Gibbon, in his historv of the j
Fall of the Roman Empire,” second volume, lltZsZ,
progress Christianity made in the fourth century and
tells how it refined the manners and ennobled the fives of
aCC n Pt L t}^ S corroborating the statements
of the other illustrious Freethinkers to whom I have re-
ferred. Those men although denying the Divine origin
tv 6 iave to acknowledge its utility.
« T •#' * ? US ’ S ?, me J ea c s ago in Germany, wrote a critical
Tjlfe „°^; re^ us > and > although acknowledging the good-
ness of Christ, cast reflections on the historical character


of the New Testament. Straus was vanquished in debate
by an old college comrade, Dr Hoffman, who effectually
refuted his arguments, and established the historical!
verity of the Gospel. Straus manned an actress, and.
retiring from the arena of controversy, settled down to-
his legitimate occupation as a novel writer.
How frequently do we find Sceptics tacitly admitting
the superiority of Christianity by continuing to hug its
shores with their frail barques of humanity, even after
they have given up their faith in it. Bishop Colenso,
after he had assailed the authenticity of the Pentateuch,
continued preaching in the pulpit, and drawing his salary
as a bishop of the Anglican Church. Under cover of
that body he forged weapons that now constitute a large
part of the stock-in-trade of the Freethought lecturers of
to-day. By their actions do men like Colenso prove that
in Christianity is the salvation qf the world. The scientific ■
thought of the world is in sympathy with Christianity.
Last year the presidents of “ The Royal Society,” “ The
British Association,” “ The Linnsen Society,” “ The-
Chemical Society,” and the “Microscopical Society” were
all Christian men, some of them preachers of the Gospel.
Men like Dana, Dawson, Agassiz, and Asa Gray have
shown that there is no want of harmony between science
and revelation.
Christianity has little to fear from the attacks of
Australian Sceptics. Their movement, as I have shown
in another portion of this book, is gradually waning,
and will in all probability at no distant date as an
organised movement become extinct, at least it can never
have sufficient vitality to grapple with the splendid
organisations of Christianity. The defect in it, however,
is that the men who are leading it are neither men of
discretion or thought. They are vain theological war-
riors, who boast very loudly in their newspapers, but
sing very small when they find a man ready to accept
their challenge. Men of such a stamp as W. W. Collins
and Joseph Symes. These men clearly belong to the
Laurentian period of Sceptical thought. In mental
biology they would be classed among the Protozoans.
Freethought in Australasia was not always led by charac-
ters like these; once it had u»on its side such able men


as Sir Robert Stout and John Ballance in New Zealand,
and equally thoughtful and influential men in other
-colonies, showed signs of giving it the right hand of
fellowship, but they seem to have taken fright when they
-discovered the nature of the monstrosity they were
nursing. It is a notorious fact that the great minds who
have penned Sceptical works; men like Mill, Lecky
Harwm, and Gibbon have kept themselves clear of the
hreethought propaganda; have not associated themselves
with movements for the destruction of Christianity, and
although declining to believe in the divine origin of that
system, yet they have granted that it has been one of the
-chief factors m producing all that is beautiful and useful
in the present civilization.
CHAPTER XI.
A Leap from my Life.
I think I need hardly ask pardon of the reader for
introducing a chapter of a personal nature. I hare been
invited by friends and challenged by foe's to give mv
. experience, but I have, up to °the present, studbuZ
avoided doing so. I feel that it is no argument aS
Secularism to merely cite the fact that an advocate has
seceded from it, unless the seceder gave Stan Hal
reasons for doing so. All the men whose names I We
and capable cI, “' P - ter ln this book ' vere men of ability,
and capable of giving a reason for the hope that
was m them lhy were men equal in ability to
those connected with Secularism at the present moment
and were willing when they left it to defend in fair dil’
cession the respective positions they took up. If I turned
Mahometan to-morrow, it would be no argument agaW


‘Christianity, unless I could show that I had satisfactory
reason? for believing that Mahometanism was better than
Christianity. I think I have written sufficient to show
that I had good reasons for taking the steps I have done,
i herefore to refute the inuendos of Secularists, and to
gratify the wishes of my friends, I proceed to enter into a
tew personal details.
Jb rom the year 1878 to 1888, I took an active part and a
deep interest in the Freethought w >rk. Prior to 1878
I was gradually drifting towards Secularism, but during
those ten years I was a full-fledged Materialist. I wal
■always found ready to take up the cudgels on behalf of
my hobby. I gave to the Freethought movement my
first love, and pleaded for it with all the earnestness of
youth and early manhood, making many personal sacri-
fices for its extension. For nearly two years I acted as
honorary secretary to the Dunedin Freethought Associa-
tion, and when I left home I carried with me a letter of
commendation signed by the members of the executive
of that body. I was in Melbourne when the Australasian
Secular Association was inaugurated, and during the first
twelve months of its career, I took a prominent part in
its work. I evidently won the esteem of its members,
■for on leaving Victoria for New South Wales, I was publicly
presented, m the Athemeum Hall, with a handsome
album, containing the photos of the members of the first
executive of the A.S.A. I also received from the ladies
a token of their esteem. I can fearlessly state, that
throughout my career as a lecturer, I never trifled with
the reputation of the movement by lapses from ri°-ht-
iivmg. Ho Freethinker can ever say I dealt dishonor-
ably with him, and no woman can blush for my acquain-
tance I have sketched out in a previous chapter my
introduction to the Freethought platform, how, through
the indisposition of a lecturer, I was led to take to it in
an emergency, and how, at the solicitations of friends, I
afterwards pursued it as an avocation. I held my first
formal debate with a representative man in Newcastle,
in the March of 1884; it lasted for four nights, and we
discussed a different proposition each evening My
opponent was the Rev. John Evans, then a Baptist
bat now a minister of the Church of England.


My next encounter was in the Angust of the same year,,
with Mr. John Buchanan, the representative of the Auck-
land (N.Z.) Christian Evidence Society. This discussion
lasted for two evenings, and was on the question, “Is the
Mosaic account of Creation at variance with Science ?”
From Auckland I went to Nelson, and there, on Thursday
evening the 6th of November, I debated with the Rev.
H. J. Lewis, Congregational minister: the proposition
was, “ Is there a God, the Maker and Moral Governor of
the Universe ?” My next discussion was in Wellington,
in the December of the following year, with Dr. Gilbert;
we debated for one night, but met again about two
months after, m Wanganui, for a further discussion of two
nights. The heaviest discussion I entered into was a
few months after this in Adelaide, South Australia; this
was a discussion with Mr. M. W. Green, a minister of
the Disciples of Christ, and a practised debater. He
defended Christianity, not as it is popularly taught to-
day by many of its defenders, but as he believed it was
taught in the times of the Apostles. The discussion
lasted for eight nights, and we debated three different
propositions ; it was a determined fight on both sides.
The debate was reported, and the report, almost verbatim,
was published in book form. During that discussion I
came to i*ealise the necessity of distinguishing between
the priestcraft, that had been commonly designated
Christianity, and the religion of Christ, as taught in the
first century. But still I left South Australia a zealous
Secularist. The debates I had after this were 'easy work
for me, and I say this without casting any reflections on
my disputants. I met none so practised in the arts of
intellectual warfare as Mr. Green. In Charters Towers,
North Queensland, I met the Rev. Mr. Haggar, Congrega-
tional Minister, for two evenings ; and in Brisbane, Queens-
land, in July 1888,1 held my last debate, as a Freethoughfc
lecturer, with the Rev. Mr. Hoskins. Neither of these
discussions impressed me with anything that was re-
markably new on the questions between us ; but in my
own mind I felt the craving for religion. I began to feel
that I was in many cases misrepresenting Christianity,
and above all my personal acquaintance with the effect of
irreligion on character was such as to induce me to take a


more lenient view of religion. These were not the only
discussions I held, but they were the principal ones, and
I cite them, not to boast of my work, but as proof of the
position I held as a lecturer, as I will need to refer to
them as a refutation of certain slanders that have been
coined about me. In the beginning of 1889, I formally
seceded from Secularism, although prior to that time I
had given up lecturing on anti-theological topics; yet it
was from distaste rather than any distinct conviction that
I was doing wrong. My last lecture, under the auspices
*s® Rethought party, was on a political topic,
‘ Under the Southern Cross, or the coming Republic.”
It was delivered in the Hall of Science, Newcastle,
Sunday evening, Jan. 6th, 1889. It was my last lecture’
and even then I doubted the wisdom of the course I
was pursuing, and when invited to lecture on the follow-
ing Sunday I declined to do so, not out of any direct feel-
ing of disloyalty to Secularism, but from a growing in-
clination not to assail Christianity. In fact, I had deter-
mined to quietly drop out of the movement and devote
my life henceforth to other pursuits. I thought I could
see in the Temperance work, Land Law Reform, and
other directions room for an energetic worker. Mr.
Daniel Wall work wrote to me from Newcastle, suggest-
ing that my wife and I should settle for a time in the
coalopolis. He believed that the Northumberland district
would supply us with tolerable audiences. I would prob-
ably have accepted this offer had not my wife .strongly
oojected to my continuing to be associated with the
Freethought party. I therefore wrote a friendly note to Mr.
Wallwork, declining to enter on the work in Newcastle!
Shll I clung to the flesh-pots of Egypt, and could not
alienate myself from the bondage of my former life. My
wife, with the keen intuition of a woman, had long before
detected the utter hollowness of Freethought so-called.
She "had never been an Atheist, but was an earnest Theist,
with strong leanings towards modern Spiritualism. Now,
in the course of an anti-papal lecture, which she was
delivering in Maitland, she boldly proclaimed herself a
Christian. On her return home, she exhorted me to take
the step she had taken, pointing to the many defects in
the system I had been associated with so long, and plead-


ing that it was unsuited to the Spiritual and Moral wel-
fare of our children. In accordance with her wish I
again went over the evidences in favour of primitive
Christianity. Soon I conceded that Theism was reasonable
and then that Christian Theism was the highest expres-
sion of religious thought. But I felt that I could not
associate myself with any denomination. In that state
of mind I wrote to Mr. Collins, who was then lecturing
in Sydney, stating my change of mind and inviting him
to a debate on the question of the existence of
God. He agreed to meet me on condition that I
would publicly proclaim my change of views, and then
formally challenge him. This I did through the columns
of the Protestant Standard. A committee was ap-
pointed, consisting of Messrs. Collins, Skinner, Black and
Tye, representing Mr. Collins; and Messrs. M att, Pieton,
Pottie and myself, representing my side. We met and
drew up the conditions; the following is a verbatim copy
of them. Mr. Collins was absent from the meetings of
committee, but signed the following conditions in the
presence of the chairman, on the first evening of the
debate. Conditions of debate :
Proposition, “Is there a God, the Maker and Moral
Governor of the Universe ?”
The debate to extend over two evenings, of two hours
each; and a third evening if either disputant desires it.
On the first evening, Mr. Selby to commence with a
speech of half an hour, Mr. Collins to be allowed an equal
period, then alternate speeches of a quarter of an hour
each for the concluding hour, the same conditions to be
observed for succeeding evenings, with the exception that
Mr. Collins opens on the second evening, all interruptions
to be allowed for.
The speakers to be notified two minutes before the
expiration of their time.
Each speaker to have a chairman, who shall if neces-
sary, have the right to appeal to the chairman of the
meeting on points of order.
, ( Isaac Sklby.
Signed j w w CoLLINS<


T still have this document in my possession, with our
names attached. The document, you will notice, pro-
vides that either disputant has a right to ask for a third
evening. I solicited tlie third night, but although Mr.
Collins had signed these conditions he declined to go on
with the discussion. He offered to avoid the difficulty by
desiring that it should be put to the meeting, which was
composed almost solely of Secularists, for at that time I
could not say that I was entitled to the friendship of any
Christian, not having associated myself with any religious
oiganisation, or having done any work in their cause.
The large majority of the audience was, therefore, entirely
hostile to me, and I contended, justly, that Mr Collins
should be bound by the agreement he had put his signa-
ture to, but this he declined to do, evidently believing*
that “ discretion was the better part of valor.” This
debate took place in the Temperance Hall, Pitt-street,
Sydney, on the 4th and sth of March, 1889, before large
audiences; and if anything was required to cement my
faith in Christianity it was that discussion. The veno-
mous conduct of some of the audience, along with the
sneers and inuendoes of my opponent, proved to me that
those men who talk so loudly of Freedom are without
ary right ideas of the import of the term. A garbled
report of this debate appeared in Freedom , Mr Collins’
paper, written by the lecturer’s “great father-in-law;”
and although I believe the reporter tried to be fair, as I
know him to be a just man, he certainly failed to give
a plain unvarnished tale.” This might be owing to
ns lack of practice as a reporter, or to his prejudice as a
partisan, or possibly to both. After this discussion I
sought a Secular avocation, but no sooner had I
promise of employment on the press than 1 fell a victim
to the typhoid fever. My finances were now exhausted
through my being out of remunerative employment so
long, so disease and debt invaded the house at the same
n im o' * however, the good fortune to fall into the
hands of some good Samaritans. During that trying time
Dr Joseph Kingsbury, the gentleman to whom this little
book is gratefully inscribed, attended me, furnishing me
with not only his kindly advice, but also gave me other
mgs needful to the body.” I was near to death s


door, the doctors having given me up before Dr Kings-
bury came to treat me. My wife nursed me tenderly, and
she and the doctor brought me back from the mouth of
the “ Valley of the Shadow of Death.” My sick hours
were periodically enlivened by the calls of Mr. Charles
Watt, Mr. H. G. Picton, Mr. Thomas Lutton, and other
Christian friends who became interested in me during
the debate with Mr Collins, but no Freethinker ever
crossed the threshold during all the hours of trouble.
If anything were required to make me bury the old man
and strive “to rise to newness of life” it was the hours
when sickness and adversity invaded the home, to find it
hallowed by a Christian friendship I did not deserve, and
deserted by the friends of a movement to which I had
given my first love, and faithfully wooed for over ten long
years. As soon as I recovered from the fever and was
strong enough to attend church, I attached myself to the
“ Church of Christ.” I was immersed by Mi*. Charles
Watt, May 12th, 1889. Why I chose this body in pre-
ference to other religious bodies I will state in my next
chapter. A few months after this, at the invitation of
Mr. Geo. T. Walden, I visited Melbourne, and lectured
on “ Martin Luther” in the Lygon-street Christian chapel.
In the lecture I made no display of hostility towards my
former friends, but invited questions on that subject.
Questions were submitted, most of them wide of the
subject, and in reply to one casting reflections on myself,
I promised to lecture on “Why I left the Secularists ?”
Mr Symes, noticing that I was lecturing in Melbourne,
put a note in the Liberator suggesting that the local Free-
thought body should offer me their hall, free of charge,
to give a lecture on my reasons for becoming a Christian,
on condition that I should submit to an hour’s question-
ing from them. No sooner did I notice this paragraph
than I wrote to Mr Symes, intimating that I was going to
give a lecture on that subject, but as I did not desire to
put myself under any obligation to the Freethought party,
it would be delivered in the Old Hall of Science (then,
and now the property of the Young Men’s Christian As-
sociation), and that he and any of his friends could attend
and put what questions they deemed desirable at the
close of the lecture. Mr Symes neither acknowledged


'the letter or attended. I delivered the lecture, my
esteemed friend Mr. Walden being in the chair. There
was- a crowded audience, and every opportunity was
allowed for questions; many were put and answered.
This was the first of a series of controversial lectures
which I have given in the City of Melbourne, at which I
have always permitted discussions and questions. The
most of my lectures have been given in the Swanston-
street Christian Chapel, where I am serving my ap-
prenticeship to the Christian Ministry, and where I have
made friendships that I trust will last as long as life.
•Swanston-street Christian Church is one of the'oldest, if
not the oldest church in the brotherhood, and among its
members are the veteran defenders of Primitive Christi-
anity. They are noted for their rigid adherence to what
they believe to be the apostolic customs. Hence it has
been an advantage for me in many respects to commence
my labors here.
Mr. Symes has systematically vilified me through the
columns of his paper, insinuating that “ I left the Secu-
larist” because there is better pasture on “my side of
the fence. Really, Mr. Symes crows very loudly in his
own paper, but he, like Mr. Collins, showed the “ white
feather” when I challenged himtodebate—but more of that
.anon. Let us for the present consider if the pasture on
my side is better than that on his. In the church to
which I belong the best paid evangelists are receiving
two hundred and fifty a year, and there are not a great
many of them getting that. Mr. Symes was, and I believe
still is, receiving a salary of four hundred pounds a year
for one lecture a week. We have two meetings a week.
He has made this salary and more by his lectures for
over six years; there is no evangelist in Australia who
has done this, so Mr. Symes gets a great deal more as a
I reethought lecturer than we would ever give him as
nn evangelist. My own receipts as a lecturer averaged
more than lam receiving now. When my wife and I were
travelling through Xew Zealand we obtained at times
veiy large sums for our lectures. For the first two
ectures she gave in Christchurch she received forty-five
pounds, and similarly high results were obtained in all
le * ai ’g> e towns of New Zealand. When we were in


Brisbane for our first engagement the local association’
paid ns one hundred and six pounds for twelve lectures,
We have not received a half of that sum for the same
amount of work among the Christians, and would not
expect it. In Sydney, one of Mrs. Selby’s houses,
amounted to seventy two pounds, I don’t say such
results could be obtained by anyone now; but at least
these facts show that there is good pasture from a worldly
standpoint in the country from which we have emigrated.
I gi’ant that we had periods of misfortune, but they were
few and far between, and striking an average, our receipts
were higher than those of the best paid evangelist in the
Christian Church to-day. Mr. Symes never expressed
doubts of my success until I changed, when of course be-
changed also. He wrote in the Liberator for Septem-
ber 7th, 1884, “Mr. Isaac Selby late of Melbourne, is
continuing his successful career in New Zealand. He-
has held a debate with a local clergyman, and the press has-
declared that the young Secularist seemed to have the-
better of it. He has challenged a bishop to debate, but of
course, unsuccessfully. Bishops are too conservative to
allow of such opportunities for their being held up to
ridicule, &c.” This and other comments have been made on
my work by Mr. Symes. While on his side I never remem-
bered his making an adverse one ; but, to use a familiar
illustration of his own, like a “transformation scene,” he-
has wheeled round, and now nothing is too vile to say
about me. A few months ago he delivered a very silly
lecture on “Christianity, The Worst Enemy of the
Working Classes.’ I attended it, and on being called to
the platform expressed my willingness to meet Mr.
Symes in public debate on the question, if the money
accruing from the discussion was given to our charities,
but to this Mr Symes objected. I afterwards, rather than •
see the discussion fall through, offered to waive that point.
Then Mr Symes positively refused to meet me or again refer
to me, declaring “ that he didn’t intend to advertise me.”
Surely it would be no advertisement to me if he defeated
me. Clearly he believed he had no case, and therefore,
like the Bishop to whom he refers in his eulogy of me,
declined to be held up to ridicule. Whenever Free-
thinkers have met the representatives of the Disciples of


Christ” in debate they have had anything but a pleasant
time of it. Forinstance, take the caseof Robert Owenin his
debate with Alexander Campbell, and also that of Charles
Bradlaugh with David King. Mr. Symes knew full welfc
that when I was associated with the Freethought party,
I fearlessly played my part, holding as many debates as
any lecturer they had in Australia, and in those days the-
lecturers did not sneak out of discussions. That form of
heroism has been left to warriors of the Collins and
Symes type, who vilify the clergy in their papers, but
sing small in the presence of them. Enough, however,
has been written to vindicate the course I am pursuing.
Now for a few remarks on my pi'esent position.
CHAPTER XII.
Primitive Christianity—The Rock on Which I Standi
As soon as I woke to the reality that Christ was
Monarch of the Spiritual World, I felt it incum-
bent upon me to become a naturalised citizen of his king-
dom. To do this I must join some religious organisation,
the question was which one; in the lirst century this
would have been an easy thing to determine ; then the re-
ligious world was not divided on points of discipline or mat-
ters of faith. But now in some respects it is a state of
Anarchy, although I grant that “ there is a streak of
kinship ” running through the various churches of
Christendom. In stating why I joined the “ Church of
Christ,” using that term in a denominational sense, I
would avoid casting reflections on other religious bodies.
The distinctive peculiarities of the “ Disciples of Christ ”
commended themselves to my judgement, as a haven of
rest, because that body pleaded for the religion of Christ,


as it was practised and taught in the first century With-
out affirming that the “Churches of Christ” now are
identical in practice and precept with the Primitive
Church, I do claim that in putting forward the plea of
“ Restoration ” they have commenced to tread the road
that must lead inevitably to that much desired I
must confess that when I first became enamoured with
this plea, I had but a hazy idea of where it would lead
me; 1 formed no complete conception of the landscape of
life 1 now contemplate. And I very much doubt, ay, do
not believe, that the pioneers of this movement, the
Campbells, Scotts and Erretts arrived at that Nebo-like
eminence from which they could see the whole of the
promised land. Nor could we expect it, considering the
errors that the human mind has had to overcome. 0 We
have only arrived at our present condition by successive
religious awakenings. When Christianity grew into
large proportions in Rome, it began to assimilate many
ot the pagan practices prevalent at those times, and the
more popular and influential it became the more pagan it
grew. Thus the church was corrupted to render it pala-
table to the depraved tastes of an idolatrous people. It
has been the aim of the reformers to get rid of these
pagan elements it absorbed, and restore it to its primi-
tive purity. Martin Luther, when he stumbled on the
Rible, read and studied it, and then translated it into
the language of the German people, did much towards
clearing the Augean Stable of Ecclesiasticism. Zwingde
and Calvin did a similarly good work for Switzer-
iand and I ranee, John Knox upheld the Standard of
Reform m Scotland, and John Wesley did the same for
England. These men and many others prepared the
world for the religious life of our own time. Unfortu-
nately the WOrl f has not been one of unmixed good, while
it has broken the power of paganism, it has at the same
mie given rise to a hateful Sectarianism. In trying to
avoid the imck Scylfa, we have fallen into the whirlpool
of Charybdis. This should not be so, the church was not
and in aiming at a restoration
ot the church, Unity with Liberty ” must be our watch-
word. Io promote unity we must give up our party
names, cease to call ourselves after men, after a, form of


■church government, or after a mere ordinance. We must
adopt the terms used in the beginning and call ourselves
only after him from whom our doctrine comes. Paul, in
the l‘* st century foresaw the danger of establishing part ies
in the Church which would call themselves after their
founder. Paul said, “ Now I say unto you that every on«
•of you saith lam of Paul; and I of Apollos ; and I of
•Christ. Is Christ divided P was Paul crucified for you ?”
This seems to imply that party names were not tolerated
in Apostolic times, then why should they be now ? Martin
Luther, catching the spirit of Paul, warned his admirers
against falling into the error of using his name, apiece of
advice they forgot to keep in mind ; he said. “ I pray yon
leave my name alone ; do not call yourselves Lutherans but
Christians; who is Luther, my doctrine is not mine; I
have not been crucified for anyone. St. Paul would not
that anyone should call himself of Paul, nor of Peter,
but of Christ. How then does it fit me, a miserable bag
of dust and ashes, to give my name to the children of
‘Christ. Cease, my friends, to cling to these party names
and distinctions ; away with them all, and let us call our-
•selves only Christians, after him from whom our doctrine
comes.” But while pleading for union among Christians
we do not plead for uniformity of opinion; that would
mean intellectual death. The creeds have attempted
this, and the result is the evils of Sectarianism. The
■divisions in the church as Mr. Tyler says, have been
christened with “ wormwood and gall.” What we want
is Unity with Liberty. We find no two flowers in the
garden alike; no two trees alike, so we cannot expect in
the realm of mind to have any two intellects alike. There
will always be diversity of opinion on matters of specula-
tion, such as the destiny of the wicked; forms of church
.government, and numberless other unessential matters.
Therefore do we adopt the maxim, “In essential matters,
urity; in doubtful ones, liberty; and in all things,
charity.”
To make clear my position, I will use an illustration,
the idea of which was suggested to me when reading one
of Dr. Cumming’s Anti-Papal Lectures Here is a noble
river flowing through a continent; it is the river of life,
■flowing through the continent of human depravity. On


its bank are the dense jungles of superstition, wherein
roam the wild beasts of ambition, lust, and avarice. As-
the noble river flows along it passes all kinds of land ;
sometimes its course is through the rugged rocks of
human self-will, at other times through the mud of human
ignorance, and so its salutary waters are darkened by the
detritus from the country through which it flows. A man
of love, thought, and action, a Martin Luther, who got a
draught of it from its source, says this stream of life
ought not to be poisoned by contact with human depravity.
So to purify it, he casts a rock into it and divides it.
The division over which he obtains authority is filtered and
somewhat clarified, so that those who drink of it in future
will relish its sweetness, and be strengthened by its health-
giving properties. Another, seeing what a Luther did,
says 1 will do more to purify the stream—it may be John
Wesley—and he throws another rock into its great tribu-
tary of Protestantism, and further purifies and further
divides it. Now, says some bold men, enough of this
filtering policy. Let us have the water in its purity; let
us go drink of it at its source as it comes fresh from the
snows of the mountains ; let us drink of its pellucid
waters before they have flown through the continent of
human depravity, and have been contaminated by the
ignorance, pride, lust, and ambition of man. And so we
say, metaphorical “ to the mountains,” let us go back to
Christianity as it was in the days of the apostles ; let us
reject all text-books, verdicts of ecumenical councils and
such like, and, swearing allegiance to Christ, be guided
only by the instructions given in the New Testament.
“The Bible, and the Bible alone,” must be our rule of
faith. Any creed that contains more than it, contains too
much; any that contains less than it, to little; and any
that contains the same, superfluous. Paul said to Timothy,
“ Every scripture inspired by God is also profitable for
teaching, for reproof, for correction, for instruction which
is in righteousness, that the man of God may be complete,
furnished completely with every good work.” If the
scriptures are sufficient to equip us for every good work,,
we need no additions in the form of creeds, which have
only been the means of dividing the brotherhood of Christ,
which it was intended should be united. There was no


-confession of faith required in the first century other than
that made by Peter under inspiration, a confession on
which-the church was built —“ Thou art the Christ, the
son of the living God.” The heartfelt acknowledgement
of this fact was sufficient to constitute one a fitting candi-
date for admission to the primitive church; why
shouldn’t it be so to-day ? The gospels are but four suc-
cinct ai’guments for the Messialiship of Christ, and around
this central fact revolves the whole of the New Testament
teachings. Let this, therefore, be the “ rock on which
the church is built,” and let the Christian world be again
united as it was in the beginning. Once men are willing
to look to Christ as their only King they will cease to bow
their knee to human tyrants; once they acknowledge him
as their Prophet, they will listen to his teachings, be
guided by his precepts, and execute his commands; once
they fully realise that he is their Priest, they will seek
absolution from him alone, and away goes all the heir-
archies of the world.
I look to Christianity to regulate our social problems.
I feel that when we realise that we are citizens of a king-
dom in which we are endowed with equal rights, a
kingdom where there is neither Jew nor Greek, neither
bond or free, male or female, we will not be able to
"tolerate within its limits the glaring inequalities that
prevail in the world to-day. When we commence to
contemplate the two great commandments, the first to
love God with all our strength, and the second to love
our neighbors as ourselves, which constitute the essence
of Christian ethics, we will realise that if brotherly kind-
ness is to continue, we can never become the upholders
of a system that is producing pampered millionaires and
famished mendicants. The Dives and Lazarus cannot sit
at the same table of God, the one only getting the crumbs
and the other eating of the dainty viands. Surely this
plea for the restoration of the church involves something
more than merely teaching “ Faith, Repentance and
Baptism.” The Christiaq cannot recline on a couch in
his richly furnished parlor and listen to the hailstorm
beating against the window panes, callous to the fact
that out in the storm are homeless women and children
crouching in uncanny places and seeking shelter from the


excesses of the night ; no Christian can do this ; he must
be m the vanguard of progress, pleading, though it be
unpopular, for social advancement, and a more equitable
distilbution of wealth; just as Christianity swept away
negro slavery by proclaiming the brotherhood of man, so
in like manner will it undermine industrial slavery, and
give to each man the inalienable right of “ Life, liberty
and the pursuit of happiness.” It builds u2ion a broad and
ample basis ; it protests against injustice, and seeks to
build a brotherhood among men in which love and not
force will be the connecting cord that binds them in
unison. Its influence upon its disciples has the same
influence on character that the discipline of the army
has on outward bearing of the soldier. When a.
man enters the army he is taught methodical habits,
drilled to stand upright and to walk with regular step,
so that after he has been for some years a soldier, he is
known to be such from his military carriage. In like
manner a consistent Christian develops his moral powers,
and becomes known to the world by his unimpeachable
conduct.
I have m this chapter pleaded for a purer and more
united form of Christianity than that prevalent in
religious circles to-day, because I am confident that much
or the infidelity of this age, is but the natural rebound
from a narrow and irrational Christianity, and a corrupt
priestcraft. A perverted representation of Christ’s teach-
ing has driven many an active and thoughtful man into
the arms of Scepticism. Just as imperfect sanitary con-
ditions foster plague and pestilence, so does superstition
and priestcraft produce infidelity. What these scorn gea
are to the natural world, infidelity is to the spiritual
wor r. . -*•* y ou want to get rid of disease you improve the
condition of your neighbourhood, so if you want to banish
Scepticism, you will have to free the Church from the
blemishes that have been introduced into it by the toach-
nig of men. Mr. Adolphe Headingsly, in his biography
v Carles Bradlaugh, mentions that the great
JtngJish Secularist was really driven into Scepticism by
the inconsiderate conduct of the Rev. Mr. Packer. Brad-
laugh had been preparing for confirmation, and in doing
so he discovered some discrepancies between the teach-


ing of the Church of England and the statements in the
gospels ; he pointed them out, being rudely repulsed in
his enquiries, and was reported to his father. This roused
a spirit of defiance in him and he soon drifted into open
hostility to the church. I once asked a Sunday school
teacher to explain to me the passage, “No man can
come unto the Father hut by the Son.’ I said, “If this
were so, what hope was there for those heathens who had
never heard of the Father ?” Instead of giving an in-
telligent answer to the question he treated it with con-
tempt. This, coupled with my distaste for the doctrine
of a physical hell, roused in me the spirit of oppo-
sition. Voltaire was educated in the college of the
Jesuits, and confounding popery with Christianity, he
dropped into Scepticism, and assailed some of the funda-
mental doctrines of our system. Edward Gribbon, the
Sceptical Historian, was educated in Ritualism, from which
he was led into Romanism, and from that rebounded into
Rationalism, like the illregulated pendulum of the clock,
which, having swung too far in the one direction, swings
back to the opposite extreme. So in the revolt of the
creed-bound mind of man against uenatural fetters, it
rushes forth into cold negations. Tennyson may well
sing, “ There lives more faith in honest doubt, believe me,
than in half the creeds.” That New Testament Christi-
anity is a good cure for infidelity is illustrated in the
conversion of two illustrious Freethinkers, Lord Lyttleton
and Mr Gilbert West. Both these men took up New
Testament themes for the purpose of hostile criticism.
Gilbert West chose the Resurrection of Christ, Lyttleton
the Conversion of Paul. The result of their able en-
quiries have been to furnish the religious world with two-
powerful arguments for revelation. The one by Lyttleton
is entitled “ Observations on the Conversion of St. Paul;
that by West is, “ Observations on the Resurrection of
Christ.” Things like this should teach us that “ the
simple gospel is the power of God unto salvation, and
that it needs no doctoring by human hands to make it
win its way. ,
Whatever may be the opinion of the religious reader in
regard to this chapter, he will cheerfully agree with
me that the destruction of Infidelity is necessary to the


•cause of our Master. If the extension of the kingdom of
is our highest ambition, then we must unite to
‘banish the common enemy. We read in classic history
that Avhen Hercules went to capture the golden apples
fin the garden ef Hesperides, he had to overcame a dragon
that stood in his way. So, when we go forth on our
.mission of saving souls, and find that there is the dragon
•of Infidelity debarring us from the accomplishment of our
.purpose, we must do with him what Hercules did to the
monster that guarded the golden apples. Ours is the
noble task to build up the commonwealth of Christ.
Poets have sung of a golden age away back in the infancy
% of mankind ; but ours is the hope that, by the spread of
the gospel, we will make that golden age a fact of the
future, for the verdict of the conscience of mankind is
that Christianity “ works well in this world and wears
'•well in the next one.”
CHAPTER XIII.
The Conclusion.
My task in this chapter is to briefly recapitulate what
has gone before, showing the connecting links, and
bringing into prominence the line of argument pursued.
In the first chapter I dealt with some Sceptics who
Recanted, after they had given a searching examination
to the evidences of Christianity, thus proving that
Scepticism is not an incurable complaint, and citing pre-
cedents for the course I have taken. My next step was
to examine the principle dogma of the Secularist, “one
world, at a time,” and to show how this creed cramped
our efforts for the good of others, how it failed to
satisfy the spiritual aspirations of mankind, and how
its consolations in the hour of bereavement were of th©


Job comforter kind. In support of this, I cited among
other things a letter from Mrs. Hume, the mother of the
celebrated philosopher and historian. Burton, however,
in his life of Hume, challenges the authenticity of this
note ; but as it is acknowledged as genuine by equally
reliable authorities, and as it does not read like a false-
hood, I embody it in this work ; but even if doubt can be
successfully thrown on the genuineness of it, sufficient is
still left to prove my case, and to show that after the
principle dogma in the Creed of the Secularist has been
weighed in the balance of criticism it is found wanting.
The third chapter depicts the Failures of Secularism,
showing that it has not sufficient vitality to accomplish
its mission; to use the words of Dr. Newman, “ Infidelity
has only the torch to burn but not the trowel to build. ,r
While Christianity has been hallowed by the lives of
its martyrs, and has overcome all the difficulties that
stood in its way, secularism has cowered before nearly
every wave of adversity. It cannot give the name of one
man who suffered martyrdom for Atheism; when pressed
for their martyrology, they trot out the names of Hypatia,
the Platonist; Bruno, the Pantheist; Socrates, the Theist,
or Servetus, the Unitarian. It breeds Anarchy and dis-
sension, embittering and not ennobling the lives of its
votaries. Christianity, on the other hand, is a divine
philantrophy, and binds men together by virtue of its
power to organise. Therefore, as in the previous chapter
I showed good reasons on the grounds of principle for
seceding from Secularism, in this chapter I show that
the step was equally desirable as a matter of policy.
In the fourth chapter I show the superiority of Chris-
tian morality over that of other systems, demonstratimg
that the doctrine of utility as taught by Secularism, has
been borrowed from Christianity and mutilated so as to
make it an unsafe guide. From the perfect character of
Christian ethics, indubitable evidence is advanced to
prove that they are of divine origin, thus in this chapter
I have tried to demonstrate that Christ alone gives us an
infallible rule of conduct.
Continuing' to examine the Platform of the Secularists,
I show that Christianity is the friend of progress; that it
pleads for education for the people, for social reform, and


for intellectual advancement, that it is the enemy of
priestcraft, and that it deprecates the pernicious alliance
of church and state in a political sense. In this chapter
I contend for the intellectual as well as the moral
supremacy of Christ, showing that the Soldiers of the Cross-
have fought shoulder to shoulder with their allies, the
men of science. The Missionary with his Bible preceded
the journalist with his paper in the heart of heathendom.
The Reformation was heralded by the printing press and
the compass, and the restoration movement to-day is
ushered in with the steamship and telegraph. In thus
showing that Christianity teaches the true Secular gospel,.
I show that in seceding from Secularism I have widened
my influence for good. Inscribed on every church might
be those words now on the Eddystone Lighthouse, “To
give Light and save Life.”
I next proceed to clear away the Objections to Belief,,
illustrating the three important lines of Christian evi-
dence, protesting against the statement that because
we cannot understand a thing, that, therefore, we cannot
believe in it. I believe in a good coat, but for the life of
me I couldn’t tell how it is made.
In my chapter on Retribution I have shown that it is
reasonable to believe that we will be punished for wrong-
doing and rewarded for righteousness ; I have repudiated
the idea that punishment is inflicted for the mere purpose
of causing pain to the sinner, it is to uphold the majesty
of law, and to prevent a repetition of wrong-doing. Love
is the spirit of Christianity—“ God so loved the world
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever be-
iieveth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. For God sent not His Son into the world to condemn
the world, but that the world through him might be
saved —John 3: 16-17. I preach God the Father, not
God the Avenger. In this chapter I defended Christi-
anity against the charge that it is a persecuting system,
and have shown that the Inquisition was the offspring of
an iniquitous priestcraft. Voltaire maintains that were
Atheists in power they would be more intolerant than
any other class, and if recent events in the Melbourne
Freethought party are to be taken as a criterion, certainly
he is right. He says, in his treatise on toleration, “An


Atheist of any capacity, and invested with power, would
be as dreadful a scourge to the rest of mankind as the
most’ bloody enthusiast.”
The Verity and the Value of the Miracles are next dis-
cussed, and the belief in the supernatural shown to be
logical. In previous chapters I had dealt with the moral
and intellectual supiemacy of Christ. Now I turn to
•contemplate him in his character as monarch of the
natural world. By his exhibitions of power over the
forces of Nature does he prove himself to be what he
claimed to be, “The Son of God.” Thus do I furnish to
my readers an additional reason for the hope that is in
me.
The chapter on the Crimes of Secularism is introduced
as a set-off against such publications as “ The Crimes of
'the Preachers.” Infidelity is proven to encourage licen-
tiousness, and other “ ills that flesh is heir to.” Had not
-the other side descended to attack the private character
of some Christians, neither would this chapter, nor a
•portion of the succeeding one, have been written ; but ae
Freethinkers have shamefully vilified the reputation of
preachers of the gospel, it is necessary, in self-defence, to
point to the brittle house in which they live. The clergy,
as a class, are more virtuous, I make bold to assert, than
the representatives of any other calling. There ar*
Judases among them, as among all sections of mankind,
but it is not fair to take these isolated cases and hold them
up as examples of the order. Who would think of con-
demning education because of the viciousness of a f*w
school masters ; or disparaging law because some member*
of the “ learned” profession forgot themselves, and
allowed their feelings to overcome their judgement; or of
questioning the advisability of banks, because a manager
or cashier occasionally, by an act of peculation, en-
dangers its safety. Fet this is the kind of logic some
Sceptics employ against Christianity.
The lives and teachings of some illustrious Freethinker*
are next dealt with. Their admissions of the advantages
of Christianity are quoted, and from their lips do we learn
that this system swept away slavery from Europe, has
elevated women, has driven cannibalism, human sacrifice,
and infanticide from Oceania. To use the word* of


Lecky, “ It did more to soften and regenerate mankind**
than any other influence. The verdict of the most in-
telligent of Freethinkers supporting the utility of Chris-
tianity, and the other evidence being before me in favor
of the beneficence of this system, it became a matter of
duty for me to pay my allegiance to it.
The eleventh chapter is of a Biographical character,
written out of no desire to prominently intrude my per-
sonality into this book, but from a desire to refute chargee
that have been brought against me. Many of the diffi-
culties attendant upon this secession from Secularism
were softened by the thought that all my relatives, and
many of my best friends, were on the other side. My
mother was a woman of exceptional piety, and my father
had a profound belief in the efficacy of Christianity,
although he held latitudinarian views that seem to me to
resemble those of Franklin, which I have sketched in the
first chapter.
In the penultimate chapter I state why I joined the
“ Disciples of Christ,” and here I plead for Unity— ‘ Unitv
as it was in the beginning,” believing that in adopting
the precepts and practices of the primitive churoh as
completely as the exigencies of our time will allow, we
will have a sure and certain panacea to Infidelity, and all
the other evils with which modern society is beset. To
show this, let us imagine what the condition of society
would be if by way of experiment for five years we de-
termined to live on purely Christian lines, we would
“owe no man anything,” consequently there would be no
bankruptcies. “He that stole would steal no more,” but
would labor with his hands, consequently no cases of
larceny would be before our courts Remembering the
apostolic injunction, “Be courteous, be pitiful,” there
would be no unpleasant disputes ; litigation would cease
in our endeavors to “ agree quickly” with our adversaries;
masters rendering unto their servants that which was
“just and equal,” and servants also carrying out the in-
structions of Paul, would promote harmony between,
employer and employed, banish strikes, and settle all in-
dustrial difficulties; in a word, society would be un-
speakably happy. Such then being the happy results of
loyalty to this system, I think my journey from Atheism


to Christianity has been a profitable one, and I trust that
the reader who has gone with me has been as much bene-
fited by reading as Ihavebeenby writingthis little volume.
I have striven to draw, as far as my feeble capabilities
will allow, a rude chart that may help the residents on
the shoals and reefs of a false system to sail safely to m
haven of rest and refuge. While myriads have tried other
systems with varying success, Christianity alone ha»
shown itself able to stand the test of progress. One after
the other the religious systems of the world have taken
their place in the cemetery of the past, they having failed
to keep pace with the march of intellect or to find an abid-
ing place in the affections of mankind. The religion of
Buddha and the ethical system of Confucius are at a
standstill. China, the land of these beliefs, has
made but little advance in two thousand years; its
-civilization is as crippled as its ladies feet, or as
dwarfed as the plant the Chinese love to cultivate.
Mahomedanism has turned woman into either a concnbine
or a slave, a toy of a monarch s pleasure, or if she be of
the lower order, a “ hewer of wood and a carrier
of water. - ’ Christ alone stands forth as “ The
Light of the World.” He outshone all other
teachers as the sun outshines the stars. No con-
queror, statesman or author has bequeathed to
the world such a lasting influence as this. He has in-
delibly stamped the impress of his mind and life on the
thought of our world, and his teachings have become
interwoven with every fibre of our social life. The
Monarchy, Republic, or Commune has not outgrown him.
A Victoria, a Garfield, or a Kingsley, will sit at his feet
and learn lessons suitable to their respective realms of
thought. The social growth of the world has only
brought us nearer to the life of the Great Teacher; instead
of transcending him, we have only touched the hem of
his garments, and in doing so we have already felt his
healing power. Homer, Milton and Skakespeare were
men of an age. Christ is the contemporary of all ages.
In a previous chapter I have shown how his morality
has never been improved on; similarly his method of
instruction was unique. His Sermon on the Mount could
be delivered in thirty minutes, and that thirty minute*


address has revolutionised the world; from exordium to
pei oration it is matchless ; its wisdom is surprising; the
gieat complaint against it is that we cannot live up to
it; some carp about it and say it is impracticable, but
the fact that it is in advance of us is a proof
■of its divine authority. Each day, as we strive
vre get nearer to it, we find it is still before
us; it is something to strive after, and inasmuch
as we come short of it, is it a proof of our fallibility.
As in the Sermon on the Mount we learn how to preach
well, so in that sermon we also learn how to pray; the
Lord s prayer is a model prayer, short but complete
Christ was master of the Socratic method of teaching
and his answers to questions astonished his listeners.
When he spoke in parables, he adopted a method for
giving permanency to his instructions, that any student
must acknowledge the advantages of; we all know how
.much easier it is to learn poetry than prose; how much
easier it is to fix a picture than an abstraction on the
mind, so when Christ taught by similies he adopted the
most approved form of rhetoric, and proved his thorough
knowledge of the capabilities of the human mind. His
character was without a blemish ; he challenged his
enemies to point to a defect in his life, but they could not;
he practised wliat he preached. He taught humanity,
and himself set the example, by washing the feet of his
disciples; baptism, and was himself baptised; self-sacri-
fice, and gave up his own life. Ho teacher so lived his
teachings as did Jesus. Mahomet made a law that his
followers should only have four wives, but he had eleven
himself. His life was ii’reproachable. Tiberious was so
enamoured with him that he offered to place his statue
in the Pantheon, side by side with the statue of the gods
in the pagan mythology—acknowledging the necessity for
religion. Ho other faith can claim the acceptance of the
thoughtful, therefore I bend the knee to him as my
Prophet, Priest and King, and acknowledge that mv
journey from Atheism to Christianity has been a trans-
lation from darkness into light.






i&l publish/^
TZHZIE
Christian Pioneer,
A WEEKLY PAPER
In the interests of Primitive Christianity, published
in Melbourne
EVERY THURSDAY.
EDITORS :
D. A. EWEES, Henrietta Street, Hawthorn,
GEO. T WALDEN, Christian Chapel, Lygon St., Carlton.
EDITORIAL CONTRIBUTORS:
J. F. FLOYD, Dunedin, New Zealand.
T. J. GORE, M. A., Adelaide, South Australia.
Correspondents in every colony.
Subscriptions from Agents, or when two or more copies are sent
teone address, 4s per year or Is per quarter ; for single copy per
post, postage 2s per year, or 6d per quarter is added.
Send. Orders and Payments to D. A. Ewers, Henrietta Street,
Hawthorn, Victoria.


SEVENTEEN REASONS
Why the Disciples of Christ should subscribe for the
Ihristian
Hioneer
1. It is the only weehly paper published by the Disciples in
Australasia.
2. It is a newspaper containing reports of the work from all the
Colonies.
3. The Editors who are both Australians are well known preachers
and uncompromising advocates of New Testament principles.
4. Among its contributors are well-known brethreh from all
directions, such as Floyd, Black, Moysey, Bates, Gore, Bryant,
Henshelwood, Pittman, Gilmour, Thurgood, Donaldson, Fischer, &c.,
&c. It is therefore a thoroughly representative paper.
5. It is an outspoken advocate of Temperance.
6. It is the Young Men's paper, containing a well edited
column conducted by the Secretary of the Literary Societies Union.
7. It is the Young Women's paper, containing their excellently
prepared Endeavour Column edited by Miss Hill.
8. It is a family paper w ; th a carefully selected Family Circle.
9. It is not filled with long book-like articles, but its contribu-
tions are short, live and practical.
10. It is taken in almost, if not every .church, and its circulation
is steadily increasing.
11. It is a warm supporter of Home and Foreign Missions.
12. It presents the distinctive plea of the Disciples of Christ in as
terse and attractive a manner as possible.
13. It is a cheap paper only 4s per year (a penny a week) if
obtained from our agents, or when two or more copies are sent to-
gether, and only Os per single copy posted to any address.
14. It is not a financial speculation and the Editors, who are sole
proprietors, only desire it to cover cost of printing and postage. The
editing and publishing are done free.
15. It is a weekly means of communication between the brethren
of Australasia, by which unity is fostered and distant churches
drawn closer together.
16. Its circulation exceeds that of any other paper ever published
by the Disciples in Australasia.
17. It is your own paper, giving an account of your work.
Send for SAMPLE COPIES to
D. A. EWERS, Henrietta St., Ctlenferrie, Victoria.


PIONEER PUBLISHING Co
GEO- T. WALDEN,
Christian Chapel, Lygon Street, Carlton, Victoria
Publishers op “Standard Sunday School Series”
comprising :
“ Eclectic Commentary ” 4s. each.
\ “ Bible Lesson Quarterlies ” 3s. per doz.
< “ Pure Words ” 6d. per doz.
I “ Buds of Hope ” 6d. per doz.
V Primary Lesson Paper 2d. per doz.
Samples sent on application.
“Distinctive Peculiarities op the Disciples,” J. Z,
Tyler.
“Why I am a Christian,” Isaac Errett
“ From Atheism to Christianity,” Isaac Selby.
Agents for the “Standard Publishing Co.” Ohio, U.S.A.
„ „ Canright’s “ Seventh Day Adventism Re-
nounced.”
Agents for the following religious newspapers :
“ Christian Standard,” U.S.,A. Weekly, 16 p.p. 10s.
yearly; post free.
“Christian Evangelist,” U.S.A. Weekly, 16 p.p.
10s. yearly ; post free.
“Apostolic Guide,” U.S.A. 10s. yearly ; post free.
“ Gospel Advocate,” U.S.A. 10s. yearly; post free.
“ Christian Commonwealth,” London. Bs. yearly; post
free.
Agents for The “ Pan! E. Wirt Fountain Pen,” price
10s. Will hold one week’s supply of ink—always ready
for use; over 300,000 now sold. Will enable one to
write 100 ordinary business letters without replenishing
ink. “An absolutely perfect fountain pen, compared
with which all others are rank failures.” — Mark Twain.
Agents for “ The hioyes ” Dictionary Holder, strongly
made, highly finished, will hold an unabridged diction-
ary and six other books —price 20s.


We will furnish Free to anyone on application, a Catalogue of
our American Books. Orders sent to the undersigned accompanied
with payment, will be at once forwarded to America, from whence
the works ordered will be sent to any address in Australasia at
Published Prices and Post Free- This is the very
Cheapest way of obtaining them.
TEE FOLLOWING ARE NOW IN STOCK:—
BIOGRAPHICAL.
Life of A. Campbell. 2 vols in one. Extra cloth, 14s; post free
15s.
Life of A. Campbell. (2 vols in one). Library, sheeps lbs ; post
free, 17s.
Life of Walter Scott. 8s ; post free, 9s.
Life of Elder Samuel Rogers. 4s ; post free, 4s 6d.
Life of Elijah Goodwin. 5s ; post free, 5s 6d.
Life of Timothy Coop. 6s ; post free, 5s 6d.
Life of Knowles Shaw. 5s ; post free, 5s 6d.
Home Life of Alex. Campbell, by his wife. 8s ; post free, 8s 9d.
Life and Times of Jno. T. Walsh. 4s ; post free, 4s 4d.
Life and Lectures Geo. E. Flower by Isaac Errett, 6s ; post free,
6s 9d.
Memoir Dr. Hopson 4s; post free, 4s 9d.
Life of Elder John Smith. 8s; post free, 9s.
COMMENTARIES.
Commentary on Acts. (McGarvey). 4s 6d ; post free, ss. Half
bound, 5s 6d ; post free, 6s.
Commentary on Romans. (Lard). 4s 6d ; post free, ss. Leather
bound 5s 6d ; post free, 6s.
Christian System. (Campbell). 6s ; post free, 6s 6d.
Criticism and Exegesis. 4s ; post free, 4s 6d.
Class Notes on Acts, interleaved. McGarvey, 6s ; post free, 6s 6d.
Catechetical Commentary on N. T. (Hurte). 5s 6d ; post free, 6s
3d.
Commentary on John's Gospel, B. W. Johnson. 8s; post free,
8s 9d.
Commentary on Luke. (Lamar.) 8s; post free, 8s 9d.
Campbell and Purcell Debate on Roman Catholic Religion. 6s. ; post
free, 6s. 6d.
Address all Orders to Geo. T. Walden, Christian
Chapel, Lygon Street, Carlton, Victoria.


CONTROVERSIAL.
Seventh Day Adventism Renounced. Canright. Cloth 6s 6d ; pos;
free, 7s.
Seventh Day Adventism Renounced—Tracts. Package of ten, Is 31.
Materialism against Itself. Pierce. Paper, Is ; post free, Is 3d.
Wilkes and Dilzler Debate. 8s ; post free, 9s.
Sabbath or Lord’s Day Discussion. Waggoner—Vogel. 3s 6d.
Evolution of a Shadow, the Sabbath Question. 6s ; post free, 6s 9d.
Problem of Problems, Braden on the Evolution Problem. 6s ; post free
6s 6d.
Debate on Universalism and Future Punishment. Manford and
Sweeny. 6s ; post free, 6s 6d.
Destiny of Wicked, a Debate. 6s ; post free 6s 6d.
BAPTISM.
Baptism : Its Action and Subject. Fee. 3s ; post free, 3s 6d.
Handbook on Baptism. Barclay. 2s ; post free, 2s 6d.
Ballantyne on Baptism. 6d ; post free, 7d. 3 copies Is ; post free,
Is 3d.
Christian Baptism. Campbell. 6s ; post free, 6s 6d.
Debate on Baptism. Watson and McDiarmid. 4s ; post free, 4s
6d.
EVIDENCES OF CHRISTIANITY.
Text and Canon. McGarvey. 6s; post free, 6s 6d. A splendid
bo< k on Evidences.
Campbell and Owen Debate. 6s ; post free, 6s 9d.
From Atheism to Christianity. Selby. Is ; post free Is 3d.
Divine Demonstration. Everest. 6s ; post free, 6s 6d.
SERMONS AND LECTURES.
Allen's Sermons 8s ; post free, 8s 9d.
Mathe’s Sermons. (Western Preacher). 8s ; post free, 8s 9d.
Jewish Tabernacle. Chase. 2s ; post free, 2s Id.
Devil in Modern Society. Lowber. 2s; post free, 2s 4d.
Tennessee Evengelist: a Book of Sermons. Ashley Johnson. 3s ;
post free, 3s 6d.
Problem of Problems. By Henry Exley. Is ; post free, Is 2d.
Franklin's Sermons. 2 vols, 8s each ; 8s 9d post free.
Kinship to Christ, sermons by Tyler. 6s ; post free, 6s 6d.
Struggles und Triumphs of the Truth. (Lowber). 8s; post free,
8s 9d.
Caskey’s Book. 6s ; post free, 6s 6d.
Address all Orders to Geo. T. Walden, Christian Chapel,
Lygon Street, Carlton, Victoria.


Living Pulpit. 12s : post free, 13s.
Missouri Lectures. 4s ; post free, 4s 6d.
Sermons aud Songs. Updyke and Hawes. 4s ; post free, 4s 4d.
Conversion to God. Cloth Covers, soiled, Is 3d ; post free, Is 7d.
Popular Lectures and Addresses. (Campbell.) 12s ; post free 13s.
Evenings with the Bible, 3 vols. 6s. per vol. ; 6s. 9d. post free.
History of Reformatory Movements. (Rowe). Bs. ; post free Bs. 9d
Voice of the Seven Thunders. (Martin). 65.; post free 6s. Id.
BOOKS SUITABLE FOR FAMILY AND S,
LIBRARY.
The White Church. 4s ; post free, 4s 6d.
Shifting Shadows. Simmonds. 4s ; post free, 4s 6d.
Hearenward Way. 2s ; post free, 2s 4d.
Letters ts a Young Christian. Errett. 4s ; post free, 4s 6d.
Talks to Bereans Errett 45.; post free 4s. 6d,
Walks about Jerusalem. Errett. 4s ; post free, 4s 6d.
fh h §
Roderick Wayne,
Norman Macdonald,
A Woman’s Doing,
By JESSIE H. BROWN.
Thee* are charming stories by a gifted writer!
which readily take first place as works of flo-J
tisn. Mere is a steadily increasing demand
for she wholesome and practical lessons which
these rolumes so ably and charmingly teach,
lip home or Snnday-scheOl library should bw
without them. Neatly bonnd la «»«*■»-
Tale of a Pioneer Church (Vogel). 6s; post free, 6s 6d.
TRAVELS.
Coop’s and Exley, or Around the J World. 4s; post free 4s 4d.
Under Ten Flags. Sweeny. Handsomely illustrated, 10s.
Chang Foo. 4s ; post free, 4s 6d.
Poetry and Prose of Marie Butler. 10s.
Lands of the Bible. (McGarvey). Cloth 12s; post free 13s ; sheep
145.; post free 15s.
Address all Orders to Geo. T. Walden, Christian Chapel
Lygon Street, Carlton, Victoria.


MISCELLANEOUS.
Bible Temperance, or Wines of Old and New Testaments. OollMi
Paper, Is 9d ; post free, 2s.
Christian Baptist. 7 vols in one. 12s ; post free, 13s.
Scheme of Redemption.—Bs ; post free, 9s.
Reason and Revelation. 8s; post free, 9s.
Conversations at the Unity Club. 3s ; post free, 3s 4d.
Living Oracles Ci npbell. 2s ; post free, 2s 4d.
“ Office of Holy Spirit.” 6s; post free, 6s 6d.
Vision of the Ages, os ; post free, 5s 6d.
New Testament, with Apostolie References. Jackson. Cloth 6s ;
post free, 6s 9d.
Care of the Churches. (Munnell). ss; post free, 5s 6d.
Trials and Crucifixion of Christ. Stout. 4s ; post free, 4s 6d.
Hermeneutics. Dungan. 6s ; post free, 6s 6d.
Orthodoxy in Civil Court*. Is 3d ; post free, Is 6d.
Christian System. (Campbell). 6s ; post free, 6s 6d.
Gospel Plan of Jalvation. (Brent). 10s; post free, 11s.
Preacher's Record. 4s ; post free, 4s 4d.
Communing in the Sanctuary. (Richardson'. 2s ; post free 2s 6 1
The Messiahship. (VV. Scott). 6s ; post free, 6s 6d.
Genuineness and Authenticity of the Gospels, (Hinsdale). 5s ; post,
free, 5s 6d.
“Contradictions of Orthodoxy.” 4s ; post free, 4s 6d.
Symposium on Holy Spirit, by best living writers. 3s; post fre »
3s fid. ■
Geras of Thought. (Smart). 2s ; post free, 2s 3d.
Ecclesiastical Tradition. ss; post free, 3s 4d.
Year book of Disoiples of Christ. Is.; post free Is. 2d.
NEW BOOKS
BEING! RECEIVED EVERY MAIL. ANY BOOK
PUBLISHED FURNISHED ON
APPLICATION.
Address all Orders to
GEO. T. WALDEN - , Christian Chapel, Lygon Street,
Carlton, Victoria.


Linjeligp tnfceftainigentg
—BY —
BRQ, A. B. MASTQN
AND
BRQ. GEQ. T, WARDEN.
WE ARK PREPARED TO GIVE A FIRST-CLASS
Limelight
Lecture Entertainment
at any place within a radius of
THREE MILES OF MELBOURNE P. 0.,
to® £3
This includes at least Forty Pictures, Lecturer, Lime-
light Operator, in fact everything necessary for a first-class
entertainment.
Places at a greater distance than three miles are
charged simply the extra cost of getting to and from the
place.


s r
‘ ' r




* •
iw-
,■I . ' .


