

The Old
Brown House
ELIZABETH POWELL


r-\ rv
O \
t
'■
f)
C ' ■ .mJi


'V
A a|X N
' = V=^
a
/
' r I v
/vM / wM* <m
07{um^
ELIZABETH™
iPOWEL^,
■ ■ . ■




' +
THE OLD BROWN HOUSE


By the same author
THE BEEHIVE
SUNSET HILL
the Si


THE OLD
BROWN HOUSE
ELIZABETH POWELL
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON LTD
SYDNEY :: LONDON
. 1942


Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-19 Niokson Street, Sydney
1942
Registered in Australia for
transmission through the
post as a hook
.
Set up, printed and bound
in Australia by
y
m


c: (t i: 7
1 7 NOV :943
CONTENTS
CHAPTER ? AGE
I. JELLYFISH AND GALLEONS .... 1
11. LOST: ONE OLD BROWN HOUSE - - 18
111. CHRISTINE’S DARK YEAR 50
IV. THE MANTLE OF CHARITY 47
V. ONE STORMY NOVEMBER DAY 62
VI. THE ALMOST-COUSINS MEET 79
VII. SUMMER MARCHES ON - 96
VIII. THE GOLDEN KNOT OF TANGLED YEARS - 113
IX. THE OLD BROWN HOUSE ISO
X. THE DISTURBING ELEMENT .... 147
XI. CHRISTINE AND JOANNA 162
XII. BY A BRIGHT PACIFIC SHORE 178
XIII. THE CAP OF YOUTH 192
XIV. ONE UNFORGETTABLE DAY - 210
CONCLUSION: THE END OF THE BEGINNING 224


#
f
'


“There are all sorts of ways of being held captive ,”
Christine cried, “and Aunt Grace . .
“Now, now, lassie,” was the quiet interruption; “don’t
let your heart get bitter.”
“I’m not bitter,” she answered truthfully. “I’m only
making a plain statement, Joe. And there are all sorts
of mysteries, too,” she added.
The day, and the scene, made too much loveliness;
perhaps that was the trouble, for unhappy youthful
thoughts, she believed, ought to be matched by storms
or fogs. The scene on the river-bank was lovely; any
stray artist would have set up his easel with pleasure, to
paint that picture of Youth and Age in the singing
peace of the radiant afternoon beside the indolent
stream.
She lay on the grass, looking over the rough stone
wall to where the old man tinkered with the engine of
a green-topped motor launch. There was no wind. Leap-
ing fish now and again spread silver rings on the olive-
green mirror of the water, reaching away in wide arms
filling the valleys between high bush-smothered rises.
Trees climbed thickly, pines and gums, up the steep
rocky slope rising like a tilted cliff-face from the green
promenade at water-level. Zigzag paths and steps made
a pattern up that steep slope where summer shadows


lent coolness and silence, and where the fogs of winter
moved like grey smoke while the boughs dripped. Chris-
tine often marvelled that Blackfish Cove could seem like
the end of nowhere, and yet was actually only a forty
minute dash by electric train from the heart of Sydney.
But the very wide river created an unbridged barrier
between the Cove and where the very outer fringes of
the suburbs began, beyond the trees of the opposite
shore.
A bush-fire had swept up the rise over the Point,
during the heat of last Christmas, leaving black desola-
tion and acrid scents behind it, but the rains had come,
and then the first warmth of spring, and now the scene
was a lacy tangle of sappy greens struck through by
golden light. Shy ferns hid in rock hollows, where leaves
hung on spider-webs; flannel flowers stood like velvet
stars on their graceful stems, and cowslips, and wild
mauve-blue orchids bloomed. But there were bull-ants
too, her mind said, for the scene was too lovely to match
her feelings.
A wandering sunbeam lighted her copper-red hair,
loosely curling and soft as silk, to a moving flame, as
she drew nearer the wall and looked down into the
launch, one hand moving out to rock it a little and
make Joe look up. She was neither pretty nor plain. Her
young face was clear-skinned and frank, depending upon
expression and animation for its full charm. There was
intelligence in her eyes and on her brow, and a sugges-
tion of doggedness in the set of her jaw. With her bright
hair, she had the usual firm creamy skin, and her brows
and lashes were a warm brown. She spoke with the
clearly enunciated tones of a carefully brought-up
youngster, which made her clothing a little incongruous.
A woman would have glanced with indignant compas-
sion at her clumsy leather shoes and hastily run-up
frock of ugly green cloth, like baize.


Suddenly she lifted her head, to watch and listen.
“The Stillwells,” she said, gazing across the river to a
spot almost a third of a mile distant, where a bevy of
children shouted in their swimming enclosure, below
a wide verandaed bungalow set against grey-green bush.
The sound of their cries, and the excited barking of
a dog, came thinly across the stream. She had made up
that name, Stillwell, one night when the flying-foxes had
come to eat the aloe buds. Imagining the family doings
of those children had eased a little of her love-hunger
and loneliness, but it was not very thrilling, just look-
ing on.
It was silly, perhaps, to make up stories about them,
but she felt sure one of those girls had a bedroom with
a reading-lamp on a desk by her window; a scribbling
girl, bending her head while dashing a pen over reams
of smooth white paper. A bit different, that was, from
a mingy slit of a room with a squeaky iron bed, and
only an inch of candle to write by—and even that be-
grudged her.
Rolling over abruptly, Christine pointed with one foot
up the slope, to where her Aunt Grace’s neglected little
cottage seemed to cower in shame beneath its heavy
canopy of creeper.
“Fact or fancy,” the child cried, “any girls, Stillwells
or otherwise, wouldn’t think much of up there, especi-
ally now Uncle Jack has enlisted and gone away over-
seas. No wonder he did, Joe,” she nodded, childish wis-
dom in her clear greenish eyes. “I’d have gone to the
ends of the earth.”
Joe made a non-committal sound over his engine, but
he agreed privately with all the lassie said. Her uncle
was her kind; of the same blood, which said a lot, and
old Joe liked Jack Mead, too. He had travelled for
months on end in farm and station requirements, which
the old man said to himself was as good a way as any


other of escaping his wife’s sharp tongue and miserable
ways. Grace had long ago nagged him into selling up his
farm, beyond the Blue Mountains, where a number of
Meads had farmed and lived for generations. So, Chris-
tine often asserted, it was Aunt Grace’s own fault that
she wasn’t well off, and had to live permanently in the
"week-end shack” of former days. The Meads had had a
flat in the suburbs for a time, using the shack for week-
ends only, but now it was all different.
Having forced her husband from his natural environ-
ment and watched his spirit falter, Grace vented all her
resentment for this on the detested shack, about which
she had once bragged as "our little place on the river,
you know”—especially when writing home to Borrow-
dale after first escaping the mediocrity of the farm that
now seemed luxury itself. She was a sour-faced woman
of thirty-eight, scrawny and unkempt. Delphine, her
only child, whom Christine cordially loathed, was a
heavy-minded, whining, disagreeable youngster who,
compared to her cousin, was like candle-grease beside
a bright flame.
The girl rolled over once more, staring down at the
jellyfish lolloping indolently along in the tide. She knew
all their shapes and patterns and scorned them as the
most senseless, useless things she had ever seen alive— if
they were alive, even though they did pulse the water
through their domes when going up and down ... up
and down . . . with the eternal tide.
“My life here,” she said, after thinking, "is symbolized
by those,” pointing at the jellyfish. "I’m living a jelly-
fish life—but for you. I wonder . . .” But she could not
say the words, for it hurt too much, when speaking of
her adored father, whose fate in enemy-held France was
an agonizing mystery. But there was a similarity between
her trapped and helpless life under Aunt Grace’s control,
living at the Point, with the river all round; and Dad’s


fate in Nazi-controlled France without even a hope of
getting away, unless he made some escape—which he
could do only if he were . . . were . . . living.
A gasp broke in her throat. Sometimes, on days like
this, when she thought like that, she felt desperate. She
had to say it, now, to Joe, because of the sound ringing
in her head.
“Joe ... if only I knew,” she said thinly. “If only I
knew what . . .”
Joe looked up from the launch, his kindly old face
crumpled to a smile, and said something about faith and
patience, and then:
“That fine father of yours wouldn’t let a bunch of
Nazis beat him, lassie. Journalists and war-correspon-
dents who are linguists as well don’t let themselves get
rattled. You can’t hurry Fate. It turns its wheels in its
own slow fashion, and knows what it’s doing. All things
are for the best, however hard they seem while putting
up with them. Old Joe knows that, lassie, from long
experience.”
She was still for a moment, and then she threw herself
over sideways on the grass, for her hair to hide her
frightened face. She did not want Joe to see. But he
knew, and shook his head as he went on with his work
in the boat.
After five minutes or so, she sat up with her hands
locked round her knees.
“The jellyfish get on my nerves,” she declared, in a
mood he knew would pass, as her strong young character
dismissed the restless yearning of the lovely spring day.
“And they do symbolize my life here, and it is trapped.
The river is like a frontier that I can’t cross. And my life
in England,” she added in another tone, soft with
memory, “was symbolized by galleons.”
“It was your Dad telling you all those tales about
Spanish sailor-men, lassie,” Joe said, creasing hi* face as


he looked up again to the creamy countenance. “Why,
I remember myself, from when I was a whipper-snapper,
being told about desert isles, and I can hear.the palm-
trees rustling even now.”
“Yes,” she reflected aloud, for Joe was always such a
help and comfort, to a girl not yet thirteen, “that’s it,
of course. I set r galleons when I think of him—and I
can’t help seeing the old brown house, too, and his
little Sair-Ann-grown-up. My life here is a jellyfish life,
and my life at Wildwood, when he was at home, was a
galleon life. Galleons have somewhere to go. Their
canvas fills with wind and the world is theirs, but the
jellyfish just drift up and down ... up and down . . . .”
She shuddered. “But for the sharks I’d like to jump in
the river and beat round with a stick.”
“My word,” Joe answered, drawing a hand round his
chin as though pulling cobwebs away, “you have got it
bad to-day, lassie. There must be something in this talk
about springtime unrest. Not that I don’t feel it myself
a bit too,” he admitted, “although poor Leaping Lena
couldn’t spread her canvas and go far, could she?”
Christine’s mouth smiled rather stubbornly, for her
feelings were to abysmal to be made light of, although
Leaping Lena, the name she had made up for the launch,
always did seem to amuse old Joe, and he was a darling.
But for him—his shack with cups of tea, his philosophies,
his quiet way of explaining such things as dreams and
nature and the weather—she would go crazy.
“I’d go crazy,” she told him with a rush of indigna-
tion, “instead of just being thought crazy by Aunt Grace
and Dclphine, but for you, Joe. But if something doesn’t
happen soon, I don’t know what I’ll do. Something must
happen. I can’t live the rest of my life in this place, if
. . . if Dad doesn’t cable. I can’t just go on scribbling
myself blind to stop thinking about other things, and
going to school with Delphine for company. I can’t, Joe.


I just go to school and come home; do my home-work
and eat; see you and go to bed—and the mattress is
lumpy.”
The old man could not answer, for his anger against
Grace Mead would have led him into indiscretion. And
only a child with the heart of a lion, and heaven knew
how much sweetness of mind and soul, could have stood
it half so well, although of course her scribbling helped.
Aye, it did any overburdened heart good to release the
feeling, whether by speech or writing things down. He
knew. There had been many a time when, in the loneli-
ness of an old pensioner-caretaker without a soul in the
world, his wiser outlook had almost failed him; and she
was a child. It was all wrong, he grieved, shaking his
head again; all wrong.
Her name was Christine Mead. She could remember
the house where she was born—Wildwood, in Hamp-
shire, England. Jean, her mother, had been a Melbourne
girl, the only daughter of a red-haired and prosperous
doctor, and his worldly, luxury-loving wife. When Dr
Childers died, Jean was taken abroad on a long tour
by her mother, who had longed all her life for this
adventure. Jean met Andy Mead, an Australian-born
journalist, in London, fell in love with him, and married
him as soon as he proposed. Old Mrs Childers had a
romantic heart and a big mind, in spite of her worldly
sophistication. She approved the match.
And when tragedy came, and her son-in-law was
widowed soon after baby Christine arrived, Mrs Childers
took charge of Wildwood and the child, while Andy,
broken and lonely, left an unfinished novel in his desk
and crossed to the Continent on a journalistic assign-
ment which, at least, kept him too busy for thinking.
The baby red-head had a gracious start out in life,


with a beautiful old rented home, a lovely garden, and
a nurse-governess to attend to her early wants and train-
ing. Andy was not well-off by any means, so he and his
mother-in-law shared the cost of the dignified home they
both loved.
Lonely without knowing what the word meant, Andy’s
little daughter liked to murmur to herself and invent
imaginary companions for company, peopling the blue-
bell wood with playing children; walking with invisible
parents along the lanes, with the governess by her side
forgotten; and in bed at night, with the glow from the
school-room fire flickering into the child’s bedroom, she
made pictures from the shadows on the walls.
When “Granny” told Christine, then nine years old,
that they were about to make a long voyage in an ocean
liner, from Tilbury Docks to Melbourne, the little girl
stood still, wondering, then laughed.
“But, my dear,” said Mrs Childers, wishing to impress
upon her the distance, “it is half way round the world
. . . the globe . . . and poor Dad has to stay in this
world—the Old World—while we go to Melbourne. Out
there it is the New World.”
The poor lady nearly collapsed when the nine-year-
old, who had access to the library crammed from floor
to ceiling, said:
“Well, the farther away the better, if you have to get
there, because of voyaging; and I’d like to see one of
the Colonies, too,”
Mrs Childers drifted away to tell her son-in-law that
his child was growing out of babyhood without a soul
realizing that fact.
Andy scratched his chin with his pipe-stem (being at
home to arrange about the voyage) and said he would
explain to his daughter.
“Great Scott,” he murmured, “she must be a chip off
the old block—travel-minded like all true Meads. I


thought her to be a regular little prunes-and-prisms,
with her Yes-Dad and No-Dad and clockwork conduct.”
With a sense of dismay he realized how little he know
about his own red-crowned daughter, with the broad-
browed, creamy face and glinting, green eyes that re-
minded him so achingly of lost Jean.
Christine had no fault to find with the long-legged,
lean, swarthy-skinned parent paying visits at home.
Articles on foreign affairs, as she well knew, had to be
written from experience. The library at Wildwood was
a treasure-trove to her inquisitive mind, and she learned
a lot about foreign affairs, too, in those books covering
all lands, many ages, and more facts than Granny would
approve of a little girl accumulating. Facts like witches’
spells, lunatic asylums, revolutions, and things Miss
Monson never thought of! Novels were different, Chris-
tine realized, for one could stay put when writing in-
vented stories. So she did not condemn her father for
not knowing much about her, although she sometimes
felt vexed.
Andy discovered his own child, in the days that fol-
lowed; discovered an intelligent little mortal who was
his own exciting personal possession—an imp crammed
full of facts and fancies, old-fashioned in ways, love-
hungry, and . . . lonely. That shocked him, for no child
should ever be lonely. Her zest for life amused him,
because it was like his own; whether a flower in a wall-
cranny or a plane zooming over the woods, she liked
to know all about it. He, too, liked to know all about
those things interesting him—especially his own
daughter.
While satisfying his curiosity, he realized her loneli-
ness, for no child will scribble for hours in a diary, and
make up poems about the birds, and children at play,
about families round dining-tables, and mothers at bed-
time, without feeling diabolically lonely. He understood


how he felt, when killing his adult loneliness by writing
his adult stories until his tired mind outwitted his
aching heart. Andy had not been so stimulated in
years, as when reading her immature records of ob-
servation and reflection. The way she hit off the char-
acters round Wildwood was more than amusing; it ex-
cited him, and turned his mind back to the past, when
he, too, used to scribble, on a farm in Australia. And
he had been lonely then, as well.
One twilight was to remain like buried treasure in
Christine’s heart, for while the silvery reed-fringed
mere faded from steel to ebony, and the elms in the
garden went to sleep, he talked on and on, the child
reclining against his shoulder as he lay back in an arm-
chair facing a pair of open french windows.
She stirred once, shocked, and pushed back from
him to survey his shadowed face in the long-shaped
unlighted room. “You fibbed,” she cried. “You told
them like made-up stories, and they’re not. They’re all
about you, and not about a Certain Gentleman at all.”
“Ah, but you see, even an egotistical journalist might
consider it bad taste to decorate his tales with T. I did
this; I did that; I conversed with a Sultan; I had dinner
with an Arabian sheikh in his desert tent; I interviewed
a dictator! How would that sound, eh? Bad! Remember
it when you start writing for publication, by the way,
for you will, or I’m a Dutchman. The Certain Gentle-
man is my nom de plume. Know what a nom de plume
is, eh?”
“I’ve started French,” she nodded. “Plural; noms de
plume : pen-names. You have a pen-name; the Certain
Gentleman, but that's only between ourselves, isn’t it?”
“ Oui—entre nous.” He laughed as, with a sigh of
relief, she relaxed to his shoulder again, while the out-
of-doors turned to utter darkness pricked by a few pale
stars—so unlike the clusters of bright gems strewn across


the heavens where the Southern Cross lay like a silver
path. Some of the stored-up pain went from his heart
as he opened it to the listening child, thrilling from
head to heels in the wonder of her parent becoming a
father. There was such a difference, and some of the
love-hunger aching through her was satisfied, just as
the same hunger was appeased in him, through talking
of his boyhood.
She saw lots of farms, much bigger than English
farms, and dazzling summer sunlight, with a willow-
shaded river winding across great distances shimmering
in heat, and purple hummocks plump against the sun-
set, when the sky flamed with colour like a flamingo’s
wings. Dad had run away from home when just seven-
teen.
“But don’t you plan anything so revolutionary,” came
the warning, as he translated a longing sigh correctly.
“No, that’s the worst of it,” she declared, “for girls
must be stay-at-homes, unless they travel properly.”
“Would you like to travel improperly, then?” he in-
quired, trying to read more of her variegated mentality.
“Un-properly, I think I would, but not improperly,
because that sounds rude, as though I rode on the front
of a train without many clothes on,” she said.
He smothered a chuckle, for she had word-sense, too.
“Quite right,” he said carefully after a pause. “We
mustn’t travel improperly, but un-properly—mentally,
I mean,” he added quickly. “Actually, of course, you
will travel very conventionally, on an ordinary liner.”
“Well,” came thoughtfully, “there’s Granny, you see,”
and, after a sigh of relief, “but not Miss Monson. She is
monot’nous, Dad, and wears grey stays with papery
lace.”
“Here, here,” he chuckled. “Miss Monson is a deli-
cate-minded young lady. Don't describe her too inti-
mately.”


“Grown-up novelists describe everything,” she said
firmly; “even chest-protectors and cholera-belts, because
an Indian lady in a book . .
“I’ll select an armful of books for you to-morrow, my
lass, and they won’t describe chest-protectors. What
reading matter do you like best, eh?”
She was prompt.
“About olden times and history and poetry and
people with big families.”
“Big families . . .” he reflected. “Then you ought to
get along well with the Mead clan at Borrowdale.”
Christine then quickened to a description, giving her
a swift glimpse of Andy's former home. She saw it in
pictures. He had one brother, John, whom people called
Jack, and Jack was a farmer from the soul outwards.
He was married to a girl called Grace Jury. Andy had
never spoken to her. Jack and Grace now lived in
Sydney—and why he had given up farming, for com-
mercial work, Andy was baffled to understand—and they
had a daughter, Delphine, a little older than Christine.
Her heart had leaped with a new anticipation. “I’ll
be able to play with her in Australia, Dad; she’s my
cousin.”
“Not so fast,” Andy laughed. “You’re bound for Mel-
bourne, dear heart . . . Sydney is hundreds of miles to
the north-east. Granny is taking you to stay with her
cousins, Clare and Max Childers, your mother’s family.
Jack and his family are in the next-door State, where
they seem to have a Sydney flat and a riverside house
also, so he must be doing rather well for himself; but
why he gave up farming ... Oh well”—and Andy re-
nounced the problem with a shrug.
Christine was faintly disappointed. “Is Delphine Mead
my only Australian cousin?” she asked, bringing a smoth-
ered chuckle from her father. No fear, he told her
presently, as the Mead clan was enormous. He was


dashed if he could keep track of them all, what with
the marrying and growing up and moving about and
what not, but . . > And Christine felt as if something
exciting had occurred, when he mentioned a little girl
of long ago, called Sair-Ann, and an old brown house
where she and Andy had spent many a holiday.
The Old Brown House! Her mind gave the words
capitals. Was it a real house? she asked. The house, he
said, ruefully, as though it had fallen down, or van-
ished into thin air, was the symbol of his youth. She
was puzzled, for that remark was too evasive for her
child-mind. The picture he drew, however, through a
cloud of lovely words, was as real as a painting in her
head—a lovely coloured painting, flashing with greens
and blues. She saw an old gabled holiday house on a
grassy cliff-slope, above thundering green seas foaming
on golden sands. She saw milky headlands fading away
along a rocky coast-line, each fold fainter than the one
before it, with white gulls wheeling and mewing, and
reeds waving beside a quiet lagoon. She saw a yellow
sandspit and a channel, where the gulls sat on windy
days, and heard the sighing of pine-trees, the rush of
the wind, and the whispering of flattened sea-grasses on
the top of a frowning rocky point.
She lay tense against his shoulder for a while, her
heart thudding, and then sat up to stare at the black
carpet—seeing, not the carpet, but a pale green rock-pool
where children splashed and cried; ' she saw a foamy
tongue of sea-spray fly in a fan across the stones where
the sea broke, and watched the drops fall . . . and scarcely
dared draw a breath for fear the glory of the coloured
picture faded, while she felt as though she wanted to cry.
Wattle, in Australia, her father said, lifting her back
against his rough tweed jacket, was mimosa abroad, and
at Christmas time the hot sunlight beat down fiercely
round the old brown house, instead of, as in England,


falling snow, or biting east winds, or ghostly quiet days
with log-fires warming the rooms. The woods, in Aus-
tralia, were “bush”; the sands were called “beaches”, and
the big turning waves were “surf”. Those magic glimpses
broke apart to show her the wood-blocked flooring of
the old brown house, the wide hall with a porch at the
front and a lobby filled with green light at the back, for
tree-ferns grew outside against a rocky wall. There, said
Andy, when he was very, very young, he had played with
his little almost-cousin, called Sair-Ann.
“That old house is my dream, Christine,” he told her,
slowly ruffling her silken reddish curls as he spoke. “Sair-
Ann was my playmate before I learned to ride my pony
across the river-bridge. She was a nice homely little girl
with dark pigtails and a motherly disposition. And the
old brown house is now, to me, a sanctuary—full of
peace, and laughter, and happiness that leaves its echoes
always, I dare say, in the heart of a man growing
older.”
“But it is a real house?” she had to know.
“All such houses are real,” he answered, “and the
longer memory grows, the more real they become. Why,
I actually wrote a novel about the old place. ‘The
Sunken Galleon’, I named it. Jove! How that brings
things back! Sair-Ann admired my diligence in writing
so many words, but had little patience with my fancies.”
Crashing seas, novels, farms, and bright sunlight spun
in the tired child’s brain, as her father’s dream of the
past became her ideal of the future, with the picture
now interwoven with her thoughts about Australia.
“Tell me more about Sair-Ann,” she asked.
Instead, for the moment, he spoke of “The Sunken
Galleon”.
“The Spanish,” he said, “were amongst the very first
explorers round that enormous coast-line—with their
lumbering wooden galleons and swarthy sailor-men.


I wove that sort of stuff into my early novel, I dimly
remember, and sank the galleon just off the Point below
the old brown house. And, from the top of the cliff,
if you have the right sort of vision, you can see down
. . . down into fifty fathoms deep, where the sunken
galleon lies, spars and anchors rusted.”
“Dad, how could any one see down through fifty
fathoms even with magnifying spectacles on?”
“Hmnl Well, we’ll make it five fathoms.”
She was stern. “Did the galleon truly get sunken
there?”
“In my novel it did,” he declared.
“You a’zasperate me, you do,” she told him.
“Well,” he laughed, “the dreamed things in this life,
believe it or not, Christine, are even more real than
the real things—as you ought to know, with your ‘pomes’
and diary. Sair-Ann, by the way, adopted a similar at-
titude, with reference to the aforesaid galleon. ‘You made
that up, Andy Mead,’ she said to me. ‘Well,’ I retorted,
hot in defence of my story, ‘why shouldn’t a galleon be
sunken there?’ ‘But,’ she answered, ‘why should one
be?’ which was so unanswerable that I believe I became
very angry with her. So, now you’ve taken a peep into
the Certain Gentleman’s past, when he was a most
uncertain boy, in the country to which you yourself will
very soon be travelling.”
“But not in a wooden galleon,” she said, regretting
this unavoidable fact.
“No, my darling, we travel nowadays in faster con-
structions—planes darting like bullets across the skies,
carrying strange cargoes, such as helmeted pilots and
bombs.” Andy had then closed his mental eyes upon a
picture which had inspired him to converse with Granny
Childers, about evacuating Christine before the mortal
storm of war burst over the Old World.
Because of that, and he was sorry in a way that Chris-


tine’s childhood at Wildwood was ending, an expired
lease was not renewed. The owners were sorry too, for
the writer and his mother-in-law were excellent tenants,
but they realized his position, and said he was very
wise. Australia, for several reasons, seemed the ideal
place for Christine. It was the land of her parents’
birth; the place for children’s safety; and Granny, she
said, was weary of grey seas and being away from every-
body she knew, now she was getting tired and old. Andy
explained some of this to his daughter, promising her
that he, too, would go home also, for he was homesick,
and that was a very bad feeling. And when that time
came for them to be together in Australia, she would
be a tall bright-haired stripling planning her future, and
girls on tip-toe at the threshold of life needed a father
to start them on that road.
Christine asked where Sair-Ann was now, sorrowing
to know that that little girl of long ago was now grown
up and full of care, perhaps, like Dad. “I’m horribly
afraid, darling,’’ he confessed, “that I’ve not written
home in years.” Then where, asked his daughter in
thinning tones, was “The Sunken Galleon” manuscript?
She almost expired in horror to hear him say casually
that he didn’t know; hadn’t thought about it since he
was a lad. Lost, perhaps. He wrote to please editors now,
not to please himself. But if he ever should find “The
Sunken Galleon”, he expected to laugh very heartily.
This mortified Christine. Fancy laughing at a real writ-
ten bookl Then, why didn’t he write to Sair-Ann? This
subject fascinated her.
“Sair-Ann,” he started to say, but sat tense, listening,
as someone entered the drawing-room and switched on
the fire-place lights.
He had then risen from his armchair, cascading Chris-
tine, like a little avalanche of muslin frills, to the carpet.


.
.
*
It was Granny Childers in the room, dressed in brown
with gold touches, waiting to be driven out for Bridge.
“Good gracious!” she exclaimed, pulling a little fur
cape round her plump shoulders. “So there you are! The
child should have been in bed two hours ago. Where is
her governess?”—and Granny tugged a bell, a thick
silky rope hanging by the fireplace.
“My fault,” said Andy, accompanying his daughter to
the door, where blushing Miss Monson appeared, “We
were holding a literary conference.” And, very gravely,
he opened the door fully, for Christine to pass through,
for he was that kind of Certain Gentleman.


CHAPTER II
LOST: ONE OLD BROWN HOUSE
Old Joe Mellish was never to forget his first glimpse of
Christine. He had not known of her existence until,
coming from his shack at the sound of splashing, he be-
held a green-clad, red-haired sprite swimming in the
pool owned by the Goulds, who employed him as care-
taker.
Their large, seldom-used, riverside house stood next-
door to the Mead’s shabby cottage, separated by half a
paling fence, for the other half had been consumed in a
small bush-fire. Amiable thrown plaster lions guarded
the front steps of the Gould home, and weather-stained
statues lurked among the trees. One moonlight night,
when first caretaking there, old Joe had gravely lifted
his cap to a motionless white lady with an urn on one
shoulder.
Civilization had provided the Point with only two
houses, so the green-clad sprite must come from the
Mead place—which Joe found it hard to believe, for she
belonged to different breed from the Delphine child and
her mother. The newcomer’s very tones told old Joe
that, as she trod water, on catching sight of the old man
shading his eyes in the shack doorway, and called:
“Please don’t mind me. I don’t feel a bit private, and
company makes things nicer.’’ And she had gone on.


thrashing her active way along the pale green surface of
the pool, believing it public property.
Christine had arrived in darkness the night before,
by interstate steamer from Melbourne, after two years
in that city, where the weather behaves so erratically.
Aunt Grace Mead had met the child on board, bringing
her to Longbridge in the electric train, then across the
river in the launch from the little wharf below the boat-
sheds. It was a short journey, but fraught with mystery
and magic for the child who at last, at last, was to meet
one of her cousins. First of all, there was the ghost-like
appearance of the boats tied up in the darkness, and then
the pop-pop-pop of the cabinless launch controlled by
Grace—in ill-humour for her vexing journey to the
wharves of the city.
The moon had risen, like a golden sovereign, from
behind a wedge of land that looked like a black wool
tea-cosy, and slowly the shape of the river, amber-tinted
and strange, crept from the darkness. Then the launch
nuzzling in to a landing-stage 1 Stone steps led upwards
into more mystery, cobwebbed by moonlight and shadow.
The cottage had startled the little newcomer with its
shameful neglect and litter. Delphine, lumpy, heavy-
featured, and openly hostile, had sickened Christine
with disappointment.
The children had stood silent for a moment in the
ugly little dining-room—the tall, open-faced, dignified
new arrival, and the sullen child who was her cousin.
Two "hullos” were spoken, one grudgingly, the other
with hesitation, as Christine saw that look on Delphine’s
face and felt her spirits sink in the cruelty of disillusion.
Delphine shared her mother’s bedroom. When Chris-
tine had been deposited for the night in her little slit of
a room adjoining, her cousin whined to her mother:
"Did you see that hat and coat she had on, Mummy? I


can’t dress like that. Now she’ll look down on me and
I’ll feel dreadful.”
Aunt Grace had cast a knowing look towards the wall,
which was thin, and whispered:
“Never mind, dear. Now she’s here you’ll have plenty
of new things. Her father is paying us three guineas and
that will work wonders for us both.”
“Can I have a green angora with a velvet collar and
hat-band like she’s got,” Delphine whispered back.
“Certainly not,” her mother snapped. “That common
colour wouldn’t suit your complexion at all. She’s pasty-
faced.”
Christine’s feelings, that lonely and dejected evening,
were abysmal, but two years of experience in Melbourne
had stimulated her natural courage. Sair-Ann, that little
girl of long ago, had kept Christine company in the
darkness while the trees rustled outside and the moon
rode higher in the heavens. Finally, she slept, her hand
in the imaginary hand of Sair-Ann, whom Dad said
was a homely, sensible, loving little girl who had lots of
understanding.
When morning came it was not so bad. To begin with,
it was Saturday, so she need not yet dread a new school.
The bathroom was icy-cold and ugly, a mere cavern
with a tin bath, that crackled when you stepped into it,
and a chipped enamel bowl on a soap-stained old wash-
stand. Breakfast was badly cooked, and set anyhow on
thick china which did not hide the stains on the limp
table-cloth. Aunt Grace was angry for having to milk
the cow on a dripping foggy morning, a morning with
the trees like grey wraiths.
She and Delphine, Aunt Grace told her niece by mar-
riage, had to cross in the launch to Longbridge, for
the week-end goods, so Christine could “unpack and
amuse herself” until their return. The fog drifted away
by seven o’clock and revealed a glorious world. At nine,


still . . . Sharks . . . Thick with sharks . . . Stand still,
lassie, don’t move.”
Five minutes later he was still shaking inwardly as he
fumbled at the primus stove in his simple shack, with
a white-limbed little visitor, shivering a bit, curled up
on the grey blankets of his neat bunk, a newspaper
under her damp bathers. She had asked for the news-
paper, for his place was like a new pin, and tidy as a
the launch crossed the river, leaving a little girl alone,
she felt, in a forest on a river-trimmed arm of land. She
had something better to do than unpack!
Enraptured by the tweet of birds in the eucalyptus-
scented morning radiance, the cold-nosed little girl ran.
in her checked wool dressing-gown, to the edge of the
garden, where some big rocks, like elephants nearly
buried, made a sort of look-out. She gazed down through
the trees, over the paths toiled up the night before in the
moonlight. Presently, on the rocks, she felt warm, as the
river-fog crept away with the sun lifting higher. The
river looked like the Lakes of Killarney, and, wonder
of wonders, down by the boat-houses an oblong of pale
green water gleamed; a swimming-pool. A bird called:
“Ta-wit, ta-wit, ta-weee,” and Christine laughed aloud,
speeding to the cottage and opening her trunk, taking
out a green bathing-suit and rubber shoes. As if she
minded coldness, when the world was shining gold.
Old Joe leaned against the door-frame of his shack,
better to enjoy the pretty sight he saw—a green-clad
sprite thrashing over-arm through the lovely pool struck
through by daggers of livid sunlight. Suddenly, how-
ever, he was galvanized by fear. Like a cat, she had
scrambled on to the outer wall, dividing the pool from
the river. Poising, white arms making a narrow V over her
head, she had to make a windmill of herself to keep
from overbalancing, for the old gentleman was calling
in a mighty voice of terror: “No, no . . . Lassie, stand


ship’s cabin. He had a shelf of books, too, which made
them kin. He spread bread with flat strokes of a metal-
handled knife. When her water-shrivelled fingers took
the warm mug of tea, it felt beautifully comforting, and
the shivers stopped.
Little ladies, perhaps, the old man said with gruff
shyness, mightn’t like drinking from mugs, but they were
all he had.
“It’s lovely,” she told him, glancing round. “Besides,
you saved my life.”
He reminded her of Dad, which was queer, in a way,
because the two men were worlds apart, in many direc-
tions. And yet ... It was Joe’s natural courtesy, his
simplicity of outlook, and his gentleness, that Christine
noticed most, trying to explain to herself the resem-
blance. Instinctively, with a child’s swift perceptiveness,
she liked and trusted Joe, and told him a little of her
history.
Christine was equally swift and accurate when sum-
ming up her relations. Aunt Grace, with sullen Del-
phine, after unloading their various bundles to the land-
ing-stage a half-hour later, stood, suddenly horrified,
to behold Christine, actually in her bathing-suit, hobnob-
bing with that dreadful old pensioner from next door.
A commanding call summoned the offender, who rose
from the grass outside the shack and brazenly offered
Joe her hand. In leaving him, she whispered: “I’ll come
again if you’ll have me,” to make up for that insultingly
offensive call of her aunt’s.
Hugging two wrapped loaves of bread to her now-
dry chest, Christine was shunted up the steep incline,
lectured at every turn and twist by the breathless woman,
while Delphine’s inferiority complex rejoiced to see her
stuck-up cousin taken down a peg. Not at alll Out of the
fire of her loyalty, and out of the depths of her good
breeding, Christine took a truth, and voiced it: “I'm


terribly sorry, Aunt Grace, if I seem rude, but my father
would want me to visit Joe, and you are not responsible
for that, because I am. He’s a dear old gentleman, and
he saved my life.”
Grace was shocked. A “gentleman”, she thought; the
child hadn’t even the discrimination to tell a gentleman
from a shabby old caretaker, and as for saving her lifel
Well, that showed 1 The Meads, as a breed, were very
good at romancing. Grace called it flat-out lying.
Delphine lifted her nose in the air and felt superior
all of a sudden. Christine was disgusted.
As their acquaintance ripened, old Joe started wonder-
ing what exactly had happened his little friend, in the
two-year interval between leaving Wildwood and arriv-
ing at Blackfish Cove. One evening, quiet with the
weight of summer heat, he asked her if she could tell an
inquisitive old codger, like himself, about her experi-
ences in Melbourne.
In utter simplicity Christine explained, while play-
ing with pine-cones on the lower step of the long flight
rising from near the Gould boat-house. She omitted the
passionate heartache, the shocks and disillusions, the
longing and the yearning and the pain a child may go
through when lonely and homesick for more than two
years.
Cousin Clare Childers’s house, Christine explained,
had been very formal and expensive, and with a grimace
of distaste displayed her rebellion against such conven-
tional homes. She was a very haughty lady with lots of
wonderful frocks, but no children, and cousin Max
Childers did not like children either.
“That makes grown-ups a bit selfish,” said Christine,
nodding wisely, “because I’ve taken note.”
Granny had died. Christine’s tones softened when she


related the quiet story of the old lady’s peaceful end.
Even cold-natured Clare had been sorry, and for weeks
let Christine do almost as she liked. Gulping, the little
girl went on into the next stage of her history, when
Max Childers had either to go to Boston without his
wife, or take her with him, and she, naturally, had
wished to go.
“You see, Joe,” said Christine in a generous effort to
understand, “it meant the world to her, going to the
United States, and after all I wasn’t a blood-relation, and
not very important. Besides, she didn’t know that child-
ren have feelings like grown-ups, but not so elaborate, of
course.”
The boarding-school into which Clare had thrust
Christine was all right, she emphasized, to cover her
doubt, for she hadn’t enjoyed boarding-school at all.
Of course. Cousin Clare sent sheaves of cables to Dad,
at last locating him in Munich, of all places, from where
he replied, following the message with a long air-mail
letter later written in London. Anyhow, she was left
in boarding-school while Clare sailed for America, and
Dad started planning, because he wrote after months of
more cabling and air-mailing, and told her he was try-
ing to “get hold of Uncle Jack”.
“Dad didn’t know a thing about Aunt Grace, Joe,”
Christine said dubiously, “because he pictured someone
very different, and said I’d be so happy in a nice home
with a cousin to play with. The thing I can’t understand,”
she went on, in tones thin with woe, “is why she won’t
ever tell me about my other relations. I’ve asked. And
Dad said in a letter that I could go to Borrowdale and
meet my other connexions, and Aunt Grace would fix
all that. But she said they don’t want to be bothered by
strange girls from England, they’ve got enough of their
own,” A puzzled, hurt look asked a silent question of
old Joe.


All he could offer by way of suggestion, was to say, not
very convincingly;
“Your aunt, maybe, is waiting for Uncle Jack to come
home. The Meads are his relations.”
She brightened a trifle.
“Perhaps that’s it,” she nodded, “although Aunt Grace
doesn’t bother much about his ideas on anything. She
doesn’t even respect him, and only wants what he gives
her, and grumbles when it isn’t much.” Her eyes glinted
angrily. “I think that’s just terrible.”
After grieving for a moment on Uncle Jack’s unloved
status in his home, Christine resumed her story, telling
of the wonderful day when at last the headmistress called
her to the study and read scraps from a letter written
by Andy. There was a bank draft, too. Miss Sells, a
junior mistress, had taken the little girl, two weeks later,
to Port Melbourne, putting her on board the Kanimbla
in charge of the stewardess.
My word, Joe said, after a long pause while Christine
frowned out over the river, she had seen a lot of the
world for such a little lady. The green eyes for a moment
held Joe’s gaze with a questioning look. “Australia is
big,” she said, with a catch in her throat. Big, aye, he
thought, and very friendless, to the lonely child for ever
seeking the shelter and sanctuary of her old brown house.
Joe improved the moment by suggesting tea. He had
cups and saucers now, with pink roses round the rims,
and a biscuit tin, frequently replenished, showing crino-
lined ladies on the lid, smiling archly at a guitar-
playing gentleman raising his voice with his eyes closed.
The storekeeper at Longbridge had eyed Joe in alarm
when making that frivolous purchase.
Christine detested the punt school—so named because
of its close proximity to the strange captive ship cross-
ing and re-crossing the river so monotonously with its
burden of vehicles and humans. But she loved the punt.


cherishing an affection, too, for the punt-man, who
relished hanging up his port and starboard lights when
dusk fell on the river. A huge wheel turned all the time
as a thick steel cable flopped over it, and once or twice,
after school, Christine rode to and fro in the cabin, which
had a desk high up against one wall, and two life-belts.
The punt-man had once been captain of an ocean-
freighter, and told her stories crisp with salt and rollick-
ing with strange doings in lonely ports-of-call. Delphine
thought her cousin very common to gossip with the punt-
man.
“Going to boarding-school and living in England
didn’t make you very stylish,” Delphine remarked one
day while the pair trudged the two-mile back road on
their way home from school. “I don’t believe you ever
had a governess at all.”
“I don’t happen to care what you believe,” Christine
said with perfect truth, “and fibbers never do believe
anything, anyway, and I loathe selfish prigs like you.”
She released much of her childish misery by scribbling
in her diary. Candles, said Grace, when this habit was
discovered, were not only expensive, but every article
in the house used had to come over by launch, and
she expected some consideration. One night Delphine
entered her cousin’s room and puffed out the light. The
diary was then put to a novel use, when it smacked down
expertly in the dark on the offender’s head. Grace came
in, struck a match, sorted out the arms and legs thrash-
ing on the ragged linoleum, and listened to her
daughter’s grizzling accusations, while Christine stood
disgustedly rigid, waiting for the smack she expected.
But Grace did not dare smack her niece—for Jack would
soon be at home, and children “tittle-tattled”.
Christine was not fond of tale-telling, although she
was tempted, when writing to her father; pouring out
her heart through pages of description far more vivid


than she realized—always avoiding complaints, for he
would be worried and there was nowhere else to send
her. Moreover, a queer instinct for protecting Uncle
Jack’s unhappy secret restrained his niece’s pen. She
knew it would hurt Uncle Jack and her father if he
knew about the sad little creepered cottage, which he
referred to as a riverside house, and about Aunt Grace’s
mean ways.
Christine received a shock one day, when reading one
of Andy's letters, for he said: “And, dear heart, if you
need more clothes or holidays than the three guineas
provide, just let me know. You are a growing girl, and
a journalist dashing all over the place knows little about
such things. Your Aunt Grace is the Supervisor-in-Chief
of your affairs at the moment. The Certain Gentleman
is merely Banker. Get fat and big, my darling, against
the time when the pair of us will housekeep, like Darby
and Joan, in our cottage by the sea we love so much . . .”
Even a little girl knew, with a sinking sense of being
trapped, that her father was victimized. Ought she tell
him? It would be tittle-tattling. Uncle Jack might be
blamed, and it was a dreadful thing to make brothers
feel bad about each other. The ethics of the problem
worried her for weeks, until she knew she couldn’t tell.
Knowing about the three guineas, however, uplifted
her self-respect, for she knew now that she had a perfect
right to ask for necessities. Her shoes pinched, and were
nearly through at the soles. Facing her aunt one Satur-
day morning, Christine extended a foot and proved her
claim. “You see, Aunt Grace, I do need a pair, don’t I?”
she said.
Grace was not deliberately robbing Andy and his
daughter. “My own come first,” she would mutter when
ignoring her conscience to cling fast to all she could of
the sums he sent. And Grace’s mind was too full of


Delphine, for consideration of the little lodger growing
shabbier day by day.
“You can use that lace-up pair of Delphine’s,” her
aunt snapped in her discomfiture. “She takes a size larger
and that pair pinch her.”
Colour burned in Christine’s cheeks.
“I won’t wear Delphine’s cast-offs,” she flashed, “and
out of three guineas every week I should think there’d
be enough for a new pair of shoes .. .” She broke off,
dismayed, for Aunt Grace looked as if she felt faint or
something.
“That arrangement is between your father and my-
self,” she said sharply. “I didn’t know he told his busi-
ness to a mere child.”
“It’s my business too,” said Christine, wondering. “He
wouldn’t let me feel beholden to any one living.”
Grace pulled herself up on the verge of an indiscretion.
If the little simpleton ever told any one . . . but she
didn’t see any one to tell! Grace’s inner sense of triumph
restored her feelings somewhat. As for the shoes . . .
The child might tell her father about those. “Silly girl,”
Grace said, twisting her mouth to an artificial smile,
“why didn’t you let me know before, that they were
worn out?”
“I thought you’d notice,” came slowly, as understand-
ing began. “You notice Delphine’s things.”
“Well, anyway,” came quickly, “I’ll get you a new
pair at once; and anything you need, just let me know.”
Christine wandered off, thinking it out, to where the
coral-tree behind the cow-shed made a leafy cave. She
felt excited, deep down within herself, and strong in
spirit, as if she could wave an arm and stop the sailing
clouds, or jump into the air and hang by nothing.
“One stroke of my pen,” the little girl reflected, “and
I could take three guineas weekly from her, for D'td
wouldn’t leave me here a minute, if he knew—even if


he had to send me to another boarding-school, in Sydney
this time.”
She couldn’t bear that thought, but her position at
the cottage had, in some weird way, altered. Christine
walked along a forbidden fence that afternoon, watching
Aunt Grace as she sat milking, her forehead against the
cow’s soft flank.
“Get down off that,” Grace called, her hands still for
a moment over the frothy bucket.
Christine airily went on along the fence, not once, but
four times, until she got sick of the silly business, and
ran inside. But Aunt Grace hadn’t called again.
And the next time Delphine interfered with the young
scribbler burning the midnight oil, in the form of a
flickering candle, she rose like a little warrior from her
chair, facing her cousin disdainfully.
“My father pays for more than candles in this house,”
she stated. “We pay you enough for my room to be
dazzling under twenty electric lights, if you had such
things at the Cove. So go now and tell your mother I
said so, and sneak about that. And go out of my room.
I pay for privacy, too, but I don’t often happen to get
it. . . .”
The abashed thirteen-year-old oozed out, running to
whisper to her mother, whose attitude was so self-
conscious and snappy that Delphine was bewildered for
hours.
But old Joe, in his protective love and understanding
of the child whose nature was marked by the ugliness
of other people’s natures, wanted desperately to wipe
that mark away. Bad natures were like tar; you couldn’t
touch it without getting soiled.
And then, without knowing quite what inspired him,
Joe became the wise servant of Fate, when leading his
young friend one night through the hot moonlight to
see the flying-foxes in the hollow where the aloes budded.


CHAPTER 111
CHRISTINE’S DARK YEAR
Joe was an amateur naturalist in his simple fashion,
with an instinctive love and protectiveness for the
creatures of the wild. Christine loved to see the possums
looking down at night, their damply wistful eyes un-
afraid and curious as they came loping down the
branches of the gums to the food the old man left on
the top of the tank. She adored him for preferring a
torch, bought one pension day at Longbridge, to the
gun that most men chose.
With power like a sword in one hand, Christine chal-
lenged her aunt’s order not to go down the slopes at
night-time.
“Why not?” the child asked, very politely, but with-
out any intention of obeying. “My father would approve.
I wouldn’t talk to strangers. Besides, there aren’t any,
only those who fish.from dinghies, and they don’t come
ashore. There isn’t any reason why I shouldn’t visit Joe.”
Nor was there. As much as Grace Mead scorned the
old man, she knew him clean, respectable, and deeply
protective to his young friend. And Christine had re-
ferred subtly again to her father, reminding the woman
of the power that letters held, when written by lonely,
shabby, cheated girls paying for much more care and
comfort.
Tilting her head, Christine marched out, and trod


the shadowy steps on the way down to knock at old
Joe’s shack door. The lamp-light within made a cosy
glow in the blue-white radiance of the steamy moonlit
night.
“Another argument,” she announced cheerfully, sit-
ting on his bunk with a wriggle to make herself more
comfortable. “But I won. She doesn’t know I wouldn’t
sneak to Dad about you-know-what, but that’s her fault,
for being suspicious and thinking I'm like Delphine.”
Joe had his pipe, and looked most luxurious in a
chair he had made from bullock-hide stretched on a
strong deal frame.
“Blackmail, lassie,” he said, startling her rigid, “is an
ugly and soul-destroying thing.”
“Blackmaill” she echoed, in a horrified whisper.
“Ayel” He nodded kindly, but gravely. “Blackmailers
on a big scale have to face the law when caught. Black-
mailers on a small scale aren’t even sporting enough to
face that risk. Don’t let yourself think along those lines,
lassie. It’ll show on your face, and in your writing. And
your fine dad wouldn’t be very proud of you, would he,
to know his daughter held the whip-hand over a nasty
woman and cracked the whip when wanting her own
way? Blackmail is ugly, lassie, and something that ought
to be foreign to good people.”
Christine sat silent, going all colours. Oh, it was black-
mail, in a minor way. But what other way was there of
defending herself against such meanness? If other people
used unfair weapons, you had to use the same sort, or
disaster came, and defeat. Christine made this declara-
tion with her head held high in self-justification.
“That’s true enough, lassie,” Joe agreed, reaching for
his torch. “But if you fight the same way as the. evil ones
do, you get like them in time. And blackmail isn’t fight-
ing; it isn’t as honest as that.”
Her mouth quivered.


“It’s the only interest I’ve got,” she cried, “and you
make me feel terrible.”
“We’ll have to find you a fresh interest,” he said,
ushering her out to the brilliant moonlight of the river-
bank. Silently, she trod beside him on the sweet-smelling
grass. Blackmail! How vile!
A soft hand slid into Joe’s work-roughened fingers.
“Joe, I’ll try, really,” she promised, “but it does hurt
so, to feel so shabby and despised while Dad does pay
for me. I know it’s beastly to defy Aunt Grace and use
Dad to do it with, but ... Joe, do you think I’m be-
coming hateful?” she implored, looking up with the
moonlight painting her face mauve.
“No, lassie,” he vowed stoutly. “Such a thought has
never entered my head, but I want to be proud of you,
just as your father would be proud . . . and it isn’t the
easy things in life that make heroes of us; it’s the hard
things.” He hesitated, pointing across the river with his
torch, to where a big bungalow showed a row of soft
yellow lights. “You want company, lassie—normal home-
life, with some interest taken in your mind and looks.
It isn’t natural, living like you do, and that aunt of
yours is more fit to guard a row of cabbages than she is
a nice little girl.”
“What’s their name, I wonder,” Christine asked, paus-
ing to stare over the water at the home where five child-
ren often played in the swimming-pool and round the
shores. They had a dinghy, a dog that barked a lot, and
a motor launch that brought their father home each
week-night from the Longbridge railway station. “Per-
haps it’s just Jones, or maybe it’s fanciful, like De Vere
or Polkinghorne. But I think it’s a nice comfortable
name like Stillwell.”
And so the Stillwells were invented, one steamy hot
night with the radiant moonlight beating down like


blue fire. Joe could not bear to tell her, much later, that
the name of that fascinating family was Johnson.
The flying-foxes came as the aloes budded; those queer
spiky plants suggestive of deserts and hard sunlight on
burning sand. Tree-like growths shot up from their
middles, like a child’s uneven drawing of a tree. They
were a pale milky blue-green, and poisoned one’s flesh
if the sharp spikes of the thick sappy leaves dug in. The
flying-foxes liked to eat the tufted buds. Christine forgot
her wickedness in the fascination of lying in wait, dis-
guised by lacy shadow, for the strange bat-like creatures
to appear.
Like blue daylight, the moonlight was, with every
shadow blackly clear and sharp. Not a breath of air
moved the heavy stillness of the night. The water smelled
as only water can, with the tide low and the rocks ex-
posed. She could even see the jellyfish on their eternal
travelling, pale mauve and glistening in the tidal flow.
Joe slowly moved the soft circle of the torch-light up-
wards as the sinister flopping swish of black wings
turned to silence. Christine held her breath as the torch-
light climbed higher and higher, pausing on a gum-
branch reaching out like a round spring-board over the
oily water.
A grotesque animal-bird hung face-down there; a
shadowy, weird thing with a furry body, gleams for
eyes, and folded wings like part of an umbrella. Her
blood thrilled as the flying-fox moved, and went heavily,
with a swish-flop-thunk, out over the surface of the river.
The moonlight gave it the appearance of something in
a witch’s tale. Presently, it returned, settling in another
tree farther along the bank. Here was magic, and a
fairy-story scene come to life!
That night, Christine placed a book like two walls
round the forbidden candle-flame, writing with infinite
caution not to make a sound. And next day, a queer


smile flickering on his mouth, old Joe took a letter in
his launch across to the Longbridge post office. It was
addressed to “The Bookworm”, The Tribune Newspaper
Office, in a city thoroughfare, and marked, “Competi-
tion”.
Christine was waiting for him when he returned with
a Saturday copy of the Tribune which gave two whole
lift-out pages weekly to juveniles. Together, at the table
in the shack, the old man and the child spread out the
Bookworm’s Pages, discussing the items freely. What
made him think of such a glorious idea, she asked. Joe
didn’t know, exactly; it just came to him, he said, when
watching the flying-foxes.
No child has ever waited through such a long week,
in such an agony of alternate hope and dejection, as
Christine waited for the next Saturday’s issue of the
Tribune. Joe went over for the paper as soon as he got
up, and did not even unfold it before planking it down
on the shack table before which Christine waited, his
tea ready, hot in the teapot, and toast made on a toaster
placed on the fizzing primus flame.
She could scarcely bear to look at the lift-out pages.
“You look,” she told him, closing her eyes and thrusting
the paper towards him, then at once pulling it back and
finding the column she sought. Below an illustration in
pen-and-ink called “Dew Fairies”, and above a section
headed, “What I saw in Nature’s Realm”, Christine
beheld one word; “Competition”, and below it she saw
her own name printed—“ Christine Mead, Longbridge,
N.S.W.'*
Her eyes closed in an ecstasy of delight. It was her
first published work. She had won a competition. Two
hundred and five entries had been received. Her own
words, as she read them, not believing they had come
first from her pen, seemed as if written by another per-
son. Christine Mead’s effort, the Bookworm wrote in her


criticism, was full of reality, well-written, and had a
charm of expression which was very engaging. The Book-
worm welcomed the new Club Member, and a Badge
of Honour would be posted to Christine Mead at once.
Joe put on his steel-rimmed spectacles and thrust
aside his toast and tea as she slid the paper wordlessly
towards him. Slowly he read her “piece”, and said:
“It’s them to a T, lassie.” Then the dull flush of
pleased old age stained his lined face. He read:
“ . . . but my dearest friend, Joe, who is an elderly
gentleman living beside the river, led me to where the
flying-foxes come to eat the aloe buds on their strange
stiff tree.” Joe rubbed his chin for several inarticulate
moments, finally patting her arm as if he forgot to stop,
then drinking his tea in haste.
Christine was so happy that the flame-like sensation
in her heart burned up all nastiness. She proudly dis-
played the clipping—not releasing it—before the amazed
eyes of her cousin. She was not long in recovering from
her jealous shock.
“That’s nothing,” she cried angrily. “And they’re our
flying-foxes, anyway, so you ought to give me half the
money.”
Christine was aghast.
“But is isn’t a paying competition, Delphine. It’s the
honour.”
Delphine’s poor little warped soul had no discernment
for that sort of lunacy.
“Then you are crazy, to do things for nothing,” she
said.
Life really did seem to brighten a little after the
flying-fox incident with the pride and pleasure of post-
ing a specially bought copy of the Bookworm’s Pages
to Andy, a curly line in ink marked like a frame round
his daughter’s first published work. The last burst of
sultry summer heat was staining the evenings now, and


it seemed that autumn would soon be on the way—the
autumn of nineteen forty I Andy Mead was now a war-
correspondent. Now and again, when he thought of it,
he posted a newspaper to the Cove, an article marked
by a cross to show Christine what he was doing.
But the war did not seem to make much difference to
the Cove. News came over the radio, but Aunt Grace
was impatient with world affairs, so switched over to
jazz or social gossip. Insensitive Delphine liked to leave
the wireless blaring its loudest for hours on end, so that
the poor cottage seemed to wince. She did not like the
Children’s Hour, or informative lectures on books,
music, and the ways of nature. They were “silly”, Del-
phine said.
Uncle Jack, after so very long away from his home,
suddenly turned up one evening like a ghost, after
being rowed over from Longbridge by the boat-shed
proprietor. Christine stood with her heart thudding—
for her uncle was amazingly like her father—as he
walked in, his raglan overcoat turned up at the neck,
his felt hat pulled down one side, and his lean brown
face quietly interested. But the little girl felt sick as he
looked questioningly at his wife, as if he expected a
nagging. Delphine said thinly: “Hullo, Daddy,” and
scowled as her father took her mother’s hands, and
kissed her, very cautiously, on one cheek. She shrugged
and pulled her hands away. After a sigh, he turned to
his brother’s child, and Jack’s quiet face wore a different
look.
“So this is Andy’s little daughter, eh?” Jack smiled,
stooping to hold her close for a moment, his arms
strangely tight round her slim, arched little body. She
hugged his face close to hers; she couldn’t help it, and
a desperate whisper met his ears.
“Oh, Uncle Jack . . . Uncle Jack . . . Oh, Uncle I”
Months of a helpless, lonely child’s desolation breathed


through that whisper, and when he looked again at his
wife, his eyes were hard.
Suddenly Uncle Jack was standing, hands in pockets,
at the dark window, as if looking at the view. Christine
saw his jaws moving as if he were chewing something,
but he wasn’t, for he hadn’t even touched the bread on
the table where an interrupted evening meal was strewn.
She showed him her flying-foxes clipping, which he
read several times, a queer softness round his mouth.
“Chip off the old block, eh?” he said in a squeezed
sort of tone. “Your father was always flinging his heart
into the High Places . . . and it’s not a bad way to be.”
He was at home for a week—a week of dazzling excite-
ment to Christine, who could not race home fast enough
from school. He liked old Joe; the three went fishing,
Delphine never accompanied them, she said fishing was
“silly”. Then, one night, through the thin partition
dividing the two rooms, Christine heard raised voices,
and held her breath. Her uncle was angry, and his wife
was mumbling fretfully.
“ . . . and I can’t forgive you for it,” the child heard
him say. “To my mind, it’s an outrage to charge for a
girl virtually an evacuee. Moreover, she happens to be
my brother’s daughter, and here, under this roof, you
have the callousness to neglect her worse than any
orphan. . . . Will you write to Grandfather Mead and
speak about Christine, or shall I?” Grace cried out in
her terror of that, and Jack went on; “Well, bring your-
self to do it, then, or I must. Never mind about the
lies you’ve told about our non-existent comfort. Tell
the truth, and let that child meet her own people.
Heaven knows they’d take her off your hands, gladly,
if they once saw her. . . .” And that was Grace’s fear,
apart from having her snobbish pretences shown up.
Three guineas weekly would go with Christine. . . .
She covered her head over with the bed-clothes,


shocked into realizing the despicableness of listening to
others’ conversations. But her heart leaped. She heard:
“ . . . and see that at least she has a holiday at Borrow-
dale,” and then her ears were tightly covered. Grand-
father Meadl Uncle Jack had spoken of him scrappily;
he was like a squire.
But when Jack went away again, on another commer-
cial tour, his wife’s cowardly spirit shrank. The expense!
And the girl would tittle-tattle and expose Grace’s miser-
able secrets. Old Joe watched hope fading again in
Christine as the holidays approached and something
quiet struck its warning note in her heart, telling her
to resign herself.
“My father,” Christine said one day, hands locked
round her legs, much thinner than they used to be, “told
me quite a lot about Borrowdale—but only in scenery,
Joe. Uncle Jack, too, talked of the trout river, and his
lost farm—in the same queer way people refer to dead
people, brushing past their names, then laughing to
cover up their feelings. It isn’t a dead and gone person
he mourns for; it’s a dead and gone life. But Uncle Jack
let go a bit about Grandfather Mead, giving me a sort of
impression. ... You don’t have squires here, although
the result is the same, and I saw a very sturdy elderly
gentleman riding round on a good horse, inspecting his
lands and calling on other farms. He loves animals.”
“Then he must be a good man at heart,” Joe stated.
“Yes, that’s what I think. And he has some of your
tastes, too, for the things of the wild. Uncle Jack told
me a story about a find of Grandfather Mead’s. Well,
not a find, exactly, unless he writes . . . No,” she said
quickly, “of course he doesn’t. That's the worst of
scribblers; they can’t imagine others not wanting to
scribble also. The find is a story, really . . And she
related it so that Joe beheld it vividly, about an artful
duck and her eggs, laid in the broken-off spout of a


gum-branch high above a reedy pool. Grandfather Mead
had naturally wondered how the duck would get the
ducklings down when they came from the eggs.
He watched from a sheltered place, calling day after
day, until at last the ducklings came from the eggs. The
mother was concerned to find her offspring so high in a
tree, instead of paddling. So, one day, she settled one
small feathered creature on her back, turning her head
to quack in her own language until the duckling seized
hold of a strong feather and, seeing her opportunity,
she volplaned down to the water and slid the duckling
off. Each duckling, in turn, through several hours of
caution, was moved in the same fashion, until the
mother, chuckling in triumph, paddled with them to a
new home in the reeds.
Christine sat thoughtfully on the lower stone step,
piling pine-cones between her ankles.
“Well,” she declared at last, “all I can say is, that the
parents of the natural world have more sense and
decency than lots of human ones.”
She used her writer’s gift of judgment, and “scented”
the news-value of the little story, writing it out and
sending it to the Bookworm’s Page, together with a
poem called “Lament”, and won two more badges. The
poem was, of course, a childish effort at expressing her
keen disappointment for losing her holiday at Borrow-
dale. Joe raged inwardly against the criminally witless
woman slowly destroying the faith in a nice little girl.
Grace’s excuses were now wearing thin. When Christine
realized the truth, she fixed a long, questioning, bitter
look on her aunt and turned away without a plea or
question. Grace was in a fury for days because of that
measuring look.
Jack Mead returned unexpectedly soon after, start-
ling the household—for it was a soldier walking across
the tangled garden. He had enlisted without saying a


word to friend or relation, and now appeared, a chal-
lenge in his eyes, a new briskness in his step. When his
wife recovered from her sickening shock, she made a
characteristic remark: how would she manage on a pri-
vate soldier’s allowance. His face hardened, just as other
soldiers’ wives managed, he said, and she must remem-
ber that it was war-time.
Christine forgot her disappointment in this excite-
ment, but she knew, without talking about it, that her
last link with Borrowdale had broken. He sailed for
‘unknown places’ a few months later, leaving a very
confused niece in the creepered cottage.
“Well,” she said to Joe when the troop-ship had prob-
ably sailed, “that’s over, Joe. It took a whole European
war to end his slavery to Aunt Grace, and that would
make Hitler scream with fury if he knew.”
Andy’s next letter helped Christine a little, for he
expressed himself warmly on the matter of the flying-
foxes article, and said:
“The Certain Gentleman, Christine, is on his busy way
to a Certain Village in northern France, not far from the
Maginot Line. By the way, my darling, is everything
well with you? You smile a lot through your very
interesting letters, but—l wonder if a tear clings some-
times on the edge of those smiles. Is anything wrong,
dear heart? I realize how fast you must be growing,
mind and form, and that young folk must weep as well
as smile, but not too much, Christine. ... Tell me, won’t
you, if there is anything wrong . . . ?”
She had said, in her letter accompanying the article,
that while he was dreadfully active in world affairs, it
seemed to be her lot to write only about little things—
not big causes and the rush of history in the making.
He answered that by writing:
“Great causes are, of course, of vast importance, but
the little things of life are most important too. Wars


flare up, great causes lift men above themselves to shout
and work and die, but the little things of life go on
eternally. Sunsets, how our gardens grow, meals and
friendships and workl You see, we have companionship,
day by day, with the little things, my dear, and the
multitudes are far more concerned by everyday events,
than by assassinated dictators and exiled kings. So go
on writing about simple things, my darling, for simplicity
is at the heart of beauty and truth—and I know you
understand.”
‘‘l think Dad’s tired of great causes,” she frowned,
reading this letter out to Joe, “and I feel he’s a bit
disgusted, too, by Europe and the war. Well,” she added
with sudden passion, “perhaps when he does come back
to this country he’ll be satisfied to stay, and write about
simple things instead. . . . It’s not much fun having a
wandering father,” she said thinly, and raced away.
Then, one night, in the dead of the Australian winter,
with the frost like splintered crystal on the grass in the
cold white moonlight, a story of tragedy came over the
radio. London was talking . . . and Christine, rigid, sat
listening. Aunt Grace, too, for once, found the oversea
news interesting, her eyes staring at nothing while a
pompous announcer spoke unemotionally of a drama
that shook the world.
111-fated France had fallen to the Nazis. Somebody
had neglected to blow up the bridges of the Meuse, over
which the floods of invaders tramped, their heavy artil-
lery rumbling. Herds of terror-stricken refugees, driven
like cattle, blocked the roads and made confusion. “We
are betrayed,” people cried, lifting their stunned gaze
to the skies where planes hummed and droned. Mothers
wept for lost homes; for little lifeless children. . . . Men
clenched their hands and asked why the Maginot Line
had not been built on into Belgium. . . . The Germans
had come round the end of the Maginot Line, as cats


skulk round the end of a high wall they can’t leap over.
France simmered in dull anger, and shame, against the
greedy politicians who, for years, had been plotting this
disaster. And Christine held her breath, remembering
what her father had written not so long ago. He was
near the Maginot Line and, as a Britisher, he was an
enemy alien to the Germans, and in dreadful danger.
The following weeks were a muddle of darkness and
twilight to the sensitive child who swung from despair
to hope until her brain rocked. No cable came from
Andy. He would cable, she said dully to Joe. If Dad were
safe and had escaped in time, he would cablel He would
know she couldn’t be deaf and blind to France’s fall, and
he would know she waited . . . waited . . . waited, to
know.
The dreadful weeks dragged by on leaden feet, but
no cable came. Aunt Grace was upset, and the little
girl wistfully declared to Joe: “She has some feeling, I
think.” But it was of herself that Grace thought as the
truth finally came home to her. The news from France
became more sinister. Several ship-loads of British
refugees escaped to England in time, but even a little
girl knew how far north the Maginot Line was, and that
ships left the quaysides in the south. And no cable had
come.
“It’s cruel,” Grace said to her daughter, who was un-
wisely told too much. “Your father’s to blame. When
Andy first cabled, your father was all for the idea, but
I said No; I had enough to do. Then Andy’s letter came,
and he said about payment. Well, I thought, why not,
as three guineas would mean a lot, and he, mind you—
your father—wanted to refuse the payment. ‘Well,’ said
I, ‘can you keep her in clothes and tooth-paste and shoes
and schooling books?’ He was too ashamed to answer,
and just looked dogged. Then he said three guineas was
an imposition. . . Grace rushed on: “What do men


know about house-keeping and children, anyhow? So
I myself wrote to Andy, and, I admit I painted the pic-
ture a bit brightly, but who wouldn’t? You have to
stand up for yourself. I made sure of the money, any-
how, by doing that, and now . . Her mouth tightened.
“And now we’re landed with an orphan girl without
a penny to her name.’’
Delphine was appalled, and yet, deep down, curiously
gratified.
“Send her to Borrowdale,” she suggested disdainfully.
“There’s heaps of Meads there, and we’re not her real
relations; you only married into the Meads.”
Her mother laughed at the trap she was in—a bitter
laugh.
“Fine idea, isn’t it?” she asked. “I keep an evacuee
a secret for over a year while I collect three guineas,
but when it stops I send her off . . . and the whole of
the district would chatter, and know all about our life
here. You don’t think I’d advertise our failure, do you?
At Borrowdale they think us comfortably off, with a flat
in the city and a shack by the river. ... A shack says
it,” Grace added.
Delphine’s face was a study.
“Is that why you didn’t let her go on holidays to
Borrowdale, or tell even your sisters that you had her
here?”
“Well, children tittle-tattle, don’t they?” came curtly.
“And besides . . .” She stopped, sniffing herself to silence.
One of the Mead families might have kept her, with
that old Grandfather Mead such a power in the district.
The child belonged to the Meads. One revelation about
the way she had been neglected, and old Mr Mead
wouldn’t hesitate, with Jack and Andy the sons of
Grandfather Mead’s own cousin, and the two old men
thick as thieves all their lives—until the brothers’ father
died ten years ago.


The child Grace had schemed and plotted to keep a
secret at the Cove, with her three guineas weekly, was
now a burden the woman could not shift, without pay-
ing for that meanness by having the whole of Borrow-
dale aware of the position—and the gossips, she knew,
would flay her alive.
Christine began to wonder why Aunt Grace picked so
much, always scolding, smacking, finding fault! She cut
off an inch of candle at a time, and Christine needed
new shoes again, for the back road was hard on footwear.
“New shoes!” the woman sniffed. “Perhaps you’ll tell
me where the money’s coming from to buy them with?”
The child stood aghast, understanding everything,
and suddenly she felt dreadfully frightened and alone.
Christine could not even try to write more pars and
poems. The words wouldn’t bubble up in her brain.
She was face to face with a startling reality, and some
of her childhood blitheness died. Joe understood. She
had lost faith in the adult world, and that was bad,
for the ground now must seem insecure beneath her
feet, and her heart must turn cold in fear if she ever
thought ahead. . . . Children didn’t think far ahead, he
realized; they just dealt with one day at a time.
Joe himself did not know that he alone kept one
glimmer of faith glowing in her poor little desolated
soul. She clung to every hopeful word he uttered as
though she clung to life itself. Andy Mead, Joe said,
knew how to take care of himself, and didn’t he talk
French like a Frenchman? He could easily pass himself
off as one, until the chance came to escape. As a French-
man, he wouldn’t be an alien enemy to the Nazis over-
flowing France. France hadn’t been bombed much,
either, especially Paris, which the Nazis wanted for them-
selves, it seemed.


Her wandering thoughts always turned for comfort
to the old brown house of her lonely dreams. But the
dream was smudged beneath the cruel hand of disillu-
sion, with the lamp of faith almost out. Dreams, she
said thinly, belonged to infancy. It was time she stopped
dreaming of old brown houses and little Sair-Ann grown
up, because, where were they now?
“But, lassie, that fine father of yours wouldn’t have
filled a mite of a girl’s head up with a lot of fibs.”
There was a new steadiness in her clear green eyes; a
new wounded droop to her mouth.
“No, he wouldn’t fib, or deceive me,” she said, catch-
ing her breath in the pitiful habit she now had when
talking of the Certain Gentleman. “The old brown
house was founded on fact, of course—like my stories
about the Stillwells. There are Stillwells. They have a
house. And when I’m old, perhaps, with daughters of
my own, I’ll feel quite truthful and good when telling
them stories about the Stillwells and their bungalow. My
daughters would listen like I listened to Dad at Wild-
wood. But, say one of my daughters was placed like
me? Say she started looking for the Stillwells grown up?
It would be only a dream, founded on fact, and she’d
never find the Stillwells while life lasted.” She hesitated
for a moment, then looked out over the sleepy river.
“I read in a book that you grow up, whatever age you
are, when you stop dreaming dreams. . . . Day-dreaming,
I mean, so perhaps I’ve grown up too soon, before my
shape grew up.”
“That was a silly book,” Joe said crossly, shoving at
his tea-cup as if he didn’t like it any more. “What is
day-dreaming, I’d like to know! Imagination, isn’t it!
Day-dreaming without doing anything about it isn’t very
sensible, but there never was a castle built without it
being first built in the air. There wasn’t any boat built,
either, without someone saw it sailing first in mind.


Dreaming sends medical folk out into dangerous jungles
to find out what makes germs give fevers to people.
Dreams plan stories, lassie, that some day get printed
in books—as you ought to know, my wordl Dreams make
music inside a man before it ever gets played on any
piano or violin. That’s imagination, Christine. Why,
even an old codger like me has his dreams.”
“What . . . Joe?” she asked, as he seemed shy.
“Silly old dreams, lassie, mine are—just silly old
dreams, of a little place of my own maybe, with a
garden I can tend, and perhaps someone fond of me
to take away the loneliness at night. The Goulds could
turn me out if they wanted it that way. I’d like to feel
‘one of somebody’, lassie, and that’s old Joe’s silly dream.
. . . Dreams never die, lassie, not while life exists, for
those with imaginations to make them.”
Silence fell on the shack. A vagrant breeze stole in to
shake the edges of the table-cloth. The jellyfish rocked
by, reminding her of sunken galleons.
Christine suddenly dropped her puckered face to both
quick hands, crying convulsively as if her heart must
break, while the old man sat rigid, his jaw clamped tight,
staring angrily out at the bungalow across the stream
where the “Stillwells” called to one another across their
swimming-pool.


CHAPTER IV
THE MANTLE OF CHARITY
One warm afternoon in late September, Christine sat
on the bottom step near his shack, watching Joe com-
ing back in the launch from Longbridge.
The river was so calm that the little vessel drew a
widening silver V behind it as it pop-popped towards
the Cove. He was standing up, head and shoulders
showing above the green-topped cabin. Out in the
stream, the oyster-beds showed darkly, like a grating laid
on the water. Several motionless dinghies made black
spots in the distance, where fishermen held their rods
so patiently. Christine watched the scene, noticing the
lazy bunches of sparkles moving about on the surface
of the dead-calm stream. Rivers like this one were very
beautiful, but they were land-bound, imprisoned, as she
felt, and so unlike the thundering freedom of the rest-
less sea.
Joe cupped his hands round his mouth and called,
as the little craft curved towards the boat-shed on the
Gould place:
“Syd-ney let-ter for you, Chris-teeeen.” The last syl-
lable skipped along the shore in dying echoes. A Sydney
letter? But she hadn’t sent a word in to the Club for
many empty and lonely weeks. Perhaps the Bookworm
wanted to know why, which mere thought flattered the
amateur writer into shamed alarm. A Sydney letterl


Joe was thoughtful; not for one moment would he let
her think of a letter, perhaps, from overseas.
She ran along the grass to the shelter over the slatted
floor of the boat-shed landing, taking the boat-hook he
held on to until the launch met the steps, when he
dropped the hook along a seat and handed the letter
across a narrow space of dim green water. Her peaky
face registered immediate stupefaction. Not from the
Bookworm! A schoolgirl hand! Could another Club
member have written . . . ?
Mesmerized, she opened the envelope with a quick
forefinger and pulled out several sheets of deckle-edge
note-paper with a long narrow monogram in raised
dark blue: M.D.
The letter read like this:
“No. 73,
Green Avenue,
Round Bay,
N.S.W.
“Dear Christine Mead,
“I hope you will excuse me if you are not the Chris-
tine Mead we think you are. Our mother asked me to
write, and made notes, because I am not much of a fist
at writing letters, especially to might-be cousins. And
especially as you write stories for your Career. Mine is
different.
“Well, my mother is in hospital but it was not danger-
ous although we nearly went off our Dots at first. She is
on the Mend now, and sitting up knitting (not all the
time) and Dr Franklin says, You must stay here until
you are quite alive and kicking because I know that
family of yours. He does, too.
“Well, this is what happened. Our mother has an
almost-cousin called Andy Mead. We say. Cousin Andy
for short. He is in a heroic sort of fix at the moment,
because of the fall of France, which caught him there.


This is who he is, in case you are our C.M. He ran away
at 17 from his farm at Borrowdale over the Blue Mts,
and then he got married in England and became a
widower with a baby girl who has green eyes and scarlet
hair, for he used those very words in a letter to my
mother when I was about a year old.
“We heard about Cousin Andy’s fix because one of
the Jurys in Borrowdale told someone else in confidence
that Grace Mead had said so, and it came out. But, if
you are our C.M., how the dikkens did you get out
here, that is what I want to know. It makes me wild, not
knowing things. As our Cousin Andy is a brother of
Jack Mead who has some sort of a place on your river,
we put 2 and 2 together one day.
“I forgot. We really started wondering about you
being our C.M. when my sister, Priscilla, the sentimental
one who is fair and aged 12, and reads the Bookworm
Bits, kept seeing your name, especially the flying-fox bit
which thrilled her. So one night she said, It might be
our Chris. Mead too, so Evan got thrilled and grabbed
the paper and said Heck. Then we all trouped along the
avenue to the hospital and showed Priss’s clippings to
Mother, and she looked funny and said. It might be, too.
“So Mother told me to ask you to come to tea any
Sat. or Sund. to get acquainted before other plans, as
we are almost-cousins if you are our C.M. Mother says
you could easily be because of War and Evacuees etc.
“Excuse me relating family affairs if you are not our
relation. (But we liked the Bookworm Bits in any case.)
How you do them beats me, especially the romantic
touches and bits about feelings.
“From Ann Driscoll, aged thirteen, Oct. 21st.”
Joe lost no time in entering his shack to put on his
steel-rimmed spectacles, so that he might affirm the facts
in the astonishing message coming like a bolt from the


blue. Christine was staggered. Her head reeled with a
dozen formless questions and problems while he went
slowly over the letter, murmuring, dazed, “My words"
now and again, then reading on. Then he rubbed his
chin and blinked, murmuring again, as the significance
of the missive impressed him more each moment. The
girl was dimly conscious of dismay, behind her first ex-
citement which, as she analysed the circumstances ac-
cented by the letter, began to drag her spirits down-
wards. All animation went from her with one quick sigh.
“It’s no use, Joe," came leadenly, “for she wouldn’t
let me go. And, even if she would give me the fares and
let me go, what about clothes? The only real outfit I’ve
got is over two years old—my navy serge, and it’s miles
too short and skimpy. I’m thinner, but I’m taller* and
the old crepe de Chine with the birds on is washed
almost to a shadow. I can’t visit new relations in things
run up like sacks with a hole to put my head through.
And look at the monogram!" A finger stained by pine-
sap pointed to that elegant M.D. “And Green Avenue
sounds nice, too, especially at Round Bay, that suburb
you told me about.”
Joe had once worked as gardener to an elderly lady
with a fine home at Round Bay, up on the Point above
the curving shores, bright with emerald lawns and
dotted by palms. He had told Christine about the naval
depot, the parks, ships clustered on moorings in the
land-end of the bay, and about the superb vistas com-
manded by the view from that old garden, over the
city, the bridge, and the harbour with its large anchored
vessels and water-traffic.
Christine’s bitter experiences of late had hardened
her courage, but she needed all her pride now, to keep
from crying in despair. Taking careful hold of her
emotions, she said levelly:


"Wanting the moon is a very silly thing when it’s right
out of reach. It’s quite nice, all the same, to have your
writing noticed, and . . . discovering almost-cousins to
correspond with. I must go now. . .
The astonished old man was left alone, to rub his
chin and wonder what had possessed her, striding off
like a soldier with her jaw set and arms swinging. She
climbed the steps deliberately, tramping along the slop-
ing paths making the zigzag pattern upwards, and did
not even glance back or wave.
Christine, in a mood of bitter recklessness, unwittingly
played into Fate’s capricious hands, when stalking into
the kitchen and slapping Ann Driscoll’s letter down on
a littered table where Grace was making a treacle pud-
ding.
At least, the child reflected, she could see for herself
that somebody respected the Bookworm Pages and didn’t
think scribbling crazyl Consoled somewhat by delivering
her silent reproach, the author trod out without a glance
backward. Grace was bored at first, until she saw the
initial, lifted the letter, and sat down with a thump to
read it. Her face blazed with the dull red of chagrin as
she sat.
Grace was a confirmed gossip. Irresistibly, in a confi-
dential letter to her sister, Clare, Grace had told of “that
Andy’s” unhappy fate. But Grace had not, even then,
admitted to having Andy’s daughter at the Cove.
After a moment’s dreadful confusion, she went out to
find Christine. She had vanished. Two hours later Grace
saw the child coming up from the river, and went to
meet her. "Now you listen to me,” Grace snapped, “and
do as I tell you. I’ve got my own good reasons for you
keeping apart from the Driscolls. You’re not to answer
that Ann Driscoll, do you hear me? I don’t want you
to.”


Christine walked past, saying as she moved on: “I have
answered. Joe has just gone over to post the letter.”
Grace stood petrified by dread.
Christine was startled sick a few weeks later, to hear
Delphine cry triumphantly:
“You needn’t talk about school in November, or the
holidays, for we won’t be at the punt school after this
month.”
The shocked girl almost asked a question, checking
herself, for she wouldn’t give the little pig the satisfac-
tion of asking more questions, however maddening it
was to remain silent. It was more maddening to watch
Delphine’s doughy face triumphant. Christine looked
airily about her as she moved away.
This empty climax, however, had robbed Delphine of
the effect she hoped for, as her cousin realized, hasten-
ing her steps. Delphine caught her up near the empty
cow-yard, where Christine turned so suddenly that the
other child had to stop dead, and so found herself at a
disadvantage. They glared at each other for several
moments, like two rigid kittens about to fight.
Christine smiled suddenly, and the smile was not a
pretty one.
‘‘How clever of you,” she said, just as she would in a
story, “to imagine me deceived by the very obvious hap-
penings of this house.” In a flash, she was her natural
self again, a white-faced little girl fencing with a worry-
ing mystery that she knew must affect her own life, too.
“We’re moving away from here, of course. We’re mov-
ing to town,” she suggested, neither questioning nor pro-
fessing ignorance.
Delphine’s trance broke.
“In a way, we are,” she said pertly, “but you’re not
going where we’re going. We’re going to live at Aunt


Lena Jury’s house. Her husband was a builder and con-
tractor. They’ve got a hot-water service. He died last
year and she’s lonely, so we’re going there to live until
Dad comes back from the war. We don’t have to pay
anything, either, so well have Daddy’s allowance for
clothes and going out. But you’re going somewhere else.
My Aunt Clare in Borrowdale wrote and told Mummy
about Aunt Jury, so we grabbed the chance, but you’re
going somewhere else.”
Fear beat its black wings round Christine’s head for a
moment, scattering her wits. Then calm came, and a
dreadful sense of despair. “I don’t know ... I don’t
know . . .” the dazed girl said, wondering and desperate.
“I don’t know.”
Where could she be sent next? What else was there for
unwanted girls—for orphans, she added, wincing, for it
looked like that—where else was there, but Homes?
“For it’s no use saying it can’t happen to me. It does
to other girls.”
She fretted herself almost ill for two days, refusing her
food, avoiding Joe, brooding and agonizing like a
hunted thing, hiding behind the cow-shed after school,
flayed alive by her imagination at night when the light
was out. Oh, what was it—that dreadfulness that seized
children’s lives and thrust them aside like a big hand
brushing crumbs from a table? “I want ... I want . . .”
What did she want? It was a mirage the child yearned
for—a mirage made up vaguely by the Stillwells, Wild-
wood, and the loving face of little lost Sair-Ann, against
a background vivid with sea-colours, sweet with safety
and homeliness, where sea-gulls mewed and wheeled.
Instead, there would be a building filled with other
unwanteds, eating from bowls set on a clothless table,
with metal spoons dipping in, and just as many lonely
heads. Girls in dozens, not expensively dressed, laughing
and chattering at boarding-school, but in sullen dozens.


or moody dozens, all lonely and thrust aside from the
merry throng of other children; other children with
homes, mothers and fathers, and sisters and brothers and
friends.
Aunt Grace verified all Christine’s agonized fears,
when suddenly puzzling over the navy serge coat and
skirt, which was all that remained of the good clothes
purchased casually by Clare Childers over two years
ago—that, and the crepe de Chine, now so fragile that
it had to be ironed with the utmost caution. Christine
stood numb and dumb as her aunt pinned and fitted
the serge on the thin figure standing like a statue, turn-
ing when turned, staring into space and beholding
things that made her eyes dilate.
“There’s no need to look so defiant,” the woman
stated, sticking pins into her dress-front as she knelt.
“You ought to be glad to get away from here, after
the way you’ve gone on. I know I’m glad enough, any-
way,” she sniffed, trying to feel amiable now her en-
cumbrance was shifted. “And, with all that crazy scrib-
bling about imaginary girls, you ought to be glad to
have real girls round you, instead of making up a lot
of nonsense about the Stillwells. Their real name is
Johnson, if you must know.”
Even that silly dream was knocked stone-dead. Every-
thing lovely was destroyed. All whom she loved were
slowly and relentlessly being taken away—for now she
was losing old Joe. A breath swelled under Christine’s
ribs until they heaved with the terrible feeling.
“Keep still,” Grace snapped, “unless you want pins
stuck into you.”
There were pins stuck into her, but not metal pins.
A stack of Delphine’s cast-offs arrived in Christine’s
room while she sat dazed and useless in school next
day. Returning tired out by her mental torture, her head
as if stuffed tight by cotton-wool, she saw the cast-offs


on the lid of the little trunk her father had bought in
the Strand one day, then stuck with labels at Wildwood,
after driving home in the long glassed car Granny and
he hired for such London outings. Andy’s daughter
could see him with het mind’s eye, slapping the labels
on after trailing them over a red sponge in a heavy fit-
ting bowl. She could see the long french windows, the
lawn outside, and the copper-beech standing in the
middle, wth a yew-hedged behind, cut along the top
with patterns like little Christmas trees.
Delphine’s cast-offs, insultingly placed on that labelled
trunk, broke Christine’s deadness, and her eyes glinted.
And Grace jumped, a few moments later, as her niece
entered the dining-room to flop a stack of altered gar-
ments on the flap of the open machine, then stand with
her chin lifted.
“You can send me to a charity home,” Christine
flashed, “but you can’t send me there with a heap of
cast-offs in the trunk my father bought me.”
Grace’s mouth opened in her stupefaction,
Christine pointed to the clothes, her face dead-white,
a look in her eyes that Grace would never forget while
breath lasted in her body.
“Besides, I shan’t need those where you’re sending me.
I’ll have to wear uniforms like all the rest.”
“Christine . . .” came feebly, but the unconsciously
afraid sound was wasted. Her composure had lasted sd
long, but could not last longer. In her bedroom, Chris-
tine stood shaking with tearing sobs, a handful of win-
dow-curtain lifted to smother her face. Nobody—nobody
in the whole wide world—nobody at all!
Grace stirred from her stunned condition with an un-
believing expression altering her face. She was aware of
shock, and anguish, as she trod heavily to where Del-
phine huddled round a movie-magazine on the narrow
front veranda where an old stretcher stood. It was a


dark, terrifying experience for Grace Mead, to see, with
the dazzling cruelty of a lightning flash, how she had
ruined her own child.
“Didn’t you tell Christine where she was going?
Didn’t you! Didn’t you do as I said, and speak about
the Driscolls, in your own way? Didn’t you, as I said?”
Shock jerked the truth from the child suddenly sullen
with her own sort of fright. The mother moved away
with her heart like lead. Jack was right. Jack had been
right all along; it was just as he had said. Grace sighed
and moved herself as if she had been asleep, then, her
head higher, entered the little back bedroom where her
niece swung round at the window, as if to meet a
scolding.
Her aunt, however, merely sat on the bed as though
hit behind the knees.
“Sit down,” she commanded, “as I have to talk to you.
Delphine . . . Delphine misunderstood several things
I told her to tell you.”
Bewildered, the red-head sank to her bentwood chair,
one arm over the back, staring with bruised eyes at the
woman who looked peculiar, as though hooks had tugged
her cheeks downward, deepening the vertical lines bent
round her mouth. She looked sallow, too, as though she
felt sick.
Grace did feel sick, but not physically, as she entered
reluctantly into the tardy explanation that had to be
given. Moreover, she felt impelled by a strange impulse
to make up for Delphine’s cruelty. Yes, cruelty; she
might as well admit it. Nor could the girl be sent off
like a parcel, a label on one arm, a stamp on her brow;
she had to be told something.
Borrowdale was now seething with gossip, so Grace’s
sister said. One of the Driscoll children had written to a
distant cousin there, saying how Mrs Driscoll had found
Andy Mead’s little girl living at Grace Mead’s riverside


place . . . since two years or more in the past. Mrs
Driscoll had written, too, to Grace, and asked for Chris-
tine.
Grace’s sister, a happily-married woman living in the
town, had advised her sensibly, and she had literally
pounced on Aunt Lena Jury’s patronizing offer to share
her home on the “mutual basis”; and Grace knew what
that meant. Nor could she cover up her neglect of the
child by outfitting her properly at this late hour; there
was no money, and it was no use locking the stable-door
after the horse had gone.
Grace simmered in fury against Christine and old Joe,
because of a flying-fox story in the Tribune, and yet knew
herself caught up in a miserable self-made trap.
Christine sat still, even though relief poured through
her like the glow of a hot drink after being chilled. The
agonizing pictures of Homes and orphans melted, but
other pictures were taking their place, as Grace an-
nounced, with stiff kindness, that her niece was being
sent next Sunday to the Driscoll’s bungalow, at Round
Bay, where Grace hoped she “wouldn’t make a nuisance
of herself, and tittle-tattle”.
“And I think,” came awkwardly, “that they expect
me to deliver you, but there’s no need. You’re no baby.”
Her cowardly soul shrank from that duty, and she closed
her eyes to the ordeal it would mean for the girl who
had not seen the city, but for passing through one be-
wildering evening, in the dusk, more than two years ago.
The directions were simple; it wasn’t much of a jour-
ney; she wasn’t a child in arms. Electric train to the
underground station in town, a little walk, then a tram
to Round Bay!
Christine stirred from a sort of trance holding her
breathless and tense. Aunt Grace had used that letter
of Ann Driscoll’s to get rid of the human burden by
the quickest method. Christine could scarcely believe it.


Nor did it occur to her that, when once Mrs Driscoll
had made her warm-hearted offer, Grace plunged into
the arrangement with everything else thrust aside—in
the relief of seizing a life-line in a dark sea. The story
of the evacuee was already known round Borrowdale
when Grace started writing to Mrs Driscoll, explaining,
whining, excusing herself, blaming the child she had
cheated, telling of her “crazy” ways, her solitary habits,
her “degrading association with an old caretaker living
by the river”, and everything that made Grace’s position
seem good. Nor had she known that by the very com-
plaints she had penned, Mrs Driscoll had accurately
sketched a picture of Andy’s child—for Mrs Driscoll had
known Grace at Borrowdale.
“Oh,” Christine gasped suddenly, “and Mrs Driscoll
is in hospital.”
“Well, what’s so amazing about that?” Grace asked.
“The children have an aunt looking after them—even
if she is that fanciful Sophie Driscoll. Besides, Mrs
Driscoll is being taken home from hospital to-morrow.
I’ve kept in touch,” came coldly, “and you won’t upset
anything so long as you behave. The place is so over-run
with children already, that one won’t make any
difference.”
Christine bit her lower lip until it hurt. Gulping, she
said thinly that she would never hold up her head again.
Grace was quick.
“You ought to be grateful, in the circumstances, as
girls like you’re placed oughtn’t to quarrel with—”
“Charity,” Christine flashed. “Don’t mind me. Go on,
say it. I’m so used to that word now being flung at me,
that it doesn’t even hurt any more.”
The woman flinched; Delphine again! To hide her
dismay, Grace unconsciously defended her unpleasant
child, as she remarked coldly:
“Well, facts are facts, and if you’re sq used to the idea.


what difference is there between charity here and charity
there?”
“Because . . The bewildered little mortal caught her
breath on the problem of ethics and codes, feeling her
brain spinning.
Pity again struck her aunt.
“Now, don’t be a silly girl and make things worse for
yourself,” she advised. “Nor will you feel ashamed of
not being fancifully dressed, with people who aren’t
well-off themselves. My sister told me all about Mrs
Driscoll since she lost her husband three or four years
back, and she can’t be anything but poor, unless her
father gives her a hand, but the Meads are funny that
way, and while Grandfather Mead keeps an eye on his
own, he doesn’t encourage dependence. All the Meads
are proud.”
“Grandfather Mead!” Christine whispered, incred-
ulous. “Please, Aunt Grace, I’m sorry if I seem ungrate-
ful .. . Is Mrs Driscoll his daughter? Is Ann Driscoll
his grand-daughter?”
“Yes,” Grace admitted, staring. “Margaret Mead, she
was, before she married Francis Driscoll and set the
whole place gossiping—her being only twenty and him
a widower with two children, and years older. War-
shocked, too, and badly wounded. The other war, natur-
ally! Those stuck-up Driscolls were somebody,” Grace
sniffed, “according to their ideas, although I must say
Francis was different. He’d talk to any one, no matter
who, if he liked them, and had no patience with his
family’s high-and-mighty ways. The old lady couldn’t
forgive him for his set notions, and when he married
little Meg Mead, as people called her, well, the fat was
in the fire. Francis Driscoll’s first wife was society—a
Travers, of Craigie Station. So Meg Mead let herself in
for a nice thing, as anybody knew, with a half-sick hus-
band so much older, and two stepchildren , . . and 1


believe one of them is a problem; the girl, Joanna. She
seems to have lived with her aunt, Sophie Driscoll—
that’s the only sister of Francis and his brother Willie
—since the child was a baby. Well it takes all sorts to
make a world.”
“I wonder,” Christine thought blindly, “What they’re
thinking about me now? That’s why Ann didn’t answer,
perhaps. Aunt Grace just gave me away, like people give
kittens away when they move. And I haven’t a penny to
buy a thing I want—not even shoe-laces. It will all fall
on poor Mrs Driscoll. Oh! How will I bear to knock
at their door?”
Another thought struck her like a spear.
“Aunt Grace, please wait a moment,” the frantic girl
cried as the woman made for the door, her gossiping
finished. “Aunt Grace, has Mrs Driscoll two Christian
names? One is Margaret, I know, but perhaps she has
another . . . another one. A name beginning with S . . .
perhaps?”
Grace stared in impatience.
“No, she hasn’t, for I happen to know that. Nor have
many of the Meads two names. Your father hasn’t, nor
your uncle. What has that got to do with it all?”
“I thought ... I wondered whether Mrs Driscoll’s
other name, if she had one, might have been Sair-Ann.”
Grace was neither wise nor sympathetic enough to
attribute Christine’s drenched look to some youthful
dream and its yearning.
“The only Sair-Ann I ever knew of,” came briskly,
“and her name was really Sarah-Ann, of course, was old
Aunt Sair-Ann, as they called her, who died at the age
of ninety with every tooth in her head and doing her
own housework to the last ... Now is there anything
else you want of me, as I've enough to do without
standing here gossiping.”
“No, thank you,” was the quiet answer, as Christine


turned her back on the woman who had such a genius
for hurting. The girl’s hands shook as she slowly drew
back the coarse unironed sheets of her narrow iron bed,
to be slept in only to-night and to-morrow night. And
then . . . ?
She wished the earth could open and swallow her
whole, but it would not be so obliging, and she knew
herself helpless. What must Ann Driscoll be thinking?


CHAPTER V
ONE STORMY NOVEMBER DAY
Ann made another violent grimace at her mother, and
stabbed a finger in the direction of the bedroom that
night to be shared with Christine Mead. The others
round the luncheon table did not see lanky Ann’s sig-
nals, so Mrs Driscoll gave a tiny flicker of her lashes, and
Ann hastily finished up her fruit.
“You, Joanna and Priscilla, can clear away to-day,”
said Meg, with a sort of smile that turns an order into
a request. “I want to attend to something with Ann in
her room.” With that, little Mrs Driscoll moved from
her chair to walk out of the room with long-legged Ann
striding after.
The fair-haired twelve-year-old, inwardly excited by
the many thrills of this week-end, and the handsome
fifteen-year-old, gipsy-dark and slightly sulky to-day,
started clearing away, while Lucy, who was only six
and had no domestic impulses, raced out with a banana
to play with the cats on the back lawn.
In Ann’s bedroom, where twin wooden beds lay
smoothly covered by patch-work quilts as reminders of
her almost-cousin’s arrival, the lanky girl propped her-
self against the centre window-sill of three casements, and
folded her arms. As Evan, her half-brother, frequently
declared, “Ann mags like a gramophone”, but, as her
mother knew, Ann could not so easily express her inner-


most feelings. She was obviously struggling now for the
right words to say and, to help her out, Meg leaned
over the dressing-table and pretended to inspect her
almond-pale complexion in the mirror. As a convalescent
newly “escaped” from hospital, she was treated very ten-
derly this week-end which, as Ann declared at lunch,
was “just stuffed full of doings”.
Aunt Sophie, to everybody's deep relief, had tele-
phoned on Friday morning for a taxi, and departed,
with her fussy luggage and characteristic collection of
futile trifles, leaving big Joanna fuming because she had
been left behind.
That self-inspired action on Aunt Sophie’s part had
left the coast clear for Meg’s home-coming next day. On
Saturday afternoon she had entered the home she had
not seen for over four months, with Grandfather holding
her arm in case her shaky legs gave way. Meg, however,
was less shaky than she seemed, for inside ten minutes
a new atmosphere had stolen through the rooms. Ann
had exclaimed loudly in her alarm, for she had turned
the invalid’s bed back, and the invalid had flatly refused
to obey the suggestion, saying she had endured quite
enough cosseting and bossing to last her a life-time, and
intended now to set her house in order—which it badly
needed.
Grandfather had sat out on the back lawn for a time,
contemplating the view over the bay, and then he went
to his hotel, knowing his presence no longer required
in a house resounding to the homely din of womenfolk
on the rampage with brooms, mops, and dusters. Because
of Aunt Sophie’s peculiarities, the bungalow was upside
down and, after Meg casting one dismayed glance round
her, she hid her annoyance and said to Ann:
“Telephone the fish-shop, darling, for Mrs Riggs to
come. She half expects to, as I dropped her a line from
the hospital.”


So, leaping to obey, Ann telephoned the mysterious
fishmonger, who sent his small boy down a lane and
located Mrs Riggs. She had arrived panting and over-
joyed a half-hour later to give the house a “real good
do-out”, and the girls had set about fussing their mother
into drinking tea on the front porch, while Lucy gal-
loped round the back lawn astride a broom, to release
some of her pent-up emotions.
Now, to-day, Christine was to arrive at any time after
three. Not only that, but a big storm was turning the
sky into a sombre cauldron, and the whole house was
churned up by another excitement, for the Driscolls were
shortly moving, and that upset in itself was enough to
turn every one slightly crazy, at least inside.
Ann cast the thought of moving from her to deal
with another thought, much more urgent, and which
for days had made her very uneasy.
“Well,” she exclaimed, as if mother had been demand-
ing instead of expecting confidences, “you see, Chris-
tine sort of belongs to me. I don’t mean I own her, or
anything silly like that, but she’s going to share this
room while we’re here, and we’re the same age all but
a week. That makes a sort of link. And then, I’m spiritu-
ally linked, because . . . well, our Careers. And say it
doesn’t work? I mean, say we don’t get on? You can’t
make yourself like people if you don’t, and I’m . . .
I’m . . .” Ann was vexed by her own stumbling explana-
tion, and stopped.
The little lady in a soft dusty-pink frock, that hung
too loosely on her very slim figure, now seemed con-
cerned by the arrangement of the dressing-table articles.
“Are you afraid of Christine’s nature, or ... of your
own?” she asked, moving a hair-brush a tenth of an inch.
“Me, of course,” came candidly, for now Ann had
her opening. She pulled the curtains round her face like
a shawl and held the ends under her chin—managing to


look, thought her mother, peeping into the mirror, like
a very sun-tanned, young, and anxious Aunt Sair-Ann
Mead. “Of me,” came with emphasis, as the curtains flew
apart again, leaving Ann’s shaggy dark hair in its usual
condition, which sometimes made her mother think of
a black chrysanthemum on a very active stem.
“If I like anybody,” the slaty-eyed girl declared, “I
don’t care what or who they are, even if they burgled
and got put into jail. I’d poke buns through the bars.
I’d stick to a chum all my life, but I’ve never had a
chum, and Christine mightn’t have the makings, either.
But if I don’t like her, not all the king’s horses and all
the king’s men could ever alter me. So it’s got me wor-
ried. And sharing a room is no joke. It divides your
secret feelings into bits and makes you feel scattered.
So, what am I, Mother, pig-headed or just a bit too
particular? I had insomnia until twelve last night,
imagining the most awful Christines, and every one was
worse than the last.”
“Perhaps,” Meg said, turning to lean against the dress-
ing-table, now the ice was broken, “poor Christine has
insomnia, imagining dozens of Anns—and Priscillas, and
everything else in this house which must terrify her at
the very thought of coming like a little ghost from Black-
fish Cove. Surely that wretched Grace Mead will deliver
the ooor little soul. What a time she’s had!”
x
Ann gulped, and knew this feeling was not sentimental,
but richer, and deeper.
“Yes, I know,” she jerked, “and you and Grandfather
know more than you told us, .too. You wouldn’t say
‘that wretched’ any one without plenty of reasons.
Mother, what is Grace Mead like?”
For one instant only, Ann’s sharp eyes detected a
flicker of angry indignation in her mother’s grey glance,
but it went like a lightning flash.
“Grace Mead, darling, is a pitiable soul, so let’s for-


get her, and deal with the nice little girl she cheated so
badly . . . Now, you’re afraid of your pig-headed antipa-
thies? Is that it?”
Meg smiled as the eldest of her three daughters blinked
and looked uncomfortable. “Well,” said Meg, nodding,
“I don’t think you have very much cause for dread.
Christine is a sensitive, intelligent, wholesome little girl,
full of imagination, with an active brain and a very deep
sense of loyalty—and a great love for life, her fellow
creatures, and the things of the earth.”
Ann was staggered. “Now, look here, Mother,” she said
dubiously, “you've never even seen her, and I can’t
imagine Grace Mead enthusing like that in her letters,
because you know that she ran Christine down, mostly.
You didn’t go spooky or something in hospital, did
you?” came a natural query from the girl used to cinemas
and radio-plays. “You didn’t study mind-reading, or
anything weird like that, did you?”
Meg was brisk.
“It’s a wonder I didn’t study all the ’ologies, in that
maddening monotony.” Her soft laughter sounded. “All
I studied, darling, was Christine herself—through that
dignified little letter she wrote you, and her stories in
the Bookworm’s very fateful columns.”
“We-11 . . .” Ann hesitated, feeling more at ease. “You
are pretty good at human nature, I'll say that for you.”
Mrs Driscoll passed the doubtful compliment by, as her
boyish daughter meant so well. “But ... if Christine’s
a prig. Mother, for all that, or a dud, or even worse 1 I
simply couldn’t stand it, that’s all. I’d go off my dot.”
Meg understood her family.
“Then perhaps we’d better switch rooms,” she sug-
gested lightly. “Priscilla would swoon with pride at the
very thought of sharing-in with a Bookworm author.”
“But I don’t want Priscilla to have her,” came the
anticipated protest. Ann was knocking a blind-tassel


to and fro in her concern, back half to her mother. “You
know Prissl She’s an angel, but not very exciting. Be-
sides, all she really likes is sentimental stories, even
fairy-tales, and dolls . . . and even if she does only keep
them to learn to sew, I know she still likes dolls. That
doesn’t match writing for any pages. And I’m the same
age as Christine. Besides, writing is a sort of Career, al-
though I think it must be a dreamy business—writing.
I like hammering, and how does carpentering compare
with poetry full of romantic touches and all that?’’ At
last it came out, with a rush: “Toy-making might be
simply too mundane for an authoress.”
Meg, hearing a catch in the brisk young voice, said
to herself: “So that’s it—artistic pride and Careers!”
“Toy-making?” Meg appeared to dubitate for a mo-
ment. “The very thought of toy-making is fascinating,”
she announced, bringing the lanky girl round with a
jerk. “And what could be less mundane than making
toys? Why, every one of them means a hundred smiles
and lots of fun for some little person. Look at Lucy,
and the joy she got from the dolls’ house you made her.”
Ann was tense, as she said in low tones:
“I mean working-toys, enamelled, from my own de-
signs.”
“Of course,” Meg agreed, managing to give Ann an
agreeable sense of sharing in a universe of skilled toy-
makers. And then, softly: “And don’t you remember
what your father used to quote—‘Build, therefore, your
own world.’ He did, Ann; a world of simple things like
clocks, pictures, cabinets, stools and chairs and tables.
And the only world worth building is the world we
create from what we have in here,” and Meg touched
her brow, “and here,” she added, laying a hand on the
tiny silver buttons looping her frock together down the
front.
Ann nodded, inarticulate—remembering the tall, fair-


haired, gentle-souled father who had first shown her how
to hold a hammer. Meg, thinking of him also, went on:
“And little Christine, darling, with her flying-foxes, and
poems, and duck-stories, and her lonely heart which at
this moment is probably banging against her ribs, is
building for herself just the same sort of world as you’re
building for yourself—although from different materials."
It was all said, and Meg disappeared in her silent way,
leaving a comforted girl standing rigid in the stormlight
shining dully through the curtains.
Suddenly, Ann made one of her startlingly swift move-
ments and pulled open a drawer—impatiently, for it
came crookedly and she had to thrust it back and pull
again with more care. From under a stack of simple
white tub-silk underwear she drew a small object wrapped
in tissue-paper.
“I made it for her, like a sentimental idiot,” she
mumbled, “and now she’s going to get it—even if she
does think it amateur and cheap.”
Ann set a neatly shaped, very polished mulga-wood
ink-well in the very middle of the dressing-table, and
sauntered out casually, almost colliding with Priscilla in
the hall. The fair child was on her way from the bath-
room to her tiny bedroom, shared with Lucy. Priscilla
hugged herself in the heliotrope crepe cotton housecoat
her mother had made, copying a black moire one of her
own, and nodded with blue eyes happy.
“Ann, Mother says I can put on my new mauve tucked
voile. It fits to perfection. And aren’t you thrilled by her
being home, and all the rest of it?”
Ann acknowledged her own condition of thrilled
pleasure, eyeing her sister with dry tenderness.
“You and your finicking,” she scoffed. “You’d better
watch out, or you’ll get like Aunt Sophie. She’s a Dris-
coll, with blue eyes and fair hair, and she ...” A dark
nod betrayed Ann’s contemptuous amusement for Miss


Driscoll, who inspired pity and ridicule in outsiders,
as well as the girls of the bungalow.
“Oh, I will not,” Priscilla gasped, evidencing her
opinion of Aunt Sophie with one indignant gesture.
“You are a mean thing to say that to me. I’d never be
like Aunty, for I’d rather die. She makes me shrivel up
in shame when other girls say, ‘ls that your aunt?’ and
the only nice thing about her is that she’s gone away.”
It was so easy to tease gentle little Priscilla, whose
emotions were all on the surface, and whose mind was
not very deep. Ann hung on to the blue chenille hall
curtains and grinned like a boy. “You never know,” she
said warningly, while her sister’s cheeks dyed pink and
her blue eyes widened in dismay. Nobody ever took them
for sisters—the piquant little girl who looked as though
she had come to life from a painting on a Fragonard
fan, and her matter-of-fact companion, with her shaggy
dark mop that never seemed tidy, shrewd slaty-grey eyes,
browned complexion, and wide generous mouth. Pris-
cilla’s hair was straight, heavily silken, worn in a page’s
bob with a shining fringe curving over her broad white
brow. Ann liked wearing whatever went on easiest, and
longed to be allowed to go round in slacks and coloured
sports-shirts; Priscilla fussed and fumed over her frilly
dresses, and made herself an array of hangers charac-
terized by gathers, gold lace, and little bags of lavender
from Grandfather’s farm garden. Ann hammered in the
garage—once her dead father’s favourite work-corner at
home—while Priscilla sighed over romances, secretly
changed her dolls’ clothes, and dreamed of growing up
and going to parties with long frocks swishing round
her high-heeled shoes.
“I’ll never get like Aunty,” she stared, smiling slowly,
as Ann winked. “Oh, you pulled my leg again,” said
the younger girl, who had not a tinge of malice or re-
sentment in her delicate make-up. “But, Ann, apart from


all that, you’re not going to wear that skirt and blouse
with Christine coming, are you?”
Ann looked down in approval on her gathered cotton
skirt with the navy and white swirls, and plucked com-
placently at the front of her skimpy muslin blouse.
“What’s wrong with them?” she asked. “If Christine
doesn’t like me with these on, she can do the other
thing.”
“It’s for your own self-respect,” came the shocked mur-
mur. Ann’s disregard for her appearance was one of
Priscilla’s few griefs, but she knew Mother wouldn’t
interfere, because Meg had a subtle habit of leaving in-
dividualism to develop along its own lines—come what
may, with limitations. “We have to make a proper im-
pression,” said Priscilla.
“You can do that for the lot of us, Aunt Sophie ,” said
Ann, thrusting herself forward by swinging on the cur-
tains and disappearing as she swung back—to stride out
through the back of the house and let the wire door slam
behind her heels—in canvas sandals minus stockings.
“She’s dreadful,” Priscilla’s murmured, and went into
her bedroom to make herself very beautiful for Chris-
tine’s benefit.
Grace Mead was slightly mistaken when telling Christine
that the Driscoll children had been looked after by their
aunt, Sophie Driscoll. Sophie Driscoll was incapable of
“looking after” any one—even herself. Her acquaint-
ances (who could not be called friends) referred to her
with a mingling of exasperation, amusement, and pity.
The kindest and wisest of people would find it very
hard to tolerate her. And, with the natural shrewdness
of children, the young folk at Round Bay were not taken
in for a moment by her surface show of gushing affection.
Meg possessed a sense of humour and the finest of all


human qualities—tolerance; and so she was able to read
Aunt Sophie like a book, while remaining quite calm in
the face of the older woman’s capricious selfishness and
utter disregard for the feelings of others. Moreover,
Sophie was, with all her blemishes, the only sister of
Francis Driscoll, whom Meg had respected and adored.
Nor did she criticize him for his blindness to his sister’s
real nature. Francis, with his gentle mind and bland out-
look, could not even see the faults in other people.
“We are all cogs in the machinery of life,’’ he was
fond of saying.
She had been pretty as a girl, in a fair, insipid, help-
less fashion—the sort of girl who clung to her father’s
arm and squealed if a horse became frisky, or pretended
a lively terror of mice, and who, at the slightest provo-
cation, took to her bed for days or weeks, to be waited
on and fussed over, until the mysterious malady cured
itself. She had golden curls, a kittenish face, pale blue
eyes, and a mean little mouth pursed up into scowls or
smiles. She knew nothing worth knowing, but gorged
her mind on sentimental romances of the more sickly
kind, and grew out of girlhood with the firm conviction
that all she had to do was wait, and Prince Charming
would come along.
Sophie had several proposals from the bluff sort of
ordinary suitor, who felt big and important when clung
to and looked up at with appealing blue eyes, but these
real specimens did not match her dream suitor, so she
drifted into middle-age as a single woman. The ravages
of Time had laid waste Sophie’s girlish prettiness just
as it does to all who grow old, but while other women
grew old beautifully, with dignity and grace, Sophie
became more helpless, more simpering, less intelligent,
and went on to her fifties in an instinctive determina-
tion to cheat Time and age. That was the chief cause of


the ridicule and pity she aroused in so many people,
who were often ashamed of these emotions.
She tinted her face, gilded her curls, dieted to save
her already thin figure, and wore the soft pastel shades
of girlhood, with chalky white veils in summer to screen
the white-washed effect of her withered skin. She
squeezed her feet into high-heeled shoes, had her eye-
brows removed and placed higher up, smeared costly
rouge on the whitewash, and disguised her thin nfcck
with layers of lacy scarves or collars of soft fur. At
fifty, the poor silly woman was a living tragedy—a mental
child in the shape of an elderly woman.
If her irresponsibility had ended in her own apart-
ments where she muddled and destroyed and wasted,
nobody would have done more than pity her, but the
ruin of a child’s true nature was another matter, and an
unconsciously criminal offence. Sophie had taken Joanna
into her so-called guardianship when the child was six
months old. Francis Driscoll was a lonely, tired, and
very worried widower then, his first wife not long gone,
the bungalow comfortless in the efficient, but inhuman
control of a housekeeper. He had two children—quiet
little Evan, under two years old, and Joanna, a tempes-
tuous little bundle of frills and wilfulness.
Francis was still suffering, as he would while his life
lasted, from the shattering effects of his four years at the
last world war. His mother wrote testily and asked him
to come home and live, but this reopened an old differ-
ence of opinion, for she was a snobbish, masterful, money-
proud woman who had already driven her older son from
her by those unendurable qualities. She had never quite
forgiven Francis for sharing William’s ideas on inde-
pendence, but while Willie went to a nearby farm as her
neighbour, maintaining a certain social dignity, Francis
had shamed the family name—as the misguided woman


regarded it—by opening a "second-hand shop" at Round
Bay,
Mrs Driscoll Senior had never beheld the shop. It was
actually a dignified place of business, artistically lighted,
tastefully arrayed, with the singular beauty and charm
provided by valuable antiques and objects of art. Fran-
cis’s hobby had always been antiques, and from them
he had slowly built the business, achieving his inde-
pendence in the only way he knew. His first wife had
been a sportswoman, even though wilful and selfish, and
it was Fern, the only daughter of the Travers of Craigie
Station, who finally soothed her mother-in-law’s ob-
jections.
"Let Fran alone, Ma, do," Fern had suggested in her
high-handed manner. "You can’t move him; those quiet
ones are all alike, and I like him for standing on his
own feet instead of being molly-coddled and sugar-fed
at home by you. I hate the bungalow, but so long as I
can drive home, here to you, and to my parents, once in
a while, to ride and have fun, I can stand the shop and
the bungalow. So be a pet and forget it.”
It had been Fern’s unhappy fate, when trying to break
an almost unbreakable horse, on her parents’ station, to
have her wilful restlessness stilled for ever.
Sophie was a very bored woman and, after the shock
had softened, she turned up at the bungalow one day.
"Leave the wretched shop with the manager,” she cried
in her thin tones. "Leave Evan with the housekeeper,
and I’ll take little Josie, the dear sweet pet ... Visit
Ma, and see Willie, and have a rest in the country. Do
you want to make orphans of your pigeon pair?”
And, on such small hinges do the doors of Destiny
turn, Francis spent a holiday at Borrowdale, re-meeting
little Meg Mead, and marrying her soon after. As the
couple travelled citywards, her heart was full of loving
plans for Francis and his babies, leaving Borrowdale


simmering with gossip. Old Mrs Driscoll was not at the
wedding; she was indisposed, she said, but everybody
knew of her dogged obsession against farms and farmers.
This complex was as violent as it was unreasonable, but
she regarded the homestead as a “station”, which was
socially very different from a farm. This annoyed Willie
and worried Francis.
Little Evan loved his stepmother from the first. The
housekeeper departed and the bungalow became a home.
Joanna, however, was missing. Sophie had taken the
baby visiting in Brisbane. She had a new “pet” she en-
joyed displaying, and meant to keep her pet so long as
it pleased her. When she could “borrow” enough from
her mother or. Willie, she rented a flat, and when in a
muddle she stayed with “friends”. Her income was very
small; a legacy from her father. And when friends and
money both failed her, she made use of the family at the
bungalow. Meg was not deceived, knowing that under
Sophie’s gush she detested her, but the poor creature was
Fran’s sister, and there was Joanna. For little Josie’s
sake, Meg endured Sophie’s visits, the first one coincid-
ing with her return, with Josie, from Queensland, for
Sophie was again in financial straits.
Very quietly, Meg asked for Joanna, for the bungalow
was her rightful home, with her brother. Francis agreed
with his wife’s responsible anxiety, but he honestly saw
his sister as a lonely woman. She translated Meg’s re-
quest into an insult, and—moneyed again—went off in
a huff to Borrowdale, taking Josie to “see her granny”,
which was such a reasonable notion that Meg was
frustrated.
Old Mrs Driscoll was failing rapidly now. Her ani-
mosity towards her younger son had long since perished,
leaving her dryly proud of his independent stand. But,
with Sophie’s complaints at work on the old lady’s dim-
ming mind, she whipped up her former indignation and


remade her will. That she repented immediately after
Sophie left for town was significant. It was too late.
Willie arrived in time to hear his mother’s sorry story
and then she died.
Sophie received the Driscoll money, mostly in invest-
ments; Willie had the homestead and land, but Francis
was bequeathed—a second-hand shop dealer—the con-
tents of his boyhood home; cedar, mahogany, silver,
hangings, carpets, and everything from piano to kettles.
The rebuff hit him like a whip-lash. Hiding his pain,
he said to Meg:
“She had no idea of what she was doing, Meg. Her
mind was dulling. I shan’t use them as required; the
things of my boyhood home will help make a similar
home for our children when we get on to our feet. The
Driscoll things can be stored behind the shop until that
time.” Nor did he suspect—nor would he have credited
it—the mischief created by his sister, whose simpering
and curls prevented him from beholding the meanness
and malice behind them. But Willie knew!
Meg had two babies of her own by this time—little
definite-minded Ann, dark-haired, independent, slaty-
eyed and frank, and dainty Priscilla, whom Evan cher-
ished as if she were made of fragile porcelain.
Sophie held on to Joanna, inventing excuse after ex-
cuse, breaking promise after promise, and cunningly ask-
ing her brother why he proposed adding to Meg’s already
heavy burdens, with a servantless house, slender means,
and three children already to wear her life to a shadow.
He had been brought up in a home where servants were
indispensible, and grieved at Meg’s weight of toil and
responsibility. That she laughed his worries away was
to no avail, and Joanna stayed on “a little longer”, with
Sophie. “And she is a very lonely woman, Meg,” Francis
suggested, and Meg had not the heart, nor the malice,


to describe Sophie’s loneliness as a self-chosen, appre-
ciated selfishness.
The children exchanged uneasy visits, their natures
clashing inevitably, for Joanna was becoming a stagy-
looking show-off, a precocious little mortal alternately
sullen, self-conscious, and arrogant. She was a Travers-
Driscoll, and her mother had been Fern Travers, of
Craigie Station. Their mother was only a farm-bred
Mead, and they kept a vulgar second-hand shop. The
Driscolls were founded on an early-day aristocrat who
sailed from ancestral England with his young wife, much
money, lots of fine furniture; and the Meads only had
farms.
Lucy, Meg’s third baby, was two years old when her
father died. The shadow, for so long darkening his life,
had drifted downward, leaving a home stricken and awed
in the lonely emptiness of any home to which that
sorrow comes.
It took a long time for the family to pick up dropped
threads and go on living normally. Evan was studying to
pass on into High School; Ann was developing her
talent for handling woods and tools, her heart aching
for the gentle presence missing from the work-room
garage; and Priscilla added to her doll-family, while
Lucy started mispronouncing the big words her sisters
used, and thought of kindergarten.
Christine Mead’s name often sounded in the bunga-
low. It was interesting to have an almost-cousin in
England, especially with such a romantic father as she
possessed. Cousin Andy had written years ago to tell
Meg about his daughter with the “green eyes and scarlet
hair’’, which Evan said sounded more like a Stop and
Go sign than a daughter. Then Andy wrote again, soon
after, the letter depressed and laden with grief—followed
by silence.
Joanna happened to be visiting the bungalow when


Priscilla had her famous brain-wave, and beheld sig-
nificance in “Christine Mead” decorating the Bookworm
Pages of the Tribune. Showy Joanna had frequently
heard about the English-born Mead girl. Priscilla and
Ann, in defending their home and dignity against their
half-sister’s attacks, had not been averse to reminding
Jo that 'all the Meads weren’t farmers. What about
Christine Mead and her father, living as they did! Pooh,
said Joanna, that was nothing. It was so, Priscilla cried
frequently, for Andy Mead was distinguished, and that
mattered more than just flinging cash about.
Meg had just gone to the hospital, along the avenue,
for her operation and long convalescence, when Joanna
arrived, sulky and annoyed, with her aunt. Sophie had
once again become financially entangled and, while wait-
ing for Mr Metcalfe to exert his legal brain on her
behalf, and realize on some shares, Sophie had to wait.
So, by the very simple expedient of just walking in, she
arrived with Jo to stay a while. The visit lasted, insofar
as Sophie was concerned, almost four months, but it
could not be said with any truth that she looked after
the children. Nor was she often at home, and Joanna
went about with her. But Sophie departed in a taxi on
the Friday before Meg came home, leaving Joanna be-
hind, fuming.
The lawyer, who occasionally tore his hair over his
maddening and utterly witless client, produced sufficient
funds for her to go on an economical visit to Brisbane,
where she had friends, who regarded themselves as such
only while she paid heavily for that imaginary privilege.
Joanna had never before stayed longer than a week
or a fortnight in the bungalow, and, after four months
there—but under Aunty’s control—the big girl had had
enough. Visualizing a number of incredible glories in
Brisbane, she made a scene with her aunt before she left,
but when Sophie’s pocket had power over her whims.


she was like rock. So she jingled off and left Jo with her
family, which, when Sophie was offended, became “those
step-relations of yours”.
Joanna’s bewilderment changed to resentment, but as
her merry-go-round existence had not yet taught her to
think, she turned the feeling on the family. Dull, stodgy,
monotonous life they lived! She was different. And so
she brooded, destroying her happiness as surely as if
happiness were tinsel trodden underfoot.
Although she gloried in swimming, diving, and surf-
ing, her strong young body exultant, Jo believed the
country boring and devoid of interest, and, as if it were
not bad enough to be moving with the stodgy family,
that up-start Christine Mead had to be tacked on. A
governess, mind you, and an English county home, for
a Mead. It was intolerable to Joanna, a Travers-Driscoll,
who had not travelled much at all, and lived in flats or
a bungalow.
To be sure, it was a sort of relief to know that Chris-
tine had been taken down a peg by living with that
Grace Mead in the Longbridge shanty, but . . .
“Well,” the deluded girl fumed, attiring herself in
an expensive outfit, “I’ll show Miss Wildwood that at
least one girl in this rotten house knows her way about!”


CHAPTER VI
THE ALMOST-COUSINS MEET
While the Driscolls made their individual preparations
for the almost-cousin’s arrival at the bungalow, Chris-
tine moved like a shabby young ghost through the false
twilight of the looming storm.
Outwardly, she was a dignified little copper-haired
girl proudly indifferent to her shamefully hot garments
for such a humid day, looking about her at the numbers
on the gates of the new and old buildings showing
glimpses of the bay between. She carried a heavy, but
small suitcase in one ungloved hand, and the other was
tightly clenched—a mortified young pilgrim treading
courageously towards the worst ordeal of her short ex-
istence. She had one comfort, and it braced her a little;
to the last, she had spurned Delphine’s cast-offs.
There had been ructions to the last, also, as Grace
Mead had wanted her niece to present herself to the
Driscolls with a few more garments than her little suit-
case and her trunk contained.
“I won’t,” said Christine, ending the matter. “I’ll keep
that much respect, and why shouldn’t Mrs Driscoll see
how you treated and cheated me? That’s justice. She
won’t be silly, or blind, even if she is just free from
hospital; she’ll read everything in my clothes, and that’s
one comfort.” Grace had called her niece a malicious


little spitfire, which was so far from the truth that Chris-
tine was not even hurt.
All the way in the electric train, after glimpsing the
woman for the last time on the Longbridge station, the
little girl had buoyed herself up by dwelling on the
cast-offs. Moreover, she felt that queer satisfaction we
all feel in actually voicing a timely retort instead of
thinking of it later. On the platform, with no other
figure in sight apart from a fox-terrier angrily biting
its own back, Grace had said uneasily:
“Now don’t make yourself unpopular at the Driscoll’s
by tittle-tattling.”
“You mean,” Christine had said coldly, “telling tales
on the way you live, after all your pretending. Well, I
can’t keep silent about Blackfish Cove all the rest of my
life, but I don’t sneak. That’s something else I didn’t
take from Delphine—as well as the cast-offs.”
Remembering that haughty speech, and its effect on
the scarlet-faced woman, quietened even Christine’s ter-
rible feeling of having deserted her only friend, darling
old Joe. It churned her feelings up, just as the sky was
churning up, to recall the sad picture he had made,
standing with one arm lifted, in the doorway of his
shack, as Grace sped the popping motor launch across
the oily river, dull in stormlight, evilly suggestive of
sharks, to the imaginative girl who, ever since old Joe
had stopped her from diving into the river long ago,
had shuddered at the memory. At the time, with the
sunlight and the shack, the tea and the surprise of meet-
ing the dear old man, she had not felt the scar laid on
her subconscious by the shock which, as time went on,
had haunted her dreams. Never before had the river
seemed so eloquent of sharks, as this steamy, stormy,
brooding day with all the earth crouching before the
thundering of Thor’s gigantic hammers in the sky.
Trudging down the avenue, Christine still thought of


old Joe, while her eyes noticed the strange darkness in
the air, and the plane-trees growing in asphalt, the
shadows under their leaves like dusk on the river. “And
the way I’ve lived for two whole years! I’m old-fashioned,
dowdy, and conspicuous.”
Her face set; she had, at least, escaped from the Cove.
Unaware of it, the spirit of adventure, that was part of
her father, was stirring in her. She shook inwardly,
however, as the street numbers added up to fifty-three.
Number seventy-three, the Driscoll’s place was, as Ann s
letter had shown; in the cul-de-sac. Aunt Grace had said,
giving additional directions to the girl she was too
cowardly to deliver.
Nor did Christine want to be delivered; if she had to
go knocking at a strange relation’s door, like a charity
girl arriving to be fed and clothed and housed, then she
much preferred to tackle the awfulness without Aunt
Grace watching, to turn an ordeal into an exhibition.
The thunder was loud now, shaking the air, as thick
as soup. Christine trickled with nervous tension and
heat. The suitcase carried four diaries, as well as the
crepe de Chine and some things for the night. Oh, that
sea of faces waiting at the bungalow, which Aunt Grace
had said was a little place that was bound to be shabby
and shoddy. Well, what if it was, Christine asked her-
self; Mrs Driscoll, anyway, was a Mead. The girl stood
still, an unconsciously picturesque little figure with black
tape garters cutting her legs below a too-short let-down
serge skirt in weather crying out for voiles and muslins.
Over a gate she beheld the bay, curiously still, the water
a dark peacock green with every small boat sinister in
the storm-light. Suddenly, she held her breath, for the
boats near the park were rocking madly as if in an
earthquake; a giant sound was whoo-ing in the distance,
and the green water was ploughing up into flying little
waves.


The wind struck her like a sheet of whirling tin, al-
most knocking her breathless. Clutching the basin-
shaped felt hat with one hand, the suitcase swinging
in the other, she ran, her black-covered legs racing
towards the dead-end of the avenue. Thunder and rain
and wind made turmoil that scattered her senses. Spray
beat up from the hot roadway with the steam it made.
She was now wet with rain as well as perspiration, and
startled out of her agony at facing the strange Driscolls.
Suddenly, in spite of the primitive alarm made by
the violent tropical storm beating out of the sky so
abruptly, she stopped dead, staring in a fluster, for
number seventy-three was a nice place, with palms on
the lawn, and blue cane stuff on the porch. But it was
seventy-three. An explosion of lightning and a terrible
clap of thunder sent her flying along the path, the gate
slamming shut, for there was nothing else in the world,
for the moment, but a round brass bell on a dark front
door.
The bell was twisted so frantically that the sound cut
through her instinctive terror, with the lightning dart-
ing at her heels and, sick with dismay, she just had
time to think: “How awful, with an invalid in bed,"
and the front door opened to reveal two figures against
the queer glow of electric light in day-time.
One figure drew her in, as another thunder-clap
drowned all efforts to speak, and the other figure pressed
against the door, wrestling with the wind. The dazed
new arrival knew the door had clicked shut, and that
was all. She stood petrified, trickling, and very, very still.
Joanna, startled into naturalness, flew down the hall with
the wet suitcase taken unaware from Christine’s nerve-
less fingers. Ann was bolting from room to room, closing
the windows in a mad rush to defeat the driving rain,


descending now in such torrents that the panes ran and
the side fences were almost obscured.
Meg knew it was utterly impossible to treat this inci-
dent conventionally, so placed a comforting arm across
the bewildered new arrival’s back and steered her into
the sitting-room. Christine’s mind received a blurred
impression of pale upholstery, books behind glass doors,
Iceland poppies, and young faces, in the novel radiance
of electric lamps with parchment shades.
Meg was angry in a way she could not master for a
moment, at the wicked outfit Grace Mead had placed on
Andy’s daughter for her difficult adventure this stormy
day. Her poor little stricken face betrayed her misery;
it was deathly pale and wet with rain and heat, Meg
knew how the adolescent girl suffers in humiliation,
and had no need to overwork her imagination in under-
standing Christine’s emotions, as she fought for com-
posure with lips quivering and green eyes proudly
ashamed. That felt hat—and a felt hat, on a day like
this I Coarse black stockings twisted round her skinny
legs, and was it black tape serving as garters below the
hem of the let-down skirt? And a pitiful scrap of ribbon
tied in a rakish little bow beneath the collar of a rub-
bishly fugi blouse! Meg’s heart opened wide to Andy’s
daughter in that one moment of indignant under-
standing.
Christine’s ringing ears heard:
“This is Lucy,” as a solid little honest-faced girl with
a straight dark bob rose from a hassock, dropping a big
tabby-cat to the carpet. The cat made Christine start
as it flew past her and, forgetting her manners, the little
girl set forth in pursuit, crying: “Trilby, you nuisance.”
Meg was speaking again, and Christine moved her
dazed eyes to a bewitching little fair-haired girl, a fringe
curved over her brow, rising, like a blushing naiad in
mauve, from behind the big chesterfield! Priscilla! The


fair one who was sentimental and read the Bookworm’s
Pages. Christine’s heart leaped. This girl was the one
who had blindly worked the embarrassing miracle re-
moving her from Blackfish Cove.
“Please excuse me,” Priscilla stammered, standing like
an alderman about to deliver a speech from behind a
table, “but that big thunder-clap ... I hid down here . . .
Excuse me, Christine.” And she climbed over the ches-
terfield with a flash of slim bare white legs and mauve
canvas sandals, sitting down decorously, her face pink
and confused.
Joanna was back, after her impulsive rush down the
hall with the suitcase. She had switched on the reading-
lamp in Ann’s bedroom, setting the valise by the win-
dows. Jo was utterly confused by Christine’s appearance.
The dark-eyed girl had been taught by her aunt to judge
people by their externals, but she recognized quality
when she saw it, even though her mind rebelled against
acknowledging the fact. She was furious to hear herself
stammering when speaking to Christine. Jo’s startled
mind cried out:
“She’s aristocratic even in that rig-out.” And Joanna
subsided into a corner like an offended tiger-cub, to deal
with the problem of the newcomer’s upsetting per-
sonality.
Meg was covertly watching Ann, in the doorway. The
lanky girl with the shaggy dark hair stood with hands
under elbows, surveying Christine sideways, taking in
everything about her—chivalrously. Meg was familiar
with the expression adorning Ann’s dogged features. It
was the look she wore when pouncing on an urchin
for stoning a cat. Suddenly she dropped her arms and
moved across the room.
“I’m Ann,” came briskly, and her mother released a
sigh of relief. “I wrote you that terrible letter. I nearly
went off my dot doing it. I’m not like you—handy with


a pen. Excuse me if I go now and put the kettle on . .
Green eyes, defiant and ashamed, clashed glances with
slaty eyes, friendly and challenging. Then Ann’s wide
mouth flickered to a boyish quirk and one hand shot out.
“Hullo,” she said, squeezing Christine’s fingers unmerci-
fully, and fled.
The girl who by now was beginning to feel like Alice-
through-the-looking-glass, turned slowly as if on a pivot
and looked at the pretty, pretty aunt standing there,
smiling in a way that made Christine want to cry. The
aunt’s hair was dark, like the raven’s wing, with little
knobs from ear to ear behind. Her face was almond-
pale and very sweet. “That fanciful Sophie,” Christine
heard her mind cry out indignantly. Fancifull Her soft
dark pink frock with the little silver buttons and belt
made of silvery kid leaves was simply beautiful, and so
was her expression. Aunt Grace was wrong about every-
thing.
Before Meg could speak, the bewildered little person
remembered, saying quickly:
“I do hope I didn’t disturb Mrs Driscoll, dashing in
like I did and trilling the bell enough to wake any one
asleep ... It was the storm,” the speaker added, in her
anxiety to explain. “I wouldn’t have disturbed her for
anything . . . not for worlds, because invalids in bed
hear noises much worse than the ones who make them.
I feel terrible.”
Priscilla was staring with lips parted, and Joanna had
forgotten herself for a moment, in surprise. The kid
made Meg seem as if she wasn’t there, a weird sort of
feeling.
“But, Christine,” Meg said, feeling slightly “weird”
herself, and laying one white hand on the silver frock-
buttons, “this is me, darling. I am Mrs Driscoll. Who
on earth did you think I might have been?”
“I thought you were Miss Driscoll,” Christine gasped.


She turned a hurt look on Priscilla, who had given
way to a violent giggle, earning a scowl from Aunty’s
pet in consequence.
“It’s no use,” Christine stammered, lifting her shoul-
ders and flopping her hands for a second. “I’m sorry,
but I can’t work it-out.”
“I shouldn’t think you could,” cried Meg, “after being
hurled into a house full of crazy people by a violent
tropical storm. . . . Come with me, Christine, and take
off those heavy clothes.” Christine moved blindly from
the room, down the hall, through a pair of blue chenille
curtains, and into another room containing twin wooden
beds, a matching suite, a carpet, two chairs, and—a
reading-lamp glowing like a rosy flower on a table be-
tween the beds.
“You have a dry frock with you, of course,” Meg
smiled, indicating the suitcase which had mysteriously
gone ahead of the empty-handed girl. Yes, she said
politely, she had. “I hope it’s a thin one,” Meg smiled,
and wondered at the dry anger in Christine’s tones as
she said:
“Very thin.”
An alert, questioning look settled on Meg’s face as
the newcomer frowned, saying with an urgent rush:
“Are you sure you’re Mrs Driscoll?” and turned her
face away, to have made such a stupid remark.
A little sound broke in Meg’s throat. Moving im-
pulsively, she lifted with both soft hands the blushing
face of lost Andy’s daughter, kissing both burning cheeks.
“I’m quite sure,” Meg declared shakily. “In fact, I’m
just as sure of being Mrs Driscoll, as I am of you being
Andy’s daughter. In all but colouring, you are so like
him when he was a boy. . . . Change those things, darling,
and come out for tea. Just follow the chattering and
clinking, and that will be the Driscolls, ravenous as
usual.”


Christine stood still for a moment after the door closed
quietly. Then with a choked whisper she dropped beside
the suitcase.
Andy’s daughter, she had saidl
Andy’s daughterl
There was no need to hesitate over walking out for tea,
for Lucy, a monstrous tabby-cat dangling in her arms,
was waiting in the hall outside the bedroom door.
“Hullo,” Lucy said, beaming, “this is my cat, Plu-
tarch.”
Plutarch? Christine murmured something about
Trilby, for she felt sure “Trilby” was the name Lucy
called Puss before.
“Yes, but that was another Puss,” the little girl ex-
plained. “They look like each other but they’re not.
Plutarch's second name is Blitzkrieg. Evan named him.
But you’ll get used to them,” was the consoling prophesy.
“And Mother said I could bring you in for tea, and the
storm’s going how. Do you like storms?”
“In their proper place, I do,” said Christine slowly,
putting one finger out to touch the cat’s soft head.
Blitzkrieg then evidenced his true character. Opening his
mmifVi in a tinrpri’cVi iatq 1/ hp tmt Tint Qnnrrilv nr snitp.
mouth in a tigerish way, he spat, not angrily, or spite-
fully, but with deliberate precision, until he used up
all his breath. The hiss done with, he kicked, growled,
and struggled free, cantering towards the back of the
house.
Christine stared.
“Oh,” said Lucy, brushing down her white linen frock,
less clean than it had been when putting it on, “he
doesn’t mean it. He's a foundling. We rescued him one
cold night from a half-built block of flats along there,”
and she moved her head. “He had rheumatics in his tail-
end, and no hair on his stummick, but hot-water bottles


and baby-bottles work wonders, but he still spits as if
he aches, but he doesn’t now, so Evan calls him Blitz-
krieg, which sounds spitty, doesn’t it? I like Plutarch
best.” Christine had been dawdling in a mesmerized
fashion along the hall with the small girl, who suddenly
called: “Here she is. Mummy; I fetched her.”
Christine stepped into the sitting-room with her cheeks
pink.
“Here you are,” Ann said in her brisk fashion, twirl-
ing an armchair. The newcomer took a small plate and
napkin from smiling Priscilla, and set them on a stool
dropped with a thud by Lucy. In a sort of daze, the red-
head took a wobbly slice of cream-cake and her cup of
tea. Meg had'switched off the lights now, and rain-wet
air puffed in with grassy scents through the open
windows.
Everything was so unlike her imagined pictures of the
Driscolls that, in spite of her inner shame, she started
to sense the naturalness and friendliness of the family,
although Christine was dimly aware of being watched
by a pair of dark brown eyes from a corner near the
piano. It didn’t seem as though she were unwelcome,
an intruder, an encumbrance shifted on! Or else they
were marvellous at pretending. No, a sweet-faced mother
like Mrs Driscoll would not pretend. Christine knew
that instinctively. Her mind spun with the effort of
absorbing so many new ideas and impressions at once.
Carpets, cream-cake, embroidered table-napkins heavy
and cool, pretty frocks and soft voices, so unlike Grace’s
nasal harshness, and Delphine’s thin tones, that the
Driscolls seemed almost affected—but they were not,
only natural. And it didn’t seem as though they were
extra pleasant only because their mother had so recently
come home. That seemed natural, too. But why wasn’t
she in bed? Invalids . . . ? Ann saw the soft glance Chris-


THE ALMOST-COUSINS MEET 89
tine moved over the slim little lady in dusty pink, and
cried:
“Mother, even Christine knows you’re too thin, so eat
another piece of cake or you’ll slip down the plug-hole
in the bath one night. Go on. Mother, it’s luscious.”
“Ann is not very social-minded,” Meg declared. “Her
spiritual home is definitely not in a drawing-room.”
Christine smiled faintly, wondering what to say. She
could scarcely agree, nor could she disagree. So this was
family life! It made the Stillwells look so insipid that
her face flamed to recall her dreaming by the river’s
edge. s
“Ann,” came unexpectedly from Joanna’s corner, “is
a ragamuffin. And everybody in this house is crazy.”
Christine nearly jumped.
Joanna seemed to be “getting one back” on Ann, who
grimaced covertly, and Christine saw the “face” the slaty-
eyed girl made, marvelling again at family-life, for
instead of slaughtering each other, they went on eating
cake. Meg smiled as she lifted another slice to the red-
head’s plate.
“Oh, but, perhaps you want to keep . . .” she said,
before she could stop herself, and flushed again, to have
been so impudent.
Meg, however, did not regard the instinctive little
revelation as impudence, but smouldered angrily against
Grace Mead, who seemed not to have been improved
by the years changing her from girlhood.
Christine’s battered mind flew off on a tangent.
“Oh, where is the boy who said Heck?” she asked,
stopping dead, for that recalled Ann’s letter, and she
had not answered Christine’s reply.
“You remembered all my letter,” Ann groaned, “and
you don’t know how long it took me to write it. I hate
writing letters. Evan is away for the day ...” A pause


followed, and a swift sidelong glance at Meg, which
made Christine wonder.
“Evan,” Joanna remarked, suddenly becoming
superior, “is immensely puffed up by pretending to be a
removal-man. He took the shop van and two men to
Darien to-day, with a load of things. We've moving
soon, and going rural.”
The floor rocked under the red-head's chair. She
heard Delphine, at the Cove, jibing: “But you’re go-
ing somewhere else." Christine’s plate went shakily to
the little stool, while she lifted a flickering, drenched
look for understanding, instinctively, on Meg. Thor-
oughly annoyed by blundering Joanna’s unpredictable
ways and moods, her stepmother was more upset by
that fixed look of dread on the face of Andy’s daughter.
Meg had no clue to the trouble, but she understood girls.
“We were saving our bit of news to tell you later, dar-
ling,” Meg explained quietly, while the piston-rod under
Christine’s ribs struck more slowly, and then stopped.
“We, ourselves, find it rather a big idea to cope with, and
you’ve scarcely had time to look at this house yet. Grand-
father Mead, Christine, has given us all a dear old house
of his at a place I don’t suppose you know—Darien. He
seems to think we’re all suffering a little from too much
civilization and, with other very good reasons added on,
we are moving. This house is to be let, furnished, and
Evan is helping shift the first load of the . . . the family
things, to-day. And, really,” Meg smiled, “it’s rather a
stroke of luck for you—for you needn’t go to school
again until the New Year. You and I can housekeep for
the scholars until break-up time in December, only a
few weeks now, and we can have a lovely lazy time
until the move.”
Christine preserved her equilibrium by a miracle. The
swift flight upwards from abysmal depths of fear and
shock was very upsetting. Meg saw the young face clear


of its terror, and wondered, as the black wings of fear
stopped whirring round Christine's face, and Delphine’s
mockery lost itself in yet another surprise.
“Am I going to ... to Darien with you?” she asked,
having to make sure.
“Of course,” cried Meg, with a note in her voice that
stirred shamed Joanna to unease. Now what had she
done? What harm was there in saying straight out
where Evan was, instead of making mysteries of the move
to Darien? Wait until Christine found out how isolated
it was, with no cinemas or decent shops nearer than
Manly, and then she’d not look so dumbfounded—or she
would, in another fashion.
“Christine!” Meg said, just as a girl would, “we stored
the news up for you, for all young people like the fun
and fuss of moving.”
Lucy was seated on the carpet now, her plate between
her knees. 1
“Evan,” she cried, without looking up, for the last
crumbs were interesting, “is going to work at Driscoll’s
after Christmas, because he’s in-der-pendent. Tom Gale’s
leaving, to join up, and Mr Jurgen likes Evan because
Evan isn’t cocky about being the boss’s son. I’m not
going to work in a furnisher shop when I grow up. I’m
going to have fun.”
“Don’t worry Christine now with all the family his-
tory,” Lucy’s mother smiled, “for, goodness knows, it’s
far too complicated for sorting out in one afternoon.
Now, Ann, take some biscuits, and show Christine round
the premises before sunset, so at least she’ll know
where she is on the map. The conservatory,” Meg added
solemnly, “and our summer houses, Christine, are kept
behind the wood-shed near the coal-bin,”
With a surprised breath breaking from her lips,
Christine rose and blindly took a handful of oameal bis-
cuits Ann thrust at her, seizing this discreetly-engineered


opportunity for a tete-a-tete with the other Careerist.
Mother was marvellous; she just knew how awful pins-
and-needles were in a room full of faces, and a hundred
things to talk about before bed-time—in a shared bed-
room.
Priscilla and Lucy, naturally, made to go after the
Careerists, but Meg restrained the younger ones.
“Leave them alone,” she nodded, making a conspiracy
of it. “They have to become acquainted. Christine isn’t
a visitor; you’ll have stacks of time to talk later—especi-
ally at Darien, with all the Christmas vacation ahead.”
The children were consoled, and Joanna, feeling very
uneasy, came from her shadowed corner to help her step-
mother with the table, which the big girl awkwardly
started wheeling from the room.
“I didn’t mean to blurt that out,” she murmured, cast-
ing a sidelong glance at Meg. “What made her look as
if she’d been hit across the mouth?”
“I don’t know,” Meg answered thoughtfully, “but that’s
exactly how she did look, and no child looks like that
without good reason. For a rather mild woman, my long-
ing to slaughter Grace Jury is most peculiar . . .”
“The way Christine is dressed I”
“Yes, it’s absolutely criminal,” Meg commented.
“What is it about her?” Joanna asked flatly. “She gets
you. What is it about her?”
“Gentility is always recognizable, even in rags,” Meg
said quietly, and Joanna glared angrily down the hall.
Meg was simply too ridiculous with her stodgy notionsl
Meanwhile, the two October-born girls stood out on
the damp lawn, in a world of apricot radiance and the
mingled coolness and steamy warmth of evening after
summer rain. The mauve petals of the jacarandas
brought a sigh of worship from the beauty-loving girl
with the scarlet hair. She was tired all through in a queer
wideawake fashion, which made the glory of the evening


light seem ten times as impressive. The bay was a pool
of creeping molten gold and blue, every little white ship
gilded too, smears of gold on the hulls, spangles on the
masts. The sweet scent of steam and wet graSs hovered
in the air, and the lawn was plastered by wet leaves
torn free by the violent squall. A huge liner lay, lighted
up like a golden brooch in the first soft sifting of the
blue haze that comes to Sydney Harbour with the dusk.
A naval pinnace, dashing briskly in Navy fashion, purred
on its way from warship to depot, and the V-shaped
wake was golden also. The Bridge seemed melting in
a blaze of flamingo-coloured beauty, turning the build-
ingß opposite to a black cut-out perforated by little
orange, squares.
Christine’s beauty-worshipping soul swelled with an
ecstasy that almost hurt.
“Oh, Ann,” she breathed.
“Yes,” said Ann, itching to discuss Careers, “it’s good-oh.
I mean—l think so too. Look here, Chris,” she went on
startling her companion pleasantly with the abbreviated
name, “what do you think of toy : making for girls? Not
fooling about; a Career, I mean.”
Ann faced the softening sunset glow, her young count-
enance clear-cut as the figurehead on some old ship, with
that gilded light giving her a bronzed effect, her hair
a rough cap of shadow. The same light turned Christine’s
head into a big soft flower, as she leaned against the
wall, her face a pale blur with a smudge for eyes.
“Do you belong to the Bookworm’s Hobby Section,
Ann?” came with interest.
Ann wanted no misunderstanding.
“No,” she nodded, “I don’t go in for that sort of
twaddle,” and, feeling this remark might be misinter-
preted, she added fervently: “I mean, I like making
things, not writing about them. You make your sort of
things when writing. See? And your writing’s not half


bad,” she conceded. “But,” she went on very casually,
“I guess toy-making seems pretty mundane against being
an authoress, even if you are an amateur.”
“No, Ann, it isn’t,” came the lingering reply, as the
newcomer dealt on the subject with a very agreeable
surprise. Fancy, this, after Delphinel A bubble of ex-
citement broke through Christine’s tiredness. “Toy-
making is romantic. No, Ann, I mean it ...” A memory
dug from some book or other came to her rescue. “Toys
are ages old. Excavators found dolls and toys in the
ancient tombs of Rome and Egypt. Factories in Europe
made tin soldiers by the million, and whole towns live
by toy-making. To make toys is . . . glamorous,” she
added, waiting with every nerve tied to a one big knot
as Ann seemed to hesitate in disbelief. “Do you make
toys, Ann?”
“Yes, I do, or I try to,” came savagely, "but not dolls.
Dolls belong to olden days, although Priss still likes them.
Dolls are a bit dreamy, to me, and so is writing, I think,
compared to carpentering and all that.”
And so they stood, the Old-fashioned girl and the New-
fashioned—the dreamer who knew nothing of moving
pictures or family rough-and-tumble, and the practical
youngster fed on modern thoughts since infancy, and
crammed with a collection of simple scientific facts by
her father’s influence. Christine, however, sensed the
gulf between them, accidentally finding a bridge by re-
calling a speech of Joe’s.
“Everything has to be dreamed first, Ann. Thomas
Edison dreamed his inventions before he made them,
and so did Robert Stevenson . . . and imagination is
only dreaming if you don’t only dream. Medical re-
search and exploration is dreaming—although scientific
and adventurous. Writers dream the books they write,
telling of the world’s happenings, so that those who
work hard know what others do.”


After a tremendous mental upheaval, while Ann
pounded with inner excitement, the two girls crossed
the bridge and shook hands, metaphorically, in the
middle.
“That’s right,” Ann declared, expelling a big breath,
“but I won’t be called dreamy, mind you.”
“Oh, no,” Christine answered, shocked, “I wouldn’t
dream of such a thing,” and they both laughed, sharing
a joke.
“I’ll show you my garage to-morrow,” Ann said casu-
ally, “and take you along to Driscoll’s—our shop—pretty
soon.”
Christine knew, without being able to see quite why,
that she had been paid a tremendous compliment, and
the two girls, their chumship cemented, strolled indoors.


CHAPTER VII
SUMMER MARCHES ON
Grandfather Mead turned up that evening, just as the
family had finished the first really interesting Sunday
night tea in more than four months, as Ann declared
while taking her turn with the washing up.
“Well,” she said, after dinner, “as you’re one of the
family you might as well be broken in,” and tossed a
green dish-towel towards her cousin, who caught it
gladly. A green dish-towel, and pastel-coloured towels
in the bathroom so that each family member would
know their own, and face-cloths with initials on in
matching colours! Even the shaded electric light seemed
luxurious to the girl who last night had fretted in a
slit of a room with a candle-flame flickering.
It was Ann’s and Priscilla’s turn, this evening, to
clear away, as they explained while Christine lent a
hand, peeping with pleasure into the well-stocked pantry
and the fascinating little refrigerator which had a mys-
terious light that clicked on as the door opened, reveal-
ing the cold white cave within. There were rules, Ann
explained, crashing cutlery to a green rubber mat on
the draining board, but they’d all become rather lax
with Aunt Sophie in the house.
“Oh, don’t,” Priscilla murmured, a bewitching little
creature with a bungalow apron on over her voile frock.


“Do put Aunty aside for a little while, Ann. Christine
will know soon enough.”
“Aunty,” Ann said, resting on the sink with her
shoulders pushed up, “is our family skeleton,” and she
spluttered, going on with her chores. “Skeleton says it,”
she nodded. “You’ll see.”
At that moment Lucy came racing down the hall to
whisper piercingly;
“Grandfather’s in the sitting-room and he wants to
see Christine.”
The green dish-towel went blindly to the table.
“Do you mean the Grandfather?” the almost-cousin
faltered.
He was sweet, said Priscilla, using a rather odd de-
scription for Mr Mead.
“Go on,” Ann said, giving Christine a friendly shove,
“he won’t eat you.” And she moved away in a state of
stupefaction. Had Mr Micawber, or Mr Pickwick sum-
moned her to the sitting-room, she could not feel more
queer.
Grandfather Mead stood, back to the empty grate, as
his young relation stepped into the room with a quick
glance at Mrs Driscoll, comfortably relaxed in a big arm-
chair with her knitting. Christine’s heart was shaking
with nervous excitement. She beheld a fine, sturdy, up-
standing elderly gentleman with dignity on his sternly
kind face and shrewdness in his keen slaty-grey eyes. He
had a neatly trimmed beard and a shining watch-fob on
his grey waistcoat. Even a nervous girl could quickly
sense the moral integrity of Grandfather Mead who was,
in the true meaning of the word, a good man.
Christine stood quietly, a quaint little person quite
unconscious of her threadbare frock and skinny black-
covered legs with the forgotten garters showing, her red
head lifted and her green eyes unflinchingly level as


she flickered a shy smile in return for his quirked eye-
brows.
“Well, well,” he declared in strongly confident tones,
“so you’re that scallywag Andy’s gel, are youl” Both of
his hands went out, taking her fingers into a surpris-
ingly soft clasp. “A nice sort of father you’ve got,” he
nodded, one eyebrow up and the other clamped down,
“ehl Running away from a perfectly good farm to take up
scribbling abroad.”
Meg looked up from her knitting while the needles
still clicked.
“Andy took up scribbling long before he ran away
from the perfectly good farm. Dad. I believe Andy
scribbled in his cradle—although I’m not quite sure.”
“Hmml” Grandfather murmured, still summing up
Andy's daughter in a protective way. Suddenly he
doubled her hands together and gave them back to her.
“Well, you’re not unlike the Meads to look at,” he said,
“although I’ve never yet seen a Mead with a head like
a posy of roses. Is that remark poetic enough for her?”
he asked his daughter, raising both eyebrows.
“Ask Christine,” Meg laughed, whipping wool swiftly
over those busily flashing red needles.
“I’m glad I resemble the Meads,” said the little girl
slowly, and unwittingly added the very thing to gratify
him most. “When my father’s job is done, he said, he’s
coming home ... to stay.” She was unconsciously stir-
ring again to hope, in a house where people spoke his
name naturally, as if any moment a cable might arrive.
Andy’s daughter lifted her chin, meeting Grandfather’s
quizzically approving glint with green eyes that glinted
too. “And it would take more than a bunch of Nazis
to beat him.”
“And,” Grandfather retorted dryly, “it would take
more than a bunch of misfortunes to beat his gel, eh?
Call me Grandfather,” he added slowly, “as the other


young ones do. Members of the family mustn’t be too
stiff; we’ll leave that to strangers . .
Christine walked out from the room 3, little later with
a strange look on her face. She looked puzzled, happy,
but slightly afraid, as she felt uncertain about her right
to be so happy, and whether the happiness might,
with the suddenness of a star falling, be taken away.
This house, she thought, with a cramped feeling in her
throat, is a safe and solid house, and because a house is
given its feeling by those who dwell within its walls,
the Darien house would be safe and solid too.
As always, when deeply stirred, a clash of lovely re-
membered scenes and poems tumbled through her mind,
in fragments. She saw her father’s face, and the imagined
face of little Sair-Ann; she saw the mere at Wildwood,
and an old brown house above a golden beach on which
green surf thundered . . .
Christine re-entered the kitchen with that exalted look
on her lifted face, and practical Ann stared. Chris looked
as if she were listening to music that nobody else could
hear, which was exactly what she was doing, and some of
the rawness of the wounds left on her soul by Aunt
Grace were soothed. s
“What did you think of Grandfather?’’ Ann asked,
blinking away from her chum’s face while wringing a
dish-cloth.
Christine could not express herself.
“He’s like I thought he’d be,’’ she said, which gov-
erned speech gratified Ann immensely.
“Yes,” she answered, “I thought you would," and
everything seemed to be quite understood between them.
In the sitting-room, while the young folk collected
round the kitchen table with books, papers, and a bag
of caramels found in the pantry by Ann, Meg and her
father talked together with the radio turned almost to a
whisper. Grandfather Mead, in his loving kindness, spoke


haltingly of Andy, for only a very bold optimist would
talk confidently of his safe return from the suffering
country which had proved a graveyard for so many
brave people. And Meg listened with a crooked smile
on her soft mouth, wondering, too, about Andy. A pang
shot through her heart. Christine had stood there look-
ing so guilelessly steadfast in a flicker of her reviving
faith. The faith of a child, however, had no power over
the iron hand gripping France.
“The gel has something in her,” Grandfather nodded,
clipping the end off a slender cigar which he lighted
in the draught that would carry the smoke through the
windows. “And her mind’s not spoiled by too many
picture-shows.” This speech seemed to galvanize the old
gentleman who leaned back, crossing his legs suddenly,
as though something had angered him. But his daughter
laughed, saying that Christine had not, to her knowledge,
seen any picture-shows at all. That wouldn’t hurt her,
he grunted.
“That gel,” he said loudly, “is a born Mead, no matter
what colour her hair is. She’ll like it at Darien.” He
nodded in satisfaction, then went on: “And what have
any of your youngsters to amuse themselves with in the
city, eh? What about your life when younger? That’s
the way for children to live.”
“Yes,” she reflected, half aloud and half to herself,
“cantering through the river-shadows, riding the binder
in harvest time, damming the river by the pool, building
wurlies, carrying broken-winged birds in to mend them
and watch them fly away . . .” She looked up, altering
her tone: “I though of all those things. Dad, the day
the family trouped along to the hospital and showed
me Priscilla’s Bookworm clippings. ‘She might be our
Christine,’ Priscilla said, and how anxious she looked!
The child can write. Dad, in her immature way, and
it amazes me the things she knows about this country—


for an English-born girl and so recently evacuated. Well,
she did come out here four years ago, but two of those
were spent in Melbourne. The Childers don’t seem to
have been very humanitarian,” she added, “with, of
course, an exception—the old lady Christine calls Granny
Childers.”
“Hmml” Mr Mead ruminated, blinking in silence for
a while. “There’s not much naturalness in people not
fond of young folk, for all their bother and anxiety. And
the Darien property will help fulfil the hopes and wishes
Francis shaped long ago, for you and the children. It
wasn’t his fault that his good plans were interrupted.
He was a fine fellow, although too much of a dreamer
to get on in this world, which isn’t to his discredit. And
you, too, can’t manage as you’re going on, especially
with another human responsibility—and young Joanna
on your hands as well. You’re no more than a bit of
a thing yourself. Living in the city is all wrong for those
who can get out of it. Your hand’s in your pocket every
time you move outside the door. Finishing-schools and
what-not are fine in their way, but not necessary when
young folk learn to speak and think and behave cor-
rectly under their own roofs. The Darien place,” he
grunted, “will influence you all for the better. I wish I
had a little income to tack on to it for you, but these
are grim times, my gel, and I have all I can do to keep
things going and watch the farms ...”
“I don’t want an income,” Meg said, with a flash of
characteristic family independence. “The shop staggers
along. Mr Jurgen is honest, if a bit old-fashioned and set
in his notions, and after Christmas Evan will be keeping
himself.”
“Yes, there’s a lot in that lad,” came slowly.
“He’s full of character, Dad,” Meg asserted, “and so
keen on reviving Driscoll’s with his youthful ideas that
I wouldn’t impede them by thought or word. He has


grown to sixteen with a dream in his heart—carrying on
for his father, and such a wholesome ambition deserves
a free rein. And so . . . my first chick leaves the nest.”
She laughed softly, reflecting sadly within, and said pres-
ently: “Christine takes Evan’s place, in a way, and I
love her already. She and Joanna, however . . . Never
mind,” came quickly, “for they’ll work out their own
problems. Grown-ups might be exasperated at times, but
children are interesting, even their furies and excesses.”
Mr Mead strode away through the moonlight a little
later, swinging his stick and thinking, proceeding to-
wards the “Round Bay Arms” for the night, before
returning next day to Borrowdale.
And Meg changed into her long black moire house-
coat for comfort’s sake, and found the young folk round
the kitchen table. Christine thought: “She’s like ai
moon-flower with her misty-pale face and that black
gown on, and it whispers like old crinolines.”
Ann asked couldn’t they all have coffee, while await-
ing Evan, and he would be very famished when he
reached home. Her mother’s smile was assent.
Christine was dizzy with tiredness, but, like most born
scribblers, she could not desert any scene providing in-
terest, however tired she might be. Moreover, she won-
dered whether a sleepy newcomer-guest might possibly
insult others if suddenly drifting off to take charge of
a shared bedroom before the other party went to bed.
“There’s a raisin loaf going stale in there,” Meg
announced; “in a biscuit tin, Ann. I saw it yesterday,
and raisin loaves soon grow whiskers in this sticky
weather, so why not toast it?”
Priscilla rescued the loaf and Joanna sliced the thick
cinnamon-dusted wedges, popped into the electric toaster
by Ann, who mounted guard over the contraption as


the bread sent up its warning smoke-signals, and turned
over as she flicked the little knobs. Christine was fasci-
nated. She thought of Aunt Grace’s starkly ugly little
kitchen, dim with the light from a smoky oil-lamp
against a tin reflector on the wall, strewn with ashes,
without one dish that it was a pleasure to handle. The
contrast made this kitchen seem like part of a doll’s
house enlarged.
“Am I allowed to ask questions?” Christine amused
Meg by asking very politely.
“Yes,” came laughingly, “of course. This house is
little else but questions. What ones do you want to ask?”
“I don’t know yet,” was the frank reply, “but I shall,
I know. It’s all so different.”
Joanna cast an uneasy look at the newcomer.
“Different from England?” Jo asked. “Or different
from the Cove?”
“Both,” came the quick reply.
Priscilla carried the delphinium blue china from the
pantry, with the tall coffee pot to match, while Ann
whipped a slightly used supper-cloth from a drawer in
the white kitchen cabinet, and in a twink the supper
was laid.
“What did Grandfather say?” Ann wanted to know,
as filled cups, steaming and smelling heavenly to luxury-
starved Christine, circulated with a big dish of heavily
buttered raisin-loaf toast. “Did he say anything more
about Darien?”
“Grandfather said a lot about Darien,” Meg admitted,
fighting off her weariness only because of the eager faces
turned towards her in the white light peculiar to kit-
chens. Christine hung on every word, unable to believe
that only this morning she had nearly fretted herself de-
mented, on her way across the river in Grace Mead’s chug-
ging launch. Alice-through-the-looking-glass was nothing,
compared to her own bewildering experience, when


blown in by a squall of tropical rain and wind, while
the thunder snapped at her heels, to a warm comfort-
able haven of safety and friendliness. Darienl Someone
with a poetic mind must have named Darien; someone
who loved Keats, and his “magic casements, opening on
the foam of perilous seas in faery lands forlorn”.
Then felt I like some watcher of the skies
When a new planet swims into his ken;
Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes
He star’d at the Pacific—and all his men
Look’d at each other with a wild surmise—
Silent, upon a peak in Darien.
“Well, Christine,” she heard in Mrs Driscoll’s laugh-
ing tones, “where have you been this time?” And the
engrossed poetry-lover came with a jerk back to the
room.
“I . . . was thinking,” she admitted, rather embar-
rassed, “about a verse my father used to like saying over.
It just came to me.”
“How odd,” Joanna drawled, putting on her grown-
up voice in a sudden spasm of dislike for the unself-
conscious girl, who swam off into absent-mindedness so
easily. “You are really most amusing, Christine.”
“Have a good cackle then,” Ann snapped, “and get
it over, instead of sitting there trying to imitate Greta
Garbo.”
“Annl” her mother frowned.
“Well,” scowled the girl, shuffling, “she’s not going
to pick at Chris while I’m about, apart from having
a bit of courtesy. Besides, as Joanna is always so anxious
not to claim this common place as her own home, let
her keep from interfering in it. Any one would think
Jo was ninety instead of only fifteen this month.”
“You make me feel a hundred and ninety,” Meg de-
clared, raising her dark brows, “when you carry on like


a flock of bad-tempered magpies. . . . Would somebody
mind passing me the sugar?” Joanna passed the little
bowl, shoving it forward so rudely that it bumped her
stepmother’s saucer. Meg made no comment, but Chris-
tine went all colours, as she inwardly expressed it, and
flashed a glance of indignation at the big showily-dressed
girl who was self-conscious one moment and superior the
next. Black eyes clashed glances with green ones like
invisibily crossed swords.
Joanna’s peculiar position in the house was now
becoming clear to the newcomer, who marvelled. Ghostly
Aunt Sophie was evidently a power in the girl’s life.
She was leaving school this term, Christine now dis-
covered, and what an odd school it seemed to bel The
other girls had been promised a final finishing-year at
St Ursula’s after the sturdier adventure at the Round
Bay State School, but the move to Darien would check
this plan. Ann said frankly that finishing-off, to her, was
a sheer waste of good time and money, for she intended
finishing herself off in her own way, and women car-
penters didn’t need a lot of St Ursula twaddle.
“Mother!” she'exclaimed, suddenly becoming aware
of a disagreeable possibility. “You won’t send us in
daily on the bus from Darien, will you? I’d go off my
dot, having to do that.”
“You can stay on your dot, then,” came placidly from
Meg, as she broke a piece of toast in two and started
nibbling it. Then, she added: “I have neither the money
nor the inclination for such a plan. Nobody is so well-
off now as before the war, and you’re not becoming
less expensive as your legs grow longer.”
Ann puffed out her deep relief and passed her cup
for more.
“Well,” Priscilla declared lingeringly, “I wouldn’t
have objected to a year at St Ursula’s, because the uni-


form suits me, and the badge is nice, and Elise Craven
goes there.”
“She’s stuck-up,” Lucy cried in sleepy anger.
“Perhaps you’d better go to bed, Lucy,” her mother
suggested, not wanting to rob the little girl of a special
treat, but deciding that she looked too heavy-eyed and
irritably dreamy to stay up any longer.
Lucy was animated immediately.
“Oh, no. Mummy, please, for at last, at last I’m up
till all hours. Besides, I’ll sleep f’roshiously to make up,
and I want to hear Evan talk about the furnisher.”
“Oh, well, for once . . .” her mother allowed, and
Lucy sighed as if missing execution by a hair’s breadth.
“You, of course,” Joanna said, directing a lofty-look-
ing glance at Christine, while the others held their
breath, “had a governess, didn’t you, before you left
England?”
“Yes; Miss Monson,” Christine answered, jerking her
mind over many thousands of miles of land and sea
to dreaming Wildwood. “But I can’t remember much
about her, Joanna.”
“It’s a wonder your Grandmother Childers didn’t bring
Miss Monson with you to Melbourne,” Joanna sug-
gested, stirring her coffee in grand-dame fashion.
Christine was surprised by a thought that had never
entered her head before.
“Goodness, that would have been a terrible expense,”
she faltered. “And if Granny had needed a governess
for me, there are lots out here, I suppose. But she
didn’t. Wildwood was different. There was only a tiny
village school and I was too young to be sent there.”
“Oh,” said Joanna, wondering why Christine pre-
tended that her life in England was governed by
economy, unless it was to console the "girls for having
to attend a free school. Joanna's conspiratorial smile


at Christine missed its mark, for the latter simply did
not understand it.
“But,” Priscilla gasped, after thinking furiously,
“there isn’t a school near Darien, Mother.”
“There is at Pinewood,” Meg announced, as Chris-
tine, setting Joanna’s funny ways aside for a time, turned
from one to another face in growing excitement. Pine-
wood, said Ann, her tones rising in consternation, was
more than two miles from Darien, and the roads were
blistering hot in summer, without a decent tree all the
way. Two miles, she emphasized, nodding eloquently
at Christine. “How would you like to do two miles each
way daily in all weathers?”
“I have been,” Christine answered, in a blind urge
to help Mrs Driscoll with her flock, whom Christine
thought terrible, to pick holes in such a lovely prospect.
“And,” came with sudden emotion, “I had to walk
them with Delphine.”
Ann was mournful, “I must be more cityfied than I
thought,” she announced, “and I’ve never really loved
trams before, but I do this minute.”
“Don’t look so hopeless,” Meg nodded, surprising
everybody. “You’ll drive yourselves to Pinewood. Grand-
father went into that this evening with me. He’s having a
horse and trap delivered at Darien early in the New
Year, and you can all learn to drive. Evan had better
start and teach each of you in turn. A horse and buggy
is most appropriate in a place like Darien.”
It all seemed enchanting to the girl who, for so long,
had known nothing of excitements. And, remembering
Uncle Jack’s books, it seemed delightfully Australian
to Christine, and just as it ought to be. A horse and
buggyl
All this after Blackfish Cove and those walks along


the rough back road with Delphine jibing and calling
out hateful things!
Ann’s expression was a study. “But, Mother,” she said
in queer, quick tones, “people don’t do that any more.
People don’t drive about these days in those weird con-
traptions. We’d look too funny for words.” Not knowing
whether to giggle or feel “wild”, Ann sat motionless,
blinking.
“Funny or not,” her mother declared, “that’s how
you’re going to school.”
Joanna unfortunately laughed, and Ann turned like
lightning. “You’d have a pair of Rolls Royces, I suppose,”
she snapped, “with a brace of footmen and a chauffeur.”
Ann had delivered her shot, so addressed her mother
again: “What about bicycles?”
“We can’t ride those either,” Priscilla faltered, “and
I don’t think I like machinery much—only cars.”
Lucy was spellbound. “Can I actually learn to drive
the horse, and go with Priscilla and Ann and Christine
to the Pinewood school?” And Meg knew that at least
one of her city-bred young folk relished the thought of
the buggy. Yes, said Meg, and Lucy sighed herself into
rapture.
“On bicycles,” Christine said quickly, “we’d look like
a cycling club out for an airing, and I think a horse
and buggy would be just wonderful.”
“You write,” Ann cried impatiently, as though this
verified Christine’s countrified tastes. But the slaty-eyed
girl’s naturally wholesome outlook came to her rescue.
“I’m batty,” she said, laughing at herself, “but it was the
shock, Mother, of going Dad-and-Dave so suddenly. Oh!
That’s why you look so pleased about it. You’ve got a
farm-complex like Grandfather. You like horses and
buggies.”
“I do,” Meg affirmed complacently. “I adore them. A
horse and buggy might provide me with a little diver-


sion occasionally, also, at Darien, which is not exactly
a wildly exciting centre. And I am not a car-driving
lady, even if we had a car or could afford one, to con-
vey you in luxury to a school like an enlarged chicken-
house with a shed on stilts in the yard. Besides, horses
don’t need gallons of petrol to keep them going, also a
consideration in war-time.”
“Well,” sighed the little fair girl, remembering an in-
fantile visit to the farm, ‘‘l did get bucked off a Shetland
pony once, so perhaps I’ll learn to drive.”
‘‘That’s not precisely logical,” her mother commented,
“but I’m sure you will, especially as Grandfather
promises us a nice amiable steed with a long-suffering
disposition.”
“I feel,” Lucy declared drowsily, “as if I might have
’sterics or something, and I think p’raps I’ll go to bed
now if every one will aggskuse me.” Everybody “aggs-
kused” her and she tottered off, blinking in wonder at
the world of delights to come, at Darien.
Christine stiffened suddenly, for Ann was talking
animatedly now about a former “vac” spent at Darien,
unaware of the strange look settling on her cousin’s
features. Ann was saying . . . ? Christine’s heart lurched
in great bumps that made her feel slightly ill. An old
gabled house, Ann was saying, with wood-blocked floors
all through, and a very wide hall running from back
lobby to front porch! Ann claimed one of the old stone
stables “down by the road” near the “beach”, for her
Darien work-shop. The pines, she said, made it cool
there, and she liked the smell of the sea.
Ann turned to Christine, still blind to the wonder-
struck expression fixing her peaky white face. “There’s
heaps to do at Darien, Chris. Not games and all that
sort of twaddle, but exploring, and walks along the
beach, and through the bush at the foot of the cliff on


the land-side. Of course, but I mean, the house faces
the land-side. It sort of sits in a hollow so that the wind
from the ocean blows right over the top. You can’t see
the house from the sea. Evan tried once, when sailing
in Jolly Roger with Bill Franklin—a chum of his—and
all they could see was the end of the front porch. It looks
along the beach to the headlands in the distance, and
they’re pretty grand, too, especially when the surf’s
heavy on a sunny day. Bright! All colours! An inlet
breaks in through the far end of the beach, too, and
makes a sort of long shallow lake. The sea-gulls are
funny. We can see the prawners at night, too, from up
on the side veranda. They carry lanterns and look like
glow-worms or something, floating about. It isn’t a bit
lonely, actually, because there’s always something to do,
even if a lunatic did build it ”
“Ann!” The lunatic, said Meg, for Christine’s benefit,
was really a solitary-minded old eccentric, a foreigner,
from whom Grandfather bought the house many years
ago, and since then the place had been used only for
holidays.
Ann couldn’t wait. “Excuse me, Mother,” she said
impatiently, “but I forgot about the pool, and it’s
terribly important. It fills itself, Chris,” the eager girl
explained, “because the waves spurt over the wall that
Grandfather had made higher from the natural rocks, to
make a safer swimming-place because of the surf and
all that. . . . What’s up?” Ann asked, checking herself
abruptly. “Do you feel sick, Chris?”
A queer unreal sensation held Christine. She could
see herself, at nine years old, lying against her father’s
shoulder at Wildwood, and saying: “Is it a real house?”
And now, the thirteen-year-old used those same words,
in a choked whisper that only Meg caught:
“Is it a real house . . . Mrs Driscoll, please?”


“Christine, darling,” Meg cried in swift alarm, for the
child was like a white flame in her trembling intensity.
“Christine . . . what is it?” And everybody sat silent,
staring in amazement.
“Has it a name?” Christine asked desperately.
Meg tried to understand. “Yes, a very stodgy name,”
she said, thinking of the postal address. “Egglethorpel
But— You’re sick, Christine. Ann, get her a drink of
water.”
“No,” Christine flashed in such an agony of annoy-
ance that her eyes blazed. “I’m not sick. I’m muddled,
that’s all. Please . . .” she begged, turning her white
face on Meg again, “has any one, ever, for any reason,
called the Darien place the . . . the old brown house}”
Meg felt her heart lurch.
“Christine . . . what a surprise you are,” she faltered.
“I’ve not heard that name in years . . . not since your
father ran away. Why, yes, of course,” she frowned,
staring anxiously at the transfixed girl, “that was your
father’s name for Grandfather’s house. But, Christine,
how on earth ?”
“Who named it Darien?” came quickly.
“Your father did. Egglethorpe, he said, made him
think of ducky hens. . . .” Meg laughed to herself as
she remembered. “He stood one day on the cliff-top and
shouted, in a most dramatic way, I thought, some strange
poem about “stout Cortez and his men”. Then he came
down, painted a board with red strokes, and nailed the
board on the veranda rail above the side steps. Darienl
We’ve called it Darien since. Andy was like that, Chris-
tine,” she added very softly, “always romancing about
something . . . always inventing tales about Spanish
sailormen and ”
“—sunken galleons,” the whisper sounded in the quiet
room, where the clock on the shelf ticked unconcernedly.


“And ... he made up a name for you, too, didn’t he,
when you were a little girl. . . . My father used to call
you Sair-Ann, didn’t he?’’ said Christine, on the breath
of a sound, as she waited.
There was no need for an answer.
Christine knewl


CHAPTER VIII
THE GOLDEN KNOT OF TANGLED YEARS
Meg stood looking down at the sleeping face of Andy’s
daughter. The commotion and gale of excited conversa-
tion had at last been defeated by weariness. One by one,
the children had gone heavy-eyed to bed, Christine in
a waking dream that soon turned to dreamless slumber.
And Meg, Andy’s boyhood chum, was quite unashamed
of the tears catching the upward glow of the reading-
lamp, as she bent over and tucked the bedclothes higher,
round the white neck of the thin little mortal in the
strange unconsciousness of sleep, when any face is its
sweetest and wholly natural. Meg had not been dis-
turbed for many a year as she had to-night, “Sair-Ann”,
her mind whispered, as she went quietly out.
It was not every day that Destiny dragged the stars
from the sky to toss them in shining handfuls to a child’s
empty lap I - Meg had beheld a miracle this evening—
the touching miracle of faith relighted behind the hurt
eyes of a sensitive girl, her heart darkened for too long
by fear and despair. Tired as she herself was, she had
to wait up for Evan and, when she told him, liked his
grurf remarks and the stirring of his boyish chivalries.
His fine eyes were keen with interest as he listened.
“What made Andy call you Sair-Ann?” the slender
lad asked in dropped tones, the house asleep. Meg
beckoned him into the kitchen from the sleep-out she


had contrived for him in the glassed back veranda, and
made cocoa and toast while she talked. Old Aunt Sair-
Ann, she said, had been a most energetic and practical
old lady; a capable old lady, with no time for sentiment
or nonsense.
“We adored her, Andy and I,” said the trim little
person in the long black moire housecoat, as she sat
opposite her stepson with the cocoa tray between them.
“One Christmas at Darien—we were very young indeed—
Andy sat tossing stones at the fence near the stables. ‘l’ll
write a novel about the old brown house some day,' he
said, and sketched out some fiery picture of romance-
clashing swords and weeping heroines and what-not. I
said: ‘l’ll furnish the old brown house when I grow up,
and have peacocks on all the curtains and a kitchen full
of shiny things,’ We squabbled of course, and then he
marched off angrily. But he stopped in the pines and
shouted: ‘Sair-Annl You’re like Aunt Sair-Ann. You’ve
got no more romance or adventure in your soul than she
has, Sair-Ann Mead .’ And,” Meg laughed, on a shaky
note, “he called me that from then on—but only when
we were alone together. When Christine used that name
to-night I can’t tell you how I felt. . . . She just wiped
the years away as you wipe a cobweb from a window-
pane.”
“Nice kid, is she,” he stated, for it was not a ques-
tion. Meg’s judgment was sound as a bell, and that look
on her face meant more than praise.
“Nice isn’t the word,” came quietly. “It’s a pallid,
simpering word for Christine. There’s a still quality
about her. I wish I had Andy’s gift of flinging colourful
words about, and I might then be able to explain her.
She has beauty in her heart, and . . . something more,
Evan. Love means everything to her, and she’s been
starved. Nobody living will ever know what that poor
good little soul has been through since leaving Wild-


wood. And while I’m not, as Andy would say, a romantic,
or fanciful person, I believe old Joe was used, Evan,
by some hidden hand, to lead her one night along the
river and lift his torch-light to the flying-foxes. . , . But
I’m a very emotional person to-night,” she added
quickly, flushing a little, “and it isn’t every day one
finds a ready-made extra daughter to love and make
happy.”
He was quiet.
“And it isn’t every day a youngster finds a ready-
made mother. I’m with you on that, Meg.” In spite of
the signs of toil and heat on his skin and garments,
the thoughtful-faced lad was uncannily like his father
in that moment. “Good for you,” he added in a very
low tone, “and I guessed she’d be 0.K.”
The moment was over. They drank more cocoa and
talked of the practical tasks he had that day been deal-
ing with, at the old brown house, with Tom Gale and
the other young man from the shop. Evan said he didn’t
quite know how to arrange the furniture, but the things
the van had delivered were duly set in their proper
rooms, as Meg had planned on a scrap of paper which
the boy now drew, very crumpled, from his grey “bags”
pocket.
After another cup of cocoa, the tired lad staggered off
to bed, filled with a sort of solemn joy to be able, at
last, to do a man’s job effectively and “make up” a bit
of all he owed Meg. Heck I there was nobody like her,
he thought, and sank into healthy slumber.
The morning light, and the bustle of breakfast for
seven, at school-time, dispelled some of the unreality
filling Christine’s heart to bursting point. She was as
quick as lightning to pick up new tricks, and in a twink
she learned to use the double-boiler and keep the rolled
oats from burning, and then to manipulate the hot-
water tap over the sink and not let the little white


tank boil. She went out to the front gate with Ann and
Priscilla, exchanged passionate promises with them to
be home after school (as though she might make a trip
to Melbourne or Brisbanel) and then raced back to see
what else she could do.
Evan was wonderful, Christine decided, beholding
him that morning, with all the signs of toil and heat
removed, and his slender form in school clothes, a grey
suit, with long pants, and a little cap with a badge.
“So you’re scarlet-hair, are you?” he grinned, taking
her hand in a strong grip that said volumes of friendly
things. “Glad you’re here, Christine Mead, but don’t
write stories about me and put them in the Pages, or
you’ll be shoved in the dust-bin and the lid banged
on. ... So long, see you to-night.” He left a bright-faced
girl standing mesmerized by such a simple climax to all
her wondering and worrying about his attitude to an
intruding relation.
“I like him,” she told Meg when the house was clear
of scholars. “He makes me think of corn-sheaves in the
sun. He wouldn’t laugh behind your back or think
stories silly. And he seemed to know about . . . you know
. . . because of his queer look when he saw me standing
there.”
“He knows, darling,” Meg said. “I told him late last
night when you were all sound asleep.”
Mrs Riggs turned up with her suitcase and hessian
apron, setting-to with a great display of importance, with
the first line of silk things out in the sunlight in no
time. She was to come every day for the chores (a new
word for Christine) until the day of the move, as Meg
must not tax her gathering strength. She had a triple
task on hand—packing and sorting for Darien, selecting
the things to be let with the bungalow, letting the
house, and housekeeping meanwhile.
Christine settled down with a kind of calm craziness


THE GOLDEN KNOT 117
raging through her. Sair-Ann, the dreamed-of little girl,
was here, grown up, and so sweetly kind and loving.
Aunt Grace had not thrust an unwanted niece on to the
dutiful, but unwilling hands of a relation; Cousin Meg
actually wanted Andy’s daughter, and had made the
offer herself. Christine’s personality took on life as a
thirsting flower does when a vase is refilled.
She poured out her heart to old Joe, not knowing
the gladness her letters gave him, nor of the excitement
warming his veins as he chugged the launch across the
river in the hope of another letter from his little lassie.
“Oh, Joe, darling Joe, you were responsible for all
this, and my heart almost splits to know it. I always
see you turning your torch-light upwards, and it seems
like a symbol, Joe. . . .”
Joe, in a glad reply, said he was “satisfied” to dwell
on the miracle she ascribed to his influence, and what a
grand feeling it must be, feeling “one of somebody” at
last, with, a dream come true. Somehow, for Joe to be
satisfied, meant more than other people raving in ecstasy.
When Christine showed Meg the old man’s simple
letter, she asked what he meant by “one of somebody”,
although the spirit of the phrase was apparent. Chris-
tine’s voice broke as she explained, until Meg heard
the river-wind whispering against the coloured table-
cloth inside the shack door, and saw the biscuit-tin with
the guitar-playing gallant on the lid. One of somebody!
What a curiously moving expression!
The packing began, and Meg was more than sur-
prised by her helper’s quick-witted understanding, as
the things to stay were set apart from those which had
to go. Huge boxes came from the shop, delivered one
evening by Tom Gale, who was enthusiastic about the
old brown house, which title he adopted. All the news-
papers were saved for wrapping, and the young folk
had a fine time round the incinerator below the garage.


Joanna’s reaction to the newcomer continued to prove
interesting, especially to Meg, who watched the big
gipsy-lovely girl irresistibly staying near the younger
ones in a sort of helpless desire to hear more of their
confidences.
“What makes you so mad on Australian life and
stories?" Joanna asked awkwardly one afternoon when
school was done for the day. Christine had just been
picturing an early-day scene on the point, long before
any houses were built there. The smoke from the in-
cinerator, she said, reminded her of the smoke from the
blacks’ fires long ago, curling upwards in signals to
tell of the coming of the white man’s ships.
Christine stood stiffly erect, surprised, with a black-
ened bar of iron in one grubby hand, while Ann went
on stoking.
“It’s history,” came simply, as a slow green glance
swept Joanna’s discontented face. “A country hasn’t any
meaning until you know how it started. When I grow
up, if I write well enough, I’d like to write a massive
tome about this country, starting from when the abori-
gines lived here in their native state, and going right
on to the days of aeroplanes and television.”
Joanna shrugged. “All the Meads are book-mad,” she
declared. “I can’t see anything in reading, myself—only
magazines. I’ve never read a book in my life.”
Christine was genuinely dismayed. Ann turned and
saw her expression, saying in a quick cry that held no
malice:
“Joanna’s too lazy to read, Chris. Besides, she doesn’t
have to know anything. She’s going to be a lady.” The
sarcasm inflecting her final words made the big brown-
eyed girl flush with anger. Christine stepped in quickly
before there might be ructions.
“How can you not read?” she asked. “What do you
keep in your brain?”


“The stuff from books isn’t all you can keep in your
brain,” Joanna flashed. “I’ve been about. I’ve met
people. My life hasn’t been confined to a State school and
a suburban bungalow. My aunt kept me up-to-date in
every way. And don’t you remember the sights you saw
on the way out here? You didn’t read those”
“No, of course,” Christine replied, still mesmerized
by Joanna’s peculiar ideas, “but I learned what the
sights meant by reading about them. The Chateau d'lf
for instance! It was just a sort of prison-castle on a
rocky islet off Marseilles, until I read about it in a
ship’s library book, and I found out then that it was
the prison where the Count of Monte Cristo was locked
up. You wouldn’t be a very good customer for me some
day, would you?” came thoughtfully. “Although I know
there must be some people who don’t read. You know
Alice in Wonderland, of course, and Westward Ho! and
The Jungle Tales, and all that sort of thing. Everybody
does.”
Joanna saved face by saying loftily:
“I know about the Count of Monte Cristo, naturally.”
“She saw it on the pictures,” Ann cried from near
the incinerator. “You can’t catch Joanna out on any
story or novel that’s been on the films, Chris,” she
added, smothering a laugh by bending to shove more
papers into the fire.
“I’ve never seen a picture-show,” Christine confessed.
“How .*. . odd,” Joanna faltered, thinking that Chris-
tine was making fun of her. She just did* not know what
to make of the red-head and, feeling herself standing
on very insecure ground, Joanna made a tactical move
to solid earth by asking Christine to come indoors and
“see her things”. Ann smothered a chuckle and waved a
hand, indicating her willingness for Christine to be so
entertained, and the two young people, so different in
almost every particular, moved indoors.


Christine wanted to admire the heaps of bright gar-
ments Joanna proudly dragged from wardrobe and
drawers, but it could not honestly be done. Red silks,
huge checks and lace-smothered underwear; sets of
coloured night-gowns, petticoat slips, and tangles of silk
stockings.
Aunty, said her idolized niece, had this frock copied
from one on the films; did Christine like it? This skirt
was peasant-style, but done in most expensive material,
of course; wasn’t it smart? These slacks, in prune and
raspberry, went with the short-sleeved shirts over there,
and of course, Joanna went on, she had caps, hats, shoes,
stockings, and all matching accessories, or what was the
use at all of being outfitted! Very soon, she declared,
when about seventeen, she would have full-length even-
ing frocks and make her debut.
Christine’s mind span. After Delphine and the Cove,
this episode was almost fantastic.
“Don’t you like them?” the big girl asked incredu-
lously.
“They wouldn’t suit my style,” came uneasily, “and
I haven’t any style to suit, anyway.”
Joanna’s momentary stupefaction underwent a sudden
change. Of course, what an idiot she was, to display a
heap of costly garments to a girl just free from that
awful existence at Blackfish Cove, without a decent rag
to her name. Joanna seated herself on the bed-edge and
eyed her companion with a quick sidelong glance.
“Look here,” was the unconsidered suggestion, “pick
out some of these things that would go with your colour-
ing, and don’t be silly about it. Nobody would know.
I wouldn’t even miss them. Aunty wouldn’t mind. She
doesn’t know what I have got, in any case, and wouldn’t
remember if she did. Meg could alter them. She’s a posi-
tive bundle of all the virtues. A bit stodgy, of course,
but that’s only natural.”


While she talked, her enthusiasm overriding her com-
mon sense, Joanna dragged a dozen or more garments
to a shimmering heap, planting a black hat on top
which she said would be gorgeous against red hair, and
failed to behold her companion’s gradually warming
face. Nor did Joanna know about the lasting rumpus
at the Cove, concerning cast-offs and charity, Christine
gulped, struggling between a desire to smite Joanna on
the head with the big black hat, and freeze her to
chagrin for her ill-bred patronizing.
“What’s up?” Joanna blurted, all at once aware of
tension. She was naturally generous, but had never
learned how to behave; nor did she understand the
delicacy of feeling that often hides beneath a shabby
garment. “Aren’t they good enough for you—Miss Wild-
wood?”
Christine lifted her chin.
“As you boast about knowing the world, why don’t
you know that decent people don’t grovel on their knees
in gratitude for cast-offs? And Mrs Driscoll doesn’t hap-
pen to be stodgy. She’s a gentlewoman. I’d look like an
actress on the stage in any of these things, too, even if I
wanted to take them. Thank you very much indeed,” she
added coldly, with her green eyes glinting, “but I don’t
need your charity.”
Joanna was flatly disconcerted. She had felt benevo-
lent, god-like, and uplifted to a sort of goodness that
gave her back her lost self-esteem, while bundling the
garments together, and now she felt the scarlet of em-
barrassment dye her full cheeks, for Christine had
pricked that self-esteem as a pin pricks an inflated
balloon. Joanna was again the victim of her inferiority
complex that smarted so because of her companion’s
well-modulated tones and dignified self-assurance, and
big Joanna did not that sensation.
“I should have thought,” she flashed, “that any one


in your position would have been only too glad to
grab them.”
“Yes, perhaps you would have thought that,” Chris-
tine smiled—and the smile was sardonic, “but you’re not
in my position, so you know nothing about it.”
“All right, cut off you nose to spite your face. I don’t
care.”
“It’s my face and my nose, and they’re your clothes.”
Christine’s forgiving spirit never submerged for long.
She realized the pathos of the big girl’s bewilderment
and tried to lessen it. “I know you meant well, Joanna,”
came haltingly, “but I don’t think, really, that you
learned much about human nature, however up-to-date
you might be. You only learned about possessions and
money . . . and that’s different. . . .” Christine slipped
away like a shadow, and joined Ann, without a word
of comment, by the incinerator.
Scarlet-cheeked Joanna left her room in confusion,
going to the sitting-room angrily to switch on the radio.
“Impudent little upstart,” she fumed, “and she’s abso-
lutely like a penniless waif in this house, thanks to
idiotic Meg. Meg would take in any waif or stray if she
pitched a pitiful enough story. Well, I don’t care what
Miss Wildwood thinks, anyway.”
But Joanna did, and her faith in her own values was
badly shaken, for, behind her manufactured contempt
for Andy Mead’s daughter, a wholesome respect for her
was starting. Joanna knew, with a sort of shock, that
the incident in the bedroom was going to haunt her
association with Christine, and the big girl prayed wildly
for Aunty to come back, and get another apartment.
She was not consoled when Meg came in a little later,
telling the brooding girl that, while she was at Darien
with the family, she would use the lovely veranda bed-
room, into which had gone Grandmother Driscoll’s own


bedroom things from Borrowdale, with the beautiful
writing desk Jo coveted.
“Those things,” Joanna said hotly, “are mine by in-
heritance in any case. I’m more of a Driscoll, spiritually,
than any of you. But thank you,” she added haughtily,
to hide her shame for what Christine had said, “and I’ll
like using them, while at Darien.”
A spasm of pity touched Meg’s quiet face. Poor
Joanna, she thought; jvhat a lot silly Sophie was account-
able for, in spoiling a girl’s happiness.
A few evenings later Dr Franklin telephoned, saying he
was sending some friends of his along, a couple by name
of Bland, to inspect the bungalow. The Blands called
that same night, and Evan hustled the young folk, in-
cluding testy Joanna, out into the moonlight at the
foot of the garden, while Meg played the part of land-
lady and showed the callers through the house from
porch to laundry. Mrs Bland was a little rotund lady
with an eye for towel-racks and cupboards. Her hus-
band was very long and lean, interested mostly in the
fire-places and armchairs. He rubbed his hands together
and said, “Capital, capital” every now and again, which
Meg considered very hopeful.
The cane stuff on the porch, she declared, and the
radio, were not included with the other things, but
apart from those . . . ? “Capital, capital,” said Mr Bland,
and asked for a pen and ink. The trio drank coffee
together a little later as a ceremonial seal on the bargain.
As the Blands knew Dr Franklin intimately, and spent
an occasional Sunday out on Jolly Roger, they also
felt they knew Evan, as Bill Franklin’s chum, so Meg
called the lad indoors to be introduced.
Evan, Meg explained, would be working at Driscoll’s
in the New Year, so he could collect the weekly rent.


Then, casting a motherly eye on the attractive lad, Mrs
Bland said thoughtfully:
“Why can’t you board with us, Evan? We can’t use
all the bedrooms, and we have only ourselves.” Mr
Bland said “Capital” again, and Evan went out a little
later to tell the others about his stroke of luck.
“It was a put-up job,” he grinned. “I’ll bet Dr Frank-
lin told the Blands I had to lodge somewhere, and
made the suggestion himself. But I like them; they’re
jolly decent, and it might be good for Meg, too, to have
a substitute landlord living on the premises. They won’t
want to play hanky-panky tricks with the furniture.”
Meg’s long list of tasks and problems was finally dealt
with to the last item, laying out the family’s clothing for
the journey to Darien. Christine’s trunk now held sev-
eral pretty cotton garments made by Meg in a hurry
through recent weeks, and instead of tight tape garters
she had short white socks and coloured sandals. Meg’s
way of providing simple necessities had not caused
offence, nor had the soft kiss going with the pretty, in-
expensive things.
Lucy was up first that important morning, calling in
anguished tones through the house that the day was
wasting, and hurry, hurry, and get up, or the car would
come before any one was ready. Christine was amazed
by the number of last-minute oddments congregating on
the veranda. She was in such a daze of joy that she
could scarcely eat her breakfast.
Tom Gale, driving the shop Buick, turned up at nine,
rolling himself a cigarette against the front fence while
Evan gathered still more oddments. Lucy and Priscilla
made after the cats, and Meg sat in the hall, on the
chair nearest the front door.
“What on earth will our sedate neighbours think of
us,” she laughed, “and aren’t the cats found yet?”
Lucy’s squeal of triumph from the drive was eloquent,


as Plutarch-called-Blitzkrieg proved why Evan had be-
stowed that title on him. Christine looked alarmed as a
burst of feline curses sounded from the side of the
house.
“We can’t take loose cats in the car with us, can we?”
she asked, looking very fresh and colourful in a new
green and white dirndl with a floppy green linen hat.
“Ann will possibly devise something,” Meg an-
nounced, smiling at Ann’s inventiveness while gazing
at the car.
How it would stagger to Darien with such a load on,
she could not imagine—although, in the past, it had
performed handsome services. Evan and Tom Gale were
now strapping the suitcases on the carrier, and roping
the last of a lumpy-looking assortment of household
articles along the mudguards, leaving only the front
doors free. Evan was very much “man of the house”
to-day, supervising the departure of the feminine folk.
He wanted the business done properly, and felt proud
of remaining on in the house until the Blands turned
up in the evening to take over. Joanna, who had flatly
refused to travel so uncomfortably, had already left the
house, for a shopping bout in town before catching
the bus to Egglethorpe. She had gone out resentfully,
in the smart white outfit given her last month on her
birthday, by Aunt Sophie.
Christine, pounding secretly with excitement, con-
trolled herself as much as she could, and hurried down
the hall to where Ann was muttering in the kitchen.
Priscilla leaned anxiously across the table, holding the
door of a wire meat-safe open, while Lucy and Ann,
cautiously, tried to insert the cats into their improvised
air-conditioned cage. Christine's eyes widened as Ann
skilfully held Blitzkrieg’s back legs with one hand, and
his front legs with the other, swinging him in with a
swoop, as if he were a bag of vegetables, to join his mate.


Hastily Lucy supplied an old blazer which Ann. tucked
gingerly under the cats, while Blitzkrieg showed his
sharp teeth with his nose wrinkled back, and gave forth
one of his long, breathy hisses, until, with no breath
left, he sat lashing his tail about and boiled like a
kettle.
“They don’t like travelling,” Ann remarked with un-
conscious humour, licking a long red scratch on one
brown hand, “but perhaps we can’t blame them, in a
way.” Then she forgot the scratch and carried the heavy
meat-safe in front of her, with both hands, out to the
car. Ann was, as usual, untidy, her dirndl crumpled and
streaked, a smear over her chin, and her soft linen hat-
brim bent back over the crown.
Christine bit her lower lip to restrain her feelings
as the party assembled on the kerb. Mrs Driscoll got
into the front seat with Lucy pulled close against her
right side, to leave room for the important driver, at
that moment inspecting the engine with the hood turned
back, while Christine watched him in terror. Perhaps
it wouldn’t startl He slapped it down again, however,
and her fear departed.
“Hand the safe in to me, please, Tom,” Ann said,
swinging her long legs over the bundles and the closed
door to the back seat, “but let me settle first.”
Presently the three girls in big linen hats, green, blue,
and white, were stirring themselves about to “settle”.
This was no easy effort, with the seat already piled up
with rugs, coats, bags, baskets, cartons, several treasures
of Lucy’s, and an alarm-clock peacefully ticking on a
bunch of parsnips. Then Ann, sitting well forward, re-
ceived the meat-safe, at which Priscilla looked in dismay.
“Do sit back, Ann,” the fair girl begged, “and let me
sit forward; we have to, drive through town.” Ann said
she wanted to brace it against the back of the front
seat, and sat where she was. Priscilla murmured some-


thing tragic about feeling like a circus, and Ann turned
quickly.
“Aunt Sophie!” she hissed, silencing the fusser.
Evan slammed the door near Tom, who was grinning
behind the driving-wheel, and the engine throbbed into
life. There was one tense moment for Christine and 10,
the Buick moved forward!
“Cheerio,” Evan called, hands in pockets on the kerb,
“nobody could ever guess you were moving.”
“He was sarcastic,” said Priscilla in pained tones. “I
think it’s quite bad enough to look like a lot of pioneers.
without having it shouted at you. It makes us con-
spicuous.”
“We don’t need shouting to make us conspicuous,”
Christine whispered, ecstatically nursing the clock and
the parsnips. “This is just marvellous.”
Ann turned her head as far as she could as the car
sped with commendable speed along the avenue.
“I should think a funny trip like this would be awfully
mundane for you, after coming in a liner from Eng-
land and then on the Kanimbla from Melbourne.”
“Oh, but this is personal,” Christine declared in heart-
felt tones. “On a liner you just feel swept away and
the captain could lose himself for all you knew, but
this is a family affair.”
“I’ll say it is,” Ann sniffed, glaring at an innocent
elderly man staring at the vehicle. Meg was laughing
softly. Priscilla suspected this and peered forward:
“Mother, haven’t you got any pride,” the little girl
grieved. “Oh, I wish I’d gone with Jo.”
“I’ve none of that sort of pride at all,” Meg answered,
“and I’m enjoying myself immensely . . . although I’m
afraid Blitzkrieg isn’t.”
Golden galleons were sweeping through Christine’s
brain, as soft wings of light sweep over the walls of a
darkened room when lamps pass by outside. She sat


with a half smile on her bright face, wanting nothing
more of life than just this—the start of the drive to the
old brown house.
Lucy turned her head, with some difficulty, in her
squeezed-up position.
“I’m going to look for some ozz-wun at Darien,” she
informed the trio behind.
“Some whatY' Ann asked quickly.
“Some ozz-wun,” the little girl repeated with a touch
of exasperation, for big words were always getting her
into trouble. “It must taste nice, because in a story I
read, in a magazine Priss had, which Aunt Sophie left
in the wash-house to be burned, a man stood ec-statch-i-
-cally drinking down large gulps of ozz-wun on the shin-
ing sands with his heart grateful to the moonlight.”
“Mercy 1” said Meg, who felt glad the magazine was
left behind. “What on earth . . . ? I've never heard of
ozz-wun, Lucy. Perhaps you’re pronouncing it wrongly.
Spell it.”
Lucy remembered with difficulty, spelling out
“o-z-o-n-e”, and was quite vexed when a gale of laughter
sounded. “Well,” she suggested haughtily, “perhaps you
can spell it right, then, Clever-bodies.”
Christine turned to glance lingeringly at the avenue,
along which she had scurried through a storm a month
ago. She only half-heard Lucy’s rapid fire of questions.
“Fancy!” Ann remarked in her brisk fashion. “We’re
actually free from school until after January. The horse
can have the little stable because he’s got the yard, and
I’ll have the big one. The door goes through from that
one into the man’s room behind. There’s an oven, Chris;
the early-day kind, that you put fire on top of, instead of
beside, and boil kettles on black bars. On wet days we
can have picnics there, and cook things. It won’t burn
down,” she said loudly, for Meg to overhear, “because
it’s all stone, even the floors. That’s what I call luxury,


and nobody can hear me if I hammer like a crazy black-
smith.” Her eyes glinted happily over the meat-safe.
“The orchard, Christine,” Priscilla said, turning her
pretty little face under the blue hat-brim, “is just per-
fection in blossom time, and in September you find
wildflowers on the ridge.”
Christine turned, her eyes like green stars.
“From the top of the cliff can you see far down
into the sea, and do the grasses really whisper in the
wind . . . ?”
The old car hummed along as if contented by its
responsible task of delivering, to the old brown house,
a cargo of young hearts and their dreams.


CHAPTER IX
THE OLD BROWN HOUSE
“Egglethoßpel” Ann exclaimed, an hour later, as if she,
and only she, had planned and built the rather depress-
ing little hamlet clustered round the southern end of
a long wooden causeway built over the inlet. Christine
peered forward like an explorer looking for the road
from Nowhere. As Meg decided to save herself a long
walk that afternoon, by shopping now, she asked Tom
to stop the car, and alighted to make her purchases.
The load in the vehicle had already been added to, by
tomatoes, vegetables, eggs and a chicken, bought at sev-
eral colourful roadside stalls which Meg declared she
could never resist.
Several sleepy-looking shops looked at one another
across a metalled road glittering in the hot sunlight.
A big red bus leaned sideways near the edge of a pine-
glade by the shore of the inlet. Picnic tables and forms,
and ragged-looking shelters, not unlike chicken-houses
minus the wire and perches, awaited week-end holiday-
makers. A low-built, long, and impermanent-looking
place of business drew Christine’s attention, because of
the curious notice rising from its roof. It said:
Fresh Fish. Sea-foods. Prawns. Rabbits. Weed. Worms.
Christine, knowing nothing about the peculiarities of


sea-side resorts characterized by fishing, camping, boat-
ing, and picnicking, asked in blank-faced amazement if
there were special sort of worms that people ate. Surely
notl The worms, Ann declared, were to tempt fish, not
human beings, and her cousin felt relieved.
“See that,” Ann said, resting her arms on the meat-
safe to point ahead. “Well, you go on to Palm Beach
along the causeway, and it’s heavenly down there. We
turn off to the right just there, past the sea-foods place.
You go to Pinewood from that road back there, behind
the shops. When we drive Dobbin to school,” she an-
nounced, spluttering for a second, “we can buy buns
for lunch at the bakery, and on the way home we can
call at the Post Office.”
Priscilla got a word in: “Mother won’t let us come
along here much, especially after dark, because there’s
a ‘noisy element’, particularly at week-ends. Oh, there’s
Mother. . . . Oh, Tom, look at all her parcels.”
Tom was out of the car in an instant as he spied Meg’s
trim little black-clad figure approaching with both arms
round a collection of purchases. As she reached the car
she laughed in a shamed manner.
“I meant only to buy absolute necessities to go on
with, but weakened, as usual,” she said, climbing in.
The car nosed its way off the metal high road on to a
soft reddish earthen track, streaked here and there by
white sand blown inland from the dunes marking the
entrance of the lagoon. They were piled yp as white and
pure as heaped salt, shading into yellow where they
swept low to the long sandspits flecked by sitting gulls.
Behind the dunes the dark blue sea showed, dancing in
little points, and a glimmer winding through the sand-
spits told how the lagoon emptied and filled eternally
with the rising and falling tide.
Christine felt a suffocating sensation now, and her
mind spun with words uttered long ago by the Certain


Gentleman. To the left of the dunes, Moon Rock stood
out, boldly brown and green, the facade facing the
ocean painted white in streaks, as the long fingers of
the surf pressed up into the fissures and dragged down
again. The beach swept southwards in a curved fold of
golden-cream towards Darien Point, rising even higher
than its companion bulwark at the other end of the bay.
“See there,” Ann cried, all at once stirred, indicating
a little palm glade to the right of the track, where a
scrap of the tropics seemed dropped down among native
bush. “You’ve no idea the fun we’ve had there, Chris,”
the eager young voice declared, “and I remember the
very feel of the fronds when we used to jump on them
like springboards. They fall with little crashes when
dried up by the heat. When the wind blows, the leaves
sort of rub together and make papery sounds. I forgot to
mention the palms before.”
“How did they get here?” asked the girl with the in-
satiable thirst for information. Ann didn’t know, but
she said there they were, so they must have got there
somehow, which undeniable truth ended that short dis-
cussion.
The air was hot now, as the tall cliffs acted like a wall
before the soft sea breeze, and left the sheltered area
to the unbroken mercy of the fierce sunlight. Christine
could not take her gaze from the little palm-glade,
motionless, blackly shadowed, and not foreign-looking
against the duller grey-greens and half-withered stretches
of grass slowly succumbing to the increasing heat of
summer.
“Ann, fancy owning your own palm-gladel Is the land
really Grandfather’s, even where the glade is?”
Ann nodded, blinking with satisfaction, then her fine
dark brows shot up into slurs.
“No, we own it,” she remarked in surprise to realize
this fact. “Goodness, so we do. We own all the land from


that fence in front of the palms to the top of the cliff,
and right from this track along to the next hill along the
ridge. Grandfather bought it for a song, but it’s going
to be valuable some day, he says, especially when the
city reaches out after the war.”
Christine could not bear to lift her gaze up to where
the old house stood against the landward fall of the
cliff slopes. The earthen track was rough for a car, so
Tom drove with infinite caution, and the scent of the
reedy lagoon wafted against the passengers’ faces in the
heat. The palm-glade had given way to some semi-open
land slightly tilted, and now a neglected orchard came
clearly into view, wandering upward and southward
over faintly hilly ground. The cliff-top ahead cut boldly
in dips and long curves across the paleness of the
summer sky.
The bonnet of the car faced the very rim of the land.
Sweet with salt, threaded through by coolness, the breeze
blew again, crystal clean and invigorating. The English-
born Mead felt her heart thudding as she saw, through
the corners of her eyes, a gabled, dark-looking house with
pale stone walls, a big out-jutting porch casting black
shadow underneath, and a long railed veranda looking
westward, across the lagoon.
Suddenly, the car stopped. Through the stillness came
the organ-roar of the waves. Journey’s end! Like a road
in a fairy-tale, it had just stopped where the land
stopped; where the rocks of the earth stood neck-deep
in the pale dry sand of the sea. A ridiculously small
white sand cove nestled under the rocks of the Point,
leading round a bold curve to several great table-like
sheets of rough stone going out into the water. Pools
gleamed like little mirrors where the receding tide had
left them to grow warm in the sunlight.
Then Christine held her breath, for half the long rock-
pool showed, pale green and smooth, surrounded on


three sides by rough boulders loosely cemented, the
fourth wall being the cliff-face itself. Shadow, mauve-
blue, marked the white foam, and the rest was golden-
cream. A purple patch of shadow lay across the pool,
whose far end defied the angry ocean waves with a
massive pile of boulders stained green by Time and
the action of the water. As she watched, a great wave
struck the rocks to seaward and spurted a lacy fan of
spray into the air. The drops flew out, fell on the sur-
face of the pool, fizzed there, and were drowned, and
the pale water went on dreaming again, but for several
trickles running out through some crevices.
Meg waited another moment, afraid to behold Chris-
tine's expression as she lifted her gaze to the old brown
house, for the enchantment of a dream is easily turned
to disappointment by the practical reality.
The newcomer looked up suddenly, as if she must,
over the pines sleeping by the shadowed stone stables,
past the tall pale-trunked gums standing in dignity with
dark bark peeling and scimitar leaves still, in the air
of the sheltered slopes, to the winding path laying a
pale line through the tangled old garden, and on, up-
wards, to the old building which had watched out over
the beach and lagoon since Grandfather Mead was a
very young man. Ecstasy ran like goose-flesh over Chris-
tine, and suddenly she felt shy and very conspicuous.
She hurried over the door of the car with the parsnips
and alarm clock held fast.
“Well,” Meg asked softly, so that only Christine could
hear, “and do you like our house, darling?”
The parsnips and clock were suddenly gathered
fiercely against the front of the green and white dirndl.
“Like it!” came in smothered tones. “I just love every
stone in its body, Cousin Meg,” and a brisk little girl
added a carry-all to her burden, hurrying after the other


young folk, also heavily burdened, talking on their
dawdling way uphill.
None of them looked back to where Meg stood beside
the car being unloaded by understanding Tom. She
stood near the big gate for a lonely moment, with the
thunder of the' surf in her ears. Her steadfast, lifted
look saw more than rocks, trees, and gables. ... The
children were planning as they climbed through the
pine-shadows. Priscilla cried out something about “To-
morrow . . .” But Meg was thinking of Yesterday. . . .
Slowly the family explored the house, exclaiming and
examining, from back door to front. Meg smiled a little
at the handsome old furniture arranged so stiffly by
the young men. But the blinds had all been put up, and
the brackets, jutting brass ones, for the curtain-poles.
These interested the city-born children, used to exten-
sion rods and pelmets. The poles were heavily made of
round wood with decorative screw-in ends tapering
thinly, and clattering wooden rings with loose brass
hooks inserted.
“Mother,” Priscilla whispered, for she was very awed
by the comparative size of the old brown house, “it
makes me feel old-fashioned. I don’t feel so big as I did
at the bungalow.”
Christine noted a fact at once, and expressed it to
quick-witted Ann.
“Ann, if the Driscoll furniture fits so beautifully in
this house, and this is all of it, even to the kettles and
curtains, then how could the Driscoll homestead be a
mansion, as Joanna said.”
Ann nodded with grim satisfaction.
“That’s Aunty’s make-believe,” she whispered in a
piercing aside. “She talks about the homestead as if it
were Windsor Castle or something, and Jo falls for it.


This is all the Driscoll stuff, and it does fit, but Jo
wouldn’t work it out for herself like that. She’s just
dazzled. . . . Come and see the sitting-room.”
The big room, on the north-eastern corner of the
simple, but roomy old house, had french doors opening
on the side veranda; and triple windows, reaching almost
to the ceiling, facing the front porch. The carpet was
old-fashioned, too, petal designs sprinkled softly on a
cream ground, and the big unmatching arm-chairs were
covered with chintz in a humming-bird and wistaria pat-
tern. The cedar bookcases had not yet been filled by
the books from the bungalow. The baby grand piano
from the homestead was not too large for this lofty old
room, where homely arm-chairs sat near stools and tables,
waiting to be arranged. Ann stroked the dark blue
cream-lined velvet curtains folded on the piano, saying
they would look stunning when hung, but weren’t the
long windows weirdl
Joanna’s room was next. The children entered by the
french doors standing open over the veranda boards.
“Oh, Annl” Christine exclaimed, clenching both hands
in her gathered green pockets. “What a lovely desk! Does
Jo ever use a desk? But, of course, it goes with the other
things. And the picturesl”
She knelt on the floor to peer at a stack against the
skirting. Sailing-ships; clipper-ships: there was some-
thing in one of the books in the drawing-room about
clippers, and she would read that book. “Ann, are they
originals?” Ann said they were pictures, and hurry, be-
cause of the other rooms, so her chum rose and turned
away.
The chums had a room each, and Lucy shared another
with Priscilla. These bedrooms were furnished simply
in pleasant country fashion—cedar chests of drawers,
plain cedar beds whose heads and feet reminded Chris-
tine of half-tables, with softly blended patchwork quilts


folded on the mattresses ready for the night. Meg had
not wasted her time when planning Evan’s task. In their
places were set oval and round hand-made coloured rag
rugs shaggy on the wood-blocked floors; plain wardrobes
and dressing-tables; simple lace and patterned linen cur-
tains; modestly plump arm-chairs, and ordinary chairs
with tapestry seats!
“You’ve got the Tower of Babel,” was Ann’s astonish-
ing remark as the quartet walked into Christine’s bed-
room. “Mother gave you and me, because we’re thirteen,
the two rooms with window-seats. They were just alcoves
once, but one Easter my father put seats in. They’re nice
to sit on,” she said rather superfluously, patting this one
affectionately. “And Mother thought the Tower of Babel
would be handy for your Bookworm papers and all that
sort of thing.”
Christine at last knew what Ann was talking about,
and turned to stare at the amazing wardrobe covering
the whole wall behind the door. Christine had never
beheld such a wardrobe.
“The old foreign gentleman who sold this house to
Grandfather,” Ann explained, “left the wardrobe behind
him when he went. I think it was too big to move. Per-
haps it was built inside the house. Look, it’s cram-full
of little drawers and they slide in and out without a
sound.”
Ann, as a connoisseur, proudly explained the fine
points of a handsome example of old workmanship, but
it was terribly massive to city-trained sight. A sort of
tiara made of shiny wood stood high along the top.
The construction was five doors wide, without mirrors.
There were hat-shelves, boot-racks, collar drawers, cav-
ities and little double-doored inside cupboards. The
knobs were carved into the drawer-fronts, level with the
surface. Wooden coat-hooks stuck out round one long
cavity, and a drawer set firm below where the hems of


long coats would hang. The old wood smelled faintly
of some lingering fragrance, flavoured by the musty
scent of ancient journals, of which a small stack stood
high above a nest of cupboards in the centre opening.
“These journals,” Ann said, standing on tiptoe to pat
them, “are funny. We’ll look at them some other time.
The eccentric foreign gentleman spoke about seven
languages. He got papers and journals from all over
Europe. Well, on wet days, when Mother and your father
were here on holidays, they used to laugh at the pictures
in those journals. So did we, when we came here some-
times on holidays. You’ll see. Ladies with bustles and
parasols, and gentlemen in long fitting trousers with
villainous whiskers that they twiddle with an elegant
hand. . . . Laugh!” Ann exclaimed, relishing the fashions
of the nineties. “I almost died.”
“But,” said Priscilla, standing by gaping Lucy, “Ann
foreot to tell you why the wardrobe is the Tower of
Babel.”
“I’ve just been telling her,” Ann cried indignantly.
Illumination dawned on Christine.
“Oh,” she said, “because of the many languages in
the journals in the wardrobe. Ann! Who named it the
Tower of Babel?”
Ann blinked. “I don’t know. It just sort of happened.”
“I'll bet my father did,” Christine declared, her voice
full with satisfaction.
“It does sound a bit like him,” Ann nodded, glancing
round the simple room with its captivating country
wholesomeness. And Christine, as keen in her youth as
her father was in scenting a story, sighed with satisfac-
tion to regard herself as mistress of the Tower of Babel.
All the children jumped and stared in startled sur-
prise as a very unromantic sound shrilled through the
house.
“I forgot telephones,” Priscilla admitted, speaking for


all, “and I didn’t notice it, coming in. Grandfather must
have had it put on since we came here ages ago.”
They heard Meg’s footsteps going along the hall,
deadened on the rugs, clicking faintly on the wood-
blocking in between. Priscilla made one of her infre :
quently picturesque remarks then, saying the telephone
made her feel like a ship tied to town by a long rope.
She hesitated, because she did like the city, in a way,
and added:
“It is nice, really, to have a few conveniences, especi-
ally for grocery orders and that sort of thing.”
Ann herself felt inspired then to groan in anticipation
of the long tramp to Egglethorpe, or Moon Rock, for
goods, but Christine had an advantage over the others,
with her Spartan experiences at the Cove.
“Walking is good fun,” she declared, “when you get
the hang of it.”
“Yes, that’s all very well,” said city-influenced Priscilla,
whose chief delight was in using a taxi, with her best
gloves on, “but what of the baking-hot weather, and
sometimes on the way to the Rock you have to jump
the channel, or wade through with your sandals off, and
that’s rather difficult with about a bushel of mixed
groceries.”
“But when the horse comes . . .” Lucy cried, as the
quartet drifted out to the kitchen.
“How,” asked Ann, “can a horse and trap go belting
along the beach, not to mention leaping the channel.
The buggy isn’t a winged chariot. Moon Rock,” she
explained, as the four entered the kitchen to look with
appreciation on the homely range and huge country
dresser as yet unadorned by china, “is smart, Chris.
Mrs Metcalfe, a friend of Mother’s, lives there. Mr Met-
calfe was my father’s solicitor, and he’s Aunty’s, too. She
nearly drives him off his dot, and I mean that, really.
But Mrs Metcalfe isn’t smart; she’s nice, and proper,


and pleasant, even r if she is a bit rich with society
friends.”
Avoiding Priscilla’s worried look, Ann went on:
‘‘Mr Metcalfe once got Aunty out of a law-case for
not wanting to compensate for a flat she spoiled. She
said it was the landlord’s fault because the curtains got
alight. . . . Did you ever hear of such a thing! So they
had a fight about it, politely, in private, and Aunty lost.”
Uneasy Priscilla, in her haunting terror of “being
made a show of”, by Aunty or anybody else, faltered:
“I hate to think of y our relations being judged by
juries, with their names in the papers.”
“She didn’t have a jury,” Ann cried witheringly. “Any
one would think you’d never been to the pictures. Aunty
doesn’t go round slaughtering people. She only destroys
things and doesn’t like paying her bills.” And with that
unconscious denunciation of Aunty sounding in the
room, the conversationalists turned to glance at their
mother.
She came in with a pleased look on her face.
“That was Evan,” she informed the company. “Mr
Jurgen has picked up a nice big ice-chest, cheaply, at a
sale, and we have to ask Tom to bring it with him
next time he comes here. Now, lunch. . . . Call Tom,
Lucy, and the rest of us can try to deal with some of
this litter.”
Joanna arrived at nearly four that afternoon. Recklessly
determined to assert herself from the start, she had de-
liberately wasted time in town, shopping round the
stores, lunching in a big restaurant, then going to a
picture-show and sitting through half a programme
which, because it was mostly news-reels, had bored her
to tears. There was nothing else to do then but catch the
bus for Darien.


She was blazing hot after the long walk along the
sand-strewn earthen track. Crowds had thronged the bus,
stamping up and down the steps at each monotonous
halt, screaming and yelling when the sea came into sight.
The hordes offended Exclusive Joanna deeply. It was
preposterous of Aunty to leave her in this semi-rural
isolation just to suit her own whims and fancies.
The other young folk were now in the stable, sharing
the laborious task of unpacking and arranging Ann’s
professional equipment. The slaty-eyed girl was like a
chimney-sweep with her hair up like black grass above
a grubby face tense with inward joy. Priscilla, who for
some minutes had been resenting her brisk sister’s bossy
orders, looked dainty as usual, for she seemed to have
some secret formula that kept her clean in almost any
circumstances.
“Let her rip,” Christine whispered, noticing the
offended look on the fair child’s kittenish features, “for
she’s in her element.”
Lucy was wet, dirty, and happy, after cleaning strings
of odd green whiskers out of the trough and knocking
the tap with a stone until it gushed with rusty water.
Now a beautiful clean drink awaited the horse, who was
not expected until the New Year. Lucy had on her fav-
ourite shorts of navy drill with back patch-pockets, and
her shirt hung out all round, which gave her an agree-
able swaggerish sensation.
Hearing the big gate scrape across the sandy gravel
of the drive, Ann hopped out into the sunlight, all hair,
eyes, and dirt, a hammer in one hand.
“Where have you been?” she called tactlessly, pointing
with the hammer. “Even if there is daylight saving it’s
after four. We’ve got the alarm clock down here, so you
can’t say it isn’t. And we had a marvellous lunch of
fish and home-made chips, with Tom and us in the
lobby, because the kitchen is a litter ... It doesn’t take


about seven hours to shop,” she cried, "especially on
Saturdays when the stores close before one. I’ll bet
you’ve been to the pictures, instead of coming home
to give Mother a bit of a hand . .
“Mind your own business,” Joanna glared, clutching
her white handbag against her chest as if about to be
attacked. "And I had creamed whitebait and pineapple
salad for my lunch, if you want to know, with eclairs
and whipped-cream coffee afterwards . . . and salted
almonds.”
"Then no wonder you’re fat,” Ann retorted, moment-
arily crushed by the recital.
“I’m not fat, and I’d rather be fat and tidy, than look
like you do, you grubby lot of ragamuffins. You ought
to be ashamed of yourselves.”
Priscilla was offended. "I’m tidy, and I washed my
hands six times in the trough.”
"Come on,” Christine whispered, jerking the back of
her chum’s soiled frock. "We’re wasting time, and what’s
the use of arguing with a fashion-plate like Joanna.”
Muttering, the amateur toy-maker returned to the stable
and resumed operations.
Meg had given her energetic daughter full permission
to make a spiritual home and work-shop of the stable
quarters. The snug old room behind the double stable
had a wash-room leading from it, and the place was now
dubbed a "flat”. It had possibilities Ann had quickly
foreseen, with her keen eye measuring and assessing.
The wash-room was crammed tightly by a miscellaneous
assortment of simple furniture, discarded from the old
house on the slope, as the young men arrived with the
new things.
Evan had declared professionally two weeks ago on the
value of the articles:
"They’d not be worth moving back to town. They
wouldn’t fetch five quid at any sale, unless the crowd


were blind and mesmerized. Leave them down in the
room; they might come in handy.” Ann had pounced
with a cry of satisfaction on the shabby cast-outs, and
perhaps uplifted their lowered pride a little, by shouting:
“I can practice renovating on them. Oh, Mother, can
I have them, please?”
“I'm not deaf, or over at Moon Rock,” Meg answered,
casting a housewifely eye over the unattractive objects.
“Yes, do what you like with them,” she finally allowed,
“providing there’s no waste or destruction, for I can’t
stand either of those vices—at any price,”
It was Christine’s first experience at playing house,
and her eyes glinted with visions as the quartette heaved
and pulled, lifted and prodded, in that curious fever of
excitement known only to house-planners, whether nine,
nineteen, or ninety.
“Fancy having our own flat,” Ann blinked, “with
running water on the premises, not to mention my work-
shop just through the door.”
“Not to mention,” Priscilla said darkly, “the stable
just round the corner.”
“Oh, the darling horse,” Lucy shivered, hugging her-
self as she remembered. “And if he gets homesick we can
go out and give him bits and pat him.”
Christine looked round her, beholding, with her inner
vision, the flat that was to be. The Stillwells were mere
shadowy ghosts, pale and uninteresting, beside this
vividly satisfying real and lovely world at Darien.
“We must have book-shelves,” she said, pointing to
the space beneath the window, “just there, and perhaps
Trilby will get used to coming down and sitting by the
fire, if we can find a hearthrug to put there, and then
it will be just glorious,”
“And,” Ann promised generously, “if you get inspira-
tions and find the house a bit noisy, you can come down
here and fix them up on your own. Providing, that is.


that I’m not hammering or anything, because that would
interrupt you a bit.”
Yes, it would, Christine admitted thoughtfully, and
they went on with Ann’s work-shop.
Joanna was still sitting on the iron and wooden seat
placed by some beauty-lover half way up through the
pines. She had dropped there as though felled, on her
toil up the path, and now leaned with one arm along
the back of the seat, wondering, thinking, watching. . . .
The waves never stopped; you watched one swell in to-
ward the foam, lift, topple, crash and boil forward, and
another come behind it, while the first one sent its
long creamy scallops fizzing up the sand, hissing back
while melting into the smoothness of the slope.
Memories were stirring at the back of her mind, in
the mesmeric thunder of the restless sea. They moved
in her head like smoke behind glass. One Easter-time,
when Sophie had characteristically left Joanna at the
bungalow while departing on a motor-tour, the family
had driven to Darien for a week’s freedom from town.
The old house had been furnished in picnic-fashion
then. She remembered dimly the sound of running feet
on the wood-blocked floors, meals at a big deal table
in the brick-floored lobby, noisy hours in the rock-pool
with Meg knitting under a sunshade in a deck-chair by
the little cove . . . walks along the moonlit sands . . .
shopping at the queer little sleepy stores at Egglethorpe
and Moon Rock . . . arguments, scuffles, picnics under
the pines, when the sea had roared and the gulls had
mewed, as they were doing now.
Joanna remembered her father, quiet and happy be-
hind the wheel of the Buick, and then, with his pipe
in his mouth, as he glassed-in the porch, his feet tangled
in shavings, while Evan and Ann helped in their juvenile
fashion.
Evan had cried shrilly in his excitement:


“Dad, I’m not much good at carpentering, but when
1 grow up can I be a partner at Driscoll’s with you? I
don’t want a profession.”
And then, Francis’s quiet words as he stopped working
and gazed out along the beach:
“You would make me very proud and happy, son, to
carry on at Driscoll's for me.” Something in the way
he had spoken impressed itself on Joanna’s mind, and
now, in recalling the incident, she understood. He had
known he might not live. . . . He had known\
Joanna made an effort to remember what Evan had
answered, but she could not. Besides, he was young; it
was before Lucy was born. Meg had poured the tea and
said how she wished she owned the old house, and how
she would furnish it, losing herself in a feminine dream
of tapestries and wood and silver.
But Francis had smiled, saying: “If this were our
house, my dear, we already have the furniture—the Dris-
coll things. However,” he had gone oh, “I might be able
to manage a home of our own before long, out a
little from town. Perhaps not an elaborate one. One
about the size of this perhaps. With the bungalow let . . .
Now you have me dreaming, too,” he had laughed, “al-
though it is a very pleasant dream—a kindly home in a
lovely setting for ourselves and our four hostages to
fortune.”
Four! Joanna sat rigid for a moment. Four hostages
to fortune. Lucy had not been thought of. So, four meant
Evan, Ann, Priscilla, and . . . herself. Her father had
regarded her as one of the family; wanted her to be one
of the family: and planned the home of the future for
them all—with the Driscoll things. Darien was not the
home he had planned, but he would have loved it,
Joanna knew.
“But,” her rebellious heart insisted, “we would have
had a country home, and a fine one, at Borrowdale,


but for Dad being so stubborn over the shop and marry-
ing Meg, for that was why Grandmother Driscoll willed
him only the furniture. Evan and I would have been
living at Borrowdale as our mother used to live, with
a proper circle round us.”
The waves thundered on, unheeding of the discon-
tented young human brooding on the everlasting
muddles of existence. Joanna’s chief cause of unhappi-
ness was in wanting things both ways. She loved her
father’s memory, but grieved for the blunders the busi-
ness man had made. She liked Meg underneath, but
resented her as a stepmother. And she gloried in surfing
and swimming, but hated being away from town where
there was always something interesting.
Cast down by the sort of mood that discontent brings,
Joanna shrugged and made her indolent way up the
winding pathway to the house.


CHAPTER X
THE DISTURBING ELEMENT
For reasons known only to Meg’s secret self, she had
concentrated on Joanna’s room, that morning of arrival.
Leaving the remains of an early lunch covered over on
the lobby table for attending to later, she had Tom and
Christine to help her in the veranda-room, where it took
a very short time to hang the curtains, which only had
to be hooked on to the rings and the pole hoisted to
the brackets. The bed-spread of the same crisply lovely
rose brocade was swiftly unwrapped and smoothed on
the bed, whose four posts tapered off like wooden torch-
flames. The clipper-ship pictures were hung round the
walls in a few moments, as the wires were attached
and a bundle of rail-hooks tied on. When the room
was done, Meg had surveyed the effect with a pleased
smile and turned her attention to Ann, clamouring
for her mother to “come down and see how the bench
and things look in the stable”.
It was magic to Joanna when, coming resentfully up
the slope with the heaviness of that feeling in her step,
she walked into the veranda-room and stopped dead,
staring about her in stupefaction. A slow blush of
mingled pleasure and annoyance crept to her cheeks.
Why she felt annoyed she did not quite know, unless
it was because she also felt so pleased. Joanna did not
want to be “won over” by the family. Aunty had said


on several occasions how Meg had done her utmost to
rob a lonely woman of her only comfort—Joanna. The
thoughtless girl had never considered the question closely.
Nor had she analysed Sophie’s “loneliness”, which was
actually the blindly deliberate isolation of a person who
will not make ordinary concessions to life. People vexed
Sophie if she saw too much of them. She liked to pick
them up and drop them when she felt inclined. She
liked doing as she liked, when she liked, and how she
liked, and the mere thought of human bondage made
her feel frantic. Nor did she consider Joanna as a person,
or feel any bondage to her; when she tired of the girl,
there was the family to take her over. When Sophie
tired of her liberty, she recovered Joanna, and dazzled
the girl back into her former state of mesmerized help-
lessness. The aunt never had the slightest fear of losing
Joanna. Money, to Sophie, was a god, a power, a flag
she could wave, and when the flag waved, Joanna stood
respectful, like a patriot awed by all that the flag repre-
sented.
And now, staring at the veranda-room, Jo thought:
“It’s Meg’s cunning way of trying to show me the
difference between Aunty’s flats, and Darien. Well, Meg
slips this time, because it isn’t her furniture at all; it
was my Grandmother Driscoll’s.”
The effect, however, of the comparison, had impressed
Joanna’s mind. She kept seeing the last bedroom she
had used in a bay-side flat with Sophie—an airless, showy,
brightly enamelled box of a room for ever littered and
dusty.
“But Meg isn’t going to make me fawn in admiration
of a room filled with Driscoll things,” the misguided
girl murmured, removing her hat reluctantly, “and the
furniture doesn’t kill the beastly monotony of living
at the back of nowhere. I’m not going to be won overl”
The very fact of her guilt in contesting the idea, was


proof of its rightness, and again Jo remembered her
father, his feet entangled in shavings, smiling about his
four hostages to fortune.
“This house,” said Joanna in angry undertones, “is
too smug for words. I won’t be won over. He didn’t really
care where I lived, and he knew Aunty was lonely.”
But he had cared, and Jo knew it, feeling a new sense
of misery as the atmosphere of the old house crept round
her like a spell. Then she laughed scornfully and trod
out to inspect the other rooms, irresistibly inquisitive,
even though she knew she would picture her father
everywhere, for the furniture, once in his boyhood home,
was carrying her mind helplessly toward him.
“I won't be won over,” she insisted, as the quiet days
went by. Everything she heard and saw, with few ex-
ceptions, she translated into an urge to win her over.
When Christine called the big girl into the room with
the Tower of Babel taking an honoured place, to show
Jo the table by the window-seat where the scribbler
had arranged her pens, the mulga-wood inkwell, pencils,
and papers, Jo shrugged her complete indifference to
such a paltry display.
“It doesn’t impress me a bit,” the girl said loftily. “I
happen to have a proper desk in my room, and you
won’t convert me over to your asinine ideas,”
Christine gazed steadily into the uneasy brown eyes.
With unmoving face, the red-head went on staring, un-
able to credit her companion with such silly fancies.
“What’s the use of a desk you never use?” asked Chris-
tine simply. “And I’m not interested enough in your
empty brain to want to convert it to anything. You
can’t convert emptiness.”
“Cocky little beast,” Jo muttered, flushing miserably.
“I heard you,” came smoothly, “but I don’t mean to
be cocky. I stated a plain fact. What is the good of any-


thing you don’t use—especially a brain,” she added,
irresistibly.
“Well, at least,” cried the disconcerted girl, “I own
my desk,”
“No you don’t,” Christine answered flatly, warm in
defence of Cousin Meg, who was looked on so cheaply
by Joanna. “Cousin Meg owns it, and you’re only here
temporarily, because you’re always brooding to get
away.”
Jo avoided that truth by letting her anger rise.
“Every article in this house belonged to my father,”
she retorted, very near tears, but controlling herself only
because Christine’s face was very wise and firm. “The
things in this place are Driscoll things.”
“You’re funny,” the red-head admitted, after a long
pause. “You own your father when you fling the
furniture at us, and disown him when you hanker after
Aunty. With a lovely father like yours was, you ought
to worship everything he touched or handled. That’s
how I feel about my father, and Dad never had to fight
for me like yours did for you. Evan knows. He went
through the rooms last week-end with me, and told me
stories about all the things. It was like a romance. That’s
what a home is, I think. Associations make a home
alive. I’ve only found that out myself since I came
here . . .”
“Romancel” Joanna scoffed, after staring with her
heart sinking. “That’s all you think about. Stories! Life
isn’t a beastly book.”
"It’s like a book,” Christine answered very slowly, for
that was true. “And nearly all real homes have stories.
And I think a home is the loveliest thing there is.”
“Well, I don’t happen to agree with you,” Joanna
snapped, stalking toward the door, where she turned
with her handsome face lifted. “A home, as you call it,


to me, is just something to keep you tied up and dull
and stuffy.”
Christine remembered a discussion with old Joe.
“A home is an anchor,” she declared, remembering his
words. “Civilization depends on homes for security, and
that’s how solid empires are made, and shiftless people
don’t help build empires. People need anchors.”
“What do you think I am, to need an anchor?” Jo
cried as she disappeared. “A blessed trawler or some-
thing!”
Christine sat down suddenly on her window-seat and
spluttered with helpless laughter. It was Andy’s sense
for the absurd that gripped his daughter now, even
though she was shocked by Joanna’s borrowed prin-
ciples. And, as there were stories in everything, the
amateur scribbler won another Bookworm badge a week
later by writing a paragraph called “ ’Mid pleasures and
palaces”.
Joanna read the piece in exasperated curiosity, and felt
worse than ever. She had no tact, so flew at the red-
head, who found her reading the clipping, which Jo
dropped as though it were red-hot.
“You’re like a dust-man,” she cried, "with your poking
round after things to write about. That’s how dust-men
behave, collecting all the rubbish they can find to sell
and use.”
"Yes,” Christine answered thoughtfully, disconcerting
the angry girl, “it is a bit like that, isn’t it, although
it can’t be very rubbishy, or it wouldn't have won me
a badge.”
“You and your badges!” Jo flashed. “They aren’t any-
thing. Who sees them, anyway?”
"/ do,” came smartly, and Christine walked away.
The house and everybody under its roof seemed to be
entering into a subtle conspiracy to undermine Jo’s self-
esteem. This arrogant quality in her had been inflated


by Aunty’s flatteries and grandeur-complex. Jo did not
like feeling in the wrong, which she often did, at
Darien, with so many reminders round her to prick her
sense of importance. Moreover, she could not, however
she tried, forget the picture of her father, tall and pale
and fair, his feet in shavings, talking about his four
hostages to fortune. The image haunted her.
"I want to get away from this house,” she sobbed one
night in her bed, with the pines and the sea murmuring.
“I hate the beastly old place. I don’t feel I belong to
myself any more. It keeps on telling me things . . . things
that make me feel smaller than a worm.”
It was not the house, naturally, who whispered those
things, but the small inner voice that nobody living can
silence, and the voice kept on saying:
“Your dead father’s wishes can’t be ignored. . . . You
are his eldest daughter and he made this home partly
for you. . . , He was too kind and gentle to drag you
away from his sister, because he believed her lonely
when she kept you against his wish. . . . He saved these
things to make a home for his children, and you are
his eldest girl.”
She had not quite realized this through her fifteen
years of living. Joanna was Aunt Sophie’s favoured
niece. But now, with the Driscoll furniture round her,
she had suddenly become her father’s eldest daughter.
It was maddening. She could not escape the feeling
while under this roof. And that is why Joanna often
wept, longing for Aunty to send for her; for the un-
happy girl had been trained to run away from problems,
which are never solved like that. Besides, she didn’t
feel herself at Darien—which meant, actually, that her
arrogance was futile, in a house where everybody was
useful, busy, and happy from morning until night.
“It’s Christine,” Jo told herself unreasonably, “for it
wouldn’t be so bad without her. I’m used to Meg and


the others, but Christine . . . She looks right into me
with those cat’s eyes of hers—the little upstart.”
To escape the house and its reminders, Joanna started
haunting Moon Rock, where it was “smart”, and picked
up with a mousy girl called Moira Dinning, spending
the summer there in a big verandaed bungalow, rented
by her mother. Moira was smart; Mrs Dinning was
smart, and seemed to have some of Aunty’s less spec-
tacular ideas. Moira also admired Jo, envious of her
gipsy-like beauty and elegant apparel. It was food and
drink to Jo’s inferiority complex, when Moira evidenced
the naive signs of heroine-worship. Sophisticated on the
surface, lonely and rather ashamed of her mother, who
did her utmost to look ten years younger than her age,
Moira was a nice child at heart—and very bored by
Moon Rock, where Mrs Dinning turned her back on the
sea, to entertain week-enders from town and those who
called during the week. And one day, sitting on Moira’s
front veranda, Joanna received a minor shock.
Mrs Metcalfe’s house was not far away; a large, taste-
fully decorated home where the solicitor and his wife
lived happily, with their married children dashing home
when they could. Moira was smiling as she pointed to-
ward a trim little figure coming out from the Metcalfe
home. It was Meg, who had just had afternoon tea
with Eleanor Metcalfe.
“Those Metcalfes,” Moira shrugged, “are the real sort
of people I’d like to know, but Mother calls them dull
and proper. Jealous, of course. They don’t fill their
house with a lot of nit-wits screeching with laughter
like a bunch of cockatoos. Look at that visitor, coming
out now. She wouldn’t visit here. She reminds me rather
of Norma Shearer. Do look, Jo. She’s coming this way.”


Joanna stirred as from a spell, and leaned over the
veranda rails.
“Oh,” she heard herself say casually, “that’s my step-
mother. She is rather sweet, and we get along rather
well.”
Moira stared, for when Joanna had formerly referred
to “my stepmother”, she had shrugged and, out of sheer
delicacy, Moira had asked no questions, imagining in-
credible difficulties at Darien. For the life of her, Jo
could not resist calling “00-oooo”, as Meg passed under
the pines with her sunshade casting coloured shadows
on her white silk frock. She looked up, smiled, and waved
a glove, then passed on, disappearing into Mrs Couch’s
shop.
“Well!” Moira gasped. “What a surprise—you lucky
thingl And a home like Darien, tool Nobody could call
you boastful, could they?”
Joanna enjoyed the faint glow of virtue making her
feel good all over. Moira’s plain face was wistfully
envious.
“Oh,” Jo shrugged, “one just takes that sort of thing
for granted. We moved from our town bungalow when
school broke up, but Darien is rather decent. It’s fur-
nished with my father’s boyhood things, from the coun-
try, where he used to live. Old stuff, you know.”
She went home later ir* a daze, but she was rather
worried, too, for if she asked Moira along to Darien,
someone would give the show away. And if she didn’t,
Moira might think it peculiar. Not for worlds, now,
would Joanna confess to her life with Aunty, for some-
how Jo wanted her friend to regard her as Meg’s step-
daughter, who lived at Darien.
Evan admitted how worried he was over his sister. Her
aggressive attitude was painfyl to fitness, when he knew


how it hurt Meg and roused the children into justifiable
self-defence. It was not fair on Meg, and the lovely peace
of the old house was disrupted by more than the usual
upsets that happen in all normal families, with a half
dozen different temperaments to contend with, and he
agonized in secret to know the cause. He was a Driscoll;
Jo was a Driscoll, and—so was Aunty, the very root of the
trouble.
He and Jo had not had many chances to become
intimate, as most brothers and sisters were, with their
separate interests and the customary differences. And
now, at Darien, she was hostile and on her guard, while
he came home only on Saturdays, perhaps not staying
the night, for another man had joined up, leaving Mr
Jurgen in a fix, but for Evan; and instead of starting
work in the New Year, he was now on the pay-roll. Not
that he minded; it was good to get a bit of cash in hand
with Christmas coming, apart from the proprietary in-
terest he felt as the former owner’s son. One of the tall
lad’s richest satisfactions was in regarding himself as the
future manager, with Meg’s little income safe; for by
Jove, she would need it, the way the world was going.
It simply was not an age when anybody could afford
to be idle, or look on life as only fun and amusement.
The world was in the dickens of a mess, and any one
over fourteen or so who went on blindly, without a
thought for anything constructive or progressive, was in
for a shock when facing adult experience. How could
play-boys and empty-headed kids like Jo ever do any
good for any new order, let alone for themselves?
And, with these thoughts battering his responsible
mind, Evan worried over Jo, for he loved her in a de-
spairing way, and admired her appearance with pride
and the thrill that beauty gives to any appreciative heart.
In that mood, he talked to Meg the following Satur-
day afternoon, just after he came home. They had tea


together on the porch, then wandered in the garden
which, after a few attacks by a jobbing-man from Eggle-
thorpe, was starting to emerge from the high grassy
tangle, and look like a garden, with the lawns mowed
and the tree-trunks cleared of rubbish. The pine-glade
was to remain untouched, for the thick carpet of needles
prevented weeds, and the entwining beauty of the peri-
winkles made a corner that rested the soul and the eyes,
just to linger there with the whispering branches
answering softly the louder voice of the surf.
The pair stopped behind a rough hedge of grey laven-
der, and Meg plucked a few of the plushy violet tufts,
holding them to her face as she tried to shape the right
answer to the lad’s troubled question regarding Jo and
her immediate future.
“I can’t find it in me to blame Jo,” came quietly as
Meg puckered her brows on the problem. “The life she’s
lived would ruin any girl. And I'm convinced, Evan,
that it isn’t ruin so much as . . .” She stopped and
pointed a lavender tuft toward a rose-bush recently freed
of tall weeds and wild creeper. “Jo is like that bush. The
weeds have been growing round her real beauty for fif-
teen years. When the weeds are cleared . . .” Meg’s grey
eyes smiled into the boy’s eyes, grey-blue and anxious
under his wrinkled brows.
“Why didn’t Dad get her away from Aunt Sophie?”
he frowned, hands in pockets, as he stared out over the
sea.
Meg explained everything in a few words.
“He was an idealist—a dreamer, and he was kind.
Sophie was, as he believed, a lonely woman. Nor did
he know that the first years of a child’s life are far more
important than adolescence—when he planned to give
her a proper home.”
“That’s all very well,” the lad who was not a dreamer
said, “but surely he saw how Aunt Sophie was changing


the kid into a rotten little snob, with her head full of
ideas of grandeur and ancestor-worship and ostentation.”
“Your father was seldom well,” Meg said levelly,
watching the fragrant scrap of violet and grey in her
fingers. The stem twirled slowly. “He was fighting—in a
race against time—to secure us all against what had to
happen, so that Driscoll’s would provide us with a liv-
ing. Then, Evan, his up-bringing . . . dear as he was,
he had been ingrained with the old-fashioned notion
that a housewife must have help. It worried him dread-
fully that I had even to do all the washing and ironing
at times.” She laughed on an unsteady note. “But I was
brought up on a farm, by a busy little mother who
believed in girls learning usefulness from infancy, and a
father who knew honest work hurt nobody. After house-
keeping—as I had done since fifteen, when Mum died
and I left school—in a big rambling farm-house with
only one maid-of-all-work, and cooking sometimes at
week-ends for ten or even fifteen relations, all arriving
with gossip and jam or fruit and their babies, the bunga-
low was child’s play to me. It was like a toy house,
with a garden that sometimes made me laugh—after the
farm and its miles in every direction.”
“You’ve been grand,” he said huskily, turning sud-
denly to break the long glance fixed on her gentle
countenance. “I think that hurts me more when Jo
behaves like a little cad, snapping and sneering and air-
ing her Driscoll manners. She believes all Aunt Sophie
says.”
“Any girl believes all that is told her by the one bring-
ing her up,” Meg declared, “and lies are the truth to the
mind knowing nothing else, Evan.”
“I’d like to tell her the truth,” he cried in smothered
anger. “I’d like to get hold of her and ram the truth
down her neck. The way you managed . . . caring for
Dad, looking after me, putting up with Sophie and her


infernal patronizing, running the house on your own.
Cooking, working . . . giving, the whole dashed time.”
Her laughter was close to tears, for her heart was very
full, with Francis before her mind’s eyes, and his son
so like him, and so anguished over his wayward sister.
“Givers can’t help being givers,” she said. "They were
made that way. No giver is ever really unhappy. The
fate that makes them soft and easily imposed upon,
plastic and protective, also puts something within that
never fails, no matter what grief or loneliness comes, or
—ingratitude. And is giving really giving if one looks for
gratitude? Giving with the expectation of something in
return—even gratitude—is really making a bargain, and
rather a conceited bargain, too. And people who must
be thanked and praised, for what they might do, aren’t
givers at all; they are actually egotists wanting to feel
big and god-like. I seem to be plunging rather deep . . .”
She smiled at the interested lad. "I suppose you think
me silly,” she suggested.
"Silly,” was the gruff response. “No fear, Meg; I
think you’re great.” He grinned. "So does Bill Franklin.
He said on the ketch last week that if he were twenty
years older he’d go on his bended knee and pro-
pose. . . .”
She was glad to speak nonsensically, in the strain of
memories.
"Mercy! I should hate to marry a week-end yachtsman,
for I’d be lonelier than . , .” She stopped suddenly and
looked away, for Evan said thickly:
“Meg, how lonely are you, honestly?”
The lavender stem twirled rapidly now.
"Sometimes much more and sometimes much less,”
she fenced, then looked up. “Now what about Joanna?”
Reluctantly, he returned to the difficult problem, feel-
ing there was more he could have said on the other


matter, which twisted his heart, for what were a bunch
of kids, to a mind like hers?
“Well,” he said, with an effort, “I can’t help wonder-
ing if she knows Dad planned a home for her as well
as us.”
“I believe she’s beginning to find that out.”
“I don’t want to harp,” he said uncomfortably, “but
Dad did want that, really, didn’t he? I mean, he ex-
pressed himself on the matter, and planned her future
a bit too, I suppose.”
“Your father even planned the furnishings for her
room—as the eldest girl,” was the quiet answer. “That’s
why I gave her the things her grandmother used to use.
He said it would give any girl dignity and grace to have
a beautiful room she could ask her friends into. It
wasn’t in this actual house, of course, but he always
loved Darien. But ... he died, Evan, before his plan
could come into effect, Sophie took advantage of that,
although I hate saying so. Underneath her casual dis-
regard for Jo’s life and happiness, Sophie is greedily
possessive, and wants to keep Jo for one reason only.
You know what that reason is.”
“To keep fast hold of something you want,” he
blurted. “Yes, I guess I’ve always known that. Heckl
And she’s my father’s sister. But all the Driscoll women
were domineering or spiteful or greedy. A nice heritage
for Jol”
“She has her mother’s blood in her veins, too, and
so have you. Fern was a magnificent woman, Evan. I
often used to admire her on her horses, when I was a
child. She was a sportswoman all through, and even if
she was a bit spoiled, her spoiling was done by gentle-
folk, not . . . not moneyed snobs.”
“I . . . I’ve often wondered,” he said limply. “And
I'm glad you said that. The Travers lot,” he asked, “were
0.K., weren’t they?”


“Fine people,” Meg said readily, “but, having always
been well-situated, with an irreproachable background
and a heritage full of good-living women and worthy
men, they took it for granted and never thought of them-
selves like that. Unlike the Driscoll women, who, like
all . . . Let us use a quotation, as it sounds less catty.”
She smiled and used Hazlitt’s words: “ ‘There cannot be
surer proof of low origin, or of an innate meanness of
disposition, than to be always talking and thinking of
being genteel.’ ”
“And that about describes it,” Evan exploded, then
he laughed. “Look here,” he said presently, comforted in
spite of himself, “you’re Jo’s legal guardian, Meg, how-
ever Sophie feels about it. Couldn’t we have a yarn with
Mr Metcalfe, and perhaps get him to have his say.
Lawyers know how to deal with those problems. Jo’s
under age—well under age, at just fifteen. We could
compel the silly fathead to stay where she belongs.”
Meg understood girls far better than her stepson did.
“I’m not a legal-minded lady,” she answered lightly.
“The law is one thing, and Jo’s future is another. Her
happiness matters, too, but without character there is no
happiness, and to force her home would do more harm
than good. Force her to stay at home, and she would
hate us for it, unreasonably and blindly, and perhaps
express it with all sorts of recklessness and rebellion. Jo
has a very strong nature, even if at the moment she
fights for the wrong things. But, leave her to discover
that she wants to live at home, and nothing would pre-
vent her from fighting for that—especially if we seem
indifferent.”
“You think she . . . she is responding a bit to decent
surroundings?” he asked hopefully.
“I’m sure of it,” Meg affirmed.
“Well, so long as Aunty doesn’t come back too soon
and upset things . .


“Jo is in her father’s home, and already she knows
that, and even away with Sophie poor Jo could not
forget.”
“She’s like a stubborn colt,” he said hotly, “that jolly
well won’t be dragged to the trough.”
Meg laid a hand on his arm.
“I always did believe in letting thirst drag any stub-
born colt to any trough,” she said. “So now we’ll go
indoors and find those lost shirts.”
“Yes,” he answered, a trifle absently, and they strolled
up the winding path.


CHAPTER XI
CHRISTINE AND JOANNA
The quiet days led slowly on toward Christmas, which
meant nothing to Jo, apart from more festivity than
usual, with gifts and perhaps decorations. Sophie had
always seized upon the Yuletide season as a fine reason
for planning a new outfit and dining at a brighter hotel
than was customary on other such outings. Jo, naturally,
had gone also, as at New Year, to a midnight supper
with Sophie, who liked feeling girlish with confetti in
her gilded curls.
Jo was thoroughly puzzled, and slightly self-conscious,
as the spirit of Yuletide crept through the rooms of the
old brown house. Whispers, secrecy, giggles, and earnest
confabulations in corners, with “You go away,” flung
excitedly at intruders, and Ann slamming the stable
door on any one approaching, while she worked in a
fever at the gifts she preferred to make, at her dead
father’s bench.
The big girl forgot everything one evening in the
sitting-room just before Christmas. Meg had a soft voice,
husky and sweet, for easy songs, and played the piano
as most girls do who go through the usual accomplish-
ments in an old-fashioned country home. The big room
was silent that evening, but for the pines and the sea.
Jo shuffled; she was uneasy in the atmosphere holding
her silent and still against her will; there was some-


thing invisible in the room that made her vaguely
ashamed—and want to cry. She went to her room after
supper to sit with a flop in the arm-chair, her mind
clouded by the beauty of oft-told tales, pictures of bright
stars in the dim dark blue of Eastern skies, and the
stirring sweetness of carols too simple and lovely ever
to be drowned entirely in the jungle madness of jazz
and jitterbug tunes.
Without knowing that it was her childhood she had
missed, with all the enduring memories that such hours
of loveliness place like gems in a youthful heart, Joanna
said to herself blankly:
“I’ve missed something in my life. I feel like a
foreigner when they go on like that.” She wanted to
laugh at Meg’s old-fashioned ways. But Jo knew she
couldn’t.
Next day the girls, including Joanna, received a pound
note each, from Grandfather Mead. Sophie, however,
posted Jo a five-pound note, which killed all the softer
feelings stealing through her awakening soul, for she
tossed her money round in the Moon Rock shop until
the others were thoroughly ashamed. Jo bought lavishly,
not bothering to select her gifts in accordance with the
tastes of the recipients, and Mrs Gouch was very pleased
to get rid of so many articles standing, dead stock, on her
shelves. In the brown paper they had been wrapped in
by the shop-keeper, Jo set the parcels on the lobby table
on Christmas morning, saying grandly:
“I don’t know what you really like, so choose for your-
selves. There are two parcels each,”
Joanna learned another bitter lesson that quiet hot day
of peace and happiness. She had blundered, she knew,
in the lobby, for a quick glance told her how, all the
other parcels were wrapped lovingly in coloured tissue
or holly-patterned cellophane, with Xmas ribbon tied
in bows, and cards inscribed for each simple parcel.


Meg had made each girl a set of hemstitched China
silk underwear, with a coloured dirndl as well. She gave
Jo a half dozen Belgian linen handkerchiefs, saying:
“Clothes to you, Jo dear, would be like taking coal to
Newcastle.”
The girls had presented Jo with perfume, a powder-
bowl, bath-salts and handkerchiefs, and Ann had made
her a mulga-wood ink-well designed with care and exe-
cuted with artistic skill. Evan’s gifts were branched china
candlesticks all round, and, to Christine, he said with a
grin:
“Here you are, scarlet-hair, this will remind you of the
midnight grease you used to burn at Blackfish Cove.”
She was rosy and shy with delight.
Then, his gift for Meg; a length of dark blue silk
patterned by tiny silver leaves wide apart, and the way
he whirled it round her, tucking it under her chin like
a shawl and kissing her swiftly on either cheek, covering
his gesture with nonsense, saying:
“I nearly had heart-failure trying to rescue it from
the lay-by system before Christmas came.”
Christine’s parcel from old Joe, too, deep in straw
inside a strong carton marked “To be op’d Xmas Dayl”
A cheap rose-edged cup, saucer, and plate, with a card
saying; “With Xmas love from Joe, to my lassie, and God
bless her always.”
“I don’t see that there’s so much in that to go senti-
mental about,” Jo commented, staring with her brown
eyes full of cloud. That was too much for Christine, who
felt dragged down from space tp the dust of the ground.
“It’s the giver I happen to be thinking of,” she flashed,
“and not the gift, although there’s nothing wrong with
that, either.”
“Well,” Jo cried, almost weeping, “you make such
fusses over things that aren’t worth a—”
Christine was quick to interrupt.


“I don’t look for price-tags on the gifts people think
out for me, and if you forgot price-tags you’d be a nicer
person.”
With that, she marched to her room, the carton high
against her waist, leaving a fuming girl standing speech-
less with a group of silently appreciative people round
the table. But Meg felt a stab of pain in her heart, for
the poor misguided young thing who, with it all, was so
honest that her words jumped out with the naivete of
a child.
The household dined under the pines that evening,
when the heat was less thick and oppressive. Joanna
sulkily helped to carry down the baskets and cartons,
and enjoyed her cold duck and salads, hot pudding and
cream, nuts, raisins, lemonade and the other delicacies,
as well as any one, but in her heart, which was another
matter, she was resentful and angry. She was a misfit
in this house. Nobody understood her. Their dull old-
fashioned ways didn’t suit her. They were a lot of
simpletons.
She tossed bones and crusts so fiercely at the gulls
hovering round that she hit one, sending the startled
creature upwards with a grating cry of fury. Meg winced,
but defiantly the wounded girl went on hitting out, and
the gulls sifted away, grey-white flecks of beauty perch-
ing on the stable-yard fence. Presently, as the sun threw
its sunset stains on to the sea and the quiet lagoon,
the birds returned, and Jo lay on one elbow with her
back to them, pretending not to see. But she could hear
their wings, and wished, passionately, that she had not
done such an ugly thing. Christine had been indignant,
Jo knew, which made her loathe the red-head all the
more.
The silent challenge of the old house continued to
reproach her, although, in hurting herself, she was
powerless to prevent it, as, from her point of view, the


family was critical and obsessed by simpleton ideas. She
spoke a different language, and this was true in a sense,
for Jo saw life through Sophie’s eyes. Later, in the
veranda-room, the unhappy girl sat brooding in the
loneliness she brought on herself, as she let self-pity
work its havoc in her mind and felt the sting and
resentment of unwilling martyrdom.
“I’m different,” Jo almost wept. “A farm-girl brought
them up. They know nothing about the things I like.
Dad didn’t care where I lived; what was I, compared
to Meg’s three? She only tried to get me away from
Aunty'to triumph over her. The Driscolls were aristo-
cratic, not farmers, and I can’t help it if I’m like them.”
Jo swung herself from the chair in an agony of restless
boredom, and dragged writing materials with savage
jerks from the left-hand drawer of her desk. She ex-
pressed herself badly on paper, although she wrote swiftly
with a strong hand. The school to which Sophie had
dispatched her without any real investigation was, for-
tunately, uncommon. As a school of “self-expression” it
would be better described as a school of self-admiration.
The two Misses Belmore who ran it were experts in
the psychology of snobbery. All the more spectacular
accomplishments had been glorified on gilt-stamped
leaflets, but education was of secondary importance. So
Jo now blundered wildly into a long, mis-spelled letter
of supplication to the only one who flattered her into a
feeling of superiority, and, working herself up to desper-
ation, lost all sense of proportion.
Weeping as she intensified her martyrdom, the mud-
dled girl blamed Darien, said Meg was stodgy and
dull and smug, flayed the girls for their lack of respect,
condemned Lucy as a little hoyden, and praised Moon
Rock and Moira Dinning with such eloquence that a
rush of manufactured adoration made her long to go
along to the Rock and seek Moira now.


The pen fell to the big gold-tooled blotter which
had once soaked ink from old Mrs Dricoll’s cheques and
invitations, and Jo dropped her head to her folded
arms and cried fit to break her heart. While writing
the feverish letter, she had almost felt released from
Darien, but her signature had brought the walls round
again, like a cage.
One flash of shame almost made her tear the wild
plea into pieces, but another emotion, dogged and de-
fiant, forced her to thrust the folded sheets into an
envelope and address it with a flourish. Aunty wasn’t
made of stone; after that, she was bound to hurry back
and get a flat.
Although she did not analyse the fact, Jo had two
treasured “superiorities” with which to inflate her self-
esteem, when punctured by the others’ refusal to cadjole
and flatter and admire. One superiority was linked up
with her Driscoll arrogance, and the other was her
indisputable prowess in the surf. The latter conceit
had already caused tiffs, and it was bound to rouse a
deeper quarrel sooner or later, which was to have a sorry
aftermath.
Jo, too, was prickly with remorse, after writing her
unjust letter to Sophie.
For two days, the atmosphere in the house was so
electrical with strain that even placid Meg almost lost
her poise.
And when, next morning, a blazing land wind started
bunting the house and throwing dust into the sunlight,
she felt she could not stand the glaring, bickering, an-
noyed children any longer, so bustled them down to the
pool with an order:
“Wash your bad tempers away, or I’ll end up by
shrieking.”


Priscilla was miserable with sunburn. Ann and Chris-
tine had suffered insults and jibes from Joanna, and had
their noses in the air. Joanna herself smouldered in such
a muddle of emotions that she could not locate the real
grievance making her want to smash everything about
her. Lucy, possessing a great deal of common sense,
changed into her shorts and a thin old shirt, and dis-
appeared into her “shop” under the porch with the re-
luctant cats who, when imaginary purchasers failed her,
became rather dull-witted customers.
Even the old house looked flustered by the wind whirl-
ing round the gables, with a coppery light gleaming
on the windows and dust clouding the air. The pines
bent about as if groaning in misery. The pool itself,
usually green and refreshing, seemed hostile, with only
one patch of dull shadow at the far end, below a
bulging shelf, and Priscilla made for that shadow with
her sunburned skin claiming the right. A hard crust had
set on the sand of the beach. Papers blew about the
little cove. The sky looked as though a flung stone would
shatter it into slivers of metallic light. And it was all
wrong for the wind to blow seawards, puzzling the gulls,
tumbling clumps of boxthorn from round the lagoon
to the glittering shore, and turning the grasses over
like hair parted wrongly. The shallows ran confusedly
about in criss-crossing waves, and the far distances, up-
coast, instead of being clean and blue and white, were
clouded by a coppery haze only a little less sombre than
the pall hanging over Egglethorpe, with bushfires on
the horizon.
How the quarrel started, nobody knew, although all
four girls felt it coming. Joanna snapped and Ann
splashed water at the others, and Christine’s eyes glinted,
while Priscilla, agonizing in the peculiar misery of sun-
bitten flesh, sat with scarlet knees and raw back watch-
ing with her pretty little face unusually petulant. She


said something envious about Joanna leaving school,
and Ann, knowing what Joanna’s school had been
like, laughed in a pointed way that the big girl could
not misunderstand. Suddenly, the air was full of hos-
tility, as well as coppery dust and scorching heat.
"Oh no,” Ann cried, as Joanna said she wouldn’t have
to go to work when older, “when precious Jo was bom,
all the gods went into a huddle round her cot, and said
she was far too special to work like an ordinary person.
Joanna Driscoll is going to be a lady—or a lounger,
whichever you like to call it.”
Jo’s treacherous emotions exploded into blind action.
Throwing herself forward to where Ann sat with one
knee up, tossing her wet hair back from her eyes with
her figure outlined against the ocean distances, Jo
grabbed one of the lanky girl’s ankles, pulling her down
into the pool with a resounding splash. The rock was
rough, but it was not the stinging streaks of red behind
Ann’s legs that upset her so much as her undignified
shock. Joanna was the stronger and bigger of the pair,
but Ann’s quicksilver mind and movements had an ad-
vantage. While Christine stared and Priscilla cried to
stop, Joanna was very thoroughly submerged and
trodden upon, until her wild heaving under water shot
Ann sideways, and the big girl came into view again,
choking, whooping for breath, her black hair round
her face like a nest of limp snakes.
“Serves you right,” Christine cried, inspired by the
cheering sight of arrogant Jo nonplussed by the sea she
mastered so proudly, “Look at Ann’s legs.”
Angry scratches marked both browned legs, but Ann
was used to such minor accidents, and shrugged at the
smarting. She was gazing in sudden dismay at Joanna’s
livid face.
“Be a bit sporting,” Ann grunted in her discomfort.
“I’m not wild, so why should you be?”


“It isn’t that,” Jo stuttered, controlling a desire to
fly at Ann, for the word “sporting” restrained her as
nothing else could. “It’s the way you mock me about not
having a hobby.”
“My hat!” Ann cried in genuine amazement. “You
can mock and sneer and jibe at us, for wanting to make
something of ourselves, but we mustn’t, at you, because
you don’t. Well, of all the one-sided outlooks! That’s
you all over,” she added hotly, glad of the chance to
speak her mind. “You always want things both ways.
Why don’t you learn the art of giving and taking? Then
you wouldn’t madden everybody.”
“I madden you whatever I do or say,” Jo cried angrily,
ploughing her way to a rock where she perched, her
chin lifted, unconsciously regal in spite of her plas-
tered hair. Arms round knees, she surveyed the three girls
from an advantageous position, several feet higher. “In
any case, I’m not your kind, so we’d never get on.”
Ann made a flourish as if indicating a museum
specimen.
“Lady Driscoll!” she cried, raising her brows at Chris-
tine. “But she left her tiara at home to-day; she was
scared it might rust in the sea.” She turned angrily on
“Lady Driscoll”, who was seething again. “You could
have got on with us all,” Ann stated, “if you’d tried to
fit in. But you always treated our home like mud, and
scorned us because we couldn’t light the fire with five-
pound notes. Friendliness cuts two ways.”
“Your home,” Joanna scoffed, rocking herself a little in
sudden scorn. “A beastly little suburban bungalow,
with Evan sleeping on the back veranda. A passage down
the middle of the place, with poky rooms each side, and
a rotten second-hand shop to boast about.”
The squabble had suddenly become serious. Loyalty
was a solemn matter to the younger girls, and even
amiable Priscilla simmered at the insult, which was


more than that, for it attacked the gentle creature who
had been their father; the business he had worn himself
out to create; and the little home Meg had slaved in to
keep sweet and comfortable. Ann’s olive skin was slow
to flush, but now she looked as if her cheeks had been
sand-papered.
“You cad,” she choked.
Jo looked behind her as though to detect the cad,
but the others were in no mood to feel amused.
“Yes,” Priscilla faltered, with the sunburn to flog her
into courage, “so you are a cad, to talk like that. Nor is
it a rotten second-hand shop. That's Aunty’s talkl Dad
was your father, too, and the bungalow was very useful
when you needed us.” Priscilla then burst into sneeze-
like tears and sat with her head bent to one shaking
/ hand.
Joanna could not cope with the storm she had aroused.
Glaring wildly about her, she sniffed, and shrugged.
“Well,” she muttered, “what did you move from the
bungalow for, if it pleased you so much?”
“Because,” Ann answered with unexpected dignity, “it
was the deepest wish of a man now gone for ever. Be-
cause my Grandfather knew that was our father’s wish,
and because we were all getting a bit slap-dash and pal-
try with nothing better to think of than Greta Garbo
and the shops in town, and because our mother hon-
oured pur father’s longing to see us grow up in a proper
home.”
Joanna felt desperate. Her face blazed with sudden
shame, and the words trembling on the tip of her tongue
almost sounded. For one moment she knew that what
Ann said was all true, and her father’s face swam be-
fore her mind. It was kind and trusting, with the bland
look of a dreamer in his sunken blue eyes. But she
choked the better impulse down and sat muttering
something about “giving in”.


Christinel Christine's quiet face maddened Joanna.
She twisted round, and glared at the silent girl who
was, although Jo did not know it, aching all through
for the misery she detected in that troubled moment of
hesitation, as Jo struggled inwardly with her two selves.
“And you,” Jo jerked out, her jealousy alive again,
“are at the root of all our rows, you smug-faced little
coward. You’ve no real right here anyway,” she added,
lost to all sanity. “Who are you, I’d like to know, with
your prinking and mincing over a scribbling father who
might never come back, and serve you right if he doesn’t.
Then you’ll always be just a charity-waif poor silly Meg
rescued from that poverty-stricken —”
“You beast," Ann shouted, to check the torrent of un-
bridled words striking the red-head like stones. “Shut
up, you beast, Joanna Driscoll, hurting her like that.
She’s no more a charity-waif than you are, so shut up.”
Jo’s heart was slowly sinking into abysmal despair.
She hadn't meant to say such vile things to Christine,
whose deathly white face was more reproach than a wild
cry of pain. But the red-head’s shock was breaking. She
stood white and still in her green bathers against the
dark rock-wall, toes round a stone on which she stood,
leaning back, while Aunt Grace’s face floated in the air,
and Delphine’s taunts sounded.
“It doesn’t matter, Ann,” Christine jerked. “I’m used
to that sort of cheap jibe. Delphine was the same. But
Jo’s not a beast. That insults the animals. She’s only a
sham, and that’s less than nothing at all.”
“A sham, am I?” came the slow retort, for there was
no sound now but her voice above the lazy slapping of
the oily sea. “Well, that’s even better than being a
coward, anyway. I loathe cowards. So does everybody.
You’re just a coward, scared stiff to go beyond your
depth in the sea.”


CHRISTINE AND JOANNA 175
Christine flinched and started to move toward the
land-end of the pool and, clambering over the rocks
there, she sat astride one, and for a long moment
measured the sullen girl with a glance that used to
madden Grace Mead.
“Worse than a sham or a coward,” she said levelly,
“is a disloyal person. I am a coward in the surf. But
I’d rather die than be disloyal like you are—even to my
own father’s memory. What a pity it is,” she said cut-
tingly, “that you can’t buy loyalty, and then you’d have
lots.”
The red-head marched off over the hot sand, head up,
arms swinging, her hair a flame in the sunlight, but her
eyes were full of tears and a pain swelled under her ribs
until they strained upwards with the dreadful feeling.
Nobody could see her face, however, and she marched
on, up through the pines, and into the shadowed old
house, where there was not a sound—only her stifled
sobbing in her room with the door locked, for Cousin
Meg might come in, and she had already had enough. . . .
Nobody, not even Cousin Meg, with all her wisdom,
could creep into the red-head’s mind, and know what
had been left there, by one incident long ago, when an
old man had plunged along a river-bank, one arm lifted
in terror, calling:
“Sharks. . . . Thick with sharks. . . . Stand still, lassie,
don’t move.”
The dreadfulness left in her mind by that memory
always came back, like flying-foxes’ wings flapping round
her face, immediately she went beyond her depth in the
sea she loved. But nobody understood those things. No-
body could explain them, particularly a girl of thirteen
who knew nothing of subconscious scars, but only felt
their presence, their mystery, and their pain.


Joanna would rather fight a cageful of tigers than
struggle wildly against a silence; cold silence full of un-
voiced thoughts and aloof reserve. Christine thought,
“I won’t give her the satisfaction of arguing again”. And
Joanna, as the end of an awful dinner-time came closer,
wanted only one thing—to make Christine say something.
As usual, after Joanna had thoughtlessly delivered a
wound, she wanted the comfort of knowing the wound
healed.
Meg observed all the signs of aftermath to a quarrel,
and if she winced, nobody knew, and if her heart ached,
she disguised the fact very neatly, as the meal ended,
and the sisters took their turn in the kitchen, while
Joanna flew to her room and Christine made her way
up the hall to the sitting-room for the eight o’clock con-
cert on the radio.
Jo stood in her bedroom doorway, a peculiar expres-
sion on her handsome face, as the red-head passed by.
“I didn’t know Miss Wildwood bore grudges,” Jo
blurted, not knowing how to explain the guilt heavy on
her heart.
Christine stopped dead and turned, her face lifted a
little. Footsteps sounded.
“Here,” said Jo quickly, backing into her room, “1
want to tell you something and that’s Meg. . . . Come
on.”
Christine hesitated, then walked into the veranda-
room, the other girl silently closing the door. Meg passed
by, unaware of the swift skirmish. It was always difficult
for the red-head to bear grudges, so she stood with her
chin up, waiting for Joanna to say what she obviously
wanted to, her mouth opening and closing like that.
Perhaps Jo felt like she herself did-hating hostility and
longing for friendship, without knowing how to create


it. Well, thought Jo, struggling in conflict, she hadn’t
actually meant that about waifs and Andy Mead perhaps
never coming back, because, in spite of the little up-
start’s maddening ways, she wasn’t a coward—not every
sort of coward, and going through those two awful years
at Blackfish Cove! The real Joanna and the false one
were locked in combat for a tempestuous moment.
Neither won. She was better at dodging issues than
acknowledging herself in the wrong, Christine had in-
stinctively glanced at the clipper-ship pictures, and
Joanna, with relief, stared at them also. Thrusting both
hands into the fanciful pockets of a gawdy goffered
crepe de Chine, she spoke awkwardly.
“Nice, aren’t they,” she said, eyes on the water-colours.
They were more than nice, Christine thought, re-
calling an hour she had thoroughly enjoyed, with Evan
explaining the pictures’ meaning.
“I always admire them.”
"Yes,” Jo agreed, adding irresistibly, “they’re heir-
looms, you know,” and her tones slid unconsciously into
arrogance. “Actually, they’ve been in the family for hun-
dreds of years.”
Christine’s silence was more than eloquent. Some-
thing about her touched Jo’s smarting inferiority
complex on the raw.
“Well,” the big girl snapped, her colour mounting,
“what’s wrong about that?”
Christine’s eyes glinted.
“I see no reason why you shouldn’t be told,” she de-
clared, “with your insufferable snobberies.” And the red-
head quietly explained. “Those ships,” she said, point-
ing, “weren’t in existence until about 1850. Clipper-ships
belong to the gold-rush days, not to the Middle Ages.
If you read a book sometimes, you’d know. Cobb and
Co’s coaches belong to the same period. The ship’s his-
tory was made on gold, and wool, and tea. Nor are the


pictures heirlooms, even since less than a hundred years
ago. Look on the back of one and see for yourself where
they came from. It’s time some one told you.”
After a blank stare, Jo plunged, rattling one of the
pictures round, face to the wall, her face dyeing scarlet
as she saw an auctioneer’s sticker on the back, with an
inscription pencilled across it in her father’s familiar
pointed hand-writing. The sticker said ‘‘Lot 66”, and
the pencilling, “Purch’s’d Jarvis Salerooms, June 1934”.
Gripped by a sense of utter helplessness, Jo remained
as if petrified, the picture in her hands, her face lifted.
And then, so swiftly that her companion moved back a
step, the dismayed girl turned.
“What right had you to come into my room prying
and poking about?”
“I didn’t,” came quickly. “I helped Cousin Meg hang
the pictures, the day we got here, while you dawdled in
town. Your father planned this room for you to have
some day, and she wanted you to see it complete. That’s
why Tom hung the curtains that day, too, before the
rest of the house. I don’t pry, I’m not a sneak. But
I am sick of your Driscoll snobbery, as any one would
be. And if I were you, I’d be more proud of old Fred-
erick Driscoll for doing what he did, than I would be
just having money to fling about, for any one can do
that—when they don’t have to earn it.”
Joanna was utterly confused. What had Frederick
Driscoll, her great-grandfather done? All he did was to
arrive in Australia long ago from England, with his
young wife, money, this furniture (or this was part of it)
and buy largely of virgin land at Borrowdale. Then he
settled down as an aristocratic land-owner to found the
family.
“I am proud of him,” Jo flashed in her bewilderment.
“That’s why I’m proud of this room, even if I did make
a mistake about the pictures. I'm no good at history and


dates. I’m not a scribbling blue-stocking. And any one
would be proud of an ancestor like he was, although
not,” she said hastily, “because he happened to be an
English aristocrat.”
Christine’s eyes widened.
“Don’t you really know who he was?” she gasped.
“Who on earth told you that tale? Evan and I were so
interested . , .” She broke off, for a sick look was creep-
ing into Jo’s dark eyes.
“Didn’t I know what?” she asked heavily.
Christine moved toward the door.
“I’m sorry, Jo, but I’d much rather you asked Evan.
He’s proud of Frederick Driscoll as your father was
proud, for that’s why he bought these pictures, but . . .
somehow I don’t think you’d be proud at all.”
And Christine opened the door, vanishing before the
stunned girl could speak or move, in the dreadful feel-
ing of humiliation dragging her spirits into darkness.
What had Christine meant?


CHAPTER XII
A BRIGHT PACIFIC SHORE
One moonlit night, with the smell of the sea rising like
salty steam to mingle with the fragrance of the pines,
Christine met the boyhood ghost of her father face to
face . . . when, in the Tower of Babel, down behind the
centre cupboard with the hand-carved knobs, she found
the manuscript that had been lost since Andy was six-
teen years old. “The Sunken Galleon." She trembled so
badly that the yellowed pages whispered in her fingers.
It was a strangely beautiful experience for the girl
who half-lived in a world of imagination and fancy.
Misty-pale and tense, the red-head stood with the sheaf
of soiled pages in her hands, wanting desperately to rush
out and tell the others, yet stilled by a sacredness. Her
fingers were holding the papers his had held; her eyes
were gazing at the words he had written down when, as a
lad, holidaying at the old brown house with Sair-Ann,
he had hunched over a table and unlocked the romantic
dreamings of his heart. The old wardrobe had held the
manuscript safely through the years. And she felt that
the house listened, eagerly, to hear what her heart would
say of the lovely surprise.
“It’s a sign," she thought. “It’s a sign to tell me he
will come home. I have lost faith sometimes, and I never
will again. . . .”


BY A BRIGHT PACIFIC SHORE 179
long in that transcended state when, for a moment, the
heavens and the earth and all things glorious and beauti-
ful seem one.
“A cable will come,” she murmured and, nodding
several times in approval of her knowledge, she walked
from the room with the manuscript.
Even Joanna was silent when the red-head stepped
through the sitting-room and placed “The Sunken Gal-
leon” on Cousin Meg’s lap. Christine’s face was pale with
a look Ann remembered from the night when Grand-
father had talked to Chris at the bungalow in town.
She felt very conspicuous, with all eyes on her, as she
said thinly:
“It's my father’s ‘Sunken Galleon’, Cousin Meg.”
Meg almost started as she lifted the yellowed papers,
scanning quickly the title and the author’s signature.
“Christinel” came the weak exclamation. “When will
you and Andy stop wrapping romance round this old
housel”
Priscilla sat on the big chesterfield with a book open
on a cushion across her knees. At last she had realized
the significance of the manuscript.
“Christine, is it ‘The Sunken Galleon’?” she gasped.
“And can we read it?”
Ann was more practical. Setting a technical book
carefully astride the arm of her chair. She marched
across the petal-patterned carpet and lifted the manu-
script, running the clipped pages back under one thumb.
“What’s it about?” she asked, flattening a page at
random to look closer. “Oh, good,” she exclaimed with
zest. “Pirates; that’ll do me. And one of them is called
Black-patch Miguel. ...” ,
Christine firmly reclaimed the precious thing.
“Even if it is hopelessly selfish,” she declared, “nobody
is going to read this before I do.” Ann laughed good-
naturedly and went back to her volume on interior


decorating. One of these days she would partner Evan
at Driscoll’s, with toys as a side-line. . . . Women were
coming to the fore in the commercial world, and Ann
meant to be one of them.
Joanna, staring out from her shadowed corner like
a tiger-cub from its lair, was dimly conscious of all that
the manuscript signified, for look at Chris, with that
look on her face, and Meg in a sort of dream; Priscilla
gazing round-eyed at Christine as though she had sud-
denly sprouted wings, and Ann blinking with satisfac-
tion.
“How old was your father when he wrote it?” Joanna
asked, as her old disturbance, jealousy, lifted its head.
Christine stepped backward and sat beside the fair
child as the answer sounded.
"He was about fifteen, I think, but Cousin Meg would
know.”
The manuscript was back under the slim fingers on
the blue silken lap, for Meg had made Evan’s Christmas
gift into a pretty frock, as plain as a housecoat but for
the snowy buttons, belt, and collar, and could not resist
wearing it in case he came home. It was Saturday night.
Evan, however, had just telephoned, explaining his
absence; he was going out sailing on Jolly Roger all
day to-morrow with Bill Franklin, who was snatching
all he could of leisure before starting his medical studies,
following in his father’s footsteps. Joanna had again
been reminded of her uselessness when Meg had come
from the phone to announce that piece of news; and
disappointed, wanting to ask him . . .
“Yes, I do remember,” Meg nodded, thinking back into
the past. The mists cleared as she went on. “He wrote
it during the Christmas holidays just after he turned six-
teen . . . the last holiday he spent here. He ran away
soon after. I remember—”


“Did he run away?” Priscilla breathed, “Mother, I
mean, did he bolt in the night and just disappear?”
“Andy was romantic,” her mother laughed, “but not
quite so spectacular. His mother was dead,” she ex-
plained, “and his father was a hard, although a very
just man, with one determination—to make farmers of
both his sons. There was no need to ‘make’ a farmer
of Jack; he was one, but Andy was different, a dreamer,
his head in the clouds, and full of what is called, I
believe, the ‘divine discontent’. He wanted to go abroad.
Quite frank about it, he told his father, who put his
foot down. Andy was also very determined and practical
—as romantic people often are inside. So, one foggy
morning I wakened from a lovely warm sleep to hear a
noise at my window. There was Andy, shivering with
nervous excitement as well as with the cold. He kissed
me good-bye—and I remember how cold his nose felt on
my cheek—and then cantered away. I remember, too, the
hollow sound of his horse’s hooves on the river bridge.
He returned the horse to his father’s stables, picked up
a suitcase, made for a siding just beyond their farm, and
caught the train to town. If that is running away, then
he ran away,” and Meg smiled at breathless Priscilla.
“How did he get abroad?” Christine asked huskily.
“Worked his way on a cargo ship,” Meg announced
with a touch of complacence. “Jumped ship—l think they
call it that—at Marseilles, made a walking-tour of the
journey to Paris, worked there a while, then crossed to
London and found himself a reporting job on a Fleet
Street paper ... or some sort of job. Messenger, I dare-
say, for I think his reporting started later.” Meg laughed
softly in her reflective way.
“I also remember that we had a tiff over ‘The Sunken
Galleon’. I must have been a matter-of-fact trial to poor
dreaming Andy. . . . ‘Why shouldn’t a galleon be sunken
there?' he flung at me, meaning off the Point, and I—”


“Said, ‘Why should one?’ ” Christine laughed, and
Meg laughed also, in earnest now, for, as she said, Chris-
tine knew far too many of her dark secrets. She sat smil-
ing, for her father had never before seemed so close and
real since she had arrived in Australia.
Joanna smouldered in her corner, a prey to several
conflicting emotions. Why had Even chosen this week-
end not to come home? Christine probably had the whole
story wrong, anyhow, about Frederick Driscoll and
whatever it was that he did or did not do, and what
business was it of hers, in any case! With far less assur-
ance than usual, Joanna asked flatly:
“What is there in one old manuscript to get soulful
over? And such a youthful novelist surely wouldn’t write
a masterpiece. Publishers, I should think, wouldn’t want
to buy stories written by sixteen-year-old boys.”
“My hat!” Ann was contemptuous. “Don’t you ever
think of anything else but money? It’s the honour.”
“Well,” Jo said in smothered annoyance, “it can’t be
very brainy to write things for fun.”
Christine jumped up; she couldn’t help it, for this
incident was history repeating itself, and she forgot
everything as she stood like a lighted match, Meg
thought, under the central light, her hands clenched at
her sides.
“That was Delphine,” she cried, for while she never
chattered about Aunt Grace and her pitiful muddles,
her daughter was another matter. “The first Bookworm
piece I had printed, she wanted half the money, because
they were their flying-foxes, she said, and thought I was
daft to write without being paid. People with price-tag
souls are abominable.”
Irate and slightly ashamed of herself, Christine
dropped with a bump to the lounge. Well, she thought,
even if Jo doesn’t whine and cringe and sneak, she
does remind me in one way of Delphine.


For once, Joanna was devoid of inspiration, so sat
scowling in her corner, detesting the red-head with such
violence that the feeling was almost physical.
That night Ann crept along to Christine’s room and
whispered fiercely. Presently the two girls were in the
latter’s bed, the clip removed from the corner of the
pages, Christine first reading one sheet then handing
it on, as together the chums plunged into the piratical
adventure penned long ago by Andy. The bedroom was
silent but for the faint whispering of the moving pages
and the distant sound of the lazy surf. It made a perfect
accompaniment for the colourful scenes leaping to life
on the invisible stages in the chums’ brains, as they
huddled over the story, beholding romance, swash-
buckling adventure, and more.
There was no old brown house in the tale, no Moon
Rock, no Egglethorpe; nothing but wild bush-land,
lonely sun-bleached sand, empty skies, and rolling hills
crossed sometimes by nomadic black men lighting fires
at night in the blue-black dimness. The first part of
the story dealt with the sea, as a cabin-boy with a
pirate’s map tucked under his tunic sailed with a villain-
ous crew in search of buried treasure. The second part
of the tale covered the sinking of the galleon off Darien
Point, the cabin-boy’s escape, and a gory affray on the
sands of the little cove, when only three less-villainous
hearties and the boy were left. The treasure, dug up
after exhaustive effort, was shared between the four,
who struck inland and explored the lonely vastness of
the great land whose history went back to the mists of
ancient times.
“That’s where you get it from,” Ann announced, as
the last page was devoured to the finish. “You’re mad on
this country’s history, too. And I hope you do write
a massive tome some day, from corroborees to television.
I’d be tickled pink to read it.”


“I’m going to,” Christine asserted. "It’s the ambition
of my life. I can’t undertake the sort of life my father
did, and I’m simpler . . . but so is the story of a nation
simple, and so are the stars in the sky, or they’d bump
into each other and throw the world off its track.”
Next day Priscilla read the manuscript, taking it down
under tjie pines with a cushion, a rug, and a bag of
acid-drops. At the lunch table, in the useful lobby,
Joanna listened in vexation while the others talked freely
of pirates, aborigines, and the age of the country. Jo did
not like admitting to herself that she had never before
thought of her own land as existing before convict days.
Again, she surged with jealousy against Christine’s store-
house of knowledge, with her innocent father’s superior
learning fanning the flame in Jo’s rebellious soul. A
tremendous curiosity devoured her—to find out what
those pirates did in the aborigines’ camp.
Meg read the story to Lucy that afternoon, but
although Jo hung about long enough to catch the first
sentence or two, her pride moved her off to the garden,
where she stared longingly down at the cove which
Andy had peopled with adventurous figures, and won-
dered again what the story was about. She stared when
Lucy went trotting down the slope with her spade at
four o’clock, to pay the author a tremendous compliment
by digging, until she trickled, in case some of the
fictional “dumbloons” and gems might have been over-
looked in the sand.
At last Christine knew the meaning of the scoffing
way Jo went on when the story was discussed again.
She was itching to read it and could not humble herself
to ask. A spasm of understanding hurt Christine, for
her happiness had burned up all her nasty feelings. So,
with the graciousness she found it very easy to employ,
she took the manuscript next morning to the front


porch, where Joanna lay curled in one of the lounges
with an unread moving-picture magazine.
There was considerable risk in tackling Jo at all,
after the day of the big quarrel and its aftermath. More-
over, the two girls had a tacit understanding on the
matter of reading books. Jo would not be converted, and
Christine would keep on trying to change the literary
heathen’s mind. Her heart was thudding as she stood by
the girl on the cane lounge with the manuscript
dangling like a little apron.
“Joanna,” she said quickly, her face warming, “per-
haps my father couldn’t write very well at sixteen, but
if you would read the story and tell me your opinion
. . . I would be so pleased.”
Even Joanna recognized the kindness behind the ges-
ture, and hesitated, and then, for once, stubbornness was
defeated by naturalness, and, of course, curiosity pulled
its weight also.
“Well,” Jo said loftily, “if you want me to . . . and I
do admit to feeling a bit inquisitive, to see if a boy
could write properly, so I might as well.”
Red in the face, she took the pages, with an inward
breath of satisfaction, while Christine, keeping her face
straight by a miracle, said:
“I hope you do like it.” Then she went indoors.
Joanna, as a literary critic, was very funny to think
of, but ... a queer emotion blazed through the red-
head as she thought suddenly of Aunt Sophie, with
angry detestation. There had been something about Jo,
as she grabbed the manuscript, that reminded Christine
of a starved urchin snatching at a bun.
For a person merely a bit inquisitive, the amateur lit-
erary critic applied herself with amazing concentration
to the perusal of Andy Mead’s novel. Moreover, Meg had
to call Jo three times before she jumped and heard the
summons to lunch, and, when she came to the table


with a most peculiar look on her face, as if she had
been dreaming in a daytime snooze, nobody took any
notice. Nobody dared.
On the following Saturday, late at night, Joanna man-
aged to get her brother alone out on the porch, and by
her manner he knew she wanted to talk to him. That
fact, in itself, pleased the lad who longed for an under-
standing. What good fun it would be, to take her round
a bit—out on Jolly Roger when Bill managed a
free day, or to a show sometimes when Jo came up to
town. People would probably accuse him of plunging
into premature romance, but he wouldn’t care, with a
beauty like Joanna to escort. These thoughts, vague but
pleasing, blundered into his head as she hung round,
talking blindly of the moonlight, the heat through the
day, Andy’s piratical story, and “olden times”, until,
using that phrase as a bridge, she reached the clipper-
ship pictures. There she stuck fast, a lump sliding to her
throat, in an unusual sense of fear. What she was afraid
of, Jo did not know, and swung round suddenly, silent
and rigid, to start out into the night. Warm and still,
the moonlit open was breath-takingly lovely, the sky
so thickly strewn with stars that she thought of upset
spangles on a blue velvet floor, and startled herself into
saying:
“I’m going literary, too.”
She said it to herself, however, and went on staring,
wondering what next to say to Evan, waiting beside her
in the patience of knowing he was wanted. Birds cried
faintly through the slow thunder of the surf. While she
watched, a huge wave turned; she saw the moonlight
twinkle along the smooth curve in diamond-pointed
flashes before the wave broke, The grassy cliff with the


sun-scorched tawniness of daytime was mauve to-night.
The pines were black, the garden asleep.
Jo moved her head, flicking a quick glance at the lad
so tall and slender by her side, then looked back at the
sea and, ‘plunging into her subject, explained rapidly
the puzzles in her head, and then stood still again, in-
wardly trembling. Nor did she know why, any more than
she knew why she had to ask him to explain.
Evan felt sorry and ashamed, sympathetic and dis-
gusted, as he affirmed all that Christine had implied and
heard his sister’s little gasps of dismay as the story un-
folded.
“. . . and Dad bought those pictures for only one
reason, apart from their beauty,” the lad went on. “Fred-
erick Driscoll was an illiterate gold-digger who came
over in the gold-rush from California, and made his
pile on the diggings in Victoria. He married a girl who
used to serve in a Sydney pub—and believe me, that
needed courage in those days—and they were Grand-
father Driscoll’s parents.”
“But, Aunty . . .” Jo checked herself, and stammered
like a confused infant as she tried to recover her
balance. “But she said .. . she led me to think .. . she al-
ways spoke so surely of the English aris ...” Jo stopped
dead, the heat of shame blazing over her from head to
foot.
Her brother was quietly disappointed by what he
thought was disillusion. “It isn’t what one’s ancestors
are that matters,” he stated. “It’s what we are ourselves.”
And then, more warmly: “I’m proud as Punch, anyway,
of that pair, for they must have been crammed full of
go and pluck, to make their way in those rip-roaring
days.”
“It ... it isn’t that,” his sister faltered, with a feeling
that she had plunged through ice to a lake below. “I’ve
been made such a fool of, and . . . Christine knows.”


“Oh, I say,” he said awkwardly, “that’s a bit thick,
Jo, getting furious over her knowing. She hasn’t a scrap
of snobbery in her make-up, and absolutely glowed with
excitement when I told her the yarn.”
“Why did you tell her?” was the despairing cry.
“She happens to find interest in life and people,” he
answered in level tones, “and Chris gets more satisfac-
tion out of a man like Frederick Driscoll, than she would
out of the elegant Vere de Vere migrant invented by
Aunt Sophie.”
Joanna was silent for a full minute, while her brother
wondered uneasily how her thoughts were working.
They weren’t working at all. Jo saw her aunt’s face,
and that was all, in all its pitiful artificiality, and knew,
for the first time, that it was not a face, but a mask.
But, to be made such a fool of, in Christine’s eyes; Chris-
tine, above all people! She must be sniggering all the
time, behind that still manner of hers, and what was
she thinking?
“Look here,” Evan faltered, as the silence became awk-
ward, “don’t let that sort of falseness worry you any
more. And it’s just as well you do know the truth about
something at last. Coming here to stay has done you that
much good, anyhow. I know it hurts like the dickens,”
he added quickly, hearing a smothered sob, “but lies
can’t last, old thing, and the sooner they perish the
better, however much it hurts. You’ve been reared with
a tissue of falseness and lies all round you. It’s like a
foul web that you’ve got to tear loose ... to get out into
the fresh air,”
With taut face and stinging eyes, Jo presently con-
quered her desire to drop and weep herself sick, and
managed another question: who had the furniture origi-
nally belonged to, as the Frederick Driscolls obviously
wouldn’t have owned it. Perhaps, Jo faltered, with a


new humility and hope, her grandmother’s people had
owned it?
Feeling rather a brute, Evan had to speak the plain
truth, for this was his chance to help Jo help herself. No,
he said, Grandmother Driscoll was an ordinary farmer’s
daughter and they had been pretty poor, too. Jo felt that
the whole world was falling into bits. Her smothered
cry was understood by Evan, who felt obliged to say:
“Well, Jo, you don’t imagine for one moment that
she was anything very grand when young, do you! Or
why should she be such a snob when older? She went
up in the world—if you count money—and hated farm-
ing ever after. She tried to live her beginnings down by
scorning people like the Meads. And she brought Sophie
up like that, spoiling her and making her useless, as
moneyed people without breeding so often do to their
children. , . . And so the miserable tale goes on.”
Then where did the furniture come from? Jo asked,
wincing when her brother told her. It had been bought
holus-bolus by Grandmother Driscoll, just after she mar-
ried, from an Englishman who had been out of the
top drawer, when he found the life tough for him in
Australia, and went back home, dead broke. Jo was
stunned.
She stirred presently in a flash of her old resentment.
“Then Meg knew all this,” she cried.
“Of course,” said Evan.
“Well,” Jo blurted, “the Driscoll things are good, how-
ever we got them, and I don’t like the way Meg puts on
airs and graces over this old house, just because some
of the Driscoll things are in the rooms.”
Evan began to feel himself entangled in a web, with
another falseness to expose.
“Some of the things!” he exclaimed in disgust. “That’s
another tarradiddle of Aunt Sophie’s. All the darned
stuff is here, from piano to kettles. The homestead was


the size of this house. What did you think it was, Bal-
moral Castle? By Jove! You’ve done a lot of thinking,
haven’t youl” he said in sarcasm, and once again her
face flamed hotly.
Then came his final revelation as, in clipped phrases,
loathing himself for having to tell the tale, he removed
Jo’s misconceptions in regard to her father’s difference
with his arrogant mother.
“. . . and it was our mother,” he added dully, “who
forced the old lady to see Dad’s independence through
decent eyes. His mother was proud of him then, in a dry
sort of way. Uncle Willie knows, if ever you want to
verify it. He was with his mother when she died—and
told how Sophie had nagged her into a fever against
Dad, and misrepresented Meg, The whole fuss over the
shop had died down ages before Dad married Meg.
Sophie revived it. The Driscoll men were all right,” he
added uncomfortably, “but the Driscoll women were
shams, upstarts, and snobs. There were three of them—
Frederick’s wife, for money went to her head after a
while, then Grandmother Driscoll, and then Sophie. The
Travers were different. And you’re next, Jo . . and it’s
up to you whether you become another female Driscoll
snob, or a real person.”
Joanna’s head was reeling. She scarcely felt the strong
grip he placed on her shoulder for a second before he
went away, but she did hear his final words.
“Aunt Sophie, Jo old thing, is wasting the cash which
might have added years to Dad’s life . . . sick and under
the strain he was, in fighting for our safety, by keeping
Driscoll’s going. Sophie is flinging that money about .. .
and you’ve been jolly well helping her do it.”
Joanna stood rigid, staring with unbelieving eyes out
into the moonlight. She saw the cliff twist and slide
about through a mist of tears. She had never heard the
words: “We rise in glory as we sink in pride: where


boasting ends, there dignity begins.” But she did
whisper to herself, after what seemed like hours of
stunned immovability:
“I’ve wasted fifteen years of my life; what a blind fool
I’ve been, oh, what a blind idiotic fool!”
Jo suddenly wanted to hide in some dark corner and
never come out. She couldn’t do that, she knew, so she
gave a little sniffing laugh of bitterness, and stood still,
staring out into the clean silver and ebony world of
the night, while the eternal sound of the sea went on
thundering below the stars.


CHAPTER XIII
THE CAP OF YOUTH
Christine leaned over the balcony, spying Joanna down
among the pines.
“Jo-AN-NA,” the call sounded, “you’re wanted on the
TEL-ephone.” And, as Jo came hastening up the side
steps, meeting the red-head on her way to the garden,
she said uneasily: “It sounded like your aunt.”
Two days had passed since that memorable evening,
when Joanna had felt a tinselled world crash to splinters
round her feet.
A very muddled girl sat at the telephone-table in the
hall and lifted the receiver. It was more than ironical
that Aunty had arrived back in Sydney just as Jo had
learned at last to see through the mask she wore. The
girl stared flatly at the pale rug on the herringbone pat-
tern of the wood-blocked floor, as Sophie’s artificially
refined tones sounded thinly through the telephone.
“When did you get back?” Jo asked, drumming her
fingers on the note-pad in front of her. Several days
ago Sophie answered, and entered into a long pointless
story concerning her ungrateful hosts in Queensland,
for whom she had nearly beggared herself; and the heat,
the tedium, and boredom of her final days there. Jo-
anna’s new values were starting to work. Aunty had,
as usual, worn out her welcome, killed off more ac-
quaintances, and come back to town to pester Mr Met-


calfe again. And she sounded so shrill, the depressed
girl reflected, unless it was the telephone. Natural voices
had sharpened a comparison Jo had never before really
bothered to make.
Then, she held her breath, whispering:
“No, oh, no, she couldn't do that . . . Oh no . . .” for
Sophie was making a wandering announcement with her
tones suddenly elated.
Joanna bit her lower lip until it hurt, in the blind
despair of listening to the story her aunt related so
triumphantly. Down to black darkness went Jo’s spirits,
for Sophie was referring indignantly to a letter received
in Brisbane ... an exaggerated, passionate, wild letter
Jo had almost forgotten. And Aunty had taken the
bungalow at Moon Rock . . . she had taken it because
of that letter, praising Moira Dinning and the Rock and
condemning Darien as all that was dull, unsmart, and
boring. Aunty had taken the bungalow . . . paid a
month’s rent in advance, and signed a three-monthly
agreement! “Oh, no . . . no . . . no,” Jo cried silently,
as if she could beat the truth away by her wild inner
cries.
“The fourth one from the end of the pines near the
Rock itself,” Aunty twittered, now she had broken the
news that had almost broken Joanna. She sat stunned, a
flush throbbing warmer in her dismayed face as she
listened. Aunty had visited the district once before, by
car, so she knew the location of the sweet little house.
And the agent who let out-of-town places had at least
six photographs and each one was enchanting.
“You must know the sweet place, Josie?” Miss Dris-
coll said, as her niece sat silent.
“Oh, yes,” she answered, the incredulous feeling break-
ing. “I know it.”
She knew it. Jo knew the little white flat-roofed build-
ing of about four rooms, by the look of it, in a patch of


ground two paths wider than itself. Jo knew it very
well. It was next door to the big verandaed house rented
by Moira’s mother. The high verandas looked down into
the bungalow backyard. There was a wood-shed and
everything, Jo told herself bitterly. The big net, that she
herself had carelessly knotted, had fallen and enveloped
her in its folds. It was no use struggling. She knew that,
too.
“You have taken the bungalow?” Jo pleaded, her
heart thudding wildly for one hopeful second, for Aunty
was so casual . . . Oh, yes, indeed, she said grimly, for
at two-pounds-ten weekly it suited her very nicely at
the moment, what with taxation and recovering after
Brisbane, and new clothes to get in case clothes-rationing
came into force. There were whispers . . . she had heard
. . . She was going to stock up enough for years. And
would Josie be a pet and go to the shop for the keys
on Wednesday morning? That was to-morrow, and she
was to order lots and lots of everything as well. Just
charge it. The shop-keeping woman was apparently a
sort of sub-agent locally, and Josie could meet poor tired
Aunty at the bungalow, so that when her taxi came she
could just walk in.
Joanna made one desperate effort to escape the net
of retribution.
“Aunty,” she cried passionately, with lips trembling,
“listen to me for just a moment. Must you come down
here . . . ? Oh, please, listen. Can’t you change your
plans . . . ?”
Sophie’s tones were suddenly very quiet.
“Why do you ask that?”
“Well,” Jo stammered, staring over the telephone into
space, "I thought * . . I wondered if ... if perhaps it
was my place to live at home now . . . now I’m older.”


The silence that followed was electric with unspoken
thoughts. Jo felt slightly dizzy, and started as her aunt’s
voice sounded again, hard with spite.
“I think you’ve been far too long already in that old
house of Meg’s. Your home is where I am, as it has been
since you were six months old, and I want none of that
nonsense. What do you think I took the bungalow for?”
she shrilled. “To please myself?’’
Joanna’s heart said: “Yes, you did, to economize, be-
fore another outburst,” but her lips said: “Very well,
I’ll be there. I only wondered. Good-bye, Aunty, until
to-morrow. I’ll be there.”
When she blindly dropped the receiver on its cradle,
Jo sat staring at nothing, but her inner eyes saw many
pictures flitting past. Moira Dinning’s respect for Meg’s
stepdaughter, who lived at Darien, wouldn’t endure for
Aunt Sophie’s niece, in the shoddy little bungalow next
door. Aunty’s strange appearance might not be so con-
spicuous in the regions of sophisticated flat-dwellers, who
were not astonished by freaks, but in the sunlight and
open air of the Rock . . . everybody would starel Especi-
ally Moira Dinning.
The little peeling white bungalow with the chipped
roughcast wall in front would be a joke to the girls,
after jibing at the big bungalow at Round Bayl And
from the front windows of the side porch at the Moon
Rock monstrosity, Jo could enjoy the exquisite mockery
of gazing at Darien—along the beach.
How the girls would laugh, especially Christine.
Joanna laughed herself. And then the sound so fright-
ened her that she went blundering into her room, where
she cried until exhausted.
“It serves me right,” she muttered, when the storm
was over. “It serves me right . . . Lady Driscoll.”


Lucy seemed to be the only one unaffected by Joanna’s
departure. Only a few days had elapsed since she had
swung herself down the path through the pines, without
even glancing back. The local carrier came early on
Wednesday morning for the girl’s large assortment of
luggage, its owner striding away to walk along the beach,
burdened by nothing more than a handbag—if one re-
fers to material burdens only. Her heart was heavier
than lead. But the cap of youth is a rakish one, even
in misery. Joanna turned her back in bravado on the
old house she had come to love at last, and marched
gallantly along the beach.
While, at Darien, the family did not know quite
what to make of the situation. Ann believed herself
speaking the truth when saying hotly:
• “Well, she wanted to get away from us, and now she’s
got away, and she's as glad as we are.”
Meg, however, was more perceptive.
“Don’t be so unkind," she chided. “And if she’s as
glad as you are, she isn’t glad at all.”
“Well," the nonplussed girl declared, after an aston-
ished pause to study her mother’s subtlety, “she did
nothing else but pick at this place, and the bungalow
in town.” Her slaty eyes snapped with a sudden thought.
“Talk about pride and its fall! That scorching windy
day she sneered at the bungalow, and now look at the
one she has to live in, and right under Moira Dinning’s
nose.”
“And I suppose," Meg said quietly, “you think that
would make poor Jo glad? I think her pride is slightly
less broken than her heart, and I detest hearing you
attack her when she’s not here to defend herself."
Amazed and slightly huffy, Ann muttered:


“You’re so soft. Mother, and I’m not attacking her.
I’m only pointing out the irony of it.”
“And I,” Meg retorted levelly, “am pointing out the
generosity of a little human kindness when even an
enemy is hurt, and Jo is not an enemy—unless she might
be her own enemy, which intensifies the need for a little
compassion. Jo hasn’t the nature to crawl when hurt,
whatever her faults might be. And I thought you, of
all people, would be the first to appreciate that sort of
courage.”
Ann looked uneasily under her lashes to interested
Christine, glinting from the depths of a big cane chair.
“Sorry,” Ann muttered, shuffling, “but I wish I knew
why you praise her up so suddenly. You wouldn’t do
that without a reason.”
“Sympathy,” Meg remarked with placidity, taking up
the knitting she had dropped when Joanna left, “is not
praise, and I have several reasons.”
Ann flushed.
“I am pig-headed, I know,” she confessed uncom-
fortably, “and I’ll take your word for it, and see what
happens. I’m sorry,” she said loudly, as her mother’s
needles went on clicking.
“So you ought to be,” Meg commented.
Ann made a startlingly quick dive at the busy little
lady in the fan-backed chair, rubbed a blunt nose into
her neck, and murmured something that only Meg
caught.
“I won’t be a pig again.” Then, as though she had
done nothing more than ruffle Meg’s hair, which she was
now straightening, the lanky girl stood, hands on hips,
to survey her chum.
“Come on, let’s do something,” Ann said impatiently.
“The house feels weird already without Jo.”
This, as a public amende honorable, pleased Meg, who
now permitted herself to smile over the clicking needles.


“Jo,” she announced, “is like a thunder-storm; she
leaves a calm behind her, but the storm was exciting.
And if you want something to do, how about making
some coffee?”
The slowly moving hours of the next few days
proved how much the children missed Joanna. Chris-
tine hated to see an empty chair at the table, where the
big girl had formerly sat, and the unused bed in the
veranda bedroom made her feel just terrible. The only
real comfort the red-head’s heart knew was, and she
admitted it honestly, not to be jibed at for cowardice.
Evan telephoned on Friday evening, to say he would
not be home for the week-end, so his stepmother seized
her opportunity to acquaint him with the story of his
sister’s departure. He was very glum. Meg, however, was
not, and she told him why, although it hurt her still to
recall Jo’s defiant face when she carelessly made her
farewell. Carelessness, defiance, and eyes bruised through
weeping are contradictive, and when a girl’s mouth smiles
while it trembles, the effect is curiously pitiful.
Saturday was a maddeningly dull day for the three
girls—Ann, Christine and Priscilla—as they found out
when trying to find fun as usual. It was no use. Even
if Jo had been a tiger round the place, tigers were more
livening than pet mice or rabbits or some other meek
and boring type of creature. Ann would not make this
declaration openly. Nor could Christine climb down
quite so suddenly, particularly as Cousin Meg was not
present to witness the discussion rising and falling under
the pines, in the pool, and in the “flat” afterwards,
where the trio made tea and raked up all Joanna’s past
sins while missing her more than ever.
Meg pretended to notice nothing unusual, next after-
noon, when the trio suddenly felt inspired to have a
dip along Moon Rock way, instead of pottering in the
pool. They went off sensibly clad for all emergencies, as


a brisk breeze romped in from the sea to sting soft
flesh to rawness with the sun blazing down. In green,
red, and powder-blue bathers, with faded kimonos and
big old cotton sun-hats, the girls set out, leaving Lucy
to her craze for collecting another formidable array of
“reptiles” in jam-jars.
The day was glorious, the sea a brilliant blue below
a paler sky piled with cloud-castles on mauve islands.
Ann carried a basket in which wrapped biscuits lay, and
handkerchiefs knotted round the remains of yesterday’s
Saturday-money, for Mrs Couch’s ice-creams were de-
lectable.
A fine mist lifted from the wind-torn breakers, to drift
landward and blur the northern coastline into a delicate
pastel-shaded picture. Moon Rock was deep in cream-
ing smothers of foam—a spot avoided by even the most
intrepid of swimmers. Gulls mewed and balanced on in-
visible trapezes just as Christine had dreamed of years
ago, when a Certain Gentleman had described Darien
so vividly.
Not much water flowed through the channel; the trio
splashed through with kimonos held high, and trod
onward, each girl gazing straight ahead now—at a little
architectural wedding-cake behind the pines nearest the
Rock. Very few cars showed, and it was too windy for
sun-umbrellas. The fine mist from the sea smudged the
scene ahead. Imaginative Christine saw it as a water-
colour whose brightness was running a little by being
held under a tap. Suddenly, she preferred writing in her
head to eating ice-cream, and sat down with a scuffle,
laughing up at the other two.
Ann’s friendship was not the sort that had to hold
hands all the time.
“All right,” she declared, “but mind you, we’re going
to linger and have them in style, in the ‘Grotto’ at one


of the tables, while Mrs Gouch fixes the things Mother
wants. She takes ages, anyway.”
“I’m going to stay here,” the author stated. “If you
don't think out the sentences while they’re fresh, you
lose them for ever. But leave the biscuits, in case.”
Christine caught the packet and the sisters went on
up the sunny slope, now shadowy with blowing sand, and
disappeared behind a dipping sweep of pale yellow
sand-dune that hid the “Grotto” from that part of the
shore. The "Grotto” was a favourite spot for the youth
of Moon Rock, with its iron chairs and tables, electric
gramophone, and the sea-shells studded in the cave-like
walls.
Christine, busily shaping a paragraph, did not know
that lonely Joanna had stared with sudden excitement
through one of the bungalow front windows, as she
saw the trio coming from Darien. Three wavery blobs
of colour in the coloured haze! Joanna’s ordeal had
commenced in bravado, when she strode away from the
old house loved at last, and gone on into leaden heart-
ache and monotony beyond enduring. But she had to
endure it, even though her thoughts clamoured wildly,
at the back of her mind, hoping against hope, that
something would restore her to Darien—that something
would help her prove how willing she would be to
start all over again. And, like so many other thoughtless
humans, Joanna was sharpening her values in the despair
of loss.
Moira Dinning’s friendship had proved worthless.
Being sick of falseness, and afraid of the tangled web
woven by deception, Jo had blurted out the story in
her thorough fashion, flinging the truth at the disillu-
sioned girl who no longer saw Joanna wrapped in
the bright colours of glamour. An ideal had been shat-
tered in Moira’s young mind, and her plain little face
lifted in her bitter disappointment.


“I thought you were different,” she choked, “but
you’re not; you’re just a hypocrite and a snob like other
people. Besides, that aunt of yours! People are known
by the company they keep, and she’s a laughing-stock. I
can’t feel as I did before, Jo. . . . But I am sorry.”
Joanna had turned on her heels with her face scorn-
ful, but her heart had been filled by lead. The two girls
ignored each other’s existence now, which was a rather
painful exercise when living next-door.
Evan’s words had sunk into his sister’s head; she could
never again help Aunty squander and waste. There was
no fun in clothes; no joy in going to town and spending
for the satisfaction of spending; all Joanna wanted in
the world was for some miracle to happen and restore
her to Darien—one of them, her heart begged, not just
in the house. The longing seemed worse than useless.
But something desperately hopeful kept Jo watching
along the beach, until Sophie became spiteful and vexed
by the shocking change just a few weeks of those step-
relations had made in the girl who was no company any
longer. In spite of a shrill protest, Joanna raced out in
her bathers and cloak and tore along the sand until her
steps slackened so that Christine, sitting there so quietly,
would not be flattered into realizing Jo’s eagerness.
“Hullo! Miss Wildwood!”
Sheer nervousness had whipped that cry from self-
conscious Jo’s lips. Christine slithered round, for her
thoughts and the sound of the wind and sea had drowned
the faint rustling squeak of the approaching girl’s red
rubber shoes. Joanna was aware of disappointment as
her spirits sank from dim hope to hard reality. Naturally,
Christine wouldn’t know of the mad shadow-show flick-
ering through her own mind for several dreadful days
of sorting out facts from fancy, shams from the real
things, and truth from fibs. Jo’s eyes stung, so she turned
to face the sea as the red-head's dazed greeting sounded,


and the big girl laughed. She laughed, or she would have
broken down. Meanwhile, Christine’s clouds of imagin-
ation and word-weaving were drifting away. How glori-
ous Jo looked, like a proud Crusader, with her red
rubber helmet and the white cloak hanging from her
broad brown shoulders to her red heels, the chalky cord
constrasting with her tanned neck.
“Nobody 1” Jo’s mind cried out in agony. “I’ve fallen
between two stools. Aunty is just a freak, and she knows
I know it, and hates me because her power over me is
gone. And the family are sick of me, and no wonder.
Nobody . . . nobody . . . and really no home. I won’t
crawl and let them know it nearly kills me. I won’t.”
The white cloak was whipped off and flung, billowing,
to the sand. Red shoes came off one after the other and
flew through the sunlight. Jo stood proud and smiling
while snapping her chin-straps into one piece under her
firm chin. One more second and she would break downl
A white and red flash cut through the sunlight, as the
girl raced down the slope and threw herself into the
shallows with a diving splash, but as she ran she called,
teasingly:
“Too rough to-day for Miss Wildwood. . . . You ought
to be a war correspondent’s daughter . . and Jo was
battling outwards in the water, the salt of the sea and
the salt of her tears indistinguishable on her twisted
face.
She did not see Christine’s mouth firm to a ledge, as
every courageous Mead in her ancestry whispered indig-
nantly against the insult and the reminder. A faded
kimono and a soft sun-hat whirled to join the white
robe and red shoes. Then a slender young green-clad
figure marched in proud defiance down the wet slope,
splashing through the choppy shallows until the water
slapped round her shoulders.
Her gesture should not be wasted. Jo must see. How


Joanna did that, Christine did not know, as she was
thrashing out again to the smooth swell beyond the tur-
moil and shooting in like a red-topped spear, to the
foaming confusion.
“But she won’t mock me through Dad’s name again,”
Christine fumed, her face dogged, “and I’ll stay here
until she does know I’m in. After all, I can swim. . . .
And it’s only imagination filling the deep water with
sharks. . . . The sunken galleon down there is only a
story. . . . And yet,” her mind argued, as those images
slid in with her reasoning, “people have been snatched
by sharks. . . . They do sneak in through channels, and
it’s' rough enough to-day for channels. . . .” She felt
rather uneasy now; shaky.
Joanna had not seen the coppery-red glint rising and
dropping in the white and green turmoil. Jo was too
busy with her sort of turmoil. Besides, in the sea, Joanna
had few thoughts. She was elemental herself—a creature
made up of. impulses and instincts and action, rather
than of thought. In the sea, she had senses, not feelings
and thoughts, and the fight employed her energies, so
that it was almost possible to crush down her misery.
Christine was different—a creature of spirit and sen-
sitiveness, whose imagination made her senses almost
unimportant. Where was Joanna? Paddling urgently,
to keep her face high enough to see, Christine failed to
comprehend the tremendous power of the undertow,
nor did she behold a huge wave rollicking in as though
quivering with delight at the idea of knocking her sense-
less. It almost did. Half-stunned, she came up breathless,
clawing the unresisting foam, gasping for air, her hair
over her eyes.
After a struggle that killed all hope of trying to think,
she managed to balance in smoother water, and clear
her eyes of the sticking strands preventing her from


seeing anything. Oh, smooth waterl It was over, and she
could actually stand up and feel safe.
Christine stood up, sinking straight down like a plum-
met, for the sand was not there. She came up frantic
with terror, choking and glancing round her with panic-
stricken eyes. The shore seemed toy-like, miles away;
and the calm smoothness was not safety, but . . . but
the swell beyond the surf. And, as her despairing wits
realized this, another swell slyly rose, growing larger and
higher with appalling power and speed, to lift into a
glassy green wall curving over at the top. She was con-
scious only of the menace, as she saw the wind whip
a long veil of white from the breaking crest. Something
went off in her head like an explosion. She saw old Joe
running along a green river-bank, one arm raised in
warning, and she heard him crying thinly through the
noise about her:
“Sharks. . . . Thick with sharks . . . don’t move.”
As the wave crashed on to her defenceless head, Chris-
tine looked upwards to the empty sky and released one
shrill call, piercingly sharp with primitive fear: “Joe.
. . . Joe. . . . Joe!”
Then the sea and the sky and the wind rushed into
one mad roaring of light and sound that suddenly
stopped.
Joanna heard that cry from some yards away as she
trod water while waiting for another swell to carry her
shorewards. She looked wildly about her in superstitious
dread, her heart sickening, for the empty ocean had
flung her name upwards like a human voice calling
thinly: “Jo. . . . Jo. . . . Jo!”
Then she knew, starting to thrash overarm as though
something had stabbed her, for she had seen a livid
face lifted, distorted by terror, reddish hair swirling
round that white blur like floating weed. Jo had never
travelled so swiftly through any water, as she strained


every muscle and nerve towards the green smoothness
behind a wave roaring landwards, and to where a help-
less girl was sinking slowly into black suffocation. . . .
Consciousness returned to the battered green-clad girl
in throbbing sounds, like a war-drum beating a long way
off and coming closer. The drumming made a sort of
rhythm mingling with the agony across her stomach,
and, crying out in sudden pain, she twisted sideways
and gave way to a convulsion of nausea. Something
strong was holding her. Her ears were ringing and her
throat was scalding, and she couldn’t stop trembling
and making queer little sounds like whimpers. . . . And
another sound was mixing with the noise in her head.
Someone was sobbing out her name in an agony of terror.
“Christine. . . . Christine. . . . Oh, Chris-teeen.
The cry broke off.
Joanna had no awareness of anything she did, as, with
tear-filled eyes and ashen face, her hands blindly snatch-
ing and pulling, she jerked her companion to a sitting
position with the white towelling robe tucked to her
chin, and held her close. Nobody had witnessed the
incident so very nearly a tragedy. The sinking line of
the dunes hid the “Grotto”. Mist drifted across the far
end of the beach near the bungalows whose windows
looked along the curving shore. People did not like the
sand when it blew like small-shot against their legs. The
wind was harder now. Ann and Priscilla were still in the
“Grotto”, finishing luxuriously a raspberry and pine-
apple ice-cream on fanciful glass saucers.
Something strange and beautiful was creeping through
Joanna, as she sat with one arm holding Christine close
against her shoulder. The coppery-red hair, caked close
to the battered little person’s resting head, was drying
already in the wind. A dancing curl moved under


Joanna’s chin. She did not move. The feeling stealing
through her could not be broken. Her heart felt as if it
were bursting.
The “first sound in the song of love’’ was making
havoc of thoughtless Jo’s emotions. The quiet miracle of
human love was a mystery whose tenderness she felt,
but could not describe. Her dazed mind was saying
things she knew were true, even if she could not under-
stand why they came to her now. She had never detested
Christine; never hated her, scorned her, or thought her
cowardly.
“I’ve been jealous,” her mind said, and she flinched.
“I wanted to be like you. I was envious and jealous all
the time. You were never paltry—but I was. I wanted
to make you paltry, too—so that I needn’t feel so cheap
and common and show-off when with you. That’s why
I wanted to escape from Darien—because it showed me
up. And all the time, when refusing to be won over,
I’ve just been loving you all. Oh, Christine ... I nearly
drowned you!” Hungrily, with her jaw set to rock,
Joanna held her friend closer, in the hollow of her
shoulder, a gasp breaking from the lips scornful no
longer.
Christine stirred and sighed, moving back to look up
in dazed surprise as a big tear splashed on her face.
“Don’t, Jo. . . . Don’t! I’m all right. I’m only a bit
queer all over me. You . . . you got me out, didn’t you?’
“I’m sorry,” poor Jo choked, gulping.
“Sorry you saved me?” Christine said shakily, sitting,
unsteady, free of the reluctant arm that left her back.
The robe felt warm with her bathers steaming, and her
wits were clearing as the dreadfulness lifted.
“Not sorry I ... got you out,” Jo muttered, making
a little sand-heap in her nervousness. “Sorry I jibed you
again. This time I didn’t mean it,” she added with a
rush, “but it’s no good saying that now.”


Christine stared at the other’s profile, with the red
helmet unconsciously crooked. A shy, tearful, shamed
Joanna, too wounded to speak clearly, was a Joanna
strangely piteous. It didn’t suit handsome Joanna to
hang her head and mutter in shame. Christine watched
with troubled eyes while the disconsolate young figure
sat helpless, just twitching sand to a little heap then
knocking it down again.
“You saved my life, Jo,” Christine said faintly, dimly
aware of familiarity in those words.
“I didn’t,” Jo said angrily, flashing a brown glance
sideways for a second. It was a bitter glance, glittering
with tears. She sniffed as she piled the sand-heap again.
“You don’t save any one’s life when you throw them
overboard and jump in and get them out; you only keep
yourself from becoming a murderer.”
“It was only cheap bravado on my part,” the red-head
declared slowly. “I am scared of going beyond my depth.
I am cowardly. . . .”
“You’re not,” came the defiant, angry cry. “Don’t say
that. I’ve thought that out. Surfing is nothing; but stick-
ing out two years of it at Blackfish Cove like you did, is
something. I know. I’ve had only a few days of it with
my precious aunt, and . . . that showed me.”
A bubble of excitement broke in Christine’s heart.
This, after all the rows and hostility! A surge of fond-
ness warmed her all over. Perhaps Joanna had felt all
the time as she herself had; and Christine recalled the
way Jo had taken the manuscript that day. . , . Nobody
close had ever loved Jo; she had had nobody to love.
Family-life and naturalness had been foreign to her; she
had been learning a new language—and now her tongue
could use it. Christine knew, without the shadow of a
doubt, that the clouds of misunderstanding had been
blown away by the wind of Darien beach.


But it was so hard for Joanna to come half way in
any admission, so the red-head helped her.
“Cousin Meg said you didn’t want to go to Aunt
Sophie, Jo. Cousin Meg said you wouldn’t crawl when
hurt. And we have missed you so terribly. The place
hasn’t seemed the same. I wish you would come home
again, because that’s all that really matters, isn’t it?”
Unbelieving, Jo turned.
“You don’t mean that,” she said in savagely low tones.
“You’re only saying it because . . . because I’m upset.”
“I do mean it,” came with a nod. “Can’t you come
home, Jo?”
“She . . . she took the bungalow because of me,” the
thick cry sounded. “But perhaps ... if I went home and
faced Meg . . . told her ...” Her words trailed off.
Eagerly, Christine said yes, that would be a start, and
the problem could work itself out later.
Two girls sat closer then, in the peace of friendliness,
talking unsteadily of the problem facing Jo, and that
is how Ann and Priscilla found them when hastening
down the slope in the positiveness of knowing something
unusual had occurred. Christine’s drying hair and white
face, her sore eyes and husky voice told only part of
what had happened. Awkward Jo, stumbling out a semi-
admissionl And a happy green glance told the rest. The
taut look gradually left Ann’s tanned face, and Priscilla,
on her knees beside her sister, released a sigh of peace.
“Come along with us now, and get it over,” Christine
suggested, gripping Jo’s arm in her eagerness,
Joanna gulped and nodded, then said heavily that she
might as well; besides, she added loudly, she wanted
to make sure Chris got home all right. Chris! Her eyes
shone in spite of their smarting. Ann, however, was a
trifle doubtful of her half-sister’s fallen defences, which
she felt might be erected again if something made her
wild.


“Well,” the slaty-eyed girl nodded at last, “no more
of that ‘Lady Driscoll’ stuff, mind you, or it won’t work."
A tremendous struggle took place in Joanna, but
nothing mattered now. With unconscious pride, which
was very different from her former arrogance, she
pointed out to the boiling surf.
“Lady Driscoll,” she said, "was drowned out there to-
day—and nobody will go into mourning because of that.”
The other girls made cordial agreement with their
eloquent silence, and Joanna got to her feet.
“Good riddance, too,” she sniffed. “Come on.”


CHAPTER XIV
ONE UNFORGETTABLE DAY
Joanna’s capitulation was not without its gallantry. But
the other girls were never to know what happened in
the sitting-room, where Jo marched in on Meg, quietly
writing a letter at a small table near the long windows.
The girl came out a half-hour later with a peculiar soft-
ness on her face and, if she was a trifle gruff and
awkward, nobody minded, for out of strain and ugliness
peace had come, and already the old house seemed aware
of the change.
And that midnight, in the shoddy little bungalow at
the other end of the beach, a grateful girl sat looking
out at the blue-white dimness, watching a shadowy out-
line that was her home—from which, for a little while,
she must be exiled, because of the curious situation still
a problem.
Meg was right, Jo told herself with her heart swelling;
she wasn’t being punished for the wrongs she had done.
That, said Meg, was a morbid and rather conceited
thought, for, with billions of people on the vastness of
the earth, why should one small mortal speck be singled
out for punishment. The Power governing all mortals
surely had enough to do without pouncing on Joanna.
“She’s right,” Jo nodded, her eyes full, as another scrap
of wisdom came, “for we’re not punished for our sins
at all; we’re punished by the wrongs we do. They add


up and up, like my taunting and mocking, and suddenly
Life shows you the sum. I saw the sum to-day on the
beach, when I thought Chris dead. Oh, God, help me
never to say and do such dreadful things again. I’ll try,
I promise. I love them all. . . . I’ll play the game if it
kills me. . . . And surely loving them, and saying so,
must be one step in the right direction,”
The strange little prayer flying out from her shocked
and comforted heart was no less sincere for its clumsi-
ness. Joanna gulped again. She knew at last what old
Joe had meant, when longing to be “one of somebody”.
“Oh, I hope he can, somehow,” she whispered. “I hope
his longing comes true, too.”
The old brown house, a mere shadow in a world of
shadows, sat still and wise on the distant hill.
Ann, Christine, and Priscilla had just farewelled Joanna
half way along the beach, where the channel now created
a sort of understood frontier between two territories.
Lucy this afternoon had again decided to collect “speci-
mens”, which thought made Priscilla consider appre-
hensively the window-sill of her bedroom. Why did little
girls like reptiles? Jam-jars made them seem worse, some-
how; at least she could use tins, which couldn’t be seen
through.
“Jo is different,” Christine affirmed, after the trio had
plodded a few hundred yards without speaking, “And
I think it’s absolutely sporting of her to stick it out with
Aunty, when she could march out if she wanted to.
Cousin Meg is her legal guardian, and Mr Metcalfe
could soon fix that. I like it, Ann, the way she can’t
make herself clear out, because Aunty took the bungalow
because of her,”
“That's what Aunty says!” Ann sniffed, having no
delusions on Miss Driscoll’s selfishness. “But I know


what you mean,” she added crisply, “and it is sporting
of Jo— I’ll say that much for her.”
Christine was well aware of Ann’s difficulty in reveal-
ing her inner feelings, and smiled, for actions spoke
louder than words, and there was no fault to find in
long-legged Ann’s attitude toward her half-sister.
“It must have knocked her senseless, nearly,” Priscilla
said sadly, “to find out about Grandmother Driscoll
being born on a miserable little hummock farm. And
great-grandfather 1” Priscilla sounded rather depressed,
“It is rather upsetting to know he was a gold-digger.”
“Gold-diggers of that sort,” Ann declared loudly, “are
superior people to the gold-diggers of these times,” and
she turned, with an expressive sniff, to jab a finger in the
direction of the flat-roofed bungalow.
“Yes,” Priscilla sighed, “but . . .” and she could say
no more.
“Aunt Sophie 1” Ann hissed, and her sister jumped,
immediately bridling. “Oh, I’m not, you hateful thing,”
the fair child cried. “I’d rather die.”
“Well, don’t go all Lady Driscoll then,” Ann chided,
“or you’ll drift into another Aunty without thinking.”
Pink-faced Priscilla stamped indignantly ahead for
several moments, then fell back, for her emotions soon
calmed down. And it was lovely to talk naturally with
Jo, and argue in a friendly way, without tiffs and up-
roars and violence. Jo would be almost human by the
time she escaped from Aunty and came home to live.
And she was even joining the Moon Rock lending
library, with a long list of authors given her by Chris.
Wonders would never cease 1
“Visitors!” Ann whispered, clutching her chum’s arm
as the trio stopped dead near the house, whence a con-
versational murmur came.
“Let’s sneak round the back way,” Ann said furtively.
“Look at us. We’re scarecrows. Mother would be wild


if we showed up like this, hair like weed and stuck with
sand. ... It isn’t Dr Franklin, because there’s no car,
and it isn’t Grandfather, for he’d let us know, so it must
be the Metcalfes. Perhaps they’re gossiping about Jo.”
The girls made a silent rush round the back of the
house, where the tree-ferns in the little courtyard out-
side the lobby door were steaming after a hosing by
Lucy, who was not now in evidence. Christine secured
the bathroom first, taking a quick shower and then, in
a kimono, rubbing her hair half-dry before dressing.
Visitors were quite an excitement at the old brown
house, but in case the children were not summoned out
to the porch, Christine intended to eat a buttered crust,
so hurried through her toilet. She quickly donned a
muslin blouse and a gathered cotton skirt covered by
large pale green leaves, fastening the big green button
behind her waist and buttoning green sandshoes on her
bare feet. After a little brushing and combing, her hair
was all right, so she tiptoed down the hall and dived
into the kitchen, finding the butter in the ice-chest and
a crusty new loaf in the yellowish crock behind the
pantry door. There was nothing so luscious as a new
crust thickly spread with cold butter when really raven-
ous.
“Christine ... is that you in there?” It was Cousin
Meg. To Christine’s astonishment, she was inspected
from head to foot by one quick glance as Meg came in,
and then she tweaked the muslin blouse tidy, pushed
back a loose curl, and kissed the wondering young face.
“Darling,” came unsteadily from the little lady whose
own face was rather dazed, also, “I don’t know how to.
. . . But, if you go out to the porch, you’ll find someone
there who wants to see you; someone who came a long
way to see you.”
“Grandfather?” Christine asked.


“Not Grandfather this time,” Meg answered, “but
but another Certain Gentleman.”
Christine’s heart misfired. A tumult of questions and
a blur of coloured scenes clashed in her head. She turned
a blank face on Meg, who nodded, and the green eyes
suddenly blazed. Christine released a broken gasp and
flew, pausing in the front doorway with her cheeks
paling.
A tall, lean, sun-browned figure leaned against one
of the windows, turning slowly to sweep a hungry look
over his thirteen-year-old daughter, from her bright head
to her soft green shoes, a crooked smile quirking his
mouth to tenderness . . . and she remembered the sound
of the rooks in the elms by the mere at Wildwood, one
twilight when she learned first about the old brown
house. The thin song of memory turned slowly to the
thunder of the waves at Darien. And then, she knew.
“Dear heart . . .” he said thickly, holding out both
hands. Christine found herself hard in his arms, one
cheek against the roughness of his tweed jacket.
“Dad ... it is you ... I knew you’d come.”
But whether she spoke the words or not, she never
knew. There was nothing in the world, for one blinding
moment, but the feel of his strong arms holding her as
though never to let her go, and the remembered scent
of rough tweed close to her face. Then he moved a hand
and softly ruffled the cool dampness of her hair, just as
at Wildwood in the arm-chair by the windows, when
the mere lay dreaming in pale starlight. . . .
Indoors, meanwhile, Meg was doing her utmost to ex-
plain a miracle in a few phrases, as Ann, with a comb
in one hand, and Priscilla, a kimono clutched round
her, hung near their rather muddled mother as she
moved a kettle from the fire and shifted it back again,
not aware of what her hands were doing.


“Not really Cousin Andy,” Priscilla gasped. “Mother,
not Cousin Andyl You can’t hop out of France and land
at Darien in a twink.”
Ann was recovering. Pointing the comb at her sister,
she said excitedly: “How do we know when he started?”
She swung round again. “Mother, it is pretty sudden,
all the same.”
“I know,” Meg agreed, trying to think, “but that’s
how Andy does things. He ran away like that. He came
back like that. Lucy came in about two and said there
was a man outside. Of course I looked over the veranda,
and went blank. It was the queerest feeling. He knocked
his pipe out on the back of the seat in the pines. Some-
thing told me. For a rather calm and collected person
I was curiously flustered . . . and I still am,” she added,
beholding what she had just done: poured boiling water
into an empty tea-pot.
Ann made one of her startling movements and tipped
the water down the sink, smacking the pot back to
the table. Priscilla snatched a tea-caddy blindly from
the mantelshelf and stared again while her mother,
rather abashed, attended the tea-tray with more control.
“When did the boat get in?” Priscilla asked, making
a mental survey of the map.
“Andy writes most convincingly about a life on the
ocean wave,” Meg declared, raising her dark brows, “but
when in a hurry he uses the air. He came by flying-boat.
That, to Andy, seems a very natural proceeding, but to
a horse-and-buggy person like myself, it seems fright-
fully dashing and unusual.”
“People come all the time by flying-boat,” Ann said
urgently, combing her hair without knowing what she
did. “What about the one always zooming over the
house in town? It must have had passengers or it
wouldn’t pay. That’s how I’d like to travel, if I ever do


travel.” A thought struck her lively intelligence. “How
did he know Chris was here? The last time she wrote
to him was from Blackfish Cove. He isn’t a magician
too> is he?”
Meg shrugged.
“I’m not quite sure in my present state of mind,” she
admitted, “for don’t forget he saw me last when I had
pigtails and wore pleated skirts. Really ... it is very
upsetting.” She recalled Ann’s query. “Know about
Christine . , . ? He went to Blackfish Cove yesterday,”
Meg stated. “It seems that his brother. Jack Mead, wrote
from there just after he enlisted . . . when Christine
was having rather a bad time. Poor Jack! His conscience
could never stand that, especially while knowing he was
leaving for the other side of the world very shortly.
But the letter he wrote Andy lay unclaimed at his bank
in London until he got away from France. . . . That
story,” came firmly, “will have to wait, but Andy made
it seem quite simple and ordinary.”
Ann sighed in rapture.
“I suppose journalists have to make weird things
sound ordinary, or people wouldn’t believe them.
Mother, I’m thrilled to the very back teeth.” Remember-
ing abruptly, the lanky girl seized her dazed sister and
hauled her toward the door.
“Come on,” said Ann in a fierce whisper, “and finish
tidying, or we’ll miss something.”
They flew, and Meg put her head on one side to
survey the attractive tea-tray which, to her shame, she
had forgotten all about since three o’clock, and it was
now well on towards five. Her grey eyes were soft with
the loveliness of this shining hour for Christine, whose
lap had again been filled with stars . . , and for the
boy who, long ago, had shouted in the pines, calling
“Sair-Ann”.


The hour that followed was confusedly unreal to every-
body, including Andy himself, who had last beheld his
daughter when she was nine years old—an intriguing
imp with the rounded cheeks of young childhood, her
green eyes wide with guilelessness, her limbs firmly
round. Now, she was a slender little lady of thirteen,
with the subtle suggestion of young experience in her
eyes and round her mouth.
Since his very recent arrival in the country of his
birth, the wandering journalist had learned a lot about
his daughter’s life after Granny Childers died. It dug
into his heart like cold knives to realize the way a child’s
mind must have anguished, in the ordeal she had
endured by loveless loneliness, helplessness, uncertainty,
and the desolation of homelessness, with the subtle trap
about her that Jack’s wife had made. Poor old Jack!
Poor honest, tender-hearted old chap! Torn between tell-
ing tales on his own wife, and leaving Christine defence-
less. Helplessness would naturally quicken Jack’s chival-
ries. A child’s happiness was greater to him than pro-
tecting his wife’s secrets from his brother’s understand-
ing—and there had been no lack of understanding in
Andy as, his heart dismayed, he read Jack’s letter in a
London bank more than eighteen months after it had
been written.
There was wisdom now on Christine’s young face, and
a sweet stillness in her personality. It stirred him to the
depths when observing the love in her eyes as she looked
at Sair-Ann-grown-up, who still startled Andy to behold
her, gentle and dignified with camellia skin and smooth
silken hair.
He looked round him with appreciation at the faces
turned his way, and one face in particular was more
lovely than the sun, moon, and stars, to the lonely-


smiled man whose long, grim, unbelievable adventure
had been haunted by that wide-browed, creamy young
face framed by coppery-red hair, with the dreams
of childhood still lurking in the depths of her green
eyes. Meg’s girls amazed him. Sair-Ann of long ago with
three girls of her own overwhelmed him as a fact, but
the girls themselves—one as delicately fair as a figure
in an old-world water-colour, another as definite and
dark as a wholesome boy, and the little one a fetching
scrap of nut-brown honesty with eyes full of life and wit.
Then the stepchildren. Andy rubbed his chin and
blinked, finishing another piece of home-made cake that
swung his mind to the riverside farms at Borrowdale.
“I’m dashed well ashamed of myself,” he declared,
leaning back with knees crossed, as he filled his pipe.
“The last time I wrote home was . . . Yes, when this
stripling of mine was no more than twelve months old.
Jove, eh, time flies all right, as these young ones remind
us. A world apart,” he said slowly, casting a low glance
along the beach. “A world apart, old thing,” and he
looked dryly at Meg. “And how much a world apart
it is, may only be realized by those who know the other
world—over there,” and with his face suddenly taut, he
made the company aware of Europe and its travail.
Christine sighed, her trance gradually breaking to
naturalness. He was sitting forward now, over the pipe
he fiddled with low by his knees, and she saw threads
of grey through the dark of his hair, and felt her heart
ache.
“Dad,” she faltered, the very word giving her a little
shock, “you’re not going away at once on another assign-
ment, are you?”
That phase of his life was done with, he said, reliev-
ing her heart of a stabbing dread. He had finished with
great causes, and he sincerely hoped they had finished
with him. A publishing firm in London wanted a book


from him, concerning his recent years in France and
other places—in France, particularly; and for a moment
his mouth set like a trap. And then, a desk by a window,
slippers by the fire, a garden with the sea outside the
gate, and the enjoyable shaping of a novel that had lain
perdu in his mind since Wildwood days.
Rosy with renewed gladness, she saw it all, and asked
huskily where he was staying now. The pipe indicated
the veranda-room, as he quirked his eyebrows at Meg.
“In there, so I believe,” he said, “but I'll have to get
a suitcase from the city before I can shave. I’ll fix that
up to-night.” He regarded Meg more fixedly. “Jove, eh,”
he remembered, “you did end up by furnishing this old
house according to plan, while my dream of weeping
heroines and clashing swords is still a dream in my head.
So much for dreams.”
Christine nearly choked as she explained: “But Dad,
you did write a novel about clashing swords. ‘The
Sunken Galleon.’ ”
“Great Scottl” he stared. “So you remembered that?”
“Yes, I did,” she answered, “and what’s more, I found
it—in the Tower of Babel.” Her father sat still and
silent in the perplexity of living two lives at once—the
past, and the present. “And,” said his daughter firmly,
“we all read it, and none of us laughed. I remember that,
too, at Wildwood, when you said you’d laugh to read
it while grown-up. Well, we didn’t laugh.”
“She nearly went off her dot when she found it,” Ann
declared, finding her tongue at last.
Andy liked candid Ann with her shrewd slaty eyes
the colour of his own.
“Well,” he told her, “I’ll have to read the yarn my-
self later, and find out what it’s all about.”
Christine was shocked.
“Don’t say you don’t know,” she challenged him. “I
think that’s terrible.”


“It was romantic,” Priscilla faltered shyly.
“I’ll wager it was,” he smiled, moving the look on to
Meg, who nodded and affirmed Priscilla’s statement. Two
pairs of grown-up eyes now exchanged the sort of glances
that only good friends understand.
“Some more tea, Andy?” she asked. “And don’t expect
me to chat lightly on literary matters, for I know nothing
more about such mysteries than I did when you ran away
—apart from thoroughly enjoying a good book.”
Lucy now appeared, wet through from head to foot,
her arms caked with sand, a small octopus dangling in
one hand, Priscilla, horrified, slid from her chair and
bustled the surprised little girl down the hall. Andy
laughed to himself as he caught the loud protest Lucy
uttered for such summary treatment.
“Why mustn’t I? Octopuses aren’t rude. . . .”
And presently the fair child returned, rather pink, to
arrange her skirts over her knees again, and compose
herself. Lucy was simply dreadful, calling Cousin Andy
“that man out there”, and dangling revolting reptiles
with her clothes soaked to the waist. Andy regarded
Priscilla dryly.
“I’ve already met Miss Lucy, you know. We discussed
several vitally important matters before she disap-
peared.”
Christine thought suddenly of Joanna, and her
heroine’s halo turned to shining gold. What if Dad had
returned to-day and found the old brown house shadowed
by tragedy . . . ? She shivered at the tricks Fate could
play if it wished. Joanna must be told as soon as pos-
sible. She was almost superstitiously scared of putting a
curse on Dad by saying he might never return—but he
had.
- Ann was itching for the returned wanderer to tell
about his escape from Nazi-held France, for wouldn’t'
the German Gestapo love to pounce on Andy Mead,


after writing with a pen dipped in fire about their evil
doings. Instead of sitting calmly smoking, like a mere
business man, he ought to be striding up and down,
clutching his brow, and reeling off miles of exciting and
thrilling deeds, all bright with explosions and dark with
underground plotting.
Andy seemed to sense her impatience, for he frowned
at the pipe, then rubbed his chin pensively, sending a
darting glance at Meg under his lashes.
“You’ll hear the tale of the Certain Gentleman’s ex-
ploits at dinner-time, perhaps,” she said, interpreting
his wishes perfectly. “And we can linger over coffee and
adventures as long as Andy likes, but let him have a
little peace now.”
He promised and sat back, gazing along the sunlit
beach again. He had no wish to shatter the spell of this
lovely hour by calling up those ugly scenes and memories.
Instead, he told his startled daughter about visiting
Blackfish Cove in the breezy warmth of the previous
afternoon. Her eagerness to ask more questions was
stilled by the lovely thought that he had met old Joe,
for Andy was explaining how a hired launch ran him
across the river from the Longbridge boat-sheds.
Andy had heard about the Stillwells—and Christine
drew back, her face pink as he said so, with a smile
that had little amusement about it. He had been pro-
foundly stirred by the simple wisdom and protective
love the old man had revealed, and by his thoughtful-
ness, too, in at once relieving a stab of agonized fear in
the heart of the father arriving after so long to know his
daughter gone.
“I am deeply in debt to old Joe,” Andy nodded, with
his keen look glinting, “and I shan’t forget.”
It was a promise, an affirmation of something her
father had resolved upon, and Christine’s spirit lifted
in sudden relief. Somehow, old Joe no longer seemed


“one of nobody”. The seal had been set on her content-
ment at Darien.
Ann’s glance snapped impatiently as she itched to
say something, and an inquiring glance from the re-
turned wanderer encouraged her.
“It was Joe, Cousin Andy, who first interested Chris
in the Bookworm Pages. Everything started like that.
Or we wouldn’t have known she was out here, and no-
body knows what . . . excuse me being personal about
relations . . . what her Aunt Grace might have done, for
she wasn’t allowed even over the river with Joe. We
kept on seeing the Bookworm bits, and then, when
Mother was in hospital, we trouped along and showed
them to her. She said it might be, too, and told me to
write. Old Joe used to watch the post office for Chris.
She wasn’t allowed to cross the river. He hoped for a
cable, too, you see. And he brought my letter to her,
and so . . .” Ann waved a hand. “Here we all are.”
Christine had been watching Priscilla; her eager
glances; the anxious way she waited for her sister to
say something that had not been said, and Christine saw
the little fair girl bite her lips to conquer some dis-
appointment. Oh, of course. . . .
“Dad,” said his daughter quickly, “nothing could have
happened, but for Priscilla. She made Joe’s idea work
out. She loves the Bookworm Pages, and had them all
saved in a hat-box under her bed. And then, she kept
on seeing my name in the Column, and one night in
the sitting-room she said it might be their Christine
Mead, and Evan grabbed the paper. So that’s how it
really developed. It was Priscilla, Dad.”
The fair child was rosy with relief and delight. She
had dreamed a hundred times of Cousin Andy some
day returning and knowing she had noticed Christine’s
name first.


“I ... I never get brain-waves,” she stammered, her
blue eyes like stars. “I’m not brainy, or anything.”
Andy made her almost swoon with bliss when, gravely,
understanding her tender nature, he rose and moved
across the veranda, bending and kissing her hands, one
by one, in true continental style.
“The good that brain-wave did, my dear,” he said
quietly, “will last you all your life.”
Priscilla’s feet were deep in invisible flowers, as a
lovely blush swirled in her cheeks, until she was not
unlike a flower herself.
Andy twisted sideways again to glance into the ocean
distances. In London, when making his final hasty efforts
to get away, and dashing to the airport, he had felt the
ache of failure behind his relief to be on his way home,
to his own land across the world. Failure; for the dreams
of boyhood had never been realized by the man who
saw no glory in his job—only escape from loneliness;
and activity, to suit his spirit of adventure. He had not
flung his heart into the High Places. The novels he had
seen with a lad’s idealistic vision, were as yet unwritten.
The simple things had won; ambition no longer mat-
tered, for purpose now swelled his heart. He was tired,
and approaching forty, with adventure done.
And he was at home! At home, here at Darien, where
the boy had planned to conquer the literary world over-
seas. Instead, it had conquered him. He had been driven
home by the eternal urge in all men, when tired of the
world. But Andy knew, looking through the golden spray
warmed by the light of the sunset shore, that now he
had other plans.


CONCLUSION
THE END OF THE BEGINNING
That night, while her father went to town for a suit-
case, Christine wrote to old Joe, so that all she had
heard of Andy’s ordeal could be set down without falter-
ing. Her new diary had double pages for duplicating, so,
with a sheet of carbon, she wrote to Joe and recorded
the evening’s discoveries at the same time. Behind the
young scribbler’s rattling brain she tucked a satisfaction
away, for Andy had talked to her for ten minutes of an
idea simmering there. Was it too ambitious, she asked
him, to plan a long story?
Of course, she had to explain, but that was simple.
“The Chronicles of an Evacuee’’, she would call it, and
use her notes made since leaving Wildwood for the
thread of the narrative. Andy had glanced through some
of her diaries, merely dipping in, as he had no time to
linger, for it was almost nine o’clock—but he would take
a taxi back from town.
“Why not?’’ he said quietly. “These are your own
personal experiences and observations. Write a plain
story of a girl like yourself, putting nothing down that
you don’t feel and know, and then it will, at least, have
sincerity. I shan’t help you in any way at all, but I will
read it as you do it and be most interested. Unless you
use your own mind utterly, you’ll lean on mine, and
that’s a bad habit for any one aspiring to independence
and individuality. Now I must pop along. . , .”


So Christine wrote to Joe, with the back of her mind
comfortably settled on a plan that could not be worked
out yet, because the old house was full of excitement and
happy disturbance. After opening the letter with the
story of the rescue in the surf, Christine described the
miracle about which old Joe knew, which made it much
easier to write the letter, and then she went on;
. . and he made very light of the story, Joe, while
we sat round the table with the coffee-tray near Sair-
Ann and Dad. We don’t have black coffee, but milk, or
milky tea, or lemon-squash from the lemons on our
own tree down by the water-hole at the foot of the
orchard.
“Dad was quiet and grim, and you will read in the
Tribune all about the dreadful confusion when the in-
vaders marched in, arid the planes machine-gunned the
poor refugees streaming away from the danger. German
bombers were near. Dad told the story so simply, Joe,
that it seemed even more tragic for that.
“Dad knew a member of the Intelligence service. He
was on private work where Dad was billeted in a tiny
village, now like a village of the dead, with its remain-
ing people behind closed doors, and silence and fear
like a cloud above the roofs. This Intelligence man and
Dad decided to get away by plane, for this was possible
because of the friend’s particular form of secret job.
So, in the night, they made their rendezvous and took
off, with only a pilot. This plane. Dad said with a funny
look on his mouth, was being stolen, and the pilot was
going to take it to England and stay there himself, to
fight on our side.
“Suddenly, Joe, in the black sky, another plane loomed
up, and they had to zoom and. twist about like leaves
in a gale. The Nazi was firing, too. It must have been
terrible. The plane Dad was in went over too far with


a hole in the body; there was a sickening lurch and she
lost several thousand feet in a flash . . . and now there
was one thing only to do. The pilot did it, for the Nazi
plane thought this one had crashed . . . and it did
presently, but not from a height. The pilot skimmed
some trees and made a crash-landing. Dad knew no more
until . . .
“The three were injured, Dad most of all, so they
got help, although Dad was unconscious, and presently
he was carried into a little farm-house by an old woman
called Madame Lament, and her elderly daughter,
Marie. The Intelligence man and the pilot had soup,
and their wounds were attended to, and then they van-
ished, for they had work to do, and the old woman
assured them of her loyalty and willingness to help. She
also had a plot which Dad said was so simple that only
a woman could have thought of it. He discovered this
weeks later, of course, when he woke up in a farm-house
bed, with his head tied up, one leg injured, and an
arm knocked about. I go hot and cold all over just to
see it all. He also had a ferocious beard, he said, which
is part of the story, ...
“Well, old Madame Lamont had suffered when the
Prussians came in 1870, and she remembered, but now
it was the Nazis. And during the invasion a few weeks
before Dad crashed, the Nazi invaders broke her heart
again. She had a simple-minded son called Pierre, and
her face went grim when she told Dad. He was harmless
and foolish, but a good son to her. Pierre was no more
. . . only a little wooden cross in the tiny forest near by,
where the Laments also had a little cache of food buried.
Pierre had been tall and limp, sallow and vacant, with
a dark beard. Dad became Pierre Lamont, and when
the Nazis now in charge came barking out questions,
they were not suspicious, for Pierre was well-known


round that farming district, and his name was on the
records. . . .
“Dad says all active-minded writers are good actors,
as they have invisible stages in their minds, and move
their characters across them all the time. Dad acted the
part of Pierre so well that, after a while, he said he
almost felt foolish himself. Madame had burned his uni-
form. You know, for I think I told you long ago, that
a British war-correspondent attached to the French Army
had a sort of uniform with a badge on the sleeve, and
was really almost military. Well, the uniform was dan-
gerous. *Dad had a good deal of money, so Madame
secreted it behind a loose brick up the kitchen chimney.
He would want that, she nodded darkly, to escape later
from ‘those pigs’.
“ 'Ah, les cochons, ’ she kept on saying in crackling
fury against them, and no wonder.
“Dad took months and months to get well. Madame
whispered to her friends who had known the real Pierre.
Nobody breathed a word. Dad helped round the farm
and slowly mended his body and health, all the time
waiting and thinking and finding out things—and worry-
ing about me. At last he heard another whisper, from
a man . . . and then the invaders began to get wild,
for sabotage started roundabout. Marie sold vegetables
in the market-place, too, walking miles, and heard more
whispers. The Nazi paper money—Schiene—was useless,
for the French banks spurned it, and that is why Dad’s
little horde was of untold value.
“Then the Commandant (Nazi, of course) said that
for every act of sabotage he would have ten Frenchmen
shot, so, to protect the good people round him from
reprisals, Dad and his loyalist friends went farther and
farther abroad, hatching the most thrilling explosions
and wrecks and sudden mysterious (?) accidents, and


then one night he heard yet another whisper—exci
beyond words to him.
“It took him weeks to reach the coast, skirmishing
and playing foolish and hiding by day. A certain Jules, a
fisherman, with a smack at anchor near the quay, was
selling the boat to some other Britishers already lurking
there, and Dad’s stored money would make up the
enormous price the fisherman wanted—for he was risk-
ing his life.
“Well, Dad made Madame promise to write to him at
his bank when France was liberated, but she refused
the money he offered her, saying he would need it all.
He did. Anyhow, one night thick with fog, using muffled
oars until beyond sound of land, the men worked the
boat out into the ghostliness. Next morning, when the
sun and a little wind drove the fog away, the smack
was well out to sea, and up went the sails, and away. .. .
“A trawler bailed them up and they went aboard.
When Dad had shaved, the captain did believe he was
British, and the party were landed up the east coast
and had to prove their identity, which was easy, on
British soil with Dad knowing the ropes. And then
London, Joe. Dad said the most heavenly music he has
ever heard in his life, was an old newspaper-seller in
the Strand, and I remember him, too, because we always
used to speak when Granny took me into the restaurant
for tea before going back to Wildwood. I remember him
because he called out ‘Evening Standard’, but all he
really said was ‘Werp-werp’, which I suppose might
sound like Evening Standard to him. He always had a
bright nose and wore a cloth cap to one side.
“Joe, when you read Dad’s articles and story in the
Tribune, the human bits I’m telling you will fit in, for
the paper will deal more with the historical and politi-
cal side of things. Dad has to start on his book at once-


the France one—and Sair-Ann said why not write it here,
instead of in hotels, and he was so pleased he fairly shone.
“I don’t know what next, Joe, but I am just a wee bit
nagged at inside, because how could I leave Darien with
everything and everybody here that I adore, and yet, if
Dad wants a little cottage to live in, how could I not
go and start housekeeping, with help of course, until I
leave school? So, there is a new problem to cope with.
Having to decide between two perfect desires is like
being torn into two parts. But I can’t think of it very
much yet, because everything is too wonderful and per-
fect as it is. Besides, I’ve proved so often how wasteful
it is to grieve about things that never seem to happen,
so we must wait and see. I don’t like those words much,
all the same.
“I don’t feel very sensible to-night with half my wits
at Darien and half in France, so I will close now, Joe
darling, and write again soon.
“With loads of love from,
“Your friend.
“Christine.
That night, very late, when Meg had tidied up her
kitchen and performed the many small tasks of a house-
wife with a large family, she crept in to look down on
the red-head lying asleep, her soft mouth still holding
the smiles of the day, and Joe’s letter, telling a long
story, propped on the dressing-table ready for posting.
Once again, with tears in her eyes, Meg tiptoed out
from the presence of a child whose lap had been filled
with shining stars, and Meg’s heart lifted in sudden
gratitude to Joanna who, for all her former hostility,
had kept Christine safe for her father’s miraculous return.
The quiet days slipped by, with school looming over
the horizon and the arrival of the equipage to anticipate.


Andy’s portable typewriter, whose cover was thick with
fascinating labels, tap-tapped like a busy woodpecker in
the veranda bedroom. It was easy for him to concen-
trate in the beloved old house, with Sair-Ann’s gentle
graciousness creating harmony and comfort and peace.
There was contentment and beauty in the quiet breaks
from work when taking tea on the porch with the sun-
light across the boards, or seated at the table with young
faces like flowers in the lamp-light. There were books,
long wandering conversations, walks along the shore and
through the bush, or to Moon Rock, Egglethorpe, and
beyond to the west and the south. Andy’s sallow look of
strain began to fade away, and his laughter began to
ring out.
Joanna came along in a plain white frock and, know-
ing she had to contact thrilling Andy Mead, skirted
round the house, from whence came the tap-tap of the
portable, and presented herself to Meg, in the kitchen.
The girl’s lovely face was warm with blushes, but her
chin was high.
“Meg ... he knows about good taste and all that sort
of thing,” she stammered. “He’s seen the most marvel-
lous girls all over the world. Does . . . does this outfit
look stagy and common, or . . . not?”
The courage and the sincerity of that simple gesture
went to Meg’s heart.
“Stand back,” she nodded, knowing girls too well to
dismiss the incident casually, after such a moral struggle
to make the deference. Grey eyes moved a slow, inter-
ested glance over the strongly built young creature who,
in a plain white linen and simple white hat, displayed
her natural beauty with unconscious effect.
“You look lovely,”/ Meg smiled, “and I’m proud
of . . .” A questioning look challenged Joanna and she
did not fail.
“My father’s eldest girl,” came gruffly, “and your


yours too, if you could, after . . . after my foulness before.
Oh Meg,” Jo cried suddenly, throwing herself forward
with such force that Meg staggered, “I do love you. I do.
I’d scrub floors to make you love me, too.”
Meg disengaged herself after a little emotionalism,
and started mopping up Jo’s streaked face with her own
lavendered handkerchief.
“I think Mrs Norris can manage the floors,” she
smiled, “but I’ve loved you all the time. Now go and
wash your face, then look in my room for a glass powder-
bowl, and dab some cream under your eyes, too. What
would the famous war-correspondent think of a bung-
eyed relative? Off you go.”
Joanna gave a wild gasp and plunged away, hanging
on to the doorway for a moment to thrust her head
round.
“Meg ... I had to do it. . . . I’ve packed up all my
showy rubbish and the butcher’s going to take it to Mrs
Norris. She can use the dye-pot, I suppose. If not . . .
her kids will probably hold up the traffic. . . .” And
Joanna disappeared into the bathroom with a crash of
the door that made Andy, in the veranda-room, jump.
He liked Joanna. A streak of wildness, now tamed
in Andy, understood the tiger-cub wildness behind her
glowing brown eyes, and his mouth quirked to a humor-
ous grin as, to her secret joy and pride, he kissed each
warm cheek, and nodded as though they shared a con-
spiracy.
“. . , and,” he said presently, almost collapsing her
into tears again, “next time my intrepid daughter
wrestles with the surf, you’d better go with her, as I have
plans which would be quite useless to a mermaid. Thank
you, Joanna,” he said, crushing her hands for a moment
as his slaty eyes glinted. “My home-coming could easily
have been black tragedy.”


Joanna was an easy victim to the sophisticated charm
that the Andys of this world distil.
“He’s marvellous,” she said later to Meg, “and I used
to call him ‘that Andy Mead’. He reminds me of Gary
Cooper thinned off a bit. Oh, I will learn about books.
And he understands about the surf that day. What plans
has he got for Christine?”
“I don’t believe he knows himself,” Meg retorted,
laughing. But she was wrong, for Andy’s plans were
very definite, although it was a trifle too soon to put
them into effect.
One day, with the surf rougher than usual and the
pines swinging in a crystal-clean breeze, Edwin arrived.
The children gathered round the buggy were slightly
dismayed by “Edwin” as a name for a horse, for it, was
a very unglamorous name. Priscilla thought “Florian”
would have been better, or “Annabelle”, but, as the
livery-stables man declared:
“Edwin’s his name, and there ain’t nothing can be
done about it, because he don’t know no other.”
Ann became a natural Jehu. The young folk insisted
upon Meg “trying” the outfit at once, and so she climbed
up into the driver’s seat and lifted the reins, while the
children clambered up to arrange themselves appropri-
ately. Lucy was speechless. Andy came down through the
pines and stood by the fence, laughing to himself as Meg
waved her whip and urged Edwin forth. Joanna was not
present, but she could try the equipage later, for there
were no qualms now about making such a suggestion,
with Lady Driscoll and her many flaws deep beneath
the sea.
Priscilla did not quite like the odd sensation, in the
back seat, of watching the road slip dizzily away behind,
instead of coming at you from ahead, as when in a car.
Besides, it was weird, with draughts floating round your
legs, and the fringed top of the buggy swaying. Christine


was crazy within and calm without, as the warm air from
the lagoon brushed her happy face, and the palms in
the little glade swayed to and fro above their moving
black shadows.
“He’s not very fast,” Ann remarked, in the driver’s
seat on the homeward journey from Egglethorpe. “Gee-
up, Edwin,” she ordered, then spluttered.
“Edwin is quite fast enough,” said her mother,
placidly surveying the lagoon to the left, “especially
with a cargo of assorted Youth on board, and the main
road in Egglethorpe to negotiate.”
“I’d like a spanking pair,” Ann cried, her face alert,
“with a light-weight spider sulky and harness trimmed
by gold studs and red kid.”
“Oh,” Priscilla complained, turning her head, while
hanging on desperately beside ecstatic Lucy, “you’d look
like a circus. Mother, don’t let her get those ideas.”
“The ideas aren’t very dangerous without the spanking
pair,” Meg returned, “and a horse that neither minds
red buses nor shies at white paper is the horse for this
family. Now, mind the gate-posts . . .”
Holding her breath, Ann managed to steer Edwin
into the yard without calamity, and sprang down with
her dirndl skirt ballooning out. After a lesson in un-
harnessing, in buggy-backing, and in refreshing the
patient animal, the company filed up to the house, from
where came the woodpecker sound of literary industry,
to which Meg was now quite resigned. And then, tea
on the porch, with horsy conversation and several tales
Meg remembered from her childhood days on the river-
side farm at Borrowdale.
One dull day, several weeks after school had started,
Christine was leaning over one of the porch window-
sills, watching down the slope to where her father and
his little Sair-Ann-grown-up were discussing the beach
and the cliff at which they looked. Christine suddenly


held her breath, for there was something unbearably
tender in the way Andy had turned to lift both of
Meg’s hands, touching each one with his lips, and then
standing still again. Presently, arm-in-arm, they strolled
lingeringly up the slope, Andy talking urgently, and
Meg nodding at intervals while she listened, as though
saying:
“Yes, I see, but I see lots of other things too. . .
And that evening, in the sitting-room, Andy quietly
explained the plans he had been formulating, ever since
sitting first on the porch to sink his soul into the peace
of the old home to which he had returned. Joanna was
there, her dark eyes looking flatly out from her favourite
shadowed corner near the piano. Her problem was not
yet settled, but Aunt Sophie’s impatience and testiness
was increasing, and that was something, anyway. Evan
was there, having just come in from a tiring week at
the shop, his hair gleaming amber in the light from a
standard lamp. He watched Andy with snapping glances
of liking and respect, with deep interest in his gradual
announcement. Ann sat rigid on the settee with Pris-
cilla dainty in her mauve voile beside her. Lucy was
asleep in bed, after a long day with the interesting
rock-pools, warm in the sun, where the sea met the foot
of the cliff. Meg sat with her lashes down, knitting.
Andy had a gift with words. His quietness, and the
pauses dropped between each remark, gave gravity and
power to all he said, while the children held their
breath and listened.
He was lonely; Meg was lonely—for adult company.
Christine’s diaries had revealed far more of Meg’s gal-
lant control of a large household than she herself would
have ever admitted. The times were difficult for all
mothers without a man at the head of the house, and
her income was small. Growing children and rising prices
created many problems. She would find trouble in giv-


ing each girl a fair start out in life, unless she had
help—partnership.
Andy smiled, saying that he had always adored his
little Sair-Ann, even though she had roused his anger
by her refusal to dream of clashing swords and weeping
heroines. But the children had to be approached
sensibly, and their approval was necessary, before Andy
and Meg could slip away one day, and come back as a
married couple . . .
Andy stood up abruptly, his lean face rather taut.
“Come on, Sair-Ann,” he smiled, holding out a hand
to her. “We’ll leave the young ones to their conference.”
After a staggered pause, a broken rush of exclamations
sounded, but Joanna said nothing at all, biting her lips
in the corner, with agony flying to her eyes. Ann, too,
looked rather peculiar, but Priscilla was rosy with the
romance of the plan, and Christine closed her eyes in
sudden joy, for now she would hot have to decide be-
tween Darien and a cottage with her father. They would
all be one big family—a tall father at the head of the
board, and a smiling-faced mother at the foot. A motherl
A little sound broke from Christine’s lips. Sair-Ann of
long ago would be a mother, and she could be called
that lovely name too. In every sweet way that mattered,
Sair-Ann would be a motherl The goose-flesh of ecstasy
crept over the red-head’s skin like tiny cold-footed ants.
Evan was grimly delighted.
“Jove,” he murmured, “that’s the best idea Andy has
ever had. I’ve been worried sick about Meg being lonely,
and goshl she has been, too. What are a bunch of kids to
a mind like hers?”
Ann glinted a queer glance at him, as her heart
swelled to a pain that almost lifted her ribs.
“Dad,” she whispered, and then, daring the other eyes
round her, choked out more loudly: “Dadl Nobody
ought to take his place.”


Evan’s colour rose to stain his young face to the brows.
“You don’t think I didn’t think of that, did you?” he
jerked. “And . . . well . . . whether it sounds mushy or
not, I’ve got to say it! There are all sorts of love. Meg
doesn’t love Dad’s memory any the less because of al-
ways being Andy’s chum. Dad knew, anyway, and . . .
Well,” he went on, determined but inwardly wincing,
“I happen to know he told her not to go on in loneliness
all her life if ... if she ever met anybody. I was teasing
her one night about a joke Bill Franklin made. Out in
the garden, earlier, it slipped out how lonely she was,
and that night I tackled her properly, and bailed her
up. She didn’t say much. She isn’t the grizzling kind,
but . . . she’s lonely, and that says it all.”
“And,” Christine faltered, not daring to look at
dogged-faced Ann, “I’ve noticed, too . . . It’s in my
diary. Sometimes I’ve seen the loneliness leap to her
eyes, and she’s had to stop looking along the beach, and
go indoors and machine, or sweep, or cook something.”
Her tones broke to indignation. “And Cousin Meg is
only thirty-four! That isn’t even middle-aged.”
“I’m first to go,” Evan said quietly, with a grateful
flash at the red-head. “One by one we’ll all go, leaving
her . . . You too, Ann,” he declared strongly, “for you
know you’re planning to enter Driscoll’s later. Christine
will travel, I dare say, in between her scribbling, or per-
haps get a job on a newspaper. You, Priss, will tackle
dress-designing—so you say in your serious moments.
You’re cut out for it, anyway,” he added, hiding a quick
grin, for she had widened her eyes in dismay, not know-
ing he was aware of her doll-dressing operations in her
bedroom.
“Anyhow,” he ended gruffly, “what a selfish lot of
fat-heads we’d be, to make her feel like a criminal for
having a chum at home, and a partner to help her with


all she’s got to manage. She doesn’t care less for Dad
because of that.”
Ann felt desperate, but the wild pain was slowly
softening, and she began to realize . . . There were all
sorts of love. She loved Chris, and that took nothing
from her loving Mother. Mother had been wonderful . . .
and Dad had known what had to happen , . . and it
could be lonely, when the time came for the young
folk to drift away from Darien, coming home only when
their own affairs let them, like Mrs Metcalfe and her
grown-up children. And she had Mr Metcalfe. Ann’s
inner vision beheld the old house almost empty, the
table deprived of youthful faces, the beds in the rooms
smoothly made, waiting, and Meg sitting on the ver-
anda gazing along the beach, alone . . .
“I’m batty,” Ann said suddenly, her natural generosity
overcoming the swift keening of loyal memory. ‘‘lt was
the shock, that’s all, but ... I won’t call Andy . . .
call Andy anything but Andy, mind you, and that’s
that.”
“Heck!” came the relieved exclamation. ‘‘You don’t
think he’s the paternal type to want titles, do you? He’s
not a scrap paternal. It would embarrass him to death.”
In her corner, poor Joanna was dealing bitterly with
self-made drama, her heart bursting in pain. With Chris-
tine, Ann, Priscilla, and Lucy, Andy wouldn’t want to
tack on the responsibility of a great lummox like her-
self, to add expense and bother and worry. Oh, she was
an outsider. Sweet as Meg was, she was only a step-
mother, and now . . . now she would be Andy Mead’s
wife. Christine would have a father and a stepmother,
and the other girls had their own mother in Meg. Evan
didn’t count, for he had stepped out; but herself . . . ?
She belonged to nobody.
Jo had something to say, however, that the others had
overlooked, and conquered selfishness with a flourish as
she cried with unexpected savagery from near the piano:


“I suppose you all forget that Dad himself married
twice for the very same reason, and what’s good enough
for him is good enough for others. You make me sick,
Ann Driscoll.”
Ann almost jumped. Slaty eyes met brown eyes in
a glance that made the others hold their breath. Joanna
sprang up with hands clenched, and Ann leaped to
her feet also. The emotional moment trembled on the
verge of conflict, but Ann remembered what the argu-
ment was about, and winced. And, in looking hard to
the big girl \yith the light overhead shining blue in
her black curls, Ann saw the brown eyes misted.
"Yes,” Ann jerked, to everybody’s relief, “I forgot
that, Jo. It’s all right,” she said. "I’m all for it, so let’s
call the romancers in and tell them it’s settled.”
Joanna shrank back into her corner, sick with despair,
while Andy and Meg came in, the latter rather pink
and very young-looking in the novel experience of hav-
ing her affairs decided upon by the family. Then Jo
held her breath, for Andy was saying, as he laughed,
glancing round him dryly:
" —and so much for the plans of mice and men! I
came back here and visualized a future existence full
of peace and elderly tranquillity. But, I’m afraid my
dream of indolent peace is slightly dented, with five
girls on my hands . . . Oh, well, I can always use my
belt if you disobey.”
Five girls!
"Me too?” Joanna blurted. "You don’t mean me too,
do you?” and shrank back with a glare at Christine, who
was staring.
Andy meant Joanna, too!
"I’ll get away from her or perish,” Jo growled, when
the truth had sunk in and lifted her spirits to unbe-
lievable heights. “I can’t bear Moon Rock much longer.”


Yes, Andy returned reflectively, “I hope you can,
Joanna. We’ll want to leave someone responsible in
charge of the children while we’re away.”
Jo blinked a look round the room that told of intense
satisfaction, and nobody uttered a whisper.
Andy had another announcement to make, his eyes
carefully avoiding Christine’s incredulous stare as she
blazed with sudden happiness, and yet it all fitted in . . .
“Well,” he drawled, while fiddling with a tobacco-
pouch on one knee, “why waste a perfectly good flat,
with only a swarm of juveniles to use it when they feel
inclined. And,” he added, curtly, “I myself would like to
have the old chap on the premises. One doesn’t meet old
Joe’s kind every day. Apart from the debt I owe him,
which nothing could repay.”
Joe! Old Joe, with a place of his own, some ground
to grow things in, and somebody who cared for him to
take away the loneliness at night; old Joe— with the
warmth of the colonial oven for the long winter nights,
instead of a primus stove which, however useful, could
not be described as a boon companion. Joe pottering
round the orchard, helping with Edwin, and entertain-
ing five girls round his table in the Room, instead of
one girl in the lonely little shack beside the river filled
with jellyfish, that did nothing but float up and down
with the tide.
“Dad, does he know?” Christine choked, her eyes filled
with light.
“No, but he will to-morrow,” Andy declared, rising
from his chair, “for you yourself are going to tell him—
so pop off and write out a telegram, asking him to ring
us here. You can meet him with the horse and buggy
at Egglethorpe, after he finalizes with the Goulds. Old
Joe,” said Andy wisely, “isn’t the kind of man to leave
them in the lurch. He’ll find a successor before he leaves,
or I’m a Dutchman.”


Andy was obviously no Dutchman, for all that he as-
serted came to pass. A glad old man with his tones break-
ing talked to Christine for ten minutes on the telephone
—after her father had had his say.
“Aye, lassie,” old Joe declared, “it’s good to be alive,
and as soon as I find someone to take my place, I’ll
come . . . Aye, that I will, and God bless you all for
not forgetting.”
Christine hid in her room for half an hour after, still
and happy on the edge of her bed.
“It almost pains to feel so full of it,” she whispered,
“but nobody minds that sort of pain. Oh, Joe— one of
somebody. You too."
Ann worked herself into a fever over taking charge
of the flat in preparation for Joe’s arrival. It was a
drizzling Saturday of steamy heat and silence. The chil-
dren trickled in the peculiar animation of home-making,
with a glorious purpose. Dark blue duco flew in all
directions. Priscilla, her fair head tied up in a scarf,
shook rugs in the stable, because of the rain outside.
Lucy trotted to and fro, and visited Edwin now and
again. Ann painted and bossed, and rubbed a blue streak
across her brow and upper lip, while Christine dusted
and swept and wiped the little table in the wash-room
where Joe’s crockery would stand, behind the door. The
stove was black-leaded and brushed clean of rusty flakes
and ashes. An old hearthrug, warm but faded, was laid
before the fire-to-be on winter nights. A blue-painted
rocker stood on either side of the old oven, and a kero-
sene lamp that did not leak was suspended from the
ceiling. >
"00-ooo?” It was Joanna, coming up from the beach
with a big black umbrella over her figure, glistening in
a white oil-skin open down the front.
Ann hopped out, hair on end, and pointed with the
brush.


“We’re in here,” she called, “getting Joe’s house ready,
and don’t tread sand on the floor, but wipe your feet
on the mat.” Ann popped back, collapsed to the floor,
and went on ducoing a chair bar.
Christine thought of the flying-foxes by the river as
Joanna backed into the doorway and shook her um-
brella fiercely, flapping it open and shut by running one
hand up and down with the ring on the handle. Then it
was stabbed into the sand beneath the little shelter over
the door looking toward the lagoon, and Jo stood tri-
umphant, hands on her hips, with the oil-skin thrown to
the floor.
“I’m free,” she cried, her brown eyes snapping. “I’m
free. I’m coming home next week.”
When the babel had died down, she sat on a stool
and explained, her tones burring with emotion. Aunty,
it appeared, had met the relentlessness of retribution.
There had been a terrible scene at the bungalow. Her
shares had gone. It was mixed up in some way with
enemy invasion to the country where Aunty’s oil-well
shares had been of value. Now they were so much worth-
less paper, Joanna was sorry, in a grimly satisfied way,
for Sophie had been a pitiful creature when hysterical
in desperation. The god of money had crashed to pieces
at her fancifully shot feet. And Mr Metcalfe had al-
most gone frantic when he came along from his bunga-
low to explain his letter.
“I’m sorry for her,” Jo jerked. “I nearly went frantic
myself for a while. You can’t walk out and leave a
penniless Aunt, for she’s only got the money she had
before . . . before my grandmother made her will. About
two pounds a week. That’s nothing to Aunty. Well, she
performed and screeched and cried, and you can imagine
how I felt. And then . . .” Jo took a deep breath in the
exquisite joy of freedom. "And then she telephoned
Uncle Willie at the homestead. She’s going there."


"Nice for Uncle Willie,” Ann blurted, her painting
forgotten. "What did he say?”
"Well,” Jo said, shuddering at the scene leaping in
her brain, "he doesn’t like her, but he seems to have a
sort of family-sense.” She blushed. "Loyalty, I mean.
And he told her she had to behave like a normal woman
and stop rigging herself up like a Christmas tree . . .”
Joanna struggled for a moment between spluttering
and frowning, for with it all she felt the tragedy of
the poor woman’s downfall.
“Well,” Christine faltered, too amazed for clear
thought at the moment, "she won’t have the money to
dress like a Christmas tree, anyway. Oh, Jo! You’re
really coming home in time to be here while they go
away!”
“In time to take charge of you,” Jo nodded, her eyes
glowing, "so you’d better watch out and behave your-
selves.”
“Good gracious!” Priscilla exclaimed, from her petri-
fied stand in the wash-room doorway. "Now Aunty can’t
make a show of us any longer. I’ve been mortified.”
“Mortified,” Jo sniffed, taking up a duster. "I’ve been
nearly driven mad.”
"But,” Christine asked anxiously, “did she say you
needn’t go to Borrowdale with her, Jo? Are you sure?”
Joanna stood with her handsome face lifted, laughing
in rather a peculiar fashion, the others thought.
"I’m sure,” she said, nodding eloquently. “Nothing
could make me so sure as what she said. I asked her
about being free. I had to. And do you know what
she said? She said: ‘Go back there, of course, you stupid
creature. How could I afford to take you with me, now
I haven’t one quarter enough money to look after my-
self!’ ” Jo released a long breath, "So that shows.”


“Never mind, Jo,” Christine said slowly. “Darien is
different.”
Joanna stood very still for a moment, her ripe mouth
drooping to wry tenderness.
“Yes,” came the gruff admission, “Darien is different
. . . and so am I . . . now."


Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-19 Niukson Street, Sydney


.
(
■
. •


.
*
.
-
.
f
'
■


3 1508 02085157 7


