

NATIONAL INSURANCE.
NOT FOR SALE.
1938.
A Summary of the Principles
of the Australian National
Health and Pensions
Insurance Act 1935.
By Authority:
L. F. JOHNSTON, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia.)
3595....


APPROVED SOCIETIES.
Conditions of Approval,
Part VII. of the National Health and Pensions Insurance Act
1938 prescribes the conditions for the establishment of Approved
Societies, and it will be supplemented in detail by Regulations. The
scope is wide., but no Approved Society may be carried on for profit
nor have less than 2,000 insured members (i.e., other than honorary
members).
The Commission will not enforce the condition of minimum
membership during the first twelve months, but provisional approval
will not be given to societies which have insufficient prospects of
securing 2,000 members.
Each Society must be subject to the effective control of its insured
members,- but its management need not be confined to such members.
Each Society must adopt the Model Rules of the Commission, subject
to such variations or later amendments as may be approved or required.
It must give security against misuse of funds, and keep its accounts in
the manner prescribed for audit by the Commission.
Other information is given in the back pages of this cover, and it
will be supplemented by circulars on request, and during disdussions
at meetings which are to be arranged. Forms of application for
approval will be supplied.
Occupational and Regional Societies.
These types of Societies may become an important feature of the
Australian plan. Approved Societies may be formed by persons having
any common interest, which may be occupational or regional or both,
and such Societies may limit their qualifications for membership.
There will be certain minor obligations regarding membership, to be
explained at meetings, but as much freedom will be allowed as is
compatible with the general plan.
While a Society cannot be approved for an area less than the area
of one State, it will not be required to take members outside a reason-
ably defined district, to be agreed upon with the Commission,
[See Chapter VI. and back cover.]


NATIONAL INSURANCE.
NOT FOR SALE.
1938.
A Summary of the Principles
of the Australian National
Health and Pensions
Insurance Act 1938.
By Authority :
L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia.)
3505.




PREFACE.
The National Health and Pe?isions Insurance Act 1938 was intro-
duced into the Commonwealth Parliament by the Honorable R. 0.
Casey, Commonwealth Treasurer, on 4th Mayj passed both Houses
on 30th June, and became law on sth July. The National Insurance
Commission—J. B. Brigden (Chairman), D. McVey and H. C. Green
—was appointed on 6th July.
The Act is based on the Report of Sir Walter Kinnear, formerly
Controller of Health Insurance in Great Britain, which was published
in June, 1937. Sir Walter Kinnear visited Australia in 1936, and
again in 1938, and has been actively associated with the Treasurer
in the preparation of this measure, together with Mr. T. Lindsay, a
senior officer of the British Ministry of Health, and the three Commis-
sioners.
Critics of this Summary will observe that it does not follow the
formal lines customary in an official publication, but because of their
novel character it is necessary to explain the principles of National
Insurance in Australia.
J. B. BRIGDEN.
7th July, 1938.
Offices of the National Insurance Commission,
West Block, Canberra.




NATIONAL INSURANCE.
CONTENTS.
Introduction by the Honorable 11. G. Casey, M.P.
Chapters. p age
I. Main Principles . . .. .. .. .. .. . . 1
11. The People Insured .. .. .. . . .. .. 6
111. Contributions .. .. . . . . .. ~ .. 7
Table of Contributions .. .. .. .. .. .. 10
Benefits and Qualifications .. .. .. .. ..II
Specimen Contribution Card .. .. . . .. .. 12-13
IV. Cash Benefits .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 14
V. Medical Benefit . . .. . . .. . . .. .. 19
VI. Approved Societies .. .. .. .. .. 22
Diagrams of the Financial Structure .. .. .. .. 26-28
VII. Finance .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 29
VIII. Pensions and Population . . .. .. . . .. 33
IX. Complaints and Disputes .. .. . . .. . . 36
X. Existing Benefit Schemes .. .. . . .. . . .. 39
XI. Employers .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 41
XII. Commencement and Growth .. .. .. .. 43
Information for persons who desire to establish Approved Societies (covers).




INTRODUCTION.
(By the Hon. R. G. Casey, M.P., Commonwealth Treasures.)
The National Health and Pensions Insurance Act 1938 is now an
accomplished fact, and the National Insurance Commission has been
appointed for its effective administration. Preparations for the estab-
lishment of Approved Societies are proceeding, and a Royal Commis-
sion is being set up to advise on the remuneration of medical prac-
titioners who will provide medical treatment for insured persons.
It is intended that iSational Insurance shall come into active opera-
tion as from the beginning of 1939. It is estimated that the scheme
will enrol about 1,850,000 people, and that its benefits will affect no
less than 3,600,000 men, women and children throughout Australia,
which is more than half of the population.
The Commonwealth Government has already announced its inten-
tion of providing some financial assistance towards the cost of medical
treatment of the wives and families of insured persons, and it has
undertaken to submit to Parliament a supplementary scheme of insur-
ance for self-employed persons (small farmers, shopkeepers and others
who are not employees) not eligible to be insured under the present
Act.
This publication is the first step in the direction of informing the
Australian people of how National Insurance w r ill work in practice
and how it will affect each individual. It will be followed by other
activities before the end of this year, directed to ensure that every
person concerned may understand his or her rights and duties under
National Insurance.
I believe that I can end this short foreword in no better way than
by repeating what I said when introducing National Insurance into the
Federal Parliament—
“ As this National Insurance Scheme has gradually taken prac-
tical shape over the last six months, the Government has become
increasingly aware both of the magnitude of the task involved, and
of the great and increasing value of such a scheme to the
Australian people. I believe that no measure of anything approach-
ing such social importance has previously been presented to the
Parliament or the people of Australia. We have heard much about
collective security in recent years. This National Insurance
Scheme is a practical application of the principle of collective
security for the protection of the individual worker. Insured
persons, through their contributions, will be able to secure on easy
terms a right to benefits which many of them could not hope to


secure by a lifetime of individual saving. The Government is
convinced that the provisions of this measure will appeal vei\
strongly to all who seek security for themselves and their
dependants, and who, at the same time, value independence and
self-reliance.
This National Insurance Scheme is designed to improve pro-
gressively the average standard" of health of the people, and to
provide, at the cheapest possible rate, guaranteed insurance against
some of the worst of the anxieties that beset the minds of men.’
On behalf of the Commonwealth Government I commend this great
social measure to the many persons whom it will concern, and ask for
their support in the great constructive effort that it represents.
R. G. CASEY, Treasurer.


Chapter I.
MAIN PRINCIPLES.
The National Health and Pensions Insurance Act 1938 is based
upon certain main principles, whicli are summarized under the
following headings:—
1. Insurance.
2. Compulsion.
3. Contributions.
4. The Sharing or Pooling of Risks.
5. Minimum Security.
6. Financial Security.
INSURANCE.
The ideas of National Insurance are not new, but they have been
stimulated throughout the world by the experience of the economic
depression. Health Insurance commenced in Great Britain 27 years
ago, and Pensions Insurance 13 years ago. Australia is setting out to
do both of these things at once, but it has the advantage of the
experience of the British system, and has had the advice of its Controller
for many years in the person of Sir Walter Kinnear.
The first principle of National Insurance is that it is insurance,
and its details are therefore based on actuarial computations of the
risks which it covers. The data for those calculations are derived
from the vital statistics of the nation (which are the most accurate
statistics published), and from the sickness experience of its people
so far as that can be ascertained.. The Census of 1933 provided
important and essential information for the Scheme.
Insurance is in effect the same thing as assurance, and it would
not deserve the name if it did not assure to its insured persons the
benefits which it undertakes to provide. This, in turn, implies two
things: (a) that the costs of the benefits promised will not be in
excess of the funds to be available; and (b) that the funds will be
available as and when they are required. The actuarial evidence
provides the information for determining these two things, and is the
basis for deciding the relations between contributions and benefits.
COMPULSION.
The second principle of National Insurance is that within its range
it is national in scope and universal in its application. The contribu-
tions are compulsory and the benefits are available to all, without any
condition other than the conditions of insurance.


There are indeed certain exemptions from the scheme, the chiet
being of employments which afford benefits equal in value to those to
be provided through National Insurance and which benefits are
guaranteed by a Government. Chapter 11. describes the scope of the
scheme, and Chapter X. deals with the problems of private benefit
schemes now existing. The principle followed is that National Insur-
ance cannot deny the benefits of inclusion to any class of employees
v ho are eligible to be protected by it, no matter how generous or secure
their privately guaranteed benefits may be at present, or are likely to
remain, and that it cannot be adapted to suit the convenience of
innumerable private schemes varying widely in their arrangements.
The compulsory principle makes National Insurance possible. It
will be observed that in the details of its administration the maximum
degree of freedom and of self-government has been allowed.
CONTRIBUTIONS.
The National Scheme, being an insurance scheme, relates its benefits
to its contributions, and has no “ means test ”. The benefits of
National Insurance will not be conditional upon poverty or necessity,
but soleiv upon insurance rights. No questions of income or property
will arise, and there will be no penalties on thrift or self-reliance.
It is, of course, only through the contributory principle that this
can be done. No non-contributory system can avoid a “ moans test ",
and that feature of the existing Invalid and Old-age Pensions system
has always been regarded as objectionable. While that system must
continue, it will become of diminishing importance as time goes on
(although not of diminishing cost to the Commonwealth, as is explained
in Chapter VIII.).
The contributory principle also widens the scope for the future
extension of welfare services. The present scheme is, of course, an
example of this fact on a grand scale. The contributions from insured
persons provide their title to benefits. The equal contributions from
their employers are based on the principle that the act of employing
a person connotes an equal liability with him for the degree of
security provided under the scheme. The contributions from the
Commonwealth Treasury are of a different kind, and are explained in
Chapter VII. on Finance.
Here it may be said that the Commonwealth contributions make
possible the fiat rates of individual contributions, irrespective of age
or condition of health. More than half a million of the insured people
will be over 40 years of age on their entry into the scheme. There
will be no medical examinations on entry, and the people who will
benefit most in the early years of the scheme will be the elderly, the
future widows of such men, and of younger men, and the insured
people of all ages in poor health.


THE SHARING OR POOLING OE RISKS.
Ail insurance rests upon this principle, and National Insurance,
with its compulsory features, does so, too. However, there are limits
to the use of this principle. Younger people are not required to share
the risks of older people, and the scheme observes other limits, also.
There is, in principle, no particular point at which “ sharing or
pooling ” must stop, and opinions will differ on the merits of the degree
at which it stops in this scheme. There are advocates for the sharing
of the costs of medical treatment for children of insured family men,
and there are complaints that some insured persons may get no
benefits at all from the scheme. (The question of “ lapses ” is dealt
with in the chapter on contributions.) It will be obvious that the
principle can be used too much, and every person must judge for him-
self where the line should be drawn. In this scheme every insured
male will share equally in contributing towards the cost of the benefits
which the average insured man will obtain from the age of 16 for the
remainder of his life, or his widow and children will obtain. Every
insured female will share similarly, except that she will contribute very
little for children and nothing for widows’ pension.
It will be obvious that the equity of pooling depends very much
on the magnitude of the benefits which are unequally shared.
MINIMUM SECURITY.
The principles so far expounded (except that of compulsion) are
more or less common to all forms of insurance, but National Insurance,
because it is compulsory, sets limits to the “ cover ” which can be
purchased. Roth the contributions and the benefits are standardized.
The object of National Insurance is not to nationalize all thrift,
nor to provide all tlie security which prudent people will desire to
provide for themselves. It is not even part of the scope of Health
Insurance to provide all the medical treatment necessary to the insured
people. The object is limited to a minimum of security within the
range of the Act. Opinions may well differ as to how the benefits now
to be provided meet that condition, and this is not the place to discuss
the question. The principle is that as much personal choice should
be allowed as is compatible •with the national objective. The insured
persons will spend any margins of income (not always negligible) in
many ways, sometimes on lotteries or more amusements, sometimes
on more substantial welfare, and to some extent on supplementary
insurance, according to their tastes and tempers. If they choose to save
more, and can do so, they will not be penalized when pension time
comes.
FINANCIAL SECURITY.
By this Act the Commonwealth undertakes future liabilities which
approach in value the colossal sum of £300,000,000. This is chiefly
on account of widows’ and old-age pensions, and most of the liability


will accrue on account of contributors now in their early years.
Insurance is a long-range plan, and the contributions are natural I,}
larger than the cost of benefits in the early years, while in much later
years the benefits are liable to cost more than current income can
provide. The financial plans are described in Chapter VII., and the
position with regard to pensions is explained in Chapter VIII.
There are two possible ways in which a Government-guaranteed
scheme might deal with this problem. It might postpone Government
contributions until they were needed for current expenditures, and
provide only what was necessary at any time. It- might rely upon
its taxing powers, and an expectation of increasing national income, to
meet its obligations as they accrue. The other way is the way followed
in this Act. The principle is that it is not enough that National
Insurance, through the National Parliament, guarantees the benefits,
but that funds must be fcuilt up to buttress the security for the benefits
which are promised, and for which contributions are paid. This
principle is, of course, only the insurance principle once again.
These explanations of the main principles underlying the scheme
are necessary because it is new to Australia.


Chapter II.
THE PEOPLE INSURED.
The object of .National Insurance is to provide that all persons who
are in employment- and who earn less than £7 per week shall be granted
certain benefits which are explained in the next chapter. It also
provides that all persons who will have been in employment for at
least two years, or the equivalent of two years, will have the oppor-
tunity of continuing to be insured if they choose. Because of the
great variety of employments and of the many kinds of arrange-
ments under which people are paid for work done, certain rather
elaborate classifications and distinctions have to be made, and the most
important of these are outlined below.
In general, all persons who work for an employer in any capacity
will be insured between the ages of 14 years and the ages when they
will be eligible to receive the Old-age Pension. These ages are 60
for women and 65 for men.
The chief condition of exclusion is earnings at a rate in
excess of £7 per week. This, however, does not apply to
manual workers, whose earnings in some occupations may
be higher than £7 per week, but who, as a rule, do not earn higher
rates continuously throughout the year. People who receive
increases in salaries which take them out of the range of compulsory
insurance may continue as a voluntary contributors For them there
is no compulsion, and the employer is not required to contribute
(although in certain circumstances described in Chapter X. he may be
willing to do so).
Women. —All female employees will be insured on the same con-
ditions as males, but their rates of contribution and their benefits will
be different, and their rights to become voluntary contributors will be
affected by marriage. (See Chapter IV. on Cash Benefits.),
Exempt Employments. —A principle of the Act is that no employed
person shall be exempted from insurance unless equivalent benefit'
are guaranteed by a Government, either State or Commonwealth.
It follows, therefore, that- exemptions are very limited. The
permanent employees of the various Governments will be wholly or
partially exempted, according to the conditions of superannuation or
other benefit under which they work.. If, as is usual, they have rights
to receive salaries to a sufficient extent while sick, they may be totally
exempted because they will be receiving, by way of payment during
sickness, the equivalent of both medical treatment and “ sick pay
under the Act. Some Government employees will not be covered for
Widows’ and Orphans’ Pensions. The various classes have yet to be
distinguished in each State. The degrees of exemption will be decided
formally when applications are received from the employers, and the
relative values of benefits can be measured for each class.


Returned Soldiers. —Returned soldiers who receive benefits under
the Repatriation Act are allowed an option with which they will be
made acquainted through their organizations.
Special Classes.-— People who are working under contract to perform
certain work under their own control, and not under the immediate
direction of an employer, will not be automatically included. Theic
are many classes of such persons. In some cases the Commission will
need to hold special inquiries before it will be able to make proper
decisions. In general, however, the intention is to include as many
people as possible.
Casual workers wfill not be excluded so long as there is any degi ee
of regularity in their employment. Gardeners, and women who help
with domestic work, wfill be included unless they do this work on
irregular occasions only. All casual w r ork for the purpose or any tiade
or business wfill be included.
Special arrangements may need to be made for seasonal workers,
for out-workers, for some workers wfith different employers in a
for employees not paid by wages or salary only, and for seamen.
People will be insured with respect to their main jobs, and not for
other jobs which may be scheduled as subsidiary. Persons wfiiose main
occupation is uninsurable employment may be also engaged in some
spare-time job which is not their source of livelihood, but is insurable
employment. An occupation of this kind wfiiich is normally engaged
in, not as a means of livelihood but as a subsidiary occupation, will
be excluded from insurability by regulation. Employment in the
service of a relative will, as far as practicable, be excluded if it is
not genuine employment but is arranged only for the purpose of
securing the benefits of National Insurance.
Many details have yet to be determined. It may not be possible
to include people in remote areas where benefits cannot be properly
provided and it may be necessary to exclude quite a number of such
people at the outset and to bring them in gradually as the scheme
develops.
Employers and Workers on Their Own Account. —The present Act
provides for employees only. Most people in Australia have been
employees at some time in their lives. In the future most people will
have been employees under the present scheme, and they will have had
an opportunity of continuing in National Insurance as voluntary
contributors. At the outset, however, workers who are not employees
will be unable to share in the advantages of the scheme, but it is the
expressed intention of the Government to bring in a supplementary
scheme for their benefit. The details of that scheme are now being
formulated.


Chapter III.
CONTRIBUTIONS.
National Insurance, like all insurance, is based upon the payment
of premiums. The benefits which are guaranteed under this Act are
related to the contributions which are, or have been, paid. Under
the insurance method it is possible to avoid any other test of the
right to receive the benefits. Where there is no such principle,
benefits must, as a rule, be limited to payments to people in necessitous
circumstances. There is really no alternative except that provided by
the insurance principle.
It is not, of course, necessary that the whole of the contributions
should be paid by those who are to benefit directly or through their
families. The Act provides that half of the Aveekly contributions shall
be paid by the employer, and the balance of the estimated cost is to
be found from fixed Commonwealth Treasury grants. The insured
person, however, will not pay his contributions directly, but through
his employer. His benefits will be directly related to his contributions.
It will, therefore, be in the interests of every person insured under
this Act to see that his or her contribution is paid.
STAMPS AND CARDS.
It will be the duty of all employers of insured persons to purchase
insurance stamps to the full amount of the joint contribution each week,
and they will have the right to deduct the employee’s share from the
wages or salary at the usual times of payment.
These insurance stamps will be sold at all Post Offices and will be
of a special design. There will be different stamps for different
contributions. All employed persons who are insured will become
members of one or other of the Approved Societies which are soon to be
established and which are described in Chapter YI. These Societies
will distribute special cards with spaces and dates printed thereon, to
which the stamps are to be affixed. The cards will contain all the
necessary instructions. These cards will be collected at the end of each
period of six months and new cards will be supplied. After collecting
the cards the Approved Societies will ascertain the contributions to the
credit of each of their members and will register his or her qualifications
for benefit. The future of these cards is then a matter between the
Approved Societies and the Insurance Commission.


it is scarcely necessary to emphasize the importance of these cards.
They will carry stamps to a substantial value, and each one will he of
prime importance to the person to whom it belongs. Normally, tne
cards will be kept by the employers in safe custody as a matter of
convenience. The card will not show the name of the Approved
Society of which the employee is a member, but it may carry the number
of that Society or some other means of identification. The employee
will have the right of access to the card on reasonable notice at any
time and will be entitled to carry it about with him if he desires to do so.
A “ Record Card ” will be also supplied to each insured person,
showing the contributions to his credit and the benefits paid to him
by his Approved Society. A third card w r ill be supplied as a voucher
for medical treatment, and may be used during absences from his
usual address.
Voluntary Contributors.
Persons who are no longer employed or who not being manual
workers are in receipt of salaries of more than £7 per
week and who choose to continue as voluntary contributors
will purchase stamps and keep their own cards. As it will no longer
be the obligation of any employer to attend to this duty for
them they must attend to it themselves. They will be given periods of
grace during which they may make up any lack of contributions and
will be allowed the “ free insurance period ” described below.
EMPLOYEE’S CONTRIBUTIONS AND VALUES OF
BENEFITS.
The proportion of the total cost of the benefits to be paid by the
people insured will vary according to their ages. Juveniles will get on
the average benefits worth lid. per week for which they will pay 4d.,
and their employers another 4d. At the age of sixteen, the premium pay-
able for the pension benefits only which are guaranteed under this Act
would on an actuarial basis be about 2s. 9d. per week for the average
youth. Lie will pay 10£d. At the average age of entry into insurance,
which is 32 years, the contribution for the man will be the same sum
of 10|-d. for pensions, but at his age it would otherwise cost him 7s. sd.
per week. The same rate of contribution is charged irrespective of
age and for older men, the weekly value is, of course, very much more.
These weekly values are the values for compulsory insurance. For
voluntary insurance they would be much higher because a scheme of
voluntary insurance tends always to attract those who are in most need
of the benefits provided and are therefore a worse insurance risk than
the average of the population.


The special position of women is dealt with in the next chapter.
The contributions are to increase by 3d. per week in five years’
time for each of the joint contributors (employers and employed) and
in another five years by another 3d. per week in respect of males only.
Ihe cost of health insurance, and still more the cost of superannuation,
is necessarily low at first and increases as the increasing age of the
contributors brings increasing liability to sickness and brings more of
them up to pensionable age.
The Effect of Lapses.
Questions are asked as to the rights of a contributor who has paid
into the Insurance Funds and for some reason or another discontinues
those payments and receives no benefits from them. In ordinary
insurance such persons are usually entitled to receive some extension of
benefit or some monetary consideration. In National Insurance these
advantages are given by means of “ free insurance periods ”.
FREE INSURANCE PERIODS.
The qualifications for the various benefits are set out in a table at
the end of this Chapter, following the table of contributions. One
of the benefits of the scheme which, however, is not listed among the
benefits is known as the “free insurance period”. This is to provide
chiefly for periods of unemployment. When a person is sick and is
receiving sick benefits he or she is not employed and is not paying
contributions. The Act provides that he or she will not be charged with
any arrears of contributions for weeks in which cash benefits are being
received. In addition, an insured woman will not be charged with
arrears in respect of two weeks before and four weeks after her con-
finement. The qualifications for pensions for widows and old-age
pensions will allow these weeks to be reckoned as qualifying weeks when
the initial waiting period has been passed and the initial qualifying
contributions paid. The effect is that weeks of sickness or of disable-
ment count as weeks of contributions for the minimum average of
contributions required before the claim for pension arises.
The effect of unemployment only is to cause the insured person
to fall into arrears with his contributions, and unless something were
done, he would gradually lose his qualifications for benefits. The


Payable by—
Amount
per week.
Total.
Distribution.
S.
d.
S.
d.
s.
d.
1. Employed, persons —
6 'l
Males
1
0
/ Health
1
3
Employer
I
« J
\ Pensions
l
9
Employed persons —
o 1
Females..
1
0
/ Health
1
2
Employer
l
0 /
\ Pensions
0
10
2. Juvenile Contributors —
Males and Females
Employer
0
0
4 \
4 /
0
8
Health
0
8
3. For male persons who have attained the
age of 65 years—Employer
1
6
i
6
Pensions
1
6
For female persons who have attained
the age of 60 years—Employer
1
0
i
0
Pensions
1
0
4. Voluntary Contributors —
Eutitled to Medical Benefit-—
Males
3
0
3
0
/ Health
l
3
9
\ Pensions
/ Health
1
Females
2
0
2
0
1
2
\ Pensions
0
10
Not entitled to Medical Benefit—
Males
2
8
2
8
/ Health
0
11
\ Pensions
l
9
Females
1
8
1
8
/ Health
\ Pensions
0
0
10
10
Special Voluntary Contributor
(Females)
1
0
1
0
Pensions
1
0
Voluntary Contributor (female) for
■
additional old-age pension
0
6
0
6
| Pensions
0
6
“ free insurance period ” provided in the Act carries him on from the
time that his card is called in by his Approved Society until eighteen
months later at least. During this period he is entitled to medical
benefit, and if he is sick or employed at the end of that period it may,
be extended further. Sufficient employment before the first free
insurance comes to an end will build up a title to a new free insurance
period if employment ceases again.
The details need not be set out here. It is intended that sickness
benefit shall not be reduced on account of arrears incurred by any
insured person during the first year of the operation of the Act and
during that period the whole problem of unemployment in relation to
health and pensions can be dealt with.
Tab' s: ok Oonthibittions.


Benefit.
Weekly
Payment.
Period of
Benefit.
Waiting period.
Minimum Number
of Contributions.
Health —
s.
d.
Modi cal (a)
During* in-
None
None
suranceand
old-age
Sickness—( b )
Adult males. .
Adult females
20
15
0
0
weeks
26 weeks
26
Juveniles
5
0
To age 16
at least
Disablement— (c )
Males
Females
15
12
0
6
"1 May can-
't- tinue to
J pension age
104 weeks
104
Pensions—
Widow’s (d)
12
6
For life or
104 weeks
104, and 78 in
until re-
last three
marriage
years(<7)
Orphan’s
7
6
Until 15 years
104 weeks
104, and 78 in
of age
last three
years(gr)
Old-age—
r
Males
20
0
From age 65^1
208, and 117
Females (e) ..
15
0
From age 60 >
5 years
in last three
Females who pay extra
20
0
From age 60 j
years(<7)
(/)
Health and Pensions
(additional to above) —
Dependent Child’s Al-
3
6
Until 15 years
Same as for
Same as for re-
lowanc-e
of age
relevant
levant bene-
benefits
fits
Benkfits am) Qualifications.
(a) Medical benefit cannot commence nntil April, 1939.
(b) Married minors are to receive the same as adults ; other minors are to receive—males Ins., females
128. 6d., or if not fully qualified 12s. and 10s. respectively. Benefit commences on fifth day of sickness.
(c) Unmarried minors, 12s. and 10s. respec' ively.
( d) 15s. after the first increase in contributions five years after commencement.
(e) Including women who have been four years in insurance, have paid 156 contributions, and who
elect on marriage to become special voluntary contributors.
(/) 6d. per week.
(g) Weeks of sickness count as weeks of contributions.


NATIONAL HEALTH AND PENSIONS INSURANCE
CONTRIBUTION CARD
CARD A
MALE
Employed
Contributor
Age 18 to 65
mm
IQOQ FIRST
I «JOi3 HAL.F
26 Weeks
Ending
2 duly, 1939
Instructions to insured Person
THB CARD MUST BE HANDED TO YOUR EMPLOYER AT
THE PROPER TIMES FOR STAMPING
THE CARD MUST BE SENT TO YOUR SOCIETY, WITH YOUR
RECORD CARD, NOT LATER THAN
15 JULY 1939
IF YOU HAVE NOT JOINED AN APPROVED SOCIETY BE-
FORE THAT DATE SEND THE CARD TO TIE DEPUTY
COMMISSIONER,
.SYDNEY
Failure to surrender card promptly may result
in loss of Benefits
IF THE CARD IS UNSTAMPED OR ONLY PARTLY
STAMPED YOU SHOULD STATE THE REASON
Instructions to Employer
A 3S. CONTRIBUTION IS PAYABLE FOR EACH WEEK
(BEGINNING MONDAY) DURING THE WHOLE OR ANY
PART OF WHICH THE INSURED PERSON IS EMPLOYED
THE CARD MUST BE STAMPED NOT LATER THAN
THE TIME AT WHICH WAGES ARE PAID
Health and Pensions Insurance Stamps only
must be used
Sg&i Each stamp must he cancelled in accordance
PPHj with the notice overleaf
The card must he returned to the insured person,
duly stamped—
(a) WHEN EMPLOYMENT ENDS, OR WITHIN 14
DAYS IE HE LEAVES WITHOUT NOTICE ;
(b) WITHIN 48 HOURS AFTER REQUEST BY
THE EMPLOYEE AT ANY TIME
At the end of its currency the card must be returned
to the insured person not later than
8 JULY 1939
IF THE EMPLOYER FAILS TO PaY THE CONTRIBUTION
AND TO DEDUCT THE EMPLOYEE’S SHARE OF IT AT THE
PROPER TIME HE LOSES HIS RIGHT TO DEDUCT ANY
PART OF THE CONTRIBUTION
RATE OF CONTRIBUTION
Employer: Is 6d. } «j /
Employee: Is. 6d. j "
You cannot obtain
the health benefits of
the Insurance Act
unless you join an
Approved Society
A list of these
Societies can be seen
at any Post Office
If you have not
selected a Society
within the prescribed
time, you will be
allocated to a Society
it will probably suit
you better to join a
Society of your own
choice
For an employed man aged 05 or over
a special card must be used and only the
employer’s contribution (is. Od.) is pay-
able. The card is issued to the employee
by the National Insurance Commission
or may be obtained at a Post Office
A PERSON FINDING A LOST CARD SHOULD DROP IT INTO A POST OFFICE LETTER BOX


N 139
WARNING.
ANY PERSON WHO REMOVES A
STAMP FROM THIS CARD OR
MAKES USE OF A STAMP RE-
MOVED FROM A CARD IS LIABLE
TO PROSECUTION AND HEAVY
PENALTY
Stamps must not be bought
except at a Post Office
NO. IN SOCIETY.
NAME
(Harman! first )
WEEK
25
BEGINNING
19 June. 1939
WEEK
26
BEGINNING
26 June, 1939
HERE BEFORE RETURN-
ING THE CARD
If you change T
your address
write new ad- |
dress hore !►.
and notify i
vour Society
within 7 days J .


Chapter IV.
GASH BENEFITS.
The benefits and the qualifications required for them are set out
in the table in the previous page. The scope and conditions of Medical
Benefit are described in the next chapter. All other benefits are in
cash and are divided into two classes, namely, Health and Pensions.
For each of these two classes there is a further benefit of Dependent
Child’s Allowance.
These cash benefits do not pretend to be adequate to meet ail the
needs of those who will receive them. They will be far more generous
than the benefits of a similar kind provided in any other country, but
they are intended to provide only a minimum of security. (See
Chapter I.).
Workmen’s Compensation, &c. —Where an insured person is entitled
to receive compensation under any other law because of any injury
or disease, he will be entitled to receive treatment or cash benefits under
National Insurance only to the extent that his other compensation falls
short of the value of his insurance benefits. He will not be entitled to
double benefits, and neither he nor his employer is being charged twice
for the provision of such benefits. If it w 7 ere not for the compensation
available under other law, the contributions for National Insurance
would be higher than they are.
Persons in Public Institutions. —When insured persons enter hos-
pitals or other institutions which are supported wholly or in part by
public funds or charity, the institution will not be allowed to collect
the cash benefits. If the insured person is sick, bis benefits will be used
in the first place for the maintenance of his dependants. If he has no
dependants or if there is any balance available the money will be used
for meeting any expenses he may have incurred outside the hospital,
and only after these liabilities are discharged will the hospital or
institution receive any payment.
if a pensioner becomes an inmate of any such institution his
pension will be reduced to 6s. per while he is an inmate, and the
balance will be used for the benefit of his dependants if any. If there
are no dependants it will either be paid to the person himself or be
retained as accrued pension and paid to him in instalments together
wuth his normal pension when he leaves the institution.
The reason for not paying the institution is that the National
Insurance benefits have been paid for by the man himself and by his
employers, and should be conserved for his personal use or obligations
before they go to relieve the funds of any State-aided institution. A
sick elderly person is not always able to protect his or her own interests.


HEALTH BENEFITS.
Sickness Benefits. —These will he distributed by the insured person's
own Approved Society on the certificate of his insurance doctor. The
man will be qualified to receive sick pay after twenty-six weeks of
contribution (six months full work) and as from the fifth day of
sickness. The benefit will not commence on an earlier day because the
money available is needed more urgently for people who are ill for
longer periods. Frequently the man is paid by his employer during a
week of sickness and under Australian conditions there is as a rule less
urgency for help in the first week of sickness than in countries where
standards of living are lower.
Should a man fall sick again after going back to work, and within
twelve months of recovery from the previous illness, he will receive sick
pay from the first day of his incapacity, whether his sickness is due to
the same cause as before or to any other cause.
Disablement Benefit. —After 104 weeks of contributions the insured
man or woman will be eligible to receive a continuation of cash benefits
on a reduced scale, and these payments may continue while incapacity
lasts until he or she reaches pension age and becomes qualified for an
old-age pension. The amounts of these disablement benefits are
substantial and they are quite as large as the pooling principle can
justify.
PENSIONS.
Widows' Pensions. —This is perhaps the most important new benefit
to be derived under the Act. The conditions are extremely liberal and
the benefit will meet a need which is often very urgent. It will remove
from the minds of many husbands and fathers a continual anxiety on
account of their wives and families. A widow’s pension will continue
until she re-marries.
The only qualifications are that the husband shall have been in
insurance at the date of his death and shall have paid contributions
for 104 weeks and have averaged 26 contributions over the preceding
three years, including contributions credited to him while he was
sick.
During the first two years, when it will not have been possible for a
man to qualify for this pension, his w r idow will be entitled to a lump
sum payment on his death, which will vary with the number of
contributions paid.
Orphans’ Pensions. —This again is quite new. An orphan child, both
of whose parents are dead, and whose last surviving parent was insured
or in receipt of pension under the Act, will be entitled to receive the
orphan’s pension of 7s. 6d. per week until it reaches the age of fifteen
years. The pension will be paid in respect of any child actually living
Avith or dependent upon the insured person at the time, irrespective of


any question of legitimacy, or form of adoption, or earnings. It will be
paid to the guardian or other person having charge of the child, or to
such other person as may be authorized to receive it.
The same special provisions will apply to orphans’ pensions during
the first two years of the scheme as have been described above in
relation to widows’ pensions.
Old-age Pensions. —These pensions will be paid to women at the
age of 60 and to men at the age of 65, when their contributions cease.
The insured person must be insured upon reaching the quali-
fying age, and have been continuously insured for not less than
five years. Not less than 208 contributions must have been paid and
not less than an average of 39 must have been paid (or credited during
sickness) over the preceding three years.
Old-age Insurance pensioners will receive their pensions for the rest
of their lives and medical benefit in addition.
To meet the needs of elderly persons who at the inception of the
Act are of such an age that they will be unable to complete the five years
of insurance before reaching their pension age, a special provision has
been introduced. This will allow them to complete their five years’
preliminary period and to qualify for pensions at the end of that
period. This will be very expensive to' the Fund, and in order to
avoid abuse the Commission must be satisfied that these persons would
have been insured had the Act been in operation in 1938. These persons
must have contributed not less than 104 weeks of contributions before
attaining the age of 60 or 65, and if they are unable to meet this
condition, but had paid for 52 weeks of contributions, they will
receive medical benefit for the remainder of their lives without further
contribution. It should be noted that the existing provisions for old-
age pensions will continue. They have been liberalized to some extent
as is explained below in respect of women.
DEPENDENT- CHILD’S ALLOWANC’E.
Attached to ail the cash benefits there will be a right to receive a
weekly allowance of 3s. 6d. for each child under the age of fifteen years,
under the conditions described for an orphan’s pension. When
a widow has children under the age of fifteen years, allowances for
these children will continue after her re-marriage.
THE POSITION OF WOMEN.
The National Insurance Act recognizes that certain discriminations
exist on account of sex. It attempts quite enough in its own field and
cannot be expected to be an instrument for altering the relations
between the sexes. These discriminations occur in the contributions and


benefits. Women are not required to contribute to widows’ pensions, nor
to dependent child’s allowance to any material extent. Their old-
age pensions commence and their contributions cease five years
earlier than for men, and because on the average women attain
greater ages than men, their pensions will, as a rule, be paid for much
longer periods.
If a superficial view is taken of the cash benefits, and no attention
is given to the value of these benefits, it will appear that women will
receive less than men, but in fact the capital value of their old-age
pension is greater than that of the man’s pension. The widow’s
pension is the most costly of all insurance benefits and will on the
average be worth about £7OO, the old-age pension being worth about
£SOO.
The special provisions for women are as follows: •
(a) An insured woman whose other income allows her to
qualify will receive an additional ss. per week from the
non-contributory pension fund, making her total pension
20s. per week. Neither her own insurance pension nor
that of her husband will be taken into account as income
with the effect of reducing that ss.
( b ) Any insured woman may pay an additional 6d. per week
and receive an additional ss. insurance pension (20s. in
all) at the age of GO. This is an option which is expected
to cost the insurance funds about £3O for every woman
who accepts it, and to be accepted by women who do not
expect to qualify under (a) above.
(e) A woman who has been in insurable employment, for not
less than four years and who has 156 weekly contribu-
tions to her credit, if she marries and ceases to be
employed, may become a special Voluntary Contributor
for old-age pension, contributing Is. per week. She
may obtain an additional ss. pension for an extra 6d.
per week also if she desires.
( d ) A widow in receipt of a widow’s pension may herself qualify
for and receive an old-age pension and receive both with-
out deduction.
No conditions either of earnings or of dependent children are
attached to the receipt of widows’ pensions.
1 NCI DENTAL BENEFITS.
There may be mentioned here certain rights and features of the
National Insurance scheme which are not listed as benefits, but which
are important in connexion with them. The “ free insurance periods ”
have been described in the previous chapter, and are in the nature of


benefits since they maintain a person in insurance for long periods
when he or she is unable to contribute. For certain qualifications weeks
of sickness will count as weeks of contribution, and the cash benefits
then provided might be reckoned as including the contributions other-
wise payable. Rights to become voluntary contributors are also of
great importance and are closely related to the benefit provisions of the
scheme.
The establishment of invested funds to give security for the benefits
will be discussed in a later chapter.
BENEFITS ARE INALIENABLE.
Section 104 of the Act declares “ every assignment of or charge on,
and every agreement to assign or charge any allowances or benefit
payable under this Act shall be void and, on the bankruptcy of any
person entitled to any benefit, the benefit shall not pass to any trustee
or other person acting on behalf of his creditors.”.


Chapter V.
MEDICAL BENEFIT.
All insured persons over the age of fourteen will be eligible for
Medical Benefit without any qualifications other than the fact of being
insured, and if they remain insured until pensions begin and contribu-
tions cease Medical Benefit will continue for the rest of their lives.
Medical Benefit includes medical treatment by qualified insurance
doctors as required, whether at home or in any area where Medical
Benefit is provided, and the supply of medicines prescribed by the
doctors and obtained through any insurance chemist or dispensary. The
insured person is to have complete freedom of choice among the doctors
available. Changes may, of course, be made at prescribed intervals,
and doctors will have the right to reject patients, provided, however,
that insurance doctors, by arrangement among themselves, under-
take to provide treatment for any insured person in need of it.
In the smaller country centres there may be only one doctor available,
or possibly no doctor, unless one is attracted by the income that would
become available to him through National Insurance. In most centres
of population, however, it is expected that there will be ample choice.
The same principles will apply as between chemists, except that
there will be no need for insured persons to place themselves on any
chemists “ List ” It is expected that practically every chemist will
dispense insurance prescriptions, but there will be no compulsion on
either doctors or chemists. The aim of National Health Insurance
is to provide for the insured people not only a competent and efficient
service, but a willing and generous one.
Chemists will be repaid by the Commission the cost of the drugs
prescribed, and will be paid a dispensing fee for the work done.
Doctors will be paid under arrangements which are to be the subject
of recommendations from a Boyal Commission. The expense and time
used in travelling is an important consideration for country doctors,
and it had been intended to pay the doctor 2s. per mile per year for
every mile in excess of 3 miles that each insured person in his district
is distant from the nearest doctor.
Remote Areas. —It is the intention of the Act to extend the area
of medical service into the backblocks, and ultimately to cover the
whole of Australia. If sufficient funds are available, the Commission
will be able to use the “ Flying Doctor ” services, and to assist their
extension into areas not now served, so that no person, whether insured
or not, shall in the future be out of reach of medical attention. The
insurance service will assist all sparsely settled areas, and indeed all
country districts, because the presence of a qualified doctor, already


guaranteed a substantial income from insurance practice, should raise
the standard of medical service for ail people resident in those areas.
The Act will be disappointing in its intimate results if it does not
increase the number of doctors in country areas. Where such arrange-
ments are appropriate, the Commission may work in conjunction with
local hospitals and bush nursing organizations.
The Act empowers the Commission to make alternative arrange-
ments where the original plans cannot be carried out. It will not be
possible to cover the whole of the field right at the commencement
of the scheme, and it is not expected to commence any medical benefit
until April, 1039, at the earliest. In all probability, the provision of
medical benefit will be extended gradually.
Scope of Service. —The precise details of the service to be rendered
by the doctors have yet to be defined. The Act describes the scope in
general terms as being the kind of service within the skill and experi-
ence of general practitioners, but it will not ‘include attendance in
respect of a confinement, for which the Commonwealth makes other
provision. It has been urged that the scope of medical treatment
should be extended beyond that here described, but for the present
a high-grade general practitioner service will be a considerable accom-
plishment. The scope of the medical treatment to be supplied to insured
persons as part of their benefit will be wider than that now supplied
through the Friendly Societies. About one-fourth of the persons to
be insured are now supplied by that service.
It is appropriate here to repeat that the Government has
undertaken to assist the medical treatment of the wives and children
of insured persons through their voluntary insurance in such organiza-
tions as the Friendly Societies.
THE CONTROL OF MEDICAL BENEFIT.
The arrangements with doctors and chemists for Health Insurance
Benefits will be the responsibility of the National Insurance Commis-
sion, which will require a competent medical staff, not only at its head
offices, but in country districts also. It will be the duty of these
officers to work in co-operation with the insurance doctors and chemists,
;u.d to see that the intentions of the Act are carried out. The detailed
arrangements for medical treatment and for its payment will be left
as far as possible to the doctors themselves. The Commission will
provide the organization necessary for dealing with complaints, both
by insured persons and by doctors and chemists but doctors and
chemists will take part in this work.
For the smooth working of the scheme and the effective co-operation
of all persons concerned, there will be a Medical Benefit Council repre-
senting doctors, chemists and contributors, and this Council will discuss
matters of major importance affecting the working of Medical Benefit.


In each State there will be a Medical Benefit Committee, oil which
doctors and chemists will be represented and which will deal
with complaints and other matters of local importance. Both
the doctors and the chemists wil 1 have their own special organizations,
which will be recognized by the Commission, and through which any
special matter may be raised, affecting the interests of these professions,
or any suggestions which they think the Medical Benefit Council should
consider.
RELATION TO OTHER HEALTH SERVICES.
In developing the National Insurance Health services the
Commission will endeavour to make use of all existing facili-
ties, particularly in country districts. It may be expected to work
in co-operation with the Medical Research Council recently established
by the Commonwealth, and to work in harmony with all other efforts
to improve the health of the nation. The national health service will
be no rival of the health services of the States. It will supplement
those services and will provide increased opportunities for the extension
of preventive treatment. Insured persons will not need to wait until
they have developed some malady to such a serious extent that they will
reed treatment in a hospital. The medical treatment they will be
entitled to receive will include the observation and advice by skilled
practitioners of and concerning all symptoms which, if neglected, might
imperil the health of the insured person and of his associates.


Chapter VI.
APPROVED SOCIETIES.
Every insured person is to become a member of some “ Approved
Society During the remainder of this year we may expect great
activity among various groups for the enrolment of members of these
Societies.
The idea of having such Societies is to introduce into the scheme
as much as possible of the principle of seif-government. In technical
language it is “ devolved democracy In more simple language the
idea is that every individual who is insured shall have the right to
select the group with which he is to be associated, and in which he is
to exercise his rights as a contributor. These groups are called
Approved Societies ” because they must fit in with the administra-
tion of the scheme and be subject to standard rules and financial
control. Applications for approval will be dealt with in the very near
future. This part of the whole scheme will be the first to be
developed.
The Approved Societies will collect the cards of the contributors and
pay out certain benefits, i.e., sickness benefit, disablement benefit,
and the dependent child allowances which go with them. They will
receive the certificates from the doctors and, in conjunction with the
Commission, will attend to the visiting of sick people. It will be their
responsibility to see that the funds of their members are not wasted
or misused.
The Approved Societies will be allowed a maximum amount per
member for their expenses of administration. Anything they can save
out of this maximum amount will go to the credit of their Society.
Some Societies will be more fortunate than others in sickness experience
of their members, and for one reason or another will spend less from
their members’ funds. We may call these the more successful Societies.
They will gradually accumulate surpluses—small or large —from which
they will be able in time to provide Additional Benefits. This will
be explained below.
The Approved Societies will have nothing to do with pension
benefits under the scheme, nor with the medical benefit already
described, except in so far as they use the certificates of insurance
doctors for starting and stopping their cash payments.
Types. —There will be many types of Approved Societies. The
most prominent among them is likely to be the Friendly Societies,
which will establish separate Sections for the purpose. These Sections
must be distinct from the Friendly Societies as registered in each of
the States, because the latter operate under State laws, which vary to
some extent in each State, whereas the Approved Societies will operate
under the Commonwealth Act.


Hie next most important type may be Approved Societies set up
by the Trade Unions. In Great Britain these are very important,
lhey also will have distinct organizations, although they may be
managed from the offices of the parent bodies. The larger of the Trade
Unions will probably each establish Societies and the smaller will be
well advised to join together in one or more groups. Some of them
will be Approved Societies for the whole Commonwealth and others for
separate States.
In addition to these types there will be many others, some of them
estaolished chiefly for particular districts and some for particular
occupations or in connexion with some common interest not necessarily
occupational or geographic. The regional type, perhaps associated
with Hospital Benefit organizations, may be particularly appropriate
in sparsely settled areas.
These Approved Societies may be expected to become an important
element in Australian life and it will be surprising if they do not seek
to exercise their full powers of self-government and of influence pro-
vided by the Act. There wall be a special u Approved Societies Con-
sultative Council ”, which will be the channel of communication
between these Societies and the Commission.
Conditions. —Among the conditions required for approval are the
following:—The Society must not be carried on for profit and it must
have not less than 2,000. members. It may be approved either for the
whole of Australia or for any State or for any group of States or other
territory. Ho Society will be approved for any smaller area, but this
does not mean that a Society will be bound to extend its activities over
the whole of a State. It will be bound, however, to take care of its
members in any part of the State, unless for good reasons the member
transfers to another Society. There may be separate Societies for
women, or separate funds and other arrangements for women in any one
Society.
Rules and Finance. —The rules and conditions of approval for these
Societies will soon be available. The Act lays down certain general
conditions, some of which have been mentioned above, and among them
is a provision that no member shall be rejected solely on the ground
of his or her age. The financial provisions assure to the Societies
that they will receive proper credits, related to the ages of their
members, from the grants to be made by the Commonwealth Treasury.
The rules of each Society will necessarily include many technical
provisions which need not he explained here. The financial system is
explained, as far as it can be in brief, in the diagrams which appear at
the end of this chapter. It will be sufficient here to say that the
financial system of rules laid down in the Act is based upon a
vast amount of experience and follows very closely, although not


entirely, the practice in Great Britain. The solvency of the Societies
is the first consideration.
In the first place, each Society will be credited with the value of
contributions for health benefits on each card collected from its
members, after deductions are made for the cost of medical benefit and
health administration expenses of the Commission in excess of those
provided by the Government grant. These expenses will be largely
for the printing of cards and stamps. Cash advances will be made
to each Society as may be required for the payments of benefits and
for the cost of running the Society. The balances will be held to the
credit of each Society under the conditions to be described in the next
chapter. In addition to the contributions from their members, the
Societies will receive credits from the Government grant of 10s. per
insured person per year. These credits will be made in accordance with
the liabilities accepted by the Societies for members over 16 years
of age. A similar credit will be transferred with a member who leaves
one Society and joins another.
Disposable Surpluses. —At the end of each period of five years
there will be a valuation, by a valuer appointed by the Commission.
All the assets of the Society, including its invested funds and the
reserve values credited to it (as explained in the previous paragraph)
on account of persons entering insurance at ages over 16, are valued
(with the estimated income from contributions) against the prospective
liabilities of the Society in respect of the benefits of their members
in the next valuation period, taking account of the need for reserves
to meet increasing liabilities at more distant dates. There should be a
surplus varying from Society to Society from which Additional
Benefits may be provided.
Before, however, the sum available for Additional Benefits is finally
determined, one-half of the surplus of each Society will be pooled
and the pool distributed among all Societies in proportion to member-
ship. This one-half corresponds roughly to the contribution of the
employer and its redistribution will help to smooth out inequalities
between Societies due to causes beyond their control.
A list of Additional Benefits is given in the Act, and there is a wide
field of choice. The Societies may choose to pay more benefits in cash,
or to provide a wider scope of medical treatment, dental or ophthalmic
treatment, or to make payments to Hospitals in return for services
to their members. They may choose to establish or assist convalescent
homes or to provide nurses for their members who are sick, and there
is a wide range of other possibilities.
To provide against the possibility of a deficit on valuation, two
i eserves will have been established, by a small deduction from each
contribution paid. There will be a Contingencies Fund for each Society
which will be the individual reserve for that Society. There will be


also a Special Risks I und, which will form a central reserve for all
Societies, under the control of the Commission, from which grants
\> ill bo made to Societies which, after absorbing their Contingencies
Fund, have a residual deficiency due to causes beyond the Society’s
control, as, for example, an epidemic.
Early Action. Despite the apparent complexities of the system
of Approved Societies when it matures, there is nothing to defer the
initiation of these Societies, and the Commission will give every
possible assistance to groups of persons who may be interested in their
formation, and afterwards in the conduct of their operations.
dhe publication of this Summary coincides with the first meeting
(at Canberra) of persons interested. Other meetings will be held in
the \ aiious States to explain what is required and to discuss any
special matters of local interest. Meanwhile, it is hoped that the
information given in this Summary, and on its covers, will meet
immediate needs.
3595.-2


diagram A ATIONAL INSURANCE FINANCE
Notes. —(a) Contributions are collected through special stamps sold at Post Offices and affixed to cards ; the cards are sent bv the insured persons to their Aonroved Societies (or
to the Insurance Commission by those not insured for health benefits). i r
(P) Grants are : £lOO,OOO a year for Commission’s administration costs, 10s. per insured person per year (about £910,000) for Health Insurance, and for Pensions £1 000 000 a year
for five years, increased thereafter by £500,000 each year up to a maximum of £10,000,000 per year. ’ ’ 1
(c) For constitutional reasons, all income passes through Consolidated Revenue. For convenience of control, it passes through a Treasury Trust Account havinc been
appropriated to its specific uses by the National Health Insurance and Pensions Act.
(d) The Board of Trustees Ls constituted by the Act, and the investments of each Fund must be kept separate.


DIAGRAM B
APPROVED SOCIETY FINANCE
N«tbs.— (a) There must in the early years be surplus funds available for investment, because the liabilities falling on societies for sickness benefit and disablement benefit
will increase with increasing age of contributors. The income of the health insurance fund will, in the early years, exceed its expenditure. Balances will be required against later
increase of expenditure and, if in the meantime they earn interest, there will be more surplus available, on the quinquennial valuation, for additional benefits.
(6) There is a Contingencies Fund for each Society, which is the individual reserve of that Society against a deficiency on valuation (see Diagram C)
(c) There is one Special Risks Fund for the ealth insurance scheme as a whole, which is a central reserve, under the control of the Commission, against deficiencies not due
to bad administration, which cannot be met from a Society’s Contingencies Fund (see Diagram C).
(d) Sums invested by the Trustees on behalf of an approved society remain ear-marked for that society although part of the general investments.


DIAGRAM C
VALUATION OF APPROVED SOCIETIES
(a) Reserve Values are credits from the Commonwealth Government in respect of those who enter insurance at ages over sixteen, equivalent to the estimated liabilities in respect
of them, less the estimated contributions in respect of them.
(b) The Central Distribution Account receives similarly half the provisional surplus of each society and distributes the aggregate to all societies in proportion to membership.
(c) A grant from the Special Risks Account is made by the Commission, if, after pooling of half provisional surplus and absorption of Contingencies Fund, there remains
deficiency that is due to causes outside the control of the Society (see Diagram B).


Chapter VII.
FINANCE.
The three diagrams which precede this chapter need not detain
the husy reader, who is more interested in the principles than in pro-
cedure. However, it is necessary to supplement the diagrams by a
short account of the financial principles and controls.
As security is the object of Hational Insurance, so security is
the object of its finance. The same object of security explains the
proposed accumulation of investment funds.
The scheme will commence with contributions from insured persons
and their employers (see Chapter III.) and with Commonwealth
Treasury grants. In the early years, before pension payments become
heavy, it will he possible to set aside substantial amounts for future
security, and the largest accumulation in any one year will probably
take effect in the first year, when rights to cash Health Benefits will
be maturing as well as rights to Pensions. Sufficient reserves will be
established in the early years without requiring either the full contribu-
tion which will later be necessary, or the larger grants that are to be
provided in later years from the Treasury.
The Commonwealth Treasury is to provide fixed sums. These are—
(a) £IOO,OOO per year for the administration of Health
Insurance;
( b ) 10s. per insured person per year to meet the liabilities for
Health Benefits on account of persons over the age of
sixteen years; and
( c ) £1,000,000 per year towards the cost of Pensions for a
period of five years, rising thereafter progressively by
£500,000 each year, until in 23 years’ time this grant
becomes stable at £10,000,000 per year.
Health Benefits. —The contributions allocated for Health Benefits,
together with grants (a) and (h) above from the Commonwealth
Treasury, will go into a Health Insurance Fund. From that Fund
three main groups of expenditure will be made, namely, Health Admin-
istration, Medical Benefits, and payments to Approved Societies for
Cash Benefits and for their expenses. The balance not required at the
time will be invested, as will be described presently. It is expected that
the liability for Health Benefits in respect of all persons who enter
insurance over sixteen years of age will be discharged well before the
youngest entrants reach pension age, and that the Health Fund will
be in credit sufficiently within 40 years’ time to enable those liabilities
to be discharged without further contributions from the Commonwealth
Treasury on that account.


Pension Benefits. —Because of its special significance in relation to
the future population of Australia, the principles upon which Insurance
Pension finance is based are the subject of a later chapter. The Pension
Fund will naturally accumulate much larger reserves than the Health
Fund, because of the much heavier liabilities imposed on the National
Insurance Commission.
A LONG-RANGE PLAN.
In order to explain the necessity for accumulating funds, and the
interest of the insured persons in those funds, the following example
is given. For a youth just entering into full insurance, the plan now
commencing is a plan for more than 50 years ahead. Fifty years from
his entry, if he survives, he will begin to receive an Old-age Pension
and will continue to receive free medical treatment, without further
contributions, and the value of these benefits will then be about £SOO.
If it be assumed that this man has been fortunate enough to
Lave continued in full employment (except for holidays), and in uninter-
rupted good health during that whole period of 50 years, we may also
assume that he will have paid the maximum contribution, and his total
personal contributions will have been about £250. From this sum
the Commission will have made payments to insurance doctors, who
w r ere at the risk of his treatment (although on our assumptions they
will not have treated him), and a lesser sum for the costs of all adminis-
tration. His approved society will have spent its share of his con-
tributions in cash and additional benefits for his fellow members who
were sick, and to those who continued to be incapacitated. The Com-
mission may have accumulated about £l6O from his contributions, plus
a similar amount from the contributions of his employer and the balance
of the cost of his Pension and Medical Treatment will need to come
from Treasury grants.
The above is a somewhat unreal simplification, for many men will
not have lived to the pension age and most will have had periods of
unemployment and incapacity for work. (See Chapter I. on Pooling,
and Chapter 111. on Lapses.) On the other hand, no account is taken
of Widows’ Pensions (which cost, per pension, more than the Old-age
Pensions), or of “ free insurance periods ”. It is indeed no more
possible to simplify the actuarial basis of the scheme, and to present
it in a short statement, than it is to explain shortly, simply, and yet
adequately, the technique of radio.
Fifty Years Ahead. —Nevertheless, it is reasonable and necessary
to estimate in terms of 50 years ahead. Whatever else may happen
in that time, we can reckon with reasonable confidence the liabilities
for Pensions that ar© likely to accrue. The future pensioners are living
with us now. We know that there are likely to be over 1,250,000 persons


of pension age eligible for Old-age Pensions (of both types), and a
large number of women will be receiving Widows’ Pensions. We know
that it would be quite imprudent to rely on current contributions and
Treasury grants to provide the money to meet these future liabilities.
Hence tbe need for invested funds.
The actuarial technique expresses itself in terms of “ initial
deficits ”, which are in effect the present value of the future liabilities
incurred by the Commonwealth under this Act in excess of contribution
income. These initial deficits are in respect of persons entering at
the inception of the scheme. The initial deficits on account of Health
Benefits total £17,484,000 and on account of Pensions £264,000,000,
plus a few millions added by concessions and by obligations which are
to be accepted on account of voluntary contributors.
The accumulated funds may properly be regarded as the investment
of that part of the contributions of insured persons which is set aside
to secure that the liabilities of National Insurance will, in fact, be met.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
The Act establishes a special Board of Trustees for Insurance Funds,
which is constituted as follows: —The Chairman of the Commission,
the Secretary to the Treasury, the Solicitor-General of the Common-
wealth, the Governor of the Commonwealth Bank, the Commonwealth
Statistician, and the Commonwealth Actuary. This Board is
charged with the responsibility of investing the funds and
of holding the securities. Investments for Health and for
Pensions are to be made separately. The scope of investment is limited
by the Act to the purchase of securities already issued by Government
authorities. The funds of contributors will not be available for new
loans, but will be invested in established securities which have passed
through the ordeal of the market. In course of time the Trustees
should hold a substantial proportion of the loans issued by Governments
and used for the development of Australia. Its interest income will,
of course, come from the revenues of Governments and their public
authorities.
THE CONTROL OF FINANCE.
The principle of security is carried right through the machinery
of finance. All contributions and Commonwealth grants are required
by the Act to pass into a National Insurance Trust Account, and from
that account into the Commission’s Health Insurance Fund or Pensions
Insurance Fund, in the proportions laid down by the Act and described
in this chapter.


The Act is quite explicit on these matters. The contributions of
insured persons, after being collected through the Post Office, pass
straight through the Treasury accounts into the control of the Com-
mission, and the Commonwealth grants will be paid by equal monthly
instalments. The Commission will not need to have separate banking
arrangements, but its right to draw on the Treasury Trust Account is
secured by the Act. ISTo variations of these arrangements can legally
be made except after an amendment of the Act.
Ihe diagrams which precede this chapter explain the procedure
to be followed with the numerous subordinate accounts required bv the
Act. Approved Society finance is described shortly in the preceding-
chapter. Two other features may be noted. The Commission’s trans-
actions will be audited by the Auditor-General of the Commonwealth,
and the transactions of the Approved Societies will be subject to
constant audit by officers of the Commission.
At five-yearly intervals there are to be actuarial valuations of the
assets and liabilities of the Approved Societies, and at ten-yearly
intervals there are to be actuarial valuations of the Commission’s
Pensions Pund, and its assets and liabilities. The Government Actuary
responsible for the control of these valuations will not be an officer
of the Commission, although he will work in co-operation with it.
Full statements of all investments are to be made by the Board of
Trustees from time to time, and an annual report must be published.


CH APTER VIII.
PENSIONS AND POPULATION.
The provisions for National Insurance Old-age Pensions have
aroused special interest because of the existing system of non-contri-
butoij pensions for necessitous old people, and also because of the
tiends ot Australian population which have largely inspired them.
Iwo facts appear to need repetition in connexion with the existing
system of pensions. The pension now provided will not be reduced,
nor will any future eligibility for those pensions he affected
by the Insurance Scheme. An insurance pension will not count as
income so as to limit the granting of an extra ss. per week to women
in addition to the insurance pension. (See Chapter IY.)
Population The trends of population are disclosed in the vital
statistics of births and deaths, and in the results of each Census. The
following quotation is from the Actuarial Report published when the
National Insurance legislation was introduced into Parliament.
“ To assist us in forecasting the financial progress of the scheme,
the Census Bureau has made extensive calculations regarding the
numbers and age distribution of the population at future dates on
assumptions, regarding mortality and birth rates, laid down by us
as representing the average experience during a recent period of
years. In these assumptions the effect of migration has been
ignored.
The estimate thus made shows not only a considerable change in
sex distribution, but also a considerable change in age distribution
and an increasing proportion of persons eligible by age for old-age
pension. Further, it shows that, although the total population may
be expected to increase until about the year 1967, it will then
begin slowly to decline.”
The actuaries ignored the possible effects of migration because they
had no evidence on the matter, and no special qualifications to offer
opinions. But the evidence which they used in indisputable. The birth
rate may recover, but it cannot recover enough in the next 30 years (or
by 1967) to vary to any material extent the effects of the last 30 years.
Persons of Pension Age. —The chief effect from the point of view
of pensions will be an increased proportion of elderly people. The
actuaries extended their estimates 40 years ahead, by which time the
survivors of the youngest first entrants into National Insurance will be
3596.-3


55 years of age. They estimate that during the next 40 years, the num-
ber of persons eligible by age for old-age pensions will increase from
590,000 to about 1,280,000, of whom 810,000 will be women.
Proportions: Working Age to Pension Age. —Another way of stating
the problem is as follows. At present there are about four persons of
working age to every one person of pension age. In 40 years there are
likely to be only two persons of working age for every person of pension
age.
By that time the trend of population may have changed, either by
migration or by an increase in births, but it takes fifteen years for an
increase in births to increase the working population. The mothers of
the next generation are already born and their numbers are known.
The facts cannot be altered quickly, and a reversal of recent trends, even
if quite dramatic in its magnitude, will take time to become effective.
Effects on Pension Prospects. —The social, economic, and financial
implications of these facts are far-reaching, but here the problem is
confined to that of pensions. To ignore that problem is to assume that
the national income will not only increase as it may reasonably be
expected to increase, but that it will increase in proportion to the
increase in persons of pension age, and that the taxable capacity of
the working population will be doubled in 40 years. It is thought
that to rest on such an assumption would be either to risk the future
pensions of our young people, or to risk the crippling of public capacity
to maintain and extend other welfare services.
Effects of National Insurance. —The present scheme endeavours
to avoid such risks, while at the same time increasing very greatly
Ihe numbers of persons who will be eligible for pensions. In 40 years
the number of persons who will be drawing widows’, orphans'’ and
old-age insurance pensions is estimated to be about 650,000, at a total
annual cost of £25,300,000. The estimated cost of the present non-
contributory pensions at the same time is £17,800,000, and the total
of both £43,100,000. It is estimated, further, that something over
£11,000,000 a year more will then be paid in pensions than if the
present scheme only were to be continued.
These very substantial obligations are to be made solvent liabilities
by the accumulation of funds in the earlier years, from which interest
earnings will accrue to bear the strain. These funds are to be held
in trust for the people whose contributions will in part provide them,
and in later years they are calculated to provide about one-third of
ihe revenue from which insurance pensions are to be paid. Current
contributions for pensions should then provide another third, and the
Commonwealth Treasury the other third. These figures are, of course,
approximate, and in the estimate the Treasury contributions will be the
largest item.


Calendar Years.
National Insurance Pensions.
Payments
under
Existing
Pension
System.
Total
Payments :
all Pensions
Contribu-
tion Income
(net).
Treasury
Grants.
Interest
Income
Payments:
Insurance
Pensions.
£000.
£000.
£000.
£000.
£000.
£000.
1943 . .
5,800
1,000
970
400
17,800
18,200
] 948 . .
8,150
3,500
2,280
6,800
16.500
23,300
1953 . .
9,850
6,000
3,720
11,200
16,300
27,500
1958
9,850
8,500
5,150
15,700
16,400
32*100
1963
9,800
10.000
6,480
19,400
16,550
35,950
1968
9,800
10,000
7,570
21,750
16,750
38,500
1973
9,750
10,000
8,500
23,350
17,350
40*700
1978
I
9,650
10,000
1
9,260
25,300
1
17,800
43,100
1 he following table indicates the planned growth of the pensions
income and expenditure. The figures are given at five-yearly intervals,
commencing five years hence.
The insurance old-age pensioners in 1978 will mostly be between the
ages of 25 and 35 next year, and those who get pensions in the earlier
years will, of course, be older at the inception of the Act.
It may be noted that the Commonwealth Treasury contributions to
both pension schemes during the first ten years will be about the same
total as it would have been if National Insurance had not been
introduced.


Chapter IX.
COMPLAINTS AND DISPUTES.
A scheme so large as this one, involving the rights and duties of
about 2,000,000 people, will not escape the common experience of mis-
understanding and disagreement over details. Some of the rights are
very valuable indeed, and the qualifications for them will be of immense
personal importance to individuals. There are bound to be complaints,
disputes, and offences.
The Act lays down certain procedure, to be worked out in detail
by the Commission, to protect the rights of every one concerned in these
difficulties, and to see that the duties are faithfully carried out. A
great deal of the Act is taken up with safeguards against abuses, as
is common in all legislation. There will always be a certain type of
person who will endeavour to escape contributions and to get benefits
without qualifications. In order to protect the rights of the great
majority, considerable expense will have to be incurred in administra-
tion, and a great part of that cost wfill be due to the endeavours made
in the Act to be just to everybody. It will be the duty of the Com-
mission to keep the scheme sound.
It will take time for every one to appreciate the fact that
this is an insurance system, and that its benefits are subject to the
rules which have been described and which must in some degree govern
every sort of insurance. A person will be either qualified or not
qualified to receive any particular benefit; the Commission’s duty will
be to determine whether title to benefit exists or not.
j Hardships. —The difficulties which have delayed the introduction of
National Insurance in Australia lie in the fact that it creates not only
new benefits but what appear to be new hardships. The benefits must
stop somewhere. The limits have been set out clearly in the Act, and
the Commission must observe them.
Waiting Periods. —Insurance benefits cannot commence simul-
taneously with contributions. There are “ waiting periods ”, during
which benefits mature. The scheme cannot commence fully fledged
and most of the hardships will arise from that cause. There will be
people lucky enough to have commenced contributions just in time
to get valuable benefits entirely out of proportion to their contributions.
There will be others who are so unlucky as to just fail to qualify for
those benefits. We may hear very little about the lucky ones and
nnmh more about the unlucky, in striking contrast to “ news ” about
lotteries. Insurance is, of course, the opposite in all essentials to
gambling since insurance converts a future uncertainty into a certainty,
while gambling converts the money in hand into an uncertainty.


PROCEDURE.
Although the Commission will have no power to disregard the rules
laid down by the Act it will be bound to investigate all substantial
complaints, and to do all in its power to remedy any real grievance
which may arise. Its duty will be to facilitate the settlement of dis-
putes in the fairest, simplest and least expensive way possible.
Lhe Act lays down the principles to be followed. Every
person who has a complaint will have his citizen’s right to take
it to a Court if he is dissatisfied with the arrangements specially pro-
vided for him, but these arrangements are devised to reduce such
litigation, and any incentive to it, to the smallest minimum. A panel
of legal referees will be established for the purpose.
The Doctors. —The idea pervading the arrangements to be made
between the Commission and the doctors who are to provide medical
treatment is that, within the general terms of contract, the details
are to be worked out by the professional men themselves in
co-operation with the medical officers of the Commission. When diffi-
culties arise which cannot be settled in this way, a simple tribunal
will be appointed on which the medical profession will be represented.
The Medical Benefit Council and the State Committees will advise
on these procedures as the work develops, and on the relations between
(loctox-s and chemists..
The Chemists. —There should not be much scope for complaint con-
cerning the supply of medicines, but much the same system will operate
to deal with any difficulties that will arise. Chemists will not be paid
a capitation fee. All chemists will be paid for the drugs actually
supplied by them as prescribed by the doctors, together with fees for
different classes of dispensing. The Commission will have analyses
made from time to time of the medicines supplied.
Cash Benefits. —Disputes which arise between an Approved Society
and one of its members over payments of any of the cash Health Benefits
will be determined in the first place by the tribunal to be appointed
under the rules of each Approved Society. (Such a dispute is in
essence a dispute whether a particular sum of money should be paid
to an individual member or should be reserved against prospective
claims by his fellow members.) The member, if dissatisfied with the
decision of this tribunal, may appeal to the Commission, who may
decide the question or may refer it to one or more of the legal referees,
if, after a decision has been given, new facts arise, a further review
will be made.
Contributions*-— Where auy dispute arises as to whether a person
was employed or was entitled to be insured or to be exempted the same
procedure will be used.


Offences.— The chief offences are, failure or neglect to pay con-
tributions, false statements and misrepresentations, the forging of or
trafficking in insurance stamps or cards, and the obstruction of inspectors.
Penalties are provided and the Commission and its delegated
authorities are given all the necessary powers under the Act.


Chapter X.
EXISTING BENEFIT SCHEMES.
A very large proportion of insured people will have engagements
oi one kind or another with insurance societies, friendly societies,
medical benefit societies, hospital benefit societies, group insurance and
superannuation funds and the like. National Insurance will impinge
on these engagements. What is to be done about it?
1 he first impulse of most people faced with the prospect of a double
or overlapping contribution is to object. On further thought,
however, it is generally realized that National Insurance offers
something better than private schemes can possibly offer as a
rule to the employed person. It is also realized that a national scheme
could not be adapted to an infinite variety of private schemes and
remain national. The problem is just how to accomplish the opposite
procedure, and to adjust existing benefit schemes to the national basis.
PRIVATE ARRANGEMENTS.
Where precisely the same class of benefit is provided (e.g., super-
annuation) under an existing scheme, the problem is not difficult,
notwithstanding the fact that there may be existing insu *ance contracts.
If a double contribution for a double benefit is too large, or if the total
insurance is too great, the private arrangement can be reviewed. It may
be necessary for State legislation to provide for the amendment of
employers’ liabilities for provident funds, and the Friendly Societies
will make other adjustments on the advice of State Government
actuaries.
The situation is more difficult where benefits are of different kinds,
as for example those obtained through a Hospital Benefit Society, or
where groups of benefits do not coincide. Nevertheless, adjustments are
being made quite satisfactorily. Some of the hospital benefit societies
will become National Insurance Approved Societies also, and it is not
expected that the rapid growth of hospital benefit schemes will be
cheeked to any material extent by the introduction of National
I nsurance.
The actual adjustments to be made in each case will not, as a rule,
present very serious problems, but they will require ingenuity and
goodwill. The Commission will endeavour to assist any organization
that may require help.
Where employers and employees make joint arrangements for the
benefit of the employees the total contributions by each to both the
national and the private scheme need not be increased unless the parties
desire to increase them. The joint contribution on a voluntary basis


can be continued quite easily if it is desired, provided the employee is
eligible and qualifies to become a voluntary contributor himself under
the scheme, when his remuneration rises above the limit for compulsory
contributions.
GOVERNMENT ARRANGEMENTS.
The Act provides that employees who as a condition of
their employment are eligible for benefits which are guaran-
teed by a Government may be totally or partially excluded
from National Insurance. There is a great variety of conditions
affecting them also in the terms of their employments, and it will
require some actuarial measurement to determine whether particular
benefits are equal in value to their equivalents under National
Insurance.
The Commission will not be concerned with what contributions are
required as a condition of benefits, nor with individuals, but with
groups for which the employer may ask for exclusion or partial
exemption.
The classifications of these groups and the working out of degrees
of exemptions will occupy the officers of the Commission and of the
various Governments in the near future.
There is ample time for all of these private and governmental
arrangements to he adjusted and to be fitted into the National Insurance
scheme, provided the people concerned do not neglect to take
appropriate action.


Chapter XI.
EMPLOYERS.
A special leaflet will in due course be issued for the guidance of
employers who will become liable to pay contributions under the Act. So
far as concerns the persons who will be insured by reason of their employ-
ment, it is not at present possible to go beyond the general statements
made in Chapter 11. on “ the people insured”, which explains the
general position. Details of the method and circumstances in which
contributions must be paid will be governed by regulations which have
yet to be drafted and consideration must be given to difficulties that may
be expected to arise in connexion with special types of employment.
It will, of course, be a serious offence if any employer neglects to
jjarry out the duties imposed upon him by the Act, since the responsibility
for payment of the contributions on which the finances of the scheme
depend is placed by the Act on the employer; and the necessary penalties
are provided for any failure on his part. It is realized that this obliga-
tion imposes a duty on the Commission to make the employer’s position
as clear as possible before his duties under the Act come into effect.
I or the great majority of employers the position will be simple and
there will be few difficulties in ascertaining their liabilities. An
employer will buy insurance stamps from the local Post Office
and will affix them to contribution cards supplied for the purpose (these
cards will ordinarily be issued to the insured person by his Approved
Society;. lor some special classes of employers and of workers special
arrangements may be necessary as, for example, where a man works
regularly for several employers in one week. The position is that the
responsibility for the contribution rests on the man’s first employer in
the week but the sensible procedure would be for the several employers
to take the payment in turn, or to make some arrangement through the
man himself under which the liability is discharged by a contribution
from each employer. Waterside workers may also require special
arraifgements to suit their particular circumstances, and there is a
provision in the Act which will empower the Commission to adapt
its provisions for seasonal and intermittent workers if the normal
provisions prove inadequate to meet the special conditions of such
employment.
General indications will be given in the leaflet mentioned at the
beginning of this chapter which will help employers to decide cases
in which there is doubt whether an employee is insurahly employed, and
advice in cases that remain doubtful will be given on application by
the Deputy Commissioners in each State. It may be mentioned here,
however, that there are many persons who work by way of manual labour


under a “ contract for service ” who are not automatically brought into
insurance by the Act, as they are not employed under a “ contract of
service ”, working under the direction and control of the person for whom
the work is done. The Commission is empowered to bring classes of such
persons into insurance by special order and inquiries into the more
important of such classes will be undertaken at an early date, with a
view to the inclusion of those who work under substantially the same
conditions as persons who are technically “ employed ” within the
meaning of the Act.
Casual workers must be distinguished from those whose work is inter-
mittent though regular. Any degree of regularity in employment will
prevent exclusion on the ground of casual employment and, if the work
is done for the purposes of the employer’s trade or business, employment
will be insurable even if it is truly casual. Some employments which are
ordinarily undertaken as subsidiary to some other occupation and are not
usually the worker’s livelihood may be excluded from insurance by
regulation.
Guidance will also be given as to the distinction between manual
and non-manual employment and as to how to ascertain, as a test of
insurability, the rate of remuneration of persons paid, e.g., wholly or
partly by commission, whose rate of remuneration cannot therefore
be ascertained until the end of the year.
Employers will not be liable to pay contributions during holidays
or sickness, or during the military training of insured persons, provided
that training occupies not less than six days continuous training in the
Citizen Forces. During those days and for any longer periods, the
Commonwealth will pay the whole of the contribution, both as employer
and for the employee.
It is not the purpose of this booklet to discuss the merits of the con-
tributions imposed upon employers. It may be said, however, in general
terms, that the requirement of contributions from employers is based
upon the idea that the act of employing people connotes a responsibility
for their health and future security to the extent provided by the Act.


Chapter XII.
COMMENCEMENT AND GROWTH.
It it had been possible to have commenced National Insurance about
fitteen years ago when it was first investigated in Australia, it would
by now have about completed its third valuation period for Health
Benefits. Some, at least, of the wider scope for health services (now so
much advocated) would have been enjoyed. The introduction was
delayed because its advocates wanted too much all at once.
However, a commencement is now to be. made, and this booklet is
a fii st, effort by the authority responsible for its operation to explain
what National Insurance is for and how it is to work.
Ihe first step is to set up the means of working the scheme. As
the Appioved Societies are to play a very large part, and a very early
pai t in the scheme, it is desired that ail persons who may desire to
foi m such societies should be familiar with the subject. The issue of
this geneial summary coincides with the first meeting of such persons
(at Canberra), and other meetings will follow in all States. Other
publications will succeed this one for the information of large or small
groups which may become or may promote Approved Societies. It
will be to the future advantage of such groups to make an early start.
The first five years will be a testing period. Five years is not a
long time for the long-range plans embedded in this national scheme,
but they will cover its most critical period. Not only the Commission
but the Approved Societies will need the goodwill of the public and of
the contributors during that period.
I‘or example, it will not be possible to commence Medical Benefit
until after three months of contributions, nor will it be possible to
have ready at the outset all the provisions that must be made for
unemployment. In consideration of the delay in establishing Medical
Benefit, and in order to give all insured persons a “ flying start ”, it is
intended that all genuinely employed and insurable people shall not
suffer any disability through unemployment during the first year.
The first cash benefits are to commence in about twelve months time
through the Approved Societies now to be formed. Within another five
years all insurance pensions will be in full operation, and both the
Commission and the Approved Societies will have been able to estimate
the margins the latter may have in sight for further benefits.
The growth of National Insurance and the development of that
public opinion which will safeguard the integrity and security of its
benefits will depend very largely upon the character and quality of the
Approved Societies.




APPLICATION FOR COPIES OF MODEL RULES
AND OTHER DOCUMENTS.
Upon receipt of the form duly signed, and addressed to the Secretary*
The lnsurance Commission, West Block, Canberra, accompanied
by a Postal Note for the sum of Five shillings, as evidence of bona fides,
the Commission will despatch three copies of the Model Rules for
Approved Societies and other information required by persons who may
apply for approval, including a copy of the Act.
Formal approval will not be granted to any Society until Ist
September, 1938.
Contracts of membership between Societies and individuals will not
be valid until Ist October, 1938.
No person may be an insured member of more than one Society.
APPLICATION.
The Secretary,
The National Insurance Commission,
Canberra, F.C.T.
We, the undersigned, being interested in the formation of an
Approved Society fequest you to forward three copies of the Model
Rules of Societies to be approved by the Commission, a copy of the Act,
and other documents containing information necessary for the formation
of an Approved Society and the enrolment of members.
We enclose a Postal Note for Five Shillings.
Yours faithfully,
Name, occupation,
and address of
v person to whom
documents are
j to be sent.
Six other persons supporting the application :
Name. Age. Occupation.




By Authority :
L. F. JOHNSTON. COMMONWEALTH GOVT. PRINTER.
CANBERRA.




APPROVED SOCIETIES.
Information Required for Provisional Approval.
State where registered office is to be located.
Area for which approval is sought—
(a) The whole of Australia.
( b ) Other area larger than one State.
( c ) If one State or Territory, which State or Territory.
(Note. —The Federal Capital or Northern Territory may be included
with a State.)
For Regional and Occupational Societies.
District, if any, in which it is intended to concentrate.
(Note. —No specific boundaries are required, but if a Regional Society is
proposed, the region should be described.)
Glasses of perso-ns. If it is intended to invite the membership of any
particular classes of employees, describe those classes.
Name of proposed Society.
Name of provisional Chairman.
Name of provisional Secretary.
Name of provisional Treasurer.
1. Will the proposed Society transact any other business, or -be
associated directly or indirectly with any other business or
organization (if so, what) ?
2. Within what time will the proposed Society expect to attain to
the minimum membership required for complete approval?
Z. The number of persons present at the meeting and the numbers
who agreed to the resolution authorizing the application.
4. The proportion or numbers among them of persons likely to
become members (other than honorary members).
5. Does the proposed Society intend to accept males only or females
only or both?
6. The names and present occupations of the officers and provisional
111 111 IIITIIII 111 111 l 11l I illlll 11111 l P ro Pos ed Society.
le front cover and back cover.]


How to Form an Approved Society.
An existing organization or any group of persons may sponsor
the initiation of an Approved Society. Where a new group proposes
to take action, it will be desirable for a public meeting to be called
of persons likely to become insured members, and of others who may be
willing to assist as honorary members. If there is any probability
that such a meeting will decide to apply for provisional approval, the
Commission will endeavour to send an officer to the meeting. It will,
in any case, supply the information required to inform the meeting of
all relevant facts.
If an existing organization or a new group at a public meeting
decides to make an application, it should set up a provisional Com-
mittee of Management to hold office until provisional approval is
granted, and the rules of the Society are prepared.
That Committee should not exceed ten or twelve persons, but at
least half of its members should be employed persons who are likely to
become insured members.
An appropriate name should be chosen for the Society to be sub-
mitted for approval. It must not resemble that of any existing Society
so nearly as to mislead, but a prefix may be sufficient to distinguish
the Society. A Eegional Society should include in its name words
descriptive of its district.
A standard maximum sum of money per insured member, which
will be available for the costs of administration of Approved Societies,
will be announced as soon as practicable.
Friendly Societies will form separate Sections and will be advised
through their Consultative Committee.
Trade Unions will also, in all probability, form separate organiza-
tions. The larger Unions may form separate Societies for each State,
or for other areas larger than one State. The smaller Unions may
group themselves together to establish similar Societies.
Where these and other existing organizations operate under other
legislation which regulates their rules, it will be necessary to form
separate Sections, as for the Friendly Societies. All organizations will
need to keep separate books for their operations as Approved Societies,
and as a rule their Approved Society activities will be distinct from
any others which may be carried on, e.g., for hospital benefits,
Relevant information is supplied on the inside of both front and
back covbrs of this booklet.
