

m
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
MANILA
—•—
GENERAL REPORT
COMMUNISM
■ #§r I
AND THE
•
COMMUNIST PARTY
Published by the
COMMITTEE ON UN-FILIPINO ACTIVITIES
(CUFA)


REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
MANILA
GENERAL REPORT
ON
COMMUNISM
AND THE
COMMUNIST PARTY
Published by the
COMMITTEE ON UN-FILIPINO ACTIVITIES
(CUFA)
MANILA
BUREAU OF PRINTING
1949


FIRST PRINTING
March, 1949
SECOND PRINTING
May, 1949


TABLE OF CONTENTS
Pagre
I. INTRODUCTION 5
11. DESCRIPTION OF THE NATURE OF OUR SOURCES OF INFORMATION
ON COMMUNISM AND THE COMMUNIST PARTY 11
111. GENERAL SURVEY OF THE INTERNATIONAL AND LOCAL COMMUNIST
MOVEMENTS 17
IV. ANALYSIS AND REFUTATION OF THE BASIC PRINCIPLES AND ARGU-
MENTS OF COMMUNISM AND THE COMMUNIST PARTY 23
V. WHAT IS COMMUNISM AND WHAT ARE UN-FILIPINO ACTIVITIES 49
VI. WHY DOES THE PHILIPPINES OPPOSE COMMUNISM 52
VII. WHO ARE THE COMMUNISTS IN THE PHILIPPINES 53
VIII. REMEDIAL RECOMMENDATIONS:
A. The State of the Nation—
a. What Congress May Do 54
b. What the Administration May Do 55
c. What the Department of Labor May Do 56
d. What the Labor Unions May Do 57
e. What Management May Do 57
/. What the Various Intelligence Agencies May Do 57
g. What the Armed Forces May Do 58
h. What the PACSA May Do 58
i. What the Bureau of Immigration May Do 59
j. What the Customs and Postal Bureaus May Do 59
k. What the Schools May Do 60
I. What Professionals May Do 61
m. What Political Parties May Do 61
n. What Anyone May Do 61
B. The State of Foreign Relations—
a. In Relation to America 62
b. In Relation to Soviet Russia 63
c. In Relation to China 64
d. In Relation to Other Asian Countries 65
e. In Relation to the United Nations 66
IX. CONCLUSION 71


COMMITTEE ON UN-FILIPINO ACTIVITIES
CORNELIO T. VLLLAREAL, Capiz
Chairman
TORIBIO P. PEREZ, Albay JUAN R. PEREZ, Leyte
RAMON MAGSAYSAY, Zambales MARCOS M. CALO, Agusan
VICENTE LOGARTA, Cebu CONSTANCIO PADILLA, N. Ecija
COMMITTEE STAFF
CECILIO MONTEMAYOR
Chief Investigator and Legal Counsel
SIMEON DEL ROSARIO AGRIPINO ALVAREZ, Jr.
Director of Research Secretary


FIRST CONGRESS I CTTFA
OF THE REPUBLIC I ] .
OF THE PHILIPPINES [ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Fourth Session J J NO. 1
INVESTIGATION OF UN-FILIPINO PROPAGANDA
ACTIVITIES IN THE PHILIPPINES
February 28, 1949—Committed to the Committee of the Whole House on
the State of the Nation and ordered to be printed.
Mr. VILLAREAL, Chairman of the Committee on Un-Filipino Activities, sub-
mitted the following
GENERAL REPORT
(PURSUANT TO H. RES. 42, FIRST CONGRESS)
I. INTRODUCTION
On April 30, 1948, the House of Representatives adopted
House Resolution 42, authorizing the Speaker—
to appoint a special committee to be composed of seven mem-
bers for the purpose of conducting an investigation of (1)
the present peace and order problem, (2) the extent, charac-
ter, and objects of communist propaganda activities in the
Philippines, (3) the diffusion within the Philippines of com-
munist, subversive and un-Filipino propaganda that is insti-
gated from foreign countries or of a domestic origin and
attacks the principles of the form of government as guaran-
teed by our Constitution, and (4) all other questions in rela-
tion thereto that would aid Congress in any necessary remedial
legislation.
The appointment of the committee members was held in
abeyance until October 8, 1948, in deference to the amnesty
proclamation for the benefit of the officials and members of the
Communist-controlled Hukbalahap and National Peasants Union
(PKM) organizations, previously issued by the President and
subsequently approved by the Congress of the Philippines. The


appointment was finally made after the Speaker was convinced
that the dissidents failed to comply with the terms of the
amnesty proclamation.
On October 9, 1948, the Committee approved unanimously a
statement of policy, organization and procedure in which, among
other things, the following scope of our investigation was out-
lined :
1. What is Communism and what are un-Filipino activities?
2. Why does the Philippines disapprove of Communism
and any other un-Filipino activities?
3. Who are the Communists in the Philippines and other
un-Filipino individuals and groups?
4. How can the Filipinos prevent the Communists and other
subversive individuals and groups from further wreaking
havoc to their national life and bringing about the disrup-
tion of their international relations?
To help us in these tasks, the Committee created a skeleton
staff of key personnel, consisting of a chief investigator and
legal counsel, a director of research, and a secretary, whose
functions are defined in the statement of organization. This
personnel was to be augmented to number twelve in all, con-
sisting of investigators, researchers and clerks. This was the
minimum help needed to effect the efficient organization of the
materials submitted to or acquired by the Committee. Only
the three above-mentioned positions and two researchers have
been filled. The rest, or any other additional personnel that
may be found necessary, will be recommended for appointment
if the life of the Committee is extended.
In the conduct of its investigations, the Committee adopted
a policy of enlightened firmness. We believe we can maintain
the prestige of the Committee, and consequently that of Con-
gress, without being unfair to any one. In the more than three
months existence of the Committee during which time we con-
ducted hearings, we never found need for the powerful weapon
of subpoena; and we hope that as our investigations continue,
we will acquire the co-operation of every one concerned without
issuing a subpoena.
The various units of the executive branch of the Government
heard by us revealed not only willingness to co-operate but also
anxiety for the success of the work of the Committee. Typical
of these expressions of faith in the usefulness of the Committee
and its ability to ultimately husband in a just manner the defeat
of Communism and other un-Filipino and subversive activities


in this country, was the statement of Major General Mariano
N. Castaneda, chief of staff of the Armed Forces of the Philip-
pines, then chief of constabulary. He said in part as follows:
"As Commanding General of the national police force
which is at present engaged in the great task of wiping out
Communist outlawry in some parts of the country, I greatly
appreciate the wisdom of Congress in having made possible
the establishment of this Committee. The need for this body
cannot be over-emphasized; in fact, there had been need for
it long before its creation. I have read your statement of
policy and I have been following reports of your actions
and investigations with interest and appreciation. By focus-
ing the people's attention on this evil that seeks to undermine
our democratic way of life and institutions through violence
and revolution, you are doing a great public service. Permit
me, gentlemen, to assure you of whatever support we can
extend in the pursuance of your endeavor."
All other government officials heard by us showed similar
enthusiasm. The then chief of staff of the Armed Forces of
the Philippines, Major General Rafael Jalandoni (retired),
assured us of the accessibility of their intelligence files con-
cerning Communist activities. Director Joaquin Par do de Ta-
vera of the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) promised
to create a unit in his bureau to specialize on Communist and
other subversive activities as a means of aiding this Committee.
Commissioners Engracio Fabre and Alfredo de Leon of Im-
migration and Customs, respectively, and Director of Posts Juan
Ruiz, provided us with valuable documents and information
concerning the entry and circulation of Communist propaganda
literature in the Philippines. Col. Eduardo Quintos, Chief of
Police of Manila, presented additional evidence on Communist
activities. Governor Jose B. Lingad of Pampanga provided
us with information and evidence concerning Communist ac-
tivities in his province. Atty. Emilio Galang of the Depart-
ment of Justice informed us on Nazi and Fascist activities in
this country.
The hearing of Mr. Federico Mangahas, private secretary
to the President of the Philippines, provided an insight into
the nature of the Communist front organization system. Like
all of us he was anxious to know about Communism and the
Communist Party and help counteract their influences. Mr. Ci-
rilo Bognot, a former Communist and now a practising busi-
nessman, provided us with authoritative background on the
beginnings of Communism and the Communist Party in the


Philippines. Mr. Mariano P. Balgos, who claimed to be the
general secretary of the Communist Party in the Philippines,
also extended co-operation. There was slight misunderstanding
over the procedure of the hearing when Mr. Balgos appeared
before the Committee, but it was soon settled; and he submitted
to investigation in the manner ruled by the Committee.
There was popular approval for the creation of the Com-
mittee, although, as might be expected in a democratic society
like ours, skepticism as to the value of our function, and even
outright clamor for the abolition of the body even before it had
hardly gone underway, have been heard from certain quarters.
However letters continued to pour in from various parts of the
country, and even abroad, containing constructive suggestions
that would make our work a success, as well as information
and evidence tending to prove the undeniable existence of Com-
munism and the Communist Party that seek to undermine the
Republic of the Philippines.
The Committee on Un-Filipino Activities (CUFA) is not a
mere copy of its counterpart in the United States House of
Representatives. This Committee is bound to become the pio-
neer in the creation of a dynamic and assertive legislative
tradition suited to the temperament and aspirations of our
people.
This Committee means that from now on the Congress of the
Philippines and the people are taking active part in the ideol-
ogical struggle of our time and will no longer permit the
unquestioned germination and development of ideas affecting
national security and internal tranquility. This Committee
means also that our people are prepared to enter the ideological
struggle and act according to the accepted tenets and procedures
of truth and fair play.
The methods being used by the Committee are not foreign to
our legislatures, past or present. The same powers and the
same latitude of action were within the reach of legislative
committees under all our organic laws from the Jones Law to
the Tydings-McDuffie Law and our present Constitution. But
this was the first time that this type of committee had been
created in our country. Attempts made before the war to
establish such a committee were unsuccessful. The then as-
semblymen Manuel S. Rojas and Fausto Gonzales-Sioco of
Cavite and Pampanga, respectively, advocated the creation of
this Committee, but failed. Their failure would seem to be due
to the absence of a widespread overt evidence of Communist-


inspired force and violence. Isolated violence, under similar
Communist propulsion, even then were already perpetrated in
the sugar fields of Pampanga and adjacent provinces. But it
seemed that it was not sufficient to stagger the national sense
of danger from Communism and the Communist Party. Only
after more than a decade later, when the rebellion of the Com-
munist-led and Communist-inspired Hukbalahap and PKM or-
ganizations happened did we decide to take stock of the whole
situation and created this Committee to provide our represent-
atives and their constituents with all the facts that led to the
breakdown of peace and order in certain sections of the country.
Unlike the American people who fought the ideas of Com-
munism from the very beginning of the Communist movement
and are still fighting them and have thus far succeeded in
merely keeping them as nothing but ideas up to the present
time, the Philippines had to wait for the ideas of Communism
to break out and materialize into actual violence before it found
the need to fight them. This country had to wait for a clan-
destine armed force to support Communist plans to be put up
here before the people's representatives decided to peer into
the nature of these plans.
Our zeal to keep untrammeled the path of progress towards
our political emancipation seemed to have dulled our natural
keenness against subversion.
True the Supreme Court outlawed the Communist Party in
1932 and meted out legal punishments for its officials and mem-
bers. But our efforts against Communism and the Communist
Party seemed to have ended there. We failed to provide for
the measures to correct the ideological outlook of the Communist
converts. With the result that after they were freed, some of
them did not only remain Communists but also succeeded in
gaining other followers who later on held the delusion that they
could successfully defy the Government with armed force, or
at least cause unending ferment in the social order as a per-
manent threat of a supposedly inevitable Communist revolution.
From the very beginning of our investigation we estimated
the peace problem to be ideological rather simply military, only
political, purely social, or primarily economic. We realized
that all these phases of human relations are intimately involved
in Communism and the activities of the Communist Party.
Your Committee knew that it was up against a movement
that challenged the whole of creation itself; and that no attack
could suffice to dislodge the grip of Communism and the Com-


munist Party over the minds of their followers less than an
attack at their very foundation—the philosophy of Marxism.
To the nonchalant Marxism is a very complicated subject.
To the impatient it is very dull and extremely boring, to say
the least.
To the rabid Communist, Marxism is his gospel of truth.
He will plot, kill and die for it.
To the close-minded or short-minded anti-Communist, Marx-
ism is the word of the devil himself. He will have nothing to
do with any Communist whatsoever and merely waits for the
Communist to commit overt acts of violence or crimes before
he starts suppressing him. Usually the Communist succeeds
in stealing the guns and suppresses the tough anti-Communist
instead.
To the opportunist Marxism is a chance for political success.
He is neither for nor against Communism and the Communist
Party and would not mind until late that these have gained
political power. Usually the opportunist is forced to toe the
party line or disappear from public life completely.
To your Committee Marxism is none of these. We find it
simple, engrossing and by contrast highly instructive of the
inherent beauty and strength of our democracy.
To us Marxism does not possess the integrity of truth, either
material or spiritual, legal or moral. In fact it is not an in-
tegral system of thought at all because it refuses to recognize
the inescapable spiritual reality of nature. Marxism is not
worth conspiring for, killing for, or dying for.
To your Committee Marxism is nothing to be afraid of. True
it thrives best in the dark and sounds very formidable when
discussed in whispers and bated breath. But it can be dragged
out into the light and like all bubbles be made to melt into thin
air. Of course Marxism has assumed the stature of Leviathan
elsewhere (Soviet Russia), and in our country it has spawned
and duped a few minor giants. But these are no longer the
days when legends really happen that long; and since we know
that the foundation of the Marxist state is false and weak, time
will come when it will fall, either on its own weight, or by
the united intelligence of an aroused humanity, or, as the means
of last resort, by the united armed might of the forces of truth
and justice.
In the opinion of your Committee Marxism, or any and all
of its political tactical derivatives—Leninism, Trotskyism and


Stalinism —are poor strings ,to tie your political fortunes with.
They are taut and dry and have no natural link with the people
whom politics must serve after all.
11. DESCRIPTION OF THE NATURE OF OUR SOURCES OF
INFORMATION ON COMMUNISM AND THE
COMMUNIST PARTY
The first phase of our investigation, which took us a little
over two months to satisfy our present requirements, was the
collection of materials from various sources that would aid
us in accomplishing our plans of action. On the first day of
meeting the Committee agreed that:
"Our first task is to determine and define in unmistakable
terms what is meant by Communism. To be able to do this
we shall examine its philosophical foundation, Marxism, and its
derivations known as Leninism, Trotskyism and Stalinism.
Knowing the theories of Communism, the Committee will then
trace its practices."
We knew that in Communism as in any other movement that
affects masses of people, thought is mother to action. Our
first move was therefore to get at the sources of the thoughts
that propel the Communists to action.
The sources of Communist thoughts listed below have been
submitted to expert examination and were found to contain:
а. Scurrilous libels against the system of Government of
the Republic of the Philippines;
б. Destructive statements that instigate others to cabal or
meet together for unlawful purposes;
c. Derogatory statements which disturb or obstruct lawful
officers in executing their offices;
d. Thoughts that suggest or incite rebellious conspiracies
and seeking to disturb the peace of this nation and stir up
the people against the lawful authorities.
These were:
1. "Manifesto of the Communist Party," by Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels.
2. "History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bol-
seviks)," Short Course, edited by a Commission of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union and Authorized by the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
3. "Marx-Engels MARXISM," by V. I. Lenin.
4. "The Theoretical Principles of Marxism," by V. I. Lenin.
5. "The Paris Commune," by V. I. Lenin.


6. "The Tasks of the Proletariat in our Revolution," by V. I.
Lenin.
7. "Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism," by V. I.
Lenin.
8. "Will the Bolsheviks Retain State Power?" by V. I. Lenin.
9. "Letters from Afar," by V. I. Lenin.
10. "Religion," by V. I. Lenin.
11. "State and Revolution," by V. I. Lenin.
12. "A Letter to American Workers," by V. I. Lenin.
13. "Two Tactics," by V. I. Lenin.
14. "The War and the Second International," by V. I. Lenin.
15. "The Teachings of Karl Marx," by V. I. Lenin.
16. "The April Conference," by V. I. Lenin.
17. "Left-Wing Communism, An Infantile Disorder," by V. I.
Lenin.
18. "On the Eve of October," by V. I. Lenin.
19. "The Threatening Catastrophe and How to Fight It," by V.
I. Lenin.
20. "What is To be Done," by V. I. Lenin.
21. "Marxism and Revisionism," by V. I. Lenin and Joseph Stalin.
22. "Foundations of Leninism," by Joseph Stalin.
23. "The Tasks of the Youth," by Joseph Stalin.
24. "The Problems of Leninism," by Joseph Stalin.
25. "Dialectical and Historical Materialism," by Joseph Stalin.
26. "The United Front," by Georgi Dimitroff.
27. "Lenin and the Agrarian Question," by Anna Rochester.
28. "Pages From a Worker's Life," by William Z. Foster.
29. "Political Economy," a Beginner's Course, by A. Leontiev.
30. "Marx and the Trade Unions," by A. Lozovsky.
The foregoing list represents only a portion of about a hun-
dred books and pamphlets of various titles which propagandize
Communism and the Communist Party, and which were sub-
mitted to us by the Commissioner of Customs and the Chief of
Constabulary. The information brought to us testify to the
fact that these types of Communist propaganda materials have
been circulating in the country even long before the war; and
it was only when the breakdown of peace and order in Luzon,
due to Communist activities, had happened were these materials
earnestly banned in accordance with existing laws.
The views of the administrative offices concerned, with respect
to the nature of these publications, are being included in this
report. The letter of the Commissioner of Customs to the
lawyers of the importers of these Communist propaganda ma-
terials, dated April 1, 1948, in part reads as follows:
"Gentlemen: This is to acknowledge receipt of your letter
of March 10, 1947, on behalf of the New Builders' Bookshop
relative to the books and pamphlets on Communism imported


by your client from the United States and which were with-
held by this Bureau for processing. In reply, please he in-
formed that after carefully examining the said books and
pamphlets in conjunction with other Government agencies,
this Office found that most of them contain propaganda ad-
vocating 'proletarian revolution,' 'unremitting class struggle,'
'peasant uprising,' 'antagonism between peasant and land-
lord,' 'the overthrow of democracy,' and the 'establishment
of dictatorship of the proletariat,' etc. You will no douht
agree with us that such propaganda is inflammatory and sub-
versive of public order and, as such, the publications contain-
ing same fall under the class of publications of prohibited
importation mentioned in section 3(b) of the Tariff Act of
1909 and are subject to forfeiture under section 1363 of the
Revised Administrative Code."
Earlier the opinion of the Secretary of Justice was sought
by the Commissioner of Customs as to whether or not these
documents are subversive of public order. The reply of the
Secretary of Justice, dated March 13, 1947, reads in full as
follows:
"Sir: This is in reply to your request for my opinion as
to whether or not such expressions as hereinbelow quoted
are subversive of public order and whether or not the books
containing them fall within the prohibitions contained in
section 3(b) of the Philippine Tariff Act of 1909 against the
importation into the Philippines of 'articles, books, pam-
phlets, printed matter ... of obscene or indecent character
or subversive of public order.' You say that most of the
books in question contain such expressions as the following:
" 'The road to socialism lies through the dictatorship of
the proletariat.'"
" 'For socialism to triumph, the rule of the bourgeoisie
must be overthrown, the bourgeois state must be destroyed
and the dictatorship of the proletariat must be substituted
in its place. The transition from capitalism to socialism is
possible only by means of an unremitting class struggle of
the proletariat against the capitalists, by means of a pro-
letarian revolution and the establishment of a proletarian
state. Only by establishing its own state can the working
class proceed with the building of socialism and create a
socialist society.'"
" 'This power, of workers and peasants, could be main-
tained only if the peasants succeeded in their deepest desire
and obtained through revolutionary struggle free possession
of the landlord's land.'
" 'At the present time and also in the future, pending the
complete victory of the peasant uprising, a revolutionary
slogan must necessarily take into account the antagonism
between the peasant and the landlord . . .'"


"That such propaganda advocating 'proletarian revolution,'
'unremitting class struggle,' 'peasant uprising,' 'antagonism
between the peasant and the landlord,' the 'overthrow of
democracy,' and the establishment of the 'dictatorship of the
proletariat' is subversive of public order in the Philippines,
has been and being eloquently testified to by current events.
Intelligence reports of the Military Police as well as of the
Division of Investigation of the Department of Justice show
that the present defiance of the constituted authorities by
certain elements is the result of such inflammatory subversive
propaganda.
"In view of the foregoing and of the actual tangible sub-
version of peace and order in the Philippines, which is
directly traceable to the revolutionary propaganda which
you say is contained in the publications under consideration,
my answer to your query is in the affirmative."
The Military Police Command, now the Philippine Constab-
ulary, rendered a comprehensive report on these documents on
May 5, 1947, and among other things, the report said:
"These books and pamphlets have instigated a considerable
number of our people to conspire and cabal against our
constituted authorities. These documents do not only ex-
pound an explosive idea for a totally unacceptable way of
life, but they also lay out the methods, the various tactics
and strategy by which the few who have been converted
could dupe and enslave a naturally conservative and freedom
loving people. The different branch organizations, of which
the Communist Party is the mother or holding company, have
been created in accordance with the plans laid out in these
documents almost to the details. And the groove through
which their activities are channeled have been so wrought
that no steps can be taken by any of them without the ap-
proval and consent of the Communist Party.
"The string that binds the Hukbalahap, the PKM ....
and other allied organizations, is not a community of interest
that can be tested in the crucible of reality. They are only
brought together by a compelling idea—the idea of Com-
munism—and these books and pamphlets have been im-
ported, not for business, but to promote the interest and
power of a foreign country—the Soviet Union ....
"These publications contain statements subversive of the
existing social, economic, cultural and political order in the
Philippines. As a whole they contain only matters glorify-
ing the Soviet Union; and they constitute the philosophy,
the theory and the general and detailed blueprints for the
ultimate destruction of democracy and the establishment of
a dictatorial form of government in the Philippines. These
books were not imported into the Philippines for business
reasons, but for the purpose of propagandizing Communism
and recruiting followers in order to promote the program
of the Communist Party."


Your Committee also examined information concerning the
exporter of these Communist propaganda materials into the
Philippines. Information concerning the importers will be in-
cluded in our subsequent specific reports.
The exporter was the International Publishers, located at
381 Fourth Avenue, New York 16, New York. Benjamin Gitlow,
former general secretary of the Communist Party of the United
States, testified before the Special Committee on Un-American
Activities on September 7, 1939, revealing in great detail the
various organizational and promotional activities of the Com-
munist Party there. We are reproducing below the testimony
of Mr. Gitlow concerning the International Publishers during
that hearing:
"Mr. GITLOW .... Now, we have another interesting
phase of Communist activity which involved the expenditure
of a lot of money, which is represented by Moscow's sub-
sidies, and that is the publishing field. We have in the
United States a publishing company known as International
Publishers. International Publishers has published the
works of Lenin and of all the Bolshevik leaders. It publishes
now the hooks of Stalin and all the works that the Communist
International is interested in distributing in the United States.
"This company was formed first as a stock company, in
which 51 per cent of the stock was owned by party members
in this country; one who is not an open party member, but
a secret party member, A. H. Heller, and Trachtenberg.
Heller owned 51 per cent of the stock. When I was in
Moscow in 1928, the literature department of the Communist
International took up with me the question of the Interna-
tional Publishers and told me of the arrangements they had
with Heller, and asked my opinion of it. I told them that
in the United States if somebody has a majority of 1 per
cent of the stock he owns the corporation and can do with
it whatever he sees fit. Therefore, I advised them to get
at least 51 per cent of the stock for the Communist Inter-
national. They supplied all the manuscripts, they supplied
many of the printed pages for the books that are sent here
in order to avoid paying excessive duties, and other sub-
sidies which are in the values of thousands of dollars are
supplied to the International Publishers. They do not have
to pay author's royalties, and so forth, on the books which
they publish and sell in the United States, and which are
supplied to them by the Communist International. So that
change was made, so that today the Communist Interna-
tional owns the International Publishers, which operates in
the United States as an out-and-out capitalist concern.
"Mr. WHITLEY (committee counsel). Operates as a pri-
vately-owned corporation?


"Mr. GITLOW. Yes; a publishing house.
"Mr. WHITLEY. And the two original incorporators, or-
ganizers of the corporation, were Mr. Heller and Mr. Alexan-
der Trachtenberg ?
"Mr. GITLOW. That is right.
"Mr. WHITLEY. Do you know whether they are still con-
nected with the International Publishers?
"Mr. GITLOW. I do not know if Heller is, but Trachten-
berg still is.
"Mr. WHITLEY. You say they are both party members?
"Mr. GITLOW. Yes.
"Mr. WHITLEY. But under the guise of a private publish-
ing concern.
"Mr. GITLOW. Yes.
"Mr. THOMAS (committee member). Will you get the ad-
dress of that concern?
"Mr. GITLOW. I think it is 381 Fourth Avenue, New York
City."
The information supplied by Mr. Gitlow to the Committee
on Un-American Activities concerning the address of the Inter-
national Publishers and its manager, Mr. Alexander Trachten-
berg, tallies with the information presented to us by the
intelligence authorities of the government.
Other authoritative conclusions with respect to the nature of
the International Publishers are contained in a United States
House document entitled "Citations by Official Federal Govern-
ment or State or Municipal Agencies or Reliable Private Or-
ganizations Regarding the Character of Organizations Named,"
dated May 29, 1946, as follows:
"International Publishers
"1. 'Publishing agency of the Communist Party' (brief for
the United States in the case of William Schneiderman, p.
1.45.)
"2. Cited as under Communist control, influence, or in
collaboration with the Communist Party by the Committee
for Cultural Freedom, Prof. John Dewey, chairman, April
1940.
"3. Chief publisher of the Communist Party, controlled
by the Communists (Massachussetts House Committee on
Un-American Activities, report, 1938, p. 289).
"4. Cited as a Communist front by the Special Committee
on Un-American Activities, March 29, 1944."
We have also acquired numerous official documents concern-
ing the over-all aspect of Communism and the activities of
the Communist Parties of the world, consisting of reports and
hearings of the Committee on Un-American Activities, publica-


tions of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the U.S. House
of Representatives and other government and private agencies
engaged in the investigation of Communism and the Communist
Party in the United States.
The documents and other materials captured by the Philip-
pine Constabulary in encounters with the Communist-led armed
bands form the greater bulk of our evidence, and these continue
to be augmented as our investigation and research go on.
Regardless of the limited facilities we have we are now
also undertaking in a very slow pace the organization of all
these materials with the aim in view of opening them for pub-
lic use as soon as they are properly classified, filed and indexed.
No other agency in the whole government set up is organizing
subversive and intelligence information in the manner and
extent your Committee is in a position to do so. Our goal is
to create a permanent non-partisan House committee that can
keep close tract and record and from time to time inform the
members of Congress and the people about every single aspect
of any Communist, subversive or un-Filipino activity without
encroaching on the field of operation of existing intelligence
agencies of the administration.
IH. GENERAL SURVEY OF THE INTERNATIONAL AND
LOCAL COMMUNIST MOVEMENTS
Your Committee is convinced that in really appreciating the
magnitude of the Communist problem and in realizing the ac-
tuality of the danger that it presents to our national and inter-
national life, one must possess knowledge of its historical
background, its philosophy and its practices. This portion of
our report now deals with the brief general survey of the world
Communist movement within a period of over 100 years from
1848 to its present development in the Philippines.
In January, 1848, a document called the "Manifesto of the
Communist Party" was published by Karl Marx and Friedrich
Engels. This was to become the bible of Communists through-
out the world. The doctrines upon which the manifesto was
based were formulated by Karl Marx. Engels was only his
collaborator. This is why when it comes to the discussion of
its doctrines, Communism is called Marxism.
In 1864 an organization known as the First International
Association of Workers was organized and partly based on the


Marxian manifesto. This association lasted only for nine years
and Marx himself withdrew his support because it was being
infiltrated by anarchists who did not believe in any form of
government, including the "dictatorship of the proletariat"
proposed by Marx.
In 1889, in Paris, six years after the death of Marx, the
Second International was formed. This organization was more
firmly based on his doctrines. But when the first world war
broke out, a disruption occurred. This was caused by the
patriotism of some of the members who considered their indi-
vidual national interests more than the internationalist doctrines
of the association. Later, under the leadership of Lenin, a
monolithic group of radical elements succeeded in forming a
bloc within the organization. This was to engineer the Russian
Communist revolution in November 1917 (October in the old
Russian calendar).
In March, 1917, Czar Nicholas II abdicated in favor of the
provisional government headed by Alexander Kerensky. The
United States was the first to recognize the Kerensky govern-
ment, which was organized on the same democratic principles
as the American and our system of government. During that
time Lenin was in exile in Switzerland and Trotsky was in
New York. Stalin was in the Siberian prison camps. Lenin
and Trotsky were subsequently smuggled back to Russia and
later on joined by Stalin. The three of them, through intrigues
and clever maneuvers, succeeded in overthrowing the provisional
government, driving Kerensky in exile and seizing control of
the central government. Other members of the Kerensky gov-
ernment were either killed or exiled. The constituent assembly
which had been called by Kerensky was elected over a month
after the November revolution. However, in view of the fact
that the Communists failed to elect a majority of the members,
it was dissolved by order of Lenin, thus officially placing the
Communists on record for the first time as being opposed to
popular government when they liquidated the representatives
elected directly by the people.
In March, 1919, when Lenin and his Communist Party were
already conveniently set up in Moscow, the Third International
or Communist International was organized. The invitation to
attend the Third International was sent to some forty Com-
munist revolutionary and left-wing socialist groups throughout
the world. This organization was said to have been abolished
in 1943 as a tactical move to induce the Western Allies to open


the second front in Europe, as well as a pretense to allay the
fears of the allied nations arising from local Communist ac-
tivities.
During the same year, in September 1919, the Communist
Party of the United States was organized in Chicago under the
leadership of a Japanese radical by the name of Sen Katayama.
Politically it must be considered that the Communist movement
was implanted on Philippine soil on this date, considering that
the Philippines was still under the sovereign authority of the
United States. As a matter of fact, in recognizing the Soviet
Union in 1933, the United States specifically required the Soviet
Union "not to permit the formation or residence on its territory
of any organization or group—and to prevent the activity on
its territory of any organization or group, or representatives
or officials of any organization or group which has as aim the
overthrow of, or the bringing about by force, of a change in
the political or social order of the whole or any 'part of the
United States, its territories or possessions." This country
was a territory of the United States before July 4, 1946, and
any violation of that treaty by the Soviet Union within the
United States before this date was logically a violation of the
treaty within this country. The United States State Depart-
ment, in a communication to the Soviet Government, considered
the Seventh All World Congress of the Communist Interna-
tional, which was held in Moscow, to be guilty of "flagrant
violation of the pledge given by the Government of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics on November 16, 1933, with respect
to non-interference in the internal affairs of the United States."
The death of Lenin in 1924 brought a bitter rivalry for
leadership of the Soviet government between Trotsky and Stalin.
Both claimed to be Marxists. Both claimed to be the rightful
interpreter of the Marxist teachings of Lenin. As a result
of this rivalry, purges were undertaken within the Communist
Party and Trotsky was exiled to Mexico and later killed. The
whole Communist movement was practically divided under these
two leaderships and the doctrines that each espoused were
known as Trotskyism and Stalinism.
Trotsky, believing in the teachings of both Marx and Lenin,
contended that the success of the world Communist revolution
was based on continuous, relentless and simultaneous bringing
about of revolution in every country of the world not yet under
the control of the Communists.


Stalin, on the other hand, contended that world Communist
revolution, without abandoning Marxism and Leninism, should
be achieved by the attainment of Communist power, through
propaganda, agitation and ultimately revolution under the
leadership of the Communists, in one country after another.
The dominant strategy and tactics now being followed by the
world Communist movement is Stalinism.
On November 7, 1930, based on the Stalinist theory of ac-
quiring political power, the Communist Party in the Philippines
was formally organized. On October 26, 1932, for violating
the law on illegal association, the Communist Party was declared
illegal by the Supreme Court of the Philippines. Convicted
were Crisanto Evangelista, Jacinto G. Manahan, Guillermo
Capadocia, Mariano P. Balgos, Enrique Torrente, Urbano Ar-
cega, Catalino Monroy, Francisco Rafael, Sotero Senson, Remi-
gio Tolentino, Dominador B. Reyes, Emilio S. Juan, Alberto
Santos, Juan Lagman, Andres Santiago, Angel Mesina, Felipe
Cruz, Maximo M. Gutierrez, Dominador J. Ambrosio, and Cenon
Lacanienta.
In the same year, 1932, six other cases involving the activities
of members of the Communist Party on cases of inciting to
sedition and rebellion were also condemned by the Supreme
Court.
Meanwhile in 1933, a Socialist Party was organized by Pedro
Abad Santos, based, also, on the teachings of Marx, Engels,
Lenin and Stalin. Five years later, in 1938, the Communist
Party emerged again and came out as the Communist Party
in the Philippines (Merger of the Communist and Socialist
Parties). The chairman of the revived Communist Party was
Crisanto Evangelista, and Pedro Abad Santos and Guillermo
Capadocia were vice-chairman and general secretary, respec-
tively. Certain provisions of the constitution and by-laws of
the merged Communist and Socialist Parties, adopted at a
convention held in Manila from October 29 to 31, 1938, are
quoted as follows:
"The united front of joint struggle for the immediate needs
of the masses has already existed in practice for a number
of years between the Socialist and Communist Parties of
the Philippines. Particularly since 1935, both parties have
co-operated in their day-to-day activities on behalf of the
working class and democracy and in their efforts to mobilize
the people in their struggle against reaction and fascism.
These united front activities of the Socialist and Communist


Parties have for some time already brought sharply to the
fore the necessity of political unity of a single mass party
of Socialism in the Philippines."
"The Socialist Party of the Philippines, since its formation
in 1933, has had a history different than the histories of the
Social-Democratic and Socialist Parties of Europe and
America. It does not share in the responsibility of the Social-
Democratic leaders for their policies of class collaboration
with the bourgeoisie and splitting the working class, which
were characteristic of those parties in Europe and America.
The Socialist Party of the Philippines always participated
in the class struggle of the masses, rejected the policy of
submission to the class interests of the imperialist bourgeoisie,
based itself upon the principle of the working class, recog-
nized and condemned the counter-revolutionary role of the
Trotskyites, and accepted as its guide the principles of scien-
tific socialism as enunciated by Marx, Engels, Lenin, and
Stalin."
"The emblem of the Party shall be the crossed hammer
and sickle, representing the unity of worker and peasant,
with a circular margin having at the top 'COMMUNIST
PARTY OF THE PHILIPPINES (Merger of the Socialist
and Communist Parties),' and underneath 'Affiliated to the
COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL.'"
"The Communist Party of the Philippines is affiliated with
its fraternal Communist Parties of other lands through the
Communist International and participates in International
Congresses through its National Committee."
These citations were extracted from a document entitled
"What Do the Communists Want?" published during the 1938
convention.
From 1938 up to the outbreak of the Second World War in
1941, the Communist Party had succeeded in inspiring the
organization of various groups representing practically all as-
pects of social, political, cultural and economic activities in our
society. These were known popularly as front and transmis-
sion belt organizations. Our information with respect to these
different organization will be revealed in subsequent specific
reports of the Committee.
When the war broke out in December 1941, the Communist
Party, together with its affiliate organizations and individual
sympathizers went underground. Incidentally thousands of
patriotic Filipinos and the then existing legal political parties
also went underground to fight the Japanese invaders. But
the global war gave the Communists in this country their greatest
opportunity to forge out a strong revolutionary movement in
which not only the Communists and other few willing fellow


travelers were involved, but also thousands who had no knowl-
edge of the true aim of the Communist movement in any way
whatsoever.
The Communist Party during the Japanese occupation existed
as the Hukbalahap, or Hukbo ng Bay an Laban sa Hapon (Peo-
ple's Anti-Japanese Army). The same individuals who were
known to be leading the Communist Party were themselves the
organizers or leaders of the Hukbalahap organization. The war
was wonderful opportunity for the Communists to organize an
army of their own and through threats and intimidation and
vile propaganda and promises swelled their following.
When the Philippines was liberated in 1945, the Hukbalahap
was one of the many guerrilla groups that helped to a certain
extent in the final defeat of the remaining Japanese forces.
In fact due to the pervading desire of the people and their
legitimate leaders to drive the Japanese as quickly as possible,
the United States Army also furnished the Huks with arms
and other war materials in the same manner that it furnished
the non-Communist guerrilla organizations.
But it was a fact that the United States Army itself did
not have full confidence in the Huks. Its leaders, Luis M.
Taruc and Casto Alejandrino, were arrested and confined in
the Iwahig Penal Colony. The Hukbalahap guerrilla organiza-
tion itself, with the exception of a regiment known as the
Banal Regiment, was not recognized by the United States
Army.
The politics of the Communist Party during the 1946 elections
invaded the political life of the country. Acting through the
Hukbalahap, PKM and other front organizations, the Com-
munist Party continued to defy the Government under the ad-
ministration of the late President Manuel A. Roxas. It was
not, however, until September 1, 1946, did the Government
order the active disarming of the Communist-directed armed
bands by means of military action. The period starting on
his assumption of office on May 28, 1946, up to September 1,
1946, was spent in earnest negotiations with the leaders of
the dissidents for the laying down of their arms. The crop-
sharing system of 70-30 was also promulgated to meet their
alleged economic demands. All these efforts failed and hos-
tilities ensued.
On March 6, 1948, President Roxas formally declared the
Hukbalahap and PKM organizations to be illegal associations.
Among the charges were that these organizations maintained


schools in the mountains for the teaching of Communist prin-
ciples. They had their own educational program and main-
tained a tax collection service to support a government of their
own. "Reorganization of their executive branch was effected
as well as their armed forces, which were finally divided into
the regular force and the police force with distinct duties."
"The Hukbalahap Army, which was originally created on
March 29, 1942, was approved to continue as such on June 25,
1946, for the sole and avowed purpose of overthrowing the
Philippine government, of attacking the Government forces and
holding and expanding their own territory." Voluminous evi-
dence, both testimonial and documentary, supporting such na-
ture and aims of these organizations were presented to your
Committee during our hearings.
The unfortunate death of President Roxas on April 15, 1948,
provided opportunity for a revision of his previously established
firm policy towards the lawless elements. There was public
pressure for a reexamination of the Government's uncompromis-
ing stand, which was finally heeded by President Quirino when
he issued and Congress approved the amnesty proclamation for
the Hukbalahap and PKM members. Fifty days were spent in
an attempt to take back once more the dissidents and their
Communist leaders into the benevolent fold of the Government.
But again hostilities broke out.
Finally, on October 8, 1948, your Committee was appointed
to look into the nature of the whole peace and order problem.
The result of our recent investigations enabled us to pursue
this problem to its ideological roots. The following pages will
be devoted to an attack or refutation of the basic principles
of Marxism or Communism and some of the stock argumento
of the Communist Party that have given the subversive move-
ment a false halo of credence.
IV. ANALYSIS AND REFUTATION OF THE BASIC
PRINCIPLES AND ARGUMENTS OF COMMUN-
ISM AND THE COMMUNIST PARTY
Our offensive starts with Communism's philosophy of nature
If we can prove its basic view of nature false there is no stop-
ping the conclusion that all other assumptions of Communism
are false. If the foundation is weak the structure will fall.
To suit their peculiar mentality the Communists insist that
the great basic question of all philosophy is that concerning:


the relation of thinking and being, spirit and nature; or, which
is primary, spirit or nature? According to them any other use
of the concepts of philosophical idealism and materialism leads
only to confusion. One must either be an idealist or a ma-
terialist.
Refuting this your Committee submits that the relation of
thinking and being, or spirit and nature, does not necessarily
raise a great philosophical question; and that to the great
masses of our people, to raise the question as to whether
spirit is primary to nature, or that nature is primary to spirit,
is idle speculation in the same manner that to raise the question
as to which came first, the chicken or the egg, is idle speculation.
Your Committee contends that the great majority of our
people know, feel, and experience that spirit and nature are
harmoniously united and they belong in that unity. They find
no useful need quibbling about this fact. Nor do they counten-
ance the right of any one man, or any small group of men, to
use this issue as a lever to compartmentalize mankind in a
manner that suits their strange paranoiac moods.
However, the issue has been forced upon our people by the
Communists. They have been pounding it on the ears of
humanity for over a hundred years. Somehow we Filipinos
must break the trend of this type of mentality in our midst
before it did irreparable damage to our society.
Cocksure and bent on forcing their will over an unyielding
humanity, the Communists smugly claim that "the real unity
of the world consists in its materiality." After a queer analysis
of reality, they jumped to the conclusion that matter is superior
to mind. Through a tedious process that serves as convenient
camouflage to their irrational minds they claim to have dis-
covered the secret of creation.
"Motion is the mode of existence of matter. Never anywhere
has there been matter without motion," they say. Then they
begun postulating the cause of this motion.
They discovered that matter, which they believe is the only
reality, is composed of opposites. They presupposed, but never
explained why, there is motion in those opposites. It was
enough that they saw the negative and positive elements in
any reality move; that these moved toward each other (ne-
gation) ; and that the whole process results in the transforma-
tion of a new and better reality. The process of opposition,
negation and transformation is all that creates reality, they say.
No power outside of this process had produced reality, and the


claim (even the best known scientists do) that a Prime Mover
or God created and provided motion to any reality is simply
thrown by the Communists in the scrap heap as all bunk.
Refuting these false Communist contentions your Committee
concedes, without dogmatic absolutism, the existence of positive
and negative elements in matter and these may, but not always,
actively act or move towards each other. The mere concession
of the existence of motion in matter, however, does not explain
the cause or source of motion. It is a description of what
takes place in matter and does not explain why matter moves.
The explanation for the existence of motion in matter is not
contained within the matter itself but outside it. There must
be a Prime Mover; and matter and what we consider to be the
Prime Mover constitute what true science and theology alike
believe to be reality or the true character of nature.
To test our contention take any object, either organic or in-
organic. Take a car, for example. This is a product of phys-
ical science.
Following the Communists' theory of motion the car moves
because of the action (positive) and the reaction (negative) of
the various mechanical parts. We know, of course, that the
car could not have come into being without an inventor. And
it took a lot of mind indeed before we could have the kind of car
that we now see around. We know also that the car's mechan-
ism cannot move without somebody with mind driving and
feeding it with gas. No one so far has invented any self-
feeding or self-propelling machine, not even the Communist
scientists; and even if that were invented, it would still take
a mind to invent it.
Or take man, for example, who is just another mechanical
product of the negative and positive motion in nature, accord-
ing to the Communists. To them the negative and the positive
elements that constitute the cells that make up the wholeness
of the object called Man has given his life. He responds only
to his environment and the good or bad traits that he might
have are only the reflection of his environment.
We know, of course, that Man has been endowed with some-
thing that is not found in any other matter or creation. We
call this something Mind. Nov/ nobody has as yet succeeded
in describing just what Mind looks like and verily this is known
only by the Source, who has been good enough to share it with
Man.


That Man can rise from his environment and do things far
beyond the capacity of ordinary creation is something which
the Communists refuse to recognize as a power emanating from
a Power greater than Man himself. But let us see this process
as it works in Man.
Let us concede that motion is immanent in both the positive
and negative human cell. We observe them unite and negate
each other and transform into a full fledge human being. But
we still have to explain why those so-called opposite elements
moved and there can be no other way of explaining except
by admitting that a Prime Mover, or God, has caused their
motion. The source of motion can therefore be the only
Creator. The cause of development or progress is not within
the reality itself but outside it, something that possesses mind
that can discern and direct the direction of that progress. Thus
man cannot be as intelligent as he is without having been so
created by God. Thus an edifice cannot be built without the
architect that designed it, without the engineer with mind that
directed the work on it, without the laborer with mind that
knew how to piece together the various parts of the building
from foundation to roof.
Your Committee contends that the test of the integrity of a
philosophy is its ability to explain the problem of God. It
must either explain God satisfactorily or be possessed with
sufficient humility to admit that it does not know. Otherwise
it remains an unreasonable dogma, a mere body of concepts
that are unrelated to reality, which Marxism or Communism
has proved itself to be.
The Communists have the temerity to apply what they see
in physical science to social science despite their shortness of
vision. Doggedly denying the existence of a Supreme Being
that guides and determines the destiny of humanity, they look
upon society as just another combination of opposite elements.
History to them is simply a description of the movements of
the matter called Man, and to further simplify their method
and conform to their materialistic view of reality, they postulate
economics as the only compelling motive in the movement of
society.
The Communists claim that the written history of all existing
society is the history of economic class struggles. After wrongly
describing the nature of Man's being they proceed to describe
the nature of the society to which Man belongs. Man is com-
posed of immanent opposite elements. Man is a social being.


Therefore society is composed of immanent opposite elements.
A very simple syllogism, logically correct at first glance, but
completely wrong after closer examination. What the Com-
munists see as opposite elements in society are not opposite but
contrary. Like a coin that must have two sides to be a coin,
society to be a society must recognize its inherent contradic-
tions. This is the natural lot of society, the existence of con-
tradictions, since Man himself, who is the basic element of
society, is a bundle of contradictions. Contradictions, like the
two sides of a coin, do not oppose each other to mutual destruc-
tion. They constitute the wholeness of Man and of society,
and to destroy those contradictions, which the Communists are
trying to do, is to destroy Man and society itself.
Your Committee has found why Communist theories are
dangerous. Their ideas flash on the mind like bright lights
and stay there until you peer closer to find that they do not
consist of any substance in any way whatsoever.
Communist logic is characteristically concise and curt with
a drive so sharp it pierces any ordinary reasoning.
One way of defeating this kind of logic is to ignore it. Let
it miss its mark. Let the Communists talk their heads off
until they get tired and call it quits.
Unfortunately they have not been completely ignored; nor
do they choose to be ignored. They have not only succeeded
in enticing a reluctant audience: they have succeeded in acquir-
ing political power to assure themselves an audience. They
have the whole of Soviet Russia and her satellites and a fraction
of the population of every non-Communist nation to hear them.
In the Philippines they have the Communist Party, the Huk-
balahap armed bands and a few other satellites and front or-
ganizations to listen to them.
The time to ignore Communism should have been when Karl
Marx first formulated his false doctrines. Engels should not
have collaborated with Marx. Lenin should not have improved
and implemented Marxist theories. Trotsky and Stalin and
other Red doctrinaires before them and their contemporaries
should not have seen in Marxism a personal chance to deter-
mine and rule the destiny of mankind. Then perhaps the
crimes of Hitler, Mussolini and To jo against humanity would
not have happened. Perhaps this nation, and the whole world
for that matter, need not now be asked not to ignore any longer
the teachings of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin.


The alternative to ignoring Marxism, which is over one hun-
dred years late as an antidote and therefore that much ineffec-
tive as a method of combatting it, is to reveal before every
man, woman and child who possesses the faculty of reasoning,
the various thought forms and substance that have been con-
ceived and practised by Marx, Engels, Lenin, Trotsky, Stalin
and their followers. We must encourage, and provide the fa-
cilities if necessary, the widest possible discussion, analysis,
observation, and experimentation to test the validity of these
principles and theories in their relation to human individual
freedom and dignity on the basis of moral and scientific truths.
Your Committee is setting the pace for this task, and if all
we can accomplish is to stir up public interest in the discovery
of the true nature of the Communist menace, we will have con-
tributed our little share in the proper solution of this world
problem.
By far the most reliable source of Communist thoughts is
the "Manifesto of the Communist Party" by Marx and Engels.
Here is a distillation of their views, a summing up, as it were,
of their interpretation of reality and society as a whole. Never
has so much mental poison been so concentrated in so little
a volume. Mr. Mariano P. Balgos, general secretary of the
Communist Party in the Philippines, acknowledged this doc-
ument as an authoritative source of their views. The doctrines
contained in his statement and the constitution and by-laws
of his party which he presented to us were drawn from this
book.
"The history of all hitherto existing society," says the
Communist Manifesto, "is the history of class struggles."
This is probably the biggest lie that has ever been written
about history and society. It is a violation of reason and a
quixotic defiance of the scientifically and traditionally estab-
lished evidence of the variety of categories that contributed
to the real development of society.
Certainly the history of the Philippines is not the history
of class struggles. Our researches reveal a number of subtle
attempts to insinuate the class struggle angle into books dealing
with our social and political development. The Philippine Rev-
olution has been interpreted as the beginning of the "bour-
geoise revolution," the revolt of the "middle class," of the
"capitalist class," in this country. Rizal is considered a "bour-
geoise" intellectual and Bonifacio a "proletarian" revolutionary.


No crueller insult had been heaped upon the memory of these
men!
To say that Rizal thought and acted only at the behest of a
social class is to constrict the universality of his outlook. To
say that the liberation of the proletariat was the compelling
motive of Bonifacio is to distort his revolutionary legacy to this
country.
In the light of the air-tight theory of class struggle, it is
not surprising that the Communists consider the present break-
down of peace and order in the Philippines, China, Indonesia,
Indo-China, Korea and other areas where they are busy creat-
ing revolutions as historically imperative. We trace their ag-
gressions to the rigidity of their false sense of history which
they are able to maintain only by the logic of force in the
same manner that the human beings they now hold in their
thumbs can be controlled only by the logic of deceit, threats,
intimidation, coercion and guns.
From Karl Marx again, on page 23 of the Manifesto, the
Communists vainly apologize for the artificiality of their
thoughts:
"The theoretical conclusions of the Communists are in no
way based on ideas or principles that have been invented,
or discovered, by this or that would-be universal reformer.
"They merely express, in general terms, actual relations
springing from an existing class struggle, from a historical
movement going on under our very eyes. The abolition of
existing property relations is not at all a distinctive feature
of Communism."
Mr. Mariano P. Balgos re-echoes the same tune on page 6
of his statement presented to the Committee:
"We Marxists believe in, although we did not create or
invent, the class through struggle. Basing ourselves on the
world outlook of dialectical materialism, we have arrived
at a materialist interpretation of history, and to us the
history of the world is merely a history of the class struggle,
or the history of exploited classes revolting against the rule
of an exploiting class, which invariably is in the minority."
Of course the Communists' theoretical conclusions are based
on principles that have been invented. In fact the principles
which Marx invented can hardly be called truly principles
because two opposite bodies, no matter how much opposed
they are, will remain inert unless mind, either of man or of
God, provides them with the motive power. The mere ex-


planation of motion in matter is not a principle. It is nothing
but an explanation of what happens. A principle to be truly
a principle must also explain why it happens and where. A
principle must be its beginning and its end. It must recognize
God. And Marx and Mr. Balgos had denied God.
Any one can see that the Communists' helpless reliance on
the thoughts and ideas or the mind of Karl Marx as recorded in
his writings is itself a refutation of their basic conclusion that
matter is superior to mind. The fact that the Communists
cannot say or do anything unless Marx said so is proof that
they themselves recognize but would not dare to admit the
superiority of mind.
But who was Marx to think he had the solution to all human
problems? Who was he to monopolize the value and power of
mind and deny its existence in every other man? And who
are the present-day Marxists who have allowed themselves to
be duped into believing in Marx and forcing others to believe
with them? If we have shown that Marx was wrong, does it
not follow that his disciples are wrong too?
It is true that the inventor of the so-called Marxist principles
was not a would-be reformer. He was a would-be revolutionist
who did not know what he wanted, how he wanted and why
he wanted. In fact he was not really a revolutionist himself.
He simply glorified in the fact that people want to revolt. And
he forged an instrument to keep them in revolt until a monstrous
state succeeded in snaring them, stunting their minds and
bodies, and kneading them into a form of humanity which no
one in the whole existing Communist hierarchy in the world
would dare to reveal what.
Can you imagine a theory that believes revolution to be a
natural inevitability and yet postulates a powerful dictatorship
to arrest and put a stop to this natural tendency? Is there
any sense there? If they believe their ideas to contain what
they think is an absolute truth, why don't the Communist dic-
tatorships in the countries where they have gained political
power allow the people to revolt? Or are their theories true
only for themselves and false for the rest of humanity? What
is the matter with such people who think they have discovered
the secret of creation and brazenly defy the power of God?
Here is what is the matter. They hide in puerile verbiage.
They claim that their conculsion "merely express, in general
terms, actual relations springing from an existing class strug-
gle, from a historical movement going on under our very eyes."


"General terms," "actual relations," "existing class struggle,"
"historical movement." These are contradictory concepts so
cleverly conjured they emanate in logical sequence only from
a confused but rigidly disciplined mentality. If they are "gen-
eral terms," how can they speak of "actual relations"? If there
is an "existing class struggle," how can it be considered a "his-
torical movement" when it is a commonplace event? Does the
struggle that we see going on in our midst in every aspect and
every moment of our existence —social, political, cultural and
economic—deserve to be classified as "class struggle"? Your
Committee contends it does not!
What actually obtain in our society is individual struggle,
since struggle exists even among the individuals composing
what the Communists call the "capitalist class" and the "labor-
ing class." It is natural for an individual capitalist to struggle,
or, what is a more acceptable term in the field of economics,
compete with another individual capitalist. It is natural for
a laborer to compete with another laborer. The struggle be-
tween the individual capitalist and the individual laborer is a
phenomenon which begun when the first hunter, the first fisher-
man, the first farmer, the first businessman, asked the next
man to join him in his venture.
The fact that a group of capitalists join together in an as-
sociation does not mean they are struggling as a class. It
does mean they have responded to the natural instinct of gre-
gariousness, and, on the principle of natural individual freedom,
pooled their resources to promote their individual interests
without violating or destroying the constitutional freedom of
individuals outside their association.
The fact that a group of laborers join together in a labor
union does not mean that they are struggling as a class. It
does mean that they have responded to the natural instinct of
gregariousness, and, on the principle of natural individual free-
dom, pooled their resources to promote their individual interests
without violating or destroying the constitutional freedom of
individuals outside their union.
In a word the basic motive in the relationship among men
is individual interest and not class interest which exists as a
compelling force only in the minds of the Communists.
The term "class" is derived from the legitimate scientific
method called classification. To classify human beings into
social, economic, cultural or political classes is an academically
acceptable system of describing human relations. But to say,


and insist by force and violence that science countenances "class
struggle" as the only categorical imperative in the development
of society is to prostitute science itself.
And this is precisely what Communism and the Communist
Party have been doing with the scientific method all along, for
which reason the movement is forced to violate every single
human freedom every inch of the way from the time its basic
formula was invented until only God knows when, unless its
spread is soon stopped in its track and pushed back to where
Marxism really belongs—in the limbo of false and forgotten
philosophies.
In the same quotation above, Marx says: "The abolition of
existing property relations is not at all the distinctive feature
of Communism." Elsewhere in the same Manifesto, he says
"the theory of the Communists may be summed up in the single
sentence: Abolition of private property."
Where is integrity in a philosophy when, in camouflaging its
true aim, it hides in a mountain of verbal sophistry? Who will
place Marx on the pedestal of the honored and respected wise
men of the ages, unless they be those who will cheat and lie
and lie and cheat again and again in order to attain their evil
political ends ?
Mr. Balgos speaks about the "exploited classes revolting
against the rule of an exploiting class, which invariably is in
the minority." Let us see to whom this theory actually applies.
Membership in the Communist Party is extremely difficult
to acquire. It is even much more difficult to maintain. The
sacrifice it exacts is such that to be sincerely a member one
must be prepared to cheat and lie and slave or die for the
Communist Party. None can stay in it unless one can submit
to rigid discipline which is aptly called "iron discipline." Con-
sequently membership in the Communist Party has been very
limited.
By these standards of the Communist Party its members
have become a social class—a special social class—cynically
practising the vile attributes the party claims to find in the
so-called exploiting capitalist class. The Communist Party has
become a class opposed to and seeking the abolition of all other
classes. The interests of the Communist Party are separate
and apart from those of the people as a whole, and it has set
UP a machinery of sectarian and groundless principles by which
the members plot to mould to their advantage the economy of


all nations. If this is not exploitation in action then the word
defies all definitions.
The magnitude of the task assigned to the Communist Party
in the Philippines by the masterminds of the world Communist
movement in Moscow is so tremendous (the destruction by force
and violence of the whole existing social order in this country
can be nothing less) that the local Party has got to have
financial and material support from its place of existence. In
other words the activities of the Party must be spent for by
the people of this country. Why? Because, although your
Committee heard rumors of Moscow gold flowing to this country
for the use of the local Reds, we have thus far found no con-
crete proof that the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
itself is spending a single cent for its local agency. We have
found evidence of direct contribution from the Communist
Party of the United States, but that was before the war yet;
and the amount was so measly it cannot be considered sufficient
reward for so dangerous a job assigned to the party to accom-
plish here. Even the propaganda materials which we examined
were to be paid for by buyers in this country. So it is obvious
that if the Communist Party must exist here, and it does; and
succeed in its work of destruction, the people of this country,
must be made to support the movement. They have to be
exploited to support Communism.
It is a fact that the Filipinos are being literally made by
the Communist Party to pay their way to Soviet slavery.
How do the Communists do it? What is the secret by which
one man, or a small group of men, are able to collect cash and
goods and a modicum of goodwill from a people whom in the
end they will destroy? Here is how.
First there was a theory. Marx and Engels formulated that.
Then there was agitation and propaganda, or, to use an allusion,
they are first made mad whom the devil seeks to destroy. A
sort of a softening process to weaken psychological and moral
resistance to the theory.
As an inseparable part of the exploitation, members in the
Communist Party were, and still are, required to pay dues,
monthly dues, yearly dues, or any other dues that may be
required by the leadership. Appeals are made also to well-
meaning people for contributions, either openly to the Com-
munist cause, or secretly to any cooked-up cause. Front and
transmission belt organizations are established as convenient


media for revenue and propaganda. Examples of these are
the Hukbalahap and PKM organizations which have served to
bolster not only the finances and logistics of the Communist
Party through the collection of dues and food supplies, but
also are serving as armed pressures to force all kinds of sup-
port from the people, which is not only exploitation but outright
gangsterism.
The Communists and their friends vehemently claim that
the rank and file people in the Hukbalahap and other mass or-
ganizations which they either put up or infiltrated are not
Communists. Certainly they are not Communists, for as we
have shown, it is extremely difficult to become one. But the
exploitation which the few Communists have been inflicting
on the people of this country becomes doubly painful when we
realize, and the Communists and their fellow travelers can
sneer on this fact, that the whole nation is being made to pay
for the promotion of a cause in which we do not believe, and
in fact through the Supreme Court, have actually condemned.
Karl Marx further said:
"Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims.
They openly declare that their ends can be attained only
by the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions.
Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communist revolution."
In different phraseology but similar in content and equally
pugnacious, Mr. Balgos said to the Committee:
"The Communist Party of the Philippines, as the party of
the exploited toiling masses cannot and will not close its
eyes to the present realities. We repeat we stand by the
Constitution of the Philippines, and will seek to achieve
our objectives through all means permitted by the Constitu-
tion, but when such Constitution is being violated flagrantly
by the enemies of the people as is being done at present,
we will not hesitate to use other effective means to restore
the democratic liberties guaranteed by it, even if it involves
the use of force. If by defining our position thus, the present
imperialist-feudal dictatorship should outlaw our Party, we
will not hesitate to sink underground and lead the toiling
masses and their democratic allies in their struggle against
imperialist-feudal exploitation and oppression, until the
masses overthrow their rule and establish a People's Demo-
cracy."
Marx and Mr. Balgos speak of revolution and use of force,
which mean one and the same thing—armed force. Your Com-
mittee believes in the validity of revolution as an instrument
in the preservation of the people's freedoms. We would be


desecrating the glorious revolutionary tradition of this country
if we did not. But we submit that in order to justify a revolu-
tion, the members of Congress and the people they represent,
must satisfy themselves that revolution is waged for the pur-
pose of upholding and protecting the principles and the eternal
truths over which freedom rests. And if the representatives
of the people of this country in Congress were to consider the
"present realities," the right to revolt is on our side and not
on the side of the Communists.
In fact the existing temper of the people against the activities
of the Communist Party and the Hukbalahap armed bands is
itself revolutionary. The spontaneous reaction of volunteer
guerrillas and the natural heroism of our soldiers in the present
armed campaigns against the dissidents are evidence of our
revolutionary heritage. Let no one mistake this.
The Communists themselves consider the government's all-out
campaign against them as "counter-revolutionary." And verily
it is, and this country will not wait for the Communists and
their few stooges to capture political power before this legitimate
Filipino revolution is undertaken and made good and done.
We must admit that this Committee is part and parcel of our
people's desire to wage war on an ideology that defines their
liberties out of existence. Our humble share in this gigantic
task is to help tear away, piece by piece, the coat of slander
and falsehoods which for a hundred years have been woven
around our people's and mankind's, God-given ideology and
institutions.
In this fight your Committee's weapon is one and only one
thing: reason. Reason in a manner approved and used by
the best thinkers, the best philosophers, the best scientists,
the best theologians and even the ancient mystics of the world.
The fight is really very simple. And we have our Constitution,
our traditions and the evidence of our history behind us. Our
method is really nothing other than our ability as individuals
to see the world without losing sight of the individual people
in it. To see the nation without losing sight of the individual
families in it. To see the family without losing sight of the
individual men, women and children in it. In a word, we
realize that the sound cause of science, both physical and social;
and all theology and metaphysics, is the individual human per-
sonality ; and the Communists have no business lumping people
into artificial social classes and interpreting into each class
such moods and behavior as will suit their queer outlook.


Against our reasonable argumentation the Communists can
pit only dogged falsehoods. Of course, they now possess armed
force; and that, indeed, is some form of argument. But then
Hitler, too, had the toughest armed force in the world. And
where is Hitler now and where is his army?
How long the Communist armed force in this country will
continue to defy the Government, your Committee does not
know. That is a military question and we leave that to our
gallant soldiers. We hope, however, that all armed hostilities
will end soon. In the meantime we shall continue to tackle
the ideas of Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin, and Mr. Balgos.
From the above-quoted paragraph of Mr. Balgos we have
chosen the following phrases for your Committee's next assault
on the heart of Communism and the Communist Party:
1. "We stand by the Constitution of the Philippines."
2. "Constitution being violated flagrantly by the enemies
of the people as is being done at present."
3. "Democratic liberties guaranteed by it."
4. "Should outlaw our party."
Lest Mr. Balgos accuse your Committee of quoting him out
of context we hasten to recall again that his paragraph is
fully quoted above and his whole statement is in our files which
anyone may examine. Our duty is to refute his claims and
we believe we can analyze his thoughts better by chopping them
into intelligible sizes.
As put together by Mr. Balgos his words can still stand
ordinary scrutiny. It is important, therefore, if we are to help
this nation break through the dark clouds of Communist pro-
paganda, that we break them up into individual thought forms
to find out what they really mean. Test generalization in the
crucible of individualization and you will fined the truth.
In the case of Mr. Balgos, who claims to believe in the so-
called "scientific socialism" of Marx, he made a very unscientific
conclusion when he said that his Party "stand by the Constitu-
tion of the Philippines." He means here that the Communist
Party does not violate the tenets enunciated by the Constitution
of the Philippines.
In the opinion of your Committee Mr. Balgos in this state-
ment reveals that he does not have a full grasp of the meaning
of the tenets in our Constitution. He displays, too, a lack of
complete knowledge of the teachings of Marx, Engels, Lenin
and Stalin which, according to him and the Communist Party
constitution and by-laws are the basis of their activities. A


comparison of the preamble alone of our Constitution and the
teachings of these men will expose in bold relief the errors of
Mr. Balgos' conclusion.
The preamble of the Philippine Constitution reads as follows:
"The Filipino people, imploring the aid of Divine Pro-
vidence, in order to establish a government that shall em-
body their ideals, conserve and develop the patrimony of
the nation, promote the general welfare, and secure to them-
selves and their posterity the blessings of independence
under a regime of justice, liberty, and democracy, do ordain
and promulgate this Constitution."
Your Committee will now compare this preamble with the
teachings of the so-called "greatest teachers of mankind" and
prove that Communism and the Communist Party strike at,
and continually are seeking the destruction of, the spiritual
foundation of our national structure.
From Karl Marx, in his "A Critique of the Hegelian Philoso-
phy of Right":
"Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the senti-
ment of a heartless world, as it is the spirit of spiritless
conditions. It is the opium of the people."
From Engels, in his "Anti-Duhring":
"The actual basis of religious action therefore continues
to exist and with it the religious reflex itself. And although
bourgeois political economy has given a certain insight into
the causal basis of this domination by extraneous forces,
this makes no essential difference. Bourgeois economics can
neither prevent crises in general, nor protect the individual
capitalist from losses, bad debts and bankruptcy, nor secure
the individual worker against unemployment and destitution.
It is still true that man proposes and God (that is the extra-
neous forces of the capitalist mode of production) disposes."
"It (Christianity) became more and more the exclusive
possession of the ruling classes, and these applied it as mere
means of government to keep the lower classes within limits."
From Lenin, in his "Religion":
"As for those who live upon the labour of others, religion
teaches them to be charitable in earthly life, thus providing
a cheap justification for their whole exploiting existence and
selling them at a reasonable price tickets to heavenly bliss."
"Religion is a kind of spiritual intoxicant, in which the
slaves of capitalism drown their humanity and their desires
for a decent human existence."
"The helplessness of the exploited classes in their struggle
against the exploiters inevitably generates a belief in a better


life after death, even as the helplessness of the savage in his
struggle with nature gives rise to a belief in gods, devils,
miracles."
"Religion teaches those who toil in poverty all their lives
to be resigned and patient in this world, and console them
with the hope of reward in heaven."
"We must under no circumstances allow ourselves to be
sidetracked into a treatment of the religious question in the
abstract, idealistically, as a matter of 'pure reason,' detached
from the class struggle ... It would be bourgeois narrow-
mindedness to lose sight of the fact that the oppression
exercised by religion on humanity is only a product and
reflection of the economic oppression in society."
"The fight against religion must not be limited nor reduced
to abstract, ideological preaching. This struggle must be
linked up with the concrete practical class movement: its
aims must be to eliminate the social roots of religion."
From E. Yarolavsky, in his "Religion in the U. S. S. R.":
"Ministers of religion, priests and parsons were paid to
teach that the world of the exploiters, of the oppressors—of
the landlords and the capitalists—is a just world, a world
in accordance with the laws of God. In any society that is
divided into classes, where on one side of the line you have
the oppressed and the exploited, and on the other side the
oppressors and exploiters, religion and its ministers were and
still are one of the bulwarks of the oppression of the masses."
From the Program of the Communist International:
"The growth of ideological, mystical and religious super-
stition, are all phenomena signalizing the approach of the
historical end of the capitalist system."
"One of the most important tasks of the cultural revolution
affecting the wide masses is the task of systematically and
unswervingly combating religion—the opium of the peo-
ple . . . The proletarian state, while granting liberty of
worship and abolishing the privileged position of the formerly
dominant religion, carries on anti-religious propaganda with
all the means at its command and reconstructs the whole of
its educational work on the basis of scientific materialism."
From Stalin, writing in the "History of the Communist Party
of the Soviet Union":
"Contrary to idealism, which regards the world as the
embodiment of an 'absolute idea,' a 'universal spirit,' 'con-
sciousness,' Marx's philosophical materialism holds that the
world develops in accordance with the laws of movement of
matter and stands in no need of a 'universal spirit.'"


Mr. Balgos presented to us his own Marxian views on religion
in the following language:
"As Marxists, while we believe in the philosophy of dialec-
tical materialism, we nevertheless respect freedom of religious
worship. However, we consider the Catholic Church as an
organization owning vast estates as the biggest feudal land-
lord in the world. We distinguish between the Church as
a property owner, and the Catholic religion as a spiritual
belief. The former, we consider as an enemy of progress,
which should be exposed to the Catholic masses, but the
latter, we respect, even if we do not agree with it. We
consider that the high priests of the Church, beginning
with the Pope, are primarily motivated by the economic
interests of their organization, and only incidentally by
spiritual considerations. This explains their position of sup-
porting imperialism in its suppression of the democratic
people's movement all over the world, screening such sup-
port by the familiar tactics of red-baiting. The Catholic
masses, however, know better. Typical is the attitude of the
Italian workers and peasants many of whom are both com-
munists and catholics. When asked to explain how they
reconcile their communist and catholic beliefs, they claim
that they are communists on earth and catholics in heaven.
This shows their practical bent of mind whereby they believe
that only the communists can solve their practical problems
on earth, and that their being communists do not conflict
with their religious beliefs, contrary to what the imperialists
and the Pope would want them to believe."
Here the Catholic Church, to which the great majority of the
Filipinos adhere, is roundly insulted by Mr. Balgos. He takes
particular pain in making shallow distinction between property
holding and spiritual belief but cannot help ending up in not
believing in both. The story of the reconcilability of the Com-
munist and Catholic beliefs of the Italian workers was said
more for effect than for fact. The overwhelming defeat of
the Communists in last year's general election in Italy smashes
Mr. Balgos' legend.
Your Committee has already explained in the earlier part of
this report the primary or superiority of mind over matter.
We proved that for matter to be able to move there must be
a Prime Mover, a Superior Intelligence that comprehends the
cause and end of that motion. Nowhere in all the Communist
propaganda we have examined is this argument refuted. If
the Communists can disprove our interpretation of the relation
of mind and matter, the Committee will only be too willing to
change its views.


The philosophy of dialectical materialism countenances neither
private property nor spiritual belief. It is true that the Church
holds property in this country, but the Philippine Constitution
respects these and has provided for a just means in the principle
of the right of eminent domain by which the State may acquire
these landholdings. Confiscation, which is the Communists'
method of abolishing private property, is repugnant to our
constitutional processes.
In fairness to the Catholic Church—and the Committee will
do this for any other religious group, either Protestant or Mo-
hammedan; and in justice to all our people whose faith in
Divine Providence remains unshaken despite the relentless bar-
rage from Communism and the Communist Party—we shall
cull from the views of other men who have also studied the
Communist problem and throw back to Marx, Engels, Lenin,
Stalin, Balgos, and the rest of the Communist doctrinaires,
the following bombshells on their atheistic teachings.
From Fulton J. Sheen, in his "Communism: Opium of the
People":
"There is no doubt that at times unscrupulous individuals
have used religion as an instrument for exploitation and
domination. Peter the Great in Russia, Napoleon in France
and even the late Czar offered classical instances of such
abuse of religion ... As regards these individuals who
have used the social institution of religion for base purposes,
we share the indignation of Lenin. But what he and his
fellow-Communists forget is that these are all exceptions,
and are not in the spirit nor the program of religion . . .
It is a very childish attitude, betraying want of critical rea-
soning on the part of the Communists, to argue that because
a few have prostituted the sacredness of religion, therefore
religion is vile. Because there are a few false coins in the
world is no reason why we should do away with money;
because there are a few individuals who practice graft is
no reason why we should do away with government; because
some automobile drivers are reckless is no reason for destroy-
ing automobiles; and because there are some who betray
Christianity is no reason for destroying Christianity."
"Why cannot the Communists see the obvious fact that if
religion emphasized the passivity of man, then religion
would never admit the terrible reality of sin? Does not sin
mean that man is conscious, deliberate and active, and that
the creature can raise his 'Non Serviam' against the Creator?
The very symbol of Christianity, which is the Cross, testifies
better than anything else to the activity of man in religion.
Before that Cross, man cannot remain indifferent; he cannot
be passive; he must either nail the Savior to it, or else mount


it to be crucified with Him. If religion is passive, why must
Communists be so active to destroy it; do we raise armies to
kill what we believe are dead dogs? If religion is passive
why did the Church condemn Quietism? For no other rea-
son than because She wanted to teach men that they must
be active in the work of salvation, that it is as foolish to
expect God to say our prayers for us as it is to expect Him
to till our crops."
From the same author in his "Liberty, Equality and Frater-
nity" :
"The resignation which religion preaches is not passive
submission to economic injustices, as Communism contends.
Resignation means accepting our lot, while working to better
conditions by an intelligent understanding of the nature of
things. A mother, for example, is resigned to the pettiness
and helplessness of her new-born babe; a farmer is resigned
to the slow maturing of the seed he sows in the springtime,
because both take into account the nature of things. But
because the mother is resigned to infancy, or because the
farmer is resigned to the season, it does not follow that they
are passive or inactive, nor that the mother does not nourish
her babe, nor the farmer till his crops. As a matter of fact
both work intelligently to draw out the perfection of things
committed to their care.
"So it is with religion. Religion is resigned to the nature
of the world and the nature of man. It knows very well
that man is prone to evil, that some selfishness will remain
under any economic system, and that no paradise can be
built here below. But because religion is resigned to these
practical limitations, religion does not refuse to better con-
ditions by infusing virtue into the hearts and souls of men,
to the end of making a world where the good can live among
the bad, where the rich can live without exploiting the poor
and the poor can live without being violently destructive of
all wealth, and where the majority can live in a state this
side of heroism and martyrdom. Communism, however, re-
fuses to accept the nature of things and thinks it can change
them by violence and confiscation. But it is just as foolish
to think that by a revolution one can alter the nature of a
baby by putting a bomb under its cradle, blowing it up and
expecting it to come down a fullgrown Bolshevik. In fact
it is just as foolish to try to build a perfect Paradise here
below by revolution, as it is to try to dynamite triangles into
four-sided figures. There are certain things to which we
must be resigned and the nature of man is one. It is simply
because Russia has refused to take account of this one fact
that it has failed. All its failures are failures incident to
human nature. Since it failed to be resigned to that, it
must be resigned to failure."


From Charles J. McFadden in his "The Philosophy of Com-
munism" :
"Communism charges that religion is the opium of the
people because it teaches the rich, the ruling class, their
rights, and teaches the poor, the exploited class, their duties,
thus strengthening the ruling minority in its determination
to exploit the masses. These charges were refuted, but we
now state that Communism is the opium of the people because
it exploits the poor by subjecting them to the will of the
Communist Party. This ruthless Party dupes the suffering
masses into believing that they must suffer unbearable hard-
ships, that they must go through a period of Dictatorship
of indefinite length, a period characterized by inhuman suf-
fering, as part of an evolutionary process that will one day
bring them an earthly Paradise.
"The extent of this ruthless control of a minority is best
realized when one understands that only three million out
of one hundred and sixty million Russians belong to the
Communist Party. Yet the Communist Party rules those
one hundred and sixty million people with a merciless iron-
hand. If this is not the exploitation of the masses by a
ruling minority, then words have no meaning.
"The leaders of the Communist Party live in power, pri-
vilege and luxury while the masses starve. The Party's
favorite mask for exploitation is its hatred of Capitalism
which it says has ground workers into the dust. But anyone
who knows anything about contemporary Russia realizes
only too well that the masses have never been ground into
the dust in the history of the world as they have been for
the past generation in Russia. Truely, the ruling class of
Russia, the exploiting Communist Party leaders, have utilized
well the dream of earthly Paradise as an opium for the
suffering Russian people."
(NOTE: With the exception of the quotation from Stalin, which was
from page eleven of the History of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, all quotations in this portion of the report are from the book
"The Philosophy of Communism" by Charles J. McFadden, published
by Benziger Brothers, Inc., New York, 1939—CUFA)
In the light of the foregoing arguments, therefore, the Com-
munist Party, contrary to the claim of Mr. Balgos, violates the
Constitution of the Philippines. As for the identity of the so-
called "enemies of the people" who are supposed to be violating
the Constitution, let this report serve as mirror for Mr. Balgos
and his followers in the Communist Party to look into.
The "democratic liberties guaranteed" by the Constitution
about which Mr. Balgos talks with so much longing, have been
so violently abused by the Communist Party that the officials of
this government cannot much longer tolerate the existence of


this organization without sharing in the end the responsibility
for all the crimes perpetrated by the Party's ideas and its
leaders in Central Luzon and elsewhere in the country from
the days of the Japanese occupation up to the present time.
As for the threat of Mr. Balgos that the Communist Party
"will not hesitate to sink underground" should the present gov-
ernment outlaw it, the Party has been remaining underground
since the very day of its organization on November 7, 1930.
The Party's own propaganda literature prove that it cannot
become a legal organization until it has gained control of the
Government. The very nature of its philosophy drives the
Party underground because its arguments cannot stand the
light of intelligent investigation. Your Committee finds that
the few individuals about whom evidence of membership have
been shown are of doubtful loyalty to the Communist Party
itself. Of course these people, by signing the Communist Party
loyalty oath, have at the same time signified their doubtful
loyalty to this nation. But your Committee is convinced that
if the falsity of the Communist philosophy and the corruption
of its practices are brought in sharp focus to the attention of
these people—and we will do this when we invite them to our
subsequent hearings—they may yet volunteer to get out of
the Party, if they are not already out at this writing. Evidence
of resignation from the Party have already been brought to
our attention; and we aim through reason to complete the disin-
tegration in the Party's membership until Mr. Balgos himself
is convinced that the teachings of Marx, Engels, Lenin and
Stalin are wrong.
Aside from the unconstitutionality of the principles of the
Communist Party, the evidence of its illegality is even much
more convincing. The specific statement of Mr. Balgos regard-
ing his belief that the Party is at present in legal existence
reads as follows:
. "In 1932, due to the militant struggle of the peasants and
workers led by our Party, the Government brought suit
against its leaders, and the Philippine Supreme Court im-
prisoned its leaders and outlawed the Party, forcing the
Party to continue leading the struggle of the toiling masses
from an underground existence. The underground move-
ment of the Party increased its strength and the democratic
mass movement of the workers and peasants continued to
grow by leaps and hounds. In 1937, the then President
Quezon extended absolute pardon to the imprisoned leaders,
and the Communist Party under a revised constitution as-
sumed legal existence once more."


In the opinion of your Committee, viewed in the light of legal
evidence, these claims of Mr. Balgos cannot hold water. The
dispositive part of the Supreme Court decision in People vs.
Crisanto Evangelista, et al (57 Phil. 379), dated October 26,
1932, reads as follows:
"Under the laws of the Philippine Islands, the association
formed by the appellants is clearly illegal. Article 188 of
the Penal Code, as substituted by article 24 of the Royal
Decree of September 12, 1897 (Alcubilla, Diccionario de Ad-
ministration, Apendice de 1897, p. 454), says that illegal
associations are those the object of which is against public
morals, to commit some crime, or to attack the fundamental
basis of the social order or alter the regularity of its func-
tions. Now, according to the appellant Crisanto Evangelista
and the constitution and by-laws of the Communist Party
of the Philippines, the purpose of the Party is to incite class
struggle and to overthrow the present government by peace-
ful means or by armed revolution; therefore the purpose of
the party is to alter the social order and to commit the crimes
of rebellion and sedition. An association having such an
object must necessarily be illegal . . . The report submitted
by Secretary Hughes to the Senate of the United States, as
well as that made by Hamilton Fish, after an investigation
of communism leads to the same conclusion, namely, that
force and violence are inseparable from communist programs."
Your Committee has already refuted the philosophy of Com-
munism. We have shown that its interpretation of reality is
ridiculous; that it is atheistic; that its theories and practices
do not measure up to the demands of true science; that its
economic and social systems are absurd and inhuman; and that
its political doctrine is absolutely incompatible with human
dignity and individual liberty.
The evidence uncovered by your Committee prove, and Mr.
Balgos himself confirmed, that these ideas of Communism are
being propagated and implemented in this country. The overt
activities of one of its mass organizations, the Hukbalahap, led
by one of its members, Luis M. Taruc, are even today defying
the Government and seeking its overthrow by armed force and
violence.
Where then is the legality of the Communist Party when
by its mere reconstitution it had violated the decision of the
Supreme Court? Where is its legality when its present depre-
dations surpass to a far greater magnitude the activities of its
members and officers which the Supreme Court condemned in
1932?


The law on illegal association is still in the statute books.
The chain of evidence presented to us by the different intel-
ligence and security agencies of the Government speak of crimes
committed against the State (sedition, rebellion); crimes against
the family institution (illegal marriages); crimes against per-
sons (murder, kidnapping); crimes against chastity (rape)
all done and will continue to be done unless this government
and its people succeed in wiping out the influence of Commun-
ism and the Communist Party completely—done in the name
of the so-called "liberation" of the so-called "working class"
as defined by Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin, and pursued by
the misguided few believers in the ideology under the tactical
leadership of local Communist Party members. Lenin himself,
in his book "Religion," defined the Communist standard of
morality, thus:
"In what sense do we deny ethics, morals?
"In the sense in which they are preached by the bour-
geoisie, which deduce these morals from god's command-
ments. Of course, we say that we do not believe in god.
We know perfectly well that the clergy, the landlords, and
the bourgeoisie all claimed to speak in the name of god, in
order to protect their own interests as exploiters. Or, instead
of deducing their ethics from the commandments of morality,
from the commandments of god, they deduced them from
idealistic or semi-idealistic phrases which in substance were
always very similar to divine commandments.
"We deny all morality taken from superhuman or non-
class conceptions. We say that this is a deception, a swindle,
a befogging of the minds of the workers and peasants in the
interests of the landlords and capitalists.
"We say that our morality is wholly subordinated to the
interests of the class-struggle of the proletariat. We deduce
our morality from the facts and needs of the class-struggle
of the proletariat.
"The old society was based on the oppression of all the
workers and peasants by the landlords and capitalists. We
had to destroy this society. We had to overthrow these
landowners and capitalists. But to do this, organization was
necessary. God could not create such organization."
With such perverted conception of morality, is there still
any question as to why in areas where Communists gained
commanding influence lawlessness is rampant? Confirmed
figures submitted by the Philippine Constabulary alone, from
January 1948 to January 1949, of atrocities committed by the
Communist-led Huks in their harassing activities speak so loud


Murder
51
Rape
4
Kidnapping
47
Arson
3
Robbery
47
Raids, attacks on PC de-
Ambuscade
31
tachments, Government
buildings
7
all claims of legality by Mr. Balgos and the Communist Party
are smashed to a thousand bits. The figures run:
A total of 190 crimes committed in a little over one year
alone. Add to this the crimes committed by the Communist
Party or its stooges from 1942 in the guise of anti-Japanism up
to 1947, whose number are still being determined, and the re-
sulting crystallization cannot fail to stagger even the most
unconcerned fence sitter.
If such Communist-instigated lawlessness do not happen in
Manila or in any other peaceful section of the country, it is
only because the Communists have not been tolerated by the
Government and the people to operate there unchallenged. On
what grounds, then, does Mr. Balgos claim the legality of the
Communist Party? Certainly it cannot be the pardon granted
to Crisanto Evangelista, to Mr. Balgos and other Communist
convicts in 1937.
Mr. Balgos qualified the executive clemency as "absolute
pardon." Granted, for the sake of argument, that President
Quezon really extended the absolute pardon and consented to
the legalization of the Communist Party, Mr. Balgos cannot
invoke the protection of the law, because then the presidential
act was unconstitutional, since under the principle of the sep-
aration of powers, the chief executive cannot reverse the decision
of the Supreme Court.
The hypothesis that President Quezon consented to the legal-
ization of the Communist Party would require the premise that
he must have believed in the efficacy of Communism as an
ideology and way of life for the Filipinos. But did he?
It is unfair to drag the good name of the late illustrious
President Quezon in these investigations, because he can no
longer answer back any imputation that might now be attached
to his official acts while alive. However your Committee did
not rest until it found conclusive evidence that the late President
did not believe in Communism. We found a volume of his
speeches and we will let the man speak for himself, as it were,
from the grave.
From "President Quezon, His Biographical Sketch, Messages
and Speeches," edited by Director Eulogio B. Rodriguez of the
Bureau of Public Libraries:


"I am against communism. I am a firm believer in the
institution of private property."
"Should any one attempt tomorrow to establish a school
for the preaching of communism in the Philippines, our
Government should right away stop it. Should anyone at-
tempt to convert every Filipino into a Red, the Government
should act without loss of time."
"You know, ladies and gentlemen, that I am one of those
who believe that no man has the right to own more land than
he can work. Of course, lam not going to apply that literally
for, if I did, I suppose many of the Filipinos would be run-
ning away from the Philippines; but there is a happy medium.
In this happy medium the purpose of the Government should
be to have as many people owning their land as possible.
No better weapon can be placed on the hands of a country
against Communism than the ownership of land in the hands
of the small man in the district."
Your Committee believes that in these words the name of the
late President Quezon is vindicated from any implication of
belief in Communism.
Mr. Balgos also said in his statement quoted above that the
Communist Party exists under a revised constitution. Your
Committee contends that the revision was superficial and was
done only for tactical expediency. A knowledge of the teach-
ings of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin, which the Party's
preamble admits are their guiding principles, defeats this pre-
tense. "The strictest loyalty to the ideas of Communism," said
Lenin, "must be combined with the ability to make all necessary
practical compromises, to maneuver, to make agreements, zig-
zags, retreats and so on, so as to accelerate the coming to
power . . ." The constitution and by-laws presented to us
by Mr. Balgos during our hearing of his testimony on December
17, 1948, was a vain attempt at euphemism. Sometime perhaps
your Committee will also refute every single concept contained
in this Communist Party document and expose further the
Party's showing strained efforts at covering its false philosophy,
undemocratic practices, and illegality.
Contrary to the claim of Mr. Balgos, in the same quotation
above, the outlawing of the Communist Party did not increase
its strength. It was the outbreak of the Second World War
and the Japanese occupation that provided the rare opportunity
not only to obtain moral and material support from the un-
suspecting people of Central Luzon, but also to obtain the much
coveted firearms for which the Communists have been agitating
even long before the war.


One other credible reason why the Communist Party gained
false strength was the alliance of the United States, of which
the Philippines was still a political adjunct, with the Soviet
Union during the war. The international political situation
during, and a few years before, that period can be considered
as a reasonable argument for the tolerance with which the
Government took the activities of the Communist Party. But
tolerance did not mean consent; and neither the Treaty of
Recognition between the United States and the Soviet Union
on November 16, 1933, nor in any other agreement in which
the two powers were signatories before the grant of Philippine
independence on July 4, 1946; nor in the Charter of the United
Nations to which the Philippines also subscribed, was there
any provision that the right of self-determination was denied
this country. The Constitution of the Philippines recognizes
all institutions and all existing laws at the time of its adop-
tion, including the law on illegal association, until repealed or
amended by the legislature of the Philippines. And the mood
of this Congress in the light of current international and local
events does not favor an amendment, much less a repeal of that
law, in favor of the Communist Party.
It may be argued, if we were to insist on the maintenance
of the majesty of the law, that no government official had the
right to overlook the decision of the Supreme Court when once
again the Communist Party was reconstituted in 1938. But
the pressure of the fast developing war atmosphere, in which
the Soviet Union was in a way playing a major role in the
defense of our own democratic way of life against the on-
slaughts of fascist Germany and Japan, proved too much to
tackle for any official intent on prosecuting the Communists.
Washington itself was forced to appease the Soviets through
the lend lease program and the promise of a Second Front in
Europe; and it took the evidence of the "Iron Curtain" and
the clear expansionist program of the Soviet Union after the
war to convince the United States to appropriate billions of
dollars for foreign aid against Communism, and to start the
prosecution of its top Communist leaders for conspiracy to
overthrow the government of America by force and violence.
And here, it took the failure of negotiations conducted by two
presidents of the Philippines with the dissidents —first by the
late President Roxas and later by President Quirino when he
extended amnesty to them, and the actual outbreak of wide-
spread lawlessness—before the Government could be forced to


mobilize its military power to try to suppress the Communist-
led and Communist-inspired Huks.
But by far the most fundamental reason why the Communist
movement was able to gain adherents and commit crimes in this
country was the existence of a general lack of knowledge as to
what is the true nature, aims and methods of Communism and
the Communist Party. Before your Committee started its in-
vestigations there was never any previous attempt by any of
the executive agencies of the government to thoroughly refute
the basic principles of Communism and the Communist Party.
With the result that no matter how much evidence had been
compiled to prove the crimes committed under the auspices of
this foreign organization, no prosecution could easily be insti-
tuted against its known directors and members. Heretofore
the arguments of Communism and the Communist Party seemed
logical and humane enough even though they advocated force
and violence. According to some administrative officials, the
Supreme Court decision was not enough to condemn the Com-
munist Party as cleverly propagandized; for even that august
body failed to refute the basic claims of Communism when it
outlawed the party in 1932. Add to this the growth and devel-
opment of a Marxist mentality among some of our vocal in-
tellectuals, as well as the skillful manipulations by Communist
leaders and their fellow travelers of national and local issues
to suit the party line and you have the complete picture of why
the Communist Party has been able to exist in seeming legality.
All these circumstances contributed to the unnatural growth
of the influence of the Communist Party. But certainly it was
not the act of outlawing the Party that gave it the semblance
of the power or the spell it now holds over some of our intel-
lectuals and laborers, any more than saying that the outlawing
of crimes is responsible for any increase in criminality.
V. WHAT IS COMMUNISM AND WHAT ARE
UN-FILIPINO ACTIVITIES?
Having refuted the basic principles and some of the stock
arguments of Communism and the Communist Party, your
Committee will now bring up the previous questions and answer
them.
QUESTION. What is Communism and what are un-Filipino
activities?
ANSWER. Communism is a system of thought or set of ideas
designed or formulated by Karl Marx after making an arbitrary


personal interpretation of nature and society for the purpose of
determinedly and violently changing the nature of mankind
and abolishing all existing relationship in human society.
Communism is oftentimes called Marxism, which means that
it is the ideology invented by Karl Marx.
Communism is sometimes called Leninism, which means that
it is the body of strategies and tactics taught by Nicholai
Lenin for the purpose of implementing or putting into practice
the teachings of Marxism.
Communism is also known as Stalinism, which means that
it is the body of strategies and tactics taught by Joseph Stalin
for the purpose of implementing or putting into practice the
combined teachings of Marxism and Leninism. This is the
more popular and generally accepted meaning of Communism,
which is named after the Dictator of Soviet Russia, Joseph
Stalin.
Communism has been called Trotskyism, after Leon Trotsky,
one of the original instigators of the Russian Revolution in
1917, who later became the bitterest enemy and rival of Stalin
in the fight for the control of the Soviet Government and the
international Communist movement. Trotskyism is simply an-
other set of strategies and tactics taught by Leon Trotsky for
the purpose of implementing or putting into practice what
he believed to be the combined teachings of Marxism and Le-
ninism. There is evidence of this type of Communism, but
it is comparatively very much weaker than Stalinism.
In the Philippines Communism is a Stalinist movement
spearheaded by a Communist Party seeking to gain political,
social, economic and cultural ascendancy for the purpose of
overthrowing the existing form and substance of democratic
government and the free social order by means of propaganda
and the use of armed force and violence.
The Communist Party is the organizational instrument for
the implementation of the political, social, economic and cultural
aims of Stalinism.
It is un-Filipino to adhere to, believe in, or aid one way or
another in the promotional propaganda of the ideas of Com-
munism. It is un-Filipino to be a member in, or to be a fellow
traveler of, the Communist Party. Such an un-Filipino indi-
vidual remains a citizen, but he stands indicted of illegal as-
sociation.
Communism and the Communist Party do not believe in, nor
do they explain why they deny the existence of, a Prime Mover


or God that guides or determines the destiny of mankind and
all creation.
It is un-Filipino not to believe in God. Such an un-Filipino
individual remains a citizen, but he stands accused of contempt
against the clear spiritual conscience of the whole Filipino
people as embodied in their Constitution.
Communism and the Communist Party do not believe in the
superiority of mind over matter, nor do they explain why
matter is superior to mind.
It is un-Filipino not to believe in the superiority of mind to
matter. Such an un-Filipino individual remains a citizen but
he stands as a millstone at the foot of Filipino intellectual
progress.
Communism and the Communist Party view history as the
history of class struggles and are actively creating social dis-
orders, confusion and chaos, obstructing national progress,
producing shortages of food and other necessities, fostering
widespread discontent and driving the masses to a state of
desperation for the purpose of bringing about a class war.
It is un-Filipino to view history in this manner and aid one
way or another in the promotion of class war in this country.
Such an un-Filipino individual remains a citizen, but he stands
indicted of conspiracy to commit fratricide.
Communism and the Communist Party view the State or the
Government as the instrument of oppression by a ruling class.
It is un-Filipino to view the Government as an instrument
of class oppression and aid one way or another in the spread
of this false belief. Such an un-Filipino individual remains
a citizen, but he stands indicted of slander against the State.
Communism and the Communist Party do not respect religion.
It is un-Filipino not to respect religion and aid one way or
another in promotion of atheism. Such an un-Filipino in-
dividual remains a citizen, but he stands indicted of violating
the freedom of worship.
Communism and the Communist Party do not believe in
morality. They consider right anything that promotes the
class struggle, including the commission of all crimes punish-
able under our existing laws and statutes.
It is un-Filipino not to believe in morality and aid one way
or another in the commission of crimes. Such an un-Filipino
individual remains a citizen, but he stands indicted of crimes
not only against the race but also crimes against humanity
itself.


Communism and the Communist Party justify revolution only
when it is undertaken to overthrow the existing democratic
form and substance of our society.
It is un-Filipino to aid one way or another in depying the
Filipinos the right to wage a revolution against any form of
oppression, including Communist oppression. Such an un-Fili-
pino individual remains a citizen, but he stands indicted of
stifling the nation's natural and traditional revolutionary
instinct.
Communism and the Communist Party believe in, and are
creating all sorts of trouble to enable them to arrive at, a
classless society.
It is un-Filipino to belive in, and aid in the hopeless attain-
ment of, a classless society. Social classes are natural human
groupings; and if genocide is a crime against humanity, then
classcide can be nothing less.
Fascism and Naziism are concepts and practices which, like
Communism, constitute the bases of un-Filipino activities.
Any alien who adheres to, or aids in the promotion of any
or all of these un-Filipino ideas and activities, deserves to be
deported. Existing laws and precedents decree this.
VI. WHY DOES THE PHILIPPINES OPPOSE COMMUNISM?
QUESTION. Why does the Philippines disapprove of Com-
munism and any other un-Filipino activities?
ANSWER. Because Communism and any other un-Filipino ac-
tivities violate the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of
the Philippines.
Because Communism and any other un-Filipino activities
seek to destroy the freedom of worship of the Filipinos.
Because Communism and any other un-Filipino activities
seek to deny the Filipino his freedom of the press.
Because Communism and any other un-Filipino activities
seek to deprive the Filipino his freedom of assemblage.
Because Communism and any other un-Filipino activities
seek to deny the Filipino his right to work in such occupation
as his experience, training, and qualifications may enable him
to secure and to hold.
Because Communism and any other un-Filipino activities
seek to deny the Filipino his freedom to enjoy the fruits of his
work, which means the protection of property rights.
Because Communism and any other un-Filipino activities
seek to deny the Filipino his right to pursue his happiness with


the implication that he does not harm or injure others in the
pursuit of this happiness.
VII. WHO ARE THE COMMUNISTS IN THE PHILIPPINES?
QUESTION. Who are the Communists in the Philippines
and other un-Filipino individuals and groups?
ANSWER. When the Supreme Court outlawed the Communist
Party in 1932 the individuals who admitted membership in
that organization were convicted of illegal association. Mem-
bership in the Communist Party, therefore, has been established
legally as a basis for the determination as to who are Com-
munists. Under this definition membership in the Party has
become a felony and, in the opinion of your Committee, the
State has only to prove an individual to be a member to acquire
conviction.
Communist authorities, including Lenin, have defined mem-
bership in the Communist Party variously as "Anyone is a
member of the Party who participates in the organization of
the party;" or "Anyone working under the supervision of the
party is a member of the party."
It is a practice of the Communist Party to issue membership
cards and that is as good an evidence as any of membership
in the Communist Party. Public admission of membership is
also admissible as evidence of membership, although the indi-
vidual may later deny the fact when brought before the court.
There are only two individuals so far whose membership in
the Communist Party has been conclusively established by your
Committee. These are Mr. Balgos and Mr. Taruc. With their
publicly demonstrated courage and frankness, the Committee
is convinced that these gentlemen will not deny membership
before any court of law. Documentary evidence showing their
membership in the party appear also to be conclusive.
From documents of the Communist Party itself five other in-
dividuals are also shown to be officials of the Communist Party.
Eighty-nine individuals are shown to have signed the Com-
munist loyalty oath in Tagalog, appealing not to be expelled
from the Communist Party. Translated to English this doc-
ument reads as follows:
"SWORN PLEDGE
"In the name of the Communist Party in the Philippines,
affiliate of the Communist Party in the world (Communist
International), which is the party of the greatest teachers
of the workers, namely, Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin, I


faithfully and voluntarily swear that I will accomplish all
the duties of a party member. I will unconditionally obey
the rules of the Communist International and the program
and regulations of the Communist Party in the Philippines
and all its organs authorized to render decision. I also
promise to observe Democratic Centralism. I will attend
all meetings of the organ or branch to which I belong and
help in the solution of problems under consideration, and
similarly I also swear to strive and learn the teachings of
Marxism-Leninism and Stalinism, and in line with this I
will attend the study groups and read the publications of the
party. I also swear to strive to wipe out my bad habits
that go counter to Filipino culture and banish from my mind
all foreign ideas or capitalist thoughts through relentless
self-criticism. And I also swear that I will not cease helping
the masses to which I belong until the high desire of the
Party to establish a Socialist society in the Philippines
through the dictatorship of the proletariat has been attained.
By these I plead that I be not expelled from membership in
this Party.
"Because of this I have signed my name and alias, before
the representatives of the high organ, today, the 24th of
July, 1945."
This document appears to be a prescribed form issued by the
Communist Party and signed on various dates. Photostatic
copies were presented to the Committee as exhibits in support
of testimonies of officials of the Philippine Constabulary.
Since membership in the Communist Party has already been
established as a felony, and since this Committee is not a pros-
ecuting agency of the Government, we are suspending publica-
tion of the names of the other known officials and members of
the Communist Party in deference to any criminal action which
the proper administrative authorities may take against the in-
dividuals concerned on the strength of these evidences.
VIII. REMEDIAL RECOMMENDATIONS
QUESTION. How can the Filipinos prevent the Commu-
nists and other subversive individuals and groups from fur-
ther wreaking havoc to their national life and bringing about
the disruption of their international relations?
ANSWER. The State of the Nation—What Congress May
Do. —We recommend that the Special Committee on Un-Filipino
Activities (CUFA) be made a standing committee of the House
of Representatives to serve as a standing and active challenge
to the ideas of Communism and the Communist Party and any


other subversive and un-Filipino ideology that undermines or
seeks to undermine the fundamental basis of our Republic.
We recommend also that the next budget for the House of
Representatives provide for the outlay of PIOO,OOO for the use
of this Committee in (1) continuing its investigation of the
activities of the Communist Party and its various fronts and
transmission belt organizations; (2) completing the compilation
and organization of all available information and evidence con-
cerning the philosophy and activities of Communism and the
Communist Party and any other subversive and un-Filipino
ideology that may be found to be in existence; (3) publishing
analysis and refutations of Communist and other un-Filipino
propaganda; (4) preparing a standard textbook for use in the
proper combative teaching of Communism and other totalitarian
ideologies in the schools; (5) studying security and intelligence
legislations; and (6) conducting nationwide lectures and open
forums on the true nature, aims and methods of Communism
and any other already known totalitarian and un-Filipino
ideologies.
As presently manned your Committee is in a position to meet
limited engagements for lectures and open forums on the sub-
ject of Communism and the activities of the Communist Party.
The Committee will continue to welcome, as it has welcomed
since the very beginning of its function, consultations with in-
dividuals or groups who come to us for advise on how to deal
with Communism and the activities of the Communist Party.
ANSWER. The State of the Nation—What the Administration
May Do. —The Administration must soon prosecute the Com-
munists whose membership in the Communist Party can be
conclusively established. This is a step in the solution of the
peace and order problem in this country which, in our opinion,
cannot much longer be deferred.
In prosecuting the known Communists, we believe that the
State will not be taking a more drastic measure than what it
has already been forced to do in ordering the armed campaigns
against the Communist-led dissidents in central and southern
Luzon. On the other hand, it will be giving proof of its un-
assailable integrity by bringing to justice not only those whom
it believes commit overt acts of force and violence against its
stability, but also those whom it can prove to be plotting and
conspiring towards the same end. The deterrent effect of this
executive action may likewise induce those who are of doubtful


conviction but continue to adhere to the Communist Party and
severe their connections completely.
There is a widespread mistaken belief that the Communist
Party can operate in this country as a legal organization. This
must be corrected immediately now by a restatement of judicial
decision.
The opinion of this Committee or of Congress with respect
to the illegality of the Communist Party will not, of course,
necessarily hold true upon the other two branches of the Gov-
ernment, the executive and the judiciary. But inasmuch as
this organization has existed since 1938 with a semblance of
legality apparently with executive tolerance, and since the
Supreme Court is the final authority for the interpretation of
our laws, the proper course must now be taken to enable that
august body to have a say once more on the legality or illegality
of the Communist Party.
As your Committee sees it, the problem of the nation with
respect to the Communist Party is no longer whether to outlaw
it or not, since that has already been judicially decided once;
but whether a group of individuals may disregard a decision of
the Supreme Court and get away with it. We submit that
the issue is much more fundamental than whether this country
is to outlaw the Communist Party or not. It is whether the
constitutional processes may be violated with impunity.
ANSWER. The State of the Nation—What the Department of
Labor May Do. —While it has been an established policy of the
Deparment of Labor not to recognize company-inspired labor
unions, it is the opinion of your Committee that the Depart-
ment may also consider it as a matter of policy not to recognize
Communist-inspired and Communist-led labor unions. We be-
lieve that while the Supreme Court did not outlaw Communism
as an idea when it outlawed the Communist Party as an organ-
ization, it is within the spirit of the decision that our workers
be protected from being exploited by individuals who use the
issues of labor to create labor disputes and promote industrial
conflicts under the existing economic arrangements as a means
of advancing the program of Communism and the Communist
Party. Your Committee will make specific recommendations
after we have completed our investigation into the activities
of Communists inside the labor unions. In the meantime, it
is suggested that the Department of Labor also conduct its
own research and investigation of the true nature, aims and
methods of Communism and the Communist Party.


ANSWER. The State of the Nation —What the Labor Unions
May Do. —Since labor unions, like any orderly and legitimate
association, are guided by rules and regulations, it is an act
of patriotism and the protection of their own individual mem-
bers, for them to include in their constitution and by-laws a
provision repudiating the leadership of Communists and the
teachings of Communism with respect to the aims and function
of labor unions. Your Committee will make specific exposition
of Communist leadership and activities in labor unions when
we have completed our investigation in this respect. In the
meantime it is also suggested that the labor unions themselves
conduct their own research and investigation of the true nature,
aims and methods of Communism and the Communist Party for
their own use in steering themselves from the path of the Com-
munist movement.
ANSWER. The State of the Nation—What Management May
Do. —Since management is the inseparable partner of labor it
too must learn the true nature, aims and methods of Commu-
nism and the Communist Party in order that it may be able
to steer its function from veering into the hands of the Com-
munists. As a legal partner in industry management may
refuse to deal with any labor union that it knows to be led or
inspired by Communism or members of the Communist Party.
Your Committee considers it axiomatic that in this free enter-
prise society of ours management must promote the interests
of its laborers on the same premise that it promotes its own,
not only in matters of wages and working conditions, but also
in human treatment, that we feel it unnecessary to make any
recommendation in this respect. Suffice to say that the prob-
lems of labor and management belong to them first, and to
their government second, and no ideology or movement that
is alien to their common interest must be permitted to intervene
under any circumstances.
ANSWER. The State of the Nation—What the Various Intel-
ligence Agencies of the Government May Do. —lt is indispen-
sable that the various intelligence agencies of the Government,
both local and national, learn the true nature, aims and methods
of Communism and the Communist Party or any other sub-
versive and un-Filipino ideology or organization that may be
found to be in existence in this country, either of local or of
foreign instigation. The G-2, AFP; the G-2, PC; the NBI,
the Manila Police Department and any other local or national
police intelligence and security unit must be able to trace the


case history of every subversive individual or organization
that has come to their knowledge and be prepared to take
immediate or cautious action to insure the national and local
security. They should master the techniques of subversive
propaganda and become experts in their identification, analysis,
collection and collation. Remember that every known Com-
munist is a potential spy, saboteur, traitor and puppet. Until
these individuals have made public their change of ideology
and demonstrated by deeds their loyalty to the ideals and ways
of our free society, they are not to be ignored, or to be entrusted
with any strategic position, either public or private.
The tasks of these intelligence agencies are made doubtly
difficult by the democratic demands of our humane society.
They should maintain their practice of fairly treating subver-
sive individuals. They must continue to reconcile the tech-
niques of efficient surveillance and the ethics of human relation-
ship. On the other hand, Congress should be responsive and
disposed to study carefully and grant every recommendation
which these agencies may make to promote their usefulness.
ANSWER. The State of the Nation—What the Armed Forces
of the Republic May Do. —The stability of the Government and
the maintenance of actual peace and order in the areas affected
by the harrassing activities of the Communist-led dissidents are
dependent upon the ability of the armed forces, both civilian
and military, to render ineffective their clandestine striking
power. The armed campaign of the Government should be
placed on the alert at all times until the last vestige of armed
resistance to constitutional authority has been wiped out. Our
goal should be to stop, in the shortest time possible, armed
hostilities with the least loss in life and property, considering
that combatants on either side are Filipinos and the destruc-
tions inflicted are on Filipino properties. Surrender rather
than annihilation should at all times be called upon the dissi-
dents, convincing them in every conceivable way about the fu-
tility and uselessness of the Communist cause for which they
are defying this government.
ANSWER. The State of the Nation—What the President's
Action Committee on Social Amelioration (PACSA) May Do.—
The PACSA should also strive to learn the true nature, aims
and methods of Communism and the Communist Party and
provide lecturers and writers who will bring to the people
whom it is helping, specially in central and southern Luzon
where Communist propaganda has been systematically and ex-


tensively carried out for years, the truth about the Government's
emergency aid campaign. They must be made to realize that
the Government cannot help them forever economically, con-
trary to the propaganda of the Communists that it is the duty
of the Government to feed and cloth them all the time. They
must be made to depend on self-reliance and self-industry, and
it seems that the best way to drive this point to them is to
refute Communism's claim that the individual is the economic
responsibility solely of society.
Already the Communists and their sympathizers are calling
the PACSA's activities as mere panacea to fool the people into
believing that the existing economic system can meet their
needs. They consider it the vain attempt of the so-called ruling
classes to buttress their tottering hold on the so-called oppressed
classes.
These are vicious propaganda and they have a way of clinging
to the senses. Unless they are roundly refuted, your Commit-
tee feels that no amount of spending on social amelioration will
restore the normal faith and confidence of the people in their
Government which is being continually alienated by Communist
propaganda.
ANSWER. The State of the Nation —What the Bureau of
Immigration May Do. —Since Communist activities or leanings
have been established as grounds for the determination of who
are undesirable aliens, the Bureau of Immigration should thor-
oughly study the true nature, aims and methods of Commu-
nism and the Communist Party This is indispensable in the
investigation of prospective immigrants; and it is suggested
that sworn statements to the effect that immigrants are not
Communists or believers in Communism should be made part of
the regular immigration forms.
ANSWER. The State of the Nation—What the Bureau of Cus-
toms and the Bureau of Posts May Do. —These offices should
also master the true nature, aims and methods of Communism
and the Communist Party as necessary in the determination
and detection of what are prohibited literature and unmailable
matters. The Committee suggests that all confiscated Com-
munist and other subversive and un-Filipino propaganda liter-
ature be not condemned or destroyed, but should be impounded
and protected as reference for the CUFA and the intelligence
and security agencies of the executive department. The atten-
tion of the public must as often as possible be called to the
presence and nature of these propaganda materials in order that


the people may be aided in the identification of similar articles
that might have entered the country without passing customs
or postal inspections.
ANSWER. The State of the Nation—What the Schools May
Do. —A course providing for the thorough critical study of the
invented fundamental philosophy, theories and practices of
Communism and the Communist Party, together with a direct
comparison with the philosophical, theoretical and practical
views of our natural system of society should be made part of
the curriculum in our educational system. Your Committee
suggests to the Department of Education, the Joint Educational
Committee of Congress, and other educational authorities both
public and private, the serious consideration of this aspect of
our educational problem.
The infiltration of the ideas of Communism and the Com-
munist Party in our schools can no longer be ignored. The
present practice of treating the subject in a piecemeal and
purely academic manner in our textbooks and other reading
matters only play into the hands of the movement. Half-hearted
discussion of Communism before the minds of our youth only
make them resist it half-heartedly, which is as good as no
resistance at all.
In your Committee's opinion, to know Communism completely
is to fight Communism. If we want to preserve our democratic
educational system our educators should now be worrying about
the types of textbooks that should be used as clinical instruments
in draining out whatever influence Communism has left in the
minds of our students.
As earlier stated in this report, the Committee on Un-Filipino
Activities itself will try to prepare a standard textbook, from
which may be drawn adaptations for the various classes from
the grades to the university. But we urgently suggest that our
educators themselves make similar efforts since this Committee
is not after all the ultimate authority in the determination and
implementation of our national educational policy.
One other aspect of the Communist problem affecting the
schools is the existence of student organizations ostensibly
promoting the interest of the students but primarily serving
as fronts to advance the program of Communism and the Com-
munist Party among youth. Your Committee is now looking
into this with a view to reporting more specifically as to its
nature, leadership and extent. But school authorities should
also be on the alert for such organizations and take the neces-


sary precautionary measures without violating the freedom of
association.
ANSWER. The State of the Nation—What Our Professionals
and Their Organizations May Do. —Our professionals are the
cream of the country's intellectual manpower. The Committee
regrets to inform the House and the nation that this field has
not been free from Communist infiltration. We are not now
going to make definite revelations about how it happened or how
far it has gone, but we do make an earnest appeal that our pro-
fessionals themselves make a thorough study of the true nature,
aims and methods of Communism and the Communist Party.
It is a fact that Communism and the Communist Party have
made converts to their views in practically all professions, in-
cluding lawyers, doctors, newspapermen, and other writers.
Scientists, philosophers, artists, and even the clergy have not
been free from the seductive appeal of the ideology and the
clever maneuverings of its disciples.
ANSWER. The State of the Nation—What the Political Parties
May Do. —Avoid any form of political coalition with the Com-
munist Party or its members. Avoid immitating their slogans
or grafting their political principles and theories. Avoid plac-
ing members of the Communist Party or their sympathizers in
strategic political or administrative positions. Political plat-
forms should include outright repudiation of Communism and
the practices of the Communist Party. Remember that the
Communist Party is a foreign conspiracy masked as a political
party.
ANSWER. The State of the Nation—What Anyone May Do.—
Avoid hysteria. Be firm and calm in discussing Communism
and the Communist Party and be sure to ask all the questions
you can think of. Don't give up the discussion until you are
completely satisfied with the answers. Keep your feet on the
ground. Hold faith in yourself, in your family, in your em-
ployer, in your Government, in the whole existing social order
until you yourself, after a thorough study of its philosophy,
theories and practices, are convinced that they do not deserve
such faith. If you have no time or are too lazy to analyze
the fundamental basis of your faith in yourself and in society,
hold that faith anyway and throw in the air all strange theories
and crackpot ideas that come your way. But be sure the other
fellow who catches those strange theories and crackpot ideas
do not fool too many other followers, or acquire such power as
to enable him and his fellow converts to impose themselves on


you. Consult the CUFA on any ideological, subversive or un-
Filipino problem which you cannot solve yourself.
ANSWER. The State of Foreign Relations—ln Relation to the
United States of America. —Communism and the Communist
Party have marked the United States of America as the only
greatest obstacle in the attainment of their program of world
domination. Viewed in the light of international politics Amer-
ica looms as the rallying point of all free nations that have
not yet been dragged, either by intrigues or by force of arms,
into the orbit of the Soviet Union. For this reason America is
being fought, maligned and slandered, in every corner of the
world wherever Communists are in existence.
In this country the few Communists and their sympathizers
have cooked up every conceivable issue against America. They
call her an "imperialist/' "fascist," "warmonger," "monopolist,"
and in this caboodle they throw in as evidence of American
domination, every sign of American culture. These, of course,
are all lies; for this country would not have anything American
here unless we know it will do us good, in the same manner
that we do not want anything Communist here because we know
it will do us nothing good.
Attacks against the diplomatic, economic, social and military
relations between this country and United States have been
chanted over and over again by the Communists and their
friends to throw off balance the cordial ties that have existed
before and after the attainment of our political independence.
Repeal of the Bell Trade Act and the abrogation of the mutual
military assistance agreement have been vociferously demanded
by Communists and their fellow travelers from either side of
the Pacific.
What seems to be the proper approach in attacking these
Communist propaganda would be to tell them frankly and in
unmistakable terms, that the Communists and their fellow
travelers, believers as they are in an ideology and way of life
that are totally and completely alien to the ideology and way of
life of this nation, have no business meddling in the affairs of
the two countries. Whatever new relations, whatever changes
that may be brought about in those relations, between the Phil-
ippine Republic and the United States of America, will be made
in their own good time and with the knowledge and consent of
the two peoples, regardless of the prodding and teasing and
gratuitous clamoring of Communists and their friends.


ANSWER. The State of Foreign Relations—ln Relation to the
Soviet Union. —The Philippine Republic has not extended formal
recognition of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and vice
versa. No formal diplomatic or consular relations subsist be-
tween the two countries. Informal commercial transactions,
however, in the barest minimum has been going on even before
the war.
There has been no evidence of any cultural exchange between
the two countries, and although our country has been flooded
with Communist propaganda, we have never had any way of
showing the Russian people how we think and live here.
Compared in size and military power with Soviet Russia, the
Philippines is very small and very weak indeed. Armed war
cannot possibly develop between the two nations alone to the
advantage of either or both. But we must admit that an un-
declared international ideological war has been going on since
1917, a "cold war" that has been ignited and carried on con-
sistently and aggressively by Communism and the world Com-
munist Parties; and when the Republic of the Philippines was
born on July 4, 1946, the young State found itself tied by
nature, tradition, culture and common sense, to other nations
opposed to this canned philosophy and its inhuman practices.
Fortunately the battle of ideas does not call for size or military
power—not necessarily we mean—for one to win. Right now
the delegation of the Republic in the United Nations, headed
by our own Carlos P. Romulo, is keeping in stride with the best
in the debates of words and wits for the universal recognition
of truth and justice.
Reason is by far the greatest weapon that can be used against
the Soviet Union in this cold war; and so long as our delegation
continues to meet the Soviet delegation across the tables and
in the halls of the United Nations on the plane of reason alone,
your Committee is confident that this little Philippines, to-
gether with the larger and stronger democracies, will un-
doubtedly keep on fighting, and win.
Your Committee hereby recommends full House support for
our delegation in the United Nations, for its capable stand in
maintaining high level friendly intercourse with the Soviet
Union despite the Philippines' uncompromising attitude towards
the ideology and practices of Communism and the Communist
Party.


ANSWER. The State of Foreign Relations —In Relation to
China. —Next to the Soviet Union, China is our largest neighbor
in the mainland of Asia. The battle for Communism there has
long been graduated from "cold" to "hot," and what should be
called a foreign invasion (Communism is foreign to China
from whatever angle of its history you look), has been con-
veniently called a "civil war." China is suffering from the
cruelty of a neglected heartless ideology, and were we to neglect
Communism and the Communist Party in the Philippines a
little longer, this country can become another China in a shorter
time than we care to admit.
The problems that a China governed by the Communists will
present to the Philippines will undoubtedly be more difficult
than the problems Communist Russia represents in matters of
foreign relations. China is figuratively only a stone's throw
from our shores. The victory of the Communists there can-
not but provide a certain degree of inspiration on the part of
our local Communists. In fact this country may expect the
intensification of the Hukbalahap activities and the develop-
ment of political pressures from quarters accessible to the Com-
munists, if not from the Communists themselves.
This aspect of the China problem, however, should not be the
cause for hopeless dismay. So long as the various intelligence
and security agencies of the Government and the CUFA are
alert, nothing will happen that might catch our people unaware.
Internal aggression, rather than external invasion, is the
immediate threat to this Republic from the Communists. And
if the government succeeds in paralyzing the incipient Com-
munist rebellion in Luzon to such an extent as to make a
recurrence within twenty years impossible, then we can be
almost certain that this country will never be invaded by the
Communists.
If the Communists overrun the whole of China, twenty years
will be too short a time for Mao Tse-Tung to consolidate his
forces among a people so conservative and practically twice
as many as the Russians which took Lenin and Stalin thirty
years to subdue superficially with a discipline so taut it might
snap off any time.
Besides twenty years is too long a time for the whole demo-
cratic world, especially America, to determine whether the
Communist China affair is similar to the Japanese China in-
cident in the early 1930'5. This was the prelude to Pearl
Harbor, remember? And by the looks of things Pearl Harbor


appears to be a memory that will never be forgotten in a thou-
sand years.
So your Committee counsels calmness to our people in view-
ing the civil war in China. While not closing our eyes to what
is going on outside the Philippines, let us concentrate more of
our attention to the immediate threat of Communism and the
activities of the Communist Party in our midst and defeat here
Stalin's timetable of world conquest without firing a shot from
the Kremlin. We are confident that diplomatic and consular
problems that might arise if the recognized Government of China
is overthrown in this civil war will be met competently by our
Government.
ANSWER. The State of Foreign Relations —In Relation to
Other Asian Countries. —Flanking the Philippines from the
north and south are Korea and Japan and the Indonesian
Republic and the Netherlands East Indies, respectively. All
these countries have their own Communist problems.
French Indo-China, the Federated Malay States, Siam, Burma
and even India are not free from this menace. All of them
are earmarked for Red domination by infiltration and internal
aggression.
Fortunately the United Nations succeeded in organizing the
Korean Republic south of the 38th parallel. It will take the
government of President Syngman Rhee quite some time to push
back the Red hold out of the whole legitimate territory of
Korea. But as the Koreans themselves are learning the tech-
niques of systematic anti-Communism they will in the end be
sovereign in the whole of their land.
The SCAP in Japan has the local Communists well under
control. Of course Soviet Russia is rooting for her few Jap-
anese Communist wards in the Far Eastern Commission, but
the evidence of her failure here is quite convincing.
The young Indonesian Republic had previously expressed in
stern terms its determination to steer out of Communist in-
trigues when it suppressed Communist armed uprisings in
Madioen and a few other places in Republican territory. It
was unfortunate that in the Dutch Government's desire to grad-
ually return sovereignty into the hands of the natives it had to
resort to "police action." But a solution to this is now being
worked out by the United Nations. And the recent New Delhi
Conference of Southeast Asian nations gave notice that their
respective governments will not countenance any or all methods


of subverting the principle of the right to national self-deter-
mination, either by Communist infiltration and internal revolu-
tion, or by 16th century aggressiveness on the basis of the claim
for the right of discovery and exploration.
Your Committee finds our country's position, in relation to
Communism and the surrounding countries in which it is simi-
larly in existence, clear and uncompromised in any way what-
soever; and we need not submit to Communist pressure inside
our national territory.
ANSWER. The State of Foreign Relations —In Relation to the
United Nations. —From its Charter, the purposes of the United
Nations are:
"1. To maintain international peace and security, and to that
end: to take effective collective measures for the prevention and
removal of threats to the peace, and for the suppression of
acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring
about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of
international disputes or situations which might lead to a breach
of the peace;
"2. To develop friendly relations among nations based on
respect for the principles of equal rights and self-determination
of peoples, and to take other appropriate measures to strengthen
universal peace;
"3. To achieve international co-operation in solving interna-
tional problems of an economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian
character, and in promoting and encouraging respect for human
rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction
as to race, sex, language, or religion; and
"4. To be a center for harmonizing the actions of nations in
the attainment of these common ends."
If it is the purpose of the United Nations, and your Committee
firmly believes that it is the purpose of the United Nations, to
maintain international peace and security, and to that end: to
take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal
of threats to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of ag-
gression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by
peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice
and international law, adjustment or settlement of international
disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace,
THEN the United Nations itself must face the problems posed by
the philosophy and activities of Communism and the Communist
Parties which are in existence in practically all member nations.


If it is the purpose of the United Nations, and your Commit-
tee firmly believes that it is the purpose of the United Nations,
to develop friendly relations among nations based on respect
for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peo-
ples, to take other appropriate measures to strengthen universal
peace; THEN the United Nations itself must face the problems
posed by the activities. of Communism and the Communist
Parties against the principles of equal rights and self-deter-
mination of peoples.
If it is the purpose of the United Nations, and your Committee
firmly believes that it is the purpose of the United Nations, to
achieve international co-operation in solving international prob-
lems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character,
and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race,
sex, language, or religion; THEN the United Nations itself must
face the problems posed by the activities of Communism and
the Communist Parties against the promotion of international
economic, social, cultural or humanitarian co-operation, and
against the encouragement of respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms as enunciated in the teachings of their
thinkers and leaders, notably Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin.
If it is the purpose of the United Nations, and your Com-
mittee firmly believes that it is the purpose of the United
Nations, to be a center for harmonizing the actions of nations
in the attainment of these common ends, THEN the United Na-
tions itself cannot fail to recognize the reality of the obstruc-
tionism of Communism and the Communist Parties and to
take the necessary legal and peaceful means to prevent this
ideology and its instrumentalities from further endangering
the attainment of international and national peace and security.
It is the studied opinion of your Committee that without
breaking Marxism, Leninism and Stalinism the United Nations
itself is no guarantee that non-Communist states will be free
from Communist encroachments.
We believe that another world war is not the argument against
Communism. Indeed war can very well serve as an argument
for Communism. The free nations outside the Iron Curtain
must, of course, prepare themselves against aggression from
without or rebellion from within their respective territories.
But the war on Communism and dictatorship will not end after
any armed conflict. The Red-inspired and Red-instigated con-


vulsions that we see around the Philippines and inside it first
started in the minds of men. We must fight Communism and
the activities of the Communist Parties in the minds of men
if we must see them cease breaching the peace of this country,
and the world.
But for the lack of a frank and vigorous international exposi-
tion as to what are Communism and the Communist Parties
and what destruction and misery they are doing in almost
every country in the world today, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, approved by the General Assembly on Decem-
ber 6, 1948, could become a live and active force against the
doctrines and practices of Communism and the Communist
Parties. Article 2 alone, which proclaims that "Everyone is
entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration,
without distinction of any kind, such as race, color, sex, language,
religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, prop-
erty, birth or other status," could be applied against the doctrines
and practices of Communism and the Communist Parties inso-
far as they discriminate in the granting of individual rights
and freedoms on the basis of political opinion, social origin,
religion, and property. The outlawing of genocide or the ex-
termination of any racial group as a crime against humanity,
which was also previously adopted by the United Nations,
could very well be applied against the doctrines and practices
of Communism and the Communist Parties which advocate
the extermination of individuals belonging to a social class.
In our opinion all these declarations of the United Nations
shall remain impotent so long as they do not openly include
in their denunciations or pronouncements such specific doctrines
and activities as are being propagated and accomplished before
the very eyes of the peoples of the world by the international
Communist movement under the leadership of the Communist
Parties.
America's Truman Doctrine of containing Communism is
fundamentally sound. The Marshall Plan of extending economic
aid to nations threatened by Communism and the Communist
Parties is practical. Both are producing some healthy practical
results.
But the ideological attacks on Communism and the Communist
Parties have been laid too heavily alone in the hands of the
United States, that those nations that are now denouncing
Communism appear to be talking for America when in fact


they owe it to themselves to fight Communism as well regardless
of America's attitude towards this menace.
It is true that the whole democratic world recognizes the
leadership of the United States in the "cold war." But the
United States alone, without initiative from other democratic
governments, can never drive out Communism and the Com-
munist Party in any area where the people's minds, or at least
that of their governments', do not fully grasp the intricacies of
this international conspiracy. The self-help required of any
Marshall Plan beneficiary or any United States aid recipient,
in order that it may in time pay back whatever is required
of it in kind, is its ability to stop popular reliance to Communist
methods which undoubtedly will continue to stand as tempting
alternatives unless Communism as a philosophy is completely
and widely discredited in the areas where help is extended.
You cannot stop the flow of Communist psychological poison
into the minds of men and into their ways of life until an an-
tidote of equal or greater potency is injected into their credu-
lity, not by America alone, but principally by the efforts of
their respective governments.
In the opinion of your Committee the time has come when
the Democracies must force out with the Communists the funda-
mental issues in the "cold war." We recommend that our
delegation urge the United Nations to create a commission to
study, analyze and refute thoroughly the teachings of Marx,
Engels, Lenin and Stalin, along which lines the Soviets and
their satellites have been consistently treading; and through
the respective governments of the member nations, with the
aid of willing private organizations, let the peoples of the
world openly debate and widely discuss these teachings which
are being used as the basis for the determination of their very
existence without their full knowledge and consent. Because
a decisive number of people in the world have been allured
into believing that Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin are right
and thereafter rendered inarticulate by force and terror, the
remaining free, vocal and assertive peoples must now attack
these teachings and prove clearly that they are wrong; and
that the men who uphold these false principles do not deserve
to lead the masses of the world.
Your Committee considers it necessary to make this recom-
mendation, through our delegation, to the United Nations since
the Philippines is not alone in this world. The fortunes of


other nations, specially those surrounding us in Asia, will in
the end vitally affect the stability and safety of our free institu-
tions. We feel that we must share with our neighbors the
burden of defending our mutual freedoms.
We believe that we cannot uproot Communism and the Com-
munist Party in the Philippines without striking at their
foundation. By the same token, we believe that the world
cannot uproot Communism and the Communist Parties without
striking at their foundation. No legislation, or any other kind
of remedial action for that matter, either economic or military,
can hope to become roundly effective unless this government,
and other governments similarly based on human freedom and
individual dignity, are able to help their people know what is
Communism and why they are against it.
President Truman made a succinct contrast of Communism
and Democracy when he said on his inauguration day, January
20:
"Communism is based on the belief that man is so weak
and inadequate that he is unable to govern himself, and
therefore requires the rule of strong masters.
"Democracy is based on the conviction that man has the
moral and intellectual capacity, as well as the inalienable
right, to govern himself with reason and justice.
"Communism subjects the individual to arrest without law-
ful cause, punishment without trial, and forced labor as the
chattel of the State. It decrees what information he shall
receive, what art he shall produce, what leaders he shall
follow, and what thoughts he shall think.
"Democracy maintains that government is established for
the benefit of the individual, and is charged with the respon-
sibility of protecting the rights of the individual and his
freedom in the exercise of his abilities.
"Communism maintains that social wrongs can be corrected
only by violence.
"Democracy has proved that social justice can be achieved
through peaceful change.
"Communism holds that the world is so deeply divided
into opposing classes that war is inevitable.
"Democracy holds that free nations can settle differences
justly and maintain lasting peace.
"These differences between Communism and Democracy
do not concern the United States alone. People everywhere
are coming to realize that what is involved is material well-
being, human dignity, and the right to believe in and worship
God.
"I state these differences, not to draw issues of belief as
such, but because the actions resulting from the Communist
philosophy are a threat to the efforts of free nations to bring
about world recovery and lasting peace."


If now all the free governments of the world can help every
man, woman and child able to clearly distinguish between
right and wrong; between truth and falsehood; between demo-
cratic processes and dictatorial methods; if now all the free
governments of the United Nations can help their people to
analyze and refute intelligently the basic principles and prac-
tices of Communism and the Communist Parties, the interna-
tional drive for peace will have been adjusted and set to its
proper bearing.
In the opinion of your Committee, the "peace" talk which
Premier Stalin recently called upon President Truman could
be the beginning of real world peace if the invitation were
premised on the proposition that Mr. Stalin had decided to dis-
card Marxism and Leninism and his own 'ism as the philosoph-
ical foundation of the Communist State and as the compelling
motives of Soviet expansionism. Otherwise, the call was noth-
ing but a vicious propaganda stunt at the expense of the great
majority of the people of the world who are unable to sound
the depth and subtlety of international Communist strategy.
IX. CONCLUSION
But quite apart from the lack of a frank and consistent
United Nations policy on Communism and the Communist
Parties, your Committee reiterates its urgent recommendation
for the prosecution for illegal association of individuals whose
membership in the Communist Party in the Philippines can be
legally established.
Your Committee once again submits the observation that in
outlawing the Communist Party, the Supreme Court did not
necessarily outlaw Communism as an ideology. Indeed the con-
viction was not intended to coerce the Communists into giving
up their ideology. But it did recognize the fact that for every
offense committed against it, the State must be compensated
with what it considers to be sufficient punishment for the of-
fenders. The State, in our opinion, does not set a limit as to
how many times it may be offended. But it does decree that
every offense that had been legally established must be cor-
respondingly punished.
If, for example, after the known Communist Party officials
and members are once again convicted for illegal association
and have paid all the penalties imposed by the courts they
decide to continue adhering to the Communist Party, they are
of course free to do so; but must be prepared once again,
as men of conviction and whose belief in Communism appear


to be unshakable, to compensate society which, through its
courts, has decreed that membership in the Communist Party
is a punishable offense.
Your Committee repeats that Congress is not confronted
with the issue of whether or not it should pass legislation to
specifically outlaw the Communist Party. The outlawing of
Communism as an ideology is definitely out of the question, since
no one can outlaw an idea or a set of ideas. The flow of these
ideas into this country is moreover already regulated by the im-
migration, customs and postal laws, and we believe that if of-
ficials responsible for the enforcement of these laws are properly
oriented in the detection of subversive and un-Filipino ideologies,
these measures are sufficient to help protect our society in those
quarters.
Your Committee considered amending Article 147 of the
Revised Penal Code to insert membership in the Communist
Party as a specific punishable offense, but we have decided,
without prejudice to later discussions, to leave the article in
its present form. We figure that as presently worded, Article
147 leaves the State a wider latitude of action against any or-
ganization with similar aims and methods as the Communist
Party. Indeed it is extremely possible for the Communists to
change the name of their organization. When that happens
another amendment may once again become necessary to include
the new name in the penal sanction. Which seems to be a
more tedious process of protecting the State than as provided
in the present article.
Your Committee also considered amending the present law on
illegal association to increase the penalty imposed. We are
likewise pending final determination of this measure. We want
to receive more counsel and we invite other members of the
House and the public to lend us their opinion on this matter.
Our own opinion is that the Communists must not be turned
into martyrs by the imposition of stiffer penalties for mere
membership in the Communist Party. In place of stiffer penal-
ties we urge greater administrative alertness and the immediate
enforcement of this law every time evidence of the existence
of such illegal associations are uncovered as the more effective
means of asserting the integrity of justice and insuring the
stability of this Government.
(Approved unanimously by the Committee on Un-Filipino
Activities, February 28, 1949.)


The report very well hears out Congressman
VillareaVs original idea, that the best service his
committee could perform would he to go deep into
the ideologies behind the communist movement and
expose them for what they are, false and mislead-
ing, This has been done at length and with
considerable skill. It has real depth arid it is forth-
right. It is a body blow to the local movement and
could be a hurtful thorn in Moscow's side. —MANILA
DAILY BULLETIN.
# * ,♦
Personally, it is my belief that the only way to
fight communism is to have a concerted campaign
by all conceivable agencies, both public and private,
and your report is paving the way to greater and
more effective attack on this social cancer. — (Mrs.)
BELEN E. GUTIERREZ, Acting President, Far Eastern
University.
I assure of a very special prayerful remem-
brance for God's blessings on your work and that
of the Committee in thus trying to save for the
Filipino people those things most dear to them, in
serious propaganda and objective means. —WILLIAM
F. MASTERSON, S. J., President, Ateneo de Manila.
Some of the revelations of the CUFA regarding
the gravity of the communistic problem in our
country may sound disheartening to our people, but
there is no other wiser course that our leaders could
take than a full exposure of the whole truth for the
masking of reality will never remedy any evil,
—Atty. JOSE 0. PERALTA, Kalibo, Capiz.
