

\-ci d LIBR ARY M
WE^/
»*agwej
* ' s ,'/ ■ ~ 0ff,,./
s& t"3. sl~/zs/~ 7 't /%!&-
\b^,LfBRARy
\ ’ <<'//
TO THE N WE>^^
QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY,
'tjlhc humble petition of the unbersignei inhabitants of fCctmka anb efsetohere in the ffiolonij of Jfiji,
RESPECTFULLY SHEWETH-
1. That most of Your Petitioners have long resided in Fiji; that they have shared the alarms and anxieties consequent
upon the existence of a weak Native Government; that it was they who, years ago, looked towards England for succour ; and
that it was they who worked hard for, and trust helped, to bring about the annexation of these islands to the Kingdoms of Your
Majesty.
2. That most of them adopted a spot on the island of Ovalau as their place of residence; that this spot
possessed great natural advantages ; commanding as it did a fine harbor open to the sea by means of two broad and safe passages;
that streams of pure water from their mountain sources flowed down into and through it to the sea ; that it was open to the
healthier winds that mercifully blow in these tropical regions, and that the natives of the locality were friendly.
3. That, prior to annexation, this spot—Levuka—had grown into a commercial town ; its centrality commended it as
the chief seat of commerce for the whole group, and it had come to be regarded as the unquestioned commercial capital of Fiji.
4. That at this early period of the town’s history much of the central land had passed into private hands, but as the
owners wished for revenue therefrom, they leased for longer or shorter periods, as convenience or interest demanded, sites whereon
to erect stores and private dwellings.
5. That many of these leases have yet several years to run ; that the annual rent paid on account of which is in some
few cases heavy, but still, not more so, than, with the lessees’ present business relations left undisturbed, they can afford to pay.
6. That since Titles have been issued to certain of the original white proprietors of Levuka town lands, these have made
absolute sales of portions, by means of which a numerous freehold proprietary has come into existence.
7. That the greater number of these latter, consisting of professional gentlemen, ■ Lvernment employees, merchants,
storekeepers, clerks, mechanics and others, have built themselves homes on their newly acquired plots of ground, and have therein
been liberal of their means, as, in most cases, the home is not merely a residence, but is an ornamental addition to the town.
8. That the means of religion have been established in Levuka since a period prior to annexation, there being a branch
of the Church of England, also one of the Roman Catholic, and one of the Wesleyan connection; but in order that the numerous
youth of btifh the city and the group at large, might be provided with the means of mental enlightenment, a literary institute at an
early period was founded ; since carefully fostered and watched over, and is at the present day in a state of vigor—solely self
sustained —and equal in every way to those in the Australian colonies. The present Institute building was not long since erected
at a cost of £2OOO ; the volumes it contains for general use nuAiber several thousands; the' periodica 1 literature of England
Australia and America is here provided, and the Committee leave nothing undone to render the Institution as widely useful as
possible.
9. That the inhabitants of Levuka proposed that a tax should he annually levied on themselves in order that a public
school, to he presided over by a trained master, might he established, that this proposition, in this, respect was adopted by the
Lieutenant-Governor, Mr. De Voeux, and that, now, there is in Levuka, under the management of a School Board, and in the
hands of such a teacher as was desired, a school at which some two hundred children from all parts of the Colony attend daily,
it being intended shortly to erect a commodious school house at an estimated cost of £lOOO.
10. That a large outlay on the part of this Colony was a few years ago made, to give to the community and to Levuka
in particular, the services of a company of Your Majesty’s Royal Engineers, that they did good service to the, town by effecting a
temporary system of surface drainage, building a sea-wall, not only along that part of the beach immediately fronting the town, hut
considerably beyond at both ends, and doing important other work that has added materially to the sanitary condition of the town,
and to the comfort and convenience of the inhabitants.
11. That at the present day the town is under a Board of Works, that its streets, bridges, culverts, water-courses,
lighting, water supply, sanitary preservation, and all that is essential to its convenience and well-being, are under the supervision
of the said Board, and that.the expenses thereof are paid out of rates levied on the householders —and that preliminary expenses
have been incurred with a view to the carrying out at no distant period such works at alignments, water supply to eacli house,
reclamation of the foreshore, efficient drainage and other like works.
12. That the town is within five minutes reach of His Excellency the Governor’s residence, the offices of the Public
Departments, all of which are in excellent repair, and in a locality scarcely to be surpassed for natural and created beauty, that
the Custom House, Government store, standing on a spot reclaimed from the foreshore, and bonded stores are all substantial
buildings ; that there are two wharves, both erected at the public expense, one of which built for the most part with stone and
cement, has been carried cut so far into deep water that the mail steamers of considerable draft of water, can come alongside,
discharge, and receive freight.
13. That private wharves have been, at considerable expense, constructed, used not only by the owners, but By the public
who were long dependent on them as a means of communication between the shore and the shipping, and these, so far as private
enterprise need go, have rendered the port of Levuku equal to the commerce of the day, and, with its extent ion, there is no question
but that the energy that has been equal to the wants of the past, will be equal to those of the future.
14. That to give an idea of the value of business and other properties, existing at the present day in Levuka, Your
Petitioners would mention that, not two years ago, the Banking Company of New Zealand erected a branch banking house here
at an outlay of some £2OOO, the building being in all respects a thoroughly substantial and handsome one; also there has been
erected an Odd Fellows and Good Templars Hall, representing a joint cost of £1,400. That the estimate, as made by qualified
assessors of the annual value of all the town property for rateable purposes, amounts to the sum of £21,000, the inferential capital
value thereof being little short of £2lO, 000; this estimate does not include Government buildings and works, nor suburban property,
which may he valued at another £50,000.
15. That extensive hospital accommodation has been provided in Levuka, there being a commodious for
Europeans, a spacious building apart for Polynesians and East Indians; and another building apart, also, for the Fijian population ;
the total value of this property cannot be much less than £lOOO, it all being substantial, and the two last mentioned buildings, not
having been erected six months. Settlers from all parts of the colony, officers and seamen belonging to Your Majesty’s navy,
master mariners and seamen of the merchant service, have ever since the institution was established, been brought thither for
medical and surgical aid.
16. That the harbour of Levuka is spacious and ample for shipping trade equal to that of most of the second rate commercial
ports of the United Kingdom, that vessels can enter and leave with perfect safety, and that the anchorage is as good as that of any
other harbour in the Colony. The late Commodore Goodenough reported very favourably of Levuka Harbour, and appeared to
regard it as the best in the Colony.


Ai £ (P
17. That, as evidence that the port of Levuka is convenient to the planters as a body, Your Petitioners will give the
statement of one of the most experienced and prosperous plrnters of the Windward Islands. He says, in a memorandum which
he placed in the hands of other of Your Majesty’s Petitioners : —“ I, and other planters, who know well the relative positions of
Levuka and Suva, assert most emphatically, that Levuka is by far the easier of access to the majority of the planters of the
Colony;” in addition to which Your Petitioners would also point out that Levuka is more accessible than Suva to a very large
portion of the native population, whose trading operations are profitable to themselves and to Your Petitioners.
18. That the large proprietors of land in Levuka, have always been, and are still willing, to hand over to His
Excellency the Governor, free of all costs except those of conveyance, such lands, and in such situations, as he may deem needful
for the proper carrying on of the Public Service, provided that Levuka remains the Capital of the Colony.
19. That Your Petitioners, having set forth herein as fully as there may be occasion for, their position in Levuka ; what has
been done for the place both by means of private and public capital; the natural and created advantages which the town possesses
for carrying on a large foreign trade ; the blessings of a religious and educational kind which exist; the home comforts which the
inhabitants enjoy, they will now endeavor to show, how all this to many of them, may soon be as though it did not exist should a
line of public policy determined on be pursued to the end.
20. That, under advice, Your Majesty has been pleased to direct that the city, which Your Petitioners have but with
indifferent success attempted to describe, shall at some future day, or whenever his Excellency the Governor of the Colony may
please, cease to be the seat of Government, and that another place on the South Eastern side of Yiti Levu shall become the capital
in its stead to the very serious injury of the Colony at large, but more especially to the Planters and Traders of the Eastern and
Northern portions of the group, as in respect of them, their distance from the seat of Government would be nearly doubled, an
intricate navigation would have to be encountered and expenses thereby would be greatly increased.
21. That so far as Your Petitioners are able to ascertain, and their examination of the question has been thorough, the
proposed new seat of Government possesses no feature, either of local or commercial value (but that of back country) that is not
surpassed by a corresponding one in Levuka; but, if the number which the latter unquestionably possesses be compared with that
said to be possessed by the former, the claim of Levuka to remain the capital must at once be pronounced valid.
12. That whereas it has been made a ground of complaint against Levuka, that the town lands were in private hands; a
like complaint may be made in respect of Suva, for the bulk of the surveyed site of the future town of Suva is held by one firm, that
is not prepared to do more than are the land proprietors of Levuka, in the way of offering land for the convenience of the Public
Service, but are ready to make some sacrifice with a view of increasing their wealth at the expense of Levuka
23. That the merchants and inhabitants are not asking to be carried away from their established business, and
comfortable homes to Suva, but the proprietors of Suva are asking that they may be carried thither, as their interests would be
immeasurably increased thereby; that the place must, as compared with Levuka, be comfortless, and the employees forced thither by
the seat of Government being removed, would be needlessly subjected to a set of ills, offsprings of the unhappy conclusions which
had brought about the changes.
24. That Suva, at the present day, consists of one store, one hotel, a few houses, the total value of which would,
perhaps, be overestimated at £2,500, which Your Petitioners would respectfully remark upon as being totally at variance with the
report made to Your Majesty as to the existence of seventy-nine plantations at Suva (see Parliamentary paper, C 1011 of July,
1874); that its water-supply is very limited ; and to obtain sufficient for a population equal to that of Levuka, will necessitate an
expenditure of several thousands of pounds in the construction of water works for a distance of from four to six miles ; that its
soil is unsuitable as that of a site for a tropical town: swamps exist in the immediate vicinity, and the space between high and
low water is covered with a noxious, muddy deposit, all of which, with the excessive humidity of the climate, must render it very
unhealthy.
25. That it has been asserted that the harbor of Suva is more secure than that of Levuka, while late facts prove it not
so; the few vessels that lay at Suva in the gale of last December having been driven on shore and wrecked, but among the
numerous shipping lying at Levuka, on the occasion, there was but one slight accident. That the coast about Suva is subject to
baffling winds, making it very dangerous of approach, and particularly unsafe to vessels not in the hands of men having
experience of the locality. That the one passage info the harbor is long and narrow, and that vessels requiring to enter or pass
out of the harbor can only do so with particular currents of wind, always uncertain, and if delay is impossible the expense of
hiring a tug must be incurred: and that until the foreshore of the harbor in proximity to the town is reclaimed between high and
low water, wharfage for the purposes of the shipping must be constructed at enormous expense.
26. That one most important consideration (having in view the past history of New Zealand) which Your Petitioners
would urge upon Your Majesty, is, the greater security from any hostile action of the natives on the small island of Ovalau,
whereon Levuka is situated, and where the native population is under 2000, than would be the case at Suva, which is on the
largest island, Yiti Levu, with a native population of over 50,000, a great portion of whom have only been lately subdued and
compelled to give up their cannibal practices.
27. That having set forth thus much to show how unjust and injurious the change must be, Your Petitioners desire to
show that on State grounds the measure would be most impoltiic in the face of the Colony’s existing indebtedness, amounting as
it does to the sum of £BO,OOO with interest for some eight years ; with the future responsibility of the “ grant in aid ” amounting
to £lOO,OOO being demanded from the colony “in the event of the local finances admitting hereafter of such a course,” in
accordance with Mr. Herbert’s despatch written by direction of Lord Carnarvon, No. 31 of June 18th, 1875 : and seeing that the
change proposed cannot be made without increasing the indebtedness, according to the statement made in the “ Loan Ordinance,”
by £BO,OOO in round numbers, for the preliminary expenditure of removal and a further annual charge for an increased staff of
officials, and all for no purpose, that Your Petitioners can see, than to bring about that which will bring ruin on Your Petitioners,
with whose prosperity that of the whole Colony has been so long, and they trust not unsuccessfully identified ; and, further, that
this collective indebtedness will have to be faced by a population of only 2000 white subjects of Your Majesty.
28. That to remove the Capital to such a place would not only be unjust to the energy and enterprise expended in
Levuka, and a blow at its commercial prosperity that would completely paralyze it, but it would be a grevious Wrong done to
humanity, absolutely without either grounds or excuse. In point of fact, were Your Majesty’s instructions ,as to the removal of
the Seat of Government carried into effect, that portion of Your Petitioners (who number with their wives and families, nearly one half
of the white inhabitants of the Colony ot Fiji), would, by such action be virtually ruined ; but setting aside all sympathy, which
Your Majesty might be graciously pleased to exercise on behalf of Your Majesty’s loyal Petitioners’vested interests, Your
Petitioners allege that, did not a single dwelling exist in Levuka, and a choice were to be made by them on the relative advantage
as between Levuka and Suva, that choice would remain with Levuka; and it is to avoid this great wrong being perpetrated upon
themselves, their wives and their families, which the consummation of Your Majesty’s instructions in the removal of the Capital
would bring about that Your Petitioners pray Your Majesty in order that the truth of the prayer of this petition may be made
plain and satisfactory to Your Majesty and Your Majesty’s advisers, that Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to give such
instructions, as to cause full and complete enquiry to be made, as to opinions and wishes of the colonists generally, before taking
such a step as the removal of the Seat of Government, which will so vitally affect all Your Majesty’s subjects in this Colony.
And Your Petitioners do, therefore, humbly pray Your Majesty to graciously re-consider your decision in the matter, and do
justice to Your Petitioners by allowing them to enjoy the fruits of their former and present labours, by cancelling vour
former decision according to the prayer herein sought to be expressed.
And Your Petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray,
NATIONAL UHKAKY
OK AUSTRALIA
