

PIONEERING IN AUSTRALIA
AND NEW ZEALAND
INCIDENTS
in the life of the late
Mrs. W. H. REYNOLDS, Dunedin, N.Z.
as recounted by herself.
Reprinted from “The Otago Daily Times,” August, 1929.
Born at Adelaide, South Australia, 19th December, 1838.
Passed away” at Dunedin, N.Z., 21st August, 1928.




PIONEERING IN AUSTRALIA
AND NEW ZEALAND
INCIDENTS
in the life of the late
Mrs. W. H. REYNOLDS, Dunedin, N.Z.
as recounted by herself.
Reprinted from “The Otago Daily Times,” August, ,1929.
Bom at Adelaide, South Australia, 19th December, 1838.
Passed away” at Dunedin, N.Z., 21st August, 1928.




PIONEERING IN AUSTRALIA AND
NEW ZEALAND.
INCIDENTS IN THE LIFE OF THE LATE
MRS. W. H. REYNOLDS.
[The following narrative embodies the earliest recollections of the
late Mrs. W. H. Reynolds, who was bom in South Australia
in 1838 and was for the greater part of her life an honoured
resident of Dunedin, where she died last year.]
I.
My first introduction to life was in
what was then the wilds of Australia,
some eight miles from Adelaide City.
Consequently the first incidents recorded
are from memory of my mother’s fre-
quent recitals. I have always understood
that T was the third white child born
there. The first I knew well. She was
the eldest daughter of Captain Finness,
who filled some Government position, 1
believe. The only name I knew her by
was “ Fanny,” and she married a Mr Mor-
gan, and passed over long years ago. Who
the second —a boy—was I never heard,
but I was told that he had also passed on.
Then I came—the third—as far as I
know.
So I pretty well began my career with
a new life in a new country —a midget
link in the chain of the Great Empire be-
yond the seas. My father—William Pin
kerton —and my mother —Eleanor Smith —
were married in the little church at Ford,
in N'orthumberland, on January 23, 1838,
and went to the farm at “ Reedsford,” a
few miles from the little village of Ford,
and no grejt distance from my mother’s
old home at Budle, where she was born,
almost opposite Holy Island and Bam-
botougb Castle. How often she saw and
spoke to the now memorable Grace Dar-
ling on the sands of the shore, as also in
Holy Island, when they were both chil-
dren, and she often said how little one
could realise the heroic powers latent
in another soul, especially in a bare-
footed, wild, unkempt little creature, with
a mass of long auburn, almost red, hair
floating and falling all around her, such
ns Grace was in those childish days
Budle is also no great distance from
Coupland Castle, the home for many
generations of some of my mother’s
people, the Matt Culleys. Her mother’s
name was Eleanor Culley, of Denton
Hall, Yorkshire, on the borders of
Northumberland. My father’s people
also come from Northumberland and had
farms in various places.
As soon as my father and mother were
married they resolved to get ready and
travel to a new and far land, which Aus-
tralia surely was in those days. They
took a very large supply of clothing and
household furnishing with them, also a
full supply of the most up-to-date farm-
ing implements then known, and some
choice cattle and horses. I believe they
took sheep as well, though of this I am
not certain. They knew how slow and
seldom any connection with the Home-
land would be,


I do not know the date of their sailing,
but the name of the vessel was the
Rajastan; several of the very well-known
old families came in the same ship. I
recall the names of Major O’Halloran
and Mr Angus, and they must have
reached Australia some time in August
or September of 1838.
The place for residence selected by my
father was some eight miles out from the
town of Adelaide, then being surveyed
and laid out. Why my father selected
this place, country, or part of the world,
I have no idea. The journey out proved
very long and tedious, over six months.
How they provisioned the cows and
animals, 1 cannot imagine, as in those
days the food for human beings was bare
and uninviting in the extreme. They had
many farm servants as well, but that they
all, even the animals, arrived, I am cer-
tain, as I learned to know and love many
of them, especially one old red cow,
called Lady Darling, a beautiful lovable
old thing, who knew my mother at any
distance, and if she had been absent
for a few days, always wept when they
met again. This is a certain fact; large
round tears used to fall from her eyes,
as she rubbed her head softly up and
down against my mother, 1 remember it
well.
When they arrived there were no houses
in Adelaide, only survey tents, sod houses
etc. Arriving some time in the early
spring, they took up a property suitable
for a farm, which they called “ Studley."
It was large—must have been many hun-
dreds of acres, or such is my childish re-
collection. They built a house of some
description, and thatched it with rushes
or prairie grass, then all over the country
to the height of from two to six feet. It
was only just completed when I came upon
the scene on December 19, 1838, the very
hottest time of the year. When I was
some 36 hours old, a man was sent at an
angle across a field to catch up with a
cart that had gone round by the track,
to give a further order, and as it was very
hot weather with a blazing sun, the tali
prairie grass was most inflammable, and
as the man turned to walk back, he struck
a match to light his pipe, and without
thinking, cast it from his hand. The grass
seized the light, and the man bad to run
for his life. All hands turned out as they
saw the smoke and flames rushing down
upon the house. My father, one ot the
first, dragged off his coat and beat the
■flames. All to no purpose; it was burnt
out of his hands, his waistcoat the same.
Had they known the value of green scrub
they could perhaps have saved the house,
but they did not, and probably there was
none handy. At last the fire seized the
sides and roof of the house. By this time
my mother was almost suffocated with the
smoke and greatly agitated hearing the
calling out of the men, “ For God's sake
don’t let the missis know." My father then
rushed in, in a speechless state, threw s
blanket round my poor mother, who took
me in her arms, and we were carried ou>.
and set down upon the place where the
mortar had been mixed for building the
chimneys. The fire raged on unchecked
and everything that my mother had
brought from Home, her piano, harp, etc.,
my father’s fishing rods and gun, all theii
10 years’ stock of clothing, everything
was swept away before their eyes. My
mother’s grief must have been keen, in-
deed, especially as every tiny garment made
by her own loving hands for me, of the
finest French cambric and real lace —for
people in those days were most particular
on such matters —all was entirely con-
sumed; not an article left. My father,
almost frantic with loss and grief, not
knowing where to go, or what to do with
my mother, got one of the conveyances,
and put her and anything in the shape of
bedding they had saved into it, and drove
down to the next homestead, some two or
three miles distant. I am afraid we were
not at all cordially received, as we were
placed in a partially-built henhouse, the
fowls in the one end, my mother and I
in the other. How long we remained
there I have no idea. I am sorry to say
I took all these strange occurrences in
my youth as perfectly natural, and made
but little inquiry, or .rather, paid very
little attention, though I have many a
time listened to a recital of the sad
trouble. I can well remember my
mother’s woe and sorrow as she told me
that, when she was able to return to the
home she forked about in the rubbish
and found the remains of some of the
flounces of silk dresses, and these were


practically the only articles she could re-
cover, and with these she clothed me. Her
distress was cruel, indeed, to see me
dressed in such a manner, but, as shq ad-
mitted, 1 was such a very healthy, happy
little soul, and never appeared to mind it
at' all, but crept about : n my silt gar
ment, red or green, or whatever they
were, quite oblivious of my funny appear-
ance. How often I have listened to the
trials that befell my mother then, with
my father away for weeks, even months
together, in the centre of those then wild
lands on runs or ranches where he had
his sheep!
After the first few years, and when
the servants they had brought with them
had left or dispersed, and others could
not be got in their place, my mother had
to milk the cows, attend the farm, look
after the garden, wash and make, cook
and clean, for all of us children, and it is
no wonder she was nearly distracted. Yet,
through it all, perhaps by it all, she was
a brave, dauntless, capable soul in all
those long years I knew her, and I never
remember seeing her out of temper.. Her
trials were legion, but I never saw her
do inferior work of any kind. Her butter
was the best, her cakes tip-top, jams and
cheese she excelled in, and tor wine she
took the palm. All the garden was prac-
tically her own work. She was a recog-
nised genius for it. She grew most of her
fruit trees from seed and did the grafting
herself Fortunately for us, she was a
really well-educated Englishwoman, and
could hold her own in most branches.
There were six of us, four sisters, an
only brother, and myself. When I was
nine years of age, I went for two or three
terms to a boarding school in the town of
Adelaide, to the Misses Rowlands in
Rundle' street, opposite Tavistock Build-
ings. I think these ladies were perfectly
beautiful in all that I can remember of
them. How keen I was to please them,
to learn everything I could! How I
struggled to overcome the first difficulties,
of music as well as the very A B C of the
language! I think very few in these days
of luxury and comfort can have any idea
of the dangers and difficulties of the early
settlers and pioneers in a new country
In my childish days at our home of “ Stud-
ley,” I can recall some strange and alarm-
ing experiences which my mother went
through.
The natives in those days were wild
and fearsome-looking creatures, tall, erect,
almost nude, only a loin girdle and some
trappings, a few eagle’s feathers in their
matted hair, and a wild dog’s tail attached
to their beard below the chin, while all
their face, arms, chest, and legs were
striped alternately with bright red and
white paint or ochre of some descrip-
tion. In such condition I have seen
them surround the house with
their wives and children, some 15 or 20
of them, and my mother would in terror
gather us all in around her, hiding us
under the tables, while she put the boxes,
chests, etc., against the door, and stood
with a double-barrelled gun at the win-
dow pointing the muzzle in the most dar-
ing and determined manner at them, till
they would fling down their spears, and
baggage and show a more' amiable atti-
tude. After which she would give them
some pannikins of flour, sugar, tea, etc,,
and they would depart. But, oh, the
loneliness, the terrible dread and solitude
in which her life was spent. She could
realise the dangers surrounding us al-
ways. We, as soon as the natives de-
parted. only saw the funny side of it all,
and could come from out our “ hidy
holes,” dancing and laughing at the curi-
ous appearance these creatures presented,
while we were ever intensely interested in
watching the little fat faces of the babies
as they appeared over the shouders of
their poor, subdued looking, underfed
mothers, the veritable beast of burden
for these outrageous autocrats in black.
It is certainly strange how little I can
recall of any sense of fear at that age,
though we were very far from any other
house of any kind; even the cattle yards
and barn were quite a distance away.
It was later in life, and even only now
that I realise the intensely desolate posi-
tion my poor mother was in, for South
Australia in those days was a weird place
to look at, and a very weird place to
live in, with strange uncanny animals,
as well as men. The kangaroo, though
harmless, is a quaint and impossible look-
ing creature and to see one bounding


when chased or alarmed is a remarkable
sight. It looks as if it were making
a most desperate effort to fly. What a
contrast and amusement to watch that
furry little bundle of grey, the opossum,
with such soft and innocent eyes, as it
swings and clutches so silently from
branch to branch, either by hands or
tail, as the case may be. Even
the cry of the native dog or dingo,
is uncanny. Who can describe the
creeping horror that seizes you when
with the closing in of night, in the far
distance, these creatures begin their
strange, unearthly w'ailing, coming steadily
near and nearer every time, augmented
in the distance by gradually increasing
numbers? Especially if you are in a
depressed or sad condition of mind, a
sense of some overwhelming calamity seems
to envelop you, and you feel as if you
must either find relief in tears or rush
outside and howl also. Then there were
the wallaby and bandicoot, not to forget
that puzzle of the biologist, the platy-
pus. This strange land must be one of
the oldest bits of creation, as is evidenced
by the remains in some of its Salt Lakes
of antediluvian and mammoth animals
of very ancient times. But how or why
should they be in the Salt Lakes? Has
this small portion of the earth had a sur-
prise dip in the briny, and drowned these
animals in the residue left, or how can
it be reasonably accounted for? I say
“ reasonably,” for I am old enough to
remember the vehemence with which the
church teaching of 30 years ago
held to the idea that the w'hole
wqrld was only some 6000 years
old, and that the whole process of crea-
tion had only occupied seven days of 24
hours’ duration each. I also well re-
member the bolt that fell from the blue
when that grand old Scotchman, Hugh
Miller, read the truth more wisely in the
“ Old Red Sandstone ” and proclaimed
from the housetops. What a heave-over
the church then took, when those immense
bits of her “ foundation ” were pulled out,
which no one was ever able to put in
again! So it settled down or a better
level, with broader conceptions, and the
seemingly impossible was accepted readily.
I wonder who would dispute the fact to-
day. I often think how Hugh Miller
must have laughed and prayed alternately
as he wrote his beautiful story of the
Great God’s record, contained in that “ Old
Red Sandstone.” But truth can only
unveil itself bit by bit, as the poor human
is capable of understanding, and as time
has no end perhaps need not be in
such a hurry.
Unnumbered ages have elapsed since these
ancient animals roamed and fed over the
ground now occupied by these smaller, less
hurtful, creatures. Equal ages may have
to pass before the multitudes who have
come and have gone again will show any
great or marked steps forward in their
general evolution. Ah, those wild free
lovely days in that faraway land, how
well 1 recall them, how they steal into
and over me, and I feel again the warm,
soft soothing glow of the early spring days
when the wild flowers gleamed on every
side, beguiled to life by this bewitching
warmth, —when the wild lilac flung its
trailing tresses through and amongst the
vivid yellow wattle, each vyeing with the
other to produce the most glorious beauty.
Then who that has wandered in childhood
on these uplands among the wild heaths
can ever forget their fragrance, or
variety? Choice and lovely they are, you
pick and pick till your hands can hold no
more.
Then the choice fruits of that fascinat-
ing land, how abundant, how various they
are! They grow naturally with littie cul-
tivation, and we, as children, needing little
care or cooking in those days, would take
a good-sized wheelbarrow, a loaf of bread,
a knife, a spoon, and a few sheets of
paper, and we were well provisioned for
the day. We visited in turn our favourite
trees, peaches, apricots, grapes, figs, etc.
Then the melons, long or short, sweet and
large, or small and delicately flavoured as
is the "Ispahan.” We were epicures in
those days, and made our choice from that
rich abundance. Then in joy and glee
trundling our well-filled wheelbarrow we
adjourned to a huge and spreading red or
blue gum tree, or perchance a fragrant
wattle to hold our feast. The ripe and
tempting pink-fleshed melon was almost
the favourite on those days when the sun
was at its hottest, and all the air vibrat-
ing under the penetrating rays of the
master of life, while overhead birds of


every colour eyed us in envy—gor-
geous parrots, quaint cockatoos,
with their beautiful yellow or
pink crests fanned out in approbation or
anger. While the hungry caw of the crow
would come from the topmost branch,
and the inquisitive magpie would even
venture almost near enough to be caught
while all the wee and lovely minstrels of
the woodlands flew and fluttered and
feasted on all around. But there were
weird and ugly enemies, also in the midst
of all this joy, but we feared them not.
Only let a snake move in the grass, and
the competition was on at once, who could
despatch it the most expertly and
promptly. No delay, then the shriek of
fun when victory was won. There, we
had to have our eyes and ears well
trained, all on the alert, for there were
many small enemies as well as large.
There were many small kinds of reptiles
as well as the larger, and even in the
water while bathing you had to look out
for the appearance of the black water
snake—as well as leeches by the myriad.
The “ death adder ” was the crowning of
the snake mystery—so noiseless, so inert,
so like.the colour of the grass and ground.
You had to step with care, and keep an
eye on all sides, for a bite from this
enemy was certain death. Fortunately for
us we were cute and cautious, even though
the day’s game was frequently a raiding
or hunting expedition for these and many
of the other enemies of life and limb
which abound, such as centipedes, scor-
pions, tarantulas, etc., to say nothing of
the harmless though alarming and grue-
some looking lizards of many kinds upon
the trunks of trees and" their branches.
Many a sorry fright have I had when well
up a huge tree in pursuit of a choice
bird’s nest to meet face to face, one of
those large red-mouthed guanas with their
yellow teeth or gums.
II.
But changes were brewing all unknown
to us. The natives inland on my father’s
runs were most troublesome, and men
were murdered and sheep disappeared to
such an extent that he resolved to seek
new scenes. As it happened, it proved to
be really “ out of the frying pan into
the fire.” By the time I was 10 years
of age, he had arranged to send us all
round to a place on the coast nearer to
Swan River, called Port Lincoln, a small,
wild, and at that time unknown place.
The journey round was a “ recollection ”
indeed. The dund-swept coast of South
Australia is dreaded enough by those who
undertake the journey in the most up-to-
date steamers with stewards and stew-
ardesses and even royal, nay, regal, com-
forts, but imagine the suffering of a
number of small, dreadfully deathly, sick
children cramped down in an evil-smelling
den —say, 10 feet by 8 feet, with a floor
space the size of an ordinary table—for
10 days or a fortnight, as the case may
be, tossing absolutely helplessly on the
crest of those mighty waves in a craft
that you would be almost afraid to cross
the bay in. It was cruel —but there was
no other way, and once we got inside of
Boston Bay, sentinelled and guarded by
Sunday Island, we were in a harbour that
would have proved a glorious asset to any
country whose city could have bordered
its shore, and all the leviathans afloat
could rest and shelter there undisturbed.
But, alas, no great city rested on Her
shores. Only a few detached and scat-
tered houses occupied the spacious plateau
known by the name of Port Lincoln.
Whether it had ever been surveyed as a
township I have no knowledge. I only
know we landed in safety, and were truly
grateful to be able to feel our feet on
solid earth again.
While we were on our way by sea, my
father was undertaking a very difficult
and perilous journey—nothing less than
transferring his sheep overland from his
station on the Adelaide side by way of
an utterly unknown route. He was the
first white man to venture on such a try-
ing ordeal. How he managed it no one
will ever know. You have only to read
the description of some of the first to
come after him to realise all it meant.
It was a superhuman effort, but he
landed on the Port Lincoln side at one
of the farthest out stations called “ Talia.”
How many of his sheep remained alive
after the journey I cannot say.
There were many stations nearer, I
know, and by degrees we became friends
with them all—the Haighs, the Loves, th'e
Tennants, the Hawsons, the Bishops, and
many more. My own chief friends were
the Hawsons, as there were no fewer than
seven girls in a family of twelve. What
a treat it was to me, when they led one
of the ponies in for me to go home with
them to their place, “Towalla,” or “The


Swamp,” as it was more usually called!
There I was in the midst of a busy farm
life, where I always received the most
uproarious welcome from the assembled
family, including the dear old mother, who
though an extremely stout woman, could
work as well as the best, and who regu-
larly made up her own butter in the old-
fashioned way—with her hands. But 1
must stop to describe those hands. Th ■
would have delighted the heart of a
painter or sculptor, exquisitely modelled
with long well-pointed fingers, each thumb
such a perfect shape, hands that never
grew hard or rough, no matter how com-
monplace the work they were engaged
in. And the beautiful pats of butter they
moulded —how evenly they turned out of
the shape. And when the work was duly
finished, this brave heart would think
nothing of her walk, butter and all, into
and back again from the little village four
miles distant. Ah, those were perfectly
joyful days, when 1 was allow-ed to ride
over hill and dale and even help to drive
in a mob of wild unbroken cattle, some
of which faced you often, and would have
charged you but for the crack of the long
stockwhip which we each carried, and
which, by the time I was 14, 1 had learned
to handle wonderfully well. They were
all expert riders, and took fences and
ditches just as they came, and many and
long were the lessons 1 received. How de-
lightful were the camping parties away to
the out stations where the wild peach grew
in rich abundance, not worth eating, but
beautiful to look at, and where the kan-
garoo could be found in numbers. It is
only a tew weeks since I received a news-
paper teding me of the decease of two
of these sisters within a fortnight of each
other, so are snapping rapidly now all the
old links that bound me with the past,
going on ahead a little to wait and be
ready to welcome me once again in an-
other new land. Even in all the warp
and woof of life the threads of joy must
ever be crossed with the lines of sorrow,
and the darkest shadows sometimes loom
up unexpectedly along the horizons of
life, and so it was that my childish ignor-
ance left me indifferent to the deep and
profound interest which I had created in
the soul of one of these my best friends.
But I was much too young in all my
thoughts and ways to realise such a
tragedy, and when the parting of the ways
came, and a kindly figure many years my
senior. whose tremhkng lies could scarcely
formulate the words, tried to say that
“ there could never be anyone else in the
world to him,” I was much staggered with
amazement, and thought it was a bit ab-
surd to say such a silly thing. The words
had no other message to me. Ah me,
by the time the message reached me, that
there “ never had been anyone else ” and
that a small locket with a scrap of my
poor hair, and a very inferior photograph
had been his coveted possession even to
the moment of the great passage, I was
able to realise the tender sympathy I
ought to have shown him.
I have referred to those perfectly “ joy-
ful ” days, and so they really were to
us simple children, though the generation
of to-day would describe them as " awful,
perfectly awful,” but we knew no other,
and were happily content with them. The
work was hard, and the so-ca'led plea-
sures nil—that is to say, our hands had
to do all the washing, cooking, cleaning,
even to the chopping of the wood and
carrying of the water, including the draw-
ing of it up in buckets on a windle from
deep wells, frequently a considerable dis-
tance from the house. Then there was
the bringing in and milking of the cows,
not to mention the gardening and general
sewing and mending, and there were no
sewing machines in those days. Every
stitch was done by hand; no nice cheap
torchon lace. Crochet, much despised
crochet, was our one indulgence, and this
because it was cheap and easily made by
our own hands, a reel giving a good
length. We could also embroider fairly
well. Some of our friends were most
proficient: the materials necessary were
almost impossible to get in those davs, in
such an out-of-the-way sort of place. But
we were busy and consequently happy—
never an idle hour. I well recall my
mother’s motto when we in any way ob-
jected to learn anything new. “ Can do
is easily carried, dear, and you will some
day see the value of it.” There was no
deviation from this. She also firmly md
steadily refused to do anything for us
which we could do for ourselves, as she
said it was her business to fit us better
to meet the battles of life than she had
been.
As regards schooling, we were almost
hopeless'y left to ourselves. There was a
common school in the little centre or vil-
lage. but the man in command was such
a merciless and cruel brute, who spent
the most of his time in beating and even
.kicking in the most fiendish manner, the
unfortunate children committed to his
care, that none of us would venture near.


I recall a man, however, who taught in
the school for a very short time, who in-
spired me with a longing to excel in
writing and arithmetic, and all my even-
ings were employed writing out choice
little bits of poetry or prose, and trying to
make perfect figures, and place them in
long and difficult sums. This is what I
never could understand in myself, because
I had then no idea how the outer world
lived, nor the necessity for either good
writing or good figures. Yet my persever-
ance was astonishing, I know. It was
the same with my music. I had learned
my notes and some scales and exercises
while at Miss Rowlands’s, and as we
. had what would now be called an “old tin
kettle of a piano,” I set myself to make
the best of it, and I never lost a moment
of spare time until I could play all the
well-known airs from ear, and could read
at sight fairly well. A great friend of
my mother’s, Mrs Andrew Murray, was
herself an excellent musician, and was at
the time intent on learning the harp.
As she had no children, she had plenty
of time, and I, with another friend. Mr
Henry Price, read out the duets on the
piano, while Mrs Murray accompanied
with the harp, and it was in such manner
that 1 learned all I did. Ry this time
I was nearly 15, and Mrs Murray used
to let me read out a new piece with her,
always-promising to give it to me if I
learned it, and I always did. even to
such pieces as “ Le Pluie de Perles.” I
had many a weep by myself when my
stiff fingers would not touch the notes
correctly, and for my singing I fought
just as determindedly. I was the only
one of the family who had any desire for
music.
Although the natives in the backblocks
Were quite as dangerous and troublesome
as they had been on the Adelaide side,
they were very harmless and peaceful
in the village, and many a funny scene
I have witnessed in their camps consist-
ing of a few clumps of brush, broken and
piled in a semicircle. A fire in the centre
and the home of the native was ready
whether for calm or storm. The : r food
was moat primitive, any cold scraps
people would give them, but the inevit-
able tin pannikin, never washed, one meal
cooked- in it after the other, was always
in evidence. In this they would boil
some water and stir in with a bit of
stock, flour by degrees, till it was as
stiff as they desired. Then the sugar
was added. Happy indeed were those
who possessed an old grass spoon, or
spoon of any kind, if not, then a scrap
of wood or bone could easily be picked
up, and answered well enough for them.
Then the fun began, the inner man in
a measure satisfied. The rain might be
coming down in torrents, glinting and
glistening on their black bodies, but that
was of no account. The last man to
come in was probably robed in some of
the (to him) finery which he had picked
up during the day. On one occasion be
rejoiced in an old bell topper, a very
ragged coat and a pair of boots. Now
some of these natives see the funny side
of everything, and are wonderful mimics,
and you had no difficulty in watching his
gestures and following his speech with
an occasional English word thrown in
and realising how he was representing,
detailing wonderfully a scene, in which
he was making bis bargain regarding
some special work, and the remuneration
and its kind, and the laugh that followed,
too infectious altogether, was a simultane-
ous roar in the end, to be followed by
others of a similar kind.
Their wailing over their dead was of
the same weird nature as the bowling of
the wild dogs, pathetic and penetrating
while it lasted, but they would wail one
minute and laugh the next. As far as
I could follow they always buried the
bodies in a sitting position, and very
near the surface. Their ideas as re-
gards a future life appeared to embrace
both incarnation and evolution, for,
many times when finding them in a seri-
ous mood lamenting their dead, I ex-
plained as well as I was able the story
of the Christ, to which they would listen
for a tew minutes with very solemn faces.
Then they would throw back their heads
and laugh till they were tired, ending by
informing me that “ all welly good white
man.” and significantly pointing with
their forefinger to the ground, assure
me, “ You put him in black man, him
jump up white man, you long time ago
black man, oh welly welly good.” No
other idea could you induce them to ac-
cept. And who can say it is not true?
How the notion originated is strange.
I also know that at that particular stage
in my being I had no very confirmed ideas
of my own. but a circumstance arose
that brought home to me in a very
pointed manner the uncertainty of life,
and caused me to at once resolve to try
and obey that inner call that came to me.
The occasion was the burial of a Mr Vane,
who had been cruelly murdered by the
natives on his station a few miles inland.
Our dear gentle minister, the Rev. Mr
Hale, afterwards bishop of Swan River,


conducted the service most impressively.
The whole scene truly entered my soul,
and when the words of the hymn “ Hear
what the Voice from Heaven proclaims of
all the faithful dead,” vibrating in the
melody of that lovely old air “Martyr-
dom ” penetrated the air, it entered my
heart never to be forgotten, and from that
day, young as I was, I became a steady
seeker in the Great Old Book, for the
pathways that lead unto eternal life. How
very little that dear man imagined that
with the words he was using to bury the
dead, he was bringing to life the seeds
that slumbered in another soul! Such is
the reward for doing one’s duty and doing
it well. Being “ in the spirit.” It is not
our business to know these side issues,
but just to go straight ahead, leaving re-
sults in higher hands.
Many of the customs of the natives were
extremely primitive, though apparently
very effective. When a man complained
of headache, as one occasionally did, for
it was one of their very few natural ail-
ments, it was the custom for him to stand
firmly with his head well forward, while
another man dealt him a most merciless
blow on the head on either side between
the crown and forehead over the ear. The
gash would be quite two inches long—he
would allow it to bleed profusely, till he
felt relief, and would then draw up his
long shaggy dirty locks, and mat them
well together over the wound, and never
wash nor touch it again, till Nature re-
moved the coagulated mass. Microbes
never troubled them at all, —not even flies,
which was a wonder, as in summer they
were most abundant. Their method of
treating their unhappy wives was in much
the same style, and how often have these
poor terror-stricken creatures rushed into
our home to seek protection, only, alas, to
get a worse punishment when they did re:
join their savage masters. 1 have seen
many poor women whose body bore much
evidence of the cruelties to which they
were subjected, three gashes inches long
was no uncommon thing at one time, and
yet I do not remember ever hearing of
them taking their own lives. I imagine
fear prevented them, as they had a super-
stitious and unexplainable belief in evil
spirits, and I think dreaded death, and
yet when one became too old or ill to
travel with the rest, he was left to die
alone or to manage for himself as best he
could. I know that when a youth ap
preached manhood, they went through
some secret ordeal, and for months were
not allowed to speak above a whisper, tor
fear the power of the evil one would grab
them. They had a curious art in the way
they used their voices for carrying long
distances, and this proved a great amuse-
ment to us children. They made the mouth
in a way to form the tone of a bell, and
uttered the words as nearly as 1 can spell
them, “Yange, Yangi ichi—the —powe.”
This when pronounced by them rever-
berated among the hills and trees tor very
long distances indeed. We had one or two
frights as children when we were informed
there was going to be a great “ kill ”
amongst each other, a feud of some kind
had arisen, and they were to take the
world approved method of “ fighting it
out.” They ranged themselves on the hill-
sides opposite each other and from the
scenes that resulted you would have
thought no one could be left alive. The
spears would fly, but no one was either
wounded or even hurt as far as I can
remember, and yet they seemed satisfied,
that their offended dignity had received
due recognition.
III.
We were as nearly as I can estimate
over five years and a-lralf in Port Lin-
coln. The move, as far as my poor
father was concerned, was, as I said,
“ out of the frying pan into the fire,"
for the natives were quite p.s aggressive
here as they had been in Adelaide, and
his life was a torture —no security of
life or limb. He had many cases of rob-
bery, despoliation, and murder as well.
The noted case of “ Johnny Hamp’s
Father,” as it was called, was on his
station. In this case the poor boy, re-
turning at night with his sheep, found
his father’s body with many spears
through it, lying at the door, and the
head later on sawn in half, hidden in the
oven. This was the last straw, and my
father resolved that he could not endure
any more of these terrible experiences
alone and in such a wilderness of hor-
rors. Someone had lent him a book on
the advantages New Zealand presented
for stock of every kind, climate, freedom
from natives, etc., and so he bought a
brig called the Amherst—l should think
under 200 tons—and in the year 1855
we reached the Otago Heads, after a long
and trying passage, out of both food and
water for our sheep and selves. I can
recall but little of this journey. I am
aware we spent a few days in Adelaide


and Melbourne replenishing, but from
there my only remembrance is that we
were too sick to take an interest in any-
thing. and, considering the general con-
dition of the Tasman Sea, this is not
much to he wondered at. On our arrival
at the Heads we were warmly welcomed
by that bright, all-alive, and amusing
man. Pilot Driver, who could give you
more information in live minutes than
an ordinary person in an hour and all
interspersed with the most thrilling anec-
dote. In competitive yarns, no matter
how sensational, emotional, or impos-
sible, he always won the belt. He was
equalled only, I think, by the author of
“ The Arabian Nights.” In due time he
guided us safely up to Port Chalmers,
then the merest outline of a place. My
father took the first boat up to Dunedin,
for, in those days, that was the only
way of reaching the city, unless you
walked over the hill by the Junction,
for it must be remembered there was no
road, such as you travel by to-day; very
far from it—many a one was lost for
hours on the track. It was often a try-
ing ordeal to come from Port Chalmers
in one of those boats; if the wind and
the tide were against you it was a long
and sorry business, as was proved on
many an occasion. On arrival in Dun-
edin, my father’s first introduction was
to James Macandrew and William Hun-
ter Reynolds, the latter afterwards my
husband. They at once did all they
could to persuade him to remain here,
and to this end provided him with
horses and made all necessary arrange-
ments for him to go a few days’ tour
inland. From all I could gather, he
appeared to have made a bee line for
Tapanui, and so satisfied and delighted
was he that he at once decided to settle
there. The more he travelled, the more
he was convinced of the value of his
first choice. Although the whole place
from what is now Crookston to the town-
ship was overgrown with tall bracken,
flax, and tussock, he foresaw the fine
estate it was.
On coming back he desired at once to
transfer us and his flocks to the shore.
The flocks we did not object to, as, in-
deed, they needed it sorely, but for our-
selves, we were not so much enamoured
of the dark look of the surrounding hills,
which at that time were thickly tim-
bered all over, and the cold, grey skies,
as to desire very much to remain. The
fascination of the tropical warmth and
growth of Australia was in our blood
from childhood, and this country was
such a contrast that we felt no drawing
to the place. As we had started out to
reach a place called Lyttelton, that
place we desired to see at any rate, so
we induced him after much persuasion
to leave his flock here to recruit, and
go with us all and let us at least see
the place we were originally destined
to reach. We reached the desired haven,
hut all to no purpose, as nothing we
could say would induce our father to
settle in Canterbury. We remained
about a week there, where we had the
pleasure of meeting Mr Fitzgerald, the
first Superintendent of Canterbury, a
man of the old school, a typical Irish
gentleman in every sense of the word,
a pleasure to listen to—as I was only
capable of doing in those days—but the
tone of his voice, the manner, and the
man. remain a vivid and pleasing re-
membrance. In after years it was my
privilege to know Mrs Fitzgerald when
she became a widow and lived in Wel-
lington, and what a harvest it was to
spend a few hours in her presence! It
was reaping all the time, in art, music,
literature. Some of her own composi-
tions were touching and beautiful, and
yet she had endured much of the strain
and stress inevitable in the life of a
pioneer. She had a courageous spirit,
a dauntless soul, and conquered most
difficulties.
In due time we again entere the Otago
Heads, on this occasion with the know-
ledge that here we had to pitch our camp
and try once more to form a home.
Never shall I forget our landing. It
was a cold, grey day, with continuous
drizzling rain. The slow lighter—the
Bon Accord, I think—which brought us
up the Bay could not get in to the shore,
even after taking many long and weary
hours to convey us from Port Chalmers,
and we had all to be carried ashore in
Jetty street, just almost where it now
meets Bond street. The tide flowed in
there in those days, and the beach ran


round under where Mr Mackerras’s store,
Bond street, and part of the Post Office
now stand on to the front of the Stock
Exchange, where the Maori house, 1
think, stood. Liverpool street and the
Post Office formed quite a hill in those
days. The ground under where the Em-
pire Buildings now are was a wild patch
of flax and undergrowth, the ground ris-
ing gradually towards Brown, Ewing,
and Co.'s and Wain’s Hotel, where it
fell again to the bottom of High street.
Here a dirty little creek ran somewhere
under where the Grand Hotel now is,
and flowed under a very rickety wooden
bridge exactly in the middle of Princes
street, opposite Water street. The
earth stood at one time up to what is
now the beginning of the second story
of Brown, Ewing, and Co.’s buildincs.
There were some wcak-looking wooden
buildings on the top of this bank, and
they were there for many years before
any or much improvement took place.
It was autumn when we landed, and
there being no conveyance to b, had, we
walked all the way to Cavei-ham, where
the only house we could get was avail-
able somewhere very close to the situa-
tion now covered by the old Emigration
Barracks. This same house was after-
wards the residence of Mr George Gray
Russell, and was considered quite a
palatial residence in those bygone times.
Neither water nor gas was laid on, and
you could never have imagined there
could or ever would be such a thing.
This house then stood alone in its glory,
all that part from the Main road to tne
sandhills and Anderson’s Bay being abso-
lutely a swamp, full of tussock, and one
small clump of trees standing sentinel
very near where the Railway Workshops
now are. I have frequently seen the
whole of this flat one sheet of water after
the prolonged and continuous rains
which we used to have, with no drains
to carry off the stormwater. Times are
much changed, and if my father had only
been wise energh to buy the whole of
this great area of swamp then available
I always understood, at 10 shillings an
acre, and had set to work to drain it, we
would have been millionaires to-day.
Dunedin iri those days was neither the
beautiful nor the blissful place that it is
to-day. All the many pretty-coloured
houses, nice trees, flowers, and gardens
have .created a magical change in the
place. There were no places of amuse-
ment then, no motor cars, no vehicles.
Rich and luxurious In the extreme did
we feel in those primitive days when we
became the proud possessor of a very
plain, common wooden sledge with a
quiet old bullock to draw it. I well
recall the first night I met Mr John
Studholme. It was at a dance at Mrs
Edward M’Glashan's on or near the situa-
tion which the See House now occupies.
Let anyone run his eye up over the hill,
past the late Mr Mitchell’s, and all round
the hilltops, through what Is now Morn-
ington, Roslyn, past Bishopscourt down to
the cliffs overlooking the See House
and just consider the distance that we
had to walk to attend a festival when
it was held in that genial home, the
mother of which was a typical Madonna
in appearance, life, and manner. The
reason I remember Mr John Studholme
so well is that it was his first visit to
Dunedin. His was a new face, he was
one of the chief guests of the evening,
and he bore on his countenance and in
his manner full evidence of the calm,
generous, and capable man he afterwards
became. But he, like almost all of
those days, has journeyed on. Mr J.
T. Thomson, so well kn'own all over
the colony as the surveyor-general, had
about the same time come over from
India for his health, and was a great
acquisition at all the dances then. He
also has gone forward. The only one
of the leading gentleman dancers of those
days that I occasionally see is Mr
David John Napier, and his dancing
days, like my own, have passed many
long years ago.
It was the same to every entertain-
ment. There was only one way of
getting there—walking—walking all the
way and back again, and by the time
you reached your own home the new
day was always well advanced. Some-
how we never realised that we were
at all tired the next day. I don’t sup-
pose we were, as the day’s work began


at the usual hour without any interrup-
tion. Of course, to these far awpy
dances we always went in parties, pick-
ing each other up at prearranged
rendezvous. The work these entertain-
ments entailed was very considerable,
as carpets had to be lifted and beaten,
then put away all in readiness to lay
down again, all the treasured stores of
china, glass, and silver hunted out from
hidy holes, cleaned, and prepared, and
generally a very considerable supper to
be cooked, as people never dined at
0.30 or 7 o’clock as in these days.
Twelve or 1 o’clock was the plebeian
hour for this warm, substantial meal.
Six o’clock was the hour for tea—a very
light and easily provided repast: cold
meats, perhaps, or only bread and butter,
scones, cakes, jams, etc. » The now
fashionable afternoon tea mid-way be
tween a very abundant lunch and a - much
more abundant dinner was never heard
of. Those were simple days and simple
times. No telephones in existence by
which you could order in every necessity
or delicacy you required. No, indeed,
for sheep and even cattle were very
scarce, and no one killed any they could
avoid. All—everything—had to be
saved. Frequently, now, as I pass the
dust tins at household gates, and see
the large lumps of fat, even flanks of
meat and vegetables, not to mention
lumps of bread, that are thrown away
in sheer wanton ignorance or extra-
vagance, I often feel I should like to go
in and give a lesson in practical economy
in a sensible use of all these wholesome
scraps, and instil, at the same time,
the wise words of the Great Master,
“ Bring hither the baskets, and gather
up all the scraps so that nothing be
wasted.” Yes, indeed, in my early
days no waste of any kind was
tolerated; all fat carefully removed from
the joint, and at once rendered cleanly,
the very cracknels remaining being
rolled in a certain proportion of flour
and sugar and moulded with an egg
into very much enjoyed shortbread. The
fat itself was made into candles, the
•only light we had. Many moulds of
these have I turned out each week. It
is perhaps difficult for the people of
to-day, with the town overcrowded with
shops of every description, to realise
the difficulty there was in getting very
necessary articles of use and diet, and
I know the two or three years before
I arrived were much worse than even
after I come, and many amusing stories
my husband’s mother told me in con-
nection with some of her experiences.
She was a 'true Scotch woman, ex-
tremely provident. Her salt or candles,
sugar or tea, never ran out; she always
had a “ nest egg ” somewhere, but the
imploring entreaties for a teaspoonful
of salt, half a teacupful of sugar, and
even one candle, were quaint to listen
to, and it can easily be understood,
when you know that no vessels can's
here from anywhere, except at very.rare
intervals, and then the amounts brought
were extremely limited. Of course,
each year made a difference, and one
cargo from even a very small craft went
a long way when there were so few
people.
IV.
In those wet roadless days it was often
a difficult matter to get from our house
in Caversham to where the Post Office
now is, but I had an old pony which I
had to catch, groom and saddle myself, in
order to wade through much of this dis-
tance, then in a state bordering on thick
pea soup, in many places quite deep, es-
pecially between where the junction of
the road to Caversham and the one
over the hill begins on into Princes street.
I often try to recall the memory of the
look of the land in those days. It is al-
most impossible as I now nave to gaze
on very long broad streets, and rows of
large stores and nice inviting cottages,
where once only the salt sea rose and
feTl, came and went, obedient to inherent
destiny. Certain, however, it is that all
the land we now see, within the wash
of the side to Bond street, the top of
Water street, circling round by the Tele-
graph Office, winding along to the Gaol
north and from Bond street to Manor
place, circling to the tramcar lines in
Princes street South, and curving out to
the railway line, has been reclaimed or
made from time to time by cutting down
the hills naturally existing in and around
the town. I remember when it was a
difficult task to get up either Stafford
street or Walker street. It was a thick
scrub matted with “ lawyers ” and
creepers of many kinds, and many were


the lovely native pigeons that fell to the
bag of anyone with a gun. All the land
in Maitland street through to Lees street
was a mass of old fallen trees, young
growing trees, ferns, and shrubs, a quag-
mire in winter. See it to-day—one of
the most sheltered, sunny, well-lighted
streets in the city.
Immediately we were all settled in our
home in Caversham my father made his
way, sheep and all, by slow degrees to
the station at Tapanui, which he had
taken up. It was afterwards called
“ Brooksdale.” There he began in
earnest to clear and burn, and prepare
a home for the family to join him as soon
as possible, but it took nearly two years
before that could be attained. All the
timber had to be cut rut of the bush,
a mill had to be erected, and then the
timber had to dry to a certain extent
before it could be used, and labour was
so scarce it was almost impossible to get.
However, it was accomplished ,and a com-
fortable dear old home they soon made
of it. My mother’s wonderful faculty
in gardening came again to the rescue,
transforming the whole place. The
natural scenery was beautiful indeed, and
there were few people in those days who
did not enjoy a stay at “ Brooksdale."
Here again began my mother’s and
father’s second experiences in pioneering
and trying and severe they were, though
nothing to be compared to those in Aus-
tralia in earlier years. Still, life was
rough and work hard before all the wild
bracken and scrub could be cleared, and
the general work for a large family well
performed. Still, all were older and very
helpful. My father was of a very cheer-
ful, hopeful disposition, most fortunately
so, for the trials he had to endure would
have otherwise utterly crushed him.
Dear, good “ dad,” as we called him,
lived as anyone might be thankful to live,
so straight and true. He was devoted
to his violin, and truly it was as the
harp of David to Saul. How often
when a child have I seen him sitting
seemingly too overwhelmed with sorrow
and worry even to look up; then the
words came brokenly, “ Bring the fiddle,
dear.” He would take it. feel the strings,
edges, sides, almost like a blind man,
eventually get up moving slowly about
the room, place it, draw the bow, bit by
bit producing the most mournful, plain-
tive airs, till, by degrees, the sorrow was
dispersed and he became his cheerful,
genial self again. He would urge
“ mother dear ” to take the baby away
and have a half-hour’s quiet, while he
placed all the rest of us in order for
Scotch reels, Highland flings, or any-
thing else we felt inclined to undertake
till in the end we were absolutely In-
capable of dancing another step.
He was a dear lover of the stage and
Shakespeare was as a treasured Bible
to him, an apt quotation for every occa-
sion. I can never forget his true and
prophetic words to me on one occasion
when 1 myself had a small family round
my knee, and had absorbed a certain
amount of Presbyterian teaching which
had engendered the idea that it was
wrong to go to the theatre —indeed, I had
been impressed with the conviction that
no good thing could come out of it; it was
evil pure and simple. The words he
uttered appeared to me almost profane
in those days. “ Ah, well, my dear, I
hope you may live to see the day, I never
shall, when the platforms of your theatres
will be a much more potent place to
preach from than the pulpits in your
churches.” And how true this is. And
40 years of seeming silence have left me
no uncertain message to the world, and
to-day I find my father’s words true
in a way I little expected or anticipated.
And many years ago, when I saw the first
performance here of “ Jim, the Penman,”
I began to think my father might have
been right. But when I saw Mr Forbes
Robertson in “ The Third Floor Back ”
in London. I had no further room tor
doubt, and it was a strange coincidence
that the same Mi® Agnes Thomas who
played one of the chief parts in “Jinv
the Penman,” when seen on the stage here
in Dunedin a quarter of a century ago,
played again in the play in London that
completely convinced me of the part the
stage could and would take in the educa-
tion and elevation of the human race in
the years to come.
Rome was not built in a day, we all
know, and it took several years before
the flocks increased, and both cattle and
horses were in any numbers at the
“ Brooksdale ” homestead, and to supple-
ment losses, help build and repair, and
generally “keep the pot boiling,” my father
applied for the position of sheep inspec-
tor for Otago, and was selected. This
took him much from home, constantly on
horseback, travelling very long distances,
as the homes were few and far between,
and many and miraculous were his escapes
from tragic and sudden death in the
rapidly rising and swiftly flowing rivers
he had so frequently to cross. Wherever
he went, he was welcomed with cordial
greetings; everyone apparently was glad
to see bim. I have frequently been told


by people in Invercargill that his visits
were anxiously looked forward to by all
the young people in the place, and, as he
always appeared to time, the first signs
in the distance of a rider on horseback
were heralded by the shouts of little boys,
who threw their caps into the air in glee,
as they always knew there would be
festivity of some kind on hand when the
gentleman who played the fiddle and gave
them all such a good time had arrived.
Simple people, simple pleasures—they
would really enjoy them much more than
many of a more elaborate kind. He was
a man who rarely appeared to feel fatigue,
was absolutely indifferent whether he had
two coats on or one, three meals or only
one.
In those very early days. Captain Car-
gill, our first superintendent, lived at
“ Hillside, 1 ’ in the house which Mrs Isaac
occupied at the time it was burnt down.
It was a wonderful building for those days,
and well furnished, as they had brought
out all they required with them, and many
were the enjoyable evenings spent there—
dances, feasts, and festivals of many kinds
—for he was the very expression of general
kindness and hospitality, a hero of many
wars under the celebrated Wellington,
and was always interesting as well as
entertaining. Then Mrs Cargill—how
shall I describe her? She would require
a Romney or a Raeburn to do so
efficiently. She was a beautiful
woman when I knew her, and must have
been perfectly fascinating when young,
her manner even then was full of spark-
ling gaiety of a finished order, while her
gift of music captivated everyone. She
required no notes before her for even the
most classical music, while she could be-
guile the rhythm of a waltz out of every
popular air, even out of the most solemn
of our hymn tunes. All the members of
this very large, well-known, and respected
family have been known to me, —all genial,
kindly, and courteous in the extreme. Who
will ever forget Mr E. B. Cargill with
his cheerful optimistic nature, his strong
desire for every high-toned and uplifting
movement for the good of the city, and
his calmness and bravery under many and
severe trials? —a beautiful lesson to all.
And Mrs E. B. Cargill will never be for-
gotten by those who had the great privi-
lege of knowing her. A woman of true
culture, and good brain power, who under-
stood all her responsibilities and per-
formed them well, —a marvellous replica
in appearance of our late Queen Victoria.
It was at Captain Cargill’s that I had
the pleasure of meeting Sir Thomas aud
Lady Gore Browne, the Governor of New
Zealand when I arrived. I met them fre-
quently and liked them much. This was
in 1855. And many a very long year after-
wards, when Lady Gore Browne paid a
visit to the colony, she kindly came to see
me at my home at “ Alontecillo,” and we
renewed our friendship under very differ-
ent conditions.
Almost the first people we became inti-
mate with after our arrival were Mr and
Airs Alacandrew, then living at Caris-
brook, which belonged to them, now called
“ The Glen.” The house was built by Air
Alacandrew and added to as occasion re-
quired. Here I spent many of my few
leisure hours. Airs Alacandrew mani-
fested an extraordinary partiality for me,
and urged my presence whenever possible,
and who could resist her kindness, gentle
and generous always, with such a sense of
humour and rectitude as few could sur-
pass? A woman in a thousand, a
woman who did valiant battle
with many a difficulty and many a trial
and became more rarefied. And when
in the midst of increasing hope and suc-
cess and almost at the summit of many
realisations, the edict went forth, that
only a few months would bring the end,
that with the fading of the summer leaf,
she also must pass away. She was now
ever enabled to go forward with daily
increasing spiritual strength leaving the
guidance of her young and numerous
family to the care of that Great Power
who so far had given her strength to
overcome so many and great difficulties.
Her sense of humour was extremely keen,
and it helped to lighten many a load, and
her farewells were said amidst smiles as
well as tears. At the time of our first
acquaintanceship, she was a zealous advo-
cate on behalf of her brother William
Hunter Reynolds, whom eventually I mar-
ried on October 7, 1856, after being in
the colony some 18 months. As houses
were impossible to get, and he had every
intention of going Home as charterer of
vessels to send out emigrants on behalf
of the Provincial Government, we took a
tiny cottage, then standing quite near
where the Presbyterian Church in the
Glen is. It suited very well, as Mrs
Alacandrew was at “ Carisbrook,” and ray
husband’s mother lived in a large brick
house at “ Woodhead,” directly in front
of the large house which was afterwards
built by Mr APNeil, and now known as
“ Avalon.”


It often strikes me as very remarkable
the rapidity with which they accomplished
really great undertakings in those days.
Labour was very scarce; naturally, so few
were the inhabitants. AH the timber for
building had to be cut and dried and
even carried long distances, as all timber
is not of equal durability. All the
bricks had to be made on the spot, and
consequently a kiln had to be erected,
lime searched for, and an immense num-
ber of troublesome details carried out,
practically without any previous founda-
tion. My husband frequently told me
of his trials in gathering and arranging
for the necessary material to build this
house at “ Woodhead.” He organised all,
left the work fully in hand, to be com-
pleted and in readiness on his return
from San Francisco, as he had arranged
to take the Titan, which was his own
ship, on a long cruise by way of Hobart,
Melbourne, etc., he himself acting as
supercargo. On reaching Hobart he found
such a ready market for much of the
cargo which he had brought from Home,
and such quantities of excellent potatoes
to reinvest his money in, with a splendid
market in San Francisco that he at once
proceeded there. At that date, 1851, Cali-
fornia was in a terrible condition. The
gold diggings were in full swing, enormous
quantities of the precious metal flowing
freely, and drawn thither by its irresist-
ible influence were every class and charac-
ter imaginable and every nation under
the “Un. Law and order were practically
non-existent, and outrages of every kind
were common occurrence—open lynching
thought nothing of: no one’s life really
safe. The first thing all the sailors did
as the vessel reached the wharf was to
desert, one and all. and sad work the
captain, mates, and my husband had to
nn'oad all their cargo. They occasion-
ally bribed some of the men on shore
to give an hour’s assistance at ruinous
remuneration. Night and day they
worked selling all their produce from the
side of the vessel at g'orious prices. Pota-
toes were worth ridiculous sums, and in
a way they were rewarded. But when
it came to getting suitable men to bring
the vessel back it was quite another mat-
ter. and it took the captain several weeks
before he had anything like his comple-
ment. while he was being worried out of
his life to make a start by those who
had taken their passages, after having
had more than a terrible time of it in
this land of the “ Golden Magi.” and who
longed to try their luck on the sunny
shores of fascinating, beautiful Sydney,
the port they W'ere bound for. The last
vacancy to fill was that of doctor, and
the captain came to my husband in des-
pair, saying he must take it, as there was
no other chance of getting out of that
inferno. My husband remonstrated, said
he absolutely had no experience to guide
him in such circumstances. It was a
terrible responsibility, but the captain in-
sisted, declared it only required a little
pluck, self-assurance, and so forth, and
that ten chances to one there never would
be any call for hie services in all the run
over, and if there should be he declared
he woud stand by and share the difficulty.
So reluctantly and very uncertainly my
husband was sworn in as doctor for the
voyage. How often have we laughed
heartily over his description of his sensa-
tions as day after day he lived in dread
lest any untoward accident should occur.
All went well till midway, when from all
the symptoms, as far as he and his assist-
ant. the captain, would make out, a case
of inflammation of the lungs was in hand.
In extiemest agitation the medical book
was unearthed, and information eagerly
sought, and distinct conclusions arrived
at. The patient w'as severely drugged and
painfully plastered, and as my husband
had once been bled in the arm while a
youth in Spain, he brought all the know-
ledge acquired by this experience into the
light of day, and the man was bled well
and properly, and much to their surprise
made a splendid recovery. I am afraid
there are more in the profession than he
who may have had a like experience.
Anyway, the principal thing was he made
himself extremely popular with- all the
passengers, which was great gain, and
on their arrival in Sydney, as a mark of
their appreciation of his attention and
courtesy, they invited him to a repast of
some description, and presented him with
a beautiful gold pencil and elaborate tes-
timonial. and although he told them the
truth that he was no doctor at
all, and never had been, they took it
as a huge joke, and only laughed at him,
so truth on this occasion seemed more
ridiculous than fiction. Returning to
Dunedin after a long and, in many ways,
trying trip, which had certainly given
him great experience in many lines,
opened his ideas, and enlarged his nature,
besides replenishing his banking account
very considerably, he finally resolved to
make this city his permanent home. His
experience led him to see that less,
acquired quietly and harmoniously, was


of much greater value than riches
garnered hardly under tragic condition.
He set to work at once, as the material
had been well and carefully prepared in
his absence, and completed the house, a
large and well-built brick house, always
known as “ Woodhead.” My husband
was at the time we came to Dunedin a
partner of the firm of James Macandrew
and Co., and had gone, on behalf of the
Provincial Government service, to Mel-
bourne to try to secure a few immigrants
from there, as it was felt that population
was a first necessity—there could be no
progress without it —and on these oc-
casions he had been very successful. As,
he was Captain Cargill’s right-hand man,
he was urged to extend his work and go
to England to secure a large accession
of people. Eventually it was arranged
and some time in February, 1857. we left
Dunedin in the Gil Bias —175 tons, I
was told —and in this extremely small
vessel we fought our way over to Mel-
bourne. And such a fight it was.
Baffling winds and mountainous waves
assailed us day after day, till we drifted
well down to the Auckland Islands—or so
the captain said—though we rarely ever
knew where we were, as the weather was
so cloudy and foggy that no sun could be
taken, and he had no idea of his reckon-
ing. The huge waves swept the craft
time and again, consequently no cooking
could be relied on, as the small galley fire
was .almost always out. and wh°n it was
lighted the only thing 1 was able to take
was water, arrowroot, and a ship’s biscuit.
Ship’s biscuit in those days was
a very different article from that of
to-day, thick, coarse, and hard, very hard,
but I sustained myself and that was all,
and when we reached Melbourne on the
twenty-eighth day out, I was really more
dead than alive, and caused good old Dr
Motherwell, a very well-known Melbourne
doctor, much anxiety. I recall his strong
words to my husband for bringing me such
a journey. It was truly all ignorance.
He was a good sailor himself and
never realised how it would affect me.
The doctor urged me to come back to my
mother, but that was quite out of the
question, as 1 should have to face the same
small ship, the same distance, back alone,
so there was no adavantage. To go on in a
much larger ship with many more com-
forts. was my only chance. So 10 days
later we sailed in the clipper ship Kent.
Captain Brine in charge. It was a hope-
less business; I could not avert it, so had
to try to make the best of it. My 10
days on shore had set me up a little, but
I was a pitiable object, and when once
secure in my berth never left it again for
40 days, by which time we were off the
river La Plata, and, the weathey turning
very nice and warm and inviting, I begun
to get on deck by degrees. The captain
was very good and allowed his own
steward to pay special attention to me,
but it was a sad and very weary journey,
as I felt a perfect stranger to almost all
the passengers so few having ever seen
me. One gentle little woman of French
extraction, who was travelling alone, and
of an extremely nervous temperament,
begged me to let her creep in and sit on
the floor at the head of my berth, when-
ever there was anything approaching a
gale, and as we rounded the Horn, in the
middle of winter, there was frequently a
•■gale.” I remember her so well; she
always carried in her arms a very small
white poodle with blue ribbons at its
neck. Dear little pathetic soul, she
touched my heart deeply, but I was too
young, I think, to be able to give her any
better comfort, save mere presence, and
I always welcomed her at any hour on
those dark tempestuous nights. On the
same ship with us was Mr James Adams,
who was engaged by the Government US
go Home as emigration agent; he had to
select the people whom my husband took
out. He was well-known as the builder
of many of the boats, the Bon Accord and
The Star. I have through all the long
years remembered him with a grateful
heart for all the kind sympathy and help
he accorded me during those long and very
trying weeks of seclusion. He was a care-
ful student of his Bible, and could, turn up
any passage which I gave him the barest
hint of, and he never failed in his patient
explanation of them, which was a great
help to me, and I own much of my after-
direction in life to his wise and uplifting
council received at this time.
V.
How commonly it occurs that on the
most gruesome-looking nights the most
gruesome things occur!' There was
something in the whole atmosphere this
evening that mad everyone feel creepy—
the look of the wildly scudding clouds,
the weird and curious noises made- by the
wind in the rigging while the movement
caused by the straining of the huge masts
resulted in a series of continuous
screeches —and when the news went
round the ship that one of the hands in
a fit of despair had selected that hour


as the close of his life, it made a sad
and deep impression on everyone. But
there was a crowded ship, and the next
day work had to go on as nsnal, and by
the followi- i evening probably few gave
much further thought to the great and
restless resting-place of that poor soul.
We were making a splendid run, the
weather clearing every hour and growing
warmer; consequently the decks were
beginning to present quite a lively ap-
pearance; summer seemed born, and all
at once were all in light apparel. Musi-
cal instruments of many small kinds
began- to be heard on deck, and the clatter
of feet as they danced on the lower deck.
The hopes of everyone were rising, and
songs and games began to be engaged in
everywhere, and the end of the journey
was reached under much more cheerful
surroundings than it had been begun.
The first thing that attracted our atten-
tion as we arrived at the dock was the
gigantic frame of that leviathan of those
days, the Great Eastern, almost ready
to launch. It was one of the first func-
tions my husband attended after landing,
and I well recall his prediction that she
would really never be of any use, as she
was “ dangerously large.” She cer-
tainly proved useless and unprofitable,
and was much too large for that period,
as they had neither the fine and capable
engines, nor the electric power in use
to-day, besides a hundred and one patent
and powerful inventions in connection
with the construction of steamers of
much larger dimensions, such as the
Mauretania to-day. What an evidence
of the enormous progress made during the
last 50 years these floating palaces are,
crossing and recrossing the Atlantic in
half the time then required, and carrying
inhabitants sufficient for a good-sized
and prosperous village, providing up-to-
•date accommodation equal to the very
best hotels. The wonders of the present
day read like a fairy tale to those who
have come up through the ancient past.
To the children born now nqthing ap-
pears wonderful. I imagine by the
time those few whose lives are prolonged
to become the ancients of the next
generation, the inventions and discoveries
■will far and away surpass anything that
has been achieved during the last cen-
tury, as the mind of man is now begin-
ning to grasp the important truth that
“ all things are possible,” and that there
is nothing hidden that shall not be re-
vealed. As men gradually come into
a realisation of their latent powers, and
follow the instruction of the Christ to
“ seek, seek,” they “ shall find,” but
what are they to find? The basis of
all truth, bit by bit. The realisation of
their “ oneness with Him,” consequently
able to do all that He did, and according
to His Word, even “ greater things,” than
indeed shall we feel ourselves in “ tune
with the Infinite,” as Irvine says. Then
shall we understand the wonderful work-
ing of “ the laws of he Lord ” absolutely
perfect, working in all cases eternally
and automatically, truly converting the
wayward -oul, by bringing light and
comfort to it, by removing the scales
from blind eyes, then we are also to
“ knock, knock and ye shall find.” But
where are we to know? And what shall
we find? Ah, the Great Master knew
the necessity for importunity, for con-
centration of mind and purpose. He
realised the evolution that comes to the
diligent seeker, as the reward for his
work. Truly we have to dig for wisdom
and knowledge as those who seek for
silver and gold. Eagerly, ardently must
we knock at the door of science, at the
door of mystery before the portals lead-
ing to all these glorious, unimagined
possibilities will open sufficiently to get
even a peep at their number, greatness
or beauty. But as Browning says in
“ Paraceleus,” “ ’Tis in the advance of
individual minds that the slow crowd
should ground their expectation eventu-
ally to follow, as the sea waits long
ages in its bed till some one wave, out
of the multitudinous mass, extends the
empire of the whole some few feet, per-
haps over the strip of sand which could
confine its fellows for so long a time,
thenceforth the rest even to the meanest
hurry in at once, and so much is clear
gained.” Certainly it is so every time.
See our wireless system, gramophones
and our moving pictures manifesting the
very microbes that infest and torture
our body seen in their natural condition.


See again in the wonders of surgery, the
mystery of amesthetics, also the value
of science in agriculture all along the
line everywhere. Science triumphant—
and it must be so and “ prove all
things ” —will also be found to be the
best foundation for “ faith.” Think for
a moment of Dr Wallace and Sir
William Crookes, of Edison, Marconi,
■of Tesla, of Dr James Simpson,
Dr Hollander and scores of others
who have been the “ harbingers of light ”
to the poor insensate doubting multi-
tudes, and so it seems that we need not
be astonished at any new or great dis-
covery. It is only “ unveiled,” has been
lying near at hand through the ages
to be foretold by the “ farseers ” or
prophets and found by the “ seekers ”;
therefore, as Paul earnestly entreated,
41 despise not prophesyings,”—they are
the natural order of things, one of the
Creator’s principles, and principles
never become defunt.
During the time we were in England
my husband worked night and day
travelling constantly in conjunction with
Mr Adam. Almost every county in Eng-
land was visited and lectures delivered,
with the result that over 2000 emigrants
were secured for the colony, and splendid
settlers they made, as witness the great
gatherings which meet from time to time
in the Early Settlers’ Hall. They have
now developed into a very substantial
multitude.
I saw but little of England myself,
as my eldest daughter, the late Mrs
G. L. Denniston, was born on August 20,
1857, and I found travelling about with
her very difficult. I went once, however,
to Edinburgh to see my husband’s rela-
tions and remained for a few weeks. 1
remember the looks of astonishment
on the faces of his old aunts when I
walked into the room. I could not
understand it, and for a moment felt
most uncomfortable, when one of them
placing her hand on my shoulder, said
in very broad Scotch, “Aye, Wullie,
Wullie, the lear that ye are.” The ex-
planation was that “ Wullie ” had been
on one or two occasions to Edinburgh
before me, and had said I was a native
of Adelaide. They immediately imagined
I was a black native, and, as soon as
lie saw a good joke was in store, never
enlightened them. They, old souls, had
gone through much perturbation of mind
on the subject*, and were intensely re-
lieved when they grasped the real facts
and saw that 1 was after all a white
woman.
It would be almost a waste of words to
say how fascinated I was with Edin-
burgh, especially under the kind escort
they always gave me and the trouble
they took to show me all its beauties.
From there we travelled as far as Banff,
where T paid a visit to one of my
mother’s sisters—Mrs Alexander
Souter—and there also I had a
most cordial reception. My uncle was
well known in the north in those days
as he had been factor to the old Earl
of Fife for nearly a lifetime. One of
his sons was engineer to the Inrieff
and Banff, Railway, then just completed.
But my husband’s time was very limited
and we had to hurry back to London
as he always made it a practice to see
every vessel which he chartered sail
from the wharf to ensure that all was
in order.
The close of 1850 witnessed the ending
of the Crimean War, which, through
unpreparedness, had resulted in so much
death, distress, and suffering to the
British, though they ■ overcame in the
end, and were eventually crowned with
victory. Still it was a sad revelation
of her utter unpreparedness for such a
struggle, and it opened the eyes of
many in the nation to the urgency for
many reformatory measures, many of
which were afterwards carried out,
notably those in connection with the
nursing and care of the wounded —all
these latter, due to the inspiration and
courage of that great-hearted woman,
who did not hesitate to attack, single-
handed and alone, almost impossible
feats; all know so well the work in-
augurated by Florence Nightingale, the
friend of every sick and sorrowing soul.
She was a young woman in those days,
and reports of her prowess were on
everyone’s lips, and while these notes
of victory were still in the air, another
and terrible cry rang out in the Indian
Mutiny, filling the land with fresh cause


for heartbrokenness, as the accounts of
the horrors practised on the helpless
women and children came daily
to hand. The details of many of the
cases linger sadly in my memory yet,
but way should I note them? Half a
century and more has elapsed since all
those agonies were endured, since brave
hearts fought and '1 and kept alive the
old tradition of their nation, yet how-
many were left to carry to the end of
their days the evidence of the fiery ordeal
through which they had passed in the
conflict, for many were the multilated.
helpless children that were arriving !■>
England at the time that we were pre-
paring to leave again for these far shores.
But these are old and oft-told talcs, and
yet is it ever possible ‘o bring home to
the mind and heart of those far from the
scene of such suffering anything but th-
smallest conception of the horror and
cruel terror that poor hearts in such an
hour of crucifixion were called upon to'
endure? Oh the mystery of it all 1 If
it is not the “ sowing and the 'Piping,” if
it is not the “ paying to the uttermost
farthing.” how can we account for such
things, debts long ago incurred and being
worked off, for. deeply as the very soul ie
shocked over sad events of the results of
a war, it is nothing in comparison with
the sufferings endured under slavery
where men are regularly permitted by the
law of the land to inflict the most out-
rageous and unnatural cruelties or help-
less creatures, such as those permitted in
Russia, the Congo, in Yucatan, and manv
other- places. We need by no means
travel to come in contact with all the
horrors that are occurring in every part
of the world: our wireless and many
other mysterious methods collect the news
from every cornrr of the globe, and have
it ready at the dawn of day as a sort of
breakfast feast. ' T, h- London of to-day
is a very different place from that of 50
years ago. The great West End was a
shadowy dream in those days. The
glorious Hyde Park of to-day, with all
its entrancing beauty, was a very wild,
uncultivated place then. As for the
city, it has extended and increased be-
yond all imagination.
My husband and Mr James Adam
were most successful in the number and
type of emignnt whom they induced to
come out and form new homes in this
far land. The records of the early
settlers fully establish this. They were
a brave and dauntless set, and courage-
ously and successfully established them-
selves in very flourishing homes all over
the country. I recall a few of the names
of some of the vessels they sent out, such
as the Nonrmnhal and Three Bells.
VI.
VVe came out in the “ Strathfieldsay ”
with that evil and notorious Captain
Brown, who was in the gaol here for
many months awaiting his trial for shoot-
ing at and wounding the second mate. He
was a most violent, intemperate man. The
passage was a long and most distressing
one. The Rev. Mr Johnstone, the first
minister for Port Chalmers, was one of
the passengers, and was of much help and
comfort to my husband in quelling many
disturbances on the way out. On one
occasion they had to keep the captain
locked in his cabin for several weeks.
Our first home on our return from Eng-
’and. was the well-known home of “ Wood-
head,.” where we resided for some years.
This was eventually sold to Mr Shad-
rach Jones, as we had intended, to go
and live in England, but my husband’s
mother, who had made a new home tor
herself in Walker street, evinced such
deep distress that we gave ur> this idea,
and bought from Mr Edward M'Glashan
that home so long known by the name of
“ Montecillo,” and there we lived for
nearly 40 years, adding to the old house
from time to time, just as we required.
Here in those old days we did nearly all
our own work, always he'ping with the
cleaning, beating carpets, scrubbing or
washing up. ironing—anything, just as it
came along. We made all our own jama,
pickles, sausages, cured all our own bacon,
reared all our own poultry—a busy,
strenuous life.
Tn those days there was no Parliament
in Xew Zea'and. but only Provincial Coun-
cils, and of the Otago Provincial Coun-
cil from the first my husband was a
member, and was the first Speaker to
wear a gown and bands; these we have
given to the Early Settlers’ Hall. I can-
not recall the date of the first General
Assembly, but it was held in Auckland,
and it took many weary weeks to reach


there, and proved a very serious matter
to business men. It was a day of much
rejoicing to the people in the south, when
Government House and Parliament were
transferred down to Wellington. Of
course, the people in the north were irate,
as it lessened values up there; all the
same it was a juster arrangement. For
the first many years I never attended
these sittings, having too many young chi!
dren, and qualified servants being ex-
tremely difficult to get. Some of those
arriving at the Barracks were truly raw
recruits. 1 recall going out to interview
some of them at Caversham. Approach-
ing one of them I asked it she understood
plain cooking. “Oh I’ee, I can cook
tatties,” and she really could, but prac-
tically nothing else. She was, however,
faithful and willing, and we got on very
well after months of anxious drilling.
How well I recall many of the old
M.H.E.’s such as Sir William Fox, and
as for the Governors, we knew each other
personally from Sir Thomas Gore Browne
through all the long years to Lord and
Lady Ranfurly, and even the acting
Governors during all the busy period.
One very well known and important old
identity I must not forget to mention. Dr
Burns, the original minister of the First
Church, where it stood in those days was,
I should say, almost exactly where the
premises now occupied by Messrs Sar-
good,. Son, and Ewcn now are. He was a
fine, genial, kindly man, very slow in
movement and in manner. His wife was
the very other extreme, as quick as a
needle, and I know she was the standard
of all womanly good management in house-
keeping, as she had to give her large
Presbytery dinners in her kitchen in those
days and although all was cooked and
dished in the same room, no mortal
would ever have imagined such a thing,
as all was in such perfect order —no evi-
dence of work of any kind going on, and
no one ever yet learned how she managed
it all. Arthur Burns, the only son, was
best man at our wedding. The original
manse stood on a hill where the Ship Inn
and John Edmond’s premises were later
—picturesque and quaint, overlooking the
harbour.
Once again my father’s roving disposi-
tion impelled him to make another move,
after 13 years of life at “ Brooksdale,”
Tapanui, where they had a comfortable
home and a lovely garden that was full
of wonderful fruit trees —nothing to
match them in the country, being many
new kinds all grown and developed by
my mother, and new and very early kinds
of strawberries from seed, and' such
asparagus beds as are rarely seen. This
time he took the idea of moving away
to America, the laud laws and other laws
oppressed him here, and so he sold >ul
to Mr David M'Kellar, and, much to
the sorrow of all, the family sailed in
August, ISHSr/Aly mother, brother, and
pater Roby followed six months later.
Soon after reaching San Francisco my
father bought many shares in the rich
Bonanza mine, and was reaping a for-
tune when a report was circulated that
the mines were on fire. A panic ensued,
and he sold out. Mr E. B. Cargill told
me long years afterwards that the fire
had been a very temporary affair—in-
deed, had been purposely arranged to
create a scare and so enable some of the
rich men to buy in all the shares, and
this was what happened. My brother
told me, only lately, that a week before
the fire he heard a man offer my father
£IOO,OOO for his shares, but he replied,
“If they were worth that much to an-
other they were equally worth it to him.”
Alas, he never imagined such a thing as
that which happened. Consequently, when
the panic came, he was glad to sell for
as many hundreds instead of thousands.
He then took up a lovely tract of coun-
try in Monteray, a place called the
“ Pleyto,” and formed a ranch for sheep
and cattle there, where he took my
mother, brother, and sister. They had not
J)ecn long there when my dear good sister
took seriously ill, and was unwisely
treated ard died after a few days’ ill-
ness. You may imagine my poor mother’s
agony away there in that strange and
new land. My father was still restless,
and left this place with my brother and
travelled into the heart of new Mexico
to Wagon Mound, just beyond Sante Fe.
He bought 300,000 acres of land there on
one of those doubtful titles. He again
removed my mother there, and had large
numbers of sheep, horses, and cattle trans-
ferred there also —a very serious under-
taking in those days, when the Arizona
Indians were very troublesome, and there
were absolutely no roads, lyirdly tracks,
certainly none of any description on the
line of route for animals, as John M'Kel-
lar. who was one of those in charge of
them assured me —for by the time ray
father had bought this property he had
induced my sister. Mrs Patterson, and
my sister. Mrs John M'Kellar, to go over
with all her children and occupy a large
portion of this huge edate. This was a
disastrous stop, as events proved, as in


course of time a railway was put com-
pletely through the ranch, the station
being placed within a stone’s throw of
the house, and, as the American Govern-
ment gave every other block to the Rail-
way Company if it would place settlers
on the. ground, this it commenced to do
at once, with the result that they were
placed all along the boundary of my
father’s land, and when he remonstrated
he was told that his title was no good,
and so he found it. After a terrible
struggle and much waste of good money
he had to pass the last year of my
mother’s life in Washington, leaving her
alone with one of her grandchildren at
Wagon Mound. He was recalled suddenly
to see her die heart-broken. He never
returned to try and battle any
more as the Government had promised
to send down some Land Court judges to
settle the matter, which they did in
favour of the Government, of course, and
they never gave him an acre of ground or
a farthing of compensation. It was such
a tragedy. He then again moved his
flock down to a place called Wilcox, near
the Gulf of Mexico, where he died almost
immediately at the age of 82. My sister,
Mrs Stevenson, had long before this
joined my mother from Antofogasta, a
place near Bolivia, at the saltpetre mines,
where her husband had been for some
years as book-keeper to a firm under a
Mr Hicks. She endured terrible tria.s.
as it was in a wild state, communication
with the outside world being rare and
difficult. Though she was there for
tour years, she never saw one drop of
rain fall. There was no milk or vege-
tables, and the ground would not grow
anything—there was not even a blade of
grass, so that no animals could live, and
as there was no water even to drink, it
had all to be condensed, and was even
then very disagreeable in taste. Con-
sequently the two babies who were born
there both died of starvation, pure and
simple, as though they kept a goat to
feed them on its milk, it starved first,
and then the children followed. She
has frequently described to me the hor-
rors of one of those terrible earthquakes
which often occur there. They went
there at the first opening of the mines,
and just after the terrible destruction
of Iquique, and some two years later, the
one she referred to, occurred at or near
Antofagasta, where they lived. She told
me she fell to the floor, and could not
rise, she was so giddy. The tail end of
a huge wave rushed in at the front door
and out of the back, flooding all the place.
As soon as she could rise she rushed out
to look for the children; they were safe,
being well up on a bank, but the sight
she saw was beyond description. The
backwash of the wave carried 800 un-
fortunate creatures out to sea. never
more to be heard of. Their cries were
heart-piercing, and while their hands and
arms waved piteously in the air, no one
could render any assistance. So she felt
she could no longer remain there, and she
took the first little vessel, a few hundred
tons, to England, had an awful passage,
but arrived safely, lived there a year
or so, and then joined the family in New
Mexico.
I had an interesting and unexpected
experience while staying at a quiet little
seaside place in Cornwall in 1906, called
New Quays. I had occasion to be taken
to visit two old ladies who owned a nice
house there, with a beautiful garden and
many curios. When being shown over
the house I observed a very fine speci-
men of soda crystals on the dining room
mantle, and inquired where it had come
from. Great was my surprise when the
name \ntofogaeta fell upon my ear, as
it wa so rarely ever heard. Thereupon
Miss . .icks told me her brother had been
manager there till the time of his death,
when I told her my brother-in-law, Hugh
Ross Stevenson, had been sent for from
Dunedin. New Zealand, to act as book-
keeper to the society. She then said,
“ Oh. well, his photo will be sure to be
in one of my brother’s many albums of
hie staff.” After a prolonged look
through there was his photo, sure enougu,
in two distinct places, and extremely like
him.
