





OF THE
Australian Club.
September, 1878.
|f dDbram:
SANDS & McDOUGALL, PRINTERS, COLLINS ST. WEST.


INDEX
RULE
Absentee Members .. .. .. .. .. iS
Accounts .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 37
Acquiescence in Rules .. .. .. .. .. .. 42
Adjournment for want of Quorum .. .. .. .. xo
Annual Meetings .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
Auditor. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 38
Bankruptcy. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 32
Bye-Laws .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 5
Committee .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
Committee Meetings .. .. .. .. .. .. S
Dogs .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..25
Election by Ballot .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
Entrance Fees and Annual Subscriptions .. .. .. .. 11
Expulsion .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
Failure to Pay Subscription .. .. .. .. ..12
Filling up Vacancies .. .. .. .. .. .. 9
For Dissolving the Club .. .. .. .. .. ..40
Games and Stakes .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
Gratuities to Servants .. .. .. .. .. .. 24
Governor and his Staff .. .. .. .. .. .. 17
Honorary Members .. .. .. .. .. ..16
Hours the Club-house shall be open .. .. .. .. 34
Management .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Members not to be paid Officers .. .. .. .. 41
Minutes of Meetings .. .. .. .. .. 21
Name of Club .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
Names of Members ceasing to be such .. .. .. • • 33
New Members .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
New Rules .. .. .. .. .. .. ..7
Newspapers, &c., not to be taken out of Club-house .. .. 28
No Servant except Messenger to be sent out of Club-house .. .. 29
Office-bearers
Officers of the Army, Navy, &c. .. .. .. .. ..18
Payment of Bills .. .. .. .. .. .. 23
Payments .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
Quorum at Committee Meetings .. .. .. .. 3
Quorum at General Meetings .. .. .. .. 6
Receipts .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 35
Resignation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 30
Resolutions binding on all Members .. .. .. .. 22
Retiring Members .. .. ~ .. .. .. 39
Special Meetings .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
Smoking .. .. .. .. .. ... .. ..27
Strangers’ Room .. .. .. .. .. ~ 20
Votes in Writing .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
Vacancies in Committee .. .. .. .. .. 3


l^xm'btnt :
Hon. W, J. CLARKE, M.L.C.
JOHN BENN, Esq.
JAMES MacBAIN, Esq., M.L.A.
f mtm:
Hon. W. J. CLARKE, M.L.C.
MacBAIN, Esq., M.L.A. JOHN BENN
JAMES
Commit tu of Itfmmgmeut:
THOMAS ARMSTRONG, Esq.
W. W. COUCHE, Esq.
R. J. JEFFRAY, Esq.
R. MACFARLAND, Esq,
JAMES ORMOND, Esq.
F. W. PRELL, Esq.
A. W. ROBERTSON, Esq.
W. SIDDELEY, Esq.
W. K. THOMSON, Esq.
G. H. F. WEBB, Esq.
J. WHITTINGHAM, Esq.
W. WILSON, Esq., M.L.A.
Stocwtwß:




RULES
OF THE
Australian Club.
I.—The name of the Club shall be the Australian
Club.
2. —The affairs of the Club are and shall be under the
management of the following office-bearers, namely:—a
President, two Vice-Presidents, three Trustees, and a
General Committee; the President and Vice-Presidents
retiring annually, but being eligible of re-election. All
the property of the Club, real and personal, shall be
vested in the Trustees, who shall remain in office until
death, resignation, or removal by a General Meeting. All
securities shall be taken, stock purchased, and investments
made, in the names of such Trustees ; the property, the
subject nature of the Trust, to be nevertheless subject to
the disposition of the Committee; the orders in writing
of a quorum of those assembled at a meeting, and signed
by the Chairman of the day, and attested by the Secretary,
shall be obligatory upon and a justification to the Trustees
as to any such purchase, sale, investment, or disposal.


3. —The Committee shall (in addition to the President
and Vice-Presidents, who shall be ex officio members thereof)
consist of twelve members, elected by ballot. At every
annual general meeting three members of the General
Committee, not being ex officio members, shall retire by
rotation, the order of rotation to be settled by lot by the
Committee, and their places shall be filled up at each annual
general meeting. All such retiring members shall be eligible
to be re-elected. Any three members of the General Com-
mittee shall form a quorum thereof. In the event of any
vacancy occurring iu the General Committee the remaining
members shall have power to fill up such vacancy.
4. —In all cases not otherwise specially provided for, the
general business of the Club shall be managed and carried
on by the Committee.
5. —The Committee shall have power to make Bye-Laws,
and to alter, amend, or rescind them as occasion may require,
and such Bye-Laws shall have the same effect as, and shall
not be opposed to the Rules and Regulations. The Com-
mittee to meet for the transaction of business, at least, once
in each month.
6.—There shall be held an annual general meeting of the
Club on the last Wednesday in January in each year.
Chair to be taken at two o’clock, for the purpose of electing
new Office-bearers, and considering the Committee’s report
and abstract of the state of the accounts and general concerns
of the Club for the past year, together with an estimate of
the receipts and disbursements for the ensuing year, and of
6


propositions for any new rule or alteration of any existing
rule of the Club. At all meetings of members (other than
for the expulsion of members,) twenty-one members shall
form a quorum. The Secretary to forward to every member,
a printed copy of the Report, Balance Sheet, and Abstract
of Receipts and Expenditure one week before the date of
annual general meeting.
7- —No new rule, nor alteration, nor suspension of a rule
shall be made without the sanction of two-thirds of those
members voting in person, or in writing, at a General or
Special General Meeting (twenty members at least, voting in
person on the occasion), nor unless the proposed rule or
alteration be signed by two members, and posted in the
public room one month before the meeting.
B.—The Committee may at any time, call a special general
meeting, on giving one month’s notice in writing to every
member of its object or objects, and shall do so on the
written requisition of ten effective members, subject to the
same notice.
g. —All vacancies in any honorary office may be filled up
by any general meetingj and all such vacancies, if not sooner
filled up, shall be filled up by the first annual general meeting
which shall take place after such vacancy occurring.
xo. —In every case of a meeting of members, or of a Com-
mittee, if after the lapse of half an hour, a quorum shall not
be present it shall thereupon stand adjourned ipso facto, until
the following day (Sundays excepted), and so on from time
7


to lime as often as the case shall happen, until a quorum
shall be present; and all such Meetings shall have power to
adjourn their proceedings from time to time, for any period
not exceeding at any one time three days.
ll. —Every member shall, on admission, pay an Entrance
Fee of Fifty Pounds, and an Annual Subscription of Twelve
Pounds, by yearly payments in advance on the first day of
January,
12,—0n the Annual Subscription becoming due, notice
shall be given to each member by the Secretary in writing,
and if any member fail to pay on or before the first day of
February, his Annual Subscription due on the first day of
January preceding, he shall pay a fine of one guinea;
and one guinea for each succeeding month ; but should a
sufficient explanation be made to the Committee they shall
have power to remit all the fines save the first, on his paying
that and his Subscription.
13. —After the opening of the Club House every candidate
for admission must be proposed by one member and seconded
by another, to both of whom he must be personally known ;
and the candidate’s name, rank, profession, or occupation,
and usual place of residence, shall, together with the names
(in their own handwriting) of his proposer and seconder, be
inserted at the time of proposing him, in a book kept for
that purpose, called “The Book of Candidates.” A notice,
signed by the Secretary, of every candidate’s name, rank,
profession, or occupation, and usual place of residence, and
the names of his proposer and seconder shall be exhibited in
8


the Club House for at least thirty consecutive days imme-
diately before the ballot, and a notice of the same shall be
sent to each member of the Club. The ballot shall take place
between half-past one and three o’clock p.m., on the first
Wednesday of every month, during which time the ballot shall
be kept open in the presence of three scrutineers, appointed
by the Committee. No ballot shall be valid unless twenty-one
members actually vote. One black ball in five shall exclude.
14. —On the admission of each new member, the Committee
or Secretary shall notify it to him, furnishing him at the same
time, with a copy of the Rules, and stating the amount of the
Entrance Fee and proportion of Annual Subscription ; but
no elected candidate shall actually become or be a member
of the Club, unless, and until he pays the Entrance Fee pay-
able by him. Every such candidate shall pay his Entrance
Fee within one month from the time of his election, after
which period it shall not be received, unless the Committee,
on good cause being shown to their satisfaction for the delay
or omission, shall deem it right to extend the time ; in which
case they may so extend it for a further period not exceeding
one calendar month, after which extended period no such
Entrance Fee shall, under any circumstances be received,
unless the member is again elected.
15.—Any ordinary member of the Club who may pro-
ceed to other parts of the world, may at his option, upon
notifying the same in writing to the Secretary, become
an Absentee Member, and thereupon shall become and be
exempt from the Annual Subscription during his absence
from the Colony; and on his coming or returning thereto,
9


and communicating that fact in writing to the Secretary*
and paying his Subscription to the end of current year, he
shall again be entitled to all privileges as a member of
the Club.
16. —Gentlemen newly arrived, not being residents in the
Colony, or gentlemen being visitors in the Colony, may be
admitted by any two members of the Committee of Manage*
ment, as honorary members for any period not exceeding one
month, during which time they shall not be called upon for
any Subscription. And it shall then be in the power of the
Committee to invite such gentlemen to remain honorary
members of the Club for the further period of three months
upon payment of the established Subscription, monthly, in
advance. No honorary member shall have any right, title,
or interest in or to any of the property of the Club. Not-
withstanding anything in this rule to the contrary the
Committee shall have the power of revoking any such
admission or invitation at any of their ordinary meetings,
provided that not less than five members of Committee be
present on such occasion.
17. —The Governor of Victoria during his tenure of office,
and his Staff, shall be honorary members of the Club.
18.—Officers of the Army and Navy on actual service,
may, subject to the approval of the Committee, be enrolled
as non-effective members of the Club, upon payment of the
Subscription, quarterly, in advance ; but no non-effective
member shall hold office in the Club, nor be present at any
meeting.
10


19. —Members shall be allowed to vote in writing,
addressed to the Secretary, for or against any proposed
new Rule or alteration, or suspension of a Rule, as well
as on all subjects brought forward at general meetings or
special general meetings. Their votes to have the same
effect in all respects as those of members present at the
meeting.
20. —A room shall be appropriated by the Committee, into
which members shall have the privilege of introducing
friends to dine with them under rules and regulations which
shall be prepared by the Committee from time to time.
21.—1 t shall be the duty of the Secretary, among his other
duties, to keep full and accurate minutes (in books provided
for that purpose) of the proceedings at all meetings of
members, as well as at all meetings of the Committee ; and
it shall be the duty of the Chairman presiding at each such
meeting to see that the minutes thereof are correct, and upon
ascertaining their correctness to sign the same. In cases of
difficulty in obtaining the signature of such Chairman thereto,
the members present at any subsequent meeting may author-
ise the Chairman for the time being to sign the same, who
shall thereupon sign them accordingly.
22. —All resolutions passed at meetings of the Club shall
be conclusive and binding on all the members of the Club,
whether they shall be present at such meeting or not;
provided that such meetings are held in conformity with the
Rules at present, or which may hereafter be in force in the
Club.
11


23. —All members are to pay their Bills weekly, for every
expense they incur in the Club House ; the House Steward
having positive orders to account daily to the Secretary for
all moneys passed, or to be passed through his hands. The
Secretary shall place before the Committee every week a list
of all sums due by members. Any member whose account
shall remain unpaid for one month, shall be required to pay
ten per cent, additional on the amount; and so on monthly
as long as the same remains unpaid. But no member’s
account shall be allowed to exceed Ten Pounds.
24. —No member shall give any money or gratuity to any
servants of the Club. No servant of the Club shall directly
or indirectly receive any presents, money, or gratuity, from
any member, or from any tradesman, or other person em-
ployed by the Club, under pain of immediate dismissal.
25.- —No member is on any account to bring a dog into the
Club House.
26.—N0 game of Loo or Hazard shall be ever played in
the Club House; nor shall cards or other games be allowed
on Sundays. No higher stake than five-shilling points shall
ever be played for.
27, —No smoking shall be permitted in the Club House,
except in the room or rooms set apart for that purpose.
28.- No member of the Club shall take away from the
Club House, or deface, tear, or injure any newspaper, book,
pamphlet, or other article, the property of the Club. Mem-
bers breaking any article, the property of the Club, shall pay
for the same.
12


29. —No servant of the Club (the messenger excepted)
shall be sent out of the Club House upon any errands, or for
any other purpose, under any pretence whatever.
30. —Any member may resign his membership at any time,
by notifying his resignation, in writing, under his hand, to
the Secretary, and thereupon he shall, ipso facto , cease to be
a member of the Club ; but no such resignation shall relieve
any member from the payment of any subscription or other
money due or payable by him, or of his proportion of any of
the outstanding liabilities of the Club at the time of such
resignation.
31. If any member shall wilfully infringe any of the
general rules of the Club, or any of the bye-laws or regula-
tions of the Committee, or if any member shall in the opinion
of the Committee, be guilty of conduct derogatory to the
character of a gentleman, or prejudicial to the interests of
the Club, it shall be in the power of such Committee to cause
a special general meeting to be called for the express and
sole purpose of determining whether such member shall be
expelled or not; and if at such meeting two-thirds of the
members constituting the same, and voting thereat shall vote
for the expulsion of such member—and if, also, the members
so voting for his expulsion shall exceed twenty-six, but not
otherwise—he shall be expelled, and shall thereupon cease
to be a member of the Club.
32. —Every member becoming Bankrupt or Insolvent, or
making any general assignment of all his property for the
benefit of his creditors, shall ipso facto , cease to be a member
13


of the Club. Any member ceasing to be such, under this
rule, may, on obtaining his certificate or release, or otherwise
ceasing to be Bankrupt or Insolvent, be re-admitted under
the regulations for the election of ordinary members, and
upon being so re-admitted shall be exempt from the payment
of any Entrance Fee.
33- —The names of all members ceasing to be such shall
be reported by the Secretary to the House Committee, who
shall thereupon cause the same either to be erased from the
list of members, or a memorandum to be made certifying the
fact.
34- —The Club House shall be open from seven o’clock a.m.
till midnight; after which hour no refreshments shall be
supplied, unless on some special occasion, by direction of
the Committee.
35- —The Secretary shall receive all Entrance Fees, Sub-
scriptions, and other moneys, and his receipt shall be a
sufficient discharge. All sums received are to be paid into
the Bank at which the Club transacts its business, at least
twice a week. Members to place their initials against the
amounts they pay in the book provided for that purpose.
36.—A1l payments shall be made under order of the Com-
mittee, by cheques, to be signed by two members, and
countersigned by the Secretary.
37- —The Secretary shall keep an account of all moneys
received and disbursed, and submit the same to the Com-
14


mittee once in every calendar month, and at any other time
the Committee may deem fit.
38. —Two Auditors, who shall not be members of Com-
mittee, shall be appointed at the first special, and subse-
quently at each annual general meeting. Such Auditors
shall remain in office until the next annual general meeting
unless sooner removed by death, resignation, or otherwise.
Any vacancy occurring during the year shall be filled up by
the general Committee. The Auditors shall have power to
call, at any time, for the production of all books, papers,
accounts, and documents relating to the affairs of the Club.
The yearly accounts shall be audited by them, and, if correct,
certified in writing under their hands before they are sub-
mitted to the annual general meeting.
39. —No member retiring from the Club, or ceasing from
any cause to be a member, or who shall not have paid an
Entrance Fee, shall be entitled to, or have any claim upon,
any portion whatever of the property of the Club.
40. —On application, in writing, made to the Committee
by twenty-five effective members, signifying their desire that
the Club should be dissolved, a special general meeting shall
be called to consider the question, of which meeting and its
objects notice shall be posted in the dining-room, and given
by circular to every member one month immediately pre-
ceding the day of meeting. At the meeting, votes by proxy
will be received, and the votes of at least two-thirds of the
effective members will be necessary to carry the proposition
for the dissolution.
15


Members not 41. —In no case shall a member of the Club be a paid
Officers! ld officer thereof.
Acquies- 42. — The payment of Entrance Fee or any annual or
cence.
monthly Subscription implies, and will be considered to
imply, a member’s acquiescence in these Rules.


PAGINAL
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CLUB.
i H. K. Aird
2 Thomas Armstrong
3 Robert G. Armstrong
4 George Arnold
5 George Aitken
6 R. C. Bagot
7 Hon. Wm. Bayles, M.L.A.
8 Hon. James Balfour, M.L.C.
9 John Benn
xo F. H. Biddulph
ii A. P. Blake
12 John Blyth
1 3 W. A. Brahe
14 Samuel Bright
15 John M. Bruce
16 John Bell
17 H. J. G. Cattanach
18 Hon. W. J. Clarke, M.L.C.
19 Jos. Clarke
20 W. W. Couche
21 James Cochran
22 W. G. Cramer
23 G. E. Crespin
24 William Crosby
25 Hon. Henry Cuthbert


Donald Campbell
John M. Davies
R. W. Dickson
J. H. Douglas
J. G. Dougharty
Thomas Edolls
N. G. Elder
John Ettershank
W. J. Ecroyd
Alfred Felton
E. G. Fitzgibbon
Thomas Finlayson
Hon. N. Fitzgerald, M.L.C.
Hon. J. G. Francis, M.L.A,
Hon. Alex. Fraser, M.L.C.
A. W. Fraser
A. N. Gilbert
Gavin Gibson
Richard Goldsbrough
C. W. Gibson
F. S. Grimwade
Win. Halliday
C. J. Hepburn
H. Hedderwick
Robert Harper
R. J. Jeffray
Alfred Johnston
Jas. Kinninmonth
James Keiler
George Kirk
W. G. Laidlaw
Henry Joseph Langdon
Samuel Lindsay
Hon. Jas. Lorimer, M.L.C.
William Lynch
Jas. R. Laing


John McVean
Robert MacFarland
Jos. McGaw
Jas. McCrae
Jos. MacDonald
Robert Matheson
James Macßain, M.L.A.
John MacPherson
Peter McPherson
Dugald MacPherson
Dr. G. A. Mein
William Murray
Thos. MacFarland
John MacFarland
Wm. McMillan
Pulteney Mein
Hon. John McGregor
Alex. McQueen
A. Newell
James Ormond
A. Purchas
F. W. Prell
C. R. Parsons
D. M. Parker
Arthur Parker
George Riddoch
Wm. Robertson
James Robertson
John Robertson
Henry Ricketson
A. W. Robertson
Duncan Robertson
J. R. Ross
S. Rennick
W. Riggall
Thomas Smith


F. P. Stevens
W. Siddeley
George Stevenson
J. K. Smyth
Hon. T. J. Sumner, M.L.C.
Thomas Shaw
Samuel Staughton
G. Napier Turner
W. K. Thomson
Lloyd Tayler
Wm. Taylor
W. H. Tuckett
J. R. Tuckett
G. H. Traill
Dr. J. C. Telford
T. H. Taylor
A. Tobin
John Wagner
James Winter
Wm. Irving Winter
J. G. W. Wilmot
G. H. F. Webb
Hon. William Wilson, M.L.C.
John Wilson
John Whittingham
E. S. Watson
George Whittingham
E. F. Yencken
J. Younghusband
Sands and McDougall, Printers, Melbourne.




