

JOHN G. PATON CENTENARY
1924
CALENDAR FOR MAY
THE JOHN G. PATON MEMORIAL HOSPITAL, VILA






Compiled from the writings of Dr. John G. Paton and issued by
A.M.B. in grateful acknowledgment of the Missionary Services
and influence of Dr. John G. Paton; authorised by the Foreign
Missions Committee of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria


MAY, 1924
O my children, love your Heavenly
Father, tell Him in faith and prayer all
your needs, and He will supply your
wants so far as it shall be for your good
and His glory.— (The mother of Dr.
J. G. Paton to her children.)
“My life is given to another Master
to the Lord Jesus, and I want
to prepare as soon as possible for His
service in the proclaiming of the Gos-
pel.”
Of so-called “attractions” wc had none,
and needed none, save the sincere pro-
clamation of the good tidings from God
to men.
Life is God’s great gift, to be preserved
for His uses, not thrown away.
The wail and claims of the heathen
were constantly sounding in my ears.
Nothing so clears the vision and lifts
up the life, as a decision to move for-
ward in what you know to be entirely
the will of the Lord.
One of the surest signs of life is the
effort of a Church to spread the Gospel
beyond its own bounds, and especially
to send the knowledge of Jesus amongst
the Heathen.
Had I been a stranger to Jesus and to
prayer, my reason would verily have
given way, but my comfort and joy
sprang out of these words, “I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee. Lo! lam
with you alway.”


9. In every great emergency someone must
take action and shew the way, else
golden opportunities are apt to slip.
10. In heathendom every true convert be-
comes at once a missionary. The
changed life, shining out amid the sur-
rounding darkness, is a Gospel in largest
capitals which all can read. Life, any
life, would be well spent, under any
conceivable conditions, in bringing one
human soul to know and love and serve
God and His Son.
12. I remembered an old saying, “Difficul-
ties are made only to be vanquished.”
And I thought in my deeper soul:
“Thus our God throws us back upon
Himself.”
13. Take action when and where God
points the way; wait for no one’s
guidance.
14. The servant does his day’s work, and
passes on through the gates of sleep to
the Happy Dawn; but the Divine
Master lives and works and reigns, and
by our death, as surely as by our life.
His holy purposes shall be fulfilled.
15. I calmly roll all my burden upon the
Lord. I await with quietness and con-
fidence His wise disposal of events. His
hand is on the helm, and whither He
steers us, all shall be well.
16. This is strength, this is peace:—To feel,
in entering on every day, that all its
duties and trials have been committed
to the Lord Jesus, —that, come what


may. He will use us for His own glory
and our real good.
Heathen, the more will it be blessed
and prospered at home.
My heart rose up to the Lord Jesus; I
saw Him watching all the scene. My
peace came back to me like a wave from
God. I realised that I was immortal
till my Master's work with me was
done.
To have actually lived amongst the
heathen, and seen their life, gives a man
a new appreciation of the power and
blessings of the Gospel, even where its
influence is only very imperfectly al-
lowed to guide and restrain the passions
of men.
It is a fixed point in the faith of every
missionary, that the more any Church
or congregation interests itself in the
20. The more we can use of the water from
the well, the fresher it will be. That
is the way with many of our Jehovah's
best gifts.
21. The Christ-spirit is the true civilising
power.
22. When I saw the diligence and fidelity
of these poor Aniwan Elders, teaching
and ministering during all those years,
my soul has cried aloud to God, Oh,
what could not the Church accomplish
if the educated and gifted Elders and
others in Christian lands would set
themselves thus to work for Jesus, to
teach the ignorant, to protect the
tempted, and to rescue the fallen.


23. My life has been dominated by one
sacred purpose, but in pursuing it the
Lord had enabled me to be Evangelist
as well as Missionary.
24. I have often been taunted with being
“a man of one idea.” Is it not better
to have one good idea and to live for
that and succeed in it, than to scatter
one’s life away on many things and
leave a mark on none? And, besides,
you cannot live for one good idea
supremely without thereby helping
forward many other collateral causes.
(John G. Paton, born May 24th, 1824.)
25. Whether savage or civilised, man must
either know the true God, or must find
an idol to put in His place.
26. Truly all are safe who are in God’s
keeping; and nothing can befall them,
except for their real good and the glory
of God.
27. We were ever conscious that our Lord
Jesus was near us, and all trials that
lead us to cling closer in fellowship
with our Saviour are really blessings in
disguise.
28. It was verily a sowing time of tears:
but despite all that followed, who shall
say that it was vain! Twenty years
have passed, and now, when I am writ-
ing this, there is a Church of God sing-
ing the praises of Jesus in that very
district of Tanna.
29. I, born in the bosom of the Scottish
Covenant, descended from those who
suffered persecution for Christ’s honour,


would have been unworthy of them
and of my Lord had I deserted my post
for danger only. Yet, not to me, but
to the Lord who sustained me, be all
the praise and the glory.
It is the Christ of the Bible, it is His
Spirit entering into Humanity, that has
lifted woman, and made her the help-
mate and the friend of man, not his
toy or slave.
31. Mission work is the noblest service in
which any human being can spend or
be spent, and, if God gave back my life
to be lived over again, I would, without
one quiver of hesitation, lay it on the
altar to Christ, that He might use it as
before in similar ministries of love,
especially among those who have never
heard the name of Jesus.


Brown, Prior & Co. Pty. Ltd.
165-171 Queen Street
Melbourne




