

PPrro 'rt 'Mca'
THE PRAYER OF HOPE, AND THE PSALM OF PRAISE.
TWO PARTING SERMONS,
PREACHED
IN THE CHURCH OF ST. JOHN BAPTIST,
HOBART TOWN.\
ON THE
SECOND SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY,
January 18, 1857.
FREDERICK H. COX, B. A.
HOBART TOWN:
J. WALCH AND SON; HUXTABLE AND CO.
LAUNCESTON: A. DUTHIE,
1857.
The proceeds of sale ivill he applied to the payment of the debt upon
the Church.




SERMON 1
<X)J*{.
St. John xyii. 24
Father , I will that they also , whom thou hast given me, he with
me where I am : that they may behold my glory.
When David of old time thought upon the revelation that
God had given him, he could hardly find words to express
his gratitude and adoration. “ Thy testimonies are wonder-
ful,” he said —“ therefore doth my soul keep them. The
entrance of thy words giveth light: it giveth understanding
unto the simple.” “ Thy word have I hid within my
heart, that I might not sin against thee.” Such were his
meditations, as he stood under the light of the older dis-
pensation of God. He was “ lost in wonder, love, and
praise.” And yet at that time the world was still unre-
deemed—God had not yet sent forth His Son to bring
life and immortality to light. What would have been his
hymn of praise had he lived in a later age; had he seen God the
Son manifest in our flesh; had he stood by and listened to
His voice as He spoke words that never man had spoken
before? especially had he heard Him praying to His
Father in heaven, engaged in divine communion with the
Eternal Godhead, the Mediator between God and man
exercising His office in the very hearing of His creatures ?
If the Psalmist of the Law spoke with such deep reverence
of God’s revelation, what would have been the utterance
of the Psalmist of the Gospel ? Or rather, (not to ask a
question which cannot be answered), how thankfully ought
we, who have both the Psalter and the Gospel in our hands,
to apply the one to the other—and as we listen to our
Divine Lord speaking in the pages of the Gospel, how


gladly should we take up the meditations of the ancient
Psalms, and, in the words of David, adore the Son of
David :—“ Lord, open thou mine eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of thy Law ! Quicken me after thy
loving kindness: so shall I keep the testimonies of thy
mouth!” Surely it will do us harm rather than good to
attempt to handle a passage so deep and solemn as this last
prayer of our Lord Jesus, unless we first ask, as the Psalmist
would have asked, for grace to receive it into our hearts as
a Divine testimony. If we thus approach it, perhaps our
thoughts may be permitted to take some such shape as the
following:—
First, all the while that we contemplate the Mediator
thus pouring out his human soul in prayer, speaking as a
man to God, we shall constantly bear in mind this truth,
that the Godhead of the Eternal Son is never to be sepa-
ated from His manhood. He who prayed as man, might,
if He would, have commanded, or promised, or given,
as God. If it pleased Him, at this time, to speak in His
office of Mediator, it was not that He had laid aside, or
could lay aside. His right to speak with authority as Lord
and King. The remembrance of this truth may help us to
regard his words with reverence.
Next, if we consider the construction of this wonderful
prayer, as it rises, step by step, from the beginning to the
close, we shall see and admire its perfect order and sym-
metry.
1. Taking the first five verses as marking its first division,
we observe that our Lord opens His prayer by presenting
Himself and His work before the Father. His work He
regards as now finished; He has still, indeed, to suffer , but
He has nothing more to do. The end for which He came
into the world, “ to he made flesh, and to dwell among men,
that they might behold His glory/’—is accomplished. He
has shone in the world as the True Light, and has glorified
God on the earth. And, having finished His work, He


claims His reward : “Now, O Father, glorify thou me with
thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before
the world was.” Notice the testimony which these words
give to the truth of His Eternal Godhead. Though He is
indeed asking as man, yet that for which He asks is not now
for the first time to he bestowed. He had hut laid it aside
for a little while, and was now to take it again. It had been
His from all eternity—His, in perfect equality with the
Father : “ the glory which I had with thee before the world
was.”
2. Next follows (from the sixth verse onwards) the
remembrance of the men who had been His attendants
throughout the work of His human ministry, who had
received from Him the manifestation of the knowledge of
God, and were now to hand on to others that which had
been entrusted to themselves. Although the Mediators
work, in His own person, was accomplished, yet He had
His labourers and ambassadors, who should henceforth carry
it on in His name. He introduces these His followers to
the Father, and commends them to His gracious protection.
Here shines forth the perfect sympathy of our Lord’s man-
hood. Quitting the thought of Himself, He remembers
only those whom He is leaving behind. “ I pray for them.”
* * * “lam no more in the world, hut these are in the
world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through
thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they
may be one, as we are.” He feels for them as for a little
flock that is about to lose the visible presence of its Shepherd,
and to be exposed defenceless to the wolves. The world
will hate them as it hated Him ; and yet He has no desire
to take them with Him, or to deliver them from the world’s
hatred. He does not ask for them that they may have pre-
sent deliverance :—“ I pray, not that thou shouldst take
them out of the world, but that thou shouldst keep them
from the evil.” Let them suffer pain and shame—it is
well: only let them through their suffering be sanctified.


Sanctification and unity—unity among themselves and with
the Father and the Son, —these are the gifts that He would
have bestowed upon them, to counterbalance the trials of
this world, and make them more than conquerors through
Him who loved them.
Such is the calm trust with which the perfect Man
Christ Jesus commits His friends and brethren to the trials
that await them. If it were the language of a mere man,
we should say it was the utterance of strong faith, for the
present casting all care upon God, and taking no thought
for the morrow.
And yet, though not anxious about an earthly future, the
closing words of the prayer our Lord has the
future in His thoughts. And it is an example to us, as
shewing how the soul of man may consistently be content
with that which lies before him, and yet look forward with
ardent hope and longing. Our Lord is content to leave His
disciples to witness for Him through suffering, “ that the
world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved
them, as thou hast loved me.” But yet this world, and the
testimony to be given here, is far from being the boundary
of His desires for those disciplesr He is content to part
from them, and yet he looks forward to a joyful meeting
again hereafter. “ Father, I will, that they also whom
thou hast given me, be with me where I am, that they may
behold my glory.”
And that hopeful longing of the Saviour takes a wider
range than appears at first sight. It is not the fortunes of
His Apostles, but the fortunes of His Church, that He is
contemplating. So He expressly declares. “Not for these
alone do I pray, but for them also that shall believe on me
through their word,” He is looking on to the great in-
gathering of the faithful of all ages, and anticipating the
day when they shall be joined to Him for ever, in rest and
peace. There seems no cloud to dim the Saviour’s prospect.
He gazes into the clear depth of eternity, and rejoices with


joy unspeakable and full of glory, as He contemplates the end
of the faith of His people, even the salvation of their souls.
A few moments before, one exceeding bitter thought had
crossed Him in His prayer, when he recorded “ those whom
thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but
the son of perdition.” But now, it seems, that thought has
passed away, or cannot hold its place beside the bright
prospect of His bringing many sons to glory. Often before
He has grieved for that traitor Apostle—often He has wept
over the ingratitude of that people who prove to Him that
faith, universal faith, will never be found upon the earth :
but at this moment, in the conclusion of His prayer. He
cannot count the loss of the gain—the king-
dom of heaven lies open before Him—already He sees the
multitude of the saved pressing into it—already in His
sight the marriage of the Lamb is come, and the Bride hath
made herself ready—to Him with whom a thousand years
are as one day the voice of ancient prophecy is already more
than fulfilled, —"Lift up thine eyes round about, and
behold; all these gather themselves together, and come to
thee : As I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe thee
with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee,
as a bride doeth.”
Vain indeed, and presumptuous it would be to attempt to
fathom the depth of our Redeemer's joy, in the prospect of
that great salvation, in the knowledge that He will not
have died in vain,—in the reckoning of the number of His
purchased ones, the “ ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands,” who throughout all ages shall
proclaim, “ Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour,
and glory, and blessing.” But, though we cannot fathom
His joy, it may be given us humbly and in our measure,
as we are able, to partake of it. At least now and then, at
some special seasons of our lives, we may be permitted to
stand still, and see the salvation of God. There are times


when Christ’s faithful servants may look on even into the
distant future in the vision of’their hope, when their eyes
may see the King in His beauty, and they may behold the
land which is very far off. Seasons probably they are, in
which sorrow and joy blend wonderfully together, seasons of
separation and knitting together, seasons when brothers and
sisters look into one another’s hearts as they have never
looked before, and find out that they have been loving one
another for a long time, and did not know it. Such times
occur perhaps twice or thrice in our lives, between childhood
and death, the more precious for being so rare, and when we
meet with them, supposing it be as Christians , then it is that
we discover, better than many books could explain, the
meaning of our Lord’s last prayer for His disciples, His
sorrow at leaving them. His calmness in committing them
to their course of earthly trial, and His hopeful joy in looking
on to their final salvation, and everlasting union with
Himself. And just as in the parting of friends, words of
sadness and regret may come first, but words of peace and
“ the Lord bless thee,” are ever the last uttered and the
longest remembered, so we understand that it must have
been with Him who was the Son of Man, —and that if His
intercession as it opened had the sound of anxiety, before it
closed, all trouble had passed away, and from the clear
heaven a bright light had streamed down, and all around
there was a great calm.
We can understand this, and (as I said) partake of it in
our measure. When the Providence of God has brought us
to some point in our course at which earthly dependance
fails us and the sight of our eyes is disappointed,—then,
(not as matter of course, but by His grace), thoughts of
Heaven come in to supply the blank, and faith takes the
place of sight, and we say to one another: “If not here,
yet there, far away, before the great white throne, on the
right hand—so be it.” And the moment, though we
thought it would be sad, is one of the happiest in our lives.


because enabling us to realize the truth that we are not
living for time present, but as heirs of immortality,—that
our religion, which we have practised so long unconsciously,
is a very help to us in time of need, —that no earthly hin-
drances or disappointments can be a bar to the Communion
of Saints, to the true and living fellowship of Christ’s people
with Him and with one another.
Years afterwards, we look hack to such a season, and say
to ourselves :—That was a day indeed, when we would
rather have laid down our lives than surrendered our faith
and our hope, when without the prospect of a better world
we should have been as nothing, and our hearts would have
sunk within us, but having that we rejoiced, as having all
things ; when we knelt together in the House of God, and
a deep solemnity came over us, because we had no eyes for
the visible temple, hut were looking right on into the
.Building of God, the house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens; —when we received the ministry of our Pastor,
a brother in the flesh, but forgot that it was he who was
leading us, and were moved to look higher, to the great
High Priest, the Bishop of our souls—Jesus, the Son of
God; —when we gathered together before the Table of the
Lord, glad to be with Christ, not fearing His presence,
humbly seeking pardon and strength and refreshment
through His sacrament, depending upon His great mercy
to receive us : and yet all the while looking on, on, far away,
to the mystical Marriage Supper of the Lamb, desiring for
one another that we might indeed be with Him where He
is, to behold His glory, and hold communion with Him
face to face.
At such a time, as with our blessed Lord, so (in one
degree) with us, there is no room for doubt or fear or des-
pondency. Just one passing thought may be permitted,
calling to mind the failures and shortcomings of the past,
and committing them to the mercy of God; just one more
anxious lamentation over the souls that seem as if they


would not be persuaded of the things that belong to their
peace : “ Oh, that they were wise, that they understood,
that they wmuld remember their latter end! ” —just one
request, (such as could find no place in the petition of the
Son of God), the request of brother to brother, granted
doubtless almost before it is uttered, craving forgiveness for
all past wrongs, omissions, neglect, forgetfulness; —and
then, leaving these thoughts of sadness, we may take up our
parable of hope, and with firm faith in the guidance of the
good Shepherd, commend His flock to His care. O Lord,
forsake them not, —let them not fall off from thee, —keep
through thine own self those whom thou hast called out of
the world, —give them thy pardon and thy peace day by day
continually,—make them one with thee and with each other,
—defend them in the time of temptation; let the enemy
have no advantage over them, nor the wicked one approach
to hurt them; suffer them not to be scattered, but keep
them within thy sure fold. Sanctify them through thy
truth; grant them to grow in grace, and after they have
done thy will, let them receive thy promise. Through the
ministry of thy Church on earth lead them to the Everlast-
ing City, and there let them be with thee where thou art,
and behold thy glory !


SERMON 11.
Psalm cxlviii. 12.
Young men and maidens , old men and children , praise the name
of the Lord: for His name only is excellent , and His praise
above heaven and earth.
Thank God for the Book of Psalms. In it Jew and Gentile,
the elder Church and the younger, meet together as on one
common ground, to adore the one God. It is the centre of
unity for the great multitude of God’s faithful people, of all
ages and all places, for those who went before, and for those
who follow after, the coming of the Redeemer. For between
the two great divisions stands our Lord Christ Jesus, and
Himself uses the book as His familiar companion and His
manual of devotion. Look through the Gospels, and you
will find that all through the ministry of our Lord, in His
teaching of the people, in His conversations with His dis-
ciples, in the city, in the temple, upon the cross, —no scrip-
tures are so frequently on His lips as those of the Book of
Psalms. Through Him, then, we receive our legacy from
the ancient Church, and while we rejoice in the possession
of our own Gospel, we rejoice no less in the inheritance of their
Psalter. And some of us (I wish I could say many), following
the direction of the Church, read the Psalms through, every
month in their daily portion, morning and evening, till they
have them stored in their hearts, and ready for application
to the various needs of their spiritual life.
Especially is the Psalter valuable as supplying us with


words of praise. Praise may be said to be its characteristic.
Many of the Psalms breathe only praise all through; and
even those which seem to be uttered in a different tone, and
at first sound mournful or penitential, almost invariably
change their key before they are ended, and close with a
Halleluiah. It is no wonder, then, that the close of the
whole book should be of this character, and that the last six
of the Psalms especially should be as it were a Halleluiah
chorus, —one continual repetition of the same burden, hardly
varied, hardly seeking variation, passing from praise to
blessing, and from blessing to thanksgiving, and from
thanksgiving to declaring the divine glory and greatness
and goodness,—and then coming back at last to the first
thought, as containing and absorbing all others —“ Praise
ye the Lord I * * * Let every thing that hath breath
praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord !”
The particular verse that I have chosen only differs from
many that surround it, in an enumeration of various classes
of persons from whom the praise of God is due. The debt
is one, and to be admitted thankfully by all: but young
men and maidens, old men and children, will still have their
various grounds for praising the name of the Lord, —for
acknowledging that His name only is excellent, and His
praise above heaven and earth.
But before we speak of these, we had better try to say
what praise is, and what are the wide and general grounds
upon which, in all cases, it must needs rest.
Praise then would seem to be the highest kind of worship
that man can render to God—the highest, and the purest,
and the nearest to the heavenly pattern. For it is the
lifting up of the soul to God, and the simplest yet fullest
possible acknowledgment that He is all in all, and that His
worshipper is nothing. More pure than thanksgiving, in
that it does not attempt to describe mercies received, it does
not cling to the thought of God’s benefits, but it turns
from them to Him, and in the fewest words that can be


framed adores the Giver. More pure than prayer—for \vc
are driven to prayer by a sense of our own necessities, our
own guilt, and weakness, and sorrow, and fear, and hope :
in prayer we ask for gifts, and look for them to be bestowed j
but in praise we ask for nothing, for no return, no acknow-
ledgment—only our hearts are full of gratitude, and it must
find vent. And the nearest to the heavenly pattern —for
saints and angels can offer no other kind of worship ; they
are redeemed from sin for ever, and need not to ask for
pardon or strength or victory ; all is theirs ; —prayer they
cannot offer, but praise is their continual offering. They
fall down before the throne and worship God, saying,
“ Amen ; Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks-
giving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto our
God for ever and ever. Amen.”
If we can praise God, (and surely those who cannot or do
not, even though they pray truly and fervently, are but
very little advanced in spiritual stature, and are almost
strangers to the heavenly mind), but if we can praise Him
from a full heart, then, surely, whenever our praise is
offered, we approach as near to Him as to flesh and blood is
possible ; we realize that special relation of which He loves
to remind us —the relation of children to their Father—(for
the voice of praise is the voice of childlike simplicity, for-
getting self and looking away to the Beloved) —we gather
for ourselves the choice fruit of the Spirit, which is “ love,
joy, peace.”
It is for this reason, among others, that the Holy Com-
munion is the highest act of Christian worship. It is
especially an Eucharist, an offering of praise, a falling down
before the throne of God and the Lamb in grateful adora-
tion. In it the Church ventures, farther than at any other
time, or in any other service, into the courts of heaven;
taking up the song of Angels and Archangels, and with them
crying “ Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts”—and again,
“ Glory be to God on High, and on earth peace, good-will.


towards men. We praise thee, we bless thee, we worship
thee, we glorify thee, we give thanks to thee for thy great
Glory, O Lord God, Heavenly King, God the Father
Almighty.”
How is it that we can be slow or backward in rendering
our praise to the Lord? Have we not cause, abundant
cause, to call forth all our praise ? Surely there is not one
among us but has daily blessings and daily mercies appealing
to him from every side to praise the name of the Lord.
I do not understand that coldness and dulness of heart
which can take all that befals as matter of course, never
impressed by it, and never grateful. One would rather
expect to find among Christians the watchful eye and the
ready ear and the attentive memory, seeing and noticing
and marking down the joys and sorrows, the warnings and
the blessings of life, and tracing in them all the hand of
God’s good Providence. This surely is the only temper which
God by His word would encourage us to cherish. “ Are
not two sparrows sold for a farthing ? And one of them
shall not fall to the ground without your Father. Fear ye
not therefore; ye are of more value than many sparrows.
For the very hairs of your head are all numbered.” “ When
thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou
walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned ; neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee. For lam the Lord thy
God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour.” Each one of
us has abundant encouragement to believe in a particular
Providence of God, encompassing his path, guarding and
guiding him. And it is good to stand still now and then, —
to take a breathing time as we are hurrying on in the way
of life—to look back, and to call this truth to mind.
Half our blessings would be lost to us if we were suffered
to go on rapidly from one to another, if the changes and
chances of life, and the solemn seasons that now and then
cast a shade upon our path, did not call upon us once and


again to count them over. Thus, even to seem to lose our
blessings for a time is itself a blessing; even bereavements,
when the Lord who once gave, now taketh away, are good,
in leading us to bless the name of the Lord; even the
deprivation of means of grace, the being shut up from the
house of the Lord, is good, as shewing us the value of past
privileges ; even the parting of friends is good, as shewing
us what we never should have known without, how dear
those friends were to us and we to them. Anything, in
short, that bids us stand still, and think, and remember
past blessings, is itself a blessing, and a cause for
thankfulness.
And so now, at this time, when some of us have good
cause to look back upon past years, that have been spent —
not in vain, we trust, and yet too thoughtlessly, too thank-
lessly ; and now that the remembrance of past mercies rushes
thickly upon us, we find how good and happy this time is,
and how blessed a thing it is to be called, in a way that we
had never thought of, to praise the name of the Lord. It
flashes upon us now, that all these years during which we
have worshipped together, and together learned the lessons
of eternal life, and together engaged in the manifold work
of the Church of Christ, —all the while that we have been
meeting one another as friends and companions and fellow-
travellers, —we have been indeed under the guidance of an
Unseen Hand, drawn on gently and imperceptibly by the
breath of the Holy Spirit of God. We had not thought
of this : we had thought more of the means that were being
used—of man, man’s work, man’s ministry,—of the visible
sanctuary, and the progress of the work of our hands, —till
we were in danger of forgetting that all these means were
nothing without the sovereign grace of our Lord God,
working in us mightily. Now, (blessed be His name), we
are able to remember this, and we acknowledge with a thank-
ful heart that, if we have advanced at all in the heavenly
kingdom, or gained any victory over the powers of evil,—


all the glory and the praise, and the power and the victory
are due to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, —the only
wise God. The occasion is too solemn and too blessed for
any remembrance but this : all joy, all sorrow, all feelings
of tenderness, all brotherly love, all interest in one another,
are blended and concentrated and gathered upwards into a
song of praise, till we have no heart, no voice, for any thought
but one : “ Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive
glory and honour and power.”
I am speaking of those causes of thankfulness for the
past which belong to us as a congregation—l must leave it
to yourselves, dear brethren, to count up your more private
blessings. I can only suggest a few, such as are likely to
have befallen you individually. “ Young men and maidens,
old men and children, praise the name of the Lord.” The
youngest among you has good reason for an Hosanna.
Children, you are not so young but that you know that
which prophets and wise men would gladly have died to
learn, the name of the Lord Jesus and the promises of the
Gospel. From the very first, you have been brought to that
good Shepherd, who carrieth the lambs in His bosom ; you
have been embraced with the arms of His mercy, and have
received the title to His everlasting kingdom. As members
of Christ, you have been trained in the faith which He has
committed to His saints. You have been taught to pray in
His name to your Father in heaven. You have been told of
the blessedness of doing the will of God. May He grant you
grace to persevere according to this beginning. May He
grant you to be faithful unto death, that you may receive a
crown of life. For this you may well pray to Him; but for
that which you have already you will surely praise Him. Yes,
praise the name of the Lord who has thus far placed your
feet upon the way of life—praise Him who has given your
parents, sponsors, friends, teachers, pastors, the Bible, the
Church ; praise Him, who, if all or any of these good gifts
should be taken away, is ready to be more than all to you


and to lead you on with His own hand. If father and
mother forsake you, the Lord will take you up,—if friends
prove false to you, and your brethren in the Church look
coldly upon you, there is one who will be more than Brother,
more than Friend; an Advocate and Intercessor at the right
hand of God, who, loving Ilis own who are in the world,
will love them unto the end. For this give thanks to God;
praise Father Son and Holy Ghost, by whose name you are
called, and by whose grace you are saved.
And you, young men and maidens, what special motive
of praise may I call to your remembrance ? What better
than that of which the beloved disciple speaks—“ I have
written unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and
the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the
wicked one.” You know, better than those who are
younger, what it is to be tempted—God grant you know
also what it is to conquer temptation. Many of you will
gratefully call to mind, that these days of your youth have
brought with them abundant opportunities for learning to
be srood soldiers of Christ. You have not come to this
point of your pilgrimage without proving many times the
truth of your Lord’s words, that he that would be His
disciple must bear his cross after Him. Temptations from
the world without, and the sin of your own inward nature,
have risen up against you ; and if you have been strong, and
able to overcome, it was only by the help of your Lord, and
through your faith in Him calling down His help. And
doubtless you can remember times of secret struggle and
fervent prayer, when the help you needed was more than
granted. And not secret strivings only, but public means
of grace have been blessed to you. You recal that solemn
and blessed time when in the rite of Confirmation you
willingly devoted yourselves to your Lord, and received
strength, we trust, to keep the life-long vow. You have no
words to tell, but it is written deeply in your heart, how at
the holy Table you have met your Saviour, and He has said.


“ Peace be unto you.” Through the preaching of the word
you have received many a counsel, warning, encouragement.
In the study of the Scriptures, both privately and when you
have met together, (as some of you have been glad to do), for
the benefit of mutual assistance, you have gained lessons of
wisdom, and been led to a deeper love for God’s testimonies.
Glory be to Him who hath so armed you with the armour ot
righteousness on the right hand and on the left! Glory to
Him who has so wonderfully enlightened your conscience,
and quickened your faith, and called you to repentance, and~
formed within you habits of holiness ! Glory to Jesus the
author and finisher of your faith, who has led you to look to
Him, and so to run with patience the race that is set before
you. Glory to Him who hath called you with a holy calling,
who hath pressed you into His service, and laid his pierced
hand upon you, and brought you to the foot of His cross.
Praise Him, too, for His gift of fellowship one with another,
for the blessing of brotherhood with your fellow-members
in the Body of Christ, for your share with them in the work
of the Church, for your place and interest in each other’s
prayers. It is of His mercy that you are not left alone upon
earth, but have those besides you to help you and to be
helped by you, on the way to a better world.
And brethren who are elder, if you are indeed brethren
in the faith of Christ, surely you will bear witness that as
you advance in years your blessings multiply. You know
that word of the Lord to be a faithful saying, “ Even to your
old age I am He, and even to hoar hairs will I carry you;
I have made, and I will bear; even I will carry and will
deliver you.” Life to you has brought its cares and sorrows,
but the Gospel of Christ has kept pace (or it is your own
fault if it has not), bringing its consolations; and the
shadows lengthen as the evening draws on, but then the
sunsetting is calm and beautiful, and you can count upon
the promise of the morrow. Doubtless the look that you
throw back upon past years is not a look of satisfaction —one


would not wish it to be—sins and shortcomings are there,
many and frequent; but if you be penitent and believing, you
know that the mercies of God are greater than your sins;
that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin; and
that He is your Advocate with the Father, gone before, to
intercede for you and prepare your place, before the day of
the great and awful meeting.
Who shall praise the name of the Lord before you ? Who
can owe a greater debt to the divine goodness and mercy ?
Surely “while you live you will praise the Lord; yea, as
long as you have any being, you will sing praises to your
God.” You, if any, will be ready to take up the hymn of
holy Simeon, “ Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.”
“ For His name only is excellent, and His praise above
heaven and earth.” What are we, that our names should
be esteemed and had in honour, when without the grace of
God we might have been as the very vilest, and no place
found for us within the ranks of His people ? Surely this,
after all, is the strongest motive for praising the name of
the Lord: that we—and not we only, but the very holiest
of men, —are in His sight unworthy of regard. “ Lord,
what is man, that thou takest knowledge of him; or the son
of man, that thou makest account of him ?” Even though
we had done our best with our Master’s talents, though we
had laboured faithfully in His service and could point with
certainty to the fruit of our labours, —even then, measuring
His numberless and great mercies by the side of our poor
endeavours, wdiat could w T e but utter the confession of the
Patriarch : “ O Lord, I am not worthy of the least of all thy
mercies and of all thy truth, which thou hast shewed unto
thy servant ?” Who am I, that I should be permitted to
receive thy gifts, in order that thou mightest have a claim
upon my gratitude ? that I should find myself the object of
thy love and care, and of the love and care of thy people, for
thy sake ? Who am I, that, when it would seem more fitting


for me to stand afar off, and smite upon my breast, and say,
“ God be merciful to me, a sinner,” —thou shouldst invite
me to draw near and look up and lift up my heart, and offer
to thee the sacrifice of praise ?
But one thing at least we can do. If we seem unworthy
to praise God each one for himself, at least we can praise
Him in behalf of one another. I can praise Him for all
signs of His grace and mercy that He has shown forth in
you, and you can praise Him for whatsoever blessings He may
have conveyed to you through me. And both together, we
may well bless the good Providence of our God, that has
ordered our paths to run together so long and so happily.
And when they are separated for a while, and our visible
fellowship must be broken off, we will still bless Him for
giving us a consolation in the truth of the Communion of
Saints, —that blessed truth which assures us that earth and
sea cannot separate those who are bound together by one
faith and hope; and that those who pray for one another,
(as we, please God, will do, day by day), can, in the truest
sense, “ take sweet counsel together, and walk unto the
house of God in company.”
THE END,
H. AND C. BEST, PRINTERS, “ COURIER” OFFICE, HOBART TOWN.
