

EAELY HISTORY OF COLONIAL MINING, IN CONNEC-
TION WITH “IS SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT A
SUCCESS?”
PAPER No. 31.
BY H. W. F. KAYSER.
When the Mining Bill came before the Victorian Legislature not so
many months ago, the question arose whether mining managers
required education, and to what extent. Some members of the
House expressed themselves in a way which appeared to leave the
impression that mining managers would be all the better if they were
not brought up in a scientific school.
To try and prove what we owe to science I will give a short
history of colonial mining from the earlier period to the present time
and compare results.
I believe I am right in saying that South Australia is the pioneer
colony in mining, and to her belongs the credit of not only being the
first mining colony, but also that her beginning turned out so suc-
cessful, as the history of the Burra Burra copper mine will testify.
At about the same time a little galena mining was carried on nearer
to Adelaide, but as this did not prove a success and was only worked
by tributing parties, little notice was taken of it.
The discovery of the Burra mine, as usually called, came just in
time for South Australia, as things were very bad, wages only 2s. 6d.
per day, and anything which gave relief to the congested state of the
labour market was a great benefit to the colony.
The history of the Burra mine is like so many others, when the
ore is found near the surface, and is at the same time of good quality,
intermixed with large slugs of native copper, nothing but muscle and
strength is required to extract it and bring it to a marketable con-
dition. This kind of work was carried on for a considerable time
until shafts were required, and still later water was struck. With
these altered conditions different appliances were required to save
labour. The windlass was replaced by whip or whim according to
requirements, and the large increase in water necessitated pumping
machinery which was erected later on. The first pumping plant was
of course a small one and just in proportion with requirements, but


after about six years work the water increased so much that it became
necessary to either abandon the deep ground or meet the case by
erecting a more powerful engine. The latter was done. A 200 h.p.
beam engine was purchased and erected and found very soon after-
wards ample employment to keep the working dry. This plant was
the only piece of scientific work the mine could show as all other
appliances, and particularly those for ore-dressing which were after-
wards required, were of the most primitive character and the loss of
ore must have been very considerable.
The next epoch is the discovery of gold in Victoria and New
South Wales, when everyone who could carry a pick and shovel was
considered a miner. Gold was plentiful in the early fifties, and a
little work with luck was all that was required to fill a good sized
shammy (chamois).
That was the time when gentlemen, miners, lawyers, bank
managers, clerks, and other professional men were mixed up with the
rest. Mt. Alexander, Ballarat, Bendigo, and other fields, which were
discovered one after the other, all furnishing surfacing and shallow
sinking to suit the taste and ability of the different parties. No
science was required in those days, but skill had then already its
reward, and as gold was plentiful, a small loss was not considered very
seriously by a good many of the early diggers.
Hole or shaft sinking required a little tact and knowledge, and if
a new chum could sink his shaft fairly well, with the sides perpen-
dicular, he would consider himself a great miner. When the sinking
became deeper the inexperienced hand could easily be detected by
examining his work. Asa rule the new chum miner twisted his shaft
gradually to one side, and by the time he reached the bottom, at a
depth of about 30ft. or 40ft., the centre line of the top and the centre
line of the bottom formed a cross. In round hole sinking similar
diversion could be observed. There were holes sunk which became
larger in diameter as they increased in depth, while others showed the
opposite inclination. The writer of this paper can recollect a party
coming up from Melbourne early in 1854 with a full rig-out, including
the long-handled shovel and double pick. They started to sink a hole
in Sailor’s Gully on old Forest Creek, the sinking being about 13ft.
to 14ft. The hole when started measured about Bft. in diameter and
when reached the bottom it was less than 2ft. in diameter, hardly
offering sufficient room to stand the last bucket for filling. One
naturally will ask how they could sink a hole like that with a long-


handled shovel and double pick. Although it appears at first sight to
be a puzzle, it is not so when you use an instrument for cutting off
the handle and this is where their inventive power came in. As soon
as the hole got smaller in diameter they cut a piece off the shovel
handle, and this was repeated ever so many times, until afterwards
the pick handle had to share the same fate, until precious little was
left of either. As fortune did not favour this party by getting a
patch of gold at the bottom the hole was left as an ornament, and
many a laugh it caused to those who saw it afterwards. I only
mention these two instances to show what stuff our early miners were
made of, but perseverance and a will have effected wonderful changes
in these very men.
Before the fifties had quite run out great changes and alterations
had been effected in deep sinking, so that skill came into demand. In
Ballarat, deep sinking, with basalt and drift to go through, and some-
times no inconsiderable amount of water besides, required all the skill
the field could muster. At Beechvvorth and Eldorado different kinds
of ground required to be worked, but still for all that very little
science was required, still a little scientific knowledge appeared to be
a great help to those who were working in these deep shafts where
drifts of different descriptions with plenty of water has to be sub-
dued, and this necessitated the change of appliances. Where
formerly only a windlass and later on a whim were required, now
steampower had to be employed to overcome the difficulties of the
new situation, and gradually the scientific knowledge required for the
introduction of improved machinery became soon an acknowledged
fact.
It quartz mining, at first nothing but strength was required. To
break the stone, crush and separate the gold from the pulverized
quartz, by washing at first and later on by amalgamation, was nothing
but a mechanical process and could be performed by anyone with a
little practical training, but after the reefs got into deep ground,
below the water line, the character of the quartz changed and became
more refractory and required greater skill and the knowledge of a
scientific character to win the gold from the quartz or other lodestone
it may have been associated with.
The progress made in scientific mining since that period is
marvellous, and the loss to mankind without it would be incalculable.
This can be easily proved by innumerable instances, but I will only
mention a few.


Mt. Morgan in her infancy and before the chlorination process
was established must have lost more than half the gold in the tailings,
and I think I am correct in saying that without the help of science
this property would be very little good for the shareholder. The same
credit is due to the cyanide of potassium process which is so largely
used in South Africa with such magnificent results, and without this
process a great number of mines would not be able to pay their way
and keep the mines open.
The same can be said of metallurgy as illustrated by the history
of the Mt. Lyell Company. This property when found and worked
by the prospector was considered a mountain of gold and interests
sold fetched marvellous prices, but as soon as the ore face deposit had
been cleared off and the clean gold changed place with pyrites, a most
dismal feeling came over the shareholders. Interests which cost
nearly £l,OOO could not find a purchaser for a one hundredth part of
the original price, and really it appeared as if Mt. Lyell would become
as great a duffer as later on Mt. Huxley proved to be, only with the
difference that the former was a genuine affair while the latter had
employed too much paint.
As soon as scientific knowledge came in contact with Mt. Lyell
the aspect changed. The mixed pyrites considered a nuisance at first
turned out afterwards a blessing, and at the present time this com-
pany does not require a sponsor. The prospecting done by the com-
pany and the experiments carried out by Dr. Peters with the sub-
sequent results speak for itself, and it is tq be hoped that when the
mine is once in full work it will not only turn out a blessing to the
shareholders, but also the salvation of Tasmania.
If we turn our attention to another branch in connection with
mining, that of ore-dressing, what progress can we not show during
the last 20 or 30 years ? When metals and minerals fetch a high
price the practical miner is satisfied with what he considers a fair
return and wants to know nothing of anj'thing above his comprehen-
sion, but as soon as he finds he cannot make the two ends meet then
the scientist is allowed to step in. Mines which formerly could
hardly cover working expenses are now, with improved appliances, not
only paying working expenses, but leave a good margin of profit to
the investing public, while the losses are reduced to a minimum. In
this branch Germany has got the lead up to the present, but it
appears as if the English miner is beginning to wake up to the great
importance of this question.


Innumerable instances could be quoted in support of the success
of these appliances, but a few may suffice as supplied by the London
Mining Journal , of the 28th August last, when a full description is
given of the machinery at the Arrayaner Galena Mine at Linares, in
Spain ; the others in the Neuhof Mine at Zanowitz, in Upper Siberia.
This mine produces galena and calamine which makes the process
more difficult than in the former case on account of the difference in
the specific gravities of the two minerals, but in both instances the
machinery is working very successfully and is automatic from begin-
ning to end.
Another example brought under my notice some time back by
Dr. A. W. Stelzner, Professor,at the Royal Academy of Mines, Prei-
berg, Saxony, where a mine in Altenburg in the same country was
kept at work with ore only averaging per cent, of oxide of tin and
a small portion of bismuth. To do the work 250 men and 1,300
stamphead with 110 percussion and other tables were required.
The London Mining Journal has devoted a great deal of attention
to the benefits accruing by using these improved appliances, and
deserves great credit for the articles written upon the subject, and it
is to be hoped that the result will be more satisfactory than the
attempt made by the writer of this paper in 1888, by supplying the
Cornwall Mining Institute with a paper entitled “ Ore-dressing by
Automatic Machinery.” At that time the members present either
could not or would not understand it, although the plan of each
machine was sent with it. They point blank refused to have anything
to do with it, simply saying that their ore was of quite a different
nature and could not be treated by that process.
Of course it is an acknowledged fact that one kind of plant will
not be suitable for all kinds of ore, certain modifications of the system
are required according to the ore to be treated; for instance, crush
dirt, which contains a large portion of coarse ore, would not require
fine crushing, but would in the first instance have to pass over the
coarse crushing plant to extract all the ore up to a certain size to
avoid sliming, and the residue would only be treated by the fine
crushing process for the recovery of fine sands and slimes.
In mining itself science is of the greatest value, and a general
knowledge of the principal branches, viz., mineralogy, geology, assay-
ing, surveying, &c., is of the greatest importance to anyone who has
the control of mining concerns ; for instance, the knowledge of rocks
in which valuable minerals occur should be in itself the means of


saving large sums of money in useless undertakings, while the want
of that knowledge would not only cause wasteful expenditure but
might be the ruin of many a mining enterprise.
Another branch of science, “ electricity,” is worth noticing, as
the progress lately made is of sufficient importance to make a few
remarks apart from its illuminating power. It is claimed that elec-
tricity is a great agent in saving gold in connection with the solution
of cyanide of potassium, and in the amalgamation, in appliances for
motive power, in metallurgy, and others. Although great advance-
ments have been made in each of these departments greater things
are still expected in the near future, and it is not improbable that
during the next 10 or 20 years, or even in less time, electricity will
become as cheap and serviceable as water and steam are at present.
After reviewing the progress of mining for the last 30 or 40 years
it must be patent to any keen observer that great advancements have
been made in the practical branches of mining, but the economical
results are due to science, and without that help mining would soon
degenerate and become an unproductive undertaking, except in cases
where the ore is plentiful, of good quality, or in shallow ground.




