

AHAB'S FALL
BY HIS
Prophets Flarteries:
Being the Subftance of
THREE SERMONS,
Upon 1. KING. 22.22.
—f will be a lying pirit in the mouth of all
his Prophets .
The firft Sermon preached before the Honourable the Com-
mons Houfe of Parliament.
The fecond before the Honourable the Lord Major of Lon-
don, with the Aldermen his Brethren.
The third at the Abbey Church in Weftminfter, where it was
much acquarrelled by fome, and as much defired to be pub-
lifhed by others.
The which is here the r at ber done,becaufe laying open the grounds of
all our prefent miferies, fpecially in the fe two Words, His Proptiets, it may
Well ferve to fupply What is Wanting in the following Anfwer to D .Fern's
fecond Reply to the laft Anfwer of him Whom the Printer ftilà, The
Fuller Antwerer of the Doctors fir ft Treatife, called
Therefolving of Confcienceupon this Queftion, Whether
upon this King Will not defend, but is bent to fubvert
Religion, Laws and Liberties, Subjets may take up Arms.
Printed by R.A. for f. Wright in the Old-Baily. 1 6 44.


TO
His worthily much choicely
learned Friend, Mr. T HOMAS FUĹER, B.D.
late Preacher of Gods Word at the Savoy.
SIR, ;
a Our invitation, or {as you are fie a fed to call it)
jour fuing me, as become c/W.Saltmarfh his
Surety, by licencing his Examinations of
your Sermon of Reformation, is commenced
with fomuch faireneffe and ingenuity, that
though Ido not a!nfiver the Challenge, yet
having this off ortunity, by the leave of the Authour o f what
followes, 1 cannot but fay fomcwhat in anfwer to your friendly
Efiftle,
1 have received fomuch of contentment and benefit by your
Holy Warre, and State, {having often read them over) that
though J do not deny my hand to the litenfing M. Saltmarlh’s
Examinations of your Sermon, yet Imujl confeffe, had 1 knowne
you to have been the Authour of that Sermon, 1 fhould have en-
deavoured to have fatisfied .Saltmadh of your good mean-
ing therein, before I had fet my hand to his Examinations of it.
Your other Books,callingtheir Authour Prebendary ofSarum,
and this, Miniftcr of the Savoy, 70. miles difiant, made me
conceive the Author fome other of your name: Prebendaries have
been fo feldome Lecturers, ffccially London-LeYturers, that the
miftake was not a little eafie: however the Sermon, 1 mufi needs
fay, ( though carried on with much fmoothnejfe and ingenui-
efpecially given out to be preached by one extremely difaffe-
ded to the Parliament, is not in it felfe fo free from fome paf-
A 2 H es


fiages that may admit of an ill meaning {at leaft ? had the Authour
been fuch as he was reported ) but that a defire that what ever of
danger might be in them, jhouldmeet with a timely Rancounter ,
might.pofiibly have wrought as farre upon a judgment of grea-
ter ftayedneffe then 1 pretend to.
Onely it troubles me not a little, that you call my licenfing
A/.Saltmarih's Examinations, an accufmg you of fuch dange-
rous portions as might have undone you and yours, (at
leaft) have intitled you to a prifbn. Sir, my licenfing the
Examinations of feme paffages of your Sermon, was {at mofi)
but on fuppofition their meaning had been fuch as feme concei-
ted them , and fiuppofit ions are no accufiations: you knew the rule,
nihil ponunt ni re, they off rme nothing •, nor {had they been ac-
cufationsfis it but the rule of Parliamentary lufiice,to have heard
the Authors fenfe of his own words, before it had condemned
him to a prifion. iThe uthour of thefe following Sermons ex-
pells fo much juft ice from the advorfe party , that if any fhould
confirue'iwhat is {in purfuance of the Text) fpoken of King A-
hab and Jezabel, any way to he meant of our dread Soveraigne
and his Con fort t to have leave to /hew, before he fujfer for it,
how farre it was from his purpofe .
Sir, this is all of nfiwer you jhall need to expeß from
him, who hath learn'd from you, in your char all er of a contro-
verfiall Divine , neither to multiply ncedlefte,nor compound
neceftary controvei fies : this Controverfie betweene your felf
and .Saltmarfh , is {at leaft) needlefte for me to make one
in , M. Saltmarfh is of age to anfwer for himfclfe , and much
more both able and at leifure: Befides,! think, 1 may fay {with-
out a Bull) this Controverfie of yours is fo much the more need-
leffe, by how much that about which it is (Reformation) is fo
without all controverfie needfulL 1 reft,
Sir, Your much obliged Reader,
and refpedfull Friend,
C HA. HERLE.


Ahabs Fall
BY
His Prophets Flatteries:
Being the fubftance of three Sermons upon
I.KING.22.22.
-fwill he a lying pirit in the mouth of all
his Prophets.
and Antidotes me. obferved by Naturalifts, to
be not onelv natives, but (moft-what) neighbours
fQi W )ms> cfonefoylsand'tis an obfervanon among Divm s
WA rapS? that ( for the moft part in Scripture) theworlt
t(®l Wsm Ki»fs and thebeft Prophets have beencontempo-,
fetJraM raries: an er«V/ W f God knowes) is a . head
w(7/jj and giv£S f 0 mu ch the Wto evUl, as it
God did not by way of counterpoife
fire. u■7?k*ssss
K£SS K f' , “"" ,4 ‘2
Rem. 6.t ,
ler .s. 23,
I Joh,


and raife the dead,and dreyn,and broach,and as it were,milk the hea-
vens with a word .-and as for water,fo for fire too,and that,one while
to bean <»Ar biter, anon a champion, and laft of all a chariot to ride to
heaven in triumph in, (as Eliah ) that can make the fire to fink, and
iron to iwimme; that can he ale Water with fait, and healc Naaman
With water' that can turne the crufe of oyle into a flowing lordan ,
and jordaninto a ftandingcrufe , containing.it felfe while he ispaf-
fing over, (as Elifha: ) thefe, I fay, together with thofe hundred
Prophets fed by Ohadiah in the cave, and this inflexible Court-proof
Prophet Micaiah (here) are all referv’d for the moft wicked raigne
of the moft idolatrous Ahab, <>Ahab who had (old himfelfe to works
wickednejfe in the flght of the Lord, Ahab to whom none of all the
Kings were like. Whom Jezabel his wife provoked.
Whether it be that ill times make good Prophets, (as fickly times
makegood Phyfitians,and ill manners good Laws)or that good Pro-
phets make ill times,by an accidental!,yet ufuallhardning & inraging
them, as Mofes and Aaronby thofe of Pharoah, Efay and Jeremy by
theirsj this is certain, God alwayes holds a proportion, as betweene
th tpfimjhment & th tfin, fo between the fin, and th tconviftion,Ahab
fhall not fall at Ramoth-Gilead , before a vifion offers to divert him,
nor fhall the Dcvill perfwade him to go, if the Prophet can per-
fwade him to ftay : how ;uft is it with God, if he will imprifon the
' Prophet for telling him truth , to let loofe the DevSll on him to tell
him a lie j ’tis truths juft vengeance, that where fhe is held an ene-
my for her indeavour to fa ve, there falihood fhould be held a friend
in her indeavour to betray : if Ahab wfill perifh, not for lack, but m
defpight of vifion, he fhall know that God can, rather then his vifi-
on fhould faile, make the Devills vifion ferve the truth of his : if
he will not be perfwaded to ftay,his fall,as it is wilfull in him/o Juft
with God, and that his own wilfulneffe to be betraid , fhall j'uftly
and fitly betray him to the traitor of his own will and choice, a ly~
ing flirit in the mouth of all his prophets, J will be a lying flirit , &c.
There is a ftrange mixture of contraries in the words .* the Spirit
of truth utters them by the mouth of Gods true Prophet; a lying
fpirit makes them good in the mouths of Ahabs falfe ones; the Au-
thor of the vifion it is God, the Seer Mlcaiah, the fpeaker the De-
vill, who though he promife to be as he hath beene from the begin-
ning, a lying flnrit, yet herein he fpeaks truth, he tells God truly that
he


he will lie to Ahab : when he jpeakj of his orvne it is a lit, when he
(peaks the truth (as here ) ’tis that he will lie , and that truth is Gods,
the He onely is his; yet as very a Iyer as he is he dares not lie to God/
I Veill he a lying (pirit Sect How doth it convince and upbraid ly-
ers ? that the father himfelfe of lies when he hath to deale with the
Father of lights , knowing that then hell it felfe is naked , and dcfru-
ition hath no cover , and that his baflard brood cannot looke upon that
Sun , he is a framed to be himfelfe a lying (pirit : nor is he ever lefle
himfelfe then when he truly confefles himfelfe a lying Jpirit : this
he gets by converting with God : would we be but often fo im-
ployed, it would un-devill us too, into a confeftion of the truth,
though of our o wne frame and falfrood .* but no thanks to the De-
vils modefty, or truth,that he confefles to God, whom he cannot de-
ceive, that he is himfelfe a lying jpirit , while where he can deceive,he
is ftill himfelfe a lying jpirit , without any fuch confefron : he is fo
much the more a D evil I, by how much the more he is an hypocrite,
not the fame to man that he is to God : would he confefle himfelfe
a lying Jpirit to <tAhab, as he doth to God, he would give himfelfe
the lie, in calling himfelfe a lying jpirit , andwefrould believe Ori-
gens leafe of his damnation were expired : but though his owne juft
accufer, and Gods inforccd confitent, yetheis ssfhabs true DevilL
ftill, and fo much the more Devil I, by being fo in the mouths of fo
many falfe Prophets, fo much more Devill is he in a Prophets mouth ,
then in his owne ; that whereas in his own he confefles himfelf tru-
ly falfe , in the Prophets he profefles himfelfe faljly true , and fo
proves himfelfe truly falfe, .i. more D evilly a true lying (pirit in the
mouth of falfe Prophets : 1 roil I be a lying jpirit in the mouth. See.
For the Parts of the Text we may take the foure Adfors we have
in it, all having their feverall parts in the Fall, or (if the word mif-
become not the place and bufinefle) the Tr age die of Ahab , and we
find them often thus ranked in Scripture.
1 God, pCg "fh eDetrill,
and W and
2 The King, j The Prophets.
Firft of Gods part herein: but as it was fomtime asked. Is Saul
among the Prophets ? fo may it not be here. Is God among 'the falfe
Prophets ? did our Saviour Chrift think much to be fought in the
company, and will not God, to be found in fuch bad company as this?
B 2 a lying
lob 26.6%


A lying (pirit, a [educed King, and f*//£ prophets. Wilt thou have a-
ny thing to do with the pole of Wickfdnejfe that imagineth mifchiefe
as a Law? (Tayes David to God) will not Gods foulebe more bath
then Jacobs to enter into fuch fccrets f The truth is, we dare not
(with Papifts and Arminians ) make God even in thefe papmes of
the foole which is to do evi'l , no other then a meere Romane tsEdile,
whofe office was onely to overlooks the [ports , but doe aferibe to
God, without any the lead fhare or tinfture of fin, in, or rather o-
ver finne a a permijftve } a defe rtive , a reJlriElive y and
a dihojitive power: did he not permit it, it could not be: did he not
for fake the Tinner,it would not be: did he not reftrain both the fin and
{inner, it would leave nothing elfe to be : lafily, did he not difpofe
of it fome way to good, he himfelfe could not be, (at lead ) not infi-
nite in his Goodnefle* Wifdome, Providence: it would disj’oyntthe
frame, and untune the univerfall organ of his Providence, fhould it
be, and not be made fome way to Terve therein : all the difficulty
is in this laft power ? for, as for the permijftve power, whoquefti-
ons but he may permit what he is not bound to hinder : it is true, In
debitis can fa deficient efficit moraliter, but God is liberimum zAgens y
not onely free from duty or coaftion, as having no fuperiour, but
free herein from any promife of his owne that fhould oblige him.
Next for that other power of defertion , that he may withdraw
his free grace, and leave the finner but what him felt hath krouspit
himfelf to, by leaving him who never leaves uni ill he be himleit hrlt
left who can queftion : and yet no more the caufe of the fin by tor-
faking the finner, then the Sun of darkneffie in the aire, or the Cut-
ler of ruft in the Sword, when he hath parted with it.
2. That God fhould limit vndreflrain the fins malignity find feta
hook in its nofirils y andJhnt it in With doors and bars fas he doth by the
Sea) without which every fin(fo fwellingand diffufive is its poyfon)
would become another deluge , and drowne the world again, there is
nothing more proper to his providence and goodneflej hut that he
fhould make ufe of fin, and though not ordaine, yet order it, as a
meane or inft rumen tto fome end of his, by this laft his dtjpofittve
power herein,_here 'tis the difficulty lyes, for the clearing whereof
thefe three Pofitions would be firft laid as a ground-worke.
i. God doth in the fin onely ufe, not infufe the evill
a. He doth not ttfc it as mevill, butas^tinfirnmont.
- “ 3. He


3. He would not To ufe it, being evilly did not of the
end, to which he nfcs it, preponderate the evill of the meane or in-
flrument,
For the firfl: God doth not infufe but ufe the evill, in every evill
adlion there are two notions or capacities , the evi/l and the aliion,
or the aElion of the evill, and the evill of the aftion, the wot us and the
modus, for the firft the a [Hon of the evill, {hould we deny him to be
the caufe and Author of it, we fhould deny the firft Article of our
Creed , that God is the maker of all things /or it falls within the com-
pare of thofe all things, whereof we believe him the maker , and
hath a pojitive and reall being, which it can have no otherwife but
from him : But for the fecond, the evill or attaxy, the anomy or irre~
gularity of the aElion, that hath no pofitive reality of being , and fo
no properly efficient, but rather a deficient caufe : It is beft exempli-
fied in the motion of a lame legge, or found of an untuned firing,
in fuch a legge the motion it hath from the foul aftuating it,thelame-
neffe from the leggs defeft, the foul though it ufe the legge , though
lame, doth not infufe that lamcnefTe: in fuch a ftring,the found it hath
from the finger moving it, the untunedneffe from its owne difhar-
mony with the other ftringsj God is not the author of the evill of
the aElion, though he be of the aElion of the evill.
For the fecond, God doth not ufe it as an evill, but as an infir ti-
me nt , and here the mainc difficulty lyes; how in punifhing one fin
by another, as a meane or inftrument of his juftice, (fuppofe here
Ahabs Idolatry by the Divells lye ) how when the fin cannot be fe-
ver'd from the punifhment, (for he cannot punifti one fin by another
nnleffc that other be a fin ) he can be faid to caufe or will the punilh-
ment, and not the fin, to ufe it as an inftrument , and not as an evill ?
aninftance willbeft make this plaine. A King hath a Subjeft that is a
malefaftour, and adjudged to dye, the death of the malefaftour can-
not be herein fever’d from the loife of a Subjedft, and yet the King
wills nut the lofte of a Subject, but the death of the malehuftour:
fo when fin is a punifhment,the punifhment cannot be really fever’d
from the. fin, and yet the volitum the formalt ohjeEi of Gods will
herein is the punifhment, and not the fin, the fin is but the materialle
not the formall notion, under which God wills it.
For the laft, he would not fo ufe it, being evill, did not the good
©f the end to which he ufes, out-ballance the eviU of the meane or
B F inftrument


inftrument, God is fo good (as Aufiine excellently ) as he would not
ufe, no not permit evill, were he not withall fo powerful! as to be a-
ble to turne that evill unto good.
All this we have fitly exemplyfied in the Tale of lofeph by his Bre-
thren ; twos not fo much you that [old mo (faies hej as God that font
mo , that' 1 might fave much people alive as it is this day : God per-
mined this fale, he Withdrew his grace from the fellers, he re framed
the fin from an intended murther i to a bare fal? y this treachery of his
brethren he did not infufe but ufe y he tiled it not as a fale but a con-
veyance, in them twas “x fe IHng y in him a fending , aiming at their
rehefe; an end out-balancing in good, the evill of the fale, th efavin?
of much people, &c. Thuslook but on a corner of apiece of Arras,
and it carries no proportion untill you unfould the whole piece, un-
till then, you fee but the one halie of Ezekiels vifon , you fee but
the 'wheeles, not the eyes in the wheels: while we look on lofephsfale
and accufation, and imprisonment in zAdgypt, but efpecialiy Gods de~
firoying ,( as the Pfalmift fpeakesj Jacobs provifton of bread, while
Pharoah hath enough for fevcn ye ares to come, wee fee nothing but
the wheels on which the World feems giddily to run, untill we look
further & confider that he hadfas he fpeak s)fent a man before lofeph,
Vehofe feet they hurt in the flocks, and then we fee eyes in thofe wheels*
an eye of providence in al the moft vertiginous vicifTitudes of chance.
Wee have all this as well here in the fell of c Ahab y as dale of
lofeph, here is Gods per miff on of the Di veils lye, thou (halt aoe
here is his defertion oh Ahab, zAhab had made xfale ofhimfelftoftm
and God j uftly makes the delivery : here is Gods reflrittim too 'tits
but that Ahab may fall, the lye that carried up lehofaphat and both
the Armies,hxd malignity enough in it to have been the mine of them
an, but, God refiraines it onely to Ahabs ; here is G o ds difbofttive
power too, and that mall the three Pofitions: he did not infufe this
lying into th ejfirit, he was a Iyer from the beginning , he did not ufe
it perfwafon, ’tis notwho Ihall lye , but who {hall
ffffdde—-- ? Laftly, thegoodnejfeof the end, preponderates the e*
vtlinejfe of the lye , it was the juft mine, (as of Ahabs) fo, of the
Uoufe of Baal, with all his lying Prophets y thzt God lookes at in lehu
through this fall of Ahab : not that wee may therefore doe evill that
good may come thereof, for, neither here doth God doe the evill that
!n^ e,n^ C f : this be-
lOj, premi sd the Doftnne is, g o( y
Gen. 45* 8.
Ezef. I.
Pfal, 105.
1 6,


GW can fo without fin mafic ufie of fin , <*/ to purifh fin with fin. For
proof hereof by Scripture , all thofe phrafes wherein the wicked
inftruments of Gods ;uft wrath are called,even in their fins of cruel*?
ty and envy againft his people, the rod of Gods anger , and ftajfe of his
indignation, his SaW and his Net, which he will ftirre up , and fend
and prepare, and draw upon them, my,chufe ,and fend, and make fir ong
their own deluftons on them, do abundantly evince it : no marvaile if
wicked Ahab were not delivered over to be deceived without the
councell of God, when as his owne innocent Sonne was not delive-
red over to be betrayed and crucified without the determinat hand and
councell of God: God delivered him over as truly as ever Judas or the
Jews did, idematlus quern fecermt,non eadem ratio ob quam fecerunt ,
fas Auftine ) they did the fame thing, not in the fame manner, or to
the fame putpofe. And for the proof of this Dodfrine by reafon.
Reafonsmay be taken herein,(as they alwaies fhould in the proof
of a Dodrine ) from the chief denominative notions of the Dodrine,
and they are here three, God, fin, and punifhment : from
Clnfinitnefl'e of God.
Enmity of finnc.
C Equity of punishment.
1. From Gods infinitenejfe in providence power and wifdome,
all thefc muft needs in him be like himfclfe infinite , now that onely is
infinite as, to which nothing can be added, fo," from which nothing
can be excluded, out of which nothing can be left ; Gods wifdome
and power are the eye and hand of his providence, all which being
infinite, the hand of his power muft needs bend, the eye of his wif-
dome muft needs order, whatever he permits to the fervice of his
providence : if any thing fbould fall within the compaffe of his per-
miffion, and not under the conduEi of his providence, there would bee
folutio continui fas Philofophers fpeak ) a vacuity or gappe therein,
which muft needs as breake the entirenefe, and difcompofe the order,
, fo, utterly difcontinue the wfimtnefe of that his providence.
2. From finnes enmity, every fin ftis an fenemy to God, would
not have him to raigne, would raigne in his ftead , now God makes
all his enemies his Footflocle, he finds them in the chaire of the [cor-
ner in the firft Pfalme, but he quickly in the 11 o. brings them do wn
to the Footfioole of fcorne, 2iud the Footfioole (weknow ) *tis an in-
ftrument of ufe as well as ft ate, as it beares, fo it raifes, as it yeelds
Do£t .
Ifa. 10. y.
13.17,
66.j\,
ler. 22. 7.
Ezefi. 12.13
>4#. 2.23..


to, Co it cafes , nor doth fin , but, as fhrinke and fuffer under the
weight of Gods vengeance, Co, raife and advance the Majefty of hi«
power and wildome, that can trample on it, and yet make ufc of it
too : a good Workman we fay makes Come ufc of every chippe ot
fhred, and a wife man makes as much ufe of his enemies as friends,
power and wifdome are more feen in making, then in finding a way
to their ends, in bringing light out of darkne(fe, meat out of the eater ,
turning an Enemies point into his owne bofome (as God doth in
puniftilng fin by fin) fome have adventured to conclude that God
had never fuffered the Divill to have tempted man at firft , but to
make way by his fall to his redemption and therein the more fitly
and fully to triumph over the Divelis pride and envy, in a nature
inferiour to that of his i What raggs doth God often twifi into
ropes to lift his Jeremies out of the Dungeon.
g. Equity of puni/bment : It is the equity, the very jujrice it felre
of jufiice, to hold a proportion ( as of meafure Co) of hind too, be-
tween the fin and puniflunent; and what fuller higher proportion
then when the fin and punifoment are fins both f though God take
no pleafure in the death of a firmer, yet, after his Co often repeated.
Why Wi/7 yee dye,he will needs dye, he teems often to take a juft plea-
fure in the manner of his dying * ludas if his boweils be wanting to-
wards others, they fhall be fo to himfelfe too, and that both in his
life and death, He hanged himfelfe, and his bowels gujhed out, Saul
will not confult God in his life , he fhall therefore confult a Witch
about his death : and he that had fo often in his life attempted to run
his fervant David through with his fpeare , fhall j’uftly beg the fame
death of another fervant of his at his end: Pharoah had made
the river guilty of the hloud of the Hebrew infants , his firft plague
fhall therefore bee the rivers being turned into bloud: hee that
had made fo many Women childlejfe , is juftly punifhed by the barr en-
neffe of his onely child, his daughter, and that her adopted Ifraehtijh
fonne Mofes fhall revenge on him the maffacre of all thole natural!
Tonnes of Ifrael: <isfdonibez.ef is juft To ferved, as he had done by
the other feventy Kings : Ely mas the forcer er that would have
blinded the Deputy, is himfelfe ftruck with blindnejfe : and that o-
ther forcerer Magus, qui pemas affumpferat, plant as amifit, (asa
Father fpeaks) he that would needs have wings to fiie with,.fhall
not have feet to go on, he fell in his ambitious flight (fayes the Itory)
3 and
V. 3*. n.
AB % i.
I Sam.i 1.4
Exokj'j.ip.
ludg. I.
Ali.ii.ll.


and broke both his thigte.even W himfclf if he ov»»
Father, to get the elder[h,p ttom his Brother, s bvthe cl
pay him in hisowne Coyne, and cozen him of his Rochet by the -
derail) of her Sifter, God will chafe to
thefrprcfwmptions with, and if they will needs the Wind, they
fhatl re ape the whirlevoind.
The of this Dadrine are. . n ~. which
I Of thofe Pepjhjk nd c Armmm Doannes^hich
allow God no other power about fin, but what is barely or
TZive, (at meft) which are indeed fo farre from or
efercifes, as that they are but reftraints (at kaft )
poWer: I eonfeffe B elUrmine fee ms to ackno wle gcano P j
whereof he makes Brno de Ft hi ore the inventer, which it he would
ftand to. would amounf to no leffe then that
power, before fpoken of: he ufes the very fame words, but retrarts
and cats them againe in thenext line, withan tdeptte ’jf'**
fedperntijftvc , but fo { fades he ) as God doth it not J*
onely fermifivel) ,as if the word dijpofmve did not mclu e
that is pefitive, and not barely permifive. f G d
So enforcedly injurious and deftruttive is this ofUods
hvepermffitmlf fin , to his infinite (fe wi°”^Z,l\oh\s nre-
ftim plainely denyes Gods ittfmtnejfe m refpe 0 , -r. l (,j s
fence and feme of our own late A have done no
infinitneffe, in refpedfot limits to his power, y g .
an irreffable poWer towards marts WUI, andtf
from cLpctence, that «tis no longer any power at
vid Stoical when he tells us that God m J an
UspcopUmUme, they willlnot:fee od w fettat
determine it Without enforcing it, an y x rlp>fprmin' , d
C«(r owne good, as free as it is. «
thereto, that he cannot:wiU any thing( but |™ d ..
ntccjfity of certainty, but coaftnm that VI • . / that thev
but 'tis a determination of the will by an d-.vfr £ ’ ,
fo much bogle at, as if that his infinite , infinite
perly laid to be extrinfiike to any thing ? o nfaPt in eve-
is more immediate, and no leffe internal, to t..e • « God
ry thing, then the inmoft offence of the thing it fctf * •«*«> Goa
(as the Apoftlc fpeakes; ymhtth to**//, he fo on
v<
Gen, 2s, 25.
Ifa, 66. 4,
Hof 8. 7.
De grat. &
lib . tvrb.L I.
<7.3,
De Deo %
initio .
Pfal, 1 10.3.


as he no lelTe worketh in the will too. It was Ciceros complaint on
Homer , that whereas he fliould have drawne up Earth to Heaven*
.1. taught men to live like the Gods,he dr ere dine Heaven to Earth
taught the Gods to live like men, in murders .rapes and thefts : It mav
be juitly our complaint on thele men, they fancy God as an earthly
A with his Courtiers and Favourites about him. at a diftance
Sri'f " ÜbieffS ? bla( P hemeufl > making hi n- („ fa their Pi!
s, lo ) in their opinions, an old moody man, fuch another as Ely
was, letting pafle many a thing in hi s government, as lb much wall
water that runs befide the ceurfe of his providence , which hee can
make no ufe of, and therefore winks at: thus (as TertulUan of the
Komane Senate rejeamg OU r Saviour Chnfi from being one of their
C iods)Deusji homtmbus nonplacuent non erit t>eus, where Gods pn.
vernment pleafes riot them, he lhali have none,rather then not make
his government full as they think of humanity , they will emntv it
(and him both) of Divinity ~i. hfinitneffe , if hee will not preferre
mans jrWbefore his ovjv\glory, it ftiall be taken from him • the very
glory of hi sglory its infimtneffe and tranfcendency , above all propor-
whnh H he f greateft man > to fpeake property fthe
W hole good of man confifts in it sferviceableneffe to that violfum-
mum tnunoeyuoejue gepere eft regula inferiorum,the good of the high-
eft end is the rule and meafure to all that are [uhordinate. , &
7. Terr our, to fuch as fall under this the fevertft 0 f all forts of
punilhments the puniftiment ot> by/*,as here Ahabs Idolatry, by
being himfdfidoliz’d into the believing the lye of his Prophets , and
ot their talle hearts ,by * lying ft ir it in their mouthes, whoftoallao ud
t* fight again ft Benjamin ? who mil lead me into the (Irona City?
thb l e T^ andCOnimirCrations ™ “®panfon of
thing fo ratall as his ambujh, his anger nothing fo dreadfull as his
fcorne, when he laughs- at a mans defiruthon, and mocks when his
W 7u C °T et I U ' he iV n ft ea d of Godi pwn being at a mans riaht hand
that he fliould not fal(as toDavid)hk gives a man over tofalfromone
wu k£dnejfe to another , and fets Satan at his right hand to tempt him
fas D imprecates, whether on Judas or Doer, or fome other
fworne enemy of God J When will ftudy for fuch a
one US, Let his Table be made a fnare to him, and the thine s of his
wealth an occafien to him of fading ; yet if God kill me (with lob) J
mu
Jud. 20.
PJal. 60, p,
Prov. 1.26.
Pfol.i 10.5.
Tfal. 1 op, 's
urn*


will trufi in him , but if he will not fo much as kill, that he may five,
not fo much as kill a man himfelfe, but put him over into the hands
of the D cvill and of thofe worft enemies and executioners ,thofe of a
mans owne heart , to make him lo much the more guilty of his own
death,what truft? what hope ? when God himfelfconfults a mans
delution, when a man (hall heare nothing (with Ahab) but go m and
proffer, but all his going up ’tis but (as to Ph*roah)(o much the more
to tumble him down, and to make his prsfferity his mine.
_ When the three great judgements are propofed to Davids choice,
hisanfwer is, Let me fall into the hands of God , and not of man:
how heavy a judgment muft it be then to fall from Gods hands into
a mans own, and thence into the Devils ? For Satan to fiand at a
mans right hand, to make him fall from one Wickednefe to another ,
when a man is put into the hands of his Executioner, before he
knowes of his condemnation: when God (after all ways for a mans
amendment failing) comes fo that expoftulation in the Prophet E-
fay. Why fhould 1 fmite any more , feeing he falls array more and
more? and thence, to that rdolution in the Prophet E^echiel, 1
rrill take away mjjealoufte, and 1 will be angry no more. Vox efi ha-
fitantis (layes nsfmbrofe on the place) & non habentis in premptu
quid fiatuat: The words of a hopelelfe anxious father, that had
tried all wayes with his diflblute forme, counfePd, correded,warn’d,
watch’d, and wooed him too, by all the wayes of providence and in-
dulgence, that he could ufe ; hardened, and flackened, and opened his
hand towards him to the utmof, and all in vaine, he falls at laft to
this his laft refolution, 1 will utterly rid my hands of him , and Wipe
him cjuite out of my thoughts , and let hisowne ryot be his rod
and ruine. Let all Gods formes (with David) pajfe over, pajfe tho-
rough me, rather then he fhould leave me to this one calme, the [ecu-
rity of mine own heart, to conclude to my felfe my fifety, from my
fucccfe; the fifety of my impiety from the fitcceffe of my impunity y
to blejfe my felfin my own heart,and jet to go on in the imaginations of
my own heartyadding fin to /»;give me any plague (fays the Wifeman)
five the plague of the heart, and any plague of the heart, (ave that of
calling great plagues peace, and of prefuming mine own fifety and
Gods love, from the ranknefte of the pafture he puts me in. Yea let
God lookpn as our Saviour Chrift on Peter,he do but look,
on me and frown, but if he pafle by, and will not know, not own
C 2 me.
Hof,6. i ,
Pro. 1.3 2.
2 Sam. 24.
H-
jr
p}' 2'
Beu.lQ T q
" y


me, not fo much as frown on me, but, as he {peaks fin the Proverbs)
laugh me to fcorne, feeing my dty a coming , and have me in derifion :
Tis almoft too late to Weeps, when God once thus begins to laugh.
1 Of the foure forts of conferences (Bernard {peaks or ) the good
and quiet , the good and unquiet, the had and unquiet , the bad and
quiet, the laft is infinitely the worft, and by fo much thewerie, by
how much’tis the mor e quiet: the counterfeit or good is douDly
worfe then the privation ; Vpon the kicked (fayes David) God Will
raine fnares , of all (bowers ( next to that of fire and brimfione) a
fhowerof fnares is the worft, a /bower of blond ffuch as we have
now (lore of) is nothing to it. * . ril ,
2. Triall, or difeovery, who they arc that ordinarily tall under
thiskindeof vengeance, the punifhment of finby fin, the heavieft ot
all other judgments on this fide hell: we will not go out ot the Text
to find them, they are more e(pecially,thefe foure forts, the fenfiall,
the fecure , the toil full, and the deceit full. .
i The fenfiall , fuch as cannot (with tAhab) deny their eye a
vineyard, or their heart a luft that lies in its way ; but grow impati-
ent and fick if they have it not; thofe land-Leviathans thatthinke
the earth made for no ether purpofe, but for them to take their pa~
dime in, that drinks in iniquity as the oxe drinks heater, given over
(as the Apoftle fpeaks ) to lafiivioufnefe, toworke uncleanneffe with
areedineffe, that make Delilahs lap their Abrahams bofome. Intem-
perance ’tis moft'what no ieffc morally,then naturally pumfh d with
its own furfeit, digs its own grave with its own teeth , mikes ns
own throat its own fepulcher, is its own rod and whipping-poll, or
rather halter, wherein the very fwindge it takes {wangles it, fault
znd punifhment both. . r „ ,
ai The fecure, that can (with Ahab) fleepe out in fin all Ehahs
and Gods thunder, and accounts him an enemy that would awaken
him , that fo he deep in a whole skin, no matter for a found confci-
ence * that (with Vhelius) proclaims ahum filentium Belli, that
no man mention warre, when in the very midft of enemies,a Lethar-
oie Tis a kind of death as well as a difealc, fecunty is fin and pumfli-
ment both, the peftilence of this chayre of the fcorners of reproofs
lurks in this the cushion of fecurity. .
2 The wilfull and incorrigible : befides Eh ah s warnings and
threatnings, vihab had felt Gods hand too, firft, in a three yeers fa-
■ 9 ' mine ,
ip*


nine, then in a fiege of thirty two Kings, and after that agamea
ftckneffe, but all will not ferve the turnc to make him ftoope, and
therefore after all, and not till after all, comes it to this queftion,
Who (hall perfwade Ahab to go up to fall ? God hangs not out this
his laft black flag of ruine, untill he hath firft difplayed his white one
of warning;, and then his red one of warre : no man whom God
hath not firft made triall on by his edge of affli&ion, doth he thus
turn his own point upon to wound himfelfe with.
4. Th e deceitful! c Ahab before he is thuspuniflwd by fn for
fmy had not onely in former judgments felt Gods hand, but feigned
himfelfe humbled under it, with promife of amendment, he rent his
deaths, and put on fackjoth, and fafied and lay in fdcifioth, and went
fifth ; but he returns again to his vomit, and (with the hypocrite in
Job) cries no longer then he is a binding, fees God no longer then he
feels him; take heed of playing thus raft s and loofe with God , take
heed after a recovery, of leaving devotion behind in thefick beda-
fleep, untill the death-bed waken it t "twill befure (I confefle) to
be found there againe, but how? no other moft-what then as a pa wn
of vengeance,feldome redeemed after fodefperate a forfeicure,fo long
and multiplying a fcore of fin upon fin,and each of them both punish-
ment and fault :take heed of going on (with Balaam ) in an illcourfe,
after God hath met us in fome firaight, and yet a narrower way to di-
vert us, and, to fave our heads, dajh’dour feet againji (ome fione, to
let us fee we are not in his wayes, fpecially if we have (with him)
bowed down our heads, and falne on our faces , and acknowledged the
perverfneffe of our wayes, with femblances and overtures of retu n.
The fecond Part’tis that of the King, aftduced King: we may
take him under a double notion or capacity, of Wickjdneffe , and of
wilfidneffe , onefo wicked as he had fold him r to Works wicked-
tuffe in the fight of the Lord, whom Jezabel his wife provoked: and
here the Obfervation may be this;
A fordid foule life fullies and darkens the undcrftandmg too,gree-
dineffe in finning gives up to a giddineffe in judging: when
they knew God they glorified hfm not as God, they became vainc in their
own imaginations, and their foolifh heart 'Was darkened: and again, Be-
caufe they loved not the truth , God fends them firong delufions , and
efficacy of errour, Solomon himfelfe, one that had tortured nature,
M J C 3 fet
l .KT mg. 18.
1 King. 20,
I King. 21,
I King. 2r.
loh 3 <5. 13.
Num.i2,
Part 11.
Rom. i. 21.
2 The f, 2.
10,1 I.


ftt heron the rack, .made her confeffeall her fecrets
to the I ftp, how did his luft un-Solomon, un-man him ? made him as
very a bead, as very an idoli as thofe he worfbipped, having eyes and
feeing net, ike. ' *
Thercafons hereof may be taken from the natures, as of truth and
the under ftanding , fo of fin and vice.
Firft for that of truth, and the undemanding: as venue is call’d
the verity of the will, fo is verity the vertue of the underftanding:
even the Philofophers (the Platonifts cfpecially ) require two things
(as preparatives in the undemanding; towards the fearch of truth,
Love: light makes it receptive of truth /love makes it
purfuitfull after it: Truth is defin’d to be conformists intelleßus
cum re, when (as the Philofopher fpeaks j excognito & cognofcente
fit unum , when the underftanding in its Idza of the ob/eft is made
as it were the counterpane of the thing it apprehends, which cannot
be done without light , and love, the one having a faculty of repre-
senting, the other of transforming; as in the fight and hearing there
IS u r * e( xr • ltC an lnt f rna^^a 9 d implanted light and ay re, whereinto the
cbjectis received, reprefented, and whereby conveighed: fo in the
be an innate and organicall light, wherein
the objeft rnuft be reprefented before it can be underftood. Now no-
thing lo much darkens and bemifts the underftanding as vice and lu-
j : f f ft 9 rmes of paftion, fumes of ambition do fo be-
and dog the wings of the undemanding,that it is impoflible
i Ihould make any likely flight in the difeovery of fo high,fcrene,and
iightiome a thing as truth is; a muddy or troubled water reprefents
either nothing at all, or not any thing aright- the underftanding hath
no ey e-falve like that of temperance, prayer, and meditation f well
mingled together. *
ligh . t m the 9? derftandl * n g> fo in the will, is love towards
the truth, no lefle neceflary in its difeovery ; Love the PhHofophers
cal pondm goddam nature, 'tis like lead in the handle of a piercer it
ma es it enter : we ufe to heat red-hot an iron we would pierce
?Ta . W T -T m£ t e into thG truth > our underftandings muft
be firft fired with the love the iron *blmt,t»e muft (fayes
Solomon) put to the more ftrength: now love (be tel S us) is ftronaer
then death : this is the onely ftrength, which put to, will before to
make it enter; Amor & gaudium (they fay) fadmt mufeam,
amor


Amor et vinumfacimt Poet am,amor et oleum Phil ofoghum,amor et ig-
nis tyAlchymiflam, love {fill is one of the keyes } the Secretaries to e-
very kind of truth; now take it any way, and lufi is ftillthe rufl,the
canker of love , efptcially love of the truth.- truth, *cis as a fereneand
Jightfome, fo a candid,clean? and modefl thing, apteft of any thing to
be driven, ftunkeout ofdoores by the nafty fleemesand flnttifh cor-
ners of luxury and riot.
2. From the nature of fin, the Scriptures often call fin darkncffe,
and ’tis the ufuall Scripture Character of fms,workj of darkle(fe, and
they are fo three waies, in their rife, in their raigne, and in their fall;
they begin in inward darkneffe,ignorance, they erre in their hearts he-
caufe they have not known my waies ,they go on in outward darknefle,
fecrecie, the Adulterer waiteth for the tw) light, and they end in ut-
ter darknefle, where is weeping andgna/hing of teeth , now if fin be
thus every way darkpefe, there is no queftion but it is every way an
enemy to truth, which is light.
The uleof this fhall be onely to convince of arrogance and felfe
delufion, tho'e the pretended witsof thefe times, that challenge to
have the foie faculty of founding the depths of the prefent differen-
ces both in Religion and State, and judging the truth of all the chi ns
Jo the truth therein j certainly if Gods fecrets he with the righteous ,
if he will guide the meekjnjudgement, if wicked men foall not under-
fiand judgment , if God will make the counfells of the wickedfoolifh, if
light and and cleere up, if Lxury and ambition darken
and dazle the eye of the undemanding, and that in a natural! and
phyficall, as well as a moralland meritorious way of working, if
btcaufe they receive not the love of the truth, andglorife not God as
God, he fend them firong deluftons that they (hauld believe lyes,\£gree-
dineffe in finning give up to a giddineffein judging, if a fowle life do
fully theunderftanding too, fure thefe kind of men,who For the moft
part conclude themfelves under an engagement to drinke at lead; half
drunk to day, if it be but to wain down the crudities and flench c f
yeflerdaies furfeit, or the horror and fling of the laft nights lnfl,that
every day anew darken and black their fouls all over with that fmoak
and foot wherein hell breath’s above ground,blafphemy, ribaldry and
profaneffe, are no way like to be fuch cabnet Councellors, fuch Se-
cretaries to truth : Or if,it may be, fome of this party prove through
temper or intereft, foil what more referved then the rdl, fhall wee
think
lob. 24.1 y.
PfaL 25.9,
Pror, 28.5".
lob, 5.13.


th;n!< that men in whofe eye two or three Stecples,with a Deanery,
to be-pinnacle them , make fcarce a moat worthy to he cafi out , can
ever fee cleeriy, fpecially into prafticall truths, where prejudicium
errore pejus, prejudice is of the two a greater Enemy to truth then
errour.
But more particularly to the behaviour of this King in this prefect
paffage,and neercr haftning to his fall at Ramoth the fe-
concfnotion, under which he is hercprefented, vU. of toUfulltep,
he will up to Ramoth Gilead, nothing {hall ftay him , and when hce
hath fet up his refolution, and made his confederacy with lehofd-
phat, then, and not till then, will he take councell, and then too, of
none but fuch as he knowes will more Tooth then fervehim, Bads
and his Wives Prophets, equally fed by her, and taught by the Di-
vtll to delude the King. JVichedneffe may make himaworfe man,
but ccttainly ef the two, wilfullncffe makes him a worfe King . The
Doftrine here,is that
He that concludes what flialbe,before he confults what Ihouldbe,
and when confult/tis but with luch as confult more them felves,
then him whom they counfell,he is fure and worthy to be deceived.
He fets the Sun by the dyall, his counccll by his will, and fo no
mar veil if he loofe the day. v
For the firft part of the Do&rine, there is nothing more frequent-
ly ur°’d in Scripture, fpecially in the Books of lob, P[alms, and Pro-
verbs, then the neceflity of councell. The fecond part wants not
proof thence neither, for the Councell there commended, muft firft
be not of the wicked, for their comfrll 'tts deceipt , not of flatterers,
for their eyes Jhallfayle, but the hearty counccll of friends: we read
indeed of one Kingdome that was gotten by flatteries , Dan. 11. 2 1,
but of many a hundred that have been utterly loft that way. Reha-
hoam is a pregnant example of this Doctrine,he would be counselled
by none but by his favourites, and fo is Ahaziah, who walked in the
wayes of his own heart, andrhis Another was his Councellor , the rea-
fons hereof may be taken both from
The deceitfulneffe of mans heart, the heart of man is deceit full a~
hove all things, and above all things deceitful! towards it felf, Ices
much leffe when a gamefter, then when a looker on, lomany win-
dings, overtures, pretences, prejudices, hath it alwaies at hand, to
hang in its owne light, that a common Proverbe tells us that he who
& takes
Doct.
Pfal. 8r .11
106.13,
lob, 5.13.
18. 17.
Vrov, 3.J,
ia. 15.
Prov. 1 2. j.
lob. 17. 7.
/Vox;. 27. P.
2 Chro.2 2,3
■fo*. 17. p..


takes advice of none hut himfelfhe hath a fool to hi* Councellor , and
he who will counfell Inch a one, hath a foole to his Schollcr, the wil-
full man never wants woe.
2, From the ufefulneffe and office of counfell, which is to un-
deceive this felfc-dectitfull heart of man, which when Tis wanting
to counterpoife this proneneffeof the heart to its felfe-deceit, there's
feldome a fecond thought betwixt refolution and mine : With the
flatterers (fayes the Pfahrift ) Were hufle mockers : flatterie, efpeci-
ally in matter of counfell, Tis but a more flie and civill kind of rmc~
kerie in earneft, and makes indeed Majefiy it fdfc no better then a
Lord of mifrule, a very Chriftmas gamboll. The ufe hereof may
bee of
Exhortation to all men, efpecially of eminence in place,or power,
to take heed ofthefe two, the great precipices of greatneffe,the [corn,
and the danger of counfell. Firft for the fcorne of it.
1. He that thinks counfell either a clog to his will, or blemiffi to
his wifdome, makes himfelfe freer and wifer then God himfelfe, he
himfelfe was plea fed to fay, Let its make man, and that after our own
image, even therein implying him a (ociable and confultive creature;
the end why God gave man reafon, Twas not to command, but to
confult with, Without counfellpurpofes are difappointed , and by ccun~
fell thou (halt make Vearre. Next,
2. The danger of counfell, corrupt to optimi pejftma, what is
beft in the ufe, is alwayes worft in theabufe, the beft wine makes the
fowreft vinegar; he was a wife Prince (zsßodine obferves) that
prefer d a good Counfell,and an ill King, before a good King, and an
ill Counfell: and herein the dire&ions may be from this very cafe of
and his Counfellours, (we will go no further) fnch as thefe.
1. That Counfellours be chofen with an eye had as well to their
interefts as abilities ; Counfellours are voluntary, not natural] A-
gents, and fo in working have wills and ends of their own, which if
they be not concentrike with the honour and fafety of him whole
Counfellours they are, they willbefureto warpeand carry wide ;
thefe Prophets of Baal, Ahabs Counfellours, they were more in-
tereffed in the Qutenes pleafure, and Baals fervice, then the Kings
fafety : s tis the Rule of a late Counfellour of our owne, that 2 good
Counfellour Jhould be better jiudiedinhis PTiwces bufmeffe, then na~
-* D ture.
Pfal, 55.16
Gen, 1.26.
Prov. 15.22
24.6.
De Repub.


turey and we may boldly add, that it no lelfe behoves the Prince to
be as wel ftudied in his Connfellours interefts,as in his abilities; M&-
chiavel concluds a Chapter with this Rule , Jmperito Principi re ft: a
Concilia non poffunt dari, refolving, that a Prince is not therefore
wife, bccaufeheis well counfell'd, but therefore well co unfell’d be-
caufe he is wife : an Ahab fhall be fure to heare nothing but goe up
and proffer , when a David may be told, Thou art the man.
2. Let them be fuch as more confult the peace and fafety,then the
power and greatnelfe of their Mailer ; in hi'' fafety they confult him
for himfelfe, and the State; in his greatnelfe they do but confult
themfelves, how by his greater power to make themfelves great;
whiewhh en once done,they care not how foon that power be either
tranfmitted to his fucccifour, to whom they have not been beholden,
or to be rid of all dependency lhar'd among themfelves : men ufe to
kick off the ladder they gat up by, leaft it fhould upbraid them , and
teach others the way up to the lame height,to the hazzard of jullling
them down; thefe Prophets would rather have the King hazzard
all Jfraely then not get Ramoth-Gileadto it, Ifrael they think will
(however) defeend upon an heir of Jezabels , and their own breed-
ingjand if Ramoth-Gileadbe wonne too, 'twilbea good acceflion to
his and their greatnelfe, by whofe counfell ’twas attempted.
3. Let not their places and imployments give totall fublillence to
their ranks and titles, their comportment and equipage not depend
wholly upon their counfells acceptance: he that dif-imployed, hath
a bottome and fublillence, may advife freely, and faithfully, at leaft
he needs not flatter ; and certainly,one of the lurell morall fecurities
againll flattery in counfel,is not to need to flatter,need hath generally
the greatefl influence into the aeftions of all forts of men,ho w much
more when re-inforc'd by ambition, wit, and acceptation ? free-
doms would be ratherindur'd and cherilhui even to unmannerlinelfe,
then any way llifled, or frown'd into fawning; he cannot ordinari-
ly meane ill in counfell, who dates run the hazzard of being thought
todofo: Pliny commends Trajan, fjluodeo rogante Jententias li-
berc dicere liceret, vinceretque fententia non prima , fed melior : that
when heconfulted, every man might fpeak his mind freely, and not
that counfcll that was moft fuitable, but that which was mgft fafe,
prevailed : whereas of Domitian he fayes, Vidimus Curiam elin-
guem t in qua dicere quod voiles periculojum, quod nolle s , mi forum
Do Principe
Plin. junx in
Pan eg.


rffet, the Court was tongue-tied, wherein to fpeake what a man
would, was dangerous j and to fpeake what he would not, was
bafe; thefe Prophets here had no, either reputation, or fubfiftence,
but what they had from Court; their very Prophetftiip depended
wholly on its infpiration, interefts,acceptation : from the time that
the peoples joyning with Eliah in the {laughter of their foiled fel-
lowes at the brooke Kijhon , mentioned in the 18. Chapter, they
wholly applied themfelves to the Court: that which Bodlne ob-
ferves of the wifdome of the Venetian State would herein not be
neglefted, who, before they come to vote in the Senate, caufe the
Cryer alwayes to make Proclamation, Ferai Preta, out of doores
with the Priefts, as knowing them to have a totall dependance upon
the Court of Rome.
4. Let them be fiich as are, at leaft, not careleffe of provoking the
common People : the People area tight Hydra y {boner overcome
by playing afleep, then by cutting off of heads : a State ’tis like a
water, you cannot ftirre the mud.,but you both ftaine and trouble the
top : thefe Counfellours of <iy4hab, Baals Prophets (upon the fore-
mendoned paflageof the peoples fiding with Eliah') grew into a
Court-tadion , altogether as fcornfuli, as fcorned of the people.
They fay, all Nations have their lejuites, though of what ever Nati-
on they be, they arc two parts at leaft Spaniard: but (I think) if
may be further faid, that not only all Nations, but almoft all Religi-
ons too, have their Jefuitcs, a kinde of precious three-pii’d men,
specially among the Clergy , who thinkc their candles , though but
fnuffts, hfl under a bujbek , if they blaze not in the Prefence at leaft;
a kind of Egyptian Frogs , that would be croaking no where fo wil-
lingly as in Kings chambers, the Locufis in the Revelation , that dr are
out the Kin<rs of the earth to battell : the Apoftle Paul was conten-
ted to be all things to all men, that he might win feme , thde will be
all things too, but ’tis but to Tome, that they might win allj net them
but theirs , (with Juvenals Greekc) Counfellours, Secretaries, Pny-
fitians, Midwives, Bawds, Buffons,all things, *any thing, to Gran-
dees, but (as the Pricfts and Pharifees incur Saviours time ) for the
common people that know not the Law, they are accurfed, and accurfed
fhalibe, for them, or any blefling of their care or thought; they
Will not fo much lofe themlelvcs in the darke, as to feeke guefis far
the marriage-feafis in the highwayes and hedges , although wefnde
D 2 that
De Repub.
/. J.ff. I.
Gen.S, 3.
Rev.p %


that the loweft Suns caft thelargeft flbadowes, and the hig’icft fliers
are many times the weakeft wing'd, meafure thefe men in their own
dimenfions, without taking in the ground they ftand on,and they are
moft-what no luch Sauls head and Jhoulders above the people. But
however the common People are fuch a pirt in every State,as would
be choicely handled by thofe that ftcere it, as not cry M up, fo much
leflc trod down, no nor altogether laid afide : the rrorall of the Ser-
pent tels us, that though the taile muft not lead,yet muft it not be ut-
terly left behind neither, lead the Head be To diiabled to fupport or
raife it felfe by : and experience tells us, that fuch Counfellours as
wholly defpife the multitude, are never either fafe to themfelves, or
ferviceable to their Mafter, but ftill in the end prove rather the peo-
ples flcrifices , then the Princes fervants.
The third Part in this fall of a yihab y *tis the Devils party a bufie
part, and full of a<slion, / Vci/l be a lying fpirit in the mouth of all his
Prophets : that ridiculous dreame of Rabbi Solomon , that this fpirit
was the rcvengefullghoft of Naboth y ('more then fufficiently refu-
ted by tyfbulenfis) as fcarce worthy mentioning, Ipafleby : But
why not a lying Jpirit in the heart of the King , rather then in the
mouth of fo many Prophets , why fo farre about to get into the heart
of the King ? is i t becaufe the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord ?
certainly fo is every mans elfe. Thole words are not to be underftood
cxclufively., towards other mens, but inclufively, even to the
Kings heart: as who fliould fay, the King, as great as he is,
yet his heart is in Ciods hand , as much as the heart of any ci-
ther: no mans heart is immediately in the hands of theDevill,
it is our helves that put the weapon into his hands, whereby he
wounds us: we that hold the candle to the Devill, and do firft, by
fome ad vantage we offer him, even tempt the Devill to tempt us,
feme obvious unwarranted cuftome or carriage, fome uncovenanted
unwatched fenfe or fancy, fome loofe unguarged affeftion or humour
we lay in his way, which he makes a fcafbld, or fealing ladder, to
climbeovcrby into our hearts, a lying fpirit in the mouth of his
Prophets : As who fliould fay, is it zAhab that is to be perfwaded
‘ 1 to go up to Ramoth-Gilead to fall ? the eafieft matter of a thou-
te fand, he hath ted up a company of flattering trenchcr-Prophets at
tc his wives table, and they are thereby no leffe already taught, then
tf fed, to Tooth him to any courfe of mine that may any way ingrati-
ate,
Part 111.


“ ate, enfhrine them more with their Diana, Jezabel, Tie do it with
a wet finger, 1 will go and lea lying fpiritin the mouth efi all thefe
Prophets.
So farre is the Divell from being able irrefiftibly to worke upon,
or incline our hearts, as he cannot without our helps, faften any the
leaf! imprefiion on them, daould he come and find nothing in w, (as
our Saviour of himfelf) he could get nothing out of us, work nothing
on US, ( as of Tarquine towards Lucrece) vexarepetefi, violare non
potefi : hereunto tend all thofe phrafes of depths , devices , voiles and
fnares , which the Scriptures ufe to exprefle his waies of working on
us by,would we not be venturing among thofe his depths , tampering
with thofe his devices, wandering in thofe his Wiles, treading on thoie
his fnares, hee might furround , he could not furprize us by them.
Some haveobferved that God is faid in Scripture, to have a fan in his
hand, the Divell to have a Scive, the fan blowes away the chaffe,and
keeps the graine, the Scive lets the Come run out, and retaines the
chaffe, the Divell can but toffe us up and down, to fee at which holes
he can make the grain of our graces to run out at, the fan caufes the
wind it works by, the Scive doth but watch and take advantage of
the wind which it no way breaths or caufes, God is the foleautnour
of that breath of grace he infpires us by, the Divell doth but make
ufe of, and drift his Sayles to the wind,he finds to ftir within, or on
us, infpire he cannot.
Reafons hereof may be taken from the natures both of the Dwell,
and of our fouls the Agent and Subjects in this work.
i. The Divell neither is, nor ever was more then a created finite
Spirit, no other then but a part of nature, and 'tisarule that pars,
nature non fuperat naturam , no part of nature can work above its
naturall fpheare and compaffe; as the end and purpofe of every things
being is Working, fo the rule and compalTe of every things working is
its being, the Divell (Saint Jude tells us jis refervedin chains, foure-
chaines he hath about him, two torment him, and two reflraine hi n,
the two that torment him, are hisowne confidence, and Gods wrath,
being a creature intelligent, he muff needs have a confcience , fmh as
muff make him both accountable to Gods knowledge as his Judge,
and lyable to Gods wrath as his Enemy. The two chaines that ce-
ftraine him, are his own finitnejfe, and Gods providence, .the firft hin-
ders him from doing all he would.doe, the fecond a {freighter chaine*
X) 3 hinders
D o a.
Mat.%. 12.
Luk.22. 3 I.
ludc 6.


hinders him from doing all he otherwife could doe; he would quefti-
onleffe otherwife work upon the foul of man immediately as God
doth, he wants neither malice to attempt it, nor ambition to afpire
it, nor impudence to challenge it, but failes only in power to accom-
plifb it, and therefore is faine to make ufe of fome obj'ed from
without, or affedion from within , either the world or the flejh to
Grve his turne by, for Adam therefore he hath an Apple, for Achan
a Wedge, a Kingdome for Ab(dlow 3 an Office for Corah , Wages
for Balaam, a Bagge for Judas, a World for Demos J and here a flat-
tering Prophefiefor Ahab , the Lord Jhall deliver it into the hands ef
the King, a Prophefie much what like thofe wonted ones of his jug-
ling Oracles* delivered it waswfo the hands of the King . but what
King? the King of Sjriah.
2. From the nature of a humane foul, a foul 'tis a Spirit as well
as the Divellhimfelf, and confidered without reference to the pre-
fent body of as fpirituall a nature, and when feperate, knowes as o-
ther fpirits doe by intuition, without the Angells ,
(as our Saviour himfelf witnefles. ) Now how Spirits equally fpiri-
tuall, can make immediate impreffion one upon another, without a
contiHuall circle of rcadion, tis hard, ifnotirnpoffible to conceive,
one Divell did not tempt another in their firft fall,if any of them had
fallen by a Tempter, he had in all proportion been (atleaftj in the
fame capacity with man, of being recovered by a Saviour, every Di-
vell is in fin an originall Proprietor, 'tis of his ovme, nor doe the Di-
veils torment the foulsof men in helfas our common pidurcs tell us,
they are tormented with the Divells , (faies Saint John) not by , but,
with them.
I confeflfe fome Divines doe make three forts of temptations,
which they call afeendentes objeEia, and injeEta, either fuch as afeend
and boyle or fume up into the foul or will of a man,from fome lower
faculty or affedion, firft diftempered ordifordcred.
2. Or fuch as have their rife from fome outward objcdjnveigling
the outward fences, the firft fort are fuch as properly are from the
fie/hy thefecond from the World, in both which the Divell hath no
fmall ftiare by his improvement of them to his advantage: but for
the third, thoft which are faid to be ondy from the Divell, and Am-
ply injeded by his immediate impreffion on the will they give the
Divell more then his due, too much of what is Gods ( whofe only
it
1 King . 22.
6,
Lul( r 20.56
Joh, 8.44*
Rev, 20. !©•


it is, immediately to aft and move the will) that give him any fuch
a power; Gods workings on the foul of man are defcendcnt, ani
direft, firft, upon the underftanding and wi'l, and thence upon the
affeftionsand fenfes , the Divells are afcendent and circular, from
carekffe fenfes, difordered affeftions,or a troubled fancy , he afcends
to the will; and thence back againe to the others : How farre by
thole intelligible fpecics that are in our fancy a lower facultie, he may
come to know what is in our understandings by way of thought or
wills, by way of purpofe; ’tis not roourprefent fub/eft,
to know that all temptations are either afcendent or objective, begm
from below within us, ©r from before without us, in both which
attempting our bleffed Saviour by hunger from within , and Kinv-
domes from without, and finding nothing within, of either, for his
advantage, he loft his labour, and left him, (as the Text tells us) hee
found nothing in him, and fo could get nothing out of him. The u-
fes of this Doftrine are of
I. Informat ion, to informe us wherein the great ftren<nh of this
our great enemie lies, and nofee artes hoftis, to know the aits of an e-
nemy in War re,his way of fight, how,and where he places his aci?s,
his ftrength of battl e, his weapons wherein he trufteth , hath been al-
waies held worth knowing, and the great ftrength and skill of this
enemy, lyes not fo much in downright battery , or open a (faults,as in
ft rat ape ms, ambujhes and mynes, (a S ’tis faid of the Hollanders ) hee
fights moft of his Battells under ground, and his fpeciall cunning lies
in earthing himfelfe well (as they call it) in all his approaches ‘"and
rouling trenches which he makes his way by : he deales by men as
men doe by flints,toffes and turns us till he find a likely edge to ftrike
on, and then he falls to work with his fled and tynder,fas he defired
to do by Peter) he winnoWes men till he find fome hole or other
through which they will be gotten to fall, would hehave Herod t o
itnke on John Baptfts head, he tries all his edges, fir ft turns him up-
on that of his brothers wife, and if that will not ferve the turne, then
to that of afeaft, and if not that, then to that of a daunce, and if not
that alone, then to that of an Oath , to make lure with ; is <*y4hab
here to be perfwaded to an utter fall, if Naboths Vineyard he not a
hole wide enough in this Sciveof temptation for him to fall through
a£, Ramoth Gilead is yet a wider one, fpecially fh lining God out of
the confutation about it, and his Prophet up 'in Prifon for offering
to
Mat. 4.
Luh 11.32


to bring him in, however a flattering ufurp.d Prophefie, prepared
and fuborned by Court-dyet an d preferment, will make it wide e-
nough, dill this enemy of ours is lure to make his approaches on that
lide we lay our (elves opened to furprizall.
2. Caution , to ad vile us to make good our out-works, that the
Divtll come not (o near as to attempt the fcaling or undermining of
our Walls; to relieve our Centinells , man Weil the Cinque-Ports of
our fenfes , order well the Forlorne hope of our ( iffettions , that wee
hazzard not too farre our maine body, our heart; to draw our line of
Intelligence t our Veatchful/ne(fe, fo large, that he may not come fo
near us, as to fire our Suburbs, to keep him out at a diftance, (as ’tis
faid of Women towards the temptations of men ) their behaviour is
a flatter deny all then is their no, he comes too neer a grant that comes
fo farre as to be denyed it, ’tis fo with us all towards this old Temp-
ter, efehue evill (faith Saint Peter) flee fornication ( faith Saint Paul)
temptations are better refilled by flight then parley,have nothing to do
with the unfruitfull works of darknefc, enter not into their fecrets ,
put the knife to the throat, floppe not onely the hand but the care from
blood, Jhake the hand from fo much as touching of bribes, frown temp-
tations out of countenance, or rather look not on them at all. Cove-
nant not onely with our hearts, but with our eyes (as lob did) turne
them aWay from vanity, (as David) and from the Wine too, (with Sa-
lomon)when it gives its colour in the cup,when it moveth it felf aright,
th teye, ’tis of all other the mod dangerous burning glaffe of the
heart, and as in fuch glades they kindle not the matter they are held
to, unleffe they be dedily and fixtly held, fo as they may colled the
Sunbeames, and founded and encentred, rc-inforce them upon the
objed, fo is it with the eye towards its objeds, take heed of fixing,
of planting it upon any worldly thing whatever, lead by fo convey-
ing its colleded bcames upon the heart, it quickly take fire, Eve fa\V
the fruit that it was pleafant to the eye, and to be defined to make one
wife, and fo came in the fall, the Sons of God faVothe Daughters of
Men , that they wevefaire, and fo came in the flood, Achanfaw among
the fpojle a goodly Babilonifh Garment, and a Wedge of Gould , ana
Naboths Vineyard too, was fird too much in Ahabs eye, before it got
fo much into his heart, it was in lezreel , hard by his Pallace , and fo
was Ramcth Gilead too, too much an eye-fore to Ahab, while in the
hands of the King of Syriagxbeame it was in his eye,before it fent an
eMrrow into his heart. The
I Pet. ll.
i Cor. 6»i 8
Eph. 5 11 •
Gen. 45?.
£fa. 3 3 •
Gen 6
en *3* *
Gen.6,2 r
Jofj.' '


The Devil! deales in his warre upon us, as Rabfhakeh did, in that
he threatncd to Rabfhakeh will not treat with his Coun~
fell ours of State, E Hakim and Shebna , but with the common people
that fate upon the wall, and them as likelieft to be wrought oft; he
ftrives to win by feares, and dangers of fward and famine , flich as
he is fure they are rood apprehensive of; and having once won them,
Jbc knowes thole Counfellours cannot long hold out neither. Juft fo
the Devill in his attempts of conqueft upon our Ifrael within us, he
applies himfelfe at firft wholly towards the common and lower fort
of faculties, our Senfes and Affcftions, fuch as he knowes are eafily
won with every overture of feare, hope or danger; and he knowes,
if once he can inveigle thefe, the Counfellours of State, ourunder-
ftandings and wills, will quickly follow : affedfions are as it were
the plummets and waights in the clocks of our foules, that doe fet
thofe higher wheeles a working, and the Devill is do good a Philoso-
pher as that he well knows, mot a faeilius moventur, the foul once fet
afloat in the fwindge of its affedHons, will hardly be held back by all
the reftraint either of reafon or refolution that the underftanding or
will can any way apply.
He (they fay) that goes about to conquer a Kingdome, without
firft gaining a party in it, is like one that goes about to cleave a block
without a wedge : this the Devill knowes well enough, and there-
fore he ftilindeavours to get a party within us, fome lurking traite-
rous humour, cuftomc, or affedfion, weeherifh in us, which we our
fel ves hold as a wedge at our own hearts, whileft he by his temptati-
on drives it to the cleaving and Splitting them in the end quite afun-
der: how tenacloufly doth Ahab (here) hug and hold faft thefe
Prophets of his owne hewing, at his own heart, while the Devill in
their mouths drives them as a wedge into his heart, to the rending
him and his whole family all to pieces.
The fourth Part in this Trage die of o 4hab t 'tis that of the Pro-
phets, in the mouth of all his Prophets. The mouths of Prophets,
when once this lying fpirit gets into them, they are, of all other, his
ambufhes and mines of greateft mifehiefe and advantage ; then, moft
of all, is this Prince of darknejfe turned into an Angell of tight , then
is he in his peftilentiall chaire of State, when gotten into the mouths
of Prophets : and if the mouth of falfe Prophets be his chay re,Court-
E favour
Jfa6.
PartlV.


favour on fuch Prophets is his velvet cufhion : The Prophet that.
Peaches lies, he is the tails, Efa.p. 15 . the taile of this old red Dragon
that Vrindes in htsprey , thecunningeft fnare of this fowler (as heis
Called by the Prophet Hofea) from fuch Prophets ’tis that prophane-
nt ife goes out into nil the land, ours as well as that of Judah: how
many ofthefe Prophets that daw be with untempered mortar, feeing
vanity) and defining lies , that bite With their teeth and crie peace , and
prepare Vvarre againfi him that puts not into their mouths , hath this
poore Land a long time felt, almoft to its utter mine ? But we pafle
from this general! notion of Prophets, at large, and take them oncly
as we find them here in the Text, under a double qualification of
number, and relation , ally and hd, all his Prophets ,
Firft in this one fhort wor daS, we have the three firft Popifli
marks of a true Church ftruck off at a blow, Vniverfdlitjy Vnity,An-
tiquity.
Firft, all, fo many arc they, as they filled the great houfe of Baal
from one end to another , or fas the Hebrew more fully,) /landing
mouth to mouth, all againft one, Micaiah ; here's Vniverfdlity to
the full.
Secondly, Vnity, one lying jpirit in all their mouths .
And thirdly, Antiquity ; this one a lying Jpirit from the begin-
ning, and yet notwithstanding all this Vniverftlitjy Vnity, <*Anti~
equity , ftill no other then a lying jpirit in the mouth of all thefe
Prophets , -
But to paffe by this confideration of their number too, though o-
thcrWife of good concernment, and to come to that which was of all
other moft aimed at in the choice of this Text, as moft pertinent to
the prefent times, the relation , his ; his Prophets.
There appeares a plaine and purpofed cAntithefis in the word his;
Gods Prophets are in the feventh Verfc of this Chapter, and againe,
2 Kina. 3.l l. called the Prophets of the Lord ; thefe Here are in way
of oppofition called his, the Kings Prophets, fuch whole Prophefte
waited more upon the Kings chnire of State t then upon Gods Throne ;
more upon a quid placeat Regl , then a quid dixit Dominos , as ap-
peares in the 13 .arid 14. Verlcs of this Chapter : the Obfervation
here may be,
When in the things of God we once become the fervants or men.
We quickly become the flaves of the dcvill; 1 will be a lying jpirit in
Jer. 23. IJ.
22,
23.
Mic. 3 y.
s King. |O,
2 1 .
Doit.


0/ all his Prophets: the word we tranflate Kites, Eph.6.
xI. ■*tis in theGrecke the Devill hath his methods, his fy-
ft ernes in his arts too,his ehaines, as well adlive, as thole paflive ones
£wc have heard of ) made up of leverall links of a dependences and
fucceffion in his temptations, from Gods fervice he firft drawes
downe to mans, and from mans fervice to his owne j the Scriptures
fitly call them the fnares of the Devill, and the devices of Satan: If
J now begin topleafe men ('faith the Apoftle) lam no longer the fer-
vent of God: and therefore he ftiles himfclfeelfwhere, Paul a fer-
vant of left* Chrifi, fet apart, .Uo that fervice from all other: fo
doth this good Prophet Micuiah here, when tempted, with the
reft, to ferve, or rather footh the King, he utterly rclolvcsto ferve
no other matter then his own, t/fs the Lord lizteth, Khat the Lord
kith unto me, that Kill I fpeake: if the Devill can but once get a Pi-
late in the dischargeof his confcience fervilely afraid of being Ga-
fins enemy, he knowes there is no (top on this fide hell, he can make
him Gods enemy, and his own flave at pleafure; if he can get a Ba-
laam but once to have a ftrongcr defire to ferve the Kings turne , then
Gods will y he can quickly get him to ferve his owne turne, it not by
the downright battery or a curfe, by the more dangerous fide-blow
of a fubtill piece of counfell, ten to one more pernicious then the
other. , _ _
The Rcafons of this Doftrine may be taken from Mans temper ,
the Devils cunning, and Gods juflice,
%. Mans temper is fuch, that though he hath the elements and
feeds of all fins in him at firft, yet not the dimenfions and growth ot
them but by degrees, nemo repente fit turpiffimtUy no man is worlt
at firft; however feme hold of Angels, that they doe move, non
tranfiendo media , without pafling through the middle (pace, lure wc
are, men paffe not from one extreme to another, but by the middle,,
from Gods fervice to mans, and from mans on a way to the Devilis;
the Devil's when they fell, being unmingkd a<fts, fell all at once, to
the utmoft of what they are in evill: where there is no aihy, or mi-
xture of contraries, there is nothing that retards or holds backe the
fwindge or motion ; 'tis not fo in man, his jarring principles oa -
waves! if notrefift, yetfufpend his entireneffe either in good or c-
vill, from any fimultaneoufneffe, or, as we may fay, oncenefie; he
takes not a deep black?, unleffe he be firft dip’d in blew,
_ E 2 2, the
a Tim. 1,16
2 Cor, 2.11.
Gal.X, 10,
Rom,l, 1.
rerf, 14,
Num, 31.3^.


a. The T> rvills cunning, he would not have us take too dcepe a
forfeit of fin at firft, leaft it might breed a loathing ever after: the
feverall degrees in finning, he knowes, will make way for one ano-
ther, like fo many wedges in the cleaving of a block t he is the old
Serpent ftill, and knowes if he can but get in the head, the bo-
dy will need to ask no leave i all his fearc is, the flopping his firft
entrance, the flaying his further progrefle he never questions : his
care is therefore to make the entrance as eafie as he can - a politike,or
plaufible, or but civ ill compliance with man in the things of Gods
lervicc, fliall infenfibly make way for a mans utter refignation, pro-
ftitution of himfelfe to him before he hath done. If he once get but a
Prophet to leave Gods fervice for the Kings, he hath taken a blew
already, and is ready for as deep a blacky as hell can give him.
Nothing fets out this his cunning more fully, then that Fable of
the Axe and Trees ; the trees finding how deftruftive the axe had
beene to their whole commonwealth, in cutting them downe, re-
folve in common councell, not to afford the axe fo much as a chip a-
mong them all to make him a helve, whereby any more to cut with :
he comes to the Oake, the Eltne y the Pop Ur, &c. they all refufe j he
comes to the AJh, and fpying a limb of it fhre wdly 'toind-Jhaken, and
hanging loofely, defires but fo much thereof for a helve, as to make
him, if not an***, at leaft an hatchet , but to pare off fuperfluous
boughs, and to cut down nothing but the ftirubs and brufliment,
that growing too neare , drew away the fap, and hindred the
growth of the taller trees: this the Afheafily confents to; but
when the axe hath gotten but fo much, he quickly makes himfelfe a
longer helve, and falls a cutting down every tree ©f them one after
another. The Devill cannot cut us downe, no not fo -much as lift
up himfelfe to cut into us, unlefle of feme looter wind-fliaken bough
we lend him a helve; which before he get, he pretends but to rid us
by it of thofe incumbrances and fuckers that hinder our growth, our
preferment, and divert that fap of comfort and delight that would
other wife make us fpread and flourifli; but fo much once gotten, the
axe is quickly laid to the root of the tree , and down it goes to the fire.
There is a ftory of Pompey the great , that no leffe fits this
purpofe, Pompey on a March palling with his whole Army by a Ci-
ty, defires in it, the City thinking it not fate to admit fo
great and numerous an Army into it, refufes; Pompey defires they
would


would admit, if not his whole Army, at leaffc forre few of his weak
and fickly Souldiers,fuch as had fainted in the March,and they Should
pay well for their entertainment; the City confident of being able to
matter To fmall and weake a number, give way to fo reasonable and
fas they think) fafe a requeft, but when thefc are once admitted , in
the dead of night, while the City is Secure, they prove ftrong enough
to open the Gates to the left of the whole Army, which once entred
they facke the City and deftroy it utterly. The Divell if he cannot
gpt admittance of his full troops of fin into our fouls, he growes
mod ft and labours to get in but his weaker harmlelfe Souldiers; fins
of infirmitie, and as we think, of leffe or no danger, with ample
prornifcs of full payment and Satisfaction for their intertainment,
we think we can eafily matter, or when we pleafe thruft thefe out a -
gainc, but thefe, as weak and inconfiderable as they feem , quickly
make way for the reft of their fellowes, to the utter ruine of our
foules.
3. From Godtjufiiee, qudm multos habet dominos ejui mum non
habet, 'tis the juftice of Gods juftice, that he that will finke from
his Service to mans,Hiould finke lower ftill,from mans to the Divels;
he that will not be contented with one fuchaMafter, Tis juft hee
Should have many Tyrants,if Saul will no longer wait on Gods com-
mands, but fear e the people and obey their voice, and content himfelf,
in beinghonoured among the Elders ofthe people , how juft is it he
Should be brought to tvitch, and ferve the Divell, if the prodi-
gall will leave his fathers houfe , and ferve harlots, how juft is it hee
Should be brought lowcr,even to ferve ftoine, The ufes.hereof are of
1. information , to informe us of the reafon why,and way how
So many Prophets oflate, (Preachers! meane) have become the
ready inftruments of the Divell, in promoting all his interefts of he-
refic, fuperftition, profanefle, and whatever elfc might tend to the
oppreflion and fcorne of godiinelfej.in a word ’twas this, they were
Prophets, fo much his, the Kings, that ’tistobefufpeftei, (as
the Pfalmift fpeakes ) God was not fo much as in all their thoughts ,
their very Prophefie it felf fo calculated to the Court Meridian, lo in-
spired, in-canoned by that Prerogative, fo ambitious of being fer-
viceable to acquit,to ingratiate Popery ,fo very a Sprinkling of Court
Holy Water at beft, fomeere a Property of State , a piece of the
Solemnity, moving with the fame artifice, of pleafing and comply -
E 3 ance
I Sam, IJ.
2 4- 3°*i
i*kg 15- J-


ance, that the Mafque did that followed it ( ufually upon the lam e
day ) that it was harB to (ay, which of the two, the Preacher or
Player, was the greater depraver of Religion, jeerer or the 1 untan,
deificrof Monarchy, dcpre&r of Law.
It was no hard thing almoft 20. yeares fince, to have P r opheliei
what ufes would in all likely hood be made by this time,ol thole fre-
quent prophefyings ofthefc Court Prophets,™*. the
V ivinity,abf rlute D ominiofi, univerfntl propriety ,Utter dt l° b^* dne *>
toward, all humane la* of Monarchy , Dodfrine* fe ptoWedly and
folemnly articled into the Court-Creed, as they were, and lo palpa-
bly preparatory no lefleto Popery then Tyranny: but here it may be
wondred at by feme, how Popery,fo evidently deftruftive as it is to
Temporall Monarchy .comes to be thus a ftickler for its ab.olutenefle
of command ? but the wonder will be foon over, if we well confi-
der that that Religion is therefore contented to make Subjedh flaves
to Kings, that thereby Kings may be fo much the greater Oaves to
the Pole.- What great matter is it for Papifts to fight for the making
of Kings abfolnte towards their ownc Pfoteftant Subjcfts, w ile
notonely Kings thereby become dyents to Rome, but Rome M»
much the abler to be a Patronclfe to themfelvcs, they have caufe to
look for mote favour from Romifi Bulb, then from EnerUfh Lower,
otherwife, what a riddle is it (if Kings would fee
men fiiould at once fight fora Kings Sovetaignty, anddenyehis Su-
premacy ? fight for him with whom they dare not pray ? nay, *-
gainft whom they mnft pray, if they bdievethe Popes fi -
tter Curies upon all ProtcftantS, as enemies of Camltkl ' C ™ r{ "\
any force at all f no marvaile then if this
power to all Kings where it can prevails , while ithaththa
give and take, to play faft and loofe herein at pleafure, '^‘ s lt t “‘
hath made fo man/ King, of the
Fornications, while under the fpecious title of
they have been contented to become Slaves to the C»«rt «/ *
nomatter ("they think.) while’tisatthatdiftance, and theymayfo
true to their Catholike Caufe. northeiiowne Proverte, •*«. that
Rez >,lB.3.


Jtrifh Papift,whofe foevers Stthjeft he be Joe hath no other then a Cat ho-
like K lug in hie heart,
■ But to retumeto thefe Zedkjahs, thefe his Prophets of our times,
that have thefe many a ycare, prophefied nothing elfe at Court, but
goe up andprefyer, Tis more worthy wonder,how ftrange a mixture
of ambition and flattery have filled their mouth , their Prophefies,
how much they have been his, and how little too they have been his,
how much his in their Doflrlne, how little his in their jurifidiSlion,
the derivation of it ? fo much his the Kings , that nothing of humane
content or law muft be admitted into the leaft concurrence, nothing
but immediate Divinity, inaugurate, inthrone Monarchy; on the o-
ther fideagaine, fo little/?//,that no derivation from him,nothing un-
der a jus divinum, muft pontificate their jurifdiftion , nothing but an
immediate providentia divina will ferve turn to independentatc their
ftile; fo much his, that all the Kingdome muft have been his Slaves,
or no Subjects, fo little his, that all (at leaft) the Clergy , muft have
been theirs , and that unalterably , in defpight of his and the States
teeth, and as many as would not have been their prophets , as would
not have fwornc the Divinity of their whole Government, even to
its Tratne-Bearer the &c . that followed it,muft have been no longer
anj' Prophets at all: N*y, Gods fpirit muft not have leave to have
COme to a Micaiah but as proceeding from thefe Zedkiahs , when
went the fpirit of the Lord from me, to come to thee ? (faieS Zedktah)
and wc cannot but remember their Doftrine, no Bifhop , no Minifter,
and no Minifter, no Baptifme, and conteqaenlly no Chr ift lanky or
grace, or being horn of the Jplrit kt all,
* How have they with Zedkjah, framed iron homes of oppremon
and warre, whereby to pufh on the King towards his ruine,ftill pref-
fing the very confidcration in this Story of the Text, is not Ramoth
Gilead oiirs? not Scotland , firft,and now not England ours , and
are ftv ft ill J, and what then > can nothing befo, but what is made fo
by Conefueft ,'i ome Have not fpared to plead that title to the full;
but thetvifdome of the Proverbe will fufficiently confute them,that
he fets his houfe on fire to roaft his eggs by , that when he may o-
therwife enjoy it quietly, thinks a Kingdome not his own,unleffe he
conquer it.
Nor have thefe Zedkjahs of our times lefte then this in the Text,
by their heavy fines, cenfurcs, fcntcnces, filencingSjimprifonments,
banifhmcms.
4.
•Ver.ll,
D.Verne.*


Kerf. 24,
Kerf. 2s.
Ant try. I. S.
c. to.
baaifblrenes, [mitten the Micaiahs of the time upon the cheeks and
months toe , and oncly for fpeaking the truth , Gods truth, that of
his owns vijton , and therefore how juftly are they now (with Zed-
kiah) faine to creep into an inner chamber, to hide their heads in.
lofephus tells us, that Zedkiah ftreoke Macaiah,i b much the more,
toconfirmethe King againft his Prophefic, alleadging, when he had
fintchcd out his hand, jHli unwithered, after the blow , that if Micai-
ah had been a true Prophet, his hand would have withered, (as Jerobo-
ams did, after he had ftruck the Lords Prophet. )
However, £6 much worfe were thefeour pretended Mejfen-
gers of God ~ then thofe of Saul, that whereas they being fent to
lay hands on David, fell aprophefying , thefc fent to prophelic , fell a
lay ing hands on D avid , fu:h as D avid and Micaiah here, the true
Prophets of the Lord, and if they did not bragge to the King, that
their hands ftill notwithftanding withered not, fomc of them at
leaft bragg’d of fir etching their hands out,not only to the utter rooting
out ofPuritanifme out of this whole lfland,but as farre as to New Eng-
land in its pur fit it*
But the hands of thefc Zedkiahs God hath jhortened , and the cor-
rivall tZJrke hath given this D agon fo fore a fall, that both the hands
and the feet too, whereby it was wont to fir ike and trample on
Gods Micaiahs, are broken off with the fall, and it remains no better
then inutile lignum, a ufeleffc regardlcfle trunk.
The fame Author tells us, that this Zedkjah perfwaded the King
of the faHKood of this Prophefie of Micaiah , concerning his fall at
Rameth Gilead , from its difagreement with that former one of E-
' Hah, in the place where doggs licked the blood of Naboth , Jhall deggs
Hckjby blood , even thine , although both agree exadly , and are e-
qually true, for though he received his wound and death at Ramoth
* Gilead: yet the blood that there ftuckppon his Chariot , Was when it
came to be wafhedin Samaria, lickedby the doggs there.
Nor have thefe Zedkiahs of our time more out-done this their pat-
terne, in that their Monopoly of the miffion of Gods ffirit , foremen-
tioned, in their pufhing on the King towards his ruine, by thofe iron
homes, in their laying violent hands upon all who were not his,*us.
fo their Prophets, in the unwitherednefte of thofe hands, ftill lifted
up and ft retched out with greater glory and confidence of fucceffe,
then in this pretence of difagreement between Gods Prophets among
' ‘ . them
I Sam.ig,
20.
Ibid.
I King. 21
ip.
I King. 2 2
35»5^37»
38.


£hemfelves,and cfpecially between the Micaiah's of thefe our times,
and thofe Eliah's of theYormer age, the firft Reformers ct Religion,
and grand Champions,againft the Baalifmesof Queen Maries days,
that (with Bliah ) rode To triumphantly to heaven in fiery chariots:
As if the improvement of what they faw, were a concluding them
blinde, as it what is more excellent, were a calling good
evili, even Bliah himfelfe, and he who came in his Jpirit (then whom
there Was not a greater among men ) were but fore-runners of a fuller
Reformation ; and were fo farre from envying or defpairing it in fu-
ture, that it was their profetfed joy and expectation, having (with
Mofes ) been onely fuffered to fee from thofe bounds of the everlafi-
ing hills of Gods promt fes more of the milhe and honey of Canaan, then
what they were admitted to enjoy : though there arofe not a Prophet
fince in Ifrael like unto Mofes , yet was it referved for others to 'pof-
felfe what he but at a diftance faw.
Chrift hath therefore in his prayer fet us for the doing his Fathers
Will , a patterne no lower then that of heaven , that we fliould not
take up at any non ultra's here on earth ; this is not the place to build
Tabernacles \n>6thtx for continuance, or content in what looks to-
wards heaven, he envies the happineffe of earth, and flights the per-
fection of heaven, that feares they may by too neare an approach cn-
terfereorclafb.* let it ftill be the vainc brag of Rome , to think fhc
cannot erre, and therefore needs not reforme : antiquity in a parti-
cular Church (fpecially in matters of Difcipline)hath been fo farre in
the j’udgmcnt of Proteftants from a mark of truth or found neffe,that
s tis rather an occafion of j'uft j’ealoufie, that through peace and want
of powring from vejfell to veffell , fhe hath gather’d dreggs , and
through eafe and plenty contracted at leaft fome rufi and crudities,
and hath fome way or other warp'd with lying fo long ftill.
Befides,he that fhall well confider the conj'unCture of time where-
in that firft reformation was wrought,fome tops of hills onely new-
ly appearing from under a floud of Popery ; if feven precepts
then be not as full as Mofes his ten Commandements, no marvcil,
(fpecially) in the raigne but of a woman ( though a Deborah ) and
that, threatned on all hands, no leffe then her brothers,with commo-
tions at home,and warres from abroad,her alliance too not great at
home, and leffe abroad,and not onely. her fex and religion,but her Ti-
tle, and even her birth (though unjuftly) murmured at at home, and
F * no
Deu. 34.10


no lefle acquarrelled by Spaine and the Empire, incenfed by her mo-
thers marriage, and fathers fore-going divorce; he (I fay) that fball
put all thefe together, will rather wonder that thofe Reformers did
fo much, then that they did not all, however we are told, the path of
the righteous 'tie that which Jhineth more and more unto the perfeß day,
2. A ufeof Caution , to warne us (with the Apoftfc) that we be
not the fervants of men in what Chrijf ( or but the Lawes of the
Land under him ) have made us free : it may be thought by fome no
ether then a giddie faftious relique of that old Tribunitiall turbuleney
of fpirit which coft old Rome fodeare, that under theclaime of Li-
berty hath plung'd this miferable Kingdomethus deep into bloud ;
but they are deceived, this common word The Liberty of the Sub-
jeß is not fo meerly proprietor, or popular and humerous as fome
would have it thought: Religion it felfe (atleaft) in the fafety and
f reedome of its profeffion, depends upon it. We fee by the Doftrine
in hand, if men once quit a liberty of profefling themfelvcs Gods fer~
va nts, and become herein the fervmts of men , they are in the high
Way to become the Devils /laves.
Tis not fofmall a matter as fome would make it, at once to un-
bottome, to unhindge Religion (at leaft) in the outward tenure and
fifety of its profeflion, from t he Law of a Land, to the will of a
Prince : the Law (they fay) is reafon Without paffion, who knowes
but that Princes may prove the contrary.
J Twas wifely faid, that that Commonwealth u happy, Where Law-
yers prevail more then Orators,and Laws then Lawyer s\ ; "twil no lefle
hold, Where Connfelloursprevaile more then Favourites, and Lawes
then both ; however let US jland fafl in and to this liberty Whereby
we are made free; free with fafety to profeife our tranflation into
the liberty of the fonnes of God, let us not turn CircumCellio’s, and
nnneceflarily betray our felvcs into affected martyrdome; the Lawes
of the Land'axe, when all is done, religions beft out-works , the which
you know, when once they arc taken, the enemy quickly falls to
mines and firings ; he that is contented in them to fell his birthright,
will npt in the other long keep his bleffmg. Which that we may keep
and enjoy, let us prize, and, while we can, defend, and pray for his
defence of it, who is (though others fade ) the Great Defender of
the Faith. To whom be glory, and honour, and praife, &c.
Prov. 4.18,
Mens fine
appetitn.


A hort Anlwer, by way of to Postfcript, to
D. Ferne’s laft Reply , at leaf as much of it as concernes the
Anlwer of him whom he calls The Fuller Anfwerer to his
firft Reply : wherein his Refutation ( as he calls it) of his
firt that tiled him lelf the Authour of the Fuller
Anlwer , let in the head of his fixth S eft ion , is the third
time anlwer ed.
HSHefe foregoing Sermons have fo farrelaid open the
waies and interefts whereby that old feducer hath
fo far re wrought upon the Cmrt Prophets of our
times, as well as thofeof Ifraely that (the wonder
once removed, how fo many of them, fo highly e-
fteemed for learning and judgement, could be fo
farre ingaged in fo ill a quarrell) any further An-
fwer or defence may feem needlefle: yet in as much as in thefe crow-
ing times the laft blow is accounted the viftory , (as the fccond
makes the quarrell and the fifft the challenge ) I yet further adde
what folio wes.
The Doftor is pleaded to crufh the Anfwerers whole Treatife, re-
turned in anfwer to his firft Reply , into one Section of this his fe-
cond and laft one, and therefore the Anfwerer, though otherwise re-
folved to have lifted no further into the branne of this Argument
(by occafion of publifhing thefe Sermons} re-affuming a purpofe of
faying fomwhat further in it by way of Anfwer, the third time
thinks a fhed or Appendix by way of Poftfcript , may ferve to an-
fwer a fingle SeUion,
Although many palfages, fpccially in the two or three firft pages
of his Setlion , wherein he labours to foder the inconfiftencies of
his former Reply, lie ftill open enough to a further difeovery of his
(at beftjbut play ftering over, not healing their cracks,yet refolved to
meddle no more with his miftakes or reproaches, but his Arguments
onely, I fhallpurfue nothing but what yet in the mainc remaines in
V 2 iflue


ifilie between us, wherein indeed the whole ftrefleof the contro-
verfie lies, viz.. Whether if the Houles oF Parliament, as the cafe
(lands, may not take up Armes, the Government be not meerly Ar-
bitrary, in the King ? or if they may without his perfomll confent,
it be not altogether popular in them ?
For the firft of thefe, all that the Dodlor faies here, or wherever
elfe, to avoid the arbitrarincfie of the government in the King, pref-
fed by the Anfwerer as unavoidable upon the Do&ors Principles of
jVp arming in any cafe by Parliament 3 no though again ft D elinquents
in tArms again ft itsjufiice, Without the Kings p erf on all confent , is,
that there may be a power in the tWo Houfes more then fufficient to re-
ftraine tyranny , (as was urged by the Anfwerer out of his Majcfties
owne acknowledgment, in his Anfwer to the Houfes ip. Propofiti-
ons) without a power of defending Lawes by Arms, but what is
this power ? A tje (as he calls itj of eftablifted LaW, and the bond of
afacredOath , and may I not here borrow his own ufuall wonder,
inftead of a Reply, and fay, doth the man knoW what he faies ? Firft,
this power is acknowledged to be in the Houfes , but the tye of efiabli-
fted Law , in all his Treatifes he contends to be not fo much as in its
declarative power , without the Kings concurrence, in the Houfes by
any means; and how then will it be a power more then fufficient to
reftraine him from tyranny, when it may not fo much as be imploy-
ed,no not finally declared without his leave, fo much as to be a Law?
can a Law never fo well eftablifhed tye thofe hands from tyranny,in
which there is a power able to hinder its execution, nay finall decla-
ration to be any Law at all ? where all thefe powers arc over Lawes,
Firft of fan&ion, whether they fhali be or no, then of declaration,
whether they fhall ffieaf or no. ? lalt of execution, whether they
ftiall do or no ? the obligation or tye of them is fure to prove like that
of the Covenant , between the Wolfe and the Flock of Sheep in the
fable, ftrong and very folemnc during a full belly, which when once
empty fome new flaw in the Articles was ftill found out,or like that
of children, which lafts no longer then the Apple is a eating.
And for the fecond bond ,that of the Kings facred Oath to reft rain
him by, how is the power of that any way in the Houfes, as this
power more then fufficient to reftraine him , is by himfelf acknowled-
ged to be, that bond fure is in the confcicnce of the King, and the
hand of God only, lam fun? the Houfes have alwaies been herein a
great


great deal more tender of the Kings Prerogitive,then the Dodor any
way appears to be,they never challenged a power in them fo much as
to call the King to account about breach of this bond of his facred
Oath at any time : But were the power of both in the Hou(es,what
Efficiency is therein them to redraine Tyranny, what cares Tyran-
ny for tyes of eftablifhed Lawcs, and bonds of facred Oathes, Ci-
J ro w ji{ tell the Dodor, that Tyranny is that which fhakes off all
tyes of faith, love, truft or friendjhip, counts them all {hackles to a
Monarch, and Cafir( none of theworftof Tyrants neither; tells
him, that ftnttitjf piety, faith, they are -plebeian vertues, fervile
bonds : that Kings have no other obligations but their advantages .
Machiavell fets it down as one of the prime c Articles of aTyrants
Creed, Religentem effe oportet religiofum nefas, That a fhov of fame
relitim in a Prince is of ufe, it fets off his attions to the more advan-
Uge, but the fibfiance of it is a hatefull clog to all his defignes,and to
belhakenoff by any meanes. ■ „ , , . ,
Bcfides, where efiablijhed Lowes , and facred Oaths take place,
there can be no tyranny to be refiyained , a Tyrant hath ever, inftead ot
all other, that one Law ot Canfbyfes , that Whether a Lav may be
found King to marry)™ fifier or no, jet this Lav Will as Well
ferve the turne,that the King of Perfia may do Vo hat he Vo ill ; and
how eafiiy will this one Lav play the Oedipus , at lealt,the
der, to untie, or cut afunder all other tyes of eftablifhed Laves what-
ever ? tella Tyrant of Lav, and you are fo farrefrom refraining
him by it, as you are fare with that noife and rattle of his broken
chainefo much the more to inrage him. . ,
When the Dodor can teach us the trick how to rcltram a trench
Chevaliers plundering , byfolemnly reading him a Proclamation a-
gainft it, or the landing of Irifb Cut-throats here in England, by tel-
ling them they are Rehells by an c API of Parliament, 18. Caron, we
{hall then be the eafier perfwaded, that ties of eflablifhed Laves and
bonds of (acred Oaths (without power, by Armes, to put them in
execution upon fuch as are in Armes agamft them W more then Juj-
ficient to refiraine Tyrants, fuch whole very interefts (if we may
believe their Mafters in the Art; aswellas ambitions, ingage th.m
to make their Wills their Laves, and to admit no other ; the Italian
Marqueffclaycs it as a ground, that a tyrant ts never fo much in dan-
ger, as by net being tyrant enough: that the meane betvixt all, and no
Tyrannorum
vita nimiru
in qua nulla
efi fides,nul-
la char it as ,
nulla fiabilis
benevolently
potejiefte fi-
duciaj nullus
locus eji a-
micitia. Ci-
cer.de Ami-
cit.4B.
Sanflitas ,pi*
etas , fides s
privata bona
Juat 3 qud ]u~
Hat Reges e-
ant.
Afalvcz>z>i
in his Tarq»


Law at all u the onely rocke he (flits at : that his modefty in check-
ing at (bme Lawes, is the onely thing that betrayes him to the ven-
geance of thofe he breaks, and therefore tutijfimum efl inferre cum
time as, that his (safety lies in hisindifferency of fcorne towards all
Lawes alike, that his violation of any one Law is bed fecured by
breaking the next in his way.
If the Dodor, fo often preffed to it as he hath been , would but
tell us wherein the difference lies, between an arbitrary government,
and a government whofe will may not be refilled ? a government
that inforces upon its Subjeds that will by Armes,the which Arms
in any cafe whatever, though of fubverfion of Lawes,Liberties,&c.
by Armes to refill, 'tis ( as he contends for ) no leffe then flat re-
bellion.
There can be nothing plainer (would men not wilfully fliut their
eyes) then that the Houfes of Parliament without the Kings perfo-
nall concurrence, are Hill a Court of Judgment, as well as a Coun-
cell of State (His Majefty himfelfe acknowledges it, in that his An-
fwer before mentioned, a Conn having fewer to judge according to
Law) that being the higheft Court, from which there lies no ap-
peale, mull needs have the finafl judgement of what is Law , or els
there mull be no fuch judgement, and fo the government dedrudive-
ly defective in that fame fummum in eodehtgenere , which mud be
radix & regula , the root, and rule, or meafure, of all inferiours,that
that finall judgment mud be able to ad upon fuch as are delinquents
to it, that thole Delinquents, making a forcible refidance, mud be
reduced by force: that this force where it prevailes not, it doth but
provoke bareGownes, Ordinances, and Lawes, though never fo fo-
lemnly enaded, being no banks againd fuch Land- floods, but the ve-
ry things that need the defence. Let the Dodor find any thing in
fuch a cafe, befide Armes, that will ferve turne, and let him take
the Caufe.
But this power in the Houfes, more then diffident to redraine ty-
ranny, the Dodor often tels us, 'tisno other then a legall, morally
Parliamentall (not military) power : pretty riddles, and amufes of
words (I mud confeffe) untill their meaning be found out.
Fird, if he oppofe a Parliamentary power, to a power of leavy-
ing Armes (efpecially in order to the refraining of tyranny) how
phinely doth it beg the quedion, and prefume as ycclded what we
mainly
Sett, 4, (£* 6


mainly contend about,and here is to be proved,w*.rhat a Parliament
hath not power of levying Arms D elinquents already in Arms
againfl its jufiice : Befides, I believe the Dodor would be loath to
be held to this his owne qualification neither, that the t\Vo Houfes
without the Kings concurrence , fo it muft be, if it hefujfcient to
reftraine tyranny) have a Parliamentary power , .{.the power of a Par-
liament,toft o adjunfto proprio ponitur et fubjeElu.w,\ am fure his Ma-
jefty fnotwithftanding the legall power the Doctor here gives them)
and his owne Law againft their diffolution, will (now at lead ) give
him no thanks for acknowledging them fo much as legall Houfes of
Parliament , much leffe inverted with a Parliamentary power.
And for his next word Morally the meaning whereof muft neeas
be Aperfwafive power, they are not (I muft confefl'e) much behold-
ing to him for giving them a power no greater then he himfelf, or a-
ny one Subject in the Kingdome, or any man alive hath, that can ule
reafon, (i)perfwadehimby reafonif he can.
But for his third word of diftindion or limitations legall power,
if he meane a power by law of refraining him from making
what Lawes he will s by withholding their contents, fas I know not
what elfe he can meane by it, for if he meane apo wer legally theirs
to reftraine tyranny by what is able to reftraine it (Armes) he gives
the caufe j then in the firft fenfe he muft make this good, that there
can be no tyranny if it have not Lawes cpnfented to whereby to go-
verne, (for how elfe will the withholding their contents reftraine
tyranny) it would be found hard for him to pro ve that bare Lawes
will be able to refiraine tyranny , but he would find it harder to prove
that the bare withholding content from the Laws a Tyrant would
have made, an do it: befides, fuch a power were rather a fufpenfion
or refiraint of power, then a power of re fir amt > a reftramt of their
owne power to confent, then of his to command, fpecially if in a way
of tyranny, which is no way reftrainable by Lawes made,muchkite
by their not making.
But of all other the Doftors /Lifts and fubterfuges, J.wonder
muft at his laft, that when he can doe no more good with his diltin-
ftions, he falls to that of excufmg thofe his Majefties words , upon
his not bavin? his learned Comjell in the Lawes, then about him, when
he returned that nyfnfwer, how plainely doth he herein point out a
way how to dude, or at Icaft retrad all thofe his Majefties gracious
J ~ -r — • Promtjoh


Promfes, ProtefiationsOffers, Grants, in all his eyLnftoers, Dccla-
rations. See, by faying, he wanted hislearned Counfell about him , to
confult with, hoW agreeable they were to Law.
Nor is that the Dodors challenge leffe ftrange, produce (laics he)
your Law that enables you (IpeaU of the Houles of Parliament)
to fuch a proceeding , .i. fby Annes ) againft your pretended Delin-
quents ; I can hardly (me thinks) believe him in earned:, when he
lets lb much at ftake upon fo ill a chance, who would ever(that gives
not his caufe for defperate) put it upon fuch an iffue ? what ? a Law
to enable the higheft Court in the Kingdome to doe, what the mean-
eft (I fay not Court ) but Magiftrate, but Officer, even to a Confta-
bie, can unqueftionably by Law do, viz. by armed violence breaks o~
pen a houfe upon an ordinary Afrayer , that detaines himfelf therein
from his arredStt to thispurpofe,L<?w£./#/. of P. 143’ *44
juft. of P. a 8,25. Fittz. of Juft, of P. 130. how yame elfe were
all Courts and Writts ?if againft Delinquents, (fpeciallyin Arms)
triable in and by them, Armes might not lawfully be ufed to bring
them to that their triall; that there were fuch Delinquents was fully
proved in my laft Anfwer, the difproving whereof the Doctor in
this his Reply, declines as a matter, (as he fpeaks ) of fad , not
There can be nothing more undenyable ( as hath fufficiently ap-
peared ) then this power in the Houfes, of leavying Armes in the
purfuanceof thofe Delinquents in Armes againft juftice, onely it this
poVeer be legally in the Houfes to prevent and reflraine tyranny, a pow-
er already in their hands , of judging according to Law {asms Majcfty
grants in his faid Anfwer) without the perfonall concurrence of his
Majeftie, how the government is any other then popular in the Hou-
fes, as able of themfclves to do this the higheft Ad of Government,
and fo not a Monarchy, is the Dodors great cavill ftiU. Whereunto
the Anfwer is. c
Firft, That the leavying Arms in fuch a purfuance of Delinquents
to Law already made, is not the higheft Ad of Government,but that
which fas hath appeared) every Court and Officer in their propor-
tions can doe, 'tis the making of thofe Lawes, whereby they are to
b e judged,that is the higheft Ad of Government, which no man yet
that I have feen, hath maintained to be in the Houfes, without his
Majefties concurrence. Secondly


Secondly, That in afmuch as ’ris no leffe impoftlble then needleffe
to alter the name of every thing, with the feverall mixtures, limits,
or variations that it admits, the name remaines ftill the fame under
fuch mixtures or limits that it was or fhould have bin without them,
and that either through what it retaines in common, with things of
the fame kind, or for diftindion fake,from things of a more different
kind* not but that however things grown different, fhould of the
two rather alter their names, then names the fame, make one,things
that differ: Rome ftill retained the name of a Common-wealth , and
the ftile of Senatm Popultifcjue, under all thofe feverall variations of a
DiEiatorftjip Triumvirat , Decemvir at , &C.
Thirdly, The denomination in all thefe kinds of mixtures, isufu-
ally from that part that is either the more eminent , or more entire, or
more exempt from community : here the Government is ftill Mo-
narchical! in all thefe three refpeds.
Firft, Monarchy in this mixture, 'tis the more eminent, not on-
ly in point of fpendour, but of power too,and that in the higheft Ad:
of power, viz. the making of Lawes, (not to fpeak of other Ads )
the Monarch or King is therein the firft and the laft, the firft, calling
together by his Writs the other two eftates that are to join with him
in making them, the laft, by his confent, giving them that which fi-
nally makes them Lawes: the power that now there is of conve-
ning them triennially without his Maj'efties formall Writ, 'tis by.vir-
tue of his Confent paffed to that Ad, and of his Writ that firft cal-
led them together to the palling it.
Next, His power is more entire ther>the others, in that his Con-
fent is without any reprefentationol him, (as ordinary Subj'eds doe
in theirs, to the making of Lawes ) or involution by the prevailing of
a major part of Votes againft him, fas the Members of either Houfe
of Parliament) he perfonally confcnts to Lawes before they become
fuch,
Laftly, his is the more exempt , and priviledged part, or Eftate, of
the three, becaufenot liable in his Perfon to any penalty, or inflidive
power of Law what ever .* in which confidcration it is, that the o-
ther two Eftates, not onely in refped of their number , trufl , and
skilly which, though ( as the Dodor obj'eds) they may leften , neg-
lett, and betray, yet are they good morall fecurities of State, and a
Government muft look to have no other then mor all ones (as the
G Dodor


Doctor often tcls us in his former Reply) but efpecially in refped of
their inter efts, they are the fitteft finall Judges of what is Law, be-
caufe they are in their owne perfons no way (as His Majefty is) ex-
empt from their own judgements therein.
But I may not conclude without taking notice of one rarity, the
Dodors thankfulnefle ; (having in my laft Anfwer confuted his co-
ordination of the Houfes With His Afajejly to (ome <±Afl or Exercife
of the Jupreme power , but not the power tt felfe ; and fhewed at large
from the correfpondency of the£jf/>, and Operariy the beings and
working of every thing, the impombility of fepararing the one from
the other (at leaft) in matter of co-ordination in their fubjeds, to-
gether with a full Catalogue of all the other Ads of fupreme pow-
er, as Embaflies, Warres, Treaties, Creations, and Collations of the
greateft Offices, &c. in all which the co-ordination of the Houfes
with His Majefty did fufficiently appeare ;) here the Dodor,
flighting all I had therein faid, gives me thanks , that beyond the reft
of his cyfnfwerers, I notice of that his co-ordination to (ome Aft
of Jupreme power , but not in the power it felfe , but fo withall that he
muft blame my ignorance that cannot make fenfe of it.
To which' I fay,that it is true, that fome things may be requifite
to the ad or exercife of a power, that are not co-ordinate with the
main Agent in the power,yet fo as they are not therfore, becaufe re-
quifi te, co-ordinate (as the Dodor acknowledges the Houfes in this
Ad of fupreme power, making Lawes to be with His Maje-
fty) for example: the Dodor himfelfe being an Arch-Deacon, his
Regifiery or fame publike Notarieisnecettzry to make a Record oi it
before any Ecclefiafticall cenfure of his (fuppofe the fiiencing of a
Minifter) can be valid or in force, and yet the Dodor will not fay,
that the Notarie is therefore co-ordinate with him in that ad of his
power, as having no vote with him in it. But the Houfes are not
oncly requifite to the ading of this power of making Lawes, but co-
ordinate with His Majefty in the very power of ading, and the Ad
depends as much upon theconfent of each Houfe,as on his own ; fo
that how they can be thus deliberatively,caftingly,and,by way of in-
fluence, co-ordinate with His Majefty to the higheft Ad of power,
and not in the Power it felfe, remaines (for what he hath yet laid)
ftill a Riddle.
FI N 1 S<


