

No. 2.]
[Dec. 1875-Rep. 1888.
THE
Australian Health Society,
MELBOURNE.—ESTABLISHED 1875.
Office and Library—4l Collins Street East.
There is, perhaps, in the whole range of Hygiene, no one con-
dition so vitally essential to physical well-being, but regarding
which people in general manifest so much ignorance and negli-
gence, as that of Ventilation; or, in other words, the obtaining
of a sufficient and constant supply of pure air in their dwellings.
A human being may live long on a scanty diet; he may neglect
exercise, bathing, and other means of vigorous health, with more
or less impunity; but without wholesome air, or lung food , he
will sicken as surely as the herb without moisture and light.
To fulfil the purpose of respiration, the human chest expands
and contracts upwards of 20,000 times in the twenty-four hours.
The lungs and skin of a human being render three and a half
cubic feet of air impure every minute, or two hundred and ten
every hour; so that the air contained in an unventilated room
eight feet by ten and eight feet high is vitiated and rendered unfit
for respiration by one person in about three hours.
In a bedroom 500 cubic feet of space, at least, must be allowed
for every adult. Two children may be counted as one adult.
An infant twelve months old requires 200 cubic feet. The
chamber must also be ventilated, or the air will in a few hours
become foul, as already stated. Thus, a room measuring twelve
feet by twelve feet by nine feet contains 1,296 feet, and is just
large enough for a man, his wife, and one child—leaving forty-six
cubic feet for furniture; for it must be remembered that all the
furniture occupies space, and its bulk should therefore be deducted
in reckoning the breathing area of a room.
Note - Measurement of cubic space: The three dimensions of length,
breadth, and height are multiplied into one another.
PURE AIR AND VENTILATION.


Almost everywhere one meets with the evidences of popular
ignorance, or neglect, of the necessity of pure air to the main-
tenance of good health. The dwelling with its house-smell, the
musty shop, the close office, and the stifling railway car and
omnibus, are the experience of every day. There appears to exist
a prejudice against fresh air in houses, and the greater proportion
of our dwellings have been built so as to leave their efficient ven-
tilation a matter yet to be accomplished. But what is truly most
needed is the enlightenment of our minds and the conviction of
our consciences; for the homely proverb here holds good, that
“ where there is the will there will be the way.”
Satisfied of the great importance of pure air to health and
happiness, let us now consider some of those practical measures
whereby it may be best secured.
Early to bed and early to rise is unquestionably a great
means; and none the less so because social arrangements or fashion
may interpose to make the habit unattainable. The pure crisp
morning air adds to life, whilst the midnight hour with its
heated atmosphere and artificial light tends to weaken vitality.
To LIVE AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE IN THE OPEN AIR, AND TO
ASSIMILATE THE AIR OF THE DWELLING TO THAT OUT OF DOORS
IN its purity, should be the aim of every one who values health.
We live in houses far too much shut up, especially for such a
climate as that of Australia during two-thirds of the year. One
passes along the streets and roads in city and suburb, in the
most genial weather—
“ So cool, so calm, so bright;
The bridal of the earth and sky ”
seeing only here and there a solitary open window, and in the
vast majority of instances opened but a few inches from the bottom.
In comparison to the injury to our lungs by the deprivation of
pure air, what matters a little dust on the furniture 2 Or why
overlay our rooms with superfluous furniture and ornament,
giving needless care and trouble 1
The Fanlight above the entrance door of the house should be
made to open, which simple contrivance for assisting ventilation
does not exist as yet in one in ten of our dwellings. By this
arrangement the passage can be supplied with fresh air, and
through it the sitting and bed rooms to some extent in most
houses. And in the case where there is a passage or staircase
window, it should be kept open, as a rule, day and night, the
object being to create air movement, or a constant relay of pure
air.
The Fireplace should be kept open always, to secure the
thorough ventilation of a room, in warm weather, when there is


no fire lighted in it, as well as in winter. On the contrary, the
chimney is often closed, lest the grate and fire-irons be rusted,
setting their value against our lungs’ welfare—an illustration
of the wrong appreciation of the relative importance of things.
The daily airing of the house, through every nook and
corner of it, by open doors and windows, is a matter of great
consequence; but, through ignorance or apathy, it is too generally
neglected.
In our Bedrooms too much care cannot be taken to secure
perfect ventilation, since there we spend, on an average, one-third
of our lives. If you can avoid a draught or strong air current,
it is most beneficial to sleep with your bedroom window open
a few inches at top ; and, therefore, the top sash should never
be fixed.
“ Of all things, the most I would have you beware
Of breathing the poison of once breathed air.”
It is better, as a rule, to have no curtains or valances about a bed ;
and the bedstead should not be placed against a wall, but well out
from the walls, so as to admit of air circulation, as well as to
avoid possible dampness. Do not keep in your bedroom an excess
of furniture, lumber, portmanteaus, trunks, and boots, which
monopolize breathing space, and serve to vitiate the air by their
emanations. The carpet should not be tacked down, so that it
can be readily and frequently taken up and beaten. A strip
alongside the bed is all that is required. No slops, soiled linen,
or impurity of any kind should be permitted to remain over
night. The air of the bedroom cannot be too sweet, and should
be kept absolutely free from any foulness. The bedding, both
mattresses and bedclothes, should daily be thoroughly aired, and
exposed to the sunshine, which ought to be allowed free access to
the apartment.
Drapery and Curtain Hangings, of one sort or other, are
in far too prevalent use, both in our sitting and sleeping apart-
ments. From a sanitary point of view they are to be decidedly
condemned; and the money usually laid out on them might be
expended to better purpose in other directions of the household,
contributing to health and comfort, and not mere ostentation.
They obstruct the air movement, harbour dust and vermin, and
prevent the ingress of light and sunshine so necessary to health
and good spirits. Venetian blinds are sufficient for every purpose
of shade and gradation of light, besides affording a free passage
to the air, and a means of regulating its supply and direction.
A blind should be so hung that, when a window is open from the
top, the passage for the air shall not be obstructed : this can be
contrived by fixing the blind, or its roller, a few inches below the
top of the window frame.


As to Public Conveyances, much still remains to be accom-
plished for the effectual and constant ventilation of railway
carriages, omnibuses, and ships’ cabins ; the desideratum being to
make this the normal state, with which the passenger could not
interfere. Meanwhile, for health’s sake, it is necessary to keep
some of the windows always open, more or less, according to the
state of the weather.
The Proper Airing of our Churches Before Service—
shut up as many of them are for days together, and of our
theatres and halls, before assemblages are held in them—should be
systematically attended to, in order to disperse the foul air which
always collects in closed buildings. And so with regard to
Government offices, those of public companies and business estab-
lishments, factories, workshops, stores, and shops, all employers
of labour are morally bound to study the physical well-being of
their employes in such an essential of health as the adequate
provision of pure and abundant ventilation. The confined air in
shops, warehouses, and other places of business, closed nightly
and throughout Sunday almost air-tight, cannot but be highly
injurious to persons inhaling it. Happily, employers have it
now in their power to do away with this source of lung poison,
by adopting the system of shutters made of metal rods in frames,
whereby thorough ventilation, as well as security, can be ensured
over night.
Such are some of the instances in our every-day life where im-
provement and reform are needed, and the foregoing are a few
homely and practical suggestions on the subject of Ventilation,
having for their object to arouse attention to the worth of fresh
air. It is good for all mankind, young and old, healthy and
invalid, the one good thing of which we cannot have too much—
the best of tonics, a sure febrifuge, and the sworn foe to con-
sumption. How necessary, then, it is that the elements of
Sanitary Science should be taught in every school throughout
the land. The knowledge of the air we breathe, and the value of
its purity to health and happiness, should be instilled into the
mind of every child, and so in the child the habit of a love for
pure air will be confirmed.
V entilation is a most essential part of cleanliness, which is
next to godliness; or, rather, is physical godliness; and every
effort made to ameliorate the physical conditions of society must
infallibly tend to promote its moral welfare, since the Divine
order is “ first that which is natural, and afterward that which is
spiritual.”
Walker, May & Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop-street, Melbourne.
