

AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE
Notes on Mesopotamia
OCTOBER. 1916.
By Authority:
Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne
C. 13431.
ISSUED BY
THE AUSTRALIAN SECTION,
IMPERIAL GENERAL STAFF.


AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE
Notes on Mesopotamia
OCTOBER, 1916.
Mp Mutfyovitp i
0.13431 J* Government Printer, Melbourne
ISSUED BY
THE AUSTRALIAN SECTION,
IMPERIAL GENERAL STAFF,


PREFACE.
These Notes have been drawn up for the information
o Australian soldiers proceeding to Mesopotamia in
the hope that they may be found of use and interest
during the campaign.
HUBERT FOSTER,
Brigadier-General
Chief of the Australian Section
Imperial General Staff.
Head-Quarters,
Melbourne, Ist October, 1916.


CONTENTS.
Chap.
1. THE PERSIAN GULF. —The Route to the Seat of Wars
Its Geographical; Historical; and Political Aspects.
2. MESOPOTAMIA—The Country: Its Inhabitants: its
Climate.
3. THE INDIAN TROOPS. THE TURKS.
4. STORY OF THE CAMPAIGN.
5. HISTORY OF MESOPOTAMIA,


THE PERSIAN GULF.


Chapter 1.
THE PERSIAN GULF.
Chief among the objects with which the campaign
10 Mesopotamia was initiated was the maintenance of
British influence in the Persian Gulf against the
machinations of Germany and her Turkish ally to
undermine it. The political situation there is thus
the first matter to be discussed in writing about this
campaign, and, in addition, as the only access to the
theatre of war lies through the Gulf, every one pro-
ceeding there will be interested in the geography and
history of this little-known region.
Trom Bombay to Mesopotamia w r e are using the
oldest sea route in the world. The Persian Gulf was
the cradle of navigation. Before even Babylon became
a vp-at of Empire the ancestors of the Phoenicians were
Lying in the Bahrein Islands and the adjoining coast.,
and acquired in that gulf waters the art of navigation
and the practice of sea trading, which they made such
use of later in the Mediterranean, after they had re-
moved to its shores and founded Tyre and Sidon.
From that remote period there has always been sea
trading between India and Mesopotamia, by creep-
ing along from point to point of the rocky coast of
what is now Persia and Beluchistan. This trade has
played a great part in the history of Asia. It helped
to enrich the Babylonian, Assyrian and Persian Em-
pires in antiquity, and the Arab Caliphate in the Middle
Ages. By it were imported silks from China, pearls
from Ceylon, spices from the Spice Islands, ivory and
precious stones from India.
Our earliest information about the Persian Gulf comes
from the log kept by Nearchus, the admiral whom Alex-
ander the Great sent up from the mouth of the Indus,
while he marched his army by land, when returning
after his invasion of India. The next historic event in
the Gulf is centuries later, when the gallant Portuguese,
about 1500 a.d., after doubling the Cape of Good Hope'


explored its waters and established trade depots at
Muscat, and at Ormuz, an island close to Bunder
Abbas, which they held for over a century.
The Persian Gulf is entered by a strait between the
Persian port of Bunder Abbas and the frowning
Arabian cape at the tip of the Musendam Peninsula,
behind which lie two wonderful deep winding inlets
surmounted by splendid rock scenery. This peninsula,
whose western side is the Pirate Coast, is mountainous
and unexplored.
The Gulf of Oman forms an ante-chamber to the Per-
sian Gulf . On its southern shore stretches the terri-
tory of the Sultan of Oman, occupying the _ eastern
corner of Arabia, and practically under British pro-
tection. His capital, Muscat, once held for a century
by the Portuguese, is a picturesque port with some
trader and is a British cable station. The northern
shore of the Gulf of Oman is formed by the ironbound
coast of Makran, which stretches from Kurachi, at the
mouth of the Indus, to Bunder Abbas. TPs coast is
a narrow line of yellow sand, backed by steep, bare
and rocky mountains, and broken by many headlands
and rocky islands.
At Bunder are islands once held by Portuguese and
later by the gulf pirates; part of one is leased to
Britain, and on another is a British cable station; on
Ormuz the massive old Portuguese castle shows up
dark against white rocks.
Prom Bunder the northern coast of the Persian Gulf
runs westward as far as Bushire. At two places
the coast range is broken by passes leading to the
interior, but between them the coast is one long preci-
pice overhanging the sea, wdiere the Persian tableland,
ends. These two roadsteads are the only apologies for
harbors in Persia, but some ruins of old cities between
them still show ports where Arab pirates dwelt, and
where once junks from far-off China anchored.
The Arabian shore of the gulf is of sand, backed by
jagged mountains and dotted with pirate castles. West
of the promontory of El-Hatar the coast turns north,
and is called El Hasa. This is the only portion of


Arabia claimed by the Turks-, who occupied two small
ports with a few troops in the seventies; but in 1913
the Arabs came down from the interior and swept
away Turkish sovereignty.
At the head of the gulf lies Koweit, whose Sheikh
rules over the country round the fine bay on which the
Arab' town stands. Fifty miles, north is the outfall of
the Rivers Euphrates and Tigris, a low swampy
estuary, at whose mouth is the Turkish port of Fao.
The Persian Gulf is the old wonderland of Arab
story Was it not from Basra, we are told in the
Arabian Nights, that Sindbad the Sailor set off on his
famous voyage, and to that port that old-world trading
ships brought pearls and silks and spices from the East,
in the years when the Caliph, HaroumAl-Raschid,
ruled the wide-flung realm of Islam in unrivalled mag-
nificence at Bagdad ?
THE BRITISH IN THE PERSIAN GULF.
It is worth noting that the British were in the
Persian Gulf long before the Turks, who did not estab-
lish themselves for good even in Bagdad till 1638, It
was not till 1668 that the Turks took Basra and reached
the gulf.
The Gulf was first entered by the English during
the impulse of expansion all over the world which
marked the glorious days of Elizabeth. In 1583, while
Portugal was in power there, four Englishmen travelled
down the Gulf seeking to establish trade. Their report
led to the East India Company being formed in 1612,
and in 1614 to its expansion to the Persian coast, where,
in 1618, the company's ships began to trade, but
encountered obstruction from the Portuguese, It was
decided to attack them by sea at their chief emporium,
Ormuz, from which the Persians were trying to oust
them. In 1622 that city was captured by the English
and restored to Persia. The Portuguese were expelled
from the Gulf, and later also from Muscat, and English
trade began there under protection of an English


squadron, which, by arrangement with Persia, was
always to he maintained. Ever since then, for nearly
three centuries, the Navy has dominated the gulf and
its coasts without dispute.
After the capture of Ormuz the East India Company
formed, in 1630, a trading depot at Bunder Abbas, and
in 1639 another at Basra to trade with Bagdad. During
the 17th and 18th centuries the English flag was always
shown in the Gulf, and our influence grew. Our men-of-
war were engaged in fighting Portuguese, Dutch, and
Arabs, and in guarding the coast for the Persians. A
British President was established in 1812, with an
assistant at Basra, and an Indian force as a guard.
Piracy has ever prevailed in the Gulf, and was diffi-
cult to check, so that early in the 19th century it became
necessary to send an expedition to destroy the pirate
strongholds on the peninsula at the entrance of the
Gulf. It comprised two British regiments, who destroyed
the pirates’ capital and their fleet. They then did the
same at the Island of Kishm, on the Persian coast, and
at other places on the Arabian shores. The pirates
were, however, not quelled, and in 1819, a stronger
expedition had to do the work again more effectually.
Piracy was finally extinguished in the Gulf in 1820, and
a “ truce ” was made with the pirate leaders of this part
of the coast, and renewed in 1853 and 1902, by. which
these “ Trucial Chiefs,” as they are called, engaged to
place their external relations with other Powers in
the hands of England, and not to alienate territory to
any other Power.
In the 19th Century' there was added to the duties of
the Navy the task of putting down the Arab slave trade
in the Gulf, and later of stopping the importation of
arms into Beluchistan and Persia, to be used against us
by the tribes on the N.W. Indian frontier. This
involved much work in capturing dhows carry-
ing slaves or arms, and led in 1911 to a
joint military and naval expedition into Persian
Makran.
Besides the continuous work of the Navy, the earlier
expeditions of the British-Indian army mentioned
above have been followed by others.


In 1856, we had for the first time to go to war with
the Persians, who had occupied the Afghan city of
Herat in defiance of our wish, and refused to surrender
it. A Britiah-Indian force, under Gutram, afterwards
one of the heroes of the mutiny, landed at Bushire.
and another under Sir H, Havelock reached Basra,
the latter went up the Karun and heat the"
Persians at Ahwaz, while Outram defeated them on
the road to Shiraz. These two engagements decided
the war. Herat was given back by Persia to Afghanis-
tan, the slave trade was abolished in the Gulf, and
the British evacuated Bushire.
fil a rki/ n cen tury British forces were again in
tne Gulf. Our troops have defended Koweit and
muscat against Arab armies from the interior. We
had recently to occupy Bushire to drive back a
German-led Persian attack on it instigated by Germans,
and have sent a force under General Sir Mark Sykes
trom Bunder Abbas to Kerman, in Persia, check
German influence.
British domination has thus long policed the Gulf
and established order in it. It has been a blessing to
peaceful pearl fishers and traders, and to the coast
dwellers both on the Persian and Arabian shores, who
live in security under our protection. Our control is
exercised by the British Resident at Bushire, who
keeps peace and order by sea and on the coasts, with
the help of the British squadron, and arbitrates in
local quarrels between chiefs. The present British
Resident, _ Colonel Sir Percy Cox, has for many years
most efficiently carried on his predecessors’ policy, and
is respected and trusted by all the local chiefs. ’ His
judgment and resolution frustrated all Germany’s
surreptitious efforts for some years back to get a foot-
hold in the Gulf. British predominance is also of the
greatest value do our prestige in India, and no foreign
power can be suffered to intrude there. We keep up in
the Persian- Gulf, and in the northern Indian Ocean a
sort of “Monroe Doctrine.” We have almost a mono-
poly of the gulf trade, and we are determined that none
but Persian or Arab shall have territory on the Persian
Gulf.


Without Holding a foot of land on its shores, we
have for centuries been masters of its waters. Our
support has guarded the independence of the Sultan of
Oman at the entrance,, and of the sheikhs of Koweit
and of Mohammerah at, the head, of the gulf,. We have
protected them and the smaller local rulers and the
Trucial Chiefs '' from aggression by Arabs from the
interior or by the Turks from the sea, and they are good
allies to us in return. We prevented the Turks., from,
annexing Koweit in the years just before the wan, and
so kept the place from the clutches of the Germans/ who
coveted it as a terminus for their Bagdad railway.
. Since 1785, we have made and kept up a marine
survey of the Gulf, and for many years we. have- erected
and maintained its lighthouses and buoyed it. The
British Navy has. thus thrown open, the Gulf to naviga-
tion for general benefit.
Chapter 2.
MESOPOTAMIA.
THE COUNTRY.
The word Mesopotamia means in Greek “ the land
between the rivers/' but it is generally used for the
whole region watered by the Tigris and Euphrates, from
the hills of Armenia far north down to the Persian
Gulf. It is hounded on the east by the long wall of
lofty mountains which form the Persian frontier, and
on the west by the Arabian desert. The present war
only covers the lower part of Mesopotamia lying south
of Bagdad—the ancient Babylonia, now a country of
river, marsh and desert; there ■is no agricultural dis-
trict gradually merging into the uncultivated waste.
Cultivation is only found on a strip along the river
banks, perhaps half-a-mile wide, green with never-end-
ing groves of date palms, beyond which all is either
marsh or desert. But the desert is not one of sand, hut
of alluvial soil uncultivated for centuries, passable when
dry, hut after rain or flood a sea of mud.


The country is absolutely flat, and very dreary away
from the rivers, the brown land stretching interminably
in every direction, and only broken by the shapeless
mounds which mark the forgotten sites of once flourish-
ing cities. It is intersected by the remains of the canals
which for thousands of years made this land the
wealthiest and most populous in the world. In its
present state it is difficult ; to realize that it was once
covered with cultivation and villages, and still more to
imagine that Eden, as the Bible and local tradition tell
us ; was situated where the rivers join at Kurna !
For ages Babylonia supported a vast population, who
cultivated the prodigiously fruitful soil, kept up the
great canal system on which the life of the country
depended, and pursued commerce and acquired wealth,
no matter under what Government they lived. Armies
might trave.se the land, governors, obey a new lord at
a distant capital, but the peasant, the artisan, and the
uicfSjldßt pursued their lives unheeding. The people
and their land had not changed from Babylonian days,
long before Abraham’s time.
Then came the unimaginable' catastrophe of the most
ruthless invasion the world has ever seen—that of the
Mongols in 1258 a.d — which killed off the inhabitants
by the hundred thousand, and wrecked their civiliza-
tion completely. The canals, unrepaired, decayed, and
the country reverted to its pristine state of solitude and
barbarism, from which this campaign is destined to
arouse it, and revive something of its old fertility and
civilization.
The Rivers.
The Euphrates and Tigris rise in the mountains of
Armenia, pursue a roughly parallel course, and join,
150 miles from the Persian Gulf, to form a large river
called the Shatt-el-Arab, wdiich runs out into the head
of the Persian Gulf.
The Tigris below Bagdad is a winding river, 200 to
300 yards wide, always shifting its channel in the
alluvial soil, and full of mud shoals. Its stream is


THEATRE OF OPERATIONS ON LOWER TIGRI S AND EUPHRATES.


strong, and navigation difficult. Only shallow draft
steamers can ascend it. The Euphrates is barely’navi-
gable, and has only a little native traffic.
TOWNS ON THE RIVERS.
Fao.
The Shatt-el-Arab, in its lower course, is the boun-
dary between Turkey and Persia. It flows into the gulf
over a bar of mud, through which is a channel for ships.
At the bar, land is hardly in sight, but after passing
it a low shore with green palm groves appears, and
3 miles up the river, on the western Turkish bank, the
village of Fao is reached, consisting of the huts of some
400 peasants, a British cable station, and a Turkish
fort, opposite which lies a Persian one.
Abadan Oil Woeks.
Some 40 miles higher up on the Persian bank, here
formed by the long island of Abadan, are the works of
the Anglo-Persian Oil Company and the residences of
its large British staff. Here ends the pipe line from
the oil-fields 150 miles away to the north-east, which
delivers about 1,000 tons of oil a day into the huge
iron tanks standing up so prominently. The oil is
refined at the works, where are also a large electric
power station and a factory for making the oil tins.
. Mahammeeah.
Mahammerah is a town situated 45 miles up the
Shatt, at the junction of the River Karun, which rises
in the Persian mountains far to the east. The Karun
valley is governed, nominally under Persia, by the
Sheikh of Mahammerah, who is practically independent,
but loyal and friendly to the British. He lives at a
village inhabited by his guard—mostly negroes. At
Mahammerah are the head-quarters of the Anglo-Per-
sian Oil Company, and there are several British resi-
dents. The town lies straggling for a mile along the
north bank of the Karun, near its junction with the
Shatß and presents a picturesque appearance with its


European houses among gardens and palms. Behind
this part of the town is a mass of dirty narrow streets,
intersected by creeks bridged with high brick bridges’
and smaller canals with footbridges of palm trunks!
The port is a depot for I 3 ersian trade, carried by stern
wheel steamers on the Kanin. Above the town the
Persian frontier leaves the Shaft at a village called
Diagi, and runs away north-east through the desert to
the Persian mountains.
Basra. ,
Basra; the chief city and administrative /entre of
Mesopotamia, lies 65 mile® up the river from its mouth.
It is a great centre of trade, mostly in dates and barley.
In 1912 its exports amounted to £3,246,000, and its
imports to £2,658,000. Its population of about 60,000
comprises Jews and Armenians, as well as Arabs. It
lies 2 miles back from the river on a canal, and pre-
sents a pretty picture with its houses nestling among
palms and gardens, and its maze of intersecting canals.
Ihe heart of the town consists of narrow streets and
mean houses. Its port on the river is the seat of the
residences and offices of the European merchants. Just
above the town, at Magil, is the present base camp of
the British force, whence a field railway runs up the
river for 50 miles. At Basra the Euphrates joins the
ligns by what is called the a Kew Channel,” and from
this point the united stream is known as the Shatt-el-
Arab, and is 1,000 yards wide and 30 to 60 feet deep.
Exiexta.
Kurna lies 50 miles above Basra, at the point formed
i^ nct l on of the old channel of the Euphrates
with the Tigris. It is a town of the same type as Basra
but much smaller.
Baud ad. ■
■ So ™® 300 miles up the Tigris lies Bagdad, the chief
city of Mesopotamia, and the objective of our operations
some 70 miles west from the Persian frontier. It is


peopled by Arabs, Jews, Persians, Kurds, and Chaldean
Christians, some 160,000 in all, two-thirds of whom
are Moslems. It is entered, like most Eastern cities,
through dust heaps and crumbling city walls, inter-
spersed with cemeteries and minarets. The suburbs
consist of old houses and gardens, and on the nyer
front are wharfs and warehouses. The central portion
is a crowded maze of mean, narrow streets, full of
coffee shops and dilapidated houses. There are large
colonnaded bazaars parallel to the river, roofed with
wood, and picturesque with every sort of little shop,
splashes of colour, occasional mosques, graceful arches,
minarets, and saints’ tombs. The chief sights are the
bridge of boats across the Tigris, and the famous gold
domes on the tombs of the Imans. The city was built
by the Caliph Mansur in .7 62 a.d., and .was for five
centuries the centre of the world of Islam, irritil
destroyed by the Mongol hordes under Hulagu in lzsß,
and afterwards by Timiirlano about 1390 a.d. Since
(dj-gp it revived,.but only to a shadow of its former self,
and has always been the. chief city of the Turkish pro-
vince of Mesopotamia. It has a considerable trade,
being the head of steam navigation, and a centre of
caravan roads—that to Persia and the East, to Aleppo
and the West, to Mosul and the North, besides the
river route to the Gulf,
Our battle of Ctesiphon was fought close to the
grand arch, which is all that remains of the palace of
Ghosroes, King of Persia, for that grand solitary rum
marks the site of the once flourishing city of Ctesiphon,
for centuries the capital of the Parthian and Persian
Empires. A far older monument lies 9 miles east of
Bagdad, the tower called Kerkuf, dated 1300 b.o. There
is also a quay in Bagdad built with bricks stamped
“ Nebuchadnezzar,” and therefore built in the 7th
century b.c.
Nazieie.
Up the river the chief town is Nazirie, 80 miles west
of Kurna, an important place, as her© the Shatt-el-hai
enters the’ Euphrates. This is a canal, or perhaps an


old channel of the 'Tigris, which leaves that river at
Kut;: and thus- provide ' access, to Basra - down the
Euphrates. On the Euphrates below Nazirie lies a mass
of swamps and lagoons choked with reeds, through
which the river has cut a new channel to Basra, the old
one to Kurna being half choked.
Ahwaz.
East of the Shatt is the Persian province: of Arabis-
tan. Its chief town is Ahwaz, at the head of navigation
70 miles up the Karun River, on the east bank of which
runs the pip© line from the oil-fields, thus, covered from
attack by the river. Ahwaz is also* accessible from
Amara on the Tigris by a desert road, so that it is an
important place to hold to defend the pipe line. This
part of Persia is now" hare and sparsely inhabited by
Arabs, but it was once rich and well cultivated —the
ancient land of Elam, long a rival of Babylonia 4,000
years ago. Further north of the Kerkha Eiver, which,
like the Karun, rises in the mountain ranges of Persia,
loses itself in the swamps which occupy much of the
country east of the lower Tigris. North of the Kerkha
a number of small rivers, rising in the great barrier
range which forms the Persian frontier, flow out
briskly from the foothills into the plains on the eastern
bank of the Tigris, where, running at first through deep
cut channels, they finally die away among swamps
before reaching the Tigris. At the edge of the foothills
lie Turkish villages and towns in pleasant oases, such
as Bedrai and Mendeli.
The Persian frontier, after leaving the Shatt-el-Arab,
strikes across the desert to the mountains which rise
up some 100 miles east of the course of the Tigris be-
tween Amara and Bagdad. It then runs north-west
along the crest of the westernmost of the great parallel
ranges which form the edge of the Persian tableland.
This part ; of those ranges is called the Pusht-i-Koh, a
wild district 160 miles in length, inhabited by Lurs, a
race, of fierce mountaineers, practically independent of
Persia.


THE INHABITANTS.
Mesopotamia is entirely populated by Arabs, except
in tbe larger towns, where there are also Persians, lews,
and Armenians, and Arabic is spoken there. The only
Turks are some of the soldiers, many of their officers,
and the governing class.
The Arabs of Mesopotamia are degenerate and un-
interesting compared to the Bedouin of the deserts of
Arabia. Some are more or less nomad, but cultivate
patches of land; others are dwellers in towns or
villages, where they are traders and artisans in a
primitive fashion. There is also a lower type of Arab
dwelling along the river banks, who live in huts of reeds
and palm branches, and are mainly fishers, but some
possess water buffaloes. The nomad Arabs are desert
wanderers, living on the produce of their flocks of
sheep and goats. They use asses, horses, and camels,
and are always ready to plunder traders, as they are
nature robbers. In war, Arabs are uncertain and
treacherous, ready to side with the strongest ; but they
will attack stragglers and wounded, and harass the con-
voys and depots, of either, combatant. When defeated,
or, often, when merely threatened, they fly into the
desert, where they are safe from pursuit.
Arabs are unsatisfactory subjects, as the Turks have
always found. Sir Mark Sykes, who knows them well,
says they are u ever ready to revolt, always willing to
compromise, never ready to keep their engagements,
always at the mercy of an organized government, yet
never entirely submissive. ’ ? Nomad Arabs recognise no
authority but that of their Sheikhs and their Councils
of Elders, and the different tribes are always at vari-
ance through jealousies and feuds.
RESOURCES.
The main resource of the agricultural Arab is the
cultivation of date palms, which demand si no attention
beyond irrigation, and provides food, fuel, and building
material for the population. There are no other
trees, except the white mulberry and poplar, to furnish


timber, but there are fruit trees-—orange, lemon, fig,
and banana. There are some cereals grown, chiefly
barley for horse feed.
Mesopotamia only needs the reconstruction of its
ancient canals, which will surely take place under
British rule, to be once more the richest land in the
world, a delta larger and richer than that of Egypt.
Ample labour from India is ready to raise on it mam
vellous crops of wheat, cotton, sugar, and rice. A
great irrigation scheme had already taken shape under
the direction of a British engineer, Sir James Will-
cocks, brother of the general who commanded the
Indian Army Corps in France; and a dam has been
mad© across the Euphrates to control it, and divert the
surplus flood water, which devastates the country below,
into a large natural depression west of the river.
The desert is full of game—antelopes, hares, sand
grouse, and bustards; while the rivers teem with duck
and snipe. There are lions, hyenas, and jackals in the
desert, and wild pig in the swamps.
. CLIMATE. '
The drawback to the climate of Lower Mesopotamia
and the Persian Gulf is that from May to September it
is one of the hottest in the world. The impression given
in those months is one of scorching sun, dust storms,
and flies. The thermometer will often be from 80 deg.
to 90 deg. by night, and 100 deg. to 120 deg. by day, but
the air is very dry, and there is generally a north-west
breeze. fNo rain falls from April to October, but rains
begin in November, when it turns quite cold, especially
when the north wind, or shimal, blows from the snow-
covered mountains. The freezing point is sometimes
reached, and warm clothing is absolutely necessary in
the cold season.
The main feature about Mesopotamia is the occur-
rence of regular floods in the Tigris and Euphrates.
They begin after February, and last till August, making
lagoons of the swamps on each side of the river, and


filling the creeks and canals. Movement is then impos-
sible; boats must be poled through the reeds, or rowed
over the waste of waters which stretches as far as the
eye can reach. In summer, therefore, all movement of
troops must be amphibious. In winter, the land dries
up, and is passable. The country i is always either
waterless, or water-logged. The rivers are at; their
lowest in October and hTovember, and the floods are at
their height in May and June, when an area is covered
with 2 feet to 6 feet of water from Basra to Kurna, and
thence 80 miles up the Euphrates to ETazirie, and 50
miles-up the Tigris to Uawizeh. The rivers then run
last and thick with silt.
To keep in health it is essential to drink no doubtful
water unboiled. The Tigris water is not unwholesome
after the sediment has settled, but that of the stagnant
swamps is undrinkable. It is advisable to avoid chill
in the abdomen by wearing a cumberbund, to use mos-
quito nets, and to prevent contamination of food by
HIOS, by burying all ordure and refuse in hot weather.
Soldiers are not allowed to work between nine and five,
but, as in India, must lie about trying to sleep, and
endure the long day as best they can. The Indian rule
of wearing sun helmets, as long as the sun is up, is
imperative.
Chapter 3.
THE INDIAN ARMY.
The bulk of the Army operating in Mesopotamia is
furnished by India. Indian divisions comprise chiefly
Indian troops, hut there is one British battalion in each
brigade. There is little cavalry, as there is no grass in
the country, and only barley for forage.
This is by no means the first time that Indian troops
have fought overseas. India has constantly rendered
fine service to the Empire since the British first estab-
lished themselves there. Indian expeditions captured
Manilla in 1762, and Java, Mauritius, and Ceylon, in


the great French war, fifty years later. In the middle
of the 19th century India added Aden and Burmah
to- the Empire, and conquered Abyssinia. Her troops
took part in our several China wars, and occupied
Peking during the Boxer troubles. She has. provided
small expeditions to assert British power in Ceylon, in
the Persian Gulf, and in the Malay States. India has
sent two contingents to act with British troops in
Egypt *. One, in 1801, marched across the desert from
the Bed Sea to the Nile ; the other was at the battle of
Tel-el-Kebir in 1882. When war threatened with
Russia in 1878, she sent to Malta a considerable force,
with which we occupied Cyprus.
In this war India has played a fine part, and kept
her fealty to her Emperor from the outset. Both
rulers and people have announced their loyalty and
desire to help. Daily offers of personal service and
resources have come in from religious, social, and
political associations, as well as from individuals.
A fine old Rajput prince, Pertab Sing, told his
troops, when they left for the front, that “ the English
were shedding their blood like water for a great cause.
They had always been ready to do so, and had done so
for the' Rajput States many years ago. Now was the
time for the Rajputs to show their gratitude, and shed
their blood for the King.” Similar ties of service and
gratitude connect the British Government with Sikh
and Mahommedan prinOes.
On 9th- September, 1914, His Majesty the King,
Emperor of India, in a soul-stirring message to the
princes and peoples of his Indian Empire, recognised
what they had done. His concluding words were —
“ Among the many incidents that have marked the
unanimous uprising of the population of my Empire
in defence of its unity and integrity, nothing has moved
me more than the passionate devotion to my throne,
expressed both by my Indian subjects and by the
feudatory princes and the ruling chiefs of India, and
their prodigal offers of their lives and their resources
in the cause of the realm. Their one-voiced demand


to be foremost in the conflict has touched my heart,
and has inspired to the highest issues the love and de-
votion which, as I well know, have ever linked my
Indian subjects and myself. I recall to mind India’s
gracious message to the British nation of good-will and
fellowship, which greeted my return, in February, 1912,
after the solemn ceremony of my Coronation Durbar
at Delhi, and I find in this hour of trial a full harvest
and a noble fulfilment of the assurance given by you
that the destinies of Great Britain and India are in-
dissolubly linked.”
When thrown into contact with Indian troops, it is
well to have some idea of the varied elements which
they comprise.
India is not so much a country as a continent, in-
habited by a number of peoples of various races and
religions, speaking scores of separate languages, with
little in common, and of very different modes of
thought and degrees of civilization. The Indian Army,
{ff gome extent, reflects these varieties. We meet in it
Rajputs, Dogras, flats, Sikhs, Gurkhas, Mahrattas,
Mahommedans from the Punjaub, and Pathans from
the north-west frontier, among other elements.
Rajputs are the oldest and noblest race in India.
Descendants of the first Aryan invaders, their past
stretches back through thousands of years in an un-
broken record of pride, valour, and chivalry. The
Rajput is tall, well-built, and aristocratic in aspect and
tradition, by heredity and instinct a hunter and a
warrior. Their home is the vast district of Rajputana,
in the north-west of India, lying north of Bombay, be-
tween the lower Indus and the Upper Granges.
Bo gras come from the Rajput States on the Hima-
laya foothills.
Jats and Sikhs are. perhaps, off-shoots of Central
Asiatic races who overran Northern India long ago.
They are tall, straight, manly, and dignified, with
perfect manners. The Sikh, in particular, is a fine
fighting man, and his nation gave us the hardest task
of any to conquer, but not long after were very helpful


in suppressing the great mutiny. The Sikhs live in the
Punjauh, where five rivers, issuing from the Hima-
layas, unit© to form the Indus. They have a special
religion, different from the Hindu, but an offshoot of it.
Mohr at las are Hindus who, 250 years ago, ban ded
themselves to overthrow the Mahommedan conquerors.
When we arrived in India they had conquered their
neighbours, reduced the Mogul emperor to a shadowy
power, and ruled Central India from the Arabian Sea
nearly to the Bay of Bengal. Had we not overthrown
them they would have been masters of India.
Gurkhas are recruited from the independent States
of .Nepal, under the Himalayas, and are of Mongol
race, as shown by their square, .sturdy physique, flat
noses, and oblique eyes. They are small, active,
cheerful, and fond of fighting.
Mohammedans. —Of these there are in India 70.
millions, partly Hindu converts, partly descendants of
invaders* but the chief fighting Mahommedans are
either from the Punjauh or Pathans from the wild
north-west borderland, to whom war is an ancestral
and highly congenial occupation.
Caste, which is founded on the Hindu religion, plays
an extraordinary part in the Indian life. Inter-
marriage between persons of different caste is impos-
sible. Caste has nothing to do with social position.
Many a servant is of higher mast© 'than his master!
Caste is peculiar to Hindus. Mahommedans,- who are
extraneous foreign conquerors, like ourselves, have, of
course, no caste; but among Hindus there are thousands
of castes and sub-castes, from the haughty, unapproach-
able Brahmans, the priestly caste, to the pariahs, or
outcasts. It is essential for us white men to respect
the oast© of every Hindu; for instance, not to touch his
food, which some castes prepare in a special way, for
loss of caste is a terrible sin and humiliation. The
Hindu reverences the cow, and killing or eating beef
is an unmentionable horror to him. The Mahommedan,
on the contrary, eats beef, but is forbidden pork. Atten-
tion to native customs and religious prohibitions is
most important.


When we realize that there are nearly 300 millions
in India, and only 15,000 white soldiers, and fewer
white civilians—civil servants, merchants, planters,
railway men, and clerks, it is clear that the domination
of Britain over India cannot he due to her military
strength, nor even to the energy, resolution, and tenacity
of her exiled sons governing that country. What has
really made possible this miracle of a hundred thousand
ruling millions is the Englishman’s constant adherence
to ideals of duty, justice, and truthfulness. The In-
dians may not appreciate his views, his aims, or his
methods, but they do trust and respect him.
It is for every white man that enters the country, or
comes into contact with Indians, to see that no word
or deed of his shall lower this confidence and respect.
As Lord Cromer, who knows the Asiatic well, has said:
“ An inconsiderate'' or thoughtless act, or the use of
harsh and tactless language, on the part of an individual
Play do an amount of harm altogether incommensurate
with its real importance, and tend to nullify the efforts
of statesmen to harmonize Eastern and Western in-
terests and affinities.” Australians should treat the
native of Colombo and Bombay they come in contact
with on the way to Mesopotamia without or
roughness, and when they find themselves fighting
alongside the Indian soldier, must never forget that he
is, like them, a soldier of the King, and entitled to
consideration and respect.
.THE ENEMY.
The Turkish army is recruited from all parts of that
conglomerate empire, and. naturally, comprises many
other men than Turks. There are Kurds from the
mountains north of' Mesopotamia, Semitic Syrians
from the Mediterranean coast, and numbers of Arabs,
fighting with the Turks. But the kernel of the army,
as of the nation, is the Ottoman Turk, the true de-
scendant of the strong race which conquered its way
from Central Asia to the Danube, 600 years ago, by its
courage, -energy, and efficiency in military organization.


, l A ', tbe height of their power the Turkish Sultans
ruled oyer the Balkan Peninsula, Asia Minor, Syria
Mesopotamia, the western Arabian coast, Egypt.' ami
Black sia riC T}T T® I a ® all round the shores of the
besieged Viemi ° hlungary for 150 years; twice
and the r, ' t'l T masters of Southern Russia
oviords nfT' A hUndr . ed y6arS a g° the y still
Thev li q | R : 0 " , ’ I ; UUiI a “ d > till lately, also of Egypt,
ihey lost Serbia, Greece, and Bulgaria only in the 19th
century, and Tripoli in Africa in the 20thu
stiU lle f once the terror of Europe is
oontemnt n o e f dS“ g both in his and
with which and tbe P atlence and fortitude
S b * ars P' a “; privation, and hardship un-
.mplaimngly Hens abstemious and frugal, and never
We
clmance in defence and capacity to entrench although
ne has rather lost the fire of the offensive with wMch
he once overthrew all his enemies. This is due to
leadership., organization, and administration
eing very different to what they once were. But as an
enemy re Turk shows well. He is eminently a gentle-
man truthful, calm, courteous, and dignified if civil
ute, generous and chivalrous to his enemies and hi
Cers erS a nd f ambulailce s and stretcher-
earers, and entirely averse from treacherous tricks.
Chapter 4.
STORY OF THE CAMPAIGN.
LANDING AND CAPTURE OF BASRA.
The Indian Government had wiselv m pn
expedition before the Turks joined in the war, and the
walTeadv Ir^the d^ v f ion which was to be sent
it occimfed i f?r n Islfnds-
moving- P ui? th ■ * e f tuar y of the Shaft, and
moving up the river disembarked above Abadan and
entrenched itself, waiting the arrival of the rest of
the division, which disembarked by the 15th. Next


MAP OF SEAT OF WAR IN MESOPOTAMIN.


day the Turks at Basra advanced against us, but were
routed at Sahil, and on the 20th evacuated Basra,
which our troops reached on the 22nd, partly by river
and partly by a 30-mile desert march.
Capture of Kurna.
The Turks had concentrated at Kurna, and we fol
lowed them on the 3rd December. Our advanced corm
rought on the east bank on the 4th, and the main
body on the 7th and Bth, while a detachment thrown
across the river higher up threatened Kurna from the
north. The Turks, thus surrounded, capitulated un-
conditionally, We entrenched at Kurna, and also on
the opposite bank of the Tigris, and thus now estab-
lished our hold of the delta and of the oil-pipe line.
: Turkish Attacks.
. Tn January we moved out up the Tigris- and drove
fnno Tl f klSll force > which lay 10 miles above Kurna—
-S,UUU strong, with six guns-. On 3rd March 12,000
lurks and Arabs drove back our garrison of 1,000 at
11 tli March our cavalry, reconnoitring
up the Euphrates, met Turkish cavalry. These actions
showed that the enemy were threatening on a wide
front, and were preliminary to a combined attack in
April on three places—Kurna, Ahwaz, and Shaiba,
west of Basra. The latter proved the main attach
being delivered by 11,000 regulars and' 7,000 Arabs'
with twenty guns. After a three days* battle this
force was defeated (14th April), with loss of 6,000
men and a mass of munitions, including machine guns
motor cars and ammunition waggons. Our losses were
Turfc s retired up the Euphrates to Nakaila,
from which we drove them (17th April).
On Ist June the Turks again attacked Kurna, but
were defeated by General Townshend's division and
driven beyond Ezra's Tomb, 33 miles north. His pur-
smt continued, and on 3rd June he occupied Amara,
i miles up the Tigris from Kurna, capturing many
boats and supplies, as well as prisoners.


.Ahwaz to Amaiia.
Meanwliile General Gorringe had, in May, been sent
to Ahwaz with his division, and driven the Turks: back
from that placet towards Amara. He followed them
across the.Kerkha, and then operated down both its
banks against their Arab allies, the Beni Taruf, whose
stellghold he captured. Then advancing across tne
plain on Amara, Gcrringe’s approach, combined with
that of Townshend, caused the Turks there to retire
up the Tigris. This march from Ahwaz to Amara,
across a desert in the hottest season, with a couple ot
battles won on the way over Turks and Arabs, consti-
tutes one of the finest feats in the campaign.
The delta was finally cleared of the enemy, and the
pipe-line completely secured; but the pursuit entailed
by our repulse of the Turkish attacks drew us further
into the interior than we had probably at first in-
tended. By the end oh June we were at Amara, and,
the Turks at Kut, the strategic key of the situation,
as they could thence either advance down the Tigris,
if reinforced and able to take the offensive, or transfer
a force" by the Shatt-el-hai to* the Euphrates, at Nazirie,
for attack on Kurna from the north-west.
No British advance was possible, therefor©,,, until
Nazirie was secured. Townshend’s division was sent
thither in July from Kurna by water, and forced its
way through reeds and swamps for 80 miles, under a
|i(jf sun, in spite of terrible fatigues and difficulties,
and with some fighting. On 24th July the Turks were
attacked and defeated in front of Nazirie, which was
entered next day. The Turks lost 2,500, with guns
and stores, and much ammunition. Our loss was 600.
Battle of Kut,
Nazirie being thus.secured, General Townshend was,
in August, sent forward from Amara up the Tigris,
and on 28th September a serious battle had to be
delivered against a Turkish force of two divisions in
front of Kut. By a .front attack, combined with an
outflanking one, Townshend ? s division defeated the
Turks in a severe battle, and on the 29th our cavalry
entered Kut, followed by the rest of Townshend ? s force.


Advance on Bagdad.
In October the decision was then taken to advance
on Bagdad. It was .not realized that the Turks had
several divisions coming up to reinforce those beaten
at Kut, who had retired to the neighbourhood of Bag-
dad. Townshend had, besides his flotilla, only one
division and one brigade, of whom 5,000 were British
troops. The advance began on 23rd October, and the
Turkish rearguard of some 3,000 or more was driven in ;
and retired on the main body at Ctesiphon.
Battle of Ctesiphon.
On 12th November, Townshend, with 12,000 men,
was 7 miles from Ctesiphon and 30 from Bagdad, in
front of 20,000 Turks, in a position astride the Tigris.
A very severe two days' battle took place on 22nd
and 23rd November, in which the Turks on the east
side of the river were attacked in front and outflanked,
and driven out of their first position. Our advance
across the open against the Turkish trenches, sup-
ported by but little artillery, and our stubborn resist-
ance to the Turks' counter-attacks next day, make thib
one of the finest actions of the Indian Army. The
Turks lost some 10,000, and we had 800 killed and
3,700 wounded; but we took 1,300 prisoners, who were
sent safely to the base by the river.
Beteeat to Kut.
On the 24th, at midnight, Townshend fell back to
the river, but was not followed up. He rested on the
25th, and got his wounded away. On the 27th his
force reached Asize, and stayed there till the 30th.
The Turks' pursuit was slow, and when they attacked
on 2nd December they were beaten off with loss. Next
day Townshend retired rapidly to Kut, but was there
surrounded by the Turks, now much reinforced. Their
siege of his entrenched camp at Kut lasted nearly five
months, but at last his much reduced force of 8,000,
of whom 2,500 were British, had to surrender, for the
floods made the determined efforts to relieve him
fruitless.


Townshend, in this sever© fighting, had lost more
than a third of his force, and his unavoidable defi-
ciency of transport made the sufferings of the
wounded very severe. There was great want of water,
and it was impossible for him to advance and attack
with his depleted force, or to remain out in the desert.
His retreat was unavoidable, and splendidly executed,
and his defence of Kut, with a force reduced by losses
and suffering to half its strength, was one of the most
gallant in British history.
In reviewing this campaign, the management of
which is now under Parliamentary inquiry, we can see
mistakes in leadership, like the rash advance to Bagdad,
and in administration, for operations were conducted
without proper provision of river transport, and,
therefore, of medical equipment; but it was highly
creditable to the gallant men who took part in it, and
forms one of the finest chapters in the history of the
Indian Army. Up to and including the battle of Ctesi-
phon it was marked by gallant fighting and uniform
success, in spite of the immense difficulties of intense
heat, waterless desert, flooded land, disease, and plague
of flies, under which the troops suffered so terribly.
Chapter 5.
HISTORY OF MESOPOTAMIA.
Babylonia, or the' southern half of Mesopotamia, the
theatre of the present campaign, is perhaps the oldest
seat of civilization. It consists of the alluvial plain
formed by the mud deposit of the Euphrates and
Tigris, and therefore of unrivalled fertility, which,
combined with its situation under a very hot sun,
makes it the most productive region in the world.
In its primeval state, the annual inundation caused
by the melting of the snow 7 on the hills at the head-
waters of the rivers could only fertilize a narrow 7 strip
along their banks, while, where the land lay lower


than flood level, the land became permanent Iv
water-logged. The construction of canals was begun in
prehistoric days to remedy both these defects cf the
country. By them the irrigation of the whole alluvia
plain was made possible, while its swamps and lagoon
were drained. So a useless region was gradually turned
into a cultivated and populous land.
But the great canal system! of which traces can
everywhere be' seen, represents an enormous amount
of work and of skill in construction and regulation
This applies also' to the great cities, which we know
arose all over the land, although now marked only by
mounds. These gigantic works thus argue the existence
of a large population,' with an advanced degree .of civi-
lization. In addition, only a great centralized
monarchy, with vast numbers of serfs and a continuous
supply of war ca.ptive.sv could have effected the ext? ■
ordinary development of the canal system and created
such a number of cities as we find in
this stage, lay thousands of years! of evdti? '
civilization, based on the agriculture made oossil ll
irrigation and drainage, and developed by tradp *
first timidly carried on with neighbours, and then V '
and more far-going, till it reached Egypt, Asia Minn!**
Persia, and. even India.
The Empire of Babylonia at its greatest extern
stretched from Persia to the Mediterranean, and Bal-
lon, fits capital, became the religions, financial, and
trading centre of the world —-a sort of combination * f
mediaeval .Pome and modern London, invested with a
sanctity and wealth which lasted for thousands of years
in spite of many invasions, and of the subjugation ami
absorption of Babylonia by succeeding Empires.
Assyria, far up the- Tigris, long a dependency nf
Babylonia, was her first conqueror, about 1300 b.c .
and became the centre of a larger Empire, but was
herself overwhelmed about 600 b.c by the Medes.
The Persians supplanted the Medes in 538 b.c. Their
Empire comprised, not only all the Assyrian one. in
eluding Mesopotamia, but also. Persia, Egypt, and A>:
Minor, In 327 b.c, the Persian Empire was in turn


conquered by Alexander the Great. After his death
his Asiatic dominions fell, in 312 8.C., to Seleucus, one
, j* his officers, whose successors ruled over Mesopotamia
until 140 b.c., when it was engulfed in the Parthian
I’m pi re, which arose in Persia in the 2nd century before
Christ, just when the Romans were annexing the fringe
of Western Asia.
These two great Empires, therefore, soon clashed
mi the upper Euphrates, and they waged undecided
••ars for three centuries, during which Roman armies
four times: reached Ctesiphon, the capital of the Par-
thian monarch, on the Tigris. In 107 a.d., Trajan,
fhe stern # conqueror of Jerusalem, captured Ctesiphon,
'Old advanced to the Persian Gulf, the only time a
Homan army ever reached it. Heat and want of water
'■one foiled his attempt to cross the desert to the Medi-
terranean, and ho retired up the Euphrates. In 165
AD -> during the reign of the noble stoic, Marcus
Aurelius, and again in 198 a.d., when Severus was
Emperor; Soiliaii armies also captured Ctesiphon. The
.ivat Emperor Julian reached it in 362 a.d. in his war
vl Vh the Parthians, but thought it too strong to attack,
and turned back.
After lasting four centuries the Parthian dynasty
was supplanted, about 226 a.d., by a Persian one,
which endured as long. But in 637 a.d., the rise of
.Mahometanism caused an irresistible Arab wave to
treak over Mesopotamia. Within a year the fiery
Khalid, general of the Caliph, had conquered the whole
country, and permanently planted there the religion
and customs of Islam, and the Arabian language, after
800 years of Persian rule.
The first capital of the Arab. Empire of Islam was
Damascus, but with the rise of a new dynasty, that of
the Abassides, it was removed into Mesopotamia, as
more central. In 762 a.d. Caliph Mansur founded Bag-
dad, which was the capital of the Moslem Empire for
•)00 years. This place had been an old Babylonian
city some 2,000 years before Christ; it is mentioned on
inscriptions again in 1100 b.c., and was still existing
1,000 years later.


Bagdad, the new capital, of which no trace remain,
was scientifically laid out, and became a rich cit v
merchants, artisans, and cultivated courtiers ' i
termed the centre of the trade of Mesopotamia bei.w
the junction of a number of caravan routes ami the
water-ways to the south. In its palmy days it had
over a million inhabitants, and was then the richest
ciiict most civilized city in the world.
In 1258 Mesopotamia was overrun by the savage
but irresistible Mongols, under Hulagu, grandson
the greatest emperor the world has known—Jengi
-Khan. The population of the country was aim*
destroyed, the whole canal system ruined for ever, and
the region which had enriched the world for thousand.*
of years was reduced to the swamp and desert we s
to-day.
Bagdad was sacked and the inhabitants massacred
but it revived somewhat under its Mongol rulers, until
again sacked with great slaughter by that scourge ;
God, Tim nr 1 ane, in 1390 a.d. After thM
was ruled by various tribes of Turkomans
1500 became a bone of contention between tlie ful'’f
and Persian Empires, until Turkey finally connJ , '
in the 17th century. The boundary between |C
and Turkey has not changed since then, and M, ’
potamia still forms part of the Turkish Empire*
By Authority: Albert J. Mullett, Goven.ment Printer, Melbourne.
