

IQj 375"
I i /
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
War Precautions Act 1914
(ISSUED WITH M.O. 584/1914).
WAR PRECAUTIONS REGULATIONS,
(ISSUED WITH M.O. 590/1914).
Jluthorits:
ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE
C. 15000.


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
War Precautions Act 1914
(ISSUED WITH M.O. 584/1914).
WAR PRECAUTIONS REGULATIONS, 1914
(ISSUED WITH M.O. 590/1914).
ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
U. 15000.


Issued with M.O. 584/1914.
The Commonwealth of Australia.
WAR PRECAUTIONS.
No. 10 of 1914,
An Act to enable the Governor-General to
make Regulations and Ciders for the
safety of the Commonwealth during the
present state of war.
[Assented to 29th October, 1914.]
Be it enacted by the King’s Most Excellent
Majesty, the Senate, and the House of Repre-
sentatives of the Commonwealth of Australia, as
follows: —
1. This Act may be cited as the War Precau- short title
tions Act 1914, and shall be incorporated and p"ration r
read as one with the Defence Act 1903—1912.
2. —(1) This Act shall continue in operation Duration of
during the continuance of the present state of Act-
war, and no longer.
(2) Eor the purposes of this Act, the present
state of war means the period from the fourth
day of August One thousand nine hundred and
fourteen, at the hour of eleven o’clock post meri-
diem reckoned according to Greenwich standard
time, until the issue of a proclamation by the
Governor-General that the war between His
Majesty the King and the German Emperor and
between His Majesty the King and the Emperor
of Austria King of Hungary has ceased


Application 3. All regulations and orders made by the
regulations, Governor-General since the commencement of the
ac., made present state of war shall be deemed to have been
since com- L r , c i
mencemcnt made in pursuance oi the powers conferred by
war! ate ° l Act, and any contravention thereof or non-
compliance therewith, whether before or after the
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to
be an offence against this Act and shall be pun-
ishable accordingly.
Regulation!. 4. —(l) The Governor-General may make regu-
lations for securing the public safety and the
defence of the Commonwealth, and for confer-
ring such powers and imposing such duties as
he thinks fit, with reference thereto, upon the
Naval Board and the Military Board and the
members of the Naval and Military Forces of
the Commonwealth.
(2) The regulations may authorize the trial by
Courts-Martial and punishment of persons con-
travening any of the provisions of such regula-
tions designed—
(a) to prevent persons communicating with
the enemy, or obtaining information
for that purpose or for any purpose
calculated to jeopardize the success of
the operations of any of His Majesty’s
forces, in Australia or elsewhere, or
to assist the enemy; or
( h ) to secure the safety of any means of
communication, or of any railways,
docks, harbors, or public works; or
(c) to prevent the spread of reports likely
to cause disaffection or alarm,
in like manner as if such persons were members
of the Military Forces of the Commonwealth and
had on active service committed an offence under
section five of the Army Act.
orders in 5, The Governor-General may by order pub-
Councii. Jigged i n the Gazette make provision for any
matters which appear necessary or expedient with


a view to the public safety and the defence of
the Commonwealth, and in particular—
(a) for prohibiting aliens, either generally
or as regards specified places, and
either absolutely or except under speci-
fied conditions and restrictions, from
landing or embarking in the Com-
monwealth ;
(h) for deporting aliens from the Common-
wealth ;
(c) for requiring aliens to reside and remain
within certain places or districts;
( d ) for prohibiting aliens from residing or
remaining in any areas specified in
the order;
(e) for requiring aliens residing in the Com-
monwealth to comply with such pro-
visions as to registration, change of
abode, travelling, trading or otherwise
as are specified in the order;
(/) for applying to naturalized persons, with
or without modifications, all or any
provisions of any order relating to
aliens;
( g ) for requiring any person to disclose any
information in his possession as to any
matter specified in the order;
(h) for preventing money or goods being
sent out of Australia except under
conditions approved by the Minister;
( i ) for appointing officers to carry the order
into effect, and for conferring on such
officers and on the Minister such
powers as are necessary or expedient
for the purposes of the order; and
(;) for conferring on such persons as are
specified in the order such powers
with respect to arrest, detention, search
of premises and persons, inspecting
impounding or retention of books docu-
ments and papers, and otherwise, as
are specified in the order, and for any
other matters necessary or expedient
for giving effect to the order.


Contraven- 6. Any person who contravenes, or fails to
regulation comply with, any provision of any regulation or
order made in pursuance of this Act shall be
guilty of an offence against this Act.
Penalty: One hundred pounds or six months’
imprisonment, or both.
Aiding and 7. Whoever aids, abets, counsels, or procures,
abetting. .. p,, 7 .,.
or is in any way directly or indirectly knowingly
concerned, in the commission of any offence
against this Act, shall be deemed to have com-
mitted that offence, and shall be punishable
accordingly.
order r re°<n —O) When any person is convicted of an
nizances. g offence against this Act, the Court before which
he is convicted may, either in addition to or in
lieu of any punishment provided for the offence,
require him to enter into recognizances with or
without sureties to comply with the provisions
of the regulations or order in relation to which
the offence was committed.
(2) If any person fails to comply with an order
of the Court requiring him to enter into recog-
nizances, the Court may order him to be impri-
soned for any term not exceeding six months.
Onus of 9. If any question arises on any proceedings
proof. under any order made in pursuance of this Act,
or with reference to anything done or proposed
to be done under any such order, whether any
person is an alien or not, the onus of proving
that that person is not an alien shall lie upon
that person.
Revocation 10. The Governor-General may by order pub-
of order* 1 ° n lished in the Gazette revoke alter or add to any
order made in pursuance of this Act as occasion
requires.
Act not to 11. All powers given under this Act or under
derogate an y instrument issued in pursuance of this Act
from other * / 11 . , ~ , A . *
powers. snail be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other powers exercisable apart from this Act.
By Authority: Albert J. M duett, Gov-rnment I’nnter, Melbourne.


Issued with M.O. 590/1914.
STATUTORY RULES.
1914. No. 154.
PROVISIONAL REGULATIONS UNDER
THE WAR PRECAUTIONS ACT 1914.
I, the Goveenoe-Geneeal, in and over the Com-
monwealth of Australia, acting with the advice
of the Federal Executive Council, hereby certify
that, on account of urgency, the following Regula-
tions under the War Precautions Act 1914 should
-come into immediate operation, and make the
Regulations to come into operation forthwith as
Provisional Regulations.
Dated the thirtieth day of October, 1914.
R. M. FERGUSON,
Governor-General.
His Excellency’s Command,
G. F. PEARCE,
Minister of State for Defence.
THE WAR PRECAUTIONS REGULATIONS*
1914.
Part I. —InteoDUCTORY.
These Regulations may be cited as the War
Precautions Regulations 1914.
2. (1) In these Regulations —
“ Competent naval or military authority ”f
means any commissioned officer of His
Majesty’s Naval or Military Forces
or of the Commonwealth Naval or
Military Forces, not below the rank
of Commander in the Navy or Lieu-
tenant-Colonel in the Army, appointed
• The powers given to the competent military authorities under these
Regulations ijhall be exercised only by the direction of the Chief of the
-General Staff e <cept in case of emergency. (M.O. 592/1914.'.
+ Commandants of Military Districts shall be the Competent
Military Authority” under this Regulation. (M.O. 592/1914.)


by the Admiralty or Army Council or
the Naval or Military Board, as the
case may be, to perform in any place
the duties of such an authority :
“ Proclaimed area ” means any area which
is for the time being proclaimed by
the Naval Board or the Military Board
to be an area which it is necessary
to safeguard in the interests of the
training or concentration of any of
His Majesty’s Forces or the Common-
wealth Forces:
“ The Act ” means the War Precautions Act
1914:
“ The Minister ” means the Minister of State
for Defence.
(2) Any harbor declared by Order of the Naval
Board or Military Board to be a defended harbor
shall, for the purposes of these Kegulations, be
treated as such.*
Part ll. —General Regulations.
3, The competent naval or military authority
and any person duly authorized by him shall
have right of access to any land or buildings, or
other property whatsoever.
4. No person shall obstruct or otherwise inter-
fere with or impede, or withhold any informa-
tion in his possession, which he may reasonably
be required to furnish, from any officer or other
person who is carrying out the orders of the com-
petent naval or military authority, or who is
otherwise acting in accordance with his duty
under these Regulations.
5. No person shall trespass on any railway, or
loiter under or near any bridge, viaduct, or cul-
vert, over which a railway passes.
6. The competent naval or military authority
shall publish notice of any Order made by him
* The following are declared “defended harbors” Thursday Island
Brisbane, Newcastle, Sydney, Melbourne (Port Phillip), Port Adelaide’
Albany, Fremantle, Hobart. (M.O. 592/1914.)


in pursuance of these Regulations in such man-
ner as he may consider best adapted for inform-
ing persons affected by the Order, and no person
shall, without lawful authority, deface or other-
wise tamper with any notice posted up in pursu-
ance of these Regulations.
7. If the competent naval or military authority
has reason to suspect that any house, building,
land, ship, vessel, or other premises are being
used for any purpose or in any way prejudicial
to the public safety, or the defence of the Com-
monwealth, the authority, or any persou duly
authorized by him, may enter, if need be by force,
the house, building, land, ship, vessel, or premises
at any time of the day or night, and examine,
search, and inspect the same or any part thereof,
and may seize anything found therein which he
has reason to suspect is being used or intended
to be used for any such purpose as aforesaid.
8. Any officer of police or any person authorized
for the purpose by the competent naval or mili-
tary authority may stop any vehicle travelling
along any public highway, and, if he has reason
to suspect that the vehicle is being used for any
purpose or in any way prejudicial to the public
safety or the defence of the Commonwealth, may
search the vehicle and seize anything found therein
which he has reason to suspect is being used or
intended to be used for any such purpose as
aforesaid.
9. —(1) Any officer of Customs or of police,
or any person authorized for the purpose by the
competent naval or military authority, may arrest,
without warrant, any person whose behaviour is
of such a nature as to give reasonable ground for
suspecting that he has acted or is acting or is
about to act in a manner prejudicial to the public
safety or the defence of the Commonwealth, or
upon whom may be found any article, book,
letter, or other document the possession of which
gives grounds for such a suspicion, or who is
suspected of having committed an offence against
these Regulations.


(2) Any person so arrested shall, if he is to
he tried by court martial, be handed over to or
kept in military custody, and in other cases shall
be detained until he can he dealt with in the
ordinary course of law, and whilst so detained
shall be deemed to be in legal custody.
(3) No person shall assist or connive at the
escape of any person who may he in custody
under this Regulation, or knowingly harbour or
assist any person who has so escaped.
Pakt 111.
Begulations specially designed for the Purposes
mentioned in Subsection (2) of Section
Four of the Act.
10. No person shall, without lawful authority,
publish or communicate any information with
respect to the movement or disposition of any
of the forces, ships, or war materials of His
Majesty or the Commonwealth or any of His
Majesty’s Allies, or with respect to the plans of
any naval or military operations by any such
forces or ships, or with respect to any works or
measures undertaken for or connected with the
fortification or defence of any place, if the infor-
mation is such as is calculated to he, or might
be, directly or indirectly, useful to the enemy.
11. —(1) No person shall, without the permis-
sion of the competent naval or military authority,
make any photograph, sketch, plan, model, or
other representation of any naval or military
work, or of any dock or harbor work in or in
connexion with a defended harbor, and no person
in the vicinity of any such work shall, without
lawful authority, have in his possession any pho-
tographic or other apparatus, or other material
or thing suitable for use in making any such
representation.
(2) For the purpose of this Regulation, the
•expression “ harbor work ” includes lights, buoys,
beacons, marks, and other for the purpose
of facilitating navigation in or into a harbor.


12. —(1) No person shall, without lawful
authority, injure, or tamper, or interfere with,
any wire or other apparatus for transmitting
telegraphic or telephonic messages, or any appa-
ratus or contrivance intended for or capable of
being used for a signalling apparatus, either visual
or otherwise, or prevent or obstruct, or in any
manner whatsoever interfere with, the sending,
conveyance, or delivery of any communication, by
means of telegraph, telephone, or otherwise, or
be in possession of any apparatus capable of being
used for tapping messages sent by wireless
telegraphy or otherwise.
(2) No person shall, in any area which may
be prescribed by order of the competent naval or
military authority, keep or have in his posses-
sion any carrier or homing pigeons unless he has
obtained from some person designated by the
competent naval or military authority a permit
for the purpose (which permit may at any time
be revoked), and the person so designated may,
if he considers it necessary or expedient to do so,
cause any pigeons kept in contravention of this
Regulation to be liberated.
13. No person shall, with the intent of eliciting
information for the purpose of communicating it
to the enemy, or for any purpose calculated to
assist the enemy, give or sell to any member of His
Majesty’s Forces or the Commonwealth Forces,
any intoxicating liquor, and no person shall give
or sell to any member of His Majesty’s Forces,
or the Commonwealth Forces, employed in the
defence of any railway, dock, or harbor, or engaged
or being in a proclaimed area, any intoxicating
liquor, when not on duty, with intent to make
him drunk, or, when on sentry or other duty,
either with or without any such intent.
14. No person shall do any injury to any rail-
way, or be upon any railway, or under or near
any bridge, viaduct, or culvert over which a rail-
way passes, with intent to do injury thereto.


15. No person shall, by the discharge of fire-
arms or otherwise, endanger the safety of any
member of His Majesty’s Forces or the Common-
wealth Forces, travelling on or guarding any
railway.
36. No person, without the permission of the
competent naval or military authority, shall, in
the vicinity of any railway or of any dock or
harbor or proclaimed area, be in possession of
dynamite or any other explosive substance, but
nothing in this Regulation shall be construed as
affecting the possession of ammunition for sporting
purposes.
17. No person shall by word of mouth or in
writing spread reports likely to cause disaffection
or alarm among any of His Majesty’s Forces or
the Commonwealth Forces or among the civilian
population.
18. No person shall, if an order to that effect
has been made by the competent naval or mili-
tary authority, light any fire or show any light
on any hill within such radius from any defended
harbor or proclaimed area as may be specified in
the order.
19. The competent naval or military authority
at any defended harbor or proclaimed area may
by order direct that all lights, other than lights
not visible from the outside of any house, shall
be kept extinguished between such hours and
within such area as may be specified in the order;
and all persons resident within that area shall
comply with the order.
20. The competent naval or military authority
at any defended harbor or proclaimed area maj'
by order require every person within any area
specified in the order to remain within doors
between such hours as may be specified in the
order, and in such case no person shall be or
remain out between such hours unless provided
with a permit in writing from the competent
naval or military authority or some person duly
authorized by him.


21. Where the behaviour of any person is such
as to give reasonable grounds for suspecting that
he has acted, or is acting, or is about to act, in
a manner prejudicial to the public safety or the
defence of the Commonwealth, the competent
naval or military authority may, by order, direct
him to cease to reside in any area (specified in
the order) within or in the neighborhood of a
defended harbor or proclaimed area, and any
person to whom the order relates shall, within
such time as may be specified in the order, leave
the area specified in the order, having first
reported his proposed residence to the competent
naval or military authority, and shall not again
reside in that area without a permit for the
purpose from that authority.
22. If any person, with the object of obtaining
any information for the purpose of communicat-
ing it to the enemy, or of assisting the enemy,
or with intent to do any injury to any means of
■communication, or to any railway, dock, or har-
bor, forges, alters or tampers with any pass, per-
mit, or other document, or uses or has in his
possession any such forged, altered, or irregular
pass, permit, or document with the like object
or intent, or with the like object or intent per-
sonates any person to whom a pass, permit, or
other document has been duly issued, he shall be
guilty of a contravention of these Regulations,
and may be tried and punished accordingly; and
where in any proceedings against a person for
■contravention of this Regulation it is proved that
he has forged, altered, or tampered with the pass,
permit, or other document in question, or has
used or had in his possession the forged, altered,
or irregular pass, permit, or document in ques-
tion, or has personated the person to whom the
pass, permit, or document was duly issued, he
shall be preslimed to have forged, altered, or
tampered with it, or to have used or had it in
bis possession, or to have personated such person
as aforesaid, with such object or intent as afore-
said, unless he proves the contrary.


23. Any person who attempts to commit, or
procures, aids, or abets the commission of any
act prohibited by the foregoing special Regula-
tions, or harbours any person whom he knows,
or has reasonable grounds for supposing, to have
acted in contravention of such Regulations, shall
be deemed to have acted in contravention of the
Regulations in like manner as if he had himself
committed the act.
24. —(1) Any person contravening any of the
provisions of the foregoing special Regulations
shall be liable to be tried by court martial and
to be sentenced to imprisonment for life or any
less punishment:
Provided that no sentence exceeding three
months’ imprisonment with hard labour shall be
imposed in respect of any contravention of Regu-
lations 18, 19, or 20 unless it is proved that the
contravention was for the purpose of assisting
the enemy or in respect of any contravention of
Regulation 17 if the offender proves that he acted
without any intention to cause disaffection or
alarm:
Provided, further, that any sentence passed by
a court martial under these Regulations shall be
placed before the Governor-General for his appro-
val, confirmation, mitigation, or remission of the
sentence.
(2) A court martial having jurisdiction to try
offences under these Regulations shall be a general
court martial convened by the Governor-General,
or a district court martial convened by an officer
authorized to convene district courts martial
within the limits of whose command the offender
may for the time being be; but nothing in this
Regulation, shall be construed as authorizing a
district court martial to impose a sentence of more
than two years’ imprisonment.
(3) Any person tried by court martial under
these Regulations shall, for the purpose of the-
provisions of the Army Act relating to offences,
be treated as if he belonged to the unit in whose-


charge he may be; but no such person shall be-
liable to summary punishment by a commanding
officer.
Part TV. —Supplemental.
25. The powers conferred by these Regulations
are in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
powers exercisable by members of His Majesty’s
Naval and Military Forces or the Commonwealth
Naval and Military Forces or other persons to
take such steps as may be necessary for securing
the public safety and the defence of the Com-
monwealth, and the liability of any person to
trial and punishment for any offence or war
crime otherwise than in accordance with these
Regulations.
26.—(1) Where the Minister has reason to
believe that any naturalized person is disaffected
or disloyal he may by warrant under his hand
order him to be detained in military custody in
such place as he thinks fit during the continu-
ance of the present state of war.
(2) The Minister may telegraph a copy of any
such warrant to the competent naval or military
authority, and action may be taken on such,
telegraphed copy as if it were the original.
27. The Naval Board or the Military Board
may authorize the competent naval or military
authority to delegate, dither unconditionally or
subject to such conditions as he thinks fit, all or
any of his powers under these Regulations to any
officer qualified to be appointed a competent naval
or military authority.
Authority; Albert J. Muixftt, Government Printer, Melbourne-..
