

ALBERT’S
Flute, Piccolo, of Fife
TUTOR.
Written, Composed and Arranged by
CARLO MINASI.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.


TUTOR FOR THE FLUTE.
INTRODUCTION.
The flute is probably one of the most ancient of all instruments, in proof of which many ancienl
basso-relievos in the British and other museums give most distinct and positive testimony.
Flutes of a primitive kind are represented in the carvings of three and four thousand years ago,
and the instrument was then, as now, doubtless played for the delight of admiring audiences. The
ease with which it can be played, the richness and sweetness of its tone, and its smoothness and
rapidity of execution, in the hands of a competent performer, all assist to make it a general
favourite; whilst the position it holds in the orchestra proves its musical value as an exponent of
melody. Flutes can be purchased, at the option of the learner, with from one to eight keys, and
the diligent study of the simple rides laid down in this book will in a very short time enable the
pupil, with proper practice, to be a constant source of enjoyment to himself and of pleasure to
his friends.


SIMPLE ELEMENTS OF MUSIC.
Music is written upon five lines called a Stave; those five lines include four spaces, and form in all nine
degrees or steps, lioth lines and spaces are numbered from the bottom of the stave upwards, thus:—
LINES.
SPACES.
Those signs which determine the Sounds are called Notes, and are named after the first seven letters ol
the alphabet, A, B, C, D, E, F, G ; the eighth, called the Octave, is only a repetition of the first. The
names of notes on the lines, and in the spaces, are as follows: —
LINES.
SPACES.
The spaces and linos of the staff, or stave, are consequently able to admit of the representation of nine
sounds, or notes, viz : five on the lines and four in the spaces. But as these nine situations are quite
insufficient, others are provided by means of extra lines above and beneath the stave, and are called
Leger lines (French Uf/ere or light lines): —
The Clef used for the Flute is known as the Treble or G clef. It is placed or turned on the second line
The name of one note thus
of the stare, and gives every note on that line the name of Gr, thus :
being plainly marked out, the other notes follow alphabetically and consecutively upward and downward :
The additional or leger lines for the use of the Flute are as follows ;
VALUE OF NOTES.
In listening to any air, we shall easily perceive, that what constitutes melody is not merely a particular
succession of notes, which alone would oifer but few resources as to variety, but also the relative duration
(more or less protracted) of the sounds: this relative length is called the Value of Notes, and is indicated
by the note itself explained by the following table.
Different kinds of notes :
which should be thus repeated and learnt:—A Semibreve is equal to 2 Minims, or 4 Crotchets, or 0
Quavers, or 16 Semiquavers, or 32 Demisemiquavers.


A TABLE OF THE RELATIVE VALUE OF THE NOTES
Wlion several quavers, semiquavers, or demisemiquavers follow each other in succession, they are generally
lied together in groups of two, three, or four by a thick line drawn through the stems of all the group,
instead of a hook being attached to each. This is shown in the above table.
ON THE DOT.
The Dot placed after a note increases its length by one half; thus, a dotted Semibreve,
is equal to 3 Minims,
or 6 Crotchets, &c.
ON TWO DOTS.
A second Dot is often placed after the first when the first Dot follows a Minim, Crctchet, or a Quaver j
in this tasc the second Dot is equal to one half the length of the first.
Two Dots placed after a note
ON THE SLUR,
A Slur * placed over a succession of Notes, signifies that they are to be played in a smooth and flowing
style.


ON THE BIND, OR TIE.
A Bind, or Tie,
them into one.
placed over two notes of the same line, or apace, serves to unit*
ON RESTS.
Rests are charao ers which indicate that we must interrupt the melody, and refrain from playing during
a longer or shorter space of time. They serve to give repose to the voice of the singer, or to the fingers
of the performer; to avoid confusion between different phrases or portions of phrases; to give prominence
to one part at the expense of others; and sometimes to produce picturesque effects by sudden and unex-
pected interruptions. Rests have a value corresponding to that of the notes which they represent.
Their forms are as follows :
The Dot and the Double Dot, of which we have treated in the preceding section, may also be placed after
rests, and serve to increase their value in the same proportion.
ON THE BARS.
All the values of which a piece of music is composed are divided into equal portions of time called Bars,
or measures, and are placed between lines drawn perpendicularly across the stave, thus :
A double bar |j is always placed at the end of a piece of music, and is invariably used to divide a piece
into parts or sections. Dots placed at the left side signify that the previous part is to be repeated,
thus : • If on the right, the succeeding part is repeated jjj . Both parts are repeated if the dots are on
both sides, ijjj
ON TIME.
The Bar in its turn is divided into fractional portions called Parts, or Time. The measures most
frequently used are those which contain two, three, or four of these fractional parts, as also that indicated
#y |, or three quaver time, and Compound measure, |, or six quaver time.
The following signs are used to denote these different measures ; they are always placed at the con
mencement of a piece, directly after the clef.
HALL COMMON TIME.
COMMON TIME.
Contains 4 Crotchets in a bar, or their value in other notes in each bar. Contains 2 Crotchets in a bai


Contains 3 Semibreves, 3 Minims, 3 Crotchets, 3 Quavers in a bar. Contains 9 Crotchets, 9 Quavers in a bar
Also the following times are seldom used, }|.
ON SHARPS, FLATS, DOUBLE SHARP, AND DOUBLE FLAT.
In order to form other scales similar to that of C, three signs have been adopted, called a Sharp Jf, a
Flat t>, and a Natural tj.
A Sharp serves to raise a note half a tone higher; a Flat 17 lowers it a semitone: and a Natural
restores the note to its first state.
Sharps ascend by fifths, that is to say, from five to five notes, and the distance is of three and a half tones
Fiats descend by fifths, with the same distance of three and a half tones.
The Double Sharp x elevates the pitch two semitones, and the double Flat Wl decreases it a tone.
ON INTERVALS.
The distance from one sound to another is called an Interval.
A student with a good ear will readily perceive that, in the Scale, the interval from one note to another
is not always the same; for example, the interval from Cto D is greater than from E to F, or Bto C; the
first of these intervals is called a Tone, the next two Semitones.
MAJOR AND MINOR SCALE
The word Scale, derived from the Italian Scala, a ladder, indicates a succession of sounds ascending or
descending by degrees, and may be either Diatonic or Chromatic. The Diatonic, which is the most usodt
proceeds by two tones and a semitone, then by three tones and another semitone.
Thr Minor proceeds by one tone and a semitone then by four tones and another semitone.


MAJOR SCALE OF C.
MINOR SCALE OF A.
OF MODES.
There are two modes—the Major and the Minor. They differ in their third; the Major third is
ompound of two whole tones, the Minor of a tone and a half.
The Chromatic Scale consists of a series of twelve Sounds placed a semitone from each other.
The following notes are actually the same sound, although they appear otherwise on paper, as shown below.
Diagram showing how the Notes change their names in three dipfebent ways, excepting the 0,
A is B Double Flat or G Double Sharp.
B is ... 0 Flat or A Double Sharp.
C is D Double Flat or B Sharp.
D is E Double Flat or C Double Sharp.
E is ... . F Flat or D Double Sharp.
F is ... ... G Double Flat or E Sharp.
G is A Double Flat or F Double Sharp.
Ajf is B Flat or C Double Flat.
BJf is C Natural or D Double Flat.
OJf is D Flat or B Double Sharp,
Djf is E Flat or F Double Flat.
EJt is F Natural or G Double Sharp.
Fjf is G Flat or E Double Sharp,
GJ is A Flat -


HOW TO HOLD THE INSTRUMENT.
It should he held in a horizontal position, bearing towards the right, the right hand thumb
holding it in position against the lower lip with a firm pressure; the left hand supporting it
between the first finger and the thumb. The hands must have room to play freely, and the
left arm must he kept away from the body in a convenient and easy maimer.
HOW TO USE THE LIPS.
The sound is produced by the breath passing through an “ embouchure ” or hole for the lips, and
upon the way in which the lips are managed depends the quality of each note, and should be the
first thing practised. The comers of the mouth are drawn inwardly, so that the lips touch the
teeth, leaving a small aperture in the centre as an air passage. The mouth-hole should then he
placed to the lips and turned in contrary directions until a good note is produced when the learner
blows into the instrument. This preliminary lip practice should be tried at first without any
attempt at fingering or using the keys. When the learner has acquired a good tone, he will
discover that moderate force produces the best notes.
HOW TO PUT THE INSTRUMENT TOGETHER.
The six finger holes must he placed in a direct line with each other, the embouchure being
slightly turned inwards; the lower joint being so placed that the keys (no matter how many) can
be used freely by the fourth or little finger of the right hand.
HOW TO SOUND THE NOTES.
The little finger of the right hand must press the key; then, by placing the first finger of the
left hand over the top hole, the note of B natural will he sounded on blowing gently into the
embouchure; then add the second finger on the next hole, which gives A natural; the third also
placed down makes G natural. When the learner has practised thus far, by adding the
first finger of the right hand over the fourth hole, E sharp is produced; the second finger
of the right hand over the fifth hole will sound E natural; and the third finger covering
the last hole cause D natural to he sounded, (for this the little finger must release the key). Eor
the note E the key may be raised or closed.
FLUTE WITH ONE KEY.


EXERCISES ON THE FOLLOWING EIGHT NOTES BELONGING TO THE KEY OF D
MAJOR, TWO SHARPS, F & D.
HOW TO FINGER TWELVE NOTES IN THE KEY OF D MAJOR.
FLUTE WITH ONE KEY.
(o) hole uncovered. (•) hole covered. (i) key open. (*) key released.


EXERCISES ON G, A, B, & C.
Common Time, Four Crotchets in each bar, (see page 4).
EXERCISES ON D, E, F, & G.


EXERCISES ON G, A. B, C, D, E, F, & G.


CHROMATIC SCALE FOR THE FLUTE WITH ONE KEY


EXERCISES ON THE FOLLOWING SEVEN NOTES BELONGING TO THE KEY OF
G MAJOR, ONE SHARP, F.


EXTRA FINGERING FOR THE FLUTE WITH ONE KEY.
The above table is inserted for those who learn upon a one-keyed instrument, but the following notes
cannot be produced perfectly on an instrument with less than four keys.
Notes 1,2, and 3 are almost unavailable owing to their weakness and incorrectness.
Notes 4,5, and 6 are not only weak, but as a rule too sharp, although sometimes used on extra-
keyed instruments.
Note 7 (the high F) is also imperfect through over sharpness, consequently extra-keyed instruments are
far better, even for learners.
General Scale for the Flute, Showing How to Finger the Notes, and the Use of
the Additional Keys.
To produce the lower C natural, C sharp or D flat, the two long keys on the flutes
with six or more keys are necessarily used, and must be pressed down with the
right hand little finger. Both keys must be used for C natural; only one for C
sharp, the 6th finger-hole being covered at the same time. All other notes can be
produced with accuracy from a four-keyed instrument.
Four keys are necessary to play in tune (with the above exception); they aie
used as follows:
The right hand little finger pnesses the key for D sharp or E flat;
The right hand third finger presses the key for F natural or E sharp;
The left hand little finger presses the key for G sharp or A flat;
The left band thumb presses the key for A sharp or B flat.


CHROMATIC SCALE FOR THE FLUTE WITH FOUR KEYS.
FLUTE WITH FOUR KEYS.




To show the various styles of composition used by various countries, the Author has selected fourteen
elodies, viz., Circassian, Cashmerian, Arabian, Persian, Indian, (two) Andalusian, Castilian, Swiss, (two)
Ahenish, Egyptian, Chinese, and Hebrew; these are not to be found in any other book, and form a well
diversified selection.












EXTRA FINGERING FOR THE FLUTE WITH FOUR KEYS.


THE EIGHT-KEYED FLUTE.
This is the instrument in general use : those with one, and four keys have been described. One of the
extra keys is a repetition of F natural, and is pressed by the little finger of the left hand, the object
being to produce F natural, to succeed D natural, or E flat, or any note marie with the right hand third
finger covering the hole. For example :
The other extra key is pressed by the right hand forefinger, and produces C natural on the third space
and also 0 natural an octave higher. A shake of B natural and 0 natural cannot be made without this
key. It is also used to make the shake with B flat and 0 natural, and that with A natural and B natural
For example, these are instances of its use: —
Flutes have sometimes nine keys, —the ninth being a lever joined to the B flat key. It is pressed by the
right hand first finger, and is used for the following shakes : A natural and B flat; A flat and B flat; and
G sharp and A sharp.
TONGUEING (SINGLE AND DOUBLE).
Single-tongneing consists of limiting the action of the tongue to repeating one syllable.
DoMe-toagueing consists in articulating by repeating two different syllables.
! In single-tongming, the action of the tongue is similar to when the syllable DOO is pronounced ; this
produces a sonorous and gentle sound; by using the action for the syllable TOO, a more marked and
distinct articulation is acquired.
In double-tongueing, the repetition is produced by the action of the tongue as in the syllables
TOOTLE, thus •*— — *
’ k-
ESSENTIAL ADVICE.
Before a performer begins a piece of music he should never neglect to ask himself the following
questions: —
Ist. In what key am I going to play ?—that is, how many sharps or data are placed after the del.
2nd. What is the time or measure of the piece ? 3rd. What is the degree of movement ?


The principal graces used in music are the Appoggiatura, the Turn, and the Shake.
The Appoggiatura, which is never more distant from the principal note than at one above or a semitone
below it (unless it be a mere repetition of the preceding note), usually divides the timo with the principal
note.
The Turn, marked thus, ~ consists of small notes placed above, or below, the large or essential note.
The plain, or simple Turn, begins with the note higher than the principal note, two notes then follow
descending, after which the note itself.
The small notes forming the Turn must be played quickly, the accent falling on the principal, or large
note.
When the Turn has a sharp affixed over it, thus, it applies to the upper note ; when under to the
lower note. The same rule with regard to flats and naturals.
The Shake, marked thus, tr, consists of a quick repetition of two notes, played alternately, and continued
as long as the time of the principal note lasts.
Written.
ft
Small notes generally follow the shake, called the termination. They must be played as quickly as the
notes forming the shake ; the lowest must always precede the principal note.
A Bind, or tie, marked ✓ —s , from one note to another of the same sound, indicates that the sound of
tbe first note is continued, without intermission, the length of time indicated by the second.
A Slur, also marked —\, over several notes of different sounds, indicates the passage to be played
smoothly, without interruption. The same mark placed over three notes, with a figure indicates that
these three notes are to be played in the time of two.
A Pause prolongs the note or rest over which it is placed beyond its proper value, creating a pause in
the time at the discretion of the jorfonuer.


INSTRUCTION BOOK
FOR THE
VIOLIN
WITHOUT A MASTER.
WRITTEN, COMPOSED, AND ARRANGED P.V
CARLO MINASI,
PRICE ONE SHILLING
