

w p. Y
REuaious
Box I
THE MIDNIGHT CRY.
% Doicc to % Mboß of Cbristenbom.
PRELUDE TO THE SECOND MANIFESTATION
AND PERSONAL REIGN ON EARTH OF
THE LORD JESUS CHRIST.
“ And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold the bridegroom
cometh ! go ye out to meet him.”— Matt. xxv. 6.
Dawn of the Millennium.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
M'Carrou, Bird <sr> Co., Printers, 37 Flinders Lone ICrst.
«




THE MIDNIGHT CRY.
§. oo m lo % (ffllljolc of Cjjristeimm.
PRELUDE TO THE SECOND MANIFESTATION
AND PERSONAL REIGN ON EARTH OF
THE LORD JESUS CHRIST.
“ And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold the bridegroom
cometh ! go ye out to meet him.”— Matt. xxv. 6.
Dawn of the Millennium
PRICE SIXPENCE.
SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.


PRELUDE
TO THE
SECOND MANIFESTATION AND PEBSONAL BEI6N
ON EAETH OF THE LOBD JESUS CHRIST.
AN EARNEST APPEAL TO THE JUDGMENT AND SYMPATHY OP
THE PEOPLE OP VICTORIA.
11 It is now more than seven years since the writer of this
appeal arrived in this colony from Adelaide, with the
intention of propagating the divine instruction he had
received regarding the second manifestation and personal
reign on earth of the Lord Jesus Christ. The first effort to
proclaim to the world the divine intelligence regarding
these important events was the publication of a pamphlet
on the subject in Adelaide, which was well received by the
public. But my divine information was from the first
regarded by the leaders of the Christian Church in
Adelaide as contrary to their views on the important matter,
and I soon obtained proof that the leaders of the Christian
Church in Melbourne were more prejudiced against my
divine information than in Adelaide. Well knowing the
extreme importance of the matter, and the necessity of
making it known to the world, I felt it my duty to make
the divine information known to the local Government of
this colony, who at once condemned my statements as the
effect of insanity, and I found myself looked upon as an
insane man, in defiance of my continued protests, explana-


tions, and petitions to leaders of both Church and State.
This state of things has continued over a period of over
seven years; five years out of that time I have been imprisoned
as insane. Several times I have been liberated on condi-
tions, and each time the result of my efforts to obtain a fair
examination into the merits of my important testimony
from the leaders of the Christian Church, being met b} r
indifference and unbelief, has led me to again apply to the
Government in hopes of obtaining justice, but who, without
giving the slightest attention to my evidence, have each
time condemned me insane, on their own imperfect and
false knowledge of the important matter, and so condemned
me to a long and severe false imprisonment. The object I
have in view in making’ this earnest appeal to the people of
Victoria is to obtain a fair and strict investigation into the
evidence in my possession to enable me to prove beyond
dispute that the divine information in my possession regard-
ing the future manifestation of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
its connection with the people of Victoria, is strictly true,
perfectly scriptural, and warranted by the highest and most
divine authority under which man can act —namely, the
divine instruction and approval of God the Holy Ghost;
consequently my evidence is divinely true, and as far
removed from insanity as light from darkness. Another
important object I have in view in thus publicly appealing
to the people of Victoria is to point out the dreadful
blunder that has been committed in my persecution, and the
great and alarming responsibility now resting over this
nation in consequence of those in official positions having
condemned as madness the divine express instructions
and high authority of God the Holy Ghost, and the divine
information contained in His holy Word, thus constituting


the greatest sin possible for a person, people or nation to
commit, being as it is blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,
which alarming responsibility, I am well convinced, cannot
be removed until the important evidence and divine
information in my possession is carefully and impartially
investigated. I must here state that I have previously
obtained the promise of four of the leading ministers of this
city to take part in examination of my evidence, but I
cannot succeed in getting them all together. They have had
some of the evidence to examine privately. As the result,
one of the most enlightened ministers admits that he
perfectly agrees with all that I have written on the subject,
wliich admission embraces the lectures I have written; he
also acknowledges that they cannot prove a negative to my
statements, and it is for me to produce a positive. This is
the very thing I am most desirous of doing, and I know of
only one way to do so, which is by a careful, patient and
thorough personal examination of all the important evidence
in my possession regarding the divinely important matter. To
obtain for me this act of justice I most respectfully appeal to
every true Englishman and all people of Victoria, earnestly
hoping that some will realise the value of this appeal to
their sense of justice, and help me to obtain the examination
of evidence that will certainly prove its divine origin and
veracity, and effectually remove the false witness that has
so long a time impeded the progress of the second personal
manifestation of the Lord Jesus Christ.
“Anyone desirous of helping in this matter will please
write a few lines to that effect and leave at the office of this
paper, for the writer of this appeal.”
This will inform the general that the foregoing
advertisement appeared in the Age on the 27th


of February, and again on the Bth of May. The information
contained in that advertisement is perfectly true in every
particular, and can easily be proved to be so. The writer
of that and this production is the same person, and the
object the writer has in view in sending out this pamphlet
is to create an interest in the very important and extremely
interesting events spoken of in this pamphlet, that will
shortly be ushered in upon the world’s great stage of action.
I think it will be readily admitted by all unprejudiced
readers of the advertisement that there must be great
ignorance and indifference existing in the world regarding
those events, when a man is condemned insane because he
professes to be divinely instructed especially on the im-
portant matter, because he proclaims truths which in reality
are as clearly revealed in the Word of God as the sun at
noonday. To me they are at any rate, and it is my duty
and my most sincere desire to spread the light by producing
evidence that is simple, natural, aud easy to be understood,
and that is in strict accordance with the divine intelligence
contained in the Scriptures regarding the deeply important
matter. The object I have in writing this is twofold. In
the first place, I earnestly wish to propagate the true
knowledge God has given me on this all important matter,
and I think it will be readily admitted by all Christians
that especially in a matter like this, whatever concerns
the Kingdom of Christ, is a matter of immense importance
to individual Christians, which should at once engage their
interest and active interference. In the second place, I
must admit that I have a strong, a constant burning desire
on my part to do all I 04m towards removing the wrong-
impressions that are abroad in the Church concerning the
manner in which the second maifestation of the Lord Jesus


Christ is to be accomplished, for that ignorance has in
reality been the chief cause of my long continued persecution.
Now I wish to accomplish this in a proper and interesting
manner, that is, by producing convincing evidence that at
the close of it will leave no doubt concerning the fact that
I have received important knowledge and divine instruction
in the Scriptures regarding the introduction of this glorious
and interesting work, and as there may be many read this
who are teachers and leaders in the Church of God, I would
most respectfully request them not to condemn in any way
the introduction of this important evidence, however con-
trary it may be to their present impressions or preconceived
ideas ; but to wait until the whole of the evidence is before
them before they pass their opinion.
I suppose I shall by many be considered bold, if not pre-
sumptuous, in publishing views which are in a great
measure opposed to the present prevailing opinion regarding
the second coming of Christ; but in reality I am neither
the one nor the other, T am simply trying to make known
divine information I received ten years ago. And I may
safely say that one proof of its divinity is, that it has stood
the test of a long and severe persecution from that time to
this. Now, although 'tis true that I alone have received
this divine instruction, yet it is no fault of mine that the
divine knowledge committed unto me has not long* since
been discovered by those whose profession and position in
the Church have given them every means of making them
in some measure acquainted with the important matter,
for it is plainly revealed in the Scriptures. And because
they have neglected to study the divine subject I have had
to suffer the painful consequences, for had they, the leaders
of the Church, been aware of the nature of the work to be


accomplished by the second manifestation of Jesus Christ I
should have been met with some degree of credence and
consideration when I made known to them the fact that I
was divinely instructed, it was to be in the flesh, that is,
the body, as at His first advent; and that is not all the
effects of this indifference to the excessively important
matter. For according to the light God has given me,
they, the leaders of the Church—and by the Church I mean
all denominations of the Christian Church—are not only
greatly in error themselves, but they are propagating error
in neglecting to proclaim the coming of Christ in the flesh.
For it is perfectly clear to me that it is the most important
part of the gospel, and now, in our day and generation, very
necessary, and positively essential to individual Salvation and
the world’s regeneration. For it may easily be seen by those
whose understanding is enlightened, that in this matter, if
what I state is divinely true, it is perfectly reasonable to say
that it must he believed. Now for it to be believed, the work
must he clearly understood—that is, the work that is to be
accomplished by the second personal manifestation of Christ
must be clearly understood—then the objections raised
against His appearing in the flesh will be very effectually
removed. That this desirable object may be attained, and,
I think, easily too, I take this opportunity of most respect-
fully informing the community of this colony that I have
very carefully prepared direct evidence on this important
matter, which I have gathered from both the Old and New-
Testaments. This important evidence I have put together
in the shape of a series of interesting lectures, containing
the direct prophecies and promises relating to the manner
in which, as I am instructed, the second personal manifes-
tation of Jesus Christ shall take place; and also the work


to be accomplished at His coming-. These lectures I have
twice endeavoured to deliver publicly in Victoria, but with-
out success. The reason of so little interest being shown
towards them was, I suspect, because they were not
encouraged by the leaders of the Church; but I am in
earnest hope that by the publication of this pamphlet I may
be encouraged to publicly deliver or publish them, and
perhaps both. Indeed, that is the object I have chiefly in
view, for I am perfectly convinced they, the lectures, con-
tain indisputable divine evidence that bears the stamp of
being received from the Source of all divine wisdom and
infallible truth; and that, as all Christians will admit, is
both the Spirit and the Word of God.
Hoping, most sincerely, this little pamphlet may meet
with encouragement, I will conclude this in the words of
the poet: —
What we have felt and seen,
With confidence we tell,
And publish to the sons of men
The signs infallible.
P.S.—The evidence from the Old Testament will be pro-
duced in the first lecture.
M'Carron, Bird & Co., Printers, 37 Flinders Lane West, Melbourne.




