





.




CHARGE
DELIVERED TO THE
CLERGY OF THE DIOCESE OF MELBOURNE,
AT THE
PRIMARY VISITATION
CHARLES PERRY, D.D.
BISHOP OF MELBOURNE,
V C/UIL/ ■
MDCCCLII.
kv L-1£ I'U l£ [\ L C kV_
PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE CLERGY.
MELBOURNE:
CHURCH OF ENGLAND BOOK DEPOT, 71, SWANSTON STREET.




TO THE
CLERGY OF THE DIOCESE OP MELBOURNE,
THIS CHARGE,
PUBLISHED AT THEIR REQUEST,
IS INSCRIBED,
WITH SINCERE AFFECTION
THEIR
FAITHFUL FRIEND AND BROTHER,
C. MELBOURNE.




A CHARGE.
EEVEEEND AND BELOVED BEETHEEN IN THE LOED,
I Rave invited yon to meet me to-day, in order that I may, as
your Bisliop, according to the usage of the Church, address to
you such advice and exhortation, as may appear calculated, with
the divine blessing, to promote your efficiency in the ministry
of the Gospel; and that we may afterwards take counsel
together upon any matters, which require our joint
deliberation. Four years have elapsed, since I entered upon
the duties of my office; and there may seem to he needed
some explanation, why I have so long deferred to hold
my primary visitation. One reason of my delay has been,
that I considered a formal visitation, for the purpose of
inspecting the state of the Diocese, in its infantine condition,
to he premature; and for the purpose of taking counsel with
my few fellow-labourers, to he altogether unnecessary. I was
also desirous to have time for consideration, and to obtain as
much experience as possible, before I ventured to deliver to
you an Episcopal Charge. For if it be a solemn matter to
address an ordinary congregation upon the truths of the
Gospel j to teach sinners how they may be saved, and believers
how they may glorify God and be built up in the faith ; it is
surely a much more solemn and responsible duty to address
a company of clergymen upon the subject of their high and
holy calling; and to show those, who are appointed to be the
teachers of others, how they may faithfully and efficiently
fulfil the trust committed to them. Most certainly, if each
one of you must in the contemplation of his work, much
more must I in the contemplation of mine, be constrained
to exclaim with the apostle; “ Who is sufficient for these
things ?” Nevertheless, blessed be God ! both you and I may
rely with confidence upon the help of Him, who has chosen


and ordained us to our respective offices; and who, if we
trust in Him, will never suffer us to lack the grace and the
wisdom, which are needful for us. To Him then would I
look up on the present occasion, beseeching Him to enable me
by His Holy Spirit, to speak according to His will, and to
render what I shall say conducive to your edification, and to
the benefit of His Church in this land.
It is not my intention now to discuss any of those points
of doctrine, or of ecclesiastical government, which have
recently so much agitated, and still continue to agitate, our
parent Church in England. Concerning some of these I
have already expressed my own individual opinion; and have
stated the grounds, on which that opinion has been formed.*
It is unnecessary therefore, and it would, I think, be
unprofitable, to occupy your attention with them now. My
wish is to avoid all “ doubtful disputations,” and to confine
myself entirely to that, which may tend to edification. With
respect therefore to all matters of dispute, whether within or
without our own Church, I would only enjoin upon you the
observance of one simple rule : viz. that when you desire to
satisfy yourself as to what God has declared upon any
particular point, you go at once to the Bible; and when you
want to know what our Church teaches, you go to the Book
of Common Prayer and her other authorised formularies. If
you endeavour, with prayer for the assistance of the I oly Spirit,
thus to form your own judgment by a careful tudy of the
original documents themselves, you may perhaps be painfully
perplexed for a time, but you shall certainly be preserved
from all fatal error in the end : whereas, if, as is too common
even among the clergy, you build your doctrines upon the
opinions and arguments of controversial writers, you may be
right, but you never can be safe ; your foundation may at any
time give way from under you; and then the whole structure,
which you have raised upon it, will be overthrown. If you
take your doctrine from the Bible, you cannot fail to be
* Appendix, A.


faithful stewards of the mysteries of God; and if you take
your doctrine from the Prayer Book and formularies of
our Church, you cannot fail to approve yourselves faithful
ministers of her communion. lam also fully convinced by
long examination, that you will never find these at variance
with one another; but that the more closely the latter are
compared with the former, the more exactly will they be
found to agree with it; so that we need never be afraid, lest
the Church should affirm what the Bible denies, or the Bible
inculcate what the Church disallows. The Church professes
to be founded upon the Bible, and continually exhorts us to
appeal to it; nor has she any cause to fear the consequence
of such an appeal.
Omitting then all further allusion to matters of contro-
versy, I would endeavour, in dependence upon the help of the
Holy Spirit, to direct your attention solely to topics, the
consideration of which may, with the divine blessing, impress
you with a deeper sense of your ministerial obligations, stir
you up to increased diligence in your high and holy calling,
and generally promote your efficiency in the fulfilment of
your ministry. With this object, I purpose in my present
discourse to set before you, according to the grace given
unto me,
I. The Character and object op the Ministerial
office :
11. The instrumental means to be employed by a
Minister op Christ for the efficient fulfilment of
HIS OFFICE TOWARDS THE PEOPLE COMMITTED TO HIS
CHARGE:
111. The duty of a Minister of Christ towards
PARTICULAR CLASSES OP PERSONS BESIDES HIS OWN PEOPLE:
IV. The personal qualifications which are required
IN HIMSELF.
In speaking upon these several particulars, my desire is
to address the elders among you as a brother, and the younger
as a father in Christ; and my request to you all is, that you


will listen to me with calm and serious attention; and, so far
as any advice which X may give shall approve itself to your
judgment and conscience, resolve, in dependence upon the
grace of God, to act upon it. But Ido not —as your
knowledge of me will assure you —desire in what I suggest to
assume “ dominion over your faith.” I would that you should
exercise, in the particulars brought before you, the liberty and
prudence which the Apostle suggests; “ Prove all things \
hold fast that which is good.” (1 Thess. v. 21.)
Before however I enter upon my main subject, I must
briefly notice some matters relating to the celebration of
divine service, and the administration of the ofiices of the
Church ) for your guidance in which, as they sometimes
occasion great practical difficulties, you may naturally expect
me to state my opinion.
1. With respect to all liturgical questions; I would say
generally, that I do not wish to give you any more precise
directions than the Church herself has given; and moreover
I do not consider myself bound to require you, nor do I
consider that you are bound without my requisition, to revive
any obsolete practices, although they may be prescribed by
the rubric. In my opinion, long custom sanctions the
violation of antiquated rules of order; and unless the present
usage should be clearly proved to be injurious, the enforcement
of such rules would be highly inexpedient. With regard
also to doubtful rubrics, I have not the same anxiety which
many feel for their authoritative settlement. The slight
discrepancies, which exist in the mode of conducting service
in different Churches, appear to me to be of little or no
importance, and not to affect in the slightest degree its
substantial uniformity. In the minutes of the Episcopal
Conference held at Sydney in Oct. 1850, are recorded the
conclusions, at which the Bishops of this Province arrived
upon several specific points, which were brought under their
consideration j* and to those minutes you will refer, if you
* Appendix, B.


should wish for any instructions from me upon the points to
which they relate.
2. The law of marriage in this Colony is at present in a
very unsatisfactory state; and the clergy are, I am aware,
often placed in circumstances of great difficulty respecting it.
The subject occupied much of the attention of my Right
Reverend Brethren and myself at Sydney, and it has occupied
much of my own attention since. I regret that I cannot give
you any further advice upon it, than is contained in the
minutes to which I have already alluded. My earnest hope
is, that the subject will be brought at an early period under
the consideration of the Colonial Legislature.
3. The question of administering the offices of Baptism,
Matrimony, and Burial to those, who are not members of our
Communion, has given rise to much earnest and even angry
discussion in some neighbouring Colonies. My opinion is,
that you should not refuse to administer them, when there is
a reasonable cause for your being requested to do so; but that,
as you are under no civil or ecclesiastical obligation, you are at
liberty to exercise your own discretion in each particular case.
This is the real meaning of the minute adopted by the
Conference at Sydney
4. Upon the administration of Baptism I would observe,
that the office of Private Baptism ought never to be used
except in cases of real necessity; such as sickness, and
perhaps, in thinly-peopled districts in the interior, the
impossibility of obtaining sponsors: also that the office of
Public Baptism, in places where divine service is regularly
performed, should be always used, as prescribed by the rubric,
after the 2nd Lesson; and in places where there is no regular
service, and where circumstances do not admit of holding one
for the occasion, should be accompanied with a part of the
Liturgy, and with a short exposition of a portion of Scripture,
which all who can be conveniently gathered together should
be invited to attend.
5. Upon securing duly qualified persons for the office of
Sponsors in Baptism, and upon restraining the impenitent


and unbelieving from coming to the Holy Communion of the
Lord’s Supper, I will only now say, that every parochial
minister is bound to use the most earnest endeavours, both by
public and private instruction and exhortation, to prevent the
profanation of either of these Holy Sacraments; whereby it
is to be feared, that many not only greatly aggravate their
own guilt, but occasion much public scandal in the Church.
6. With respect to the places and times of administering
the Holy Communion, I would refer you to the minutes of
our Episcopal Conference. The use of the words, which are
addressed to the communicants upon receiving the bread and
wine, only once for all who are kneeling together at the
Communion rails, a practice which is generally adopted in
this Diocese, is in my opinion the most solemn, as well as the
most convenient mode of administration, when there is a large
number of communicants; and, although not according to the
strict letter of the rubric, may be considered so far sanctioned
by custom as to be free from any just objection on that
ground. The seeming anomaly of using language in the
singular number, when speaking to several persons together,
is fully warranted by the precedent, which we have in the
questions put to the Sponsors in the Baptismal Service.
I now proceed to the consideration of the four particulars,
which, as I have already mentioned, will constitute the
principal subject of this address; and
I. The character and object of the Christian
Ministry.
We must be careful, my beloved brethren, lest we in any
degree confound the Christian ministry, as to its character
and object, with the office of the Mosaic priesthood. The
two are totally distinct and different from one another. Every
priest, in the sense in which this title is used in the
Scriptures, was ordained for men in things pertaining to God,
that he might offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins. (Heb.
v. i.) He was a type of our Great High Priest, and so a
Mediator between God and man. But the Christian minister,


although he is called a priest,—whereby, as it would seem,
nothing more than presbyter is intended—is certainly no
priest in that sense. He does not stand between God and the
people. He has nothing to offer for them unto God. His office
is that of an ambassador for Christ (2 Cor. v. 20), and a steward
of the mysteries of God (1 Cor. iv. 1); and it corresponds
rather with that of the prophets, than with that of the priests
among the ancient Israelites. For the object of the Christian
ministry is to beseech the ungodly to accept of reconciliation
with God through Christ (2 Cor. v. 20); to admonish such
as profess to know God, that they examine themselves whether
they are in the faith, and prove their own selves (2 Cor. xiii.
5); to bring back those that have wandered out of the way
(Lzek. xxxiv. 4); to raise up them that are fallen ; to
strengthen the feeble minded; to comfort the afflicted; and
in general so to warn every man, and teach every man in all
wisdom, that every man may become perfect in Christ Jesus.
(Col. i. 28.)
It would occupy far too much time to consider the character
and object of the Christian ministry with the fulness, which
its importance deserves. I shall not therefore enter into any
details concerning it, but only make one observation, which
I would especially impress upon you; viz. that its object is
twofold; (1) to bring sinners to the Saviour; —in the language
of the Ordination Service, “to seek for Christ’s sheep that
are dispersed abroad, and for His children who are in the
midst of this naughty world, that they may be saved through
Christ for ever;” and (2) to perfect the saints of God;—in the
words of the same Service, u to teach and to premonish, to
feed and provide for the Lord’s family.” No minister can,
without bringing guilt upon his own soul, neglect cither the
one or the other of these duties. He must, so far as is
possible, urge the offer of salvation upon the acceptance of
every individual among the people committed to his charge ;
and he must also watch over those, who are, as he trusts, in
Christ already; endeavouring to promote their growth in grace,
to stir them up to increased diligence in every good work,
and to impart unto them continually some new spiritual gift


(Rom. i. 2); so that God may be more and more glorified in
them, and that their joy may be full. (1 John i. 4.)
Having thus briefly considered this first branch of my
subject, I would bring under your attention,
11. The instrumental means to be employed by a
Minister op Christ por the efficient fulfilment of his
OFFICE TOWARDS THE PEOPLE COMMITTED TO HIS CHARGE.
These are, 1. The public preaching of the word in the
congregation;
2. The establishment and superintendence of Parochial
Institutions; such as Daily and Sunday schools, a District
Visiting Society, a Lending Library, a Missionary Association,
a Young Men’s Society, &c.
3. The conducting of Parochial Meetings for carrying on
these Societies, and for other purposes;
4. The preparation of young persons for Confirmation;.
5. Pastoral Visitation ; and
6. Occasional intercourse.
I. For the efficient fulfilment of his office, the principal
instrumental means to be employed by a minister of Christ
most undoubtedly is the public preaching of the ivord in the
congregation. Upon this, as upon those which follow, I shall
simply offer for your consideration a few practical suggestions
and cautions; which may perhaps appear to some of you trite
and superfluous; but of which my experience and observation,
both in England and in this Colony, convince me that the
Christian minister needs to be continually reminded. Bear
with me then, my brethren, if I would stir up your pure
minds by putting you in remembrance of practical truths,
which, although you know them, may yet need to be made
more distinct subjects of reflection, in order that they may
become more active principles of conduct.
First then; the subject of your public preaching, if you
would efficiently fulfil your ministry, must be the Gospel;
the love of God in the redemption of mankind by the gift of
His Son, and in the sanctification of his elect people by the gift


of His Spirit. The offices of the Son and of the Spirit, with
the doctrines and duties, the motives and encouragements, the
hopes and fears, the promises and thrcatenings, connected
with, and flowing from them, as all these are shadowed forth,
proclaimed, illustrated, and enforced in the Scriptures, both of
the Old and New Testament, furnish abundant topics for your
sermons; and render it wholly inexcusable to travel, as many
are apt to do, into fields of unprofitable speculation, or dry
moral philosophy. If the Christian minister preach anything
contrary to the Gospel, or if he do not preach the whole
Gospel—the work of the Spirit as well as the work of the
Son —faithfully and fully, he is unfaithful to his trust, and
will bring upon himself the terrible wrath of God. On the
other hand, if he preach anything else besides the Gospel, he
exceeds his commission, and lays aside the character of an
ambassador for Christ; the word spoken by him ceases to be
the word of the Lord, and the work to which he has been
ordained stands still. Let me beseech you then, my beloved
brethren, that you preach the whole Gospel, and that you do
not waste your time in preaching any thing but the Gospel to
your people.
Again, every sermon ought to be composed with a distinct
practical object, so that it shall be profitable either for in-
struction, or for encouragement, or for warning, or for consola-
tion. Many an interesting and well-written discourse from
the pulpit conveys no definite lesson, and therefore produces
no practical impression upon the hearers ; and I have often
asked myself, after listening to such an one, what object the
clergyman could have had in preaching it. We should always
bear in mind, that the use of the pulpit is given us by the
Lord for the express purpose of carrying on the work of our
ministry; and we should beware, lest we ever throw away an
opportunity of speaking from it a word in season to those to
whom He sends us.
Moreover, every sermon ought to be suited to the par-
ticular congregation to whom it is preached. Hence, it
should be prepared as it were in their presence; i. e., under a


vivid recollection of their character and circumstances, do
speak to men upon the great subject of their salvation in
language which they cannot understand is a bitter mockery.
It is as if you held out food to one who was starving, but kept
it just beyond his reach. Yet this is far from uncommon.
The general tenor and language of many sermons are such,
that the large majority of an ordinary congregation are
unable to comprehend, and consequently quite unable to profit
by them. It behoves a minister therefore always to take heed,
that he speaks so as to be understood by his people.
It behoves him also to be careful to make, what the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury, when Bishop of Chester, in his primary
charge, termed, a discriminate application of the subject;
so that the different classes of his hearers may severally
receive those lessons, which are suited to their respective
cases. One great fault of ordinary sermons is their deficiency
herein. They abound in general exhortation; but they do not
speak distinctly to individuals. They do not enter sufficiently
into particulars, so that different hearers may appropriate this
or that description of character, or admonition, or consolation
to themselves. I am far from intending to recommend any
actual allusion to particular persons. Such must, except in
very peculiar cases, be avoided. But a minister should be
able, from his knowledge of the human heart, to speak so that
individuals, with whom he has had no previous acquaintance,
may say within themselves; “ How exactly the preacher
described my feelings!” “ How suitable that reproof, or that
warning, or that encouraging promise, was to me.” This is
the preaching, which is commonly honoured for carrying on
the work of the Lord.
A minister of Christ must also be careful that he do not err
in the tone and spirit of his preaching. While he is faith-
ful, he must take heed that he is not harsh ; while he boldly
rebukes sin, he must show all tenderness towards sinners. He
must always speaJc the truth in love. He must be cautious,
that he do not fall into a habit of scolding ; and, avoiding all
angry threatening, must seek to soften the obdurate by his


affectionate yearning for their souls. Herein lie should par-
ticularly take St. Paul for his model. How hold and yet how
tender-hearted, how uncompromising and yet how conciliat-
ing, was the great apostle of the Gentiles !
The manner of the preacher should be also suited to the
solemn and all-important subject upon which he speaks.
It ought to be always earnest, but in general calm; impressive
but not impassioned ; adapted to command the attention and
engage the sympathy of his hearers, but not to produce in them
an excited state of feeling, such as is likely to be injurious
rather than beneficial to their spiritual growth. It has been
said, that the effect of a sermon depends more upon the mode
of its delivery, than upon the matter which it contains ] and,
although this may be an exaggeration, yet undoubtedly the
benefit of many a good sermon has been entirely lost by
its being badly delivered, while many a very inferior one,
well-delivered, has produced a great and lasting impression.
Whosoever therefore would be an efficient minister must
attend not only to the composition, but also to the delivery of
his sermons; and, in order that he may deliver them appro-
priately, he must determine, with God’s help, not to read but
to preach them. This is a point, which I would most
earnestly impress upon you. If you would gain the attention
of your people, you must speak to them ; and if your dis-
courses be written, as I am now supposing, they must be
delivered as the expression of your thoughts and feeling at
the time of preaching them. You must preach as one, whose
mind and heart are full of what he is saying. Thus only
will you preach to the consciences and affections of your
hearers. I am aware of the difficulty of delivering a written
sermon with the same freedom and earnestness as one which
is unwritten; but this difficulty must not be regarded as
insurmountable. It needs only resolute exertion and some
practice to be, with God’s help, almost wholly overcome.
Upon the practice of what is improperly called extempore
preaching, i. e. preaching unwritten sermons, I would observe,
that the clergyman who adopts it possesses usually the advan-


tage of much more freedom in his delivery; but, on the other
hand, he is in danger of not studying his subject with sufficient
attention, and thus being less accurate in his statements, and
less lucid and orderly in his arguments. The following
remarks of the late excellent Mr. Venn, one of the most
efficient preachers of his generation, exhibit the usual wisdom
and discrimination of the writer. He thus expresses his
opinion in answer to the enquiry of a friend:
“ I believe most men who have thought on the subject are
agreed, that young men should write for some years —perhaps
five or seven; and afterwards when they speak, they certainly
should have a plan, and the great outlines of their sermon
before them. They should speak, not extempore, but after
premeditation, study, and self-abasing prayer. When these
rules are constantly observed, no written sermons will, in
general, be more connected, more full of matter; nor can
they ever be delivered with so great advantage ; for, after such
due preparation, a pastor comes up into the pulpit, weak and
ignorant in his own eyes, yet full of affiance in his Great
Master; so that he will be jealous of his glory, and pity the
people. He will have his presence, and find his understanding
enlightened even while he speaks; and feel his word has
authority and power over the congregation. When he has
done he will feel ashamed of himself, and be filled with
wonder that the Lord God should make use of him. In this
manner, joined to constant reading the word of God, and
constant cries to be formed and fashioned as a vessel of honour
to bear witness of Christ, an able minister of the New Testa-
ment is formed. Those ministers, whether young or old, who
dare to be idle, to venture into the pulpit without looking up
and sighing,—without feeling their total inequality to the
subjects they are to prove, explain, or enforce—are in a terrible
state; and some severe correction will be sent, to bring them
to themselves; or they will proceed from bad to worse. It is
too true, I fear, that many times we all offend in neglecting to
prepare; but when a strict watch is kept on this head, and we
beg of our Lord, that, with all reverence and godly fear, with


all carefulness and understanding, we may fulfil the ministry
we have received, we shall, in the tenour of our ministry, be
found faithful, and be blessed in our work. * *
Upon the whole I much prefer speaking to writing; but upon
this condition, that the speaker read much, write much, think
and pray much. As for those speakers who know not their
subject till the Bible is opened in the pulpit, their preaching
must be deplorable.”
For your assistance in the composition of a sermon, 1
would recommend to you the following short rules given by
the late Mr. Simeon, of Cambridge, who bestowed very great
attention on the subject. In order to use them with advan-
tage, you must reflect carefully upon them, and see how they
are exemplified in his own sermons, and those of other eminent
preachers.
“ (1) Take for your subject that which you believe to be
the mind of God in the passage before you.”
“ Be careful to understand the passage thoroughly, and regard nothing
hut the mind of God in it.”
“ (2) Mark the character of the passage.”
“It may he more simple, as a declaration, a precept, a promise, a threaten-
ing, an invitation, an appeal; or more complex, as a cause and effect; a
principle and a consequence; an action and a motive to that action, and,
whatever he the character of the text, especially if it he clearly marked, let
that direct you in the arrangement of your discourse upon it.”
“ (3) Mark the spirit of the passage.”
“It may he tender, or compassionate, or indignant, or menacing; but
whatever it he, let that he the spirit of your discourse, To he tender on
an indignant passage, or indignant on one that is tender, would destroy
half the force and beauty of the discourse. The soul should he filled with
the subject, and breathe out the very spirit of it before the people. As
God’s ambassadors we should speak all that He speaks, and as He speaks
it. God himself should be heard in us, and through us.”
“ The true meaning of the text should he the warp, which pervades the
whole piece; and the words should be the woof, that is to he interwoven, so
as to form one connected and continued whole.”
“The spirit of the words should pervade the discourse upon them.
Whatever peculiarity there be, either in the matter or manner of the text.


that should be transfused into the discourse, and bear the same measure of
prominence in the sermon, as it bears in the text itself.”
It will not be irrelevant in this place to make some remarks
upon the other part of a minister’s office in the congregation;
viz. the reading of the service. It is not too much to say,
that the devotional character of a congregation depends very
greatly upon the officiating clergyman ; and that, if he do not
by his voice and manner show that he is praying, they will
not really pray We all, I trust, appreciate the excellence of
our liturgy: but I have often felt, that those who do not use a
form of prayer have one advantage over us; viz. that they are
not liable, as we are, to use the language without using the tone
of prayer; in other words, to read a prayer instead of praying.
I would affectionately exhort you, my beloved brethren, to
watch and pray against falling into this habit \ which we
cannot deny to be too common among the clergy of our Church.
Our only security against it is watchfulness, and fervent
private supplication for the presence of the indwelling spirit;
that we may, when we are leading the worship of others, be
spiritual worshippers ourselves.
Next to the keeping of our own hearts, by God’s grace, in
a praying frame, care to read with simplicity, and to observe
the punctuation and emphasis correctly, is of chief importance.
Many clergymen err in endeavouring to give force to their
reading by introducing pauses, and laying an emphasis upon
words, where the sense does not authorise either the one or
the other. The reading of the service, as well the prayers as
the lessons and other portions of Scripture, should be simple
and unaffected; the pauses regulated by the punctuation,
which, both in the Book of Common Prayer and in the Bible,
is excellent; and the tone of voice naturally modulated ac-
cording to the nature of the particular passage; i. e. according
as it is historical, didactic, hortatory, supplicatory, or of any
other character. It is a great mistake to suppose, that every
chapter of the Bible, because it is the word of God, ought to
be read in the same slow and emphatic manner. All is to be
read with reverence ; but not all with the same solemnity and


earnestness. The historical parts of the Bible are to be read
in a tone suited to history; the awful denunciations of God's
wrath against His offending people in the tone, which
the feeling that they produce naturally suggests; and so of
the rest. If this rule were observed; I believe that our people
would understand much more clearly, and value much more
highly, the word of God read to them; and so, while they would
be prepared to receive more profit from the sermon, they would
not attach that undue importance to the abilities of the
preacher, which many are now apt to do.
2. A second instrumental means for a Minister’s efficient
fulfilment of his office towards his own people is the establish-
ment and superintendence of Parochial Institutions such
as Daily and Sunday Schools, a District Visiting Society, a
Lending Library, a Missionary Association, a Young Men’s
Society, &c.
As to Daily and Sunday Schools, there is, I trust,
no need for me to enforce upon any of you the importance of
these for the due carrying on of the work of the ministry in a
parish. To maintain them however in a satisfactory state
requires the continual supervision of the clergyman. Every-
thing relating to them ought to come under his eye, so that
no defect or irregularity may escape his observation; and he
should be continually endeavouring to promote their improve-
ment. With this object, he ought frequently to visit the
Daily Schools, and at certain periods thoroughly inspect
them: and although I do not think he should, except in cases
of necessity, teach a class, he should always, if possible, open
the Sunday School himself; so that he may show the interest
which he feels in it, notice the teachers and scholars, and
observe whether they are regular and punctual in their
attendance. The well-being of a school will greatly
depend upon the influence of the clergyman upon the
teachers; and he should therefore pay especial attention to
them. With respect to the teachers of the Daily Schools :
he should always remember the importance of the office which


they hold, and look upon them, not as hirelings, hut as sub-
ordinate fellow-labourers in the Lord. As such he should
treat both them and the Sunday School teachers with the
greatest consideration and kindness ; reproving them with
Christian faithfulness, if they require reproof, but always
exhibiting towards them both affection and respect. I regard
the state of the Parochial Schools, and particularly the Sunday
School, as in general a sure test of the clergyman’s efficiency.
A thinly attended and ill-conducted Sunday School, where
there are no signs of spiritual life either in the teachers or the
scholars, indicates a want either of zeal and diligence, or of
ability in the minister; and shews, that he is not qualified for
the post which he occupies. Ido not say that he may not be
a pious man, but he is certainly not an efficient parochial
clergyman.
Next in importance to the Parochial Schools is the District
Visiting Society. This is an institution of comparatively
very recent origin. For one great error, as it appears to me,
3f the clergy in former years was their unwillingness to avail
themselves of the assistance of the lay-members of our Church
in their ministerial work. Hence arose two great evils :
First, the great majority of the laity were led, as in the
Church of Rome, to think that their duty was restricted each
one to himself alone, or at most to his own family and house-
hold 5 and that it was not their business to interfere in the
spiritual concerns of others. Many were even induced to
believe, that it did not belong to them to judge of doctrines,
or to exercise their own minds upon questions of faith; but
simply to receive what they were taught, and to live what is
called a pious life. To this we may in a great measure attri-
bute that ignorance of the Scriptures, that want of real
spiritual religion, and that indifference to the condition both
of their own countrymen and of the world, which even now so
greatly prevail in our Fatherland. Another evil, which
originated in the same cause, was that the few, whose hearts
were warmed by the love of Christ, and who longed to do
something for Him who had done so much for them, finding


the door altogether closed against them in our Church, in
many cases separated from our communion, and joined them-
selves to other religious bodies. A great change has however
now taken place in this respect; a change, which is duo, I
believe, in a great measure to the influence of our present
excellent Primate, when he presided over the Diocese of
Chester. A large number of the English Parochial Clergy
now feel the importance of securing for themselves the assist-
ance of Christian laymen, either as gratuitous visitors, or paid
Scripture Readers j and some of our most eminent prelates,
who were formerly opposed to the practice, are now found
among its zealous supporters.
The employment of gratuitous visitors, under the direction
and superintendence of the clergyman, is indeed most bene-
ficial both for themselves and others. It is most beneficial
for themselves; inasmuch as the Christian intercourse, which
they thus have with their neighbours, will greatly promote
their own growth both in knowledge and in love ; and more-
over they are thus brought into closer communion with their
minister, whereby he is enabled to address to them from time to
time such advice and caution as he may see that they require.
It is most beneficial also to others; for in a populous town, or
a widely extended parish, it is not possible for the clergyman
to visit his parishioners personally as often as he would wish to
do ; but by means of a well-constituted District Visiting
Society, or, if circumstances do not admit of a Society, by in-
dividual lay-visitors under his direction and control, he may
exercise a constant supervision over them all. His visitors
will become links of communication between him and his
people. Being deputed by him, they will go continually from
house to house in his name, and thus supply his necessary lack
of service. They will make themselves regarded by those
whom they visit as Christian friends and counsellors; and, from
their intimate acquaintance with the character and circum-
stances of the several families, will be able to speak a word in
season to all. They will also inform the clergyman of any
particular cases, to which his special attention maybe required;


cases of sickness, domestic affliction, spiritual awakening, and
such like.
The maintenance and superintendence of a District Visiting
Society constitute therefore a very important part of the duty
of a parochial clergyman; and Ido not hesitate to say, that
no one is fitted for the charge of a large and populous parish,
who is not able to gather out and associate with himself, and
to direct and control those among his people, whose hearts
the Lord has touched, and disposed to become fellow-helpers
with him in his work. Hence the existence and condition of
a District Visiting Society forms, in my opinion, another test
of the efficiency of a clergyman.
The other Parochial Institutions, which I have named, viz. a
Missionary Association, a Lending Library, and a Young
Men s Society,are all important; and all require care and judg-
ment in their formation, and constant pains and attention for
their successful maintenance. With respect to the first in par-
ticular, I would observe, that, in order to procure the blessing
of God on the Church at home, it is essential that we regard
the wants of our brethren and fellow creatures abroad. By
promoting a Missionary spirit among his people, a minister
will cherish in them the mind which was in Christ Jesus, and
so promote their own spiritual growth and raeetness for their
heavenly inheritance.
3. Closely connected with the carrying on of Parochial
Institutions is the conducting of Parochial Meetings.
Periodical meetings of the Sunday School teachers and
District Visitors ought, if possible, to be held regularly in
every parish, and to be presided over and conducted by the
clergyman. Upon these depend in a great measure the
maintenance of an earnest, self-denying, diligent attention to
their work, their own individual and spiritual advancement,
their affectionate sympathy with one another, and their close
communion with their minister. These meetings enable the
clergyman to impart to them special religious instruction,
together with suitable counsel and encouragement for the
efficient prosecution of their labours. They afford an oppor-


tunity also for uniting in prayer together for a blessing on the
work in which they are engaged. The time does not permit
me to discuss the best mode of conducting such meetings ; but
I would impress upon you three things respecting them; viz.
(1.) That every clergyman should make the efficient
management of them a subject of special consideration and
special prayer :
(2.) That in this, as in all other particulars of his
ministerial duty, he should not suffer a diffidence of his own
powers to prevent him from occupying his proper position, and
from entering upon and carrying on his work in the humble
confidence, that he can do all things through Christ
strengthening him; and
(3.) That he should impress upon every teacher, and every
visitor, the duty of attending them regularly, and expecting
a blessing from them.
Besides his Sunday School teachers and District Visitors,
it is very desirable that a clergyman should adopt means for
bringing together other members of the Church, particularly
the communicants; and accordingly it is a common practice
to hold a Communicants’ meeting, on some day of the week
previously to the administration of the Sacrament, for the
study of the Word of God and for prayer. Such a meeting
is a visible exhibition of the union, which subsists among them
as brethren in the Lord; and it tends to promote mutual good-
will and friendly intercourse. It likewise affords their minister
an opportunity of speaking to them as children of God, more
particularly than he can do on any other occasion, for their
edification and growth in grace. It enables him also to bring
before them the spiritual wants of his parish, and to enforce
upon them the duty and privilege of assisting, as they are able,
in the service of the Lord.
Periodical or occasional meetings are, I need scarcely
remark, essential for the success of a Parochial Missionary
Association, and are also very profitable for the people them
selves.
I would here notice a subject of great importance, but of


great difficulty. One of the chief Parochial defects in our
Church appears to be the want of Christian intercourse
among its members ; through which it often happens, that he,
who is just enlightened, can find no one to take counsel
with; he, who is weak in faith, no one to encourage and
strengthen him in his Christian course; he, whose heart burns
within him, no one with whom he can hold sweet counsel
concerning the things of God. Hence the question naturally
arises; How can this want be supplied ? How can we promote
more Christian fellowship among the members of our own
communion? Other religious bodies employ each its own
peculiar machinery; but our own Church possesses no recognised
means for this object. To supply the want, various clergymen
have at different times adopted such measures, as seemed to
themselves most suitable; e. g. the formation of associations
for religious conversation, and the holding of meetings for
reading the Scriptures and for prayer : but these have, I
believe, almost invariably failed of answering the desired end,
and have often produced much mischief, and caused much dis-
appointment and mortification to their authors. I cannot
therefore recommend any individual clergyman to try the
experiment: but I earnestly desire, that we may take counsel
together, and endeavour to devise some general plan; whereby,
with God’s blessing, we may safely accomplish the desired
object. It appears to me, that this is by no means impossible;
for, if parochial meetings for prayer and for religions con-
versation were made part of our Church system, and the
rules to be observed at them, after being well considered, were
generally promulgated, and strictly enforced, the evils hitherto
found to attend them, might be altogether prevented, or at
least very greatly diminished. The subject however requires
much careful deliberation. We must do nothing rashly.
4. A fourth means to be employed by a minister of Christ
for the efficient fulfilment of his office towards the people
committed to his charge is the preparation of candidates
for Confirmation.
The period of life at which this ordinance is usually received,


viz. when a young person has just arrived at years of discretion,
and is capable of deliberately choosing for himself whether he
will serve the Lord or not; the obligation upon the minister
to certify, that he has examined the several candidates, and
thinks them duly qualified for its reception; the fact of each
of them being required to make a solemn declaration
previously to its administration, that he does, in the presence
of God and the congregation, renew the solemn promise and
vow, that was made in his name at his Baptism; and, lastly,
the consideration that Confirmation is preliminary to admission
to the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, which those who are
confirmed ought thenceforth regularly to receive; —all these
circumstances combine to render the preparation of those, who
are desirous to be confirmed, a deeply interesting and very
important duty. In fulfilling it a minister has a peculiarly
favourable opportunity, and one which he must by no means
neglect, of setting before them in order, explaining, and
establishing by Scriptural proofs all the fundamental
principles of the Gospel; at the same time enforcing all the
motives, whereby they may be constrained to join themselves
unto the Lord in a perpetual covenant which shall not be
forgotten. (Jer. i. 5.)
The particular mode of conducting this preparation must
be left to your own discretion; but I should recommend, that,
when there are many candidates, and where it is possible to
bring them together, they should be formed into classes accord-
ing to their sex and knowledge; and that each class should meet
once a week, for a period of three or four months, to receive
catechetical instruction from the minister. The proper basis
of such instruction is, in my opinion, our own Church Cate-
chism ; which is an admirable summary of Christian truth,
and expressly appointed to be used for this purpose. It is a
matter of regret, that the members of our Church do not
sufficiently value this wonderful composition ; probably because
they were taught to repeat it at an age, when they were
too young to understand its meaning; and being accustomed
to regard it as intended only for the use of children, have


never thought of making it a subject of study in their more
mature years. By taking it for the basis of your system of
instruction in preparing your young people for Confirmation
you will correct this prevalent mistake, and cause it to be
more justly appreciated by them.
Besides the instruction and exhortation addressed to them
in their several classes, each candidate ought to be spoken
with alone, at least twice; once in the beginning, immediately
after he has communicated his wish to be confirmed; and
again a second time, at the close of his preparation, before he
receives his certificate of approval. In these private con-
versations a minister must examine into their acquaintance
with the Gospel, and endeavour to ascertain the real state of
their hearts before God. He must also solemnly and
affectionately set before them the necessity of making an
unrestrained surrender of themselves to the Lord; impressing
upon them, that they cannot be lovers of the world and lovers
of G od; that they cannot serve God and Mammon; that if
they would be the disciples of Christ, they must take up their
cross —be willing to deny themselves, and follow Jesus. The
administration of the ordinance of Confirmation, when due
pains have been taken in preparing the candidates, has proved
the means, through the blessing of God, of establishing
many in the faith and love of the Saviour, and has been
looked back upon by them as the commencement of a new
life. It behoves you therefore, my beloved brethren, to ex-
pect, that it will produce much real spiritual good to your
people; and to take heed, that no single individual fail of
obtaining the grace of the ordinance through your negligence
and inattention.
5. I come now to consider Pastoral Visitation, which I
regard as being, next to public preaching, the most important
of all instrumental means for a minister’s efficient fulfilment
of his office; but in which, I am constrained to say, the
clergy of our Church, so far as I have had the opportunity of
judging, seem to me exceedingly deficient. I have been surprised
to find, how few—l do not speak of the clergy of this Diocese


in particular—appear to feel the obligation, or even to under-
stand the nature of this duty. I would therefore request
your patient attention, while I explain to you what it really
is, and also offer some advice as to the manner of performing it.
You will understand more clearly the nature of this duty,
if we consider it under two distinct branches, which I may
designate as general and special Pastoral Visitation.
By general Pastoral Visitation I mean the carrying on
of a general intercourse with his people, for the purpose of
obtaining a personal acquaintance with them, conciliating
their regard, showing his interest in their welfare, speaking to
them a word in season, and especially opening the way for
what I have called special Pastoral Visitation.
Such a general intercourse every parochial minister should
make it a part of his regular business to maintain ; par-
ticularly with those, who are constant in their attendance
at the services of the Church. In large parishes indeed
he must be content to know most of his people only
through the agency of the District Visitors, and Sunday
School Teachers : but this is justified only by the necessity
of the case. So far as is possible, he ought personally to know,
and make himself known by all who are committed to his
charge; and he ought especially to avoid any appearance of
partiality. He must not confine his calls to a few, whom he
likes; and shrink from intercourse with others, of whom h
has an unfavourable opinion, or who do not seem to welcome
him. Moreover, he must not be offended by any apparent
slight, or discouraged by the frivolity and worldliness of those
whom he visits; but he must remember, that his office re-
quires him to watch for the souls of all; and that he cannot
tell but that God may make some of those, concerning whom
he has the least hope, to become in the end his joy and crown
of rejoicing. Every faithful minister, who has had much
pastoral experience, can mention instances of this kind.
To carry on this general Pastoral Visitation with comfort
to himself, and with profit to his people, will however require
much care and watchfulness, togeth ,«• with fervent and constant


prayer for divine teaching. A minister must endeavour to
make his visits really useful; and yet he must avoid forcing
religious topics upon any, who are not in a state to receive
benefit from them. While he talks upon ordinary subjects
without apparent constraint, he must always seek to give a
spiritual savour to the conversation. (Col. iv. 6.) One of
his objects on all such occasions ought to be, as I have
already intimated, to open the way for special Pastoral
Visitation • and hence he should always endeavour to afford
those with whom he is conversing an opportunity, if they
should be inclined, to communicate to him what is passing in
their minds, in order that he may give them such advice and
consolation as they may need. Where there is a faithful
minister of the Gospel, there will be generally some under
the influence of the Spoii’it, who are longing to tell him what
is in their hearts, and obtain from him counsel and assistance;
but who are too timid to go to him and make known their
case. A well conducted system of general Pastoral Visitation
will afford such persons the opportunity which they desire.
I would exhort you all, my beloved brethren, to be diligen
and persevering in the performance of this duty: but yet
more would I exhort and earnestly entreat you to attend
sedulously, according to the grace and wisdom given unto you,
to special Pastoral Visitation. Herein you are particularly
required to prove yourselves faithful and able ministers of
Christ.
By special Pastoral Visitation I mean the private minis-
tration of the word to particular individuals; who, either
from sickness, or from some domestic bereavement or other
providential dispensation, or from their state of mind, require
the special attention of their spiritual guide. A faithful and
earnest minister will be continually on the look out for such
cases. He will Impress upon his District Visitors the duty of
searching for, and communicating them to him. He will
show himself thankful to any one, who informs him of them.
He will be careful to attend immediately to all, which come


to his knowledge. He will make each one of them the
particular subject of his consideration and prayer. He will
visit them regularly at intervals according to their several
circumstances. He will be very fearful of incurring the guilt
of neglecting any through indolence, or procrastination, or
inadvertence.
It is not possible, on such an occasion as this, to enter into
a detailed examination of the various cases, which are likely
to occupy the attention of a parochial minister; but I would
offer a few general remarks, which may be useful especially
to my younger brethren. Diseases of the soul are, like
those of the body, very diverse in their character, and will
require very different ministerial treatment. Hence, in
special Pastoral Visitation there is need for the exercise of
careful observation,and a sound discriminating judgment.
The most experienced steward of the mysteries of God must
continually feel, that he lacks the wisdom to discern with
certainty, what particular spiritual food or medicine this and
that person may require. Those who are less experienced
ought therefore always to remember, how great caution they
must use, lest they mistake the state of any whom they are
visiting; and either make the heart of a weak believer sad,
whom God would not have made sad; or encourage a false
professor in his self-deceit, and so hasten his destruction.
Yet let none shrink from the duty through a distrust of his
ability; for, if he ask wisdom of God, God will not fail to
bestow it upon him. The Holy Spirit, given unto him for
the office of the ministry, shall be his constant teacher and
guide; and the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, sought for
continually by fervent prayer, shall be always sufficient for
him.
When a minister is making a pastoral visit, he must take
care that no time is lost in unprofitable conversation, or in
what may not inappropriately be called religious gossiping.
His business is not to talk upon ordinary topics, or to discuss
theological questions, or matters relating to the Church, or
the characters of others, but to apply the Word of God to


those particular individuals whom he is visiting; to bring
e doctrines and precepts, the threatening and promises of
the Gospel to bear practically upon their understanding, con-
science, and affections. This object will in general be best
secured by his directing their attention to some portion of
the Scriptures; from which, according to their spiritual state,
6 may eitlier stl ow them the nature of sin, or point out to
them the freeness of salvation through Christ; set before them
the holiness and justice, or exhibit the abounding mercy of
Grod ; instruct or exhort, warn or encourage them.
As a general rule, a minister should always use the Bible
in his pastoral visiting. This remark will perhaps appear
to some of you altogether unnecessary ; for you may probably
think it impossible, that any should omit to do so. But I
have reason to believe, that many, who are really faithful
servants of the Lord, do not use the sacred volume in their
private ministrations among their people as they ought to do;
and that the efficiency of those ministrations is in consequence
greatly impaired. I have reason to think, that very many
occupy with their own discourse time, which would be much
more profitably employed in reading a select portion of (rod’s
word, and in commenting simply and briefly upon it.
Remember then, my brethren, that you are to instruct your
people, both in public and private, out of the Scriptures;
and be assured, that anything which you may say, whether
in the way of warning or of consolation, will carry with it
much more weight, when it is suggested by, and grounded
upon a passage of Scripture. The selection of suitable
passages, and the appropriate exposition and application of
them, will also be found a very profitable exercise to the
minister himself.
Again ; every minister, and especially every young minister,
ought to be very careful, lest, through a secret self-sufficiency,
or a mistaken notion of ministerial dignity, he assume in his
pastoral visits too inquisitorial and authoritative a tone.
Any direct questioning, until he has acquired the confidence of
the person he is the most part inexpedient. The


best mode of ascertaining the spiritual state of such as have
been previously unknown to him is by observing what
response they make to his remarks upon the Scripture. He
can, incidentally as it were, put a remark into the form of a
question ; and if he perceive that they do not readily answer
it, give the answer himself; and so pass on without noticing
their omission. Above all, he must most carefully avoid any
appearance of scolding; for there is nothing so likely as this
practice to close the hearts of his people against him. In
speaking to any one, whatever may be his character, a minister
of Christ should use all tenderness; and if he be constrained
to reprove, he should do so in the spirit of meekness,
considering himself, lest he also be tempted. (Gal. vi. 1.)
If a minister desire to produce any particular feeling, such
as conviction of sin, or trust in the Saviour, or gratitude for
the mercies of God, it is often well to follow the example of
the Apostle Paul, and connect himself with the person whom
he is addressing. You will see examples of what I mean in
Ephes. ii. and Titus iii.
It is most important also for the success of his pastoral
ministrations, that he should enter with real heartfelt
sympathy into the particular case of each individual: for it
will usually be found, that the influence, which we are able to
exert upon any perosn, will be in proportion to the sympathy,
which we shew towards him.
I have already remarked, that clergymen do not appear to
make sufficient use of the Bible in Pastoral Visitation:
I would add, that they do not usually avail themselves as
they might of our Book of Common Prayer. I speak with
reference, not to “ the Order for the Visitation of the Sick” in
particular, although that is very valuable, but to the Litany,
Collects, and Prayers; which, the more they are studied and
meditated upon, will be more highly esteemed, as the
appropriate expression of what ought to be the desires and
feelings of a child of God. Hence they will be found by a
minister most useful, not only as prayers, but also as helps for
producing such desires and feelings in those whom he visits.


I can testify from my own experience; that the reading of
select portions of our Liturgy, and the pointing out of its
suitableness to our condition and wants, is a most effectual
means, with God's blessing, of comforting the afflicted,
soothing the excited, and imparting peace to the sincere but
weak believer. The use of the Litany, or of extracts from
Morning and Evening Prayer, is especially appropriate, when
a person has been long prevented from going up to the house
of the Lord. It is well also to advise the sick to read the
service, or a portion of it according to their strength, by
themselves upon the Sabbath-day, when they would but for
their sickness have been worshipping with the congregation.
6. There remains for our consideration one other instru-
mental means to be employed by a minister for the efficient
fulfilment of his office towards his people; viz., occasional
intercourse with them. By occasional intercourse I mean
such as occurs otherwise than in the way of direct Pastoral
Visitation. The use of this means appears especially enjoined
upon every minister by the exhortation of the Apostle Paul
to Timothy; “Be instant in season, out of seasoni. e.
be ready in all places, and at all times, to fulfil the duties of
preaching and teaching Jesus Christ. A minister is not
indeed to preach the word out of season in such a manner as
to offend against our Lord’s caution; “ Give not that which is
holy unto the dogs, neither cast 'ye your pearls before swine,
lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and
rend you.” Matt. vi. 6. But he is to preach it, not only on
the Lord’s day and in the Lord's house, not only in his
ordinary pastoral visits, but always everywhere : and I have
often thought, that he would do well to imitate the practice
of Missionaries among the heathen, who use every occasion, a
public fair, or a casual meeting, for proclaiming the truths of
the Gospel. Why should not a parochial clergyman in a
professedly Christian land seek, in like manner, for opportu-
nities of speaking of the things of God to those among his
people, who never attend the services of the Church, and whom
he can never find at home in their own houses ? Why should


he not, if he see a company of them together, or if he meet
them singly, enter into conversation with them, and deliver
to them the message with which he is entrusted ? Doubtless,
his words would often be disregarded, perhaps he himself
sometime scoffed at; but this is nothing more than happens
continually to a missionary among the heathen ; and why
should he shrink from what his brethren in other lands do not
hesitate to encounter ? But although he might often meet
with discouragement from the hardness of heart and indiffer-
ence of those whom he addressed, yet I feel a confident
assurance, grounded upon instances which have come to my
own knowledge, that if any one would persevere in the
endeavour to be thus “ instant in season, out of season”—
provided that to a fervent earnest spirit he unite a sound
judgment and a kind affectionate manner, and that he always
go forth in the name of the Lord and in the strength of
prayer—he would find that his labour had not been in vain
the Lord; yea, he would probably meet with a measure of
success far beyond his most sanguine expectations.
I would beg therefore of my brethren in our towns and
villages to consider, whether they may not, by attending to
this Apostolical precept, greatly increase their ministerial
usefulness; but I would more especially urge the con-
sideration of it upon those, whom the Lord has appointed to
minister to the scattered population of the interior. To
them many of the remarks, which I have made concerning
Parochial Institutions and Parochial Meetings, are wholly
inapplicable. The necessity of itinerating from station to
station precludes the possibility of establishing Sunday
Schools, and District Visiting Societies; such at least as I
have contemplated in this charge. The means to be adopted
by them for carrying on the ministry must be suited to the
circumstances, in which they are placed; and perhaps, next
to soundness of doctrine, the most essential requisite for their
efficiency is that they should be “ instant in season, out of
season.” In passing through his District, wherever he may
spend the night, and wherever he may rest upon his journey


in the house of the proprietor, and in the hut of his men; to
the traveller on the road, and to the shepherd with his flock ;
upon the Sabbath, and upon other days, a Bush Clergyman
must do the work of an Evangelist; he must fulfil his minis-
try ; he must preach the word. I know that this is difficult ;
I know that it requires much zeal, courage, faith, and
patience; but I know that, if it be not done, a minister is
unfaithful to his trust; that he will possess no influence over
his people ; and that he will have little, if any success, and no
comfort in his work. Ministers often shrink from the faith-
ful discharge of the Pastoral Office, lest they should give
offence to those to whom they speak; but the fact is, that by
this timidity and hesitation they not only lose the esteem and
confidence of the Lord’s people, but also incur the reproaches
of those very persons, whom they are fearful of offending.
“Ho never speaks to us upon religious subjects;” “ his con-
versation is just like that of any other man;” these are the
complaints frequently made against such, as thus forget, or
seem to forget, their office of Ambassadors for Christ.
111. The next branch of my subject is the duty of a
MINISTER OF CHRIST TOWARDS PARTICULAR CLASSES OF
PERSONS BESIDES HIS OWN PEOPLE.
Hitherto I have spoken only of the fulfilment of his office
towards those, who are committed to his pastoral charge; but
it is important also to consider the spirit which ho ought to
exhibit, and the conduct which he ought to pursue, towards
certain other classes; viz. his brother clergy, ministers of
the various Protestant denominations, and the clergy and
lay-members of the Church of Rome.
1. A minister ought, as far as possible, to cultivate a close
communion / and carry on a frank and unrestrained inter-
course with all his brother clergy. If St. Paul appealed to
the Philippian disciples, much more may a Bishop appeal to
his clergy, and say ; “ If there be therefore any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bowels and mercies, fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like-


minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one
mind. Let nothing be done through strife or vain-glory; but
in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than them-
selves.” (Phil. ii. 1—8.) Among men of independent minds
there will always be found differences of opinion, both on
subordinate points of doctrine and in practical matters ) but
if brethren in the ministry bear in mind the injunction of
the Apostle in the last verse which I have quoted, those
differences will produce no alienation from one another, but
only give occasion for them to exhibit more conspicuously the
graces of meekness and mutual forbearance.
But, besides cherishing towards one another the spirit of
Christian brotherhood, ministers ought to endeavour in every
way to assist one another in the fulfilment of their respective
duties. They ought to seek by mutual counsel to strengthen
each other’s hands. They ought to remember one another in
prayer. The younger ought to show all respect and deference
towards the elder, and the elder to impart to the younger the
benefit of their greater experience. I have often lamented,
that English clergymen of advanced years, and of mature
wisdom, seem in general to take so little pains to educate their
younger brethren, even their own curates, for the responsible
duties of a parochial charge. Too frequently they simply tell
them what is to be done, and leave them to do it in their own
way, asking no further questions about the matter; whereas,
if, as is done in some instances, an experienced minister would
kindly watch over his youthful brethren, encouraging them to
come and make known to him their difficulties, and giving
them from time to time such advice and caution as he may
sec needful, he would confer a very great benefit both upon
them and upon the Church. I would therefore exhort the
younger among you to seek instruction and direction from the
older; and I would beg of the older, that they would regard
it as a part of their duty to impart such instruction and
direction to the younger.
For the purpose of promoting friendly intercourse, and
facilitating mutual co-operation, it has been sometimes
customary for the clergy residing in the same town to meet


together on some appointed day in each week; and, after
reading a portion of the Scriptures and uniting in prayer,
talk over any matters of common interest, and make any
arrangements which may he requisite, with one another.
Such meetings, if they are well conducted, and care is taken
that too much time is not spent at them, will be found, I
believe, very useful.
Other periodical meetings of neighbouring clergymen may
also be advantageously held for the study of select passages
out of the word of God, the discussion of subjects previously
agreed upon, and general spiritual conversation. The benefit
of these will depend, under the divine blessing, upon the
pains taken by the several members in making due
preparation for them, and upon the care and skill of the
president in preventing irrelevant and desultory conversation,
and in summing up the remarks of the various speakers in a
clear and orderly manner. If therefore such meetings should
be agreed upon among any of you, I would remind you of
your obligation individually to use your best endeavours to
render them really profitable; lest they should do harm
rather than good.
Before I pass from the consideration of a minister’s duty
towards his brother clergy, I would add one important
admonition; that he be never guilty of that, which is too
common even among the children of God; viz. speaking
of a brother’s fault behind his back, and keeping silence
upon it before his face. The very reverse of this is the
duty of a faithful servant of the Lord ; viz. to be, in all
cases where it is possible, silent upon a fault to others;
and if his relative position permit him to do so, to mention
it to the offender himself alone. It is indeed painful
to point out to any one, and above all to one who is
associated with us in the ministry of the Gospel, what we
regard to be wrong in his conduct; but the Scripture has
commanded us not to suffer sin upon a brother; and if the
duty of reproving him be undertaken in sincere affection and
humility, with prayer for divine help, it will often be
accompanied with the happiest result; and, instead of


estranging from us the offender, will attach him the more
closely to us.
2. In his intercourse with ministers of the various Pro-
testant denominations a clergyman of our Church ought
always to exhibit on the one hand the kindness and affability
of Christian love, and on the other the circumspection of
Christian prudence.
Although we most heartily approve the doctrines and
Liturgy, and are most justly attached to the Episcopal
Constitution of our own branch of the Church of Christ,
we have no right to consider it alone as the true Church, and
look upon all other bodies of professing Christians as schis-
matics. The Church of Scotland for instance, and the
various Protestant Churches on the Continent of Europe,
have never seceded from the Church of England; and
although they have thrown off the Episcopal, and adopted
the Presbyterian or some other form of government, this in
no w r ay affects their independence, or affords us any pretext
for interfering with them, or any just ground of complaint
against them. The order of Bishops, although we believe it
upon most conclusive evidence to have been derived from the
Apostles, is not anywhere in the Scriptures expressly com-
manded to be retained; and therefore is not in any of our
formularies, or in the writings of any of our earliest and best
Divines, affirmed to be essential to the constitution of a true
Church.* Hence the Church of Scotland which has lost that
order, and the Church of England which, through God’s
mercy, has preserved it, are to be regarded as Sister Churches;
and so likewise are their respective branches in this Colony.
The ministers of the Church of Scotland may justly claim
from us the same respect and kindly regard, which we expect
to receive from them.
With reference to those bodies, which have separated them-
selves from the Communion of our own Church, the case is
somewhat different. Their original secession was justifiable
only on the ground, that we had as a Church apostatised from
* Appendix, C.


the faitli ; and become incurably corrupt. This of course we
deny; and therefore, although wo may confess that there was
much in the state of our Church at that time to palliate their
conduct, we are of opinion that the founders of the different
dissenting bodies did commit a great error in their secession.
We are likewise of opinion, that all dissenting bodies have
erred in their Ecclesiastical systems, and many also in sub-
ordinate points of doctrine; and that their ministration of
the Word and Sacraments is irregular. Hence, while we may
hope that the labours of faithful ministers among them have
been, through the mercy of God, productive of much good,
we cannot but consider dissent itself to have been upon the
whole prejudicial to the progress of pure religion and piety.
Nevertheless, inasmuch as they are sound in all the funda-
mental doctrines of the Gospel, we ought to recognise indi-
vidual dissenters as Christian brethren, and to make due allow-
ance for the circumstances in which they arc placed. It does
not become us to judge them harshly. It would be wrong for us
to break up against their will any of their establishments, or to
impose silence upon their ministers. We ought not even to
withhold from those ministers the titles which they assume,
and which Christian courtesy requires us to concede to them.
We should remember, how, when the Apostle John mentioned
that they had seen one casting out devils in the name of
Jesus, and had forbidden him, because he followed not them,
Jesus, instead of commending them for what they had done,
answered and said; “ Forbid him not: for there is no man
which shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak
evil of me. For he that is not against us is on our part.”
(Mark ix. 39, 40.) The lesson which our Blessed Lord here
teaches us I conceive to be, that, however we may differ from
any preacher of the Gospel upon lesser matters of doctrine,
or upon questions of Ecclesiastical order, still, if he preach
and teach Jesus Christ, we ought to wish him God speed, to
avoid any unnecessary interference with him, and to rejoice in
his success.
Thus much Christian love, which is the parent of all
genuine liberality, appears to demand from us; but beyond


this Christian prudence forbids us to go. Ido not think it
wise for a clergyman of our Church, except in very peculiar
cases, to connect himself with, or to afford any direct assist-
ance to other religious bodies. lie may indeed safely and
properly associate himself with all men indiscriminately for
purposes, which are simply good in themselves, and which can
be carried out without any distinction of Creeds and
Ecclesiastical systems; e. g. the circulation of the Bible
without note or comment. He may also very properly regu-
late his parochial services with reference to the visits of a
Presbyterian clergyman, or a dissenting minister. But any
positive agreement respecting his ministerial duty, or the
erection of any place of worship for common use, seems to me
inexpedient; as being likely to lead, sooner or later, to mis-
understanding and consequent collision. A clergyman must
be careful also, that, while in all lawful ways he shows a
kindly regard and consideration to those who do not belong to
our communion, he never, from a mistaken fear of giving
them offence, infringes the regulations of our own Church.
I may here appropriately state, what I consider to be the
duty of a minister towards his Presbyterian and dissenting
parishioners. According to the principles of the Church of
England, a parochial clergyman must regard himself as
solemnly pledged to watch for the souls of all, who reside
within the boundaries of his cure; and he is therefore bound
to attend alike to all, who need special Pastoral Visitation,
and who do not receive it from any other minister, without
making any distinction among them. If however any of his
•parishioners profess to belong to some other Protestant de-
nomination, and be duly visited by a minister of that
denomination, the clergyman may in general consider himself
as released from any responsibility concerning them } and may
employ the time, which he would have spent in visiting them,
for the benefit of others who stand more in need of it. So
likewise, in carrying on what I have called general Pastoral
Visitation, a clergyman ought to be ready to regard as
under his care all, who are beyond the reach of any other,


and who desire to avail themselves of his ministrations ;
hut at the same time he should he careful not unseason-
ably to intrude upon those, who do not recognise him as their
pastor.
3. With respect to the clergy of the Church of Rome ;
the opinion, which I formed before my arrival here, and
which my experience since has only tended to confirm, is that
any intercourse with them, except when necessity or courtesy
requires it, or when there is good ground for hope that it may
lead to their conversion, is inexpedient. For I trust I need
not remind any of you, beloved brethren, of the judgment,
which our Church has expressed in her Articles, and yet
more strongly in her Homilies, upon the doctrines and
practices of that Church. I trust I need not impress upon
you, that the errors into which it has fallen are not only
repugnant to the word of God, but also directly subversive of
the truth of the Gospel, and most dangerous to the souls of
all those who belong to her; that she is unsound in the
fundamental doctrine of justification by faith , that transub-
stantiation, purgatory, the power of the priest to forgive sins,
auricular confession, extreme unction, and the supremacy of
the Pope, are all inventions of man and contrary to the
Scriptures, and have given occasion to many superstitious and
vicious practices ; above all, that the invocation of angels and
deceased saints is as great an abomination in the sight of
God as the worship of Baal and Ashtaroth, and the veneration
of images and pictures one of the worst kinds of idolatry.
Those therefore, who teach such errors and encourage such
practices, cannot but be regarded by us as “ evil men and
seducerssuch as the Apostle forewarned Timothy were to
" wa x worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.” The
ministers of the various Protestant bodies may hold their own
peculiar notions, and yet be acknowledged by us as brethren
in the Lord; but not so the clergy of the Church of Rome.
If they be faithful to their own Church, they are the servants
of Antichrist, and we ought to have no fellowship with them ;
for, as the Apostle John has taught us, “ Whosoever trans-


gresseth and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not
God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath
both the Father and the Sou. If there come any unto you
and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house,
neither bid him God speed : for he that biddeth him God
speed is partaker of his evil deeds.” (John ii. 9—11.) I re-
peat therefore, that the duty of a clergyman of our Church is
to avoid, as much as possible, all intercourse with them ;
unless there be good ground in any particular case to hope,
that he may be the instrument in the hand of God of bring-
ing one of them to the saving knowledge of the truth as it is
in Christ Jesus. Nevertheless, he should be careful not to
show any unkindness or discourtesy towards them; and he
should remember, that, as we are bound, when we have no
positive proof to the contrary, to give them credit for sincerity
in their religious profession, they are to be regarded by us as
objects, not of aversion, but of pity.
There is not the same reason for avoiding all intercourse
with the laity of the Curch of Rome • for, as they are not
public teachers of false doctrine, a minister of Christ does
not, by maintaining a friendly acquaintance with them, in any
way appear to countenance their errors, He ought however
always to bear in mind his own office as a herald of salvation,
and their danger of perishing under the strong delusion,
with which Satan holds them in bondage. Hence he should
continually endeavour, as the Lord may give him opportunity,
to bring them out of the darkness of superstitious ignorance
into the pure light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ. He must never forget, that, as I
have before remarked, he is appointed to watch for the souls
of all who dwell in the district assigned to his charge; and
that he is therefore bound to instruct and warn with affection-
ate earnestness those whose minds Satan has corrupted with
his subtilty, as well as those whom he has allured through the
lusts of the flesh, or the vanities of the world. The former
are in equal danger of destruction with the latter; and if
he leave them to perish without giving them any notice of


tlieir peril, he is equally guilty of their blood. It will indeed
be in general difficult for him to find the means of access to,
and obtain the attention of such as account themselves
members of the one only true Church, and who regard him as
an heretic and apostate; but he must not the less seek, and
watch, and pray for an opportunity of speaking to them.
And when the opportunity is afforded him, he must speak in
all boldness, and yet in all meekness ; with the humble hope
and fervent prayer, that God peradventure will give them
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth ; and that they
may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are
taken captive by him at his will. (2 Tim. ii. 25, 26.)
IY. I come now to speak of the personal qualifications,
WHICH ARE REQUIRED IN A MINISTER OP CHRIST.
These may be comprehended under the four following
heads;
1. A due appreciation of the blessing of salvation for
himself, and for others ;
2. A just view of his own position;
3. An accurate practical knowledge of the word of God,
and of the heart of man; and
4. A large measure of particular graces of the Sprit.
_ L Ever J minister of Christ ought to have a due appre-
ciation of the blessing of salvation for himself, and for
others.
For himself: No one, who does not know the preciousness
of the Gospel by his own experience, is fit to be a preacher of
the Gospel; and although a well-grounded assurance of his
own adoption to be a child of God, and an heir of everlasting
life, is not necessary for a man’s own salvation, yet it does
appear to me necessary for the efficient fulfilment of the
Christian ministry, Ido not see how a minister can speak to
sinners, as he ought to speak to them, of the free offer of
pardon and salvation made to them through Christ, if he
have not a good confidence that he is himself pardoned and
saved. Still less can I understand how he can assure


believers, as he ought to assure them, of their perfect security
in the Saviour, if he be not able to use the language of the
Apostle, and say; “ I know whom I have believed, and am
peisuaded that He is able to keep that which I have com-
mitted unto Him against that day.” (2 Tim. i. 12.) I would
not be understood to affirm, that a minister of Christ is
disqualified for his office by occasional doubts and fears
concerning his own state; for Satan may be permitted to
haxass, and at times to shake the faith of the most eminent
Saints : but I must affirm, that he ought habitually to enjoy
the inward witness of the Spirit of adoption, whereby he can
call God, “Abba, Father;” and that, unless he enjoy this
witness, he cannot realise, or appropriate to himself, the
character of an Ambassador of Christ, nor deliver with a
proper confidence the message which he has received
Again ; every minister ought to have a due appreciation of
the blessing of salvation for others. He must realise the
miserable condition of all unconverted sinners, in contrast
with the happiness of those, who have been brought to repent-
ance, and have received forgiveness of sins, and inheritance
among them that are sanctified by faith in Christ. Thus only
will he be stirred up to watch, and pray, and labour, for the
salvation of those, over whom he is placed. Thus only
will he be moved to long after them all in the bowels of Jesus
Christ (Phil. i. 8); and thus only will he be sustained under
all his difficulties and trials; remembering that, “he who
converteth a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul
from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.” (Jas. v. 20.)
2. There is required in every minister of Christ a just
view of his own %)Osition.
This implies a confidence that the Lord has really
chosen him to his office. Without such a confidence no one
can speak as a duly commissioned Messenger of God, or can
iel} upon the presence and help of the Holy Spirit in all his
work. Our Church indeed requires every candidate for the
office of Deacon to declare expressly, that he thinks himself
to be inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon him


that office and ministry; and also to be truly called, according
to the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the due order
of this realm, to the ministry of the Church. (Ordination
Service.) Hence it might appear, that no one of us could
ever doubt of his being called of God to the ministry. I fear
however, that the very reverse is the case, and that com-
paratively few of the clergy enjoy a sure confidence- of this.
I fear that many, having in the first instance presented them-
selves without due consideration as candidates for holy orders,
afterwards doubt, and with reason, whether they have ever
received any real call from the Lord; and that this is one
chief cause, why they experience so little encouragement and
comfort in their work.
Again; a just view of his own position implies in a
minister a deep sense of his responsibility to God for
every individual member of his flock. This sense of
responsibility is necessary, in order that he may watch for the
souls of all as one who must give account, and so may warn
every man, and teach every man in all wisdom, that he may
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. (Col. i. 28.) A
minister must continually bear in mind, that if he neglect
any opportunity of warning an ungodly man or a backslider
of his danger, or of instructing an ignorant man in the way
of salvation, or of strengthening a weak believer in the season
of temptation, and any of them perish, or at all suffer,
through his negligence, the Lord will require their blood at
his hands.
A just view of his own position implies also a conscious-
ness of his own utter insufficiency , joined with an implicit
confidence in the all-sufficiency of the grace of Christ,
for the fulfilment of his office. The heartfelt language of
all, who are ordained to any holy function, ought to be;
“ Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think anything as
of ourselves; but our sufficiency is of God; who also hath
made us able ministers of the New Testament,” (2 iii.
5,6.) Of their own selves ministers can do nothing; but
they can do all things through Christ strengthening them;


and hence, while on the one hand they must not trust to
themselves, on the other they must not distrust God. His
strength is made perfect in their own weakness. (2 Cor.
xii. 9.)
A just view of his own position implies further a deter-
mination to devote himself altogether to the work of the
ministry. To this every clergyman in full orders is solemnly
pledged by his ordination vow; “ We have good hope,” says
the Bishop addresssing the candidates for the order of the
Priesthood, “ that you have well weighed and pondered these
things with yourselves long before this time; and that you
have clearly determined, by God’s grace, to give yourselves
wholly to this office, whereunto it hath pleased God to call
you: so that, as much as lieth in you, you will apply your-
selves wholly to this one thing, and draw all your cares and
studies this way.” A minister of Christ is set apart for a
particular service; and for this his whole time and attention
are required. He must give continual “ attendance to read-
ing, exhortation, and doctrine” (1 Tim. iv. 13); i. e. to the
work of the ministry. If he neglect this work, every other
employment, however good in itself, will be iniquity in the
sight of God.
A just view of his own position implies lastly, the main-
tenance of a strict impartiality , and of a becoming
independence, in his intercourse with his people. A
minister of Christ ought to be careful to preserve the repu-
tation for a strict impartiality among his people. He
ought, after the example of his Divine Master, to be kind
and affable to all; not minding high things, but condescend-
ing to men of low estate (Rom. xii. 16). He ought not to
show an undue respect for persons; not to flatter the rich,
and not to despise the poor. He ought, moreover, to avoid
connecting himself with parties of any kind, whether of a
political or any other nature. Doubtless his influence might,
by such a connection, be sometimes usefully exerted for the
benefit of his country; but, on the whole, the good thus
effected would be more than counterbalanced by the estrange-


ment from him of a number of his people, which it probably
would occasion. The duties of every Christian in relation
to the state, and the sins of violence, of personal abuse, of
misrepresentation of facts, of bribery, &c., may be, and ought
to be, enforced from the pulpit generally upon all; and this
is the legitimate, and by far the most effectual mode, in which
a minister may exert his influence for the public good. For
if he preach that which the Apostles have plainly preached
before him, none can impugn his doctrine, or accuse him of
taking part against them ; and if any should be disposed to
complain, that his preaching controverts their principles, or
condemns their practice, they will be silenced by the con-
viction of their own conscience, that the doctrine is not his
own, but the doctrine of the Lord, in whose name he speaks.
A minister must also be careful to maintain a becoming
independence of character. He must “ not be afraid of
the face of men.” He must not covet the favour or applause
of his people. He must not seek to please them, except for
their own edification. Moreover, he must not incur any
obligations, which may diminish the influence of his authority.
Hence he must be careful always to preserve a pecuniary
independence. I do not mean, that a minister should not
receive his maintenance from the contributions of his people;
for the Apostle Paul distinctly affirms, that he has a just
claim upon them for it. The circumstance of being provided
for in this manner ought not therefore to produce in his mind
any painful feeling of dependence ; for no personal obligation
is incurred thereby ) “ the labourer is worthy of his hire.”
(Luke x. 7.) Nor, again, is the acceptance of such little
presents as his people may voluntarily offer, and which it would
be ungracious to refuse, likely in general to affect his indepen-
dence, or at all injure his character. But that against which
he should guard is incurring debts, which he is unable to pay.
This, by placing him under personal pecuniary obligation, can-
not but tend to lower his character, and diminish his usefulness.
It behoves every Christian man, but more especially it behoves
every minister of Christ, whatever comforts he may be obliged


to deny himself, and however he may seem thereby to descend
below his proper station in society, to live strictly within his
means. By the self-denial, which he thus practises in order
to provide things honest in the sight of all men, he will not
really sink, but rather rise, in the estimation of those, whose
esteem he may properly desire to possess; whereas, if he run
into debt in order to preserve a respectable appearance, he will
sooner or later bring shame and degradation upon himself and
his family.
3. Every minister of Christ ought to possess an accurate
practical knoicledge of the word of God, and of the heart
of man.
It is, as I have already remarked, out of the Scriptures
that a minister must, both publicly in the congregation, and
privately from house to house, teach his people. It is only by
the knowledge of them, as the Apostle Paul has told us, that
“ the man of God,” i. e. the divinely commissioned teacher of
divine truth, is “ throughly furnished unto all good works.”
(2 Tim. hi. 17.) This is a point, upon which, although it is
of essential importance, I feel that I must not now enlarge, I
would only remind you, that, while there are many branches of
human learning, which are exceedingly valuable to a minister
of the Gospel; and many eminent authors upon theological
and other subjects, whose writings he will do well, as he has
time and opportunity, to peruse; it is to the Scriptures, and
to such studies as may help to the knowledge of the same, that
he is bound by his ordination vow to apply himself: it is the
Bible, which he is exhorted, when admitted to the Priesthood,
most studiously to “read and learn.” And rightly; for an
accurate practical knowledge of the Bible—by which I mean
such a knowledge, as will enable him to select and apply suit-
able portions to persons in different states of mind—is
essential to the efficiency of a minister of Christ.
He must also possess a similar knowledge of the heart of
man, so as to be able to form a correct judgment of human
character in general, and to discern the real spiritual con-
dition of particular individuals. This is essential, in order


tliat lie may in his sermons address with due discrimination
the several classes of his hearers ; and in his pastoral visitation
select, and apply to every case, the appropriate spiritual medi-
cine. I have noticed in a former part of my Charge the
danger of a minister mistaking the state of mind of those
whom he visits; and will only add here, that an accurate
practical knowledge of the heart of man is to be acquiied by
him chiefly by meditation upon the Scriptures, by habitual
reflection upon his own thoughts and feelings, and by careful
observation and experience.
4. I have mentioned as another personal qualification in
every minister of Christ, that he possess a large measure of
particular spiritual graces. A minister of Christ ought
indeed to possess a large measure of all the graces of the
Spirit; for he is to be “an example of the believers, in word,
in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity,
(1 Tim. iv. 12) ; he is to show himself “ a pattern of good
works.” (Titus ii. 7.) But there are certain graces, by which,
for the efficient fulfilment of his ministry, it is especially
necessary that he should be distinguished.
Such a grace is humility, which has been well described as
the warp, into which all other spiritual graces are woven.
It is the basis of the Christian character, and therefore must
exist in every true disciple of Christ. But it ought peculiarly
to distinguish a minister of the Gospel; for surely nothing
can be more incongruous than the appearance of pride, or
vanity, or the love of pre-eminence in one, who is emphati-
ically the servant of the “ meek and lowly” Jesus. "W hat
ought to be the feelings of a minister towards those over whom
he is appointed to watch, the language of St. Paul may teach
us j “we preach not ourselves,” writes that great apostle in
2 Cor. iv. 5, “ but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your
servants for Jesus’ sake.” Again; what ought to be his
feelings towards his brethren in the ministry, our Lord him-
self has shown us by His admonition to his apostles, recorded
Luke xxii. 26 ; “ He that is greatest among you, let him be
as the younger; and he that is chief as he that doth serve.


There are no sins, which cleave more closely to us than a secret
pride and vain glory 3 and therefore it behoves every minister
to he upon his guard against them. A love of pre-eminence
also is natural to all men, and is especially apt to show itself in
the more earnest and energetic. We see it exhibited in the
Apostles themselves before the crucifixion of their divine
Master 3 and I cannot but think, that the frequent mention of
the strife among them who should be the greatest, and the
recorded answers of our Blessed Lord, to one of which I just
now referred, showing that personal ambition ought to have no
place among the ministers of His Church, were designed by
the Spirit of God to impress upon us, how strong the feeling
would be found in all ages, even among his chosen servants, and
how resolutely they should labour to restrain and subdue it.
Bear with me then, my beloved brethren, if I speak to you
somewhat more fully upon this particular.
There are, I believe, scarcely any faults more common among
the clergy, and more injurious to the efficiency of their min-
istry, than these. I feel them in myself; I observe them in
others. I see how they infect and mar all that we do 3 how
they insinuate themselves into our sermons, our public ad-
dresses, our familiar conversation; how they make us timid
when we should be bold, presumptuous and overbearing when
we should be diffident and gentle 3 how they cause us to flatter
those whom we ought to check and reprove, and to offend
those whom we ought to conciliate 3 how they deprive us of
the esteem of the good, and expose us to the ridicule of the
ungodly.
I would therefore affectionately exhort you, if you would
enjoy peace in your own souls, if you would adorn the Gospel
which you preach, if you would become instruments in the
hand of God for extending the kingdom of His dear Son,
if you would not expose the name of your Saviour to reproach,
if you would not bring shame upon yourselves, cultivate
the grace of humility. Be on your guard against a secret
inward pride. Think lowly of yourselves 3 and be willing
that others also should think lowly of you. Be on your


guard too against the exhibition of vanity, or self-conceit. In
your intercourse with those around you, be careful to avoid all
assumption of superior wisdom, all boast of what you have
done, or of what you are going to do. If at any time you
are led to speak of what the Lord has done for you, or of what
the Lord has done by you, take heed that your manifest
object is to glorify Him, not to glorify yourselves. How
anxious was the Apostle to clear himself from any suspicion
of vain-glory, when he was compelled to speak of his own
works ! “By the grace of God,” he writes, “I am what I
am : and His grace which was bestowed upon me was not in
vain; but I laboured more abundantly than they all; yet not
I, but the grace of God which was with me.” (1 Cor. xv. 10.)
And again, after enumerating his labours and sufferings, and
the revelations made to him, he adds, as if ashamed of writing
thus about himself, “I am become a fool in glorying; ye
have compelled me : for I ought to have been commended of
you: for in nothing am I behind the very chiefest Apostles,
though Ibe nothing.” (2 Cor. xii. 11.) Once more; be on
your guard against the love of pre-eminence among your
brethren. Let no one put himself unduly forward; or
assume an authority, to which his age and standing do not
entitle him; or show any jealousy of the precedence or
superiority of others; or be discontented with the post, which
God has assigned him; but let each be willing, if the Lord so
appoint, to take the lowest place, remembering that Jesus
Himself was in the world as “one that serveth,” and that,
as He repeatedly declared, “ Whosoever exalteth himself shall
be abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.”
Disinterestedness also is a grace wdiich ought peculiarly
to distinguish a minister of Christ. He must be “ not greedy
of filthy lucre.” He must let all men see, that his object is
not to lay up treasure upon earth, nor to procure for himself
the good things of this life. He must be careful not to seem
to make a gain of godliness. The Apostle shows by his
repeated appeals to the several Churches upon the subject,
how essential he felt this to be to his own ministerial


influence: “Did I make a gain of you?” he asks the
Corinthians : “ Neither at any time used we flattering words,
as ye know; nor a cloke of covetousness; God is witness ;”
was his language to the Thessalonians. In like manner ought
every minister of Christ to be able to appeal to his people,
and call them, as well as God, to witness, that he seeks not
theirs, but them. 2 Cor. xii. 14.
Another spiritual grace, a large measure of which is
peculiarly requisite in a minister of Christ, is meekness. It
behoves him, as a servant of the Prince of Peace, to be a
peacemaker among his neighbours, and particularly among his
own people; and he may, by the judicious exercise of his
influence, do much to reconcile differences, allay jealousies,
and promote a feeling of mutual kindly regard. But how
can he exhort othei’s to “follow peace with all men;” if he
himself openly manifest, or secretly cherish, enmity against
any? Hence he must take heed, that he never give way to
anger, or take personal offence at any one. In his intercourse
with the world he will sometimes meet with rudeness, some-
times experience ingratitude; he will sometimes receive an
intentional, more frequently an unintentional slight; he will
sometimes be misrepresented and unjustly calumniated, soxxxe-
times seriously injured. But all this ought only to be an
occasion for him to exhibit more conspicuously his meekness.
Under every provocation his duty is clear : others may be
offended with him, but he must not be offended with them.
Others may slander, or injure him, but he must pity and
forgive them. A minister of Christ must follow the example
of his divine Master; “who, when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when He suffered, He threatened not; but committed
Himself to Him that judgeth righteously.” (1 Peter ii. 23.)
A minister of Christ must take for his rule the commandment;
“ Love your enemies; bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use
you and persecute you.” (Matt. v. 44.) He must not be
“ overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.” (Bom,
xii. 21.)


Again; a minister of Christ ought to he characterised by
an affectionate tenderness. This grace was very conspicuous
in the Apostle Paul; as appears from many passages of his
Epistles, particularly 2 Cor. ii. and vii., and that exquisitely
touching declaration in xii. 15; “1 will gladly spend and be
spent for you; though the more abundantly I love you, the
less Ibe loved;” also from his language in 1 Thess. ii. 7,8;
“ We were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her
children : so, being affectionately desirous of you, we were
willing to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only,
but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us.” An
affectionate tenderness is perfectly consistent with the strictest
faithfulness in applying the Word of God to the conscience,
and in admonishing, warning, and reproving, as the occasion
may require; and as it may be said to be essential to general
pastoral usefulness, it should be most carefully cultivated by
all, who would give an account of the souls committed to their
charge with joy, and not with grief.
With these gentle graces must be united also others of a
different kind; such as moral courage, patient self-denial,
and persevering energy.
A minister of Christ ought to possess a large share of
moral courage : for he must open his mouth boldly to make
known the mystery of the Gospel. He must not be ashamed
of the testimony of the Lord; but must always remember
whom he serves, and be careful to approve himself faithful to
his Divine Master.
He must also possess a large share of patient self-denial;
for he is required to “ endure hardness as a good soldier of
Jesus Christ.” (2 Tim. ii. 3.) After the example of the
Apostle Paul, he must be willing to “ endure all things for
the elect’s sake ; that they may also obtain the salvation which
is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.” (2 Tim. ii. 10.)
This is a grace, which many of you, my beloved brethren, are
at the present time peculiarly called upon to exhibit. Some
of you have to experience great trials and privations. It
behoves you therefore to recollect, that these very things are


appointed by God for tbe more conspicuous manifestation of
your patience ; and that you should not complain, but rather
esteem it a privilege, that you are accounted worthy “not only
to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for His sake.” (Phil. i.
29.)
A minister of Christ must likewise be endued with much
'persevering energy. He must possess much energy, in
order to fulfil his ministry efficiently at all; and he must
possess much persevering energy, in order that he may carry
it on efficiently during any lengthened period. To labour
therein day after day and year after year, amidst the
opposition of the profane, the indifference of the worldly-
minded, the faithlessness of false professors, the backsliding of
some and the faintheartedness of others ; under the manifold
discouragements without, and the continual sense of his own
infirmities and deficiencies within ; and yet not be weary and
faint in his mind; —this requires a persevering energy,
which, as well as the moral courage and patient self-denial
just now spoken of, is no mere natural quality, but, if partly
dependent upon the natural disposition, is so strengthened
and sustained by the sanctifying influence of the Holy Ghost,
as rightly to be designated a spiritual grace.
I shall mention only two other graces, viz., a spiritual
mind, and the habit of fervent and continual prayer.
A spiritual mind ought to be a distinguishing characteristic
of every minister of Christ. This is essential to give life and
power to his ministrations. Without it, all his duty will be
performed in a perfunctory manner: there will be no
“unction from the Holy One” (1 John ii. 20) either in his
public discourses or private conversation. In order that his
speech and his preaching may be “ in demonstration of the
Spirit and of power” (1 Cor. ii. 4.), he must have his “ con-
versation in heaven” (1 Phil. iii. 20); his affections must be
set “on things above, and not on things on the earth” (Col.
iii. 2); his life must be a life of faith in the Son of God
(Gal. ii. 20.)
Lastly, a minister of Christ must possess the habit of


fervent and continual prayer. He must be pre-eminently a
man of prayer. He must pray for the influence of the Holy
Spirit upon his own heart and understanding, that he may
have “a mind and will” (Ordination Service) to the fulfilment
of his office, and that he may know how to behave himself in
the house of God: (1 Tim. iii. 16.) and he must pray for the
influence of the same spirit upon the hearts and understand-
ings of his people; that they may receive “the love of the
truth” (2 Thess. ii. 10), and may “ walk worthy of the Lord
unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and
increasing in the knowledge of God.” (Col. i. 10.) A minister
of Christ ought to do nothing without prayer. In his closet
before the composition of a sermon, and in the pulpit before
its delivery, he should never omit to ask for the special help
of the Holy Spirit. When he is going to conduct a parochial
meeting, or to make a pastoral visit, he should always entreat
of the Lord to be present with him and bless him. Pie should
enter into no company without asking for grace to glorify his
God and Saviour in it. He should commence no undertaking
without praying that it may be begun, continued, and ended
in the Lord. He should likewise continually cry unto the
Lord for a blessing upon all his institutions, and all the means
of grace; and for the outpouring of the Holy Spirit upon all
classes of his people, his communicants, his congregation, the
children of his schools, and all who are placed under his
spiritual charge. Thus, and thus only, can a minister go forth
to his various duties, in the confidence that the Lord will be
with him, and manifest the savour of his knowledge by him
in every plaee. (2 Cor. ii. 14.) Thus only can he look for-
ward with an assured hope that he shall finish his course with
joy, and the ministry which he has received of the Lord Jesus,
to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. (Acts xx. 24.)
I have now completed the task which I proposed to myself.
The wide range which I have taken has occasioned the
extension of my Charge to a length far beyond what I should
have desired; while it has, at the same time, compelled me to


notice many important particulars in a very cursory manner.
By confining myself on the present occasion to one or two
branches of the subject, and reserving the others for a future
opportunity, I might have treated of those which I selected
more fully, without making so large a demand upon your
patience; but I could not be satisfied to defer for a period of
three years—with the uncertainty of being alive at that time,
and of being permitted to address you again the con-
sideiation of any matters, which aifect the efficient fulfilment
of your ministerial office. Ido not indeed forget, that I have
been speaking to several, wdiose knowledge and experience
qualify them to be teachers of others. Neither do I forget,
that my younger brethren may learn from various books,
especially from the admirable work of Bridges on the
Christian ministry, far better than from my instructions,
the mode of qualifying themselves for, and of efficiently
fulfilling, the duties of their sacred office. But, at the
same time, I cannot forget likewise, that it is peculiarly
the province of a Bishop to remind his brethren of these
things, and to stir up their pure minds by way of remem-
brance. (2 Pet. iii. 1.) More especially does it seem to
me right, that, in my primary Charge as the first Bishop of
this Diocese, I should state to you distinctly my view of the
Christian ministry, and of the obligations of those who are
engaged in it. I trust I am not wrong in cherishing the
hope not from any presumptuous idea of my own superior
ability, but in the humble confidence of having spoken to you
as a messenger of the Lord—that you all, the elder as well as
the younger, will derive some benefit from my observations;
and that, by reflecting upon what I have said, you will be led
to “ stir up the gift of God,” which was imparted to you at
your ordination. (1 Tim. iv. 14; 2 Tim. i. 6.)
If it be a high dignity with which you are invested; viz.,
“to be Messengers, Watchmen, and Stewards of the Lord j”
it is likewise a most heavy responsibility which is laid upon
you. For those committed to your charge “ are the sheep of
Christ which he bought with his death, and for whom He


shed his blood. The Church and congregation whom you
serve, is his Spouse and his Body. And if it shall happen
the same Church, or any member thereof, to take any hurt or
hindrance by reason of your negligence, ye know the great-
ness of the fault, and also the horrible punishment that will
ensue. Wherefore consider with yourselves the end of your
ministry towards the children of God, towards the Spouse
and Body of Christ; and see that you never cease your labour,
your care and diligence, until you have done all that lieth in
you, according to your bounden duty, to bring all such as are
or shall be committed to your charge, unto that agreement in
the faith and knowledge of God, and to that ripeness and
perfectness of age in Christ, that there be no place left among
you, either for error in religion, or for viciousness in life.”
(Ordination Service.)
Let me then affectionately warn you, my beloved brethren,
against the feeling, which is apt to arise in the mind of
a Parochial minister, that he does all that he can be ex-
pected to do for his people; and that it is not his fault,
if they neglect the means of grace, and continue in im-
penitence and unbelief. Such a feeling is a sure indication
of a hardening of the conscience, and a coldness of heart in
the work of the Lord. Every minister ought to expect, that
God will give him success in his ministry ; and, as our excel-
lent Primate has remarked, he ought not to rest satisfied, until
he can see the main body of his Parishioners seeking first the
kingdom of God and His righteousness; and exhibiting such
a state, as in the case of death would give reasonable and
Scriptural hope respecting them. This may seem to some
perhaps altogether visionary. But why so ? “ Why should
the Gospel,” as the same Prelate asks, “ have less power upon
our people than it had upon the Thessalonians; to whom
St. Paul was able to appeal, as having turned to God from
idols to serve the living and true God, and to wait for His
Son from heaven ? concerning whom he could thank God
without ceasing; because, when they received the word of
God, they received it not as the word of men, but as it is in


truth, the word of God, which effectually worketh in them
that believe. Apostolical zeal, and apostolical doctrine, will
still have the same effect. We have the like promise of
assistance : ‘Lo I am with you alway even unto the end of
the world.’ We have the same weapon entrusted to our hands,
‘ the sword of the Spirit which is the word of God.’ ” Baxter
has recorded the blessing of the Lord upon his own ministry;
and the Archbishop, after quoting some of his statements,
adds, “ Every neighbourhood will still show instances of the
like effects following the like means; and if these means were
universal, so also would the effects be : “ The harvest truly is
plenteous.” “ Many,” he proceeds, “ when they find gross
ignorance, or gross vice, generally existing, abandon the case
as hopeless : whereas these evils ought to stimulate to greater
exertion, and to the introduction of plans suited to the
circumstances ; for no plan can be laid down, which shall be
adapted to every case, though every case will admit its own, if
diligently enquired into.”
Lay these sayings, my Reverend Brethren, to heart: for I
am sure, that, if the labours of a minister be unfruitful, that
minister, so far from resting in a self-complacent feeling of
having done what he could, has cause to search and try his
ways, and to cry earnestly unto the Lord, in order to discover
wherefore a blessing is withheld from him. I would not
indeed deny, that God may in some instances cause his faith-
ful servants now, as He caused Jeremiah of old, to appear to
labour in vain, and to spend their strength for nought; but I
would say, that it becomes a minister under such a trial to
adopt the language of the prophet, and say; “ 0 that my head
were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my
people.” (Jer. ix. 1.)
Remember also, that, whatever post the Head of the Church
may have assigned to you, He will enable you to occupy it for
his glory, and your own profit; provided that you be faithful,
diligent, and humble. This encouraging consideration I would
especially impress upon those among you, who officiate to the


scattered population of the interior. The constant travelling
from station to station, and holding services on each succeed-
ing Sabbath at a different place with a different congregation;
the spending sometimes an entire day, particularly the Lord’s
day, in the house of an ungodly or worldly-minded man ; the
want of intercourse with your brethren in the ministry, and
often the separation from any Christian friend; and, lastly, the
difficulties attending your household arrangements, and the
frequent necessity for employing yourselves in manual labour;
these things must not only occasion you much personal dis-
comfort, but must also be great trials of your spirit, and
hindrances to the efficient fulfilment of your ministry. To
preserve under them an habitual spirituality of mind, and an
unwearied zeal, requires a large measure of faithfulness and
prayer. Nevertheless, be ye not therefore discouraged, nor
faint in your minds. Whatever may be the circumstances in
which you are placed, the Lord will give you wisdom and
strength in proportion to your difficulties, and inward con-
solation in proportion to your outward trials.
In conclusion; I would remind you all of the influence,
which you may, under the providence of God, exercise, not
only upon the present, but also upon all future generations in
this country. Our Colony is, as it were, in a state of child-
hood ; and its character hereafter, when it shall have attained
its mature growth, will be the development of that which is
now impressed upon it. Who then may hope, with the divine
blessing, to do so much towards restraining the evil tendencies
of our population, and towards promoting in them the growth
of all those virtues which render a people truly great and
happy, as may the clergy of our Church ? Let me therefore
exhort you to “ walk worthy of the Lord,” who hath chosen
you to be his servants. Take heed to the ministry which you
have received, that you fulfil it. (Col. iv. 17.) Three several
times did the Apostle Paul, in his Epistles to Timothy,
charge that beloved disciple “ before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ,” that he should observe the things enjoined upon him,
and be faithful to the trust which he had received. (1 Tim.


y. 21; vi. 13, 14 ; and 2 Tim. iv. 1,2.) Let us all regard
these appeals as addressed to ourselves; let us continually
remember “ that strict and solemn account,” which we must
render to our Divine Master, when He “ shall judge the quick
and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom.” 0 that at
that great day multitudes of those, unto whom we have minis-
tered the word of God, may he found our “ joy and crown of
rejoicing!” And if any of those committed to our charge
perish in their sins, may the righteous Judge testify unto us,
that we are pure from their blood. (Acts xx. 26.)




APPENDIX.
As tliis Charge may be read by some, who have not seen the
Minutes of the proceedings of the Episcopal Conference held
at Sydney in October 1850, I think it well to reprint the
statement of my opinion upon Holy Baptism, which is con-
tained in them. The several propositions, in which that
opinion is expressed, were suggested by the particular
questions, which had arisen out of the previous discussion of
the subject with my Right Reverend Brethren,
“ The doctrine of onr Church concerning the nature and efficacy of
Holy Baptism may, in my opinion, he stated in the eight following
propositions.
“]. Regeneration is that operation of the Spirit of God upon the
heart, which produces ‘ a death unto sin, and a new hirth unto righteous-
ness.’ ( Catechism .) By regeneration we are made members of Christ,
children of God, and heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven. ( Catechism.)
“ 2. Baptism is the Sacrament of regeneration, which is the particular
grace prayed for, expected, and thankfully acknowledged to have been
received in the Baptismal Service.
“ 3. The work of regeneration is wrought in all, whether they be adults
or infants, who receive Baptism rightly {Art. xxvii.), hut in none others.
{Art. xxv.)
“ 4. The Church in her office for the Baptism of infants, and in that for
the Baptism of adults, uses the language of faith and hope; and is not to
be understood as declaring positively a fact, which it certainly cannot
know, viz. that every baptized infant, or every baptized adult, is
regenrate.
“5. The statement put into the mouth of a Catechumen, that he was in
Baptism made a member of Christ, (fee., is to be understood in the same
qualified application, as the declaration, which almost immediately follows,
that by God’s help he will do as his godfathers and godmothers had
promised for him, and that he heartily thanks his heavenly Bather, that he
hath called him, &c. ( Catechism.)


“6. Repentance and faith are required of those who come to b#
Baptized ; hut the Church is silent as to the fitness, or unfitness, of an
infant, who is incapable of repentance and faith, for receiving regeneration
in Baptism.
“ 7. The unworthiness of a Minister does not take away the effect of
Baptism, either in the case of adults or infants, (Art. xxvi.)
“ 8. Parents are nowhere mentioned in the Articles, or in the Baptismal
Service; but infants are baptized, because they promise repentance and
faith by their sureties. These sureties, or sponsors, are to be duly qualified
persons ; and no one is to be admitted godfather or godmother, before the
said person, so undertaking, has received the Holy Communion.
( Canon xxix.) The Church, however, has not positively affirmed, that the
unworthiness of sponsors disqualifies an infant for receiving the grace of
Baptism.
“The truth of the following four additional propositions may also, I think,
be gathered from the Scriptures, and is perfectly consistent with the general
tenor of the Articles and Formularies of our Church, viz.
“ 9. Sponsors, who themselves repent and believe, may and ought t 0
expect most confidently the grace of regeneration for the children, whom
they bring to be baptized.
“ 10. While the Church may, and ought to use the language of faith
and hope respecting all infants brought to be baptized, impenitent and
unbelieving sponsors are not entitled to expect any blessing from an
ordinance, which they only profane.
“11. Children, who have been baptized, are to be taught to regard God
as their Father, and to love and trust in Him as having redeemed them by
his Son, and sanctified them by his Spirit; to pray, that, being regenerate,
and made the children of God by adoption and grace, they may daily be
renewed by the Holy Ghost (Collect for Christmas Day); and to consider
the guilt of any sins, which they may commit against God, as aggravated by
their having been baptized, and brought up in the faith of the Gospel.
“ 12. Our own personal repentance and faith are the only sure evidence
of our being spiritually the children of God.
“ Having thus stated my own views of the doctrine of our Church con-
cerning Holy Baptism, I would unite with my Right Reverend Brethren in
expressing,
“ 1. My cordial and entire agreement with all the Articles and Formu-
laries of our Church in their plain and full meaning, and in their literal
and grammatical sense,
“ 2. My willing disposition to accept and use them in the manner ■vshich
is appointed, and (with especial reference to our present subject) to carry
on the work of Christian education in the firm belief, that infants do
receive in Baptism the grace of regeneration ;
“ 3, Above all, my unfeigned thankfulness to Almighty God for the gift
and preservation of these inestimable blessings.”— Minutes , sc.


I subjoin also an extract from the Preface to a small Tract
written by the Rev. E. Hoare, Incumbent of Christ Church,
Ramsgate, which I have ventured, in the confidence that he
would not disapprove of my doing so, to republish here. It is
entitled “ Baptism as taught in the Bible and Prayer Book.”
I confess that it does appear strange to me, that some even of my Eight
Reverend Brethren, for whom I entertain the most sincere esteem, should
allege such a charge (a charge of want of simplicity and godly sincerity
in interpreting the language of our Service) against us ; while they them-
selves put the same interpretation upon the same language in the service
for the baptism of adults. If certain words must be understood as
declaring something to be universally true of all baptized infants, these
same words must also be understood as declaring the same thing to be
universally true of all baptized adults : but if it be admitted that they
have a qualified meaning when used of the latter, then it surely follows,
that they may also have a qualified meaning when used of the former.
I do not wish to retort upon our opponents, that they, and not we, put a
forced meaning upon the plain language of our Church; but I cannot help
observing, that, in their arguments for the universal regeneration of
Infants in Baptism, they are accustomed to appeal to the opinion of
particular divines much more frequently than to the statements either of
the Bible or of the Prayer Book. Por my own part, I can declare, without
the least fear of incurring the charge of inconsistency, my full assent and
consent to every expression, which is to be found either in the Bible on the
one hand, or in the Liturgy, the Thirty-nine Articles, or Catechism of our
Church, on the other. The opinions, which I expressed at the recent
Episcopal Conference at Sydney, rest, as appears to me, upon the con-
current authority, if I may speak of the concurrence of divine and human
authority on such a subject, both of the Bible and Prayer Book. I have
been told indeed, that some of my brethren regard the expression of “ my
willing disposition to carry on the work of Christian education in the firm
belief, that infants” (not all infants) “do receive in Baptism the grace of
regeneration,” as inconsistent with my previous statements ; but, if I did
not possess that willing disposition, I could not conscientiously use the
Church Catechism ; which, I thank God, I can do, not only without any
scruples, but with the most entire satisfaction. Baptism is, according to
my view, the Sacrament of Regeneration; and the grace of regeneration
is to be “ prayed for, expected, and thankfully acknowledged to have been
received,” in the administration of that ordinance, whether to infants or to
adults. The spiritual blessing may have been, as it were, intercepted and lost
throifgh the want of the necessary qualifications in those who receive it;
but we cannot certainly determine, when this happens even in the case of
adults, much less in the case of infants. It behoves us, therefore, to


exercise faith in respect to all; and, particularly, to teach all baptized
children, that they may address God in the words of the Lord’s Prayer,
“ Our Father which art in heavenbecause they have been in their
Baptism made “ members of Christ, children of God, and inheritors of the
kingdom of heaven.” At the same time they must be reminded, as they
grow up, that repentance, faith, and holiness of life, are the only sure
evidences of their having received these great spiritual privileges.—
Preface.
It is not in general wise to speak about oneself; but, as a
writer in an English Periodical, the Colonial Church
Chronicle, alluding to the above opinion upon Baptism, has
represented me to have “ always been known as symbolising
with a class of theologians, to whom that doctrine (the doctrine
of universal regeneration in Baptism) has been ever distasteful,”
it will not, I trust, be thought unbecoming for me to mention;
that, although I do now, I believe, agree with the class re-
ferred to upon most, if not all, of the questions of doctrine
and ecclesiastical polity agitated at the present day, yet I was
brought up in a totally different school, and did not become
personally acquainted with any of the excellent clergymen of
what is called the Evangelical section of the Church, nor read
any of their writings, until I had attained an age, when an
educated man, who is capable of thinking at all, has learnt to
think for himself. Moreover, I can unhesitatingly affirm,
that my opinion upon Baptism was not derived from them, but
was formed principally, if not entirely, from the careful and oft
repeated examination of the Bible and Prayer Book, and from
an earnest endeavour, by reflection and prayer, to satisfy myself
upon the meaning of the language used in them respecting that
Sacrament. I have always felt, and still feel, that many of
those, whose authority I most highly revere, differ from me,
more or less, upon this particular point; and it is a curious
circumstance, that, after a long conversation upon it with my
friend the Kev. E. Hoare, some years previously to the pub-
lication of the tract above referred to, we parted with the
painful feeling that there was considerable disagreement
between us. I was therefore greatly surprised, as well as
delighted, upon reading his Tract, which he kindly sent me,


to find, that he had in it exactly expressed my own sentiments'
and established their agreement with the Bible and Prayer
Book by reasoning, which appears to me perfectly irrefragable.
Whether he had in the interval modified his opinion, or I had
modified mine, or whether we had not before perfectly under-
stood each other, I do not know, nor does it at all signify; but
the fact shews, that our mutual agreement did not result
merely from our both “ symbolising with” the same “ class of
theologians.” I have mentioned these things, not with the
object of vindicating my own character for independence of
thought, which is a matter of very little consequence; but to
shew that my opinion is not that of a party, but that of an
I ndividual Bishop, who has done, what he would exhort each
one of his clergy to do, studied the Bible and Prayer Book for
himself, and, in dependence upon the teaching of the Spirit of
Grod, fonned his own judgment thereon.
B. Page 8
For the information of those, who may not have an oppor-
tunity of consulting the “ Minutes” for themselves, I here
subjfoin the clauses, which refer to Liturgical questions.
t (1.) Division of Services.
HVc are of opinion that the Bishop of each Diocese, as Ordinary, has a
discretion to authorise clergymen, in cases of necessity, to divide the
m ‘orning service, by using either the Morning Prayer, the Litany, or the
C/Jommuuion Service separately; but that each of the services so used
should he read entire.
(2.) The Administration of the Holy Communion.
In parishes where the number of communicants is very great, the
Communion Service may be used separately, and the Lord’s Supper
administered at an early hour, besides the usual administration at the
morning service.
In places where there is no morning service, the administration of the
Holy Communion may be in the afternoon, if necessity so require.


When the Holy Communion cannot be administered in a Church, or
other building duly licensed for the celebration of Divine Service, it may
be administered in such places as necessity shall xecjuire.
(3.) Occasional Services.
We are of opinion that no clergyman has authority at his own dis-
cretion to abridge, or alter, any of the occasional services of the Church.
(4.) Rules for Service on Saints' days falling on Sundays , sc.
Should a Saint’s Day fall on Ash Wednesday, Good Friday, or Easter
Eve, or on Easter Sunday, Ascension Day, Whit Sunday, or Trinity Sunday,
or on Monday or Tuesday in Easter and Whitsun weeks, the Lessons,
Collect, Epistle, and Gospel for those days are to be used.
When a Saint’s day shall fall on any other Sunday, the Lessons of the
Saint’s Day (unless they be from the Apocrypha) are to be used, and the
Collect, Epistle, and Gospel for the Saint’s day, with the Collect for the
Sunday.
(5.) Of persons for whom the Prayers of the Congregation are
desired.
It is convenient that the names of the persons for whom the prayers of
the congregation are desired should be mentioned either before the Litany
or before the Prayer for all conditions of men, as the case may be.
The words, “especially those for whom our prayers are desired,” may be
inserted in the Litany in their appropriate place.
(6.) Thanksgiving Service.
It is convenient that the names of the persons who desire to return
thanks should be mentioned before the General Thanksgiving.
The words, “particularly to those who desire now to offer up their
praises and thansgivings for thy late mercies vouchsafed unto them,” rbay
be used for persons who have not been specially prayed for.
(7.) Offertory.
We are of opinion that no clergyman can justly be suspected of holding-;
opinions at variance with the sound teaching of the Church, in consequence
of his complying with the Rubric, which directs “ that upon the Sundays
and other Holy Days (if there be no Communion) shall be said all that is
appointed at the Communion, until the end of the General Prayer, [for
the whole state of Christ’s Church Militant here on earth,] together with
one or more of the Collects, concluding with the blessing.
(8.) Sponsors.
Being aware that the Clergy have felt the great importance of having


duly qualified Sponsors at Holy Baptism, we recommend that the most
earnest endeavours be used by them to convey correct impressions upon
that subject to their several flocks, in the hope that suitable persons may
be in all cases provided to discharge the duties of that office.
(9.) Marriage.
(a.) Within prohibited Degrees.
Inasmuch as it is directed by the 99th Canon, that “no person shall
marry within the degrees prohibited by the laws of G-od, and expressed in
a Table set forth by authority, in the year of our Lord God, 1563” ; wo
are of opinion that any clergyman of the Province, who shall solemnize
matrimony between persons so related, will be acting in violation of tho
Law of the Church.
Referring also to Canons 26 and 109, and to the Rubrics prefixed to the
Communion Service, we are further of opinion that persons so marrying
within the prohibited degrees are liable to be repelled from the Holy
Communion until they have repented and be reformed.
( h .) Of Persons neither of whom belongs to the Church.
We are of opinion that Ministers of the Church of England ought not
to solemnize marriage between persons neither of whom is of our own
communion, except in cases where the marriage cannot, without extreme
difficulty, be solemnized in any other way.
(c.) Irregularly Solemnized.
While we recognise the validity of all marriages contracted in con-
formity with the laws of the State, provided that they be not contrary to
the laws of the Church, we would earnestly impress upon all members of
the Church of England the duty of having their marriages solemnized
according to the rites of the Church, and in no other way.
(d.) Caution to be used.
1. We desire to draw the attention of the Clergy to the necessity of
exercising due caution before they proceed to solemnize marriage.
2. Wc therefore recommend that the banns be thrice published, except
in case of marriage by license, once at least in the licensed place of
worship which is nearest to the residence of the parties desiring to be
married.
3. And that the Registers of Marriage, Baptism, and Burial be
accurately kept, and copies sent at the times required by Law.
(10.) Churching of Women.
We are of opinion, from the Rubric at the end of the service for the


Churching of Women, that that service is not intended to he used for
persons who are living in such a state as would justify the Minister in
repelling them from the Holy Communion.
(11.) Ministering to Dissenters.
We are of opinion that the general principle of Colonial Legislation, by
which the equality of all religious denominations is recognized, releases
the Clergy of the Church of England in these colonies from the obligation
to perform religious services for persons who are not members of our own
Church.
C. Page 37.
Since this Charge was delivered, we have received accounts
of the obloquy and misrepresentation, which our excellent
primate, the Archbishop of Canterbury, has brought upon
himself by an expression of opinion similar to my own as to
the character, in which we ought to regard the ministers of
other Protestant Churches not enjoying an Episcopal Grovern-
ment. I confess I am surprised, that any divines of the
Church of England, acquainted with her history, and observ-
ing the language of her formularies, can find fault with one
of her Prelates for acknowledging, and assuming that the
great body of her Bishops and Clergy would acknowledge, that
such ministers were “ truly pastors of the Church of Christ,
and not to be considered as merely laymen.” For
1. In the Preface to “the Book of Consecration of Arch-
bishops and Bishops, and ordering of Priests and Deacons,” our
Keformers affirm the fact of Episcopacy being an apostolical
institution; but they do not assert, that it is essential to the
validity of the Christian ministry, Their language simply is;
“It is evident unto all men diligently reading the Holy
Scriptures and ancient authors, that from the Apostles’ time
there have been these orders of Ministers in Christ’s Church ;
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.”
2. Again; in the Article “of ministering in the congrega-
tion” they have most carefully guarded against the appear-


ance of binding the Universal Church to any one particular
form of Ecclesiastical polity. Their words are such, that any
member of the Church of Scotland might adopt them as
unhesitatingly as ourselves:
“It is not lawful for any man to take upon himself the office of public
preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be
lawfully called, and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to
judge lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and called to this work by
men, who have public authority given unto them in the Congregation to
call and send ministers unto the Lord’s vineyard.”
3, Lastly; it appears to be a well-established fact, that,
during a considerable period after the Reformation, “ many
English benefices were held by divines, who had been admitted
to the ministry in the Calvinistic form used on the Continent;
nor was re-ordination by a Bishop in such cases then thought
necessary, or even lawful. ( Macaulay*s History of England,
vol. 1 ~p. 76.)
Surely therefore, whatever may be the private opinion of
individual members of the Church of England upon the
absolute necessity of Episcopal ordination, under all circum-
stances, for the validity of holy orders, they have no pretext
for affirming that our Reformers held it to be so; and there-
fore they have no right to represent their opinion as the
doctrine of the Church, and charge their brethren, Bishops
and others, with heresy for denying it.
How ought “ the meekness of wisdom,” displayed by the
good Archbishop in the following paragraph of a letter re-
cently published, to put to shame those, who do not scruple, in
the presumptuous confidence of their own private judgment,
to speak evil of the highest dignities :
“ It would as little represent my sentiments, as it would ill become my
station, if I should be suspected of undervaluing the perfect constitution
of the Church of England. It is our great privilege to enjoy apostolical
discipline, together with apostolical doctrine. But we do not disparage
these advantages, when we acknowledge our conviction that foreign Pro-
testants who teach Apostolical doctrine, though not under Apostolical dis-
cipline, may yet be owned of God as faithful ministers of his Word and
Sacraments, and enjoy his blessing on their labours.”


QUALIFICATIONS OF CANDIDATES FOR HOLY ORDERS.
As I am desirous that this Charge may prove, under the
divine blessing, a help, not only to those who have already
been ordained, but also to those who may hereafter become
candidates for ordination in this Diocese, I will here add, for
the guidance of the latter, a few remarks upon the qualifica-
tions, in respect to knowledge, which I consider to be essential,
and which I feel myself therefore bound to require in all, who
are admitted to the sacred office of the ministry.
These qualifications are,
1, An accurate knoivledge of the English Bible.
Of the necessity for this knowledge as a qualification for
the ministry I need say nothing; but I would mention, that
every candidate for ordination in this Diocese will be required
to exhibit it, both in the way of exposition and of reference.
2. Ability to state and to prove the fundamental
Doctrines of the Gospel.
No one can be an efficient minister of Christ, who is not
able to state with precision, and to demonstrate by reasoning
out of the Scriptures, the truths which he is commissioned to
preach. It will therefore always be my object, in examining
candidates for orders, to test their ability herein.
3. A competent knowledge of the Evidences of Christi-
anity.
Every minister ought to be able to give both a satisfactory
reason for his own belief, and also an answer to the various
objections, which different classes of gainsayers are accustomed
to allege against Christianity. It is the duty therefore of a
Bishop to see, that candidates for ordination are well instructed
in the Evidences of our holy religion, and able to apply them
in argument as occasion may require.
4. A familiar acquaintance with the Book of Common
Prayer and the other Formularies of our Church.
Every minister ought to be thoroughly acquainted with the


Articles of religion, the Ritual, and tlie Forms of instruction,
agreed upon, or prescribed, by that particular Church, in
which he exercises his sacred office. These therefore will
always constitute one of the subjects of my examination.
5. A knowledge of Ecclesiastical History.
Every minister ought to possess a general knowledge of the
whole history of the Church; and he ought especially to be
able to give an account of the growth of the corruptions and
power of the Church of Rome, of the Reformation in
England, and of the origin and peculiarities of the different
sects, which have sprung up since that period. Hence Church
History in general, and these portions of it in particular, will
form a fifth subject of examination.
There are two other branches of knowledge, which I might
be expected to include among the essential qualifications for
the ministry ; viz.
1. A knowledge of the Fathers ; and
2. A knowledge of the Latin and Greek languages.
I will briefly state my reasons for not doing so.
1. With respect to the Fathers ;
Although it is most important for the Church, that there
should always be among the clergy some learned men, who are
thoroughly conversant with these ancient authors ] yet a know-
ledge of them is not, in my opinion, necessary, nor even
desirable, for all. My experience has convinced me, that very
few, even of those who have been educated at an English
University, possess that clearness of understanding, and that
sound discrimination, which are requisite for studying them
with advantage; and that the superficial acquaintance with
them, which many young men acquire in order to pass a
Theological Examination, is prejudicial, rather than beneficial,
to their future usefulness in the ministry.
2. With respect to the Latin and Greek languages;
At the period of the Reformation, and during the following


century, every valuable theological work was written in Latin;
and therefore a knowledge of that language was justly con-
sidered indispensable for the clerical office : but the necessity
for such knowledge on this account has long since ceased. A
clergyman can now obtain all the instruction requisite for his
sacred office in English authors; and hence, “to be learned
in Latin tongue” appears to be no longer an essential
qualification for holy orders.
A knowledge of Greek is now much more valuable in itself
than a knowledge of Latin ; because the former enables us to
read the Scriptures of the New Testament in the original;
but still I do not feel myself justified in requiring even this
as an indispensable qualification for the ministry. For there
are many, who, from the defect of their early education, are
able to study the word of God only in the English version;
but wdio are nevertheless very valuable clergymen of our
Church.
I would beg however, that I may not be supposed to under-
rate the importance of classical learning as a principal part of
a liberal education ; nor to be insensible to the value of such
an education for the clergy in general. I only mean that the
knowledge of Latin and Greek is not, in my opinion, so abso-
lutely essential for the ministry, as that there may not be
circumstances, under which it may be dispensed with.
The examination of candidates for Orders in this Diocese
will therefore comprise four papers of questions upon the
English Bible; viz. two upon the Old, and two upon the New
Testament; in one of each the candidate to be allowed the
use of a Bible without marginal references, and in the other
not. It will also comprise a paper upon the Greek Testament,
and single papers upon each of the other above-mentioned
subjects.
Melbourne: B. Lucas, Printer, 72, Collins Street, East.








