

ABOLITION
OF STATE SUPPORT FOR RELIGION.
At a Public Meeting held in the Hall of the
School of Arts, Sydney, on Thursday, 26th June,
1856, and presided over by Robert Campbell, Esq.,
M.P., at which about 600 persons were present, the
following Resolutions were passed, with only one
dissentient:—
I. —“That the system of supporting Religion by grants from the
Public Treasury to the clergy of certain denominations, besides
being unjust to all other denominations, and also objectionable
on other and still higher grounds, will involve an amount of
future taxation for the support of Religion which will be utterly
intolerable, while no good purpose is served by such a system,
but under it the sources of Christian liberality are dried up, and
the clergy reduced at length to a much worse position in regard
to pecuniary support than if there had been no State Support for
Religion whatever.”
II. —“ That the Voluntary System, under which the Support of Religion
is left entirely to the liberality of its professors, has been found
sufficient for the purpose, in the face of powerful and richly
endowed establishments in the United Kingdom : as, for example,
in the case of the Wesleyans, Independents, and Baptists, in
England; in that of the Free Church and the United Presby-
terians in Scotland; and in that of the Romish Church in Ireland.”
The Meeting having been adjourned to Thursday,
3rd July, the following Resolutions were on that occa-
sion (inter alia) unanimously carried :
TIT—“ That although, in the opinion of many, it would be a measure
of strict justice to all concerned to discontinue the existing State


support for Religion forthwith, it is the opinion of this Meeting
that, to prevent any embarrassment which might he occasioned
to some of the present incumbents by the suddenness of the
change, it is the opinion of this Meeting that such an equitable
arrangement should be made with them as may commend itself
to the discretion of the Legislature.”
IV.—“ That a Society he now formed for the promotion of this object,
to be called “ p for tire Iklithra nf all |tafo input
for lirliginil fo lirur 'BfofoS f that a subscription of Ten
Shillings a-year shall constitute membership in such Society ; and
that the following he the office bearers of this Society for the year
commencing July, 1856, viz :
“ President : J. R. WILSHIRE, Esq., M.P.
Vice-Presidents : JOHN RICHARDSON, Esq., M.P.;
THOMAS WALKER, Esq.; GEO. REES, Esq.
Treasurer: Mr. HUGH DIXON.
Secretary : Rev. WM. RIDLEY,
Committee of Management : The office bearers above men-
tioned, and Messrs. ROBERT HORNIMAN, GEORGE
BROWN, WILLIAM SPRIGG, J. M. ILLIDGE,
HUMPHREY RICHARDSON, ALFRED CANE, J. G.
CROUCH, and CHAMBERS, with power to add to
their number • and any Minister of Religion who approves
of this Society and its objects shall he, ex officio, a mem-
ber of the Committee.”
The Society for the Abolition of all State Sup-
port for Religion in New South Wales, submit to their
fellow colonists the following considerations :
The present system of issuing grants from the Public Treasury
to the clergy of certain denominations, including those who, on the
most momentous subjects, maintain opposite doctrines, is so manifest an
outrage on the understanding and conscientious feelings of the com-
munity, that it cannot he defended.
The Religious institutions fostered by the Government are so
decidedly contradictory to one another, that one or more of them must


involve untruth, and thus be dishonouring to God and pernicious to
man. And the real language of the State in maintaining this indiscri-
minate system of endowment is, that there is no truth in religion at all.
If there be any truth, it is of unspeakable importance to every human
being to choose that form of Religion which is founded on truth; and it
is an immeasurable calamity to be under the guidance of false doctrine.
But the Government practically recommends to the people, as worthy
of their belief, five Religious denominations, every one of which
distinctly charges one or more of the others with fatal error.
And what other plan of State Support for Religion can be substi-
tuted for the present system ? If the Legislature select from among
the various existing Religious institutions those which in their judgment
are right, and aid them alone, such an arrangement would be objection-
able to many who believe such endowments, under any circumstances,
wrong, as an invasion of the prerogatives of Christ, subversive of the
rights of conscience, and essentially opposed to the spirit of Christi-
anity ; and, it must he universally admitted, that it would be unjust
and intolerable to all that large section of the people who, while con-
tributing, by means of taxation, to the public funds, would he excluded
from all share of the grants for religious purposes. Indeed, it is
scarcely credible that any denomination would earnestly seek, or even
consent to receive, exclusive support from the State, and thus to incur
the odium of defrauding their fellow colonists, under the pretence of ad-
vancing true Religion. So that the endowment of Religion by the
Legislature of the colony, on any conceivable plan, would involve a
grievous offence against Religion itself.
Experience fully confirms the conclusion to which a consideration
of the principles involved leads us. For in tins colony, as everywhere
else, where the same system has been followed, the pecuniary aid given
by the Government has had a withering influence on the interest taken
by the people in the support and extension of the Religious institutions
to which they adhere. And the State support given for the promo-
tion of Religion is, in fact, a hindrance to that sacred cause.
Every anomaly that is tolerated in a community acquires in the
course of time a fallacious prescription in the public mind; and the
longer the unjust and hurtful system of State Endowments is allowed


to continue, the more difficult will it be to get rid of it. No time,
therefore, is to be lost in seeking, by every constitutional means, to
bring about a legislative abolition of that system. The other principal
colonies of Great Britain have advanced before New South Wales in
the struggle for this most important reform. In Canada and in South
Australia, the contest has ended happily in the thorough freedom of
Religion from all State interference. In Victoria and Tasmania an
earnest, well directed, and extensive agitation is now going on for this
object. And in New Zealand, a Society for the same purpose was
established eighteen months ago.
The peculiar political position of this colony, invites the friends of
religious freedom to an immediate, united, and strenuous effort. The
country has called for a revision of the New Constitution Bill, with
which the present system of State Support for Religion is incorporated ;
and the ministry themselves have proposed the repeal of the two-thirds
clause, so as to make way for such a revision. The opinions expressed
on the subject of State Grants for Religion, at a recent meeting of the
Diocesan Society in Sydney, by the Bishop of the Church of England
in this Diocese, and by Sir William Denison, furnish another strong
reason for prompt action to remove the entire sustem of such endow-
ments.
The members of this Society are not pledged to any particular
view of the general subject of Religious Establishments. Both those
also regard such establishments as unscriptural and wrong in principle,
and those who think that, under certain favourable circumstances, it
would be the duty of the State to endow the Church of Christ, are
agreed in the conclusion that in this colony there is but one consistent
course for the Government to pursue in this matter, the entire abolition
of State Support for Religion. All who think that such a course would
serve for the vindication and furtherance of true Religion, are therefore
invited to join in a unanimous effort for securing it.
Printed at the Empire General Steam Printing Office, 173, George Street, Sydney.
