

FEDERATION AND AFTERWARDS
A FRAGMENT OF HISTORY
(A.D. 1898-1912)
WHICH BRIEFLY SETS FORTH SOME OF THE CAUSES OF THE LATE ABORTIVE
REVOLT OF THE STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES AGAINST THE
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
A. NUGENT ROBERTSON
“ Better is the Enemy of Good '
fr/f.V73,
Sydney
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON
|)ubUsljers to tlje Hnibersitg
PRICE ONE SHILLING
—ltalian Proverb




FEDERATION AND AFTERWARDS.




FEDERATION AND AFTERWARDS
A FRAGMENT OF HISTORY
(A. D. 1898-1912)
WHICH BRIEFLY SETS FORTH SOME OF THE CAUSES OF THE LATE ABORTIVE
REVOLT OF THE STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES AGAINST THE
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
A. NUGENT ROBERTSON
‘ ‘ Better is the Enemy of Good ’
—ltalian Proverb
Sydney
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON
publishers to tbc (Rmbersitg




PREFACE.
In this little pamphlet is presented to the reader the
original draft of the last chapter of the great work
to which the late Dr. Ananias Honeybun, formerly
Professor of Australian History in the Federal
University, Melbourne, had devoted so many years
of his life. It is hoped that by its publication the
disaffected in New South Wales will be reminded of
the circumstances under which that State voluntarily
joined in the union which had been advocated so
ardently by many ot her leading statesmen, during
the closing years of the last century ; that they will
be convinced of the futility of attempting to renew
a vain struggle with the power of the central govern-
ment ; will gain a livelier consciousness of their
duties and privileges as members of a great Com-
monwealth ; and will be aided in the attainment of a
high, holy, and patriotic frame of mind, when that
which now they call the ruin of their country,
herein chronicled, will be thankfully remembered as
but the price (all too small !) which had to be paid
for the Morious Union of Australia.*
January 24th, 1915.
* Less, of course, Queensland and Western Australia. The combined
populations of these two colonies are expected in a few years to equal that
of the Commonwealth.




FEDERATION AND AFTERWARDS.
We have now arrived at the second great event in
the history of the Australian colonies. It has
already been pointed out that, from the dates of the
granting to them of responsible government until
the year 1898, no very considerable constitutional
changes took place in any of the group of states.
But in that year the agitation, which had per-
sistently been carried on by several of the leading
statesmen and politicians of the time, was so far
successful that the colonies of New South W T ales,
Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania were
induced to enter into a Federal Union.
It is curious to look back and to observe the
undoubted fact that the Federation of these states
was achieved, as far as regarded the mother colony,
largely as a consequence of apathy on the part of
the people. Unwilling, perhaps, to be at the trouble
of examining the question for themselves, the
inhabitants of New South Wales seem to have
accepted without hesitation the statements made by
enthusiastic public speakers as to the advantages
which would accrue from the proposed union ; the
required number of voters were induced to go to


poll; and Federation ceased to be in the air and
came down to dwell upon the earth.
However disastrous the effects of this union
may have been to the colony of New South Wales,,
and that they have been disastrous in the highest
degree to that province must be admitted, no true
Australian can doubt that the general benefit of the
Australian continent has outweighed the particular
evil. If Sydney has declined to the proportions of
an inconsiderable town, the enormous growth and
rapid expansion of the magnificent metropolis of
Melbourne must directly be traced to the Federal
movement. If the colony has practically been
shorn of more than half its territory, it cannot but
be admitted that the transfer has been to the mani-
fest advantage of the districts affected, as well as to
the colonies of Victoria and South Australia to
which in a short time they will actually belong; and
there is room for hope that the negotiations now in
progress, by which it is expected that Queensland will
receive a portion of the northern counties of New
South Wales as a consideration for joining the
Federal Union, will be successful, greatly to the
advantage of those districts and of the other
members of the Federal group.
The history of New South Wales, indeed, pre-
sents a striking example of the effect which a simple
change in a form of government may effect in the
lines of development of a nation. It is startling k>


think that, considerably less than twenty years ago,
the pleasant seaside winter resort of so many ot the
prosperous citizens of the metropolis of Australia
had an import and an export trade surpassing in
magnitude that of Melbourne ; a id that the residents
of Sydney, at that short distance of time, enter-
tained the belief that their city was destined to hold
a position scarcely inferior to that which Melbourne
occupies to-day. Perhaps it would not be unprofit-
able to inquire whether we have not here one of the
repetitions of history; whether the fate that has
overtaken Sydney is not an illustration of the causes
which may have led to the death and decay of some
of those ancient cities, whose ruins attest their past
magnificence, and whose apparently sudden abandon-
ment it is so difficult to explain. It may prove that
ohe decay of Sydney will throw a new light upon
some of these obscure problems of ancient history.
Incredible as it may now seem to those who have
not been eye-witnesses of the change, Sydney, less
than a quarter of a century ago, was a busy and
growing city, which then contained more than
400,000 inhabitants. It was the principal port of
Australia ; the imports and exports largely exceed-
ing those of any other. The pleasant walks round
its coves and bays, which so delight the tourist
to-day, were busy quays; its blue waters were
crowded with shipping ; the open spaces, which now
add so much to the beauty of its streets, were


covered with enormous stores and offices, where the
operations of a huge commerce were conducted ; it
was the seat of the heads of the English and
of the Catholic churches ; its reading public sup-
ported two important morning and two evening
journals, besides numerous other newspapers and
periodicals ; its streets were crowded with the traffic
of an industrious and prosperous population.
Its appearance to-day is too familiar to need
description. Many of the unsightly structures
which once disfigured the beautiful site have been
pulled down, and their materials have been used to
build the villas which occupy the places of once busy
streets. It is a veritable city of gardens and pro-
menades, and is, and we think must always remain,
a true city of pleasure, the spoilt beauty of the
Pacific, while its sterner sister Melbourne represents
the utilitarian side of life, —queen and metropolis of
the southern hemisphere.
But it is time that the muse of history should
cease to wander amongst the pleasant by-paths of
conjecture and fancy, and should return to the hard
high road of fact. We resume our brief account ol
the progress of the federal movement and of the
consequences which followed from it.
Everyone knows that in the year 1897 the colonies
stood divided from one another, almost as much
as if they had been separate countries. Yet
there existed a growing sense that before Australia


there lay a destiny of nationhood ; and a conscious-
ness arose that this could be achieved only by a
federation, if possible of all, at least of some, of the
various states.
We have seen in another chapter of this history
how this feeling had at first been brought into
existence some years before by the exertions of Sir
Henry Parkes, and of others who shared in his
views. It has been shown that the efforts of the
earlier advocates of Federation culminated in the
appointment of the delegates to the Convention
which met in Sydney in 1891, when the historic
Bill was drafted which embodied a proposed Federal
Constitution. After the dissolution of that Con-
vention the scheme was allowed to slumber—mur-
muring fitfully in its sleep during some years, it is
true, but with little sign of any awakening to renewed
activity.
But when the Reid Government had succeeded
in carrying out its mission of restoring Freetrade to
New South Wales, and of introducing a new system
of direct taxation into that colony, a fresh develop-
ment took place in the fortunes of the country.
New industries, notably the shifting of sand from
one place to another, the cutting down of forest
trees, and others of a highly remunerative character,
sprang into sudden existence ; and universal pros-
perity took the place of previous commercial
stagnation. It was then that the leader of the


Freetrade party was enabled to turn his attention
to the neglected subject of the Federation of the
various colonies. Largely as a consequence of his
energetic action, Federal Enabling Acts were passed
in the colonies of New South Wales, Victoria, South
Australia, Tasmania, and Western Australia, and
under these Acts delegates subsequently, w'ere
appointed by four of the colonies named to the
Convention which met at Melbourne in 1897.
Western Australia at the last moment retired from
the movement: Queensland already had declined to
take any part in it : New Zealand'had never shown
any active sympathy.
The duty committed to the delegates of the
various colonies was that of framing a Federal
Constitution, which should subsequently be sub-
mitted for approval or rejection to the people of each
individual colony ; and it was felt that the perfor-
mance of it would by no means be an easy task.
Indeed, it was believed by many that eventually
it would be found impossible to reconcile the
conflicting interests of the various states. Large
questions such as the unification of the different
public debts, the raising of the federal revenue, the
fusion of the railway systems, post office services,
and many others, appeared to present insuperable
obstacles to any complete agreement. Even the
question of the distribution amongst the contributory
states of the surpluses which might accrue to the


federal revenue was hotly debated in the public
press of New South Wales ; and this discussion
must be peculiarly interesting to the philosophical
observer of history, since the fact that after the
first year or two no surplus was ever payable to
that state, offers another illustration of those ground-
less fears which seem always to attend the inception
of any new kind of legislative system.
But, contrary to expectation, it soon appeared
that an agreement as to the terms of the Federal
Union might be reached comparatively easily. To
begin with, all the delegates were in favour of some
kind of federal union ; all were committed to find
some common ground for it, or in some sort to
confess their own ineompetency for the work;
happily, all were affected by the bias of the advocate
to attain the end which each had long and publicly
urged ; all were deeply imbued with that sentiment
which so often influences judgment; and some were
influenced by the consideration that success would
give them a strong claim to the recognition of
O O
history. There were other and stronger reasons for
agreement. The Victorian delegates foresaw that
O O
splendid consummation of the hopes of Victoria,
which events have so amply justified ; the South
Australians perceived in the movement, if not a
nominal, at least a practical extension of the
territory, and a vast addition to the wealth of their
colony ; the Tasmanians recognised the advantage


of the concentration near to their own shores of a
vast population in the neighbourhood of Melbourne ;
the delegates from New South Wales were in-
fluenced, in some cases by patriotism and the
glorious thought that they would become citizens of
a Great Australian Nation, in others, by the con-
sideration that the first step was being taken
towards an Australian Republic, and freedom from
the bondage of England. Eventually, with minor
modifications, the Constitution under which we now
live was adopted.
With hardly a dissentient voice it was agreed
that the territorial divisions existing at the time
should be retained and respected. By this course
the sensitive feelings of the colony of New South
Wales were placated, while at the same time the
neighbouring colonies were assured that their gain
at the expense of their neighbour would not be
diminished, since trade and revenue would inevitably
flow through them as distributing centres to large
districts of the mother colony.
As it was readily perceived that by adding
their debts together upon equitable principles the
joint credit of the colonies interested would largely
be increased, a principal difficulty was easily and
simply removed. From the railway question less
trouble was experienced than had been anticipated.
The southern colonies, well aware of how much they
had to gain from the proposed union, were ready


with concessions ; and it was clearly proved that
any loss which had hitherto been incurred had been
due largely to a war of rates and guages which
would now cease. Moreover, if New South Wales
had hitherto been successful in her railway manage-
ment, it was obvious that she would profit still more
under the proposed uniformity, when the entire
management of the railways of Australia would be
placed under the control of her own chief com-
missioner. To this view some of the New South
Wales delegates were not prepared at first to agree.
They held that the individual control of the railways
would enable the colony to some extent to protect
from undue competition certain parts of it, which,
from their situation with regard to the neighbouring
capitals, upon the removal of all fiscal barriers,
might be exploited by Melbourne and Adelaide to
the detriment of the colony at large. But it was
reasonably answered that, while the maintenance of
this unfederal attitude would do much to diminish
the value of the Union, it would only be partly
effectual for the purpose indicated. If the wretched
war of rates were to be continued, the other
colonies, as traffic increased, might build additional
railways to tap the borders of New South Wales ;
and it would only be a question of time for discon-
tent and agitation among the districts affected to force
the government of the colony to connect them with
the new lines. Moreover, it could not be doubted


that the question ot uniform rates was not much
less important than the question of uniform tariffs ;
that the loss incurred by senseless competition had
been enormous in the past, and under an uniform
tariff must be even greater in the future ; that it
would be a fatal step to allow the holders of their
securities to believe that the colonies were prepared
to unify their debts but not their assets. The free-
trade delegates were taunted with supporting a
course which had something worse than a savour of
protection, and wavered ; the protectionist delegates,
always enthusiastic in the Federal cause, were
entreated to remember that by their opposition they
might imperil the glorious hope of a great and
united Australia ; the military advantage of the
proposed course was warmly urged, and all were
reminded that Federal defence was one of the first
purposes of Federation. Lastly, it was argued that
a division of interests in this great matter would be
an everlasting blot upon the noble picture of “one
people, one destiny;” an evidence of distrust where
there should be perfect confidence, and of discord
where there should be brotherly love. Could any-
one, it was asked, call himself a federationist and
doubt —Australia ?
After a protracted sitting the amalgamation of
the railway systems was agreed to amidst much
enthusiasm.
In this conciliatory spirit all difficulties were


dealt with, and with a far-seeing wisdom the
delegates from the other colonies were always ready
to meet and to defer to the objections raised by those
from New South Wales.
But the consideration which perhaps had the
greatest weight in the settlement of differences was
a much nobler one. It was felt that in entering into
the proposed union the most perfect and childlike
trust ought to be placed in the good faith of the
Federal Parliament, which could have no other
desire than the general good of the whole country.
The case was put with great force by the delegates
from New South Wales, who, amidst much
cheering, asked if it should be sought to tie the
hands of that great body ; if it should be distrusted,
oven before it came into existence. Sir Hector
Rhino, indeed, ventured to dissent from this view,
and to suggest that the experience of individual
colonies of their own Parliaments had not been
universally fortunate ; and that in certain districts
of his own country discontent had been expressed
at the neglect of local interests. But this narrow
view happily was overruled, even by his own
colleagues, who pointed out that the great principle
of Australian politics had hitherto been that the
will of a majority should prevail, and that the
wishes of a minority, however large, could not be
regarded as being of any importance ; that Australia
was now upon the point of obtaining majorities and


minorities larger than she had ever experienced
before ; and that therefore she had good reason to
believe that she was about to attain to a form of
government far more perfect than she had ever
known.
It was in this fine spirit that it was decided that
the question of the position of the Federal capital
should be left to the decision of the Federal Parlia-
ment ; and the event has proved the loyalty and
sagacity of those who agreed to this course. It is
possible that, rather than forego the advantages
which she has received from Federation, Victoria
might have consented to the selection for this pur-
pose of so unsuitable a site as Sydney; and it is
right that the unselfish patriotism-towards United
Australia which was shown by the delegates from
the senior colony should suitably be acknowledged.
Nor should history fail to do justice to the
patriotic efforts of another body of men who showed
a noble desire to subordinate the interests of New
South Wales to those of other parts of Australia,
A notice, however brief, of the Federal movement,
would be incomplete which failed to make honour-
able mention of the Bathurst convention of 1896.
This convention was composed of a large
number of delegates, many of them very young,
who came together principally from New South
Wales, but also from different parts of Australia, to
discuss the subject of the Federation of the colonies.


It does not, indeed, appear by whom these persons
were delegated, nor how they were elected. Filled
with an enthusiasm which amply compensated for
any want of judgment, they met at Bathurst, in the
colony of New South Wales; discussed a proposed
scheme of Federation, based upon the draft bill of
1891 ; at the conclusion of their proceedings listened
in a respectful spirit to addresses delivered to
them by some of the leaders of the movement in
the colony, and then departed to their own homes.
But they had done a great work. In the
course of their deliberations they had succeeded in
convincing themselves and each other that the
O
Federation of the colonies was not only desirable
in the abstract, but must presently be achieved in
the concrete, and many amongst them were believed
to have arrived at a clear opinion of their own fitness
for high positions under the proposed Common-
wealth, Thus they could hardly fail to be valuable
auxiliaries in the after-time, when it became neces-
sary to canvas for votes amongst apathetic voters ;
and largely by their exertions the number of
affirmative votes (50,000) necessary to be recorded
by the electors of the colony of New South Wales,
in order that the proposed Federal Constitution
might be accepted, was exceeded by no less a number
than seventeen. The remaining steps may be
glanced at briefly. The amendments made in the
Draft Bill by the Parliament of New South Wales


were not of a drastic nature. It has been suggested
that many members were strongly of opinion that
in a Federal Parliament there lay before them a
larger opportunity for usefulness and a higher
salary, and a majority in favour of the Bill as
amended was readily secured. Some trouble, indeed,
was experienced in getting the measure through
the Upper House; but, upon a threat of their
extinction by the Government of the day, that
venerable body decided to follow the precedent set
in the case of the Land and Income Tax Bills not
long before, and immediately gave way. The amend-
ments in the Bill made by the Parliament of New
South Wales for the most part were accepted by the
other colonies without difficulty; the second meet-
ing of the Convention was little more than a
formality ; and the assent of the people of New
South Wales to the measure was obtained as already
stated.
The other states, who were parties to the
measure, hastened to follow suit; the electors, as a
contemporary record tells us, almost “ tumbling
over one another at the polls; ” and after the
necessary delay for reference to the Imperial
legislature, the Bill was passed finally into law in
the autumn of 1898, and came into force in Australia
on the Ist of January, 1899.
It must not be supposed that this result was
attained altogether without opposition, although the


conflict was short, and, comparatively speaking,
unimportant. In the colony of New South Wales,
several ill-advised persons arose, who declared that
the alleged advantages to be expected from the
measure were not in fact all that they seemed to be.
It was urged that, where two states had been
unable to agree about so simple a matter as a
common railway-guage, it was unreasonable to
expect that they would eventually prove to be at
one over matters of far more vital importance, such
as an unification of debts and a community of tariffs,
even if other important matters were left alone.
Those who brought forward these considerations
were rightly described as persons of provincial and
even parochial minds : for it was replied that the
proposed Union was, as it were, a marriage, where
the contracting parties might have something almost
amounting to a dislike to one another at first, but
where it was desirable that the marriage should be
consummated for the sake of the race, and the con-
tinuance of the family, with the full assurance that
the parties would afterwards fall in love. It was
urged, in vain, that such unions but seldom achieve
the ends expected; and that often they result in
individual misery, while the line of descent is not
materially strengthened ; that when they do not
lead to barrenness, they end in internecine family
conflicts. Others of the opponents in New South
Wales of the proposed union were even more


practical. Speaking according to their provincial
ideas, as citizens of that colony, they declared that
the Federation of the colonies must, upon the with-
drawal of Queensland from any active share in the
movement, be inimical to the interests of their own
country, since Melbourne must inevitably become
the Federal capital. Not only Victoria, but South
Australia and Tasmania, they declared, would vote
Melbourne as the Federal capital. In support of
their contention they appealed to the map of
Australia.
To these objectors a crushing retort was
offered. The question of the position of the Federal
capital was peculiarly one which should be referred
to the Federal Parliament, which had the greatest
interest in its solution ; and no sufficient answer
being forthcoming, it was agreed that it should so be
referred.
Subsequent events, we conceive, have proved
the value of this decision. Melbourne has justified
her right to the pre-eminence which the Federal
Parliament subsequently accorded to her.
But we must hasten our narrative of events.
It has already been stated that the dream of so
many Australian statesmen ceased in the year 1899
to be a dream. It was an accomplished fact. It is
true that Queensland and Western Australia were
not included within the Federal Union ; but it was
felt that the question of their adherence to it was


one only of time. It is also true that the
unfederated colonies represented a coast-line exceed-
ing the total of the intended Commonwealth of
o »
Australia, which it would fall to the lot of the
federated colonies to defend if Federation were to be
a practical means of defence. The four colonies
regarded these matters as comparatively unimportant,
conscious that the advantages of their expected
condition must offer so powerful an appeal to those
who had hitherto neglected or declined the oppor-
tunity of sharing in them, that they too would
shortly seek shelter under the mother-wing of a
Federated Australia.
It must here be confessed that the hopes thus
entertained have not hitherto been realised. The two
great colonies, Queensland and Western Australia,
have shown a growing tendency to watch rather
than to avail themselves of the results of what they
have been pleased to term the “ Federal Experi-
ment and the dealings of the Federal Government
with recalcitrant New South Wales do not appear to
have encouraged them, as might have been expected,
to join in our great Federal Union.
Having stated this deplorable fact we proceed to
notice very briefly what followed upon the adoption
by the non-provincial and non-parochial states of
a common constitution, under the great name of
“ The Australian Commonwealth.” By order of
the Federal Government New Year’s Day was set


apart as a day of special thanksgiving and of
rejoicing for ever ; and it was ordered that the first
week of 1899 should be a week of public holiday.
In city and country alike, shone nightly illumina-
tions ; the roar of pacific guns was heard on every
hand, and many tons of gunpowder were peacefully
burnt in celebration of the great event. In all the
capitals the enthusiasm was immense ; and in Sydney
it reached such a height that a monster subscription
list was started for the purpose of raising statues,
in some prominent quarter of the city, of the ten
delegates to the Federal Convention, who had done
so much to assist in the great work which had just
been accomplished. These effigies eventually were
reared in Martin Place, and for some years they
were looked upon by visitors as one of the wonders
of Sydney; being held to excel even the carvings
for which the Post Office buildings of the place had
long been famous. They continued to occupy their
honoured position for several years ; but, in the
outburst of popular fury, during the revolt of the
colony against the Federal Government, to which
allusion will be made hereafter, unfortunately they
were totally destroyed.
The winter of 1899 saw the first meeting of
the Federal Parliament. This event took place in
Sydney. The capital of the senior colony was
chosen at the instance of the Premier of Victoria;
and the proposal was hailed at once as graceful, and


as showing an earnest of that goodwill which had
been predicted from the union. The opening of
Parliament by the Governor-General was greeted
with still farther rejoicings, and a free banquet was
provided for the humbler electors in the Domain. In
Parliament itself numerous congratulatory speeches
were delivered, and it was felt that the newly-
effected union was about to achieve all that had
been expected from it.
It was not long, however, before a cloud fell
upon the sunny prospect of perfect agreement.
It will be remembered that New South Wales
had entered into the Federal Union with a declared
intention, expressed on her behalf by her delegates
to the Federal Convention, of loyally abiding b y
any decision which might be come to by the Federal
Parliament as to the site of the federal capital.
And this had been provided for in the Act. Now
it was rightly held that one of the first duties of the
Federal Parliament must be to settle this question ;
and, accordingly, one of the first motions of the new
legislative body was moved by the Federal Premier,
the Right Honourable George Joker (lately Premier
of the mother colony), who, upon the principle of
seniority, had been called to that distinguished posi-
tion by the Governor-General. Mr. Joker then
moved that Sydney be the Federal capital, and
advocated the claims of that city in a speech in


which wit and imagination played like lambent fires
over the surface of solid reason.
It is unnecessary to follow in detail the course
of the debate : it is sufficient to say that it was in
every respect worthy of the august assembly by
which it was conducted. As an example of human
endurance it is believed to have been without a
parallel ; but the proceedings may be summarised
very shortly.
An amendment was moved by which it was
proposed that the Federal capital should be situated
in Melbourne. The amendment was warmly sup-
ported by the members for Victoria and by a large
majority of those who represented South Australia
and Tasmania ; but it was bitterly opposed by the
representatives of New South Wales. At length the
latter, fearing defeat, proposed that a federal district of
limited area should be set apart which should become
the seat of the Federal Government; but as it was
intended that this district should be situated some-
where upon the borders of New South Wales and
Victoria the motion met with a good deal of
hostility from the members both for South Australia
and Tasmania, and the original amendment finally
was carried by a very large majority in both Houses of
the Federal Legislature. That the conclusion arrived
at was a reasonable and proper one cannot now be
doubted ; and it is to be regretted that during the
course of the debate some of the members repre-


senting New South Wales were guilty of an
intolerance of language—amounting to the open
expression of disloyalty to the Union itself—-which
sowed the first seeds of discord, and, as it were,
directed that unhappy colony towards the course
which afterwards was so disastrous to the happiness
and best interests of its inhabitants. That the
determination arrived at by the Federal Parliament
was one of the greatest moment to their colony will
afterwards appear; and it cannot be doubted that,
if the effects which were to follow had been foreseen
by the people of the colony, an effort would have
been made at the time to break away from the
Union ; and it is even conceivable that such an
attempt might then have been successful. But the
decision of the supreme power was acquiesced in,
although with the expression of a great deal of
discontent in all parts of the colony. The action of
the Senate, in particular, was made the subject of
hostile criticism. It will be remembered that each
colony sends an equal number of representatives to
this body; and the fact that the members for
Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania then were,
as they have been ever since upon intercolonial ques-
tions, at one, as against the representatives of New
South Wales, was made the pretext for a charge of
hostile combination against the interests of the
latter colony. It is surprising that time, and the
opportunity for reflection, have failed to convince


her statesmen, even up to the present day, that the
majority of the Senate have solely been moved by a
regard for the great principles of the greatest
happiness of the greatest number, and of the right
of majorities to coerce minorities in any way which,
to the majority, may seem desirable. These, we
repeat, have been, and we trust will always be,
fundamental in the government of Australia.
It is‘ not our intention to follow the course ot
Federal legislation at present. We shall briefly
refer to two principal measures, and state as shortly
as possible some of the more important effects which
followed from them.
We speak of the fiscal issue and of the estab
lishment of the great railway centre in Melbourne.
The belief had always been held, really or pro-
fessedly, by the freetrade party, which for so many
years had been dominant in New South Whies, that
Federation would be a direct step towards the adop-
tion of a general system of freetrade, alike between
the colonies themselves and with the outside world.
That such a belief was sincere we now can hardly
believe. That it can have been supposed that the
leading men of three colonies would consent to acknow-
ledge that they had been in error for years, and would
bow to the wisdom of those of one, seems incred-
ible enough ; but that it should have been thought
possible that those whose vested interests were already
open to possible encroachment to some extent, in


consequence of intercolonial freetrade, should have
been expected to consent to throw down all barriers
of competition with the outside world, is beyond all
reasonable comprehension. Yet this belief was
professed by the party in power in New South
Wales at the time of the Union. It seems hardly
to be necessary to recall the fact that it proved to
be entirely unfounded. Moreover, it became need-
ful to find some means of raising revenue to meet
the large additional expense which was occasioned
by the introduction of the new form ot government.
It is true that at the time it was generally expected
that the new constitution would eventually result in
increased economy. But money had to be found in
the meanwhile ; direct taxation could not be resorted
to ; and the custom-house provided the only reason-
able resource. These considerations, coupled with
the determination of the majority of the states to
continue the system under which they had so long
lived, led to the imposition of a heavy protective
duty upon all imports into the territory of the
Federated states, and created one of several classes
of malcontents in the colony of New South Wales.
The mercantile community were bitterly disappointed,
and highly indignant at this interference with the
freedom of their trade. On the other hand, the
manufacturing interests were proportionately jubilant;
although, as will be seen, their rejoicings were
short-lived.


And here it becomes necessary to refer to the
adoption by the Commonwealth of a common
railway gauge.
A measure by which this great boon was
conferred upon the Federated states was amongst
the earliest of those passed by the Federal legis-
lature ; and it was determined that the centre of the
system should be placed in Melbourne. This was
resisted by the representatives of New South Wales
who, we regret to say, from the first, appealed
actuated by a selfish and provincial spirit wholly at
variance from that displayed by their delegates at
the great convention of 1897. Melbourne was the
natural centre; and to have administered the railways
from Sydney would have been as great an injustice
to South Australia as the control of them from
Adelaide would have been to New South Wales,
greater; for the remarkable development of
South Anstralia in recent years, through her
situation with regard to the western districts of
New South Wales, has placed her in a position
whose superior importance to the older colony was
only dimly foreseen, even by the most intelligent
minds in the southern colony. Moreover, Victoria
already possessed large locomotive works, and had
long been building, while New South Wales had
been importing. It was urged, indeed, that branch
railway works might be established in Sydney ; but
the proposal was negatived upon the ground that in


this kind .of manufacture centralisation contributes
alike to efficiency and economy. The shops at
Eveleigh were continued for the carrying out of
necessary local repairs; and large numbers of the
employees were transferred to the works at Ballarat,
and to those which gradually grew up in Melbourne.
Thus began that steady transference of industry
from Sydney to Melbourne which has made those
two cities what they are to-day. A common gauge
had long been desired, and at last it was attained,
but unfortunately not without a further display of
that unfederal spirit which was rapidly becoming
characteristic of New South Wales. The effect of
this reform, when completed, was very striking.
Commerce began to find its natural inlets and out-
lets. No longer hindered by such artificial barriers
as Customs duties and special railway rates, it
began to flow through its proper channels. Already
for a long time those parts of New South Wales
which included Wagga Wagga, and the country to
the west of it upon the main line between Sydney
and Melbourne, had looked to Melbourne as their
real, although not their nominal, capital, and now
the latter city may have been said to have become
the actual capital; and the whole of the Riverina
district, though still compelled to pay the local
taxes, for all purposes of trade was practically
annexed to Victoria. Broken Hill and the neigh-
bouring country, under a freetrade policy, had con-


tributed comparatively little to the revenues of New
South Wales ; and the entire loss of their trade was
less severely felt than that of the western districts
of the colony, which, by means of the Darling and
Murray Rivers, aided by the spirited railway policy
initiated by the Federal Parliament, passed into the
hands of the two neighbouring colonies.
For it was rightly felt that the time had come
when it should be sought to develop Australia, and
not merely any part of it; and with this end in
view, the Commonwealth largely availed itself of
the increased credit, which was expected from the
Union, to obtain loans for the purpose of developing
the resources of the country. It was urged that the
railways of Australia had always been regarded as
amongst the most valuable of her assets, and that
their reduction to a scientific system, which would
afford the greatest facilities for traffic to the most
convenient ports, would immensely increase their
value. To objectors it was very properly replied,
that one of the great objects of Federation had been
the breaking down of artificial barriers drawn upon
the map, with which geography had nothing to do ;
and they were pertinently asked what system they
would propose to substitute for that which promised
the most efficient service for the whole country.
Obviously, from her outlying position, it would be
absurd to endeavour to centre trade in Sydney, and,
moreover, the colony already was served by a rail-


way system which, under the new conditions, would
probably be more than sufficient for all her reason-
able needs.
We must freely confess that in this case the
advantage of the Commonwealth at large was pro-
ductive of some hardship to New South Wales.
While she was made responsible for the increased
debt incurred by the Commonwealth, she gained no
individual advantage from the expenditure ; and the
demand for labour attracted to Victoria a large
number of her working population, leaving available
for her own needs only the unemployed and the less
energetic of the industrious workers. Wages rose,
it is true, for a time to famine rates ; but as a con-
sequence her industries languished ; and eventually
many of her factories had to bo closed —in some
cases temporarily, in more, permanently —since the
operatives drifted away to the busier centres in
Melbourne and Adelaide. Capitalists, in view ot
the decline of the Sydney trade, were unwilling to
face the competition of those great and growing
manufacturing centres, and the wages of those of
the workers who were unable to move
again suffered a heavy decline.
Thus, then, those conditions began to arise
which the merchants of Sydney found so difficult to
face. The areas commanded from Melbourne and
from Adelaide grew rapidly, while those left open
to the competition of New South Wales speedily


diminished. Meanwhile, the population of the chief
city of New South Wales quickly fell away. As
the capital of the Commonwealth, Melbourne be-
came the chief social centre of Australia. The wealthy
classes, no longer willing to live in the obscurity of
a provincial town, were attracted to it in large
numbers; those engaged in active commercial pur-
suits by the hope that they might transfer their
interests to a city upon which shone so bright a sun
of prosperity ; others because the gaieties of the
court of the Governor-General were an attraction ;
and many because they desired to establish their
families in a position where they would have the
greatest opportunities for advancement. In addi-
tion to these, the most energetic minds of New
South Wales saw in Victoria the best scope for
their activities; and with their secession the per-
sonnel of the population of the older colony began
to deteriorate. Then the wise policy of a reduction
of the harbour dues, applied to the port of the
capital, and the expenditure which increased pros-
perity allowed to be made, without difficulty, upon
the improvement of the port itself, led to an enor-
mous advance in the number and tonnage of the
ships visiting it; while the diminished imports and
■exports of New South Wales caused a rapid decline
in the shipping trade of the port of Sydney.
Meanwhile a cause, operating from the land-
ward side, began to affect that city most injuriously.


Mention has been made of the diversion of trade from
those parts of New South Wales which were most
conveniently situated for communication with the
ports of Melbourne and Adelaide ; and it will readily
be understood that the increase of traffic over the
railways leading* to those cities caused a corres-
ponding diminution of the receipts of the lines con-
necting the districts in question with Sydney. In
•other words, the railways of New South Wales
began to show a considerable yearly deficit. Even
apart from the provision in the Commonwealth Act,
following that adopted by the Bathurst Convention,
by which gains and losses by state railways were to
be credited or debited to the respective states, it
would doubtless have been held unjust that the
other colonies should be called upon to make good
this deficiency. The Victorian and South Aus-
tralian lines were beginning to be highly profitable ;
and such a proceeding would have been grossly
unfair to Tasmania, whose railways, although within
the Federal control, had no direct connection with
the system. It became necessary, therefore, to
increase the charges for freight in New South
Wales; and, as a consequence, the agricultural and
pastoral interests of the colony were placed at a
heavy disadvantage as compared with those of the
other states, while a further diversion of traffic was
•caused to the neighbouring capitals from places
outside of the radius which had been affected in the


first instance. Pastoralists, agriculturalists, store-
keepers, and the merchants in Sydney who had
been accustomed to supply their needs, alike
suffered ; and a further decline took place in the
fortunes of the capital ; while in the country many
who had been employed in the various producing
industries, and whose labour was of little value for
other purposes, were thrown out of work. The
mining industry, also, which a few years before had
shown strong signs of revival, was greatly hampered,
and its development was either stopped or seriously
delayed by increased rates, protective duties, and
growing taxation.
But, as will easily be perceived, the agricul-
turalists were the greatest sufferers, except where
their situation enabled them to send their produce
directly to the great markets of the South : for those
who had hitherto found a market in Sydney dis-
covered that with the decline of that capital
supplies very soon exceeded demands ; prices fell to
figures at which, more especially with increased
railway rates, it was impossible to make a profit
upon the spot, while the cost of freight destroyed
any hope of competition with those who supplied
the southern markets directly.
Against these losses may be set the fact that
for a time the trade of Newcastle showed signs of
O
considerable activity, and it was once believed that
the town would become a great manufacturing


centre ; but its distance from the populous parts of
the Commonwealth, and the development of the
southern coal-fields which has been stimulated by
the magnificent increase of manufacturing industries
in the metropolis of Australia, have militated
against this expectation. Its trade with Sydney has
become inconsiderable, and but few of the great
steamships which once visited that city now find it
worth their while to proceed beyond Melbourne.
Even at the time of the union the getting of coal
had ceased to be a very profitable industry. Re-
peated strikes had caused a serious shrinkage of
foreign trade, and the fear of their recurrence has
prevented any large investment of capital, upon the
spot, in industries dependent upon coal ; but, as with
the northern parts of the State, where, under the
Federal tariff, a considerable increase took place in
the production of sugar for export .to the southern
capitals, industrial enterprise has greatly been
checked by the heavy taxation which the'conditions
of the colony have required, and to which it will be
necessary to make short allusion presently.
Nevertheless, Newcastle has continued to be a.
place of considerable importance ; and her trade is
now larger than that of any city in New South
Wales. She is the chief producer of iron in
Australia. The demand, however, is not very great.
There is no export trade, and unless there should be
a sufficient reduction in the present price of labour


it is not likely that there will be any ; while even
the limited internal market suffers, in spite of the
duty, from heavy outside competition. The industry,
however, is of value to New South Wales, and has
helped her to a certain extent to bear up against
the burden of taxation which her conditions hitherto
have rendered necessary, and when, by the labours
of the Royal Commission now sitting, the State shall
have been limited to her natural boundaries, the
iron industry will bear a more just proportion to the
value of her other products.
In considering the facts which' have here been
set forth, it is impossible not to feel some regret at
the unmerited misfortunes which have overtaken the
mother colony. But we must remember that they
were the necessary outcome of that glorious destiny
of a Federated Australia, which has so nobly been
achieved ; and we cannot doubt that her leaders in
the F ederal movement must have foreseen the
conditions which subsequently arose, and must have
patriotically determined to sacrifice all provincial
considerations to the good of their country,
remembering that though the individual might
wither Australia would grow more and more. At
the same time it is curious to speculate upon the
different course which the story of Australian
history might have taken if Queensland had been a
member of the Federal group ; and if Sydney, with
its magnificent harbour—now, alas, little better than


a pleasure-ground —had been almost at the centre,
instead of almost at the circumference, of the
Federal circle.
It must not be supposed that the decline of
New South Wales to a subordinate position among
the Federal States, which we have chronicled so
unwillingly, took place in a moment of time, or that
it proceeded without local discontent or criticism.
For the sake of brevity we have endeavoured to
compress some of the principal results of the passage
of several years into the briefest possible retrospect.
Long before the year 1913, when the ineffectual
revolt of the State took place, there had been a
widespread expression of the popular discontent ;
and this had found utterance in the columns of the
principal journals, up to the time when so many of
those literary enterprises ceased to have any
existence
At the time of the Union there were published
in the capital of the State four daily journals of the
strictly “ newspaper ” class —namely, The Sydney
Morning Telegraph, The Daily Herald, The Evening
Star, and 2 he Australian News. In addition to
these, two newspapers were published on Sundays.
It is right to say that it was largely by the
unselfish efforts of the proprietors of the four first-
named newspapers that Federation was accomplished;
that the dim spark of brotherly love was fanned into
a consuming fire ; that the flagging interest in the


question of the Union was kept alive ; and that the
electors subsequently were driven to the polls to
give their assent to it.
The effect of the establishment of the Common-
wealth these organs of public opinion was
almost immediate. With the establishment of the
capital in Melbourne, they were reduced to the
rank of provincial newspapers ; while the great Mel-
bourne dailies took their places as leaders of the
public thought of Australia. Let history do justice
to the noble view taken by the proprietors of those
four journals. They put patriotism before profit;
and when, a few years afterwards, the Daily Herald
Newspaper Company went into liquidation, a testi-
monial was presented to the chairman by the united
press of the southern metropolis. The Sunday
newspapers, it must be confessed, were less altru-
istic ; and, though they shared in an ever-glorious
ruin, their proprietors were not able to solace them-
selves with the thought that they had deliberately
achieved it in the cause of an United Australia.
By the year 1909, then, the decline of trades
and industries in New South Wales had been so
great that out of all the newspapers mentioned the
Sydney Morning Telegraph alone continued to exist.
The journal was a very old established one. For a large
number of the families of New South Wales it had
been the chronicle of the births, marriages, and
7 n '
deaths of two or three generations; and sentiment,


as well as. utility, helped to preserve its diminished
circulation. Its younger rival, the Sydney Herald ,
had no such claims for public support; and the
company by which it was published was wound up
in 1908. The Sunday papers had already succumbed
to the general stagnation, and the shrinkage, alike
in circulation and in the advertising power of the
community, had led to the extinction of the evening
papers after they had made a gallant but ineffectual
struggle. It is true that before passing into silence
each and all of these journals had violently attacked
the new constitution, and had deplored the effects
of the union which they had once so earnestly
advocated; but their respective circulations were
so contracted that their outcries made no impression
upon the great public of Australia. One by one
they passed out of existence, until at last the
Sydney Morning Telegi'aph was left as the sole
representative of metropolitan journalism in Sydney.
At last this great newspaper awakened, and
announced the fact that it had observed that
of late there had been a decline in the pros-
perity of the State of New South Wales; and
it declared its intention of advocating reform. The
effect upon the community was electrical. The cir-
culation of the paper rose rapidly, until the daily
issue reached no less a number than five thousand
copies.
We will glance briefly at some of the conditions


which The Sydney Morning Telegraph had to record,
and note some of the classes who murmured their
discontent most loudly. The condition of the mer-
cantile classes was deplorable. The heavy protective
duty had destroyed the greater part of the general
trade of Sydney, while that with Queensland may
be said to have been totally lost; since what
was left of her commerce with the federated
States went direct to the great distributing
market in Melbourne, which then was, as it always
will be, the great centre of the wool trade. Even
the northern sugar districts of New South Wales
forwarded their productions directly to Melbourne.
As a consequence of the widespread depression,
and the enormous depreciation of real property,
alike in city and country, the three leading local
banks had been compelled to suspend payment, and
a large number of persons had been ruined.
The bulk of the shipping trade had been
diverted to Melbourne ; and even the mail
steamers no longer found it worth their while to
go round to Sydney.
Agriculturists no longer found a market for
o o
their products ; they and the pastoralists alike
suffered from increased railway rates and the heavy
direct taxation ; and enormous areas of Crown lands
had gone out of occupation, causing a corresponding
deficiency of revenue.


Under that taxation, and in consequence of
their distance from the great centres of population
and commerce, manufactures had declined.
Enormous reductions had been made in the
Civil Service by the Public Service Board, and
numbers of families were reduced to a state of
utter destitution.
While there was a brisk demand for labour in
the neighbouring colonies, the local market was
overstocked ; and the wages of those of the workers
who had not sufficient means to leave the colony
had fallen heavily. The number of unemployed
was such that there was no longer room for them
to meet, as they had been accustomed in old days
to do, at the top of King-street, Sydney, and they
had been compelled to adjourn to the Domain ; and
this in spite of the praiseworthy endeavour of the
Government of the State to preserve an appearance
of neatness by having the sand upon the foreshores
of the colony swept up into heaps.
Clerks had everywhere been thrown out of
work.
The spending power of the community had
been so much diminished by the rise of prices, and
by the reduction of incomes consequent upon the
general depreciation in the values and returns of all
local investments, that tradesmen all over the
colony, but particularly in Sydney, had been over-
whelmed by disaster and ruin.


Until the State Government, upon the failure
of the .sand-shifting industry, initiated its policy
of resuming the city r lands at the low prices pre-
vailing, and of turning them into ornamental spaces,
as a means of utilising the labour of the unem-
ployed, empty houses, stores, shops, and offices met
the eye everywhere.
In order that they might be more in touch
with the great centres of population, it had been
found necessary to transfer both the Catholic and
Anglican Archbishops to Melbourne ; and the local
adherents of the respective creeds' were proportion-
ately dissatisfied.
Necessary retrenchment had deprived the
University of Sydney of all Government assistance ;
and the attendance of undergraduates at that seat
of learning had fallen away to such an extent that
its maintenance became a farce, and at last it was
amalgamated with the great Federal University in
Melbourne.
Something must now be added with reference
to the taxation of the State, and that deterioration
of the local Parliament with which, of necessity, it
was associated.
It was obvious, of course’ that the government
of the Commonwealth could not be carried on with-
out a considerable expenditure of money; and, as
happens almost invariably, the sum required largely


exceeded that which had been estimated. In
addition to the cost of the Parliament itself, the
salaries of Ministers, members, a large staff of
officials, and the interest payable upon the loan
expenditure, which had been incurred in erecting
magnificent parliamentary buildings, constructed in
a manner worthy of the august assembly which
they were to accommodate, it became necessary to
pay for a new civil service for the administration of
the government in regard to Federal matters, as
well as a Federal Court of Appeal. Under-Secre-
taries were appointed for the different departments,
and complete staffs of officials were found necessary
for each of them. Accommodation had to be found
for the various offices, and land, which had rapidly
advanced in value in Melbourne after the decision
of the Federal Parliament upon the question of the
Federal capital, was resumed for the purpose and
for the building of the Houses of Parliament, at
greatly advanced prices. To all this the great cost
of the buildings themselves was added. Nor was it
found that the withdrawal of matters, falling within
the Commonwealth Act, from the control ot the
local legislatures, resulted in any great saving to the
various States, since many of them were of a
description which hitherto had permitted of dis-
tribution over various departments, and ot adminis-
tration conjointly with other necessary services.
The departments to which they had previously been


referred for the most part had still to be maintained ;
and the saving of a few minor salaries was all the
economy which union effected for the individual
States.
Again, nothing was more natural than the
ambition which was entertained for the possession
of naval and military defence forces worthy of a
Nation ; and there was a rapid increase in the esti-
mates and in the suras granted by the Parliament
for the department of the Minister for National
Defence. It was argued that Australia ought no
longer to be dependent upon so distant a country as
England for her protection by sea, or upon ships
which in a time of national peril might be required
for service elsewhere, even in the interests of Aus-
tralia herself. It had long been the ambition of
Victoria to have a navy of her own ; and this
patriotic spirit spread to the representatives of the
other southern States, and the nucleus of the present
Australian fleet was formed at considerable expense
to the country.
Nor were the land forces neglected. It was
clearly seen that if an enemy should attack our
shores we must be prepared to meet him with
appliances no less perfect than his own, and large
sums were spent upon the purchase ot the most
improved kinds of light and heavy artillery and
magazine rifles, and upon the development of an
army which should be something more than a name.


The means of defence, indeed, both by sea and
by land, rapidly grew to dimensions out of all pro-
portion to the populations of the Federal States, for
it was obviously necessary that provision should be
made for the defence, not only of the shores of the
Commonwealth itself, but also for those of the
States which had refused to join it, since the landing
of an enemy in any part of Australia would have
imperilled the safety of the whole country.
To all these causes of expenditure must be added
the fact that the increased indebtedness of the
Commonwealth was not characterised by the
expected diminution in the rate of interest which
had been anticipated. The advances required for
the purposes which have been mentioned were se
considerable that investors began to ask themselves
whether Australia were not, in popular language,
going ahead too fast, particularly when it was
considered that the fresh loans had been spent in
directions where the expenditure, however necessary,
could not fairly be called reproductive. The value
of the national securities, therefore, showed a
tendency to decline rather than to improve, and the
benefit expected in this direction unfortunately was
not realised.
It will readily be understood that the burden of
supporting her share of the Federal Government
pressed particularly hardly upon New South Wales,,
with her falling population and declining industries-


In Melbourne matters were different; the population
was increasing rapidly, and large sums were being
spent on behalf of the Commonwealth, in which
Sydney had little or no share. South Australia
already was reaping a rich harvest from the western
districts of New South Wales. It may be added
that, since contribution to the funds of the Common-
wealth was proportioned upon a population basis,
and since it was impossible to take a census every
year, a State with a declining population necessarily
paid more than its share of the general taxation, as
compared with a State whose' population was
increasing, until the next census enabled the pro-
portion to be corrected, after which the same
process recurred.
But, in addition to the heavy weight of taxation
imposed by the needs of the Commonwealth, New
South Wales groaned under a self-imposed burden
which threatened the utter ruin of the country.
It will be remembered that when the colony rushed
into the Federal Union it did not possess a system
of local government; and much of the expenditure
for local needs which ought to have been controlled
by local authorities was left in the hands of her
Parliament. Even during the days of her existence
as an independent province the “ roads and bridges ”
member was not entirely unknown ; and the claim
of a member to his seat, in some instances, was held
to depend upon the extent of his ability for milking


the State cow for the benefit of his constituents.
At the same time there were returned to the local
parliament a certain number of men who were
influenced by patriotic feeling, or by motives of not
ignoble personal ambition ; and many of these were
men, not only of integrity, but of ability.
Now an early effect of the establishment of the
Federal Parliament was the drawing away of the
latter class from the local legislature, while the
former class began to preponderate in it. Men of
ability and force, in particular, very naturally pre-
ferred to seek a larger field for their energies than
was presented by the State Parliament, where
debates were becoming daily more parochial in
character. Peference has been made to the fact
that the development of the southern metropolis had
already robbed New South Wales of many of her
best and brightest intellects ; and a like process led
to the transference to the Federal Parliament of
many of those who hitherto had raised the intelli-
gence of her legislative chambers somewhat above
that of the ordinary vestry. With the loss of its
best minds the State legislature sank to a condition
which was truly deplorable, and this at a time
when the solution of the problems presented by the
condition of the State itself might well have taxed
the ingenuities of the ablest of her statesmen.
In her social sickness she sought every political
quack remedy, and was delivered over into the hands


of noisy empirics whose only claim to consideration
was their blatant self-contidence and the bold adver-
tisement of promises which, it is needless to say,
could not be fulfilled. In the struggle for a voice
in the affairs of the State the loudest cries were
most listened to by thoughtless electors ; and in the
absence of men of force and character the affairs of
the country fell into the hands of demagogues, each
of whom was anxious to urge and to try his own
patent nostrum of new taxation, and to reward those
who had voted for him by an expenditure of public
funds which would diminish, if not relieve, the de-
pression existing in his own electorate. As will
readily be imagined, the direct taxation of the
wealthier classes was the favourite remedy; and
this method of raising revenue was adopted to
such an extent that capital no longer found re-
munerative employment in the State, and sought
investment elsewhere. Pressed down by this burden
and the heavy protective tariff, the industries of the
country were crippled, and even the natural advan-
tages of the territory, such as the possession ot
magnificent deposits of iron and coal, and of large
tracts of pastoral and agricultural land, to a very
■considerable extent were lost to it. Yet, though
we may inveigh against the misgovernment of that
unhappy State, it must be confessed that it was not
■easy to suggest a remedy. Money had to be found ;
the customs had been handed over to the Common-


wealth ; the revenue from Crown lands was greatly
diminished, and, as we have already stated, many of
them had gone out of occupation ; the railways were
worked at a loss which was chargeable to the State ;
and depression and depopulation had led to an
enormous shrinkage in the sums receivable from
stamp, death, and other duties : with the falling
away of trade the amount received through the
customs fell short of that debited by the Federal
Government for the share of expenditure incurred
on behalf of New South Wales, and a heavy annual
deficit had to be made good by that State ; and in
addition to these troubles she was met with the
expense of administering the government of a large
part of her territory in the west and south, from
the products of which, under a system of freetrade
with the neighbouring colonies, she received little
or no return. It is easy, we repeat, to find fault
with those to whom the government of the State
was entrusted : it is very difficult to suggest any
practical course which was open to them.
It must not be supposed that the representa-
tives of the State in the Federal Parliament were
blind to the condition of their country, or that they
failed to urge its claims to consideration. In season
and out of season they were insistent, and they
employed every means allowed by the constitution
to forward their aims. But the obstructive tactics
which had met with some success in other legis-


latures were of but little service in the Parliament
of the Commonwealth. So greatly did the interests
of New South Wales diverge from those of the
united colonies that that isolated State never was
able to achieve the balance of power which alone
could have given value to her as a supporter of any
Government policy, or have caused her to be feared as
an opponent of it. The only result of the efforts of
her members, coupled with the unhappy condition
of the country, was the perpetration of a historical
joke. It was gravely proposed that the name of the
State should be changed from New South Wales to
“ New Ireland.”
And yet a grim truth underlay this sorry jest.
Overtaxed by the superior government of the Com-
monwealth weighed down by local burdens ; her
industries almost destroyed ; her population falling
away ; suffering from the fatal haemorrhage which
goes on when local return for capital is unable re-
muneratively to meet the demands of foreign invest-
ment ; her pastoralists, agriculturists, and manufac-
turers alike financially broken down by the burden
of increasing taxation ; it is no wonder that in the
condition of the State there was found an analogy
to that of the unfortunate country of the old world,
many of whose sons had been amongst the most
earnest advocates of federation in the new. For it is
a strange but undeniable fact that, amongst the
leaders of federation in New South Wales, were to


be found those who were most anxious to forward
the cause of Home Rule in Ireland ; who were most
sensible of the evils of the existing legislative union
of that country with England ; and who joined in the
protest made at the time against the excessive
taxation, which it was alleged was exacted from
her for the general benefit of the Empire.
But the aspect of the Federal Union accom-
plished in the year 1899, here set out, now hastens
towards a conclusion. It has been viewed, we hope
sympathetically, chiefly from the point of view of
New South Wales. In chapters of this history,
hereafter, we trust, to be written, will be set out the
brighter story ot the development of Australia as a
nation ; and it will appear that thus, as ever, the
great principle was illustrated that the apparent
loss of the individual means the advancement of the
race ; it will be shown that the decline of New
South Wales was but an illustration of it; and that,
as had been foreseen by the leaders of the Federal
movement in that province, Australia profited even
though the fortunes of their native country were
given over to disaster and decay.
But, before we reach our account of this glorious
consummation, it becomes necessary to notice very
briefly a dark period in the history of the senior
colony, and to speak of a time when the selfishness
of a section of her citizens caused an attempt to be
made to overthrow the great constitution which had


been built up with so much difficulty and labour.
We allude to the revolt which, trifling as it was,
indicated a desire on the part of that unhappy pro-
vince to rebel against the glorious destiny of an
United Australia; to forget the motto of “ one
people, one destinyand to endeavour to return
to that policy of provincialism and parochial-
ism which had characterised the earlier history of
the Australian continent.
The causes for discontent in the State,
which existed even in the earliest years of the
present century, have already been set forth
sufficiently; and reference has been made to the
disloyal tone adopted by the Sydney Morning
Telegraph so early as the year 1909. And as time
went on, the spirit of dissatisfaction continued to
spread. The continuity of the policy of a country
is always maintained by those classes in it who have
something at stake. If they preponderate, there is
stability ; if, on the other hand, there is an excess
of those who have nothing to lose, the State will
become revolutionary.
Now, at the time when the above-mentioned
journal made its great discovery, New South Wales
was full of owners of estates whose properties
brought them no return ; of landlords who were
without tenants ; of professional men who were
without clients ; of merchants who had lost their
business connections ; of tradesmen who were


without customers; of working men who were
without work. To these were to be added
pastoralists, agriculturalists, and manufacturers
whose industries had ceased to be remunerative,,
and those who, if they still remained in their
employment, received merely starvation wages as a
remuneration for their labour. Beyond them there
remained a floating population of journalists, jockeys,
domestic servants, and other ministers of mere
luxury who, in old days, had been so magnificently
rewarded for their services. Amongst all this social
tinder the journal in question had come as a fire-
brand, and had lighted up the prevailing discontent
until it became a devouring flame.
The first signs of the coming social conflagration
were manifested at the polls. A national spirit,
which, alas, was not a federal spirit, commenced
there to be manifested ; and hostility to the
Commonwealth was freely urged as a claim to the
suffrages of the electors. New South Wales began
to return to the Federal Parliament men of
provincial and even parochial views, who thought it
to be consistent with their duty to the Commonwealth
to oppose an enlightened policy of Federal expen-
diture, and, in the pretended interest of an isolated
State, to endeavour to block by senseless obstruction
measures intended for the good of the country at
large. It is needless to say that these tactics were
not successful ; and the timely application of tho


closure enabled Federal legislation to proceed with
comparatively little interruption.
But in the State Parliament matters began to
assume a far graver complexion ; and, but for the
continual vigilance and the foresight of the I ederal
cabinet, affairs might have proceeded to the point of
serious disaster to the Union, It had chanced but
rarely that any representative of New South Wales
had been included in the government of the
Commonwealth ; and, fortunately, as it happened,
no member for that colony was regarded as being
influential enough to have a claim to cabinet rank,
at the time with which we have to deal. The
(government of the Commonwealth, therefore, was
.able to act when the emergency arose, not only with
dispatch, but with secrecy.
For the truth must be confessed that the local
Parliament had become little better than a merely
seditious gathering. The State, blind to the great
interests of the Commonwealth, and led astray by
the utterances of selfish agitators, began to ask itself
what it had individually gained by that Union which
had been greeted with so much enthusiasm ; and at
the elections men found favour who did not scruple
to urge that New South Wales ought to intimate
her intention of retiring from the National Federation.
At first the government of the Commonwealth,
secure in its unassailable position, paid but little


heed to all this wild talk. But matters advanced
rapidly. It had been easy enough in the Federal
Parliament to silence or to disregard the protests of
the representatives of New South Wales ; to point
out to them that they had refused to accept a pro-
posal, which had more than once been made, to
lighten the burdens of the State by attaching to
Victoria and to South Australia those portions of
the colony which, geographically considered, ought
to belong to them : it was more difficult to take
effective action to repress the seditious utterances
which in the Parliament of the State itself were-
listened to with demonstrative sympathy and satis-
faction. At last, in the year 1912, the discovery of
a widespread conspiracy, extending over all those
districts which still owned Sydney as their capital
city, the purpose of which was the throwing- off of
the yoke of the Federal Government, convinced the
central government that effective steps would have
to be taken to prevent the occurrence of serious dis-
turbances within the province.
Matters were in this position when an event,
ordinary enough in itself, precipitated that revolt—
or perhaps it might more properly be called that
r iot—to which the revolutionary spirits of New
South Wales have sought to give the more honoured
name of rebellion.
It has been pointed out that the great decline
in the customs receipts of New South Wales, con-


sequent upon the fact that the trade of a large part
of her territory had been diverted to the southern
capitals, coupled with the loss upon her railways,
left her, as a contributor upon a population basis,
annually a debtor instead of a creditor when the
expenditure for Federal purposes had to be appor-
tioned. And at the moment when the discontent
of the country had reached its highest point, the debt
thus incurred was placed upon the estimates by the
State Parliament. The item was violently opposed ;
the grant was supported in the most lukewarm
manner by the Ministry of the day, who felt that
their very seats were at stake ; and the vote was
refused by the Parliament. The Ministry resigned,
only to be succeeded by a cabinet pledged to a
policy of immediate separation; and a resolution
declaring the independence of the State was im-
mediately passed with acclamation by the Legislative
Assembly. The Governor, a subordinate official of
the British Colonial Office, who, in consequence of
that policy of necessary retrenchment which had
Jed to the abandonment of the old Government
House of the colony, had resided in Macquarie-
street, took refuge at Moss Yale ; the members of
the Upper House, faced by another constitutional
crisis, fled in all directions ; lawless gatherings met
in the open spaces of the city; disloyal mobs
paraded the streets and destroyed the effigies of the
ten patriots who had effected the Federal Union of


the colonies; anarchy threatened to obtain every-
where. A vast and representative public meeting
was held at the Town Hall, which passed an unani-
mous resolution calling upon Sir Hector Rhino, the
colonel commandino- the National Guard of the
O
•colony, to place himself at the head of the local
troops and to declare, and if necessary to maintain
by force of arms, the independence of the colony of
New South Wales. The veteran responded, and—
[Editor’s Note. —At this point in his narrative Professor
Ananias Honeybun died suddenly, leaving his great work uncom
pleted. This is not the place to express the grief of his admirers
at the sad event. It is enough to say, here, that what he had
intended to record is matter of contemporary history. It is well
known that the rising, the beginning of which he has chronicled,
ended in disaster to the unfortunate State by which it was
countenanced. The coup de main will long be remembered by
which the army of the Commonwealth, long and secretly held in
readiness for the event, seized upon the railways and roads lead-
ing to Sydney; while the Federal Navy, which had been sup-
posed by the leaders of the revolutionary movement to be
cruising in the neighbourhood of New Zealand, suddenly
took possession of the local arsenal upon Cockatoo Island,
and also prevented all approach to the port from the sea.
To avoid Imperial complications, the whole affair was treated
as a riot; the Federal forces had been sworn in as special
constables, and nominally were under the command of the
Inspector-General of the Federal police. The rebels in the
country were unable to effect a junction with those in the city ;
and it became apparent that no more active measures would be
necessary, since Sydney must quickly be starved into an undig-
nified surrender. The rioters in the city were but ill provided


with munitions of war ; their numbers fell quickly away, and
resistance to the power of the Commonwealth was seen to be out
of the question. In spite of the fiery eloquence of Sir Hector
Rhino, Sydney capitulated; the Federal troops took possession
of the town ; order was rapidly restored ; and the leaders of the
revolt were placed under arrest. Partly by intimidation and the
fear of fine or imprisonment; partly, it has been suspected, by
promises, or even bribery ; partly by the support of the members
representing the districts directly in touch with the southern
capitals, who saw only one way of relieving the burden of taxation
under which their electorates suffered—a majority was secured
in the State Parliament which not only agreed to the unpopular
vote, but passed a resolution in favour of the appointment of that
Royal Commission which is still sitting to devise the scheme for
the new demarcation of the boundaries of New South Wales,
which it is expected will shortly be adopted by the Federal and
State Legislatures.
Although it is probable that under the contemplated measure
the State will lose more than one-half of her territory, it is certain
that the burden of taxation will be very considerably diminished
in that portion which will remain to her. It is hoped that she
has learnt her lesson ; that it has been proved to those of her
citizens who still nourish discontent that it is idle to attempt
armed resistance to the will of the Commonwealth of Australia;
and that their only hope of altering existing conditions lies in the
employment of the proper constitutional means which have been
so successful in Ireland. But we may cheerfully expect that all
feelings of rancour will now die away ; that for New South
Wales a new era of prosperity is about to dawn ; and that, with
her beautiful coast and magnificent mountain country, she may
yet rival Tasmania as one of the best loved holiday grounds of
those who dwell upon the Australian continent.]




H. C. ELDERTON,
financial Agent,
Corner Hunter & Bligh Sts
ADVANCES on Freeholds, Leaseholds, and Personality at LOWEST
RATES.
INTERESTS under Wills and Settlements PURCHASED.
JV. MJ. COR\MGVU
Centennial . .
Cooperages,^*
DARLING HARBOUR.
VATS and CASKS of All
Descriptions.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
LAWSON
and
SMITH
(JAMBS R, LAWSON),
AUCTIONEERS,
VTAIaU TUTORS, and
COMMISSION AGENTS.
128,130 & 132 Pitt Street
(Nkar Kino Street,)
Sales by Auction at Private Residences.
Weekly Sales by Auction in the commodious Rooms.
128, 130 and 132 Pitt Street,
CASH ADVANCES made against Furniture, Plate, Pic-
tures, Fine Arts, Pianofortes, and general effects
received for unreserved auction sale.
Valuations made for Probate . Inventories prepared.
Mr. James R. Lawson, as heretofore, will personally conduct
the auction sales.
No Purer and Higher Class Egyptian
Cigarettes and Turkish Tobacco on
the Globe than “DUBEC.”
Manufacturers, Growers, and Exporters : Cousis & Co.
Obtainable from all the leading Clubs, Tobacconists, and Hotels throughout the world
Sole Importing Depot for Australasia :
Turko-Egyptian Tobaeeo & Cigarette Co.
108 PITT STREET, SYDNEY, N.S.W. (Established 1889.)


'Websdalb, Shoosmith & Co., Printers, 117 Clarence Street, Sydney


CHAMPAGNE
Veuve ♦ Cliquot.
PERHAPS
The Only Widow
That Ever Made
and ... AAtjoe,
The Only Wine
That Never Made
a Widow.
<3OOO IaOOHS
Are more closely connected with GOOD BEER than
most people are aware of. You cannot be good-looking
unless you are healthy, and you cannot be healthy if you
drink adulterated Beer.
PUiStUEP
Is what you may call a pure, wholesome, palatable Beer
—pure enough for your children to drink. It is brewed
from the pick of Bohemian Hops.
SOLE AGENTS
MORGAN & SMITH, 311 Kent Street


