

CHRISTIAN MISSIONS:
OR,
MAN TO MAN.
No. 15.
Sermon by Red. Charles Strong, D.D.
Reprinted from the "Leader," November 21, 1896.
Melbourne:
J, HAASE, PRINTER, 17 SWANSTON STREET.




Christian Missions : or, Man to Man.
BY THE REV. DR. STRONG.
[ Reprinted from the Melbourne “ Leader," November 21, 1896.]
At an interesting meeting held last week in this
city the question was discussed how the masses are
to be reached by the Church. It has struck me that
we might with profit review and continue this dis-
cussion.
It is hopeful to see this question brought to the
front, and hopeful also to see Calvinist and Armin-
ian embracing and kissing each other, so to speak,
in public, and declaring that they must lay aside
denominationalism if they are to do the work of a
Christian church. It is something to have ecclesi-
asticism and denominationalism left behind even
for a brief hour, and to see the Calvinist moderator
of the Presbyterian church welcoming a Wesleyan
Arminian pastor of very socialistic tendencies, as a
brother in Jesus Christ. It is something to have
the question of how to raise money for this or that,
forgotten for an hour, and the real end and aims of
the Church held up to the churches. For the real
end and aims of the Church are apt to be utterly
forgotten amid the noise of church machinery and
the details of church organisation.
A TRUE CONCEPTION OF CHRISTIANITY?”
The first thing which I think we have to bear in
mind is a truth which I have on other occasions
sought to bring before you, that Christianity means
a church, a society, an army, an association. We
Protestants have to thank our Roman Catholic and
Anglican brethren for keeping alive this concep-
tion of Christianity. They have given it what seems
to us a too materialistic and dogmatic form, but
the idea is true. We have reduced Christianity, too
much, to an individual and individualistic matter,
and our central thought has been, too much, the
safety of the individual soul. This is the weakness
of Protestantism—first, that it is individualistic and
then that it is selfish. The Church exists, according
to us, for the individual, and the aim of the indi-
vidual is to save his little soul.
Now, I am not denying that there may be a sense
in which the Church exists for individuals, nor that
religion is a deeply personal relation of each soul to
the great F’ather of souls.
When the Church, in the sense of a priesthood and
an ecclesiastical order, sacrificed the individual to
itself, and was ignoring the truth of religion as a
personal relation of spirit to spirit, Protestantism
did a great work in protesting against this one-
sided and tyrannical ecclesiasticism. It rightly
declared that the individual is a person, and that
personality implies that each man and woman is an
end in himself and herself, not a means merely to
an end, and that the Churchfexists to elevate, and
bless and save the personal being of each—that in
sacred, as in secular society, room must be found
for individual thought, conscience, and action.
But then Protestantism fell into the opposite
error. It began to ignore the truth that only in and
through a society, a church, can the individual find
the truest personal freedom and the highest
religious life. The error of Protestantism has been
very much the error of modern political life, which
is so closely allied to Protestantism in its rise and
progress, and which has, in the rebound from serf-
dom and feudalism, fallen into a onesided political
individualism which it is our task to-day to correct
and counterbalance by the idea of association,
collectivism and organic unity.
Is it not the idea of the Church that the Protes-
tant must seek now to regain ?
THE SPIRIT OF UNION.
And graduany, very gradually, we are regaining
it. We are being driven out of our little sheepfolds
into larger folds by the spirit of the times, by larger
knowledge, by the fusion of races, by hostile
criticism, by the presence of common dangers, by
(let us hope) a truer conception of what religion
means, growing up in our hearts, and the dissipation
of a barbarous theology which made cowards
of us all, and degraded Christianity to
the level of a miserable sauve qui peut.
There are signs which encourage us to think that
the idea of the Church is reviving under a
regenerated form—a form not like that of the
Roman Empire which the early Church adopted
and read into Christ’s words a machinery
imposed from without—but a form springing from
within, elastic and free, and growing naturally out
of the Christ spirit in men’s hearts.
This it seems to me was the great mistake into
which the Christians fell at an early period—they
interpreted Christian society as meaning Roman
society—a society founded on principles of Roman
government, which were by no means always in
accord with Christ. This is the mistake which
Romanists seem to us to make to-day. They
appeal to the text where it is said with a play on
two Greek words (which cannot have been Jesus’
words, if he spoke Aramaic, as is generally sup-
posed), “Thou art Petrus, and on this Petra I will
build my Ecclesia,” or, as we might say, “ Thou art
called Stoner, and on this Stone I will build my
society, or my democracy, represented by the old
Greek ecclesia or assembly.” But even if these
words are exactly what Jesus said, surely it does
not follow that his ecclesia or society, or kingdom,
was to be Roman, though Romans and Greeks
naturally enough read into them their conception
of a kingdom, society, or ecclesia.
And this misconception or reading of a worldly
meaning into spiritual words has infected
all churches. Only now does it seem to
be gradually melting jaway, like a cloud
from the face of the sun. It is a very
big dense cloud, however, and will perhaps take
long to disappear ; but it moves. Christianity, we
say first, means a church, a society, an army, an
association, an ecclesia, which Jesus drew around
him, which grew around him out of love and rever-
ence for bis memory, and faith in him as the loving
revelation of God in man.
THE MISSION OF CHRISTIANITY.
A second thing which we have to bear in mind
is that Christianity means a missionary church or
society. Jesus was inspired with the sense of a
mission. He felt that he had something to do for
his fellow men, and that he had found “a pearl of
great price ” which he longed to share with them.
He felt that he had found the key to open at
length to his nation the long looked for “ kingdom
of God.” If only they would use his simple key the


doqif-would Sy open, and they would “ enter into
the Jby of their Lord.” So Jesus went about preach-
-ijjgj not a dogmatic theology,' or an ecclesiastical
system, or an ism, not asking men to call them-
selves Jews or Christians, but urging them to press
through the strait gate and the narrow way of
filial trust and brotherly love, and a righteousness
of which he found the germs in the ancient
Law, which he said must be “ fulfilled,”
but fulfilled in a very different way
from that in which the clergy taught.
Those who gathered round Jesus and caught the
glowing inspiration of his spirit quite naturally
longed to help in bringing the Kingdom of God on
earth and opening its door to others. Jesus’ spirit
of filial trust and brotherly love was a fire in their
hearts which could not help radiating and cheering
and warming, and drawing men together as round a
family hearth. Jesus was not anxious to make
proselytes to a sect. He was anxious that men
should become trustful, loving and self-sacrificing ;
that they should give up their proud nationalism
and become as little children, and stoop low to
serve ; that they should renounce wrath and
hatred, and love the Roman enemy ; that they
should cease to labor and be heavy laden under
wearisome burdens of legal prescriptions which
could never lift them any nearer God, and take on
them the yoke of the meek and lowly in heart ;
that they should cease to regard God as a Task-
master, and henceforth call Him “Our Father,”
and that they should look on His Law as given not
to oppress them, but for the best interest of man
himself. The Law, he said, was made for man.
Very soon men and women lost this inspiration of
Jesus, and wanted to proselytise like the old Jewish
clergy who, Jesus said, compassed sea and earth to
make one proselyte. They changed zeal for the
Kingdom of God into zeal for an organisation, or
sect, or nation, or theology. But the real mission-
ary spirit is always the same—the zeal of Jesus for
“ the Kingdom of God and His righteousness.”
And if you were to ask me for a definition of the
Church, I do not know how better to define it than
as a society, an assemby, held together and inspired
by the glowing desire to uplift man to God and
bring God down to man through the stiait gate of
filial trust and brotherly love and spiritual free-
dom.
This idea of the Church, as essentially 'mission-
ary, has been too much lost sight of. When we
talk of a church we often, perhaps most fre-
quently, mean a building with a congregation
somewhat listless, assembling weekly to say
prayers, sing hymns and listen to sermons. Now
prayers, hymns and ssrmons may be very good
in their own place. They may and should generate
spiritual electricity and steam power, and rekindle
our lamps which the cold winds of the world are
always blowing out. But the first idea of a church
is that of an assembly knit together in the desire of
Jesus to make the world a God’s Kingdom, and to
do so by inspiring men, not with fanatical zeal for
this ism or that, but with a trustful, filial, brotherly
spirit, as the only key with which to let God’s King-
dom enter the world.
WHAT ITS TRUE MEANING IS.
Churches will think that their mission is to make
converts to their theology, and get people to pro-
nounce the shibboleth “Christ,” to declare them-
selves converted, or “ washed in the blood,” and
sure of heaven when they die. And so they have all
sorts of cut and dried ways of missionarising, and
all sorts of revolting nonsense and self-glorifying
cant are palmed off in the name of “ Christ,” and
Christ is dishonored by being reduced to the level
of a vulgar demagogue or king, who is loaded with
flattery and honey sweet adulation. But is this
the true and noble conception of a Missionary
Church ? Is this an assembly, an ecclesia, inspired
with the desire to draw men into God’s kingdom
through the narrow gateway of Jesus’ noble spirit ?
I cannot think so.
The real Church is a glowing fire, radiating light
and heat. It is an army animated with Jesus’
great thoughts and hopes—a society not seeking to
win proselytes to itself, but to open the gate into
the kingdom of love and liberty and humanity, and
persuade men to enter in.
In an often dim and confused way Protestants
are feeling this, that Christianity means a church
and a missionary church—but in what a dim and
confused way !
The question which many Protestants begin-
ning to put to themselves is, How to reach “ the
masses,” as they are called. They are no longer con-
cerning themselves so exclusively with Jews and
interesting black heathen, for it is dawning on them
that the Christian masses are not yet converted,
that half of them belong to no visible church, and
that, as one speaker at the meeting referred to
pointed out, they have in some cases given up their
Bible even, and have, from the orthodox point of
view at least, relapsed into heathenism.
Roused at length to this alarming state of things,
many rush about as people often, do when they
discover that a house is on fire, talking very loudly
about what ought to be done to extinguish the
flames, but doing really nothing.
HOW THE MASSES ARE TO BE REACHED.
We have many who believe that the masses are to
be converted by a display of banners, noise, and
vulgar rant. Among those who employ such
methods we are glad to recognise earnest,
unselfish, good men and women ; and the influence
of such people, no matter in what extravagant
clothes they array themselves, must make itself
felt. The question, however, is, Would they not
let their light shine more brightly if the glasses of
their lamps were not so highly and fantastically
colored? ,
We have many who think by multiplying services,
increasing ecclesiastical machinery or scattering
Bibles, the Church is to fulfil its mission. But we
question if the ends and aims of Jesus can be
carried out in this way. We are sure they can-
not.
Some speakers last week told us that ministers
must divest themselves of their clerical robes, and
speak “as man to man.” But we fear that if there
is no message in the Church’s heart it won’t matter
much what clothes we wear, or whether we preach
in our shirt sleeves.
When the gown and bands are discarded we want
to know what message our clergy have beneath
these articles of raiment, and whether it is such as
one man can look another in the face when deliver-
ing, without laughing like the Roman Augurs.
One does not like to say hard things, but it is to
be feared the churches have not got the inspiration
of Jesus. They do not realise what the Church is
and what its mission is. Strange they do not see
that until they do realise this, they can do nothing,
in Jesus’ sense of the word, to missionarise !
THE FIRST DUTY.
The first mission, I think, which Christian clergy-
men have to fulfil is to convert the churches to the
gospel of divine humanity proclaimed by Jesus, and
to put off the old clothes of theology and ecclesiasti-
cal traditions which are the real hindrance to the
couversion of the world. It matters little
that a clergyman changes his university or
Genevan gown for a fashionable frock coat, and
his white tie for a black one, or for a scarf of many
colors, if he is still at heart an ecclesiastic, or pre-
sents to his fellow men a view of religion which
insults their reason and contradicts their holiest
instincts. It matters little that our Presbyterian
brethren, for instance, should leave their churches
and address congregations on a hillside, on Yarra
bank, or in a theatre, if they carry with them the
gospel according to the Westminstei Confession of
Faith, with its terrible doctrines of hell tire and a
God who elects some to eternal joy “to the praise
of His glorious grace.” and “passes over” others
to take their part in the lake of Are for ever, “ to
the praise of His glorious justice.’' You might
divest yourself of all but the scantiest clothing, and
yet you could not speak “as man to man ” with a
message of this kind on your lips.


The Church’s theology wants to be thoroughly
recast btfore we can speak as man to man. And
this is wliat our churches will i 7 t do. They are
afraid to meet the real questions of the day, the
••eal questions of criticism, science, the Bible, social
reconstruction, and skulk ignominiously behind
their creeas and trusts. The mission of Jesus thus
degenerates into a defence of our sect or our creeds,
or our in A mee.
The first thing, then, we clergy have got to do is
to'conveit the churches to the noble aim and Gospel
of Jesus. When the churches are converted,
“ the masses ” will soon come in.
THE TRUE VVA.Y OF CONVERSION.
Then, in the second place, having caught afresh
the inspiration of Jesus, for which artificial excite-
ment, hymn singing, tawdry music and respect-
able formality are now very largely substituted,
the next thing will be to discover that the
way to convert the world to Jesus and open
the door to the Kingdom of God, is
not by talking and canting, but by trying to prac-
tise the gospel, and breathing the humane spirit of
the Gospel into our laws, institutions, and social
relations.
Did the masses feel that the Church, like Jesus
of old, loved, cared for man, woman and child, and
was indeed their Friend, “the Good Shepherd,”
carrying not only the lambs, but as, we are told, in a
picture in the catacombs, the goats on his shoulder,
don’t you think the Church would have no lack of
power? But the Church does not so much as it
should put forth this power—“the power of God
unto salvation.” No, it too often contents itself
with delivering a message about how to win heaven
and escape hell, and then goes, like Jonah, outside
the great human city and lies down under its eccle-
siastical gourds to watch what will befall.
Great injustices may prevail, but how slow is
the Church to right them ! How often has it taken
the side of the strong against the weak ! It has
thought to be a “ lord over God’s heritage ” rather
than “the Good Shepherd” caring for all the
sheep, and smiting the lions and wolves that tear
and rend the flock.
To lift humanity in Jesus’ sense, is not to go de-
livering a theological message, or giving men a
chance of heaving a selfish gospel ; it is to breathe
the breath of humanity into them, and to make
them feel that justice and love, and deep fellow
f ’ling, and self-denying sympathy are touching
tt sm, and saying, “ Rise up and walk.”
The Ctr'rch has thought that its mission is to pre-
pare r. jople for another world. But is not its real
mission to establish righteousness, goodness, and
brotherhood on the earth ?
THE LIFTING OF HUMANITY.
And how can this be done ? Well, Ido not de-
spise Bibles, or services, or prayers, but I say that
it can best be done by honest sympathy taking
shape in justice, in interest—living interest—in all
that helps to make men men, and women women.
The Church’s missions have failed because they
have been too mechanical, too ecclesiastical, with
too little about them of the breath of manly
trust and rational thought uplifting man to God,
and too little enthusiasm for justice between man
and man, class and class. The Church has looked
upon this as outside of its domain. It has sought
to be a self-contained house, instead of endeavoring
by the power of human sympathy to lay hold of the
individual conscience, the family conscience, the
citizen conscience, the national conscience, and the
cosmopolitan conscience, and making itself part
and parcel with these.
The Church must recognise its mission as being
not to save from a theological hell and raise to a
theological heaven, but to “ save ” by breathing
spiritual health and life and peace into the spiritu-
ally sick and wounded and dying, and raising from
their graves those dead in selfishness and indiffe-
rence. And to fulfil this greatest of missions it will
never do for her to limit her sphere to the four
walls of a building, or her methods by the good old
forms of church worship. She must speak “as
man to mail”—to man the individual, man the
member of a family, man the member of a society,
man the citizen of a state, man the rational being,
man the member of a world-wide fraternity. She
must claim for religion a right to enter into all
departments of life, and erect her pulpit in litera-
ture, in art, in politics, in social economics, in
world wide thoughts and sympathies. Ido not
mean that we must secularise the Church, but
rather that the Church must claim every sphere of
human life and interest as her own sacred domain,
and take man to her heart.
WHAT THE CHURCH,, MUST DO.
'But the Church that seeks to do this must not be
a society of ecclesiastics, but a Church of the Holy
Spirit ; and her weapons must be the shield of
trust in human destiny, the helmet of hope in the
triumph of truth, and the sword of a divine-human
spirit; while her feet are shod with the prepara-
tion of a gospel of peace.
We Protestants have failed because we have for-
gotten that Christianity means a church and a mis-
sionary church ; because our idea of our mission
has been a false one, or because our methods of
doing good have been so narrow, so artificial, so
mechanical, and even grossly fantastical and ridi-
culous.
“ The Spirit of the Lord,” we read, “is upon me,
because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good
news to the poor. He hath sent me to proclaim
release to the captives, and recovering of sight to
the blind ; to set at liberty them that are bruised ;
to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.”
There was the first Christian sermon.
But the servants of God can never fulfil this noble
mission till you strike from the Church the cruel,,
fetters of tradition and ecclesiastical despotism and
conventional religion and mammonism and Biblio-
latry, and bid them go forth in the power of God’s
free Spirit to convert human life into the Kingdom
of God, and speak to man in the name of his own
best manhood.
Friends and brethren of this congregation, let me
point out to you your mission as a church. You are
invited not only to edify yourselves, but to inspire
with the breath of health and peace your city and
country and fellow men. Free yourselves, help
others also to true freedom, and act the part of
missionaries to other churches. It is for you lay-
men to set the clergy free. Beware of degenerating
into a sect; claim for yourselves to be part of the
true Catholic Church, and be true to the broad,
humanising, spiritualising and saving mission of
the Church of a living God.
