

F I J I.
m ~kJ /
CORRESPONDENCE
RELATING TO THE
NATIVE POPULATION OF FIJI.
PART I.—NATIVE LABOUR ORDINANCES.
PART lI.—CONDITION OF THE NATIVE
POPULATION.




CORRESPONDENCE
RELATING TO THE
NATIVE POPULATION OF FIJI.
PART I-NATIVE LABOUR ORDINANCES.
PART 11-CONDITION OF THE NATIVE POPULATION.
to fiotf) Rouses of iJ.uliamrut 6i> (Tomnuiiti of iQrr mairoti?.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY EYRE AND SPOTTISWOODE
To be purchased, either directly or through any Bookseller, from any of the following Agents, viz.,
Messrs. Hansard and Son, 13, Great Queen Street, W.C., and 32, Abingdon Street” Westminster:
Messrs. Etre and Spottiswoode, East Harding Street, Fleet Street, and Sale Office, House of Lords •
Messrs. Adam and Charles Black, of Edinburgh ;
Messrs. Alexander Thom and Co., Limited, or Messrs. Hodges, Figgis, and Co., of Dublin.
[0. —1434.] Price Is, 10 d.
1885.




Fro™ <> r to whom.
Date.
March 12, 1877
(Rec. May 28, 1877.)
Governor Sir A. H.
Gordon.
To Governor the Hon
Sir A. H. Gordon.
Governor Sir A. H.
Gordon.
To Administrator
J. B. Thurston.
Governor G. W. Des
Voeux.
Sir A. H. Gordon
Governor G. W. Des
Voeux.
Ditto
To Governor Sir G. W
Des Voeux.
Governor Sir G. W,
Des Voeux.
Ditto
17270. Wt. 1700.
June 27, 1877
Nov. 15, 1880
(Rec. Jan. 20, 1881.)
Feb. 9, 1881
Jan. 18, 1883
(Rec. March 9,1883.)
April, 1883
(Rec. April 17.)
March 19, 1883
(Rec. May 7, 1883.)
April 10, 1883
(Rec. June 1, 1883.)
(Extract.)
Aug. 10, 1883
Sept. 3, 1883
(Rec. Oct. 20, 1883.)
Sept. 3, 1883
(Rec. Oct. 20, 1883.)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART
Subject.
Transmitting, with explanatory observations
thereon, and Report of Attorney-General,
Ordinance 10 of 1877, to regulate and control
the hiring and service of Native Labourers
within the Colony ; enclosing also various other
documents.
Conveying Her Majesty’s confirmation and
allowance of Ordinance 10 of 1877, and calling
attention to several points in connexion with
the measure.
Transmitting, with observations thereon, and
Report of Acting Attorney-General, Ordinance
23 of 1880, to amend Ordinance 10 of 1877,
to regulate and control the hiring and service
of Native Labourers within the Colony.
Conveying Her Majesty’s confirmation and allow-
ance of Ordinance 23 of 1880,
Transmitting copies of a Message addressed to
Legislative Council in connexion with a new
Ordinance for regulation of the engagement of
Native Labourers, and observing that this
Message is a reply to attacks which have been
made on the Native Policy of the Government.
Expressing entire concurrence in the views put
forth in Mr. DesYoeux’s message to the Legis-
lative Council, with regard to the Ordinance
for amending the Native Labour Law.
Transmitting, with Report of Acting Attorney-
General, Ordinance No. 4 of 1883, with
respect to the engagement and service of
Native Labourers.
Submitting further and fuller observations with
regard to the Native Labour Ordinance, 1883,
and the message relating thereto addressed to
the Legislative Council, enclosing also a Memo-
randum by Sir A. H. Gordon.
Conveying Her Majesty’s confirmation and
allowance of Ordinance 4 of 1883, with
observations upon certain sections of the
measure.
Transmitting, with observations thereon, and
Report of Attorney-General, Ordinance 10 of
1883, for the better regulation of dealings
between Natives and other inhabitants of the
Colony.
Transmitting, with explanatory observations
thereon, and papers connected therewith,
Ordinance No. 12 of 1883, to amend the
Native Labour Ordinance No. 4 of 1883.
Page.


Serial i ,
j From or to whom.
Date.
G. Anderson, Esq.,
M.P.
Nov. 8, 1883
Governor Sir G. W.
Des Yceux.
Sept. 27, 1883
(Rec. Nov. 15, 1883.)
To Governor Sir G.
W. Des Yoeux.
Nov. 17, 1883
To G. Anderson, Esq.,
M.P.
Dec. 6, 1883
To Governor Sir G.
W. Des Yoeux.
Dec. 17, 1883
Administrator J. B.
Thurston.
Nov. 27, 1883
(Rec. Jan. 19, 1884.)
Acting Governor
G. W. Des Yoeux.
May 26, 1879
(Rec. Aug. 5, 1879.)
(Extract.)
To Governor Sir
A. H. Gordon.
Aug. 13, 1879
(Extract.)
Governor G. W. Des
Yceux.
April 26, 1882
(Rec. June 30,1882.)
To Governor G. W.
Des Yoeux.
July 11, 1882
Governor G. W. Des
Yoeux.
Dec. 21, 1882
(Rec. Feb. 12,1883.)
The Hon. Sir A. H.
Gordon.
(Rec. Apr. 17, 1883.)
Subject.
Calling attention to the existence of much dis-
content in the Colony on account of the
absolute power exercised by Governor, and
citing the case of the recent Labour Law.
Transmitting copy minutes of Legislative Council
of 6th September, on which occasion Mr. Hill,
an unofficial member, expressed views in accord
with those of official members with reference
to the charges of the “Fiji Times.”
Conveying Her Majesty’s approval and confir-
mation of Ordinance 12 to amend the Native
Labour Ordinance No. 4 of 1883.
Explaining, in reply to his letter of Bth Nov.,
that it is usual in Colonies with a large Native
population unrepresented in the Council for
the Crown to retain under its control a majority
of the votes, and that the recent labour legis-
lation was for the benefit of a peculiarly
helpless class.
Transmitting extracts from a letter received from
Mr. G. Anderson, M.P., together with copy of
the reply thereto.
Submitting observations on the Native Labour
Ordinance, and the position taken up by non-
official members of the Council v- ith reference
to that measure.
Commenting upon the letter from Mr. Anderson,
M.P., on the subject of the Native Labour
Ordinance.
Submitting explanatory observations with refer-
ence to statement made by Mr. Fillingham
Pan', and particularly as to the collection of
food in payment of Native taxes.
PART
Submitting explanations respecting the suspension
of the Eoko* of Rewa and Eoko of Lomai Yiti.
Approving the course adopted by Mr. Des Yoeux
in suspending the Roko of Rewa and the Eoko
of Lomai Yiti.
Reporting the removal from office,of Ratu Epeli
and Ratu Rabici, and the provisional appoint-
ments made in consequence.
Approving his proceeding in regard to the removal
from office of Ratu Epeli and Ratu Rabici,
and the arrangements made for supplying their
places.
Transmitting copy of a correspondence with the
Rev. F. Langham, Chairman of the Local
Board of the Australian Wesleyan Mission
Society, and copies of letters written to the
“ Argus” newspaper, on the subject of certain
grave charges brought against the Native
policy of the Government by that gentleman.
Submitting observations on the correspondence
between Mr. Langham and Governor Des
Yoeux, and generally on the question of the
treatment of Natives in Fiji.
Page.


Governor Sir G. W.
Des Voeux.
July 2, 1884
(Rec. Aug. 29,1884.)
Transmitting the Report of the Secretary for
Native Affairs on the vital statistics of the
Colony for the year ending 30th September
1883.
Administrator J. B
Thurston.
June 21, 1884
(Rec. Aug. 19, 1884.)
Transmitting a letter to the Queen from the
Chiefs assembled at the recent annual meeting,
together with the report and recommendations
of the Chiefs, the Administrator’s replies thereto,
and his address to the Council.
136
To Governor Sir G
W. Des Yceux.
Ditto
Sept. 9, 1884
Sept. 23, 1884
Governor Sir G. W
Des Yceux.
Nov. 22, 1884
(Rec. Jan. 15, 1885.)
i 17270.
Conveying Her Majesty’s, reply to the letter
received from the Chiefs assembled at the
annual council.
Observing that it appears from the Report on the
vital statistics for 1883 more than ever de-
sirable to persuade the people to pay attention
to existing regulations on sanitary matters.
Forwarding, with observations thereon, a tran-
script of certain questions recently put to the
Government in Council with reference to its
Native policy, and the alleged discontent and
oppression of the Natives, together with copy of
the reply thereto by the Acting Colonial
Secretary.
b
112




PART I
NATIVE LABOUR ORDINANCES.
No. 1.
Governor The Hon. Sir A. H. GORDON, K.C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the
EARL OF CARNARVON. (Received May 28, 1877.)
My Lord, Nasova, Fiji, March 12, 1877-
I have the honour to transmit for Her Majesty’s gracious allowance and
confirmation an Ordinance “ to regulate and control the hiring and service of Native
“ labourers within the Colony.” The object of this Enactment is to repeal Ordinance
No. XV. of 1876, bearing the same title, and make other provisions in lieu thereof.
2. I was directed by your Lordship in your Despatch, No. 122, of the 18th September,
to make some alterations in the Ordinance No. XV. of 1876, and in giving effect to these
instructions I have introduced some other changes of which the Ordinance stood in
need.
3. The present occasion appears to me a suitable one for a brief account of the rise of
the traffic in native labour within the Colony, the facts of which I have reason to think
have as yet never been very fully laid before your Lordship.
4. The earlier settlers in Fiji cultivated their plantations with the aid of the Natives
living on the land they had purchased. In most cases, however, this arrangement was
found not to answer. The Natives seldom fully compreliended that the new proprietor
had acquired exclusive rights over the land. If he had bought from the Chief, he was
supposed to have purchased the Chief’s rights only ; if, on the other band, the vendors
were the tankeis or occupants of the soil, the buyer was held to have acquired nothing
more than their own right of occupation, a right to be exercised in conjunction with them,
and not to their own exclusion. Disputes arose, and the settlers, as a rule, though with
some honourable exceptions, fell into the habit of forcibly expelling the Natives from the
whole of the land they had purchased, and burning the villages which stood within its
boundaries. The whole population were thus expelled from the large island of Rabi,
which at the time of Captain Wilkes’ visit was inhabited by about 5,000 persons. The
islands of Wakaya, Mago, and many others, as well as large tracts on the main islands,
have been in like manner utterly dispeopled. The natural resource of the planter when
he had driven off the population from his own estate, was to purchase labour from the
next local Chief. The planter gave a present to the Chief, and the Chief gave the
planter men in return, for a longer or shorter period. But this arrangement did not
prove much more satisfactory than that of employing the original occupants of the land.
V hen local labour was thus employed the labourers were still in the immediate neigh-
bourhood of their homes. The presence of their wives and children and the desire to
keep their own gardens in good order, induced them to be more frequently absent than
was agreeable to their employers, and promoted habits of greater independence than,
suited the planters’ wishes. The native labourers, moreover, were still in the vicinity
and under the eye of their local Chief, and were able to appeal to him in case of
ill-usage.
5. The planters accordingly began to import labour from other groups of Polynesia,
from the New Hebrides, the Line islands, the Solomon group, &c., &c.
6* If S00 J) occurred to someone that the same system might be conveniently applied
to liji itself, and that, if men were brought from the more distant islands of the group
i 17270. A


they would be practjcally as far removed from home influences, and as completely under
the absolute control of their masters, as if they had been brought from the New Hebrides,
whilst the expense of introducing them w r ould be considerably less.
7. This system has been since generally followed by those unable to afford the expense
of obtaining Polynesian labourers, or for other reasons not desirous to employ them.
8. Various causes led to the districts of Ra and Ba, in Viti Levu, and the Yasawas
islands being selected as the field for these operations, and the supply of native labour
has been drawn almost exclusively from these provinces.
9. At first the planter desiring labour himself or his manager used to go over and
purchase from the Chiefs the services of the number of men he required. "This, however,
was soon found to take up time, and be otherwise inconvenient and objectionable.
The planter might not. perhaps, be always very particular as to the mode of obtaining
labourers, but he might have felt some difficulties which it w r as well to avoid had he been
himself an eye witness of the means used to procure the requisite supply.
It was more convenient to receive labourers delivered by others in Tavinni or elsewhere
without asking embarrassing questions; and the trade soon fell almost wholly into the
hands of men styled recruiters or labour agents, or. in more colloquial parlance, <c black-
bird catchers,” who either purchased men on their own account for the purpose of
retailing them to planters at a higher price, or executed orders received from the planters
for a given number of men.
10. But the supply was not equal to the demand. Some Chiefs hesitated to dispose of
the services of those over whom they had control to the recruiters, and were, moreover,
reluctant to deprive themselves of their services. A remarkable expedient was then
adopted by the so-called Parliament of Fiji for promoting the supply of labour. A
heavy poll tax was imposed on every native man or woman, a failure to pay which
was made punishable by imprisonment with hard labour on the plantation of anyone
paying a certain sum to the Government.
11. Of course, the effects, both direct and indirect, of this measure were considerable.
A oreat number of persons voluntarily offered to work for those who would pay their
tax°for them, and thousands more were swept from their homes by this iniquitous lav/.
A war was also undertaken against the tribes of the interior of Viti Levu, and the
population of whole districts deported and assigned in a similar manner to service on
plantations.
12. These prisoners taken in the mountain war were released from servitude in
consequence of the strong representations of the late Commodore Goodenough, but the
assigning of defaulting tax-payers to planters continued until the time of cession.
Sir H. Robinson diminished the amount of the poll tax, and made it redeemable in
local labour. Virtually it was thus abolished, and the former system of purchasing
from Chiefs was for a time more or less reverted to.
The last instance on a large scale that I am aware of this having been done, was
about three months after the cession, when between one and two hundred men were
purchased from the Chief of Nadrau by one Cousens (better known by the more
euphonious name of Harding), and disposed of by him at a considerable profit to planters
in Taviuni and elsewhere.
This case came to the knowledge of Mr. Lavard, and was the cause of bis passing
Ordinance 11. of 18?5.
13. Since that time sale of labour by Chiefs has been almost unknown. Cajolery and
falsehood on the part of the recruiters, who are, for the most part, men of very
indifferent character, have instead been resorted to. 1 enclose a record of evidence
lately taken, which shows to what lengths in this direction the recruiters still go.
Your Lordship will perceive from . this paper that a large number of men from the
island of Kadava were induced to go as labourers to Tavinni, by representations that the
recruiter had received a special authorization from the Government; that it w T as my wish
that they should engage; that they were to work on my plantation; that they were to
receive 10/. per annum wages ; that the produce tax had been abolished; and that they
would be sent to prison unless they could forthwith pay a tax of I/, per head in money;
all utterly false statements. u
I also enclose copies of reports from the two magistrates m whose districts the labour
trade has been chiefly carried on, and which your Lordship wull find, I think, not
uninteresting.
14 In the interests of the employers of labour I was, however, anxious to make the
restrictions on its engagement as light as was compatible with security to the native


population, and in the Ordinance passed last year the provisions which Mr. Layard’s
Ordinance had contained, rendering it necessary for recruiters to take out a licence were
omitted.
Experience has, however, shown that this was an error, and I have felt compelled,
with general approval, now to re-enact them. I have, however, excepted planters
themselves or their managers from the obligation to take out such a licence. In the
case of their proceeding to another island or province to seek for labour, the} 7 will take
with them an authorization from the Agent-General of Immigration. If they obtain
labourers in their own province or island, all they have to do is to enter into a contract
with them before the stipendiary magistrate of the district.
15. On the other hand, it has been found necessary to omit a proviso with regard
to Natives seeking for labour, which was gravely abused in ways which had not been
foreseen.
16. A clause has been introduced, giving legal sanction to transfers which had before
been only irregularly practised.
17. A provision has been added to prevent the engagement of young children,
except in cases where their parents or natural guardians are also employed, as has
also one to secure the payment of the commutation of his produce tax by the
labourer.
18. The section with regard to the carriage by water of engaged labourers, has been
modified in the sense suggested by your Lordship, a strong distinction being drawn
between the waters within the reefs of any island and the open ocean. The other
alterations directed by your Lordship have been introduced, and a few other additions
and amendments made which are detailed in the accompanying report of the Attorney-
General.
19. The objects which 1 and the Legislative Council have had in view in making
these alterations, besides that of bringing the Ordinance into harmony with your
Lordship’s views, have been the encouragement of the employment of local the
sanction and regulation of the introduction of immigrant labour from other islands of
the group without unduly promoting it, and the distinct discouragement of the employ-
ment of professional labour traders as recruiters.
Encouragement of local labour cannot, I think, be otherwise than beneficial ; and I
should much rejoice to see its employment once more become general.
The importation of labour from other islands of the group requires careful watching
and regulation.
I need not tell your Lordship, who is, I believe, as familiar with the literature of that
period as I am myself, that after the conquest of Spanish America no agency was found
more certainly and rapidly destructive of the native races than the introduction of
migratory habits among the male population.
In the present circumstances of the Colony its continuance is perhaps essential to
prevent greater evils ; but in itself 1 can hardly regard it as otherwise than an evil.
Family ties are broken, wives and children are left to become a burden on others, the
increase of the population is naturally retarded, cultivation is neglected, homes are
allowed to decay, and frequently, whole villages are reduced to misery by the with-
drawal of too large a portion of their male inhabitants.
The employment of professional labour agents, especially of such men as those now
engaged in the trade, is, I think, altogether mischievous, and I should be dad to see it
wholly prohibited.
Such a step would not, however, be at present judicious, although there is a very
strong feeling against their proceedings among all the more respectable class of the
community, as your Lordship will perceive from the enclosed letter which I received
only the other day from an unofficial member of the Legislative Council, himself a large
estate holder, and possessing considerable influence in the Colony.
I may add, that the unofficial Members of Council have all given a hearty support to
the Ordinance now submitted for Her Majesty’s approval
I have, &c.
rpu u . , „ . , „ (Signed) ARTHUR GORDON.
Ihe Right Hon. the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
&c. &c. &c.
A 2


Enclosure 1 in No. I
Fiji, No. X., 1877
An Ordinance (enacted by the Governor of the Colony of Fiji, with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council thereof) to Regulate and Control the Hiring
and Service of Native Labourers within the Colony.
(1.5.) Arthur Gordon,
March 6, 1877.
Whereas it is expedient to repeal an Ordinance passed in Council on the twenty-first
day of April 1876 entitled f ‘ An Ordinance to regulate and control the hiring and
“ service of Fijian Labourers within the Colony” and to make other provisions in lieu
thereof.
Be it therefore enacted by his Excellency the Governor with the advice and consent
of the Legislative Council as follows :
I. The Ordinance passed in Council on the twenty-first day of April 1876 entitled
“An Ordinance to regulate and control the hiring and service of Fijian Labourers
“ within the Colony 92 is hereby repealed except as regards any engagements made
thereunder. And any offences against the provisions of the same may be prosecuted
as if this Ordinance had not been passed.
11. This Ordinance may be cited as “ The Native Labour Ordinance 1877.”
111. Every contract for the hiring and service of native labourers for any time
exceeding one month shall be in one of the forms contained in Schedule A. hereto
annexed and shall be entered into in the presence of the Stipendiary Magistrate of the
district within which the intending labourers reside and if such Magistrate be satisfied
of the ability of the intending employer to perform the conditions of the contract and
that such contract is fully understood and is voluntarily entered into by the intending
labourers he shall endorse on such contract the words following that is to say —“ I
“ hereby certify that the parties to the within contract fully understand the nature and
“ terms of said contract and entered into the same voluntarily and of their own free
“ will.” And no such contract shall be valid or have any force or effect without such
endorsement.
IV. Every contract shall be in duplicate one to be retained by the employer the other
to be forwarded by the Stipendiary Magistrate endorsing the contract within one week
from the date thereof to the Agent-General of Immigration.
V. No contract shall be for a longer period than twelve months and at the termination
of such contract the labourers shall be paid such wages as may be due to them and
discharged in the presence of an European Justice of the Peace who shall then endorse
on the contract that such payment and discharge have been duly made in his presence
and such Justice shall forthwith forward the said contract so endorsed to the Agent-
General of Immigration.
VI. It shall not be lawful after the first day of April 1877 for any Stipendiary
Magistrate to endorse any contract one of the parties to which is in default in regard to
any payment due to the Crown for advances made for the payment of labour unless
with the consent of the Agent-General of Immigration or unless security for the
payment of wages be given to the satisfaction of the Stipendiary Magistrate endorsing
the contract.
VII. If any person be desirous of obtaining for himself or others the services of any
native labourers not resident in the same island or the same province in which the
plantation on which it is intended to employ such native labourers is situated he shall
apply by letter or personally to the Agent-General of Immigration for a license to
recruit labour which license the Agent-General may if he see fit deliver to such applicant
on payment of a fee of five pounds and every such license shall be in the form of
Schedule B. hereto and shall remain in force until the thirty-first day of December next
ensuing but may at any time be cancelled by notice in the Royal Gazette for any
reasonable cause by the Agent-General of Immigration with the approval of the
Governor.
TUI. Every person who without being duly licensed as herein-before provided shall
recruit or otherwise attempt to engage the services of any native labourer for a period
exceeding one month snail on conviction in a summary manner forfeit any sum not
exceeding fifty pounds and in default of payment be imprisoned with hard labour for
any term not exceeeding six months. Provided always that where the proprietor or
manager of any plantation himself proceeds personally to recruit labourers in another
island or province it shall not be necessary for him to take out such license as is herein-


before mentioned but it shall be sufficient if he produce to the Stipendiary Magistrate
before whom the contract may be entered into a written permission in the form of
Schedule C. hereto attached which permission the Agent-General of Immigration shall
be bound to furnish on application except for reasonable cause to the contrary to be
approved by the Governor and provided always further that nothing herein contained
shall make it necessary for any person desirous of engaging for himself or others native
labourers resident in the same province and in the same island as that on which the
plantation on which it is intended that they should be employed is situated to take out
such license or apply for such permission as is herein-before provided but in every such
case contracts of service may be entered into before the Stipendiary Magistrate of the
district according to the form 2 contained in Schedule A. hereunto attached.
IX. Every person who desires to enter into a contract under this Ordinance with any
Natives to serve as labourers on any plantation of which he is not himself the owner or
manager shall produce to the Stipendiary Magistrate before such Magistrate endorses
such contract a letter of agency in form of Schedule D. filled in and signed by the
person for whom he acts as agent and whenever any contract of service is entered into
between such agent and an y Native before a Stipendiary Magistrate such Magistrate
shall make entry on such letter of the number of persons engaged before him to such
agent and when the full number expressed in such letter of agency has been engaged the
Stipendiary Magistrate shall retain sucli letter of agency and transmit it to the Agent-
General of Immigration.
X. Native labourers shall not be embarked or carried in vessels of less tonnage than
is set forth in Schedule E. hereto or in excess of the number of persons proportionate
to each ton of the vessel’s registered tonnage as is therein mentioned. For any breach
of the provisions of this section the master or person at the time having charge or
control of such vessel shall be liable to the penalties provided in Section XXX. to this
Ordinance.
XI. Every licensed recruiter of labourers shall keep on board his boat or vessel or
carry with him a copy of this Ordinance and any Regulations made thereunder.
XII. When it shall appear to any Stipendiary Magistrate that the person desirous of
employing any labourer under contract as herein-before provided has been ffuilty of any
neglect of duty or breach of contract towards labourers under contract to him it shall be
lawful for such Magistrate to refuse to endorse such contract and in every such case
such Magistrate shall forward a report thereon to the Agent-General of Immigration.
XIII. When it shall appear to any Stipendiary Magistrate that the employer desirous
of entering into a contract with any Native is not likely to be able to pay such labourer
the wages agreed on in such contract such Magistrate shall refuse to endorse such
contract unless such employer shall find proper security for the payment of such wao-es
when they may become due.
XIV. It shall not be lawful for any Stipendiary Magistrate to endorse any contract
under this Ordinance where one of the parties to such contract shall be under the age of
fourteen years unless the parent or natural guardian of such infant shall have entered
into a contract to serve on the same plantation for a similar term and should any intended
employer or licensed agent bring before a Stipendiary Magistrate any Native who in the
opinion of the Stipendiary Magistrate is under the age of fourteen years with the
intention of engaging such infant to wmrk on any plantation unaccompanied by the
parent or natural guardian of such infantas aforesaid it shall be lawful for the Stipendiary
Magistrate to order the intended employer or licensed agent to return such infant to
the custody of his parent or guardian or to pay into Court such a sum of money as
will cover any expenses incurred in the support and the return passage of such infant to
his home.
XV. Should any person by fraud falsehood intimidation or coercion induce any Native
to enter into any contract under this Ordinance the person so doing shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanour and shall be liable on conviction before any Stipendiary
Magistrate to a fine not exceeding fifty pounds or to imprisonment not exceeding six
months with or without hard labour at the discretion of the Court and such contract
shall be held void. And the Stipendiary Magistrate may order such person to return
such native labourer to his home or to pay into Court such a sum of money as will cover
any expenses incurred in the support and return passage of such labourer to his ordinary
place of abode. J
XVI. Should the intending employer or recruiting agent give any money or goods to
a native as an inducement to such Native to enter into a contract to labour or with a view
to such Native inducing others to enter into a contract to labour and should such Native
tail to enter into the contract to labour himself or fail to induce other Natives to enter
A 3


into such a contract it shall be at the discretion of the Stipendiary Magistrate to direct
the Native to return such money or goods or the value thereof, to the intending employer
or licensed agent.
XVII. Where it shall appear to the Agent-General of Immigration that any labourer
serving under any contract as herein-before provided has been ill-used by his employer or
in case of any breach of contract or neglect of duty on the part of such employer the
Agent-General of Immigration may with the consent of the Governor cancel the contract
of such labourer or of any other native labourer who may be serving under contract on
the same plantation and notice thereof shall be given in the Royal Gazette and every
labourer whose contract shall be cancelled as herein-before provided shall be returned to
the place where he was recruited at the expense of the revenue of the Colony.
XVIIL Where the contract of any native labourer shall be cancelled as herein-before
provided the employer with whom such labourer shall have been serving under contract
shall pay to such labourer such amount of wages as shall be proportionate to his term of
service.
XIX. The services of any native labourer under any contract entered into as herein-
before provided may with the consent of such labourer and of his employer and of the
Agent-General of Immigration be transferred to any employer desirous of obtaining the
services of such labourer and every such transfer shall be made before the Stipendiary
Magistrate of the district in which such labourer shall be serving under contract and
such Magistrate having obtained the consent of the labourer in person before him and
likewise of the employers herein-before mentioned or the consent of such employers in
writing and the consent of the Agent-General of Immigration in writing shall cause a
note of such transfer to be entered on the contract of such labourer and shall forward
a note of the same to the Agent-General of Immigration within one month from the
date of such entry. On the execution of any transfer herein-before mentioned the
employer to whom the services of any labourer shall be transferred shall become liable
for all the wages due to such labourer under such contract whether prior or subsequent
to such transfer and shall on the expiration of such contract return such labourer free of
cost to the town or place at which he was recruited and no bonus or other consideration
shall be paid for such transfer under a penalty on conviction thereof in a summary
manner upon the transferee giving such bonus or the transferror receiving it of
fifty pounds.
XX. No labourer shall be chargeable with stores or moneys paid on account during
his term of service unless the bill for the same shall be first approved by the Stipendiary
Magistrate of the district within which the said labourer shall be discharged.
XXI. If any labourer under contract as aforesaid shall unlawfully absent himself
from work during the term of his contract or shall refuse to fulfil the same unless for
some reasonable cause or shall by negligence or other improper conduct lose throw
away or damage the property of his employer or shall endanger such property by a
careless or improper use of fire or shall wilfully maim wound or cruelly ill-use any cattle
or other live stock belonging to his employer every such offender on conviction thereof
shall suffer such punishment by fine or imprisonment with hard labour for the whole
or any part of such imprisonment such fine not to exceed ten shillings and such
imprisonment not to exceed one month as to the convicting Magistrate shall seem fit.
XXII. Any labourer who shall enter into any contract under the provisions of this
Ordinance and who shall during the term of such contract absent himself without
reasonable cause for more than five consecutive days not counting Sundays or public
holidays from the plantation on which he shall have contracted to serve shall be deemed
to have absconded from such plantation and where any such labourer shall be convicted
of such absence before the Stipendiary Magistrate of the district in which he shall be
serving under contract such Magistrate shall cause a note to be made of the number of
days of such absence to be given to the employer. Provided that for a second or any
subsequent offence of a like nature on the part of the labourer the Stipendiary Magistrate
before whom the conviction shall be obtained may if he shall see fit order such labourer
to be imprisoned with hard labour for any time not exceeding sixty days and in every
such case shall cause a note of the number of days for which such labourer shall be
committed to be delivered to the employer.-
XXIIL The Stipendiary Magistrate of the district in which any labourer shall be
serving under contract shall on the application of the employer of such labourer and
production of the notes of absence aforesaid extend the contract of such labourer for
such time as shall be equal to the number of working days mentioned in such note or
notes and shall endorse on the contract the date on which such extension will expire
and forward a note of every such extension to the Agent-General of Immigration.


XXIV. If any employer shall ill-use any labourer or shall not deliver to any labourer
the articles stipulated for and which by the contract of service were to be furnished by
the employer to the labourer or if the articles so furnished shall not be of the stipulated
quantity or quality every such employer being convicted of any such offence shall
forfeit any sum not exceeding twenty pounds as to the convicting Magistrate shall
seem fit.
XXV. Any wages due to any labourer who shall enter into any contract under the
provisions of this Ordinance may if the Agent-General of Immigration shall see fit be
sued for and recovered before the Chief Police Magistrate by the Agent-General of
Immigration or any person duly authorised by him so to do.
XXVI. All wages due to any native labourer under any contract under this Ordinance
shall be a first charge on the lands of the plantations in respect of which the service of
such labourer shall be rendered and shall take precedence of all mortgages or other
charges whatsoever save and except moneys due to Polynesian Immigrants and may be
recovered with costs before any Stipendiary Magistrate by the labourer to whom such
wages may be due.
XXVII. Prior to the execution of any contract under this Ordinance between any
male native labourer above the age of fourteen years and the person desirous of employ-
ing such labourer under such contract such intending employer or his agent shall pay to
the Stipendiary Magistrate a sum of money calculated at the rate of one shilling and
eight pence for every month of the term of such contract and such sum shall be paid in
by such Magistrate to the Receiver-General to the account of the assessed native taxes
of the province of such labourer and every sum so paid may be deducted by the employer
from the wages of the labourer on whose behalf it was paid.
XXVIII. Every case of death or desertion of a native labourer engaged under this
Ordinance shall be immediately reported by the employer of such labour to the
Stipendiary Magistrate of the district within which such Native is serving under contract
and in the case of death such report shall if possible be accompanied by a medical
certificate of the cause of death of such labourer and the length of illness previous to
death and the Stipendiary Magistrate shall forward a note of the same to the Agent-
General of Immigration.
XXIX. Labourers shall not be employed in any field or plantation work on Sundays
except in cases bf great emergency. Regular working hours shall not exceed nine hours
per day and shall be estimated exclusive of the time allowed for meals.
XXX. Any person charged with any offence against or violation of the provisions
of this Ordinance for which no penalty shall have been herein-before provided or of any
Regulations made as herein-after provided shall on conviction before any Stipendiary
Magistrate be liable to a fine not exceeding the sum of ten pounds or three months
imprisonment with or without hard labour.
XXXI. The Agent-General of I mmigration or any person authorised by him in
writing may at any time enter into or upon any plantation on which native labourers
may be employed and inspect the state and condition of such labourers and may inquire
into any complaint which the employer may make against such labourer or such labourer
against his employer.
XXXII. Any charge for any breach of the provisions of this Ordinance or of the
regulations made thereunder may be made by the Agent-General of Immigration if he
shall see fit or any person authorised by him in writing so to do before the Chief Police
Magistrate within twelve months after the commission of such offence and such
Magistrate is hereby empowered to hear and adjudicate on such charge.
XXXIII. Every charge for any offence against the provisions of this Ordinance made
by an employer against a labourer or by a labourer against his employer shall be made
within thirty days from the day on which such offence was committed. Provided that
where any labourer shall have absconded from any plantation such charge shall be made
within thirty days after such labourer shall have returned or shall have been brought
back to the plantation on which he shall be under contract to serve.
XXXIV% No conviction under this Ordinance shall be quashed for want of form and
no warrant of commitment or order for imprisonment shall be held void by reason of any
defect therein provided it be therein alleged that the person has been convicted or
ordered to be imprisoned and there be a good and valid conviction for an offence to
sustain the same. Provided that no conviction under this Ordinance shall be a bar
to an indictment for felony.


Daily Ration.
I. — Meat or Fish Ration .
Beef Mutton Pork or fish
Vegetables -
Salt -
- 1 lb.
- 3 lbs.
- | oz.
II.— Vegetable Ration .
Yams taro or sweet potatoes
Or beans -
Or maize meal -
Salt -
- 7 lbs.
li lbs.
- 2 lbs.
- i oz.
Tobacco per week
- 2 oz.
Clothing &c. (per annum).
Four Snlus
Mosquito Curtains.
Two Mats.
Form 2.
Memorandum of Agreement made this day of
of of the first part and
of the second part.
between
native of
XXXV. The Governor may from tim to time make Regulations for carrying this
a PP r ° ve u d V Legislative Council and published
in the Roy at Gazette shall be binding and have the force of law.
Passed in Council this First day of March in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-seven.
SCHEDULE A.
Form 1.
Memorandum of Agreement made this
of of the first part and
of the second part.
day of
between
native of
The conditions are that the said party of this second part engages to serve the said
party of the first part as on and otherwise to make
himself generally useful for the term of months and also to obey all
lawful and reasonable commands of the said or of his overseer or
authorised agents during that period in consideration of which services the said party
of the first part doth hereby agree to pay the said party of the second part wages in the
com of the realm at the rate of per annum at the expiration of the
terra ot service to provide him with the understated rations daily and to provide suitable
clothing and proper accommodation and to defray the cost of conveyance to the place
at which the said party of the second part is to be employed and to provide him with
a return passage to the place from whence he came.
The conditions are that the said party of this second part engages to serve the said
party of the first part as and otherwise make himself generally useful
for the term of months and also to obey all lawful and reasonable
commands of the said or of his overseers or authorised agents during
that period in consideration of which services the said party of the first part doth hereby
agree to pay [monthly or once in every three months according to terms of engagement]
the said party of the second part wages in the coin of the realm at the rate
of # per month and to provide him with the understated rations daily
to provide suitable clothing and proper accommodation and to defray the cost of
conveyance to the place at which the said party of the second part is to be employed
and to provide him with a return passage to the place from whence lie came.


Dailylßation.
T. —Meat or Fish Ration
Beef Mutton Pork or fish
Vegetables
1 lb.
3 lbs.
h oz.
Salt
ll. Vegetable Ration .
Yams taro or sweet potatoes
Or beans
7 lbs.
li lbs.
2 lbs.
i oz.
Or maize meal
Salt -
Tobacco
2 ozs.
Clothing &c. (per annum).
Four Stilus
Two Mats
Mosquito Curtains.
SCHEDULE 8..
Recruiting License,
A.B. is hereby licensed to recruit labourers under the provisions of the “Native
Labour Ordinance, 1877,” for the year 187
C. D.,
£) a t e Agent-General of Immigration.
SCHEDULE C.
Permission to engage under Section VIII.
A.B, [proprietor or manager] of Plantation has permission
to engage native labourers under the “ Native Labour
Ordinance 1877.”
C.D.,
Agent-General of Immigration.
SCHEDULE D.
Letter of Agency.
I of do hereby authorise A.B. licensed
recruiting agent to engage in accordance with the provision of the “ Native Labour
Ordinance 1877 ” natives as labourers on
[Date.]
Witness to signature —
C.D.
[Proprietor or manager]
Plantation.
SCPIEDULE E.
Boats authorised to carry Labourers under Section X.
Inside the reefs of any Island—
Boats of not less than three tons.
Outside such reefs
Decked Boats of not less than nine tons
i 17270. B


Scale of Passengers.
Boats under nine tons not more than two passengers for every ton of registered
tonnage.
Boats of nine tons and over not more than three passengers for every ton of registered
tonnage.
Enclosure 2 in No. 1.
Report on Ordinance No. X. of 1877.
“ An Ordinance to regulate and control the hiring and service of Native Labourers
within the Colony.”
By this Ordinance is repealed Ordinance No. XV. of 1876, bearing a similar title and
having a similar object, and in its principal provisions, with some important exceptions,
corresponding with the Ordinance under consideration.
2. By section 111. the contract must be made before, and endorsed by the Stipendiary
Magistrate where the intending labourers reside, the provision contained in repealed
Ordinance allowing intending labourers in search of employment to leave their district
and engage elsewhere, if provided with a certificate from a Stipendiary Magistrate
resident in their district, being eliminated.
3. By section VII. any person desirous of obtaining labourers for himself or others in
any district or island, other than that in which the plantation on which such labourers
are to work is situate, is required to apply for a license to recruit labour from the
A gent-General of Immigration.
4. Such license may be for reasonable cause cancelled by the Agent-General of
Immigration with consent of the Governor.
5. A breach of this provision of the Ordinance is punishable by fine not exceeding
fifty pounds, or imprisonment not exceeding six months.
6. Any proprietor or manager of a plantation seeking to recruit labourers under the
circumstances set forth in section VII. as to locality, but who goes in person so to do,
requires only a written permission from the Agent-General of Immigration, not a
license.
7. In case the labourers are engaged in the same island, and the same province in
which the plantation is situate on which they are to work, it is only necessary to engage
such labourers before the Stipendiary Magistrate of the district.
8. By section IX. any person seeking to employ labourers to work on the plantations
of third parties must procure from such persons letters of . agency stating the number of
labourers required, such labourers are to be engaged before a Stipendiary Magistrate,
who is to endorse all engagements thereon ; and when the number stated as required in
such letter have been obtained, the Stipendiary Magistrate is to forward the same to the
Agent-Genera! of Immigration.
9- By section X. labourers are to be carried inside the reef in boats not less than
three tons, and outside the reefs in boats not less than nine tons.
10. Boats under nine tons may carry two passengers for every ton ; boats over nine
tons may carry not more than three passengers to every ton.
11. The provisions contained in sections VII. to X., both inclusive, differ materially
from provisions of repealed Ordinance on same points.
12. By section XIV. no labourer under fourteen years of age is to be allowed to enter
into any contract of service, unless his parent or guardian is working on the same
plantation.
13. By section XVI. money or goods given by any person to induce such person to
engage as a labourer, or to induce others so to do, may on failure of the consideration
for such gift be directed by a Stipendiary Magistrate to be returned to the
donor.
14. By section XIX. Uie services of labourers may, with consent of all parties and
of the Agent-General of Immigration, be trensferred, the transferee being responsible for
the v/ages of the whole term and the return of the labourers.
15. Wages are to be a charge on land on which work done; and any person
employing a labourer under this Ordinance is to pay to the Stipendiary Magistrate at
the rate of one shilling and eightpence for every month of each labourer’s engagement in
payment of assessed taxes of the province.


16. The remainder of the sections of the Ordinance do not differ in any material
respect from the repealed Ordinance.
17. I am of opinion the Royal Assent may be properly given to this Ordinance.
L. H. Garrick,
Levuka, Fiji, March 12, 1877- Attorney-General.
Enclosure 3 in No. 1.
Stipendiary Magistrates Office, Vuda,
S IR August 21, 1876.
By request of his Excellency the Governor, I have the honour to forward to you
a report on matters connected with the Fijian labour traffic, and to the usual mannei
of conducting the same in this district.
2. This report must of necessity be wanting in many respects with regard to details,
but I will endeavour to make it as clear as I can, making every allowance for statements,
which have from time to time been made to me more or less to be depended on, and from
which statements, together with what I have personally become acquainted in my short
experience of the above traffic, I shall endeavour to give at least a general idea ol the
above subject
3. I may begin by observing that before the Colony became a British possession, a
great traffic was done in Fiji labour, especially on that part of the coast known as the
Ra coast, and Tai Levu, also at the Yasawas; and many, if not all, of the present hired
recruiters were then, as now, in the same business.
4. The usual way at that time was to contract with some influential Chief on the
coast, and whose power or influence also extended into the interior. The consideration
then given to these Chiefs was in the form of fire-arms, ammunition, cash, and large or
small vessels, according to the number of men received.
5. After annexation, of course, such a plan could no longer be followed, the recruiters
having to conform (outwardly at least) to the provisions of the Ordinance then in force,
and the present or consideration was given to the individuals themselves, who were
supposed to be free agents ; still the influence of the Chiefs was naturally brought to
bear, and a present or consideration was still given to them, but with another name than
“ purchase-money.”
6. The same men were recruiting labourers as before the passing of any law, and
dealing with the same Chiefs, of course the understanding between them, as may
easily be seen, had to be kept up; a word from a Chief would prevent a man getting
labour, and, consequently, he had to be propitiated.
7. After the passing of the “ Ordinance to regulate and control the hiring and
“ service of Fijian labourers within the Colony of Fiji, 1875,” the labourers were engaged
and passed before the Stipendiary Magistrate of the district to which they were taken,
and it was during that period that I first became officially acquainted with many circum-
stances connected with the traffic.
8. While the above Ordinance was in force, I was frequently being informed of
labourers being recruited about the Ba, and elsewhere in this district; and from different
circumstances of which I was informed, had made notes, which the subsequent passing of
the “ Fiji Labour Ordinance, 1876 ” rendered it unnecessary to form into a report.
9. I must here explain that Roko Tui Ba, the head Chief of Ba and Yasawas, is not
on the same footing with regard to procuring labour, as the Chiefs to whom I referred in
clause 4of this letter; and, generally speaking, the labour from his district has been
recruited, apart from any influence of his, he not being a local Chief, the labour recruiters
are in the habit of applying to local Chiefs of towns and districts for assistance in their
vocation. They, the recruiters, are aware of the jealousy existing among the local Chiefs
with respect to their influence among the people, and work on that to get their labourers.
10. It would be difficult to prove that these Chiefs or “ Taukeis ” receive money or
trade as payment for the labourers; but there is not the slightest doubt, as any one
knowing Fijian customs will admit, that native Chiefs are not in the habit of assisting
white men to get labour, without receiving remuneration for the same.
11. A great number of men are now absent from this district; figures would be difficult
to arrive at, without having the records, and until the passing of the late Ordinance the
Stipendiary Magistrate of the district had no means of obtaining anything like correct
returns. Since last May inclusive about 120 have been passed before me ; 40 of these
are indentured to planters, &c. in this district.
B 2


12. Labour agents finding that men are not now so readily procured, are using every
endeavour to induce women and young girls to go. They are generally hired at a lower
price than men, and it is to the recruiter’s advantage to put the wages as low as he can,
then the employer can afford to give more per head passage money. To windward the
rates have, generally speaking, been twenty and thirty- shillings for women, and
forty shillings for men. In this district with, I think, one exception, the uniform rate of
2 1. 12s. o d. for men, and 1/. 16s. Od. for women, has been given.
13. I hear that in most cases the women are anxious to leave. Some of them have
their own private reasons, no doubt, for doing so, quarrels with their husbands, or
burdens laid upon them in consequence of the scarcity of male population, as at Yasawas.
But I am constrained to believe that they are tempted and allured by representations,
and highly coloured descriptions of the freedom they will enjoy, and the total absence of
restraint put upon their actions while under the protection of the white man ; when it is
considered that total absence from restraint with the generality of Fiji women means
license to indulge in any immorality without fear of consequences, it cannot lead to the
best consequences.
14. The taking away from their homes of women, both married and young girls, is
not productive of good to their morals, and is a cause of anxiety and great dissatisfaction
to their relations, and reports are occasionally circulated about the doings on board some
of the labour crafts ; and when we consider the character of many of the recruiters, and
that, in their vessels, they are accompanied hy Fijimen who are trained by them as under
recruiters, and whose busmen it is to go among the towns and act as “ decoy ducks ” or
touts,” also that recruiters, as a rule, have one, perhaps two Fiji women of their own on
board, whose business it is, also, to do all that lies in their power to persuade Natives into
engaging, it is not surprising that such associations will prove the reverse of beneficial
to the moral character of those who are thrown in such company ; and no doubt the
reputation enjoyed by the Yasawa women is owing in some measure to this.
15. With reference to the individuals who carry on the business of recruiters in this
district, what is said of one, may with equal propriety and justice, be said of them all.
There is in every case the same description of Fijimen recruiting-masters, if they may be
so called, the same description of Fiji women belonging to the owner of the, vessel, the
same glowing accounts given of the quantity of food supplied and the lightness of the
work required of them, the same bragging of the wealth and personal importance of the
labour recruiter himself, and feeling accounts of the loving and amicable relations which
exist between himself and the Government, and the magistrate of the district, or any
other person whose name might perhaps carry a little weight in the minds of the Natives.
This way of acting, cunningly masked, so that no proofs could be had for a conviction
under clause 9 of present Ordinance, has exactly the same effect to produce the cause
which the said clause is meant to prevent. Statements are made to Natives, from which
a Native w r ould draw T an inference, and the men who make the statements know exactly the
inference a Native would draw therefrom ; also the “ decoy ducks ” are taught what to
say, thus taking the responsibility of what is really due to the recruiters.
16. To give one instance, by no means, I am led to believe, a solitary one : I was
informed during the month of July last by Ratu Isikeli, a Chief of Kiva, Yasawas, that
Mr. G. B. Evans arrived there a short time before, sending his under-recruiter, a man
called Susu, native of Na Korokiku, to his, Isikeli’s, town to induce people to ship, Susu
explained that Mr. Evans had come to get labour from Kiva, that it was “sa macala ki
“ na Matanitu,” or clearly understood by the Government that he should get men, that
he had come straight from the Magistrate’s quarters at Vuda, and that the latter had
said to him, “ I am preparing to go to Yasawas, go on before and get your vessel filled.”
Susu and Mr. Evans also gave this man to understand that Mr. Evans was now, as
formerly, in Government employment, without exactly making a statement to that effect.
He was" at one time secretary to Boko Tui Ra, w hile the late Fijian Government was in
existence, and at that time w T as well-known at in that capacity.
17. The way he conveyed the latter idea to the minds of the Natives was by saying
that he still occupied his old quarters at Nakorotubu, which, taken in conjunction with
Susu’s narrative, would go a great way to impress the Natives that Mr. Evans was still
acting in an official capacity. The inhabitants of many parts of Yasawas are more
unsophisticated than Natives on the coast, and more readily deceived. In this case
Mr. Evans was not believed, but still a doubt was established in the minds of the Natives,
which was not fully removed until Ratu Isikeli heard from me to the contrary. On
another occasion, this same man informed the Natives that they were all to be taken away
to fish beche-do-mer for the Government, and they had better ship with him to prevent
such a catastrophe befalling them.


18 I believe that Mr. Robert Evans, who resides at Naviti, Yasawas, has made, or
intends makino- arrangements with his brother to run labour regularly, and they nave got
of preparation for that purpose. Mr H Evans dates near y
all the island of Naviti, and according to his statement, the Natives aie there onlj on
sufferance, he pretends to exercise a sort of feudal authority, and boaststbat he can as
he likes, procure labour for others, or prevent “his Natives from engaging. No doubt
he may have a certain amount of influence. He is the only white man on that island,
and naturally makes the Fijians believe a great deal of what he says. If those two men
do begin operations they can, at the first, do some harm, and cause a certain amount of
trouble to the Government. , ,
19 Another labour agent of comparatively old standing also, named Bradberg, has
lately caused both trouble and hindrance 'to the Government on the Ba river, and by
attempting to undermine the authority of persons employed on Government service he
was the cause of some delay and hindrance to the important operations which were then
being conducted at that place. lam indebted to Captain Knollys for this information,
that gentleman having been seriously inconvenienced by Bradberg s action He
succeeded in stopping them for a time by remanding him to appear at next Court on a
charge of assault on an officer of Sagunu; he was duly convicted of the assaul and, by
the evidence and his own admission, his conduct certainly was prejudicial to the peace
and good order of the district. , .
20. Were Ito repeat all the circumstances which have been reported to me at various
times I might extend this report to any length, but I restrict myself to what 1 believe
to be correct, and to what from my own personal observation I know to be so.
21 I said before, the same rule applies to the rest ot the hired recruiters with
whom 'l have come in contact. Evans, Murray, Bradberg, Ferguson and Morton are
those who have mostly been in the habit ot recruiting here. Of the latter I have had no
experience in my official capacity ; the others have all been guilty of repeated breaches
and attempted breaches of the laws in force. The two former are continually laying
informations against each other, but not formally or distinctly stating a proper charge
on which proceedings could be founded with any likelihood of proof. Murray has
been fined lately; and Ferguson is now avoiding this district, knowing that he is required
for an offence committed in May last.
2*2. To prevent irregularities I should suggest i Ist. that vessels and inasteis ot
such vessels should be licensed. 2nd. That it should be compulsoiy on t!ic mastei to
carry a copy of the existing Ordinance on board. 3rd. A penalty should be on each
individual over and above the complement. 4th. To fix the number of hands (native),
called the “crew.” Also to define whether any passengers (native) “ travelling for
pleasure,” or who “have begged a passage,” are to be included in the statutory number.
By this last I allude to several instances in which I was informed that such and such a
man had only begged a passage to Ba, or to Viti Levu, &c., &c., as the case might be.
Others again have been described as “one of the crpw, or two men engaged as crew,
“ the present crew being about to leave.” On occasions like these I have felt in my own
mind that I was being imposed upon, but the influence that is brought to bear upon
Natives as soon as they are on board clearly shows itself by their reticence in many cases,
and in others by set phrases which have evidently been learnt off by heart. This is
especially the case in the many attempts to evade the provisions of the Clause VII. of
Labour Ordinance, 1876, and the magistrate is put at a disadvantage unless he acci-
dentally hears something in conversation among the people (on one occasion only 1 was
fortunate enough to do this), he has little chance of finding out whether the parents or
guardians are on board or not.
23. Then again if children are not passed by the magistrate, say, for instance, that the
vessel has come from Yasawas or Ba, and the labourers are passed at Nadrogu, as the
law at present stands, the recruiters cannot, I think, be compelled to return them to their
homes. The only punishment he receives is not having the children passed for him.
The clause merely slates that “it shall not be lawful for any stipendiary magistrate to
“ endorse the contract, &c.” If he has brought the children from a distance on refusal
of endorsement he could make it right with the would-be employer to land the children,
who would then be engaged by private agreement purporting to be weekly or monthly.
Such questions have been fully discussed as a means ot evading this clause of the
Ordinance.
24. And the same rule holds good with other breaches of this law. If labourers are
in any way embarked or engaged when clear proof of illegal proceeding is had the
recruiter is fined, and he, so to speak, picks his people up again. If, fortunately for him,
they are engaged for some planter in the district, the people are there, he does not
B 3


re-embark them, but they engage themselves to the same party for whom they are
brought. This latter case happened lately with Murray, who brought over six women
from Yasawas in a one-and-a-half ton boat, engaged to work for Mr. John Blatchford,
Nadi. Murray was fined, and I refused to pass the labour either to him or to
Mr. Blatchford’s overseer, but on Mr. Blatchford 3 s return from Levuka and applying to
me I had no other course open to me but to endorse the contract; but the women were
kept on the plantation and under the guardianship of Murray and the overseer, which
latter wrote me a most impertinent letter on my sending an officer of Nadi to request
the women to come to my office, I doing so not considering that the said women were
legally under the authority of any master. The officer was ordered away by the
overseer, and the women prevented from accompanying him. I had another reason for
wishing to see these women privately, having had what might be called an information from
Evans that tw 7 o of them were under age, and had been taken away by Murray against
the will and consent of their parents. However, the latter charge I could see no reason
to believe true on subsequent inquiry. Experiences of this description may be useful in
framing regulations for the proper guidance of the labour trade, as by them it can be
seen the points to touch on, and I hope that this letter may in some degree help to show
the immediate necessity of making stringent rules to prevent and punish abuses and
malpractices in connexion with this business which, allowed to go unpunished and
unrestained, would become more frequent, both among recruiters and employers as well,
will break up homes and families, and go far to depopulate whole districts.
1 have, &c.
(Signed) Archd. Taylor,
The Hon. A. P. Maudslay, Stipendiary Magistrate, Ba and Yasawas.
Colonial Secretary, Nasora.
Enclosure 4 in No. 1.
The Stipendiary Magistrate, Tai Levu, to His Excellency the Governor.
Stipendiary Magistrate’s Office, Tai Levu,
S IR? March 3, 1877-
In compliance w T ith your Excellency’s request, I have the honour to submit the
following remarks on the system of recruiting, and employing native Fijians as
labourers.
Prior to the annexation of the islands, the whole system was one of complete, short-
sentenced slavery ; rarely were the labourers questioned as to their desire or otherwise
to enter the service of the planter; they were ordered to do so by their Chief, to whom
the “ Labour Agent ” invariably applied, and with whom he bargained for so many
labourers, men, women, or children, at a given sum per head; having done which a loud
talking bully was sent by the Chief as his messenger to a named district to procure the
specified number, and the result was, invariably, compliance with the demand.
The labourer was engaged without any cumbrous legal written or printed forms ; he
had the W'ord of his employer, that at the expiration of his term of service, a certain
quantity of trade would be supplied to him, generally a trade musket and a few trifles,
w y hich would probably cost in Fiji 80s., and in Great Britain half that sum. Ihere aie
many Natives on the Ra Coast and the Yasawa, who could tell whether these verbal
contracts w T ere fulfilled. I remember one lot of men who were paid off with dogs, which
are at the present time a source of constant annoyance to the neighbouihood of theii
t 0 By the above exquisitely simple arrangements, your Excellency will readily perceive
what a great advantage it w ? as to the two contracting parties, viz., the Chief and the
( Yince annexation, several attempts have been made to legislate for the regulation of
the employment of the Fijian as a labourer, but with indifferent success, and 1 desire to
point out some of the objectionable features of the present system of recruiting and
employment of labourers. ~ . , n , ,
Under the present ordinance it is necessary for those wishing to engage labourers to
enter into the contract, either personally or by their agents, the intention being I
presume, that the agent should be some person directly employed by the planters. Ihe
system at present usually adopted is to give an order to some one of the men commonly


known as “ Labour Recruiters,” and who are the owners of small vessels, for a given
number of labourers.
Many of these persons thus employed are men utterly unworthy of such trust; they
appear lo delight in practising all manner of trickery, to induce persons to leave their
towns, married men their families, and women their husbands, each misled by some tale
or false promise. .
Since it has been prohibited for the high Chiefs to receive presents in exchange tor
their influence to obtain labour, I have little doubt but that the Chiefs of districts and
towns have been tampered with, and in consequence of the Roko Tuis endeavouring to
check this system, they have brought on themselves the displeasure of the agents and
employers of labour.
I am aware of several instances in which town officers have been employed by the
to go to the inland towns with them, and it is almost incredible how great an
influence these men exert in some of the districts where they are not well known, and
where they can talk loudly about being an 66 Ofica in Matanitu,’ &c., &c. They are
well supported by their employers in this.
Another and somewhat valuable instrument used by some of these men, is the women
they usually carry with them, or have living in some spot convenient for recruiting;
these are generally the daughters of, or related to, some old Chief of influence.
Apart from the agents they thus use, these men do not scruple at any falsehood or
subterfuge ; in two or three instances 1 have been informed that a number of young
people who have been guilty of some very trifling offence, have had the terrors of the
law so magnified to them that they have run off as labourers.
Latterly these men, the recruiters, have dilated on the hardship of having to gather
produce, and work in the cotton plantations, and this has been a fruitful field for the
display of their “ Lawaki it is in connexion with this that the Chiefs have again been
accused of interfering to prevent their people leaving as labourers. The interference and
bad feeling more frequently originates with the European, who, now that the Chiefs are
jealous of a large number of able-bodied men leaving their towns, and forbidden to
receive bribes, take delight in informing, the people they have perfect liberty to act
without any reference to their superiors.
I think one of the most objectionable features in the present system is, that particular
districts are sometimes levied on to such an extent, that few of the male population are
left. This must affect the interests of the district most seriously.
Another abuse of a most objectionable character, is that of the young women leaving
their towns, especially those who are married, at times leaving young children behind
them.
A further objectionable feature attaches to the present system. In several, instances
passing under my notice, the wages of the labourers appeared to be a question resting
entirely with the Europeans, except with two or three of the leaders among those to be
employed, incidentally showing me that the people had left their homes under some other
influence than their own choice; the amount of wages named in some instances being an
absurdly low rate, so low as 30s. per annum, very seldom more than three pounds.
The agent’s interest is to procure the labourers at as low a rate of wages as possible,
as he is thus enabled to make better terms for his own portion of the work, frequently
receiving as much as 2/. 10$. to 3 L a head for Ra and Yasawa men delivered in
Taviuni.
In reply to the inquiry as to the character of those engaged in the work of recruiting,
I may mention particularly G. Evans, T. Morton, and J. Fergusson, as men capable of
any scheming, lying, and low rascality to attain their object. J. Brad berg I know little
of. Martin May and Louis Munroe, so far as I have had opportunity of observing,
conduct themselves with moderation and decency. I may remark that Martin May
resides in Korotubu, near to Ratu Isikeli’s ; he is a trader. The Roko procures many
things from him, and is frequently in his debt; he paid him 30/. recently, and still owes
him a considerable sum.
I enclose herewith a table, showing the names of recruiters and their vessels, as known
to me; also the number of labourers who have left my district, those entering it from
others, and the number whose time has expired in my district, and who have been paid
off. So many return labourers having been paid off elsewhere that I have no record of
their number.
Beyond the attempt to evade the Ordinance in recruiting, I fear others are often made
by the employers ; and it must require the utmost vigilance of magistrates, in districts
where men are employed and paid off' to prevent unfair advantage being taken of
the men.
B 4


Vessels engaged in Fijian Labour Traffic.
District of Ba and Yasawa. Since May 1876 (inclusive).
No. of Trips
since above
Name, &c. of Vessel.
Master or Owner.
Size.
date.
Tons.
Amy, Cutter
Iris
G. B. Evans
J. Bradberg, Levuka
A. Hill, Ba -
Alice, Schooner
New York, Cutter
Harriet, „
J. Ferguson
Stevenson
G. B. Evans
I am not aware if all the magistrates hold a power from the Agent-General of Immi-
gration to visit plantation labourers, but it is certainly most desirable that some person
in each district should have such authority, so that the houses, food, &c. may be subject
to examination.
I cannot explain how it is done, but I have on several occasions been informed by
return labourers that they have been paid off with trade; and, in estimating its value, I
have as often found the value much less than it should be. Only lately a return
labourer was sent to me by the Buli of one of the Ra districts, who informed me that he
and Ins fellow labourers had been taken into a store in Levuka, and, notwithstanding their
expressed wish to be paid in money, they were given trade and refused cash ; the} 7 should
have received each 3/.; the trade, as far as 1 could judge, was full value at 21. 10s.
The man assured me that they were not taken before any magistrate to be paid off and
have their agreement cancelled.
I am reporting this case to the Agent-General.
Another case came before me at Naitasiri last month, when one, T. Morton, was
paying off 25 Yasawan labourers. At their request; he had supplied a quantity of trade
as part payment. He requested me to examine the accounts without seeing the trade.
I declined, and on exhibiting the goods 1 reduced the price charged by one-sixth. I was
much amused by the presence of some, whose labourers’ time is nearly expired, and who
were watching the experiment with no little anxiety. I trust the result may save me
some trouble in the future.
I beg to record my opinion that, if difficulty exists in procuring labourers, the blame
rests with many of those who have used unfair means to procure them, treated them
injudiciously while in employment, and then cheated them out of their justly earned
wages, some in pay, and in not a few instances altogether.
It is admitted that Ra and Yasawan men are well behaved and good workers, perform-
ing as much as either Polynesians or Coolies. Why not pay them honestly for it, and
treat them justly ? This is the only way the planter can expect to produce any desire in
the Ra districts to yield a fair and regular supply of labourers ; they do not require to
leave their homes for 12 months for their food and a few fathoms of cloth.
Admitting the present necessity for not absolutely checking the migrations of the
Natives from one district to another, I beg to offer the attached suggestions for future
legislation, to regulate the hiring and service of our native population.
I have, &c.
(Signed) Alexander Eastgate.
Suggestions for Regulating the Hiring and Employment of Fijians as Labourers.
1. Every person desiring to employ labourers, shall apply to the Agent-General for a
permit, stating the number required and their term of service.
2. Every person engaged as recruiting agent to be licensed by the Agent-General.
3. Term of service not to exceed three years.
Note. —l am of opinion that beyond being of the utmost importance to the employer,
a more lengthened service would be a better education in regular and industrious
habits. I have observed that most of the yearly labourers returning home are
a serious source of annoyance to their friends and the neighbourhood; they are
for months consumers without producing anything. Of course the permit would
always be a check to undesirable persons having the option of engaging labourers
for so long a time.


4 —Wao-es not less than 21. 10s. for boys under 16 years of age, and not less than
3/ 10s. for those of 16 years and upwards, to be paid half-yearly, either to the Agent-
General or Stipendiary Magistrate. In cases of service for more than one year, the
labourer may receive, say, not more than one-third of his wages, same to be paid betore
and certified to by a stipendiary magistrate.
5. On engagement. Before leaving the district, to go in company with the Agent
to the Bali, and have Bond of Agreement (printed in the Fijian language) read and
explained; the Buli to certify that such has been done; then, as now, the Agreement to
be attested by stipendiary magistrate of district.
Note. —One copy of the Agreement in the Fijian language to be given to the
labourers.
(3. —No married woman to enter into service without consent of her husband, and no
children under 16, unless accompanied by parent or guardian.
Note.— At present those between 14 and 16 are not subject to this, and are not required
to commute the labour tax.
7. No married man shall leave his family, unless he can prove to the satisfaction of
his Buli that he has provided sufficient food for their maintenance, and that they are
decently housed.
8. —Commutation of labour tax to be paid by every male from 16 years and upwards.
9 _The Roko Tui, Buli, and Stipendiary Magistrate may determine what number of
adult males it may be desirable should be permitted to leave any particular district. A
register of same to be kept in magistrate’s office for public inspection.
All the penal clauses of the present Ordinance to be retained; that referring to
destruction of property, wilfully or by neglect, should be increased.
The Ordinance should be printed in the Fijian language, and placed in the hands of all
native officials.
(Signed) Alexander Eastgate.
Number of
Number of
Labourers
engaged in
District.
Number of
Names of Vessels engaged in the Labourers
Labour Trade. Name ot Master or Owner. left District
1876 & 1877.
Time-expired
Labourers Remarks.
paid oft.
Emma
Alice
George B.'Evans.
John Fergusson.
Thomas Morton.
JMartin May.
* These are
Vunivalu
Lizard
included
in the
Louis Munroe.
162.
March 2, 1877.
Enclosure 5 in No. 1.
, S.M.
Qila, Tavinni, February 7, 1877.
Depositions taken before the Stipendiary Magistrate of Vanda Levu in the case of
Labour from Kadavu, employed in John Rannie’s plantation, Nasisila, Taviuni,
and engaged by George Evans.
Tevita sworn. —I am a native of Dravuni, Kadavu. It was shortly before Christmas
last year that George Evans came to Kadavu. Mr. Evans sent a man ashore (a kai
mua) to the Chief of the town to tell all the men of the place to assemble (soqoni mai)
to hear what he had to say. When we assembled, Evans said, <e I came to ask what
“ your mind is (me taroga na yalodra na tamata). The work that I ask is for ‘ the
“ Governor,’ it is for the ‘ Matanitu.’ The Governor said to me that you were to give up
“ Fijian* ways (me bu na ka vaka viti) and now to pay money only to the Government.”
Evans said it was the Governor’s command that the old way of raising taxes was over
* Rather, Fiji way of taxes, the veka viti way of paying taxes, i.e., in Fijian articles.—(Signed) J. B.
i 17270. C


now, that they were to collect no more Beche-de-mer, no more sheli (Civa), no more
nuts, they were to pay in money only. This is the Governor’s voice to me. After
Christmas every man was to pay 1/. Whoever did not pay his 11. would be taken to
Nasova to work on the roads (“ta vatu ”).
his
(Signed) Tevita x
mark.
(Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
When we arrived at Vuna 1 alone only went ashore, all the others remained on board.
Mr. Hunter asked me only two questions : (1.) If I knew how many months I had to
work ?—I said 12. (2.) If I knew the wages ? Mr. Evans said, “ Say 21.” I said 21.
At Kadavu Mr. Evans had said 10/. I simply followed his voice. I did not sign before
Mr. Hunter, I signed on board the boat before Mr. Evans. All the men signed before
him. Mr. Hunter did not go on board. He did not ask the men any questions at all.
We were told at Vuna that we were to come to Nasisila. We were not asked.
(Signed) Tevita x
mark.
Witness to the above mark and discourse.
(Signed) John Rennie
Signed and sworn before me at Qila, this 7th day of February 1877.
(Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
John Rennie sworn :—I am a planter. A few days after these men came to work for
me at Nasisila, the Chief Tevita (above) came to me and asked me if I was the owner
of this land (i.e.. Nasisila) or only an overseer. I said I was astonished at the question,
why did he ask ? Because (he said) Mr. Evans told us we were to work for the
Government, and we supposed that this was Government land and you were set over us
by the Governor.
(Signed) John Rennie.
(Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
Seruvatu sworn :—I am a native of Bulia, Kadavu. We were preparing for Christmas
when Evans came to Kadavu. Bulia is near to Dravuni on the same island. When
Evans had finished at Dravuni he went to Bulia. We all assembled in a house to hear
what Evans had to say. He said he came from the Governor to tell us that the old
Fijian way of collecting taxes was over, there were to be no more nuts taken. We were
to pay 1 1, each. If we did not pay we would be sent to Nasova to break stones (ta
vatu) or be put into prison. When we arrived at Vuna Point no questions were asked
of me. We signed no paper at all. We signed only at Bulia before Evans.
(By S. M.) Did you not go before Mr. Swanston at Kadavu?—Witness. Yes.
(By S. M.) And what did he say?—Witness. He asked us if we were going of our
own free will or not.
We thought we were going for the Governor, and it was our will to please him and
work for him. I thought it was the Governor he meant and did not wish to be
“ yalo ca ” to him,
his
(Signed) Seruvatu x
mark.
Witness to above.
(Signed) John Rennie.
Sworn before me at Qila, Tavinni, this 7th day of February 187 7-
(Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
Tuivalisi sworn :—1 am a native of Dravuni. It was about two weeks before Christ-
mas when Evans came to Kadavu. He assembled us all and told us that the Governor
himself had sent him to them to ask their minds. Did they wish to go to work for him ?
He was to tell them that they were not to pay any more taxes in nuts, or beche-de-mer,
or cotton, but in money only. They were to pay 1/. each. If any man did not pay, he
would be taken to Levuka and put in prison or work on the roads. We next went to
Misi Bob (Swanston) ; he asked us if we were forced to go or if we went of our own
accord. He did not ask each of us, he' asked us all at once. He did not wait for an
answer. He was very quick (vakariri). We had no time to answer. I thought I was


going to work for the Governor. 1 did not object to work for him. I would not have
come had I known that we were going to work for any other white man than the
Governor. Evans told us our wages would be 10/. (ten pounds) each man. Wc did
not sign at Vuna. I was asked no question at Vuna at all. I did not sign any paper
there. ■ j,is
(Signed) Tuivausi X
mark.
Witness to above.
(Signed) John Rennie.
(Signed) James Biath, S.M.
Sanaila sworn ; —I am a native of Dravuni. It was about two weeks before Christmas
when Evans came to Kadavu. He told us that the Governor had sent him to tell us
that he wanted to know if we were willing to go to work on his plantation at Nasisila.
That if we went he would pay us 10/. each in Levuka ; that was better than staying at
home and paying a pound. The taxes were to be 1/. each man. No nuts nor any
produce at all would be taken as taxes. Money only would be taken. lam giving you
the Governor’s own voice now. Mr. Evans said, “If I had known that Nasisila was not
“ the Governor’s plantation, I would not have come. It was because I wanted to please
“ the Governor that I came.” We went to see Swanston (Bob) at Wailevu. He asked us
if we wanted to go to work. He said we might if we liked. He did not wait for any
answer. He asked us all together. He did not ask each of us. I did not answer,
because I had no time. 1 would not have objected if I had been sure that it was the
Governor that wanted us. If Swanston had said that we were to go to a white man s
plantation, I would not have come. We were asked no questions at vuna; we signed
no paper there. hig
(Signed) Sanaila X
mark.
Witness above.
(Signed) John Rennie.
Sworn before me at Qila this 7th day of February 1877.
(Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
Livai sworn : —I am a native of Dravuni, Kadavu. lam a teacher. About two
weeks before Christmas Mr. Evans came to Dravuni to ask labour for the Governor.
He said the Governor himself had sent him to get men to work in his land at
Nasisila, the Governor’s garden. After a year they would be paid 10/. each in
Levuka, 5 that was better than staying and paying 1/. each. 1/. was to be the tax after
Christmas. No tax in produce would be taken ; no nuts, nor any cotton, nor anything
but money. Mr. Evans said the Governor himself had sent him for men to work 46 me
taroo-a na tamata caka caka.” I went because Mr. Evans told us that Nasisila was the
Governor’s property; had I suspected that it belonged to any other white man, I would
not have gone. It was to please the Governor alone. I signed no paper at Vuna.
No question at all was asked of me. Mr. Swanston certainly told us at Wailevu that
we might go to work or not as we liked. He did not wait for any answer.
• his
(Signed) Livai x
mark.
Witness to above.
(Signed) John Rennie
Sworn before me this 7th day of February 1877, at Qila, Tavinni, Colony of Fiji.
(Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
Veniasi sworn: —I am a native of Nabawalu, Kadavu. The evidence given by
Yeniasi is to all intents and purposes exactly the same as the preceding. I need not
write it out. He said that Evans gave out that he was his Excellency’s Secretary
(vunivola), and came direct from him with his message to them to know if they were
“ good-minded ”to go to work in his Excellency’s gardens at Nasisila. The witness
went to please the Governor, &c.
(Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
C 2


There are 30 men in this lot, or rather 29 Kadavu men and one Yasawa man.
examined 10 more besides the above, and they corroborate what has been put in
evidence. «
Mr. Rennie was present and heard all my examinations; he has signed as witness.
Given under my hand, at Qila, Tavinni, this 7th day of February 1877.
Vanna Levu. (Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
Memo.—l sent the above men back to Nasisila to work, and told them that all they
had said would be reported to the Governor.
(Signed) J. B,
Selia Levu, February 9, 1877.
Depositions taken before the Stipendiary Magistrate of Vanna Levu in the case of
certain Kadavu men engaged by George Evans to work on Selia Levu.
Wm. M. Moore sworn as Interpreter.
Katu Evenisa sworn:—l am a native of Nacamotu, Kadavu. Mr. Evans engaged me
to come to work. I signed before Evans alone. No white man was present. A number
of us were present when Evans spoke to us. Evans said, Who wants to go to work ?
The Governor says that 1 can take men to work, i.e ., the Governor has no objection to
your going to work. Those who are willing are to come. Mr. Evans said, “ You are to
<c pay your tax in money.” He said that it was forbidden to us in future to pay in any-
thing but money ; no more beche-de-mer, nor sinnet, nor cotton, &c., &c., would be taken.
If Evans had not said we must pay money, we would not have come. Mr. Swanston
asked us if anyone had forced us to go to work, or if it was our own mind. We said,
Yes, it is our wish to go. Mr. Hunter asked us, when we were all together at Vuna,
what our minds were, and we said we had come to work. I have no complaint against
Mr. Richardson. We prefer to get our taxes in produce (named) rather than to pay
money, as it is difficult to find money.
his
(Signed) Evenisa X
mark.
(Signed) Wm. M. Moore, Interpreter.
Sworn before me, this 9th day of February 1877, at Naselia Levu.
(Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
Tamamena sworn :—I am a native of Nacamotu, Kadavu. Mr. Evans engaged me to
work. There were a number of us assembled. He said, I have been to the Vale Bose
and the Governor says I can go for labour. We said, We are engaged with our taxes.
He said, All these things (mentioning all kinds of produce) are abolished, you can pay
in money only.* He said, I will pay the money for you, and so we came to work. We
understood Evans to say that he was a messenger (Na Mata) from the Governor,
Mr. Evans said, 1 am a “ Vunivola” to the Government.
his
(Signed) Tamamena X
mark.
(Signed) W. M. Moore, Interpreter.
Sworn before me, this 9th day of February 1877, at Naselialevu.
(Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
Taito sworn lam a native of Nuku, Kadavu. Mr. Evans engaged me. We were
assembled in numbers. He said, lam come from the Vale Bose at Nasova to ask men
to o'o to work. We said, What about the work of the Matanitu that we are doing, beche-
de-mer, &c. He said, All that is done away with, money alone will be taken. He said
he did not bring a “ talanoa,” but a “ lewa ” of the Governor, about cash in lieu of the
produce. (By S. M.) Why did you not sell your produce and get money ? Answer. —
Mr. Evans said he would pay our taxes to Swanston. We preferred that Mr. Evans
* 1.e., Money alone will be taken. —(Signed) J. 8., S.M.


should pay our tax than that we should go and look for it ourselves. (By S. M.) If we
had the whole year to seek for our taxes, we would have preferred to do so by selling our
produce.*
r his
(Signed) Taito x
mark.
(Signed) W. M. Moore, Interpreter.
Signed before and sworn this 9th day of February 1877, at Naselialevu,
(Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
Elia sworn :—I am a native of Lawaki, Kadavu. Mr. Evans engaged me. There
were seven of us present. He said, I am come from the Vale in Bose at Levuka to
enquire for men who want to go to work. I want to get 50 men to work at Tavinni. We
said, We are engaged collecting shells, beche-de-mer, &c., for the Government. He said,
All that is done away, nuts, &c. In the coming year each man will pay a pound in
money. He said, You go to work, and you will get 2/. to pay your taxes at the end of
the year, and that was why we came. (By S. M.) Why did you believe what Evans
said P—He said it is the voice of the Government. We followed his word. He is a
great talking man and we believed him. He did not say he came as a messenger, but
simply that he came from Levuka to askf for men.
his
(Signed) Elia X
mark.
(Signed) W. M. Moore, Interpreter.
Sworn before me this 9th day, February 1877, at Naselialevu.
Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
Serupepeli sworn:—l am a native of Nakasaleka, Kadavu. Mr. Evans engaged ;
there were many of us present. I have come from Levuka. Mr. Evans said, from the
Vale in Yei Bose, Levu, The Governor says that those men who wish to go to work
can do so ; those men will not be ill-treated. Those who wish to remain at home can
remain. He said, I want men for Nasisila, but we have not gone there. He said,
Government, will take only money, it will not take produce, no candlenuts, nor beche-de-
mer, &c., &c. (By S. M.) We believed him because he said he had come from the
Vale ni Matanitu, and assured us of the truth. (By Mr. Moore, Interpreter.) If
Mr. Evans had said that the Governor had said all the boys were to be killed, we would
not have believed him. Mr. Evans said, Those of you who wish to stop at Kadavu and
seek for 1/. during next 12 months can do so, those of you who wish to go to work at
Tavinni, I will pay their tax. I said, Yes, I wish to go to Tavinni. It was not clear
to me that I had a year to collect my tax in Kadavu. Mr. Evans did not say when I
had to pay,
his
(Signed) Serupepeli X
mark.
(Signed) W. M. Moore, Interpreter.
Sworn before me at Naselialevu this 9th day of February 1877.
(Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
Tomu sworn :—I am a native of Nakasaleka, Kadavu. Engaged by Evans. We
were all together in the town. Evans said, I come from the Vale ni Bose at Levuka to
tell you that you are to go to work for the Government. Evans said, I entered the
House of Government at Nasono, and the Governor said some men from Kadavu can
go to work at Nasisila. Those who wish to go to work can do so, and if any Chief
prevents you they can be “ punished.” He said, It is forbidden to you to pay your taxes
in anything but money this year, and it is good that you should go and work at Tavinni,
* Memo.—The witness had evidently been told that the 1/. to Swansfon would have to be paid at once. I
believe, when he said that he would prefer Swanston to pay it, that it was because he could not get 1/. at once,
and that it was why he engaged.—(Signed) J. B.
t The last sentence is Moore’s interpretation of what I understood very differently. We nearly quarrelled
Moore would not say anything but “ ask ” for men unless he used vakankawa and taura bibi.
C 3


and I will pay your tax. He said we were to work at Nasisila and to be paid at Nasova.
He said, Nasisila is my land.
(Signed) Tomu X
mark.
(Signed) W. M. Moore, Interpreter.
Sworn before me at Naselialevu this 9th day of February 1877.
(Signed) James Blyth, S.M.
Memo.—Mr. Moore objects to phrase above; he asked witness the meaning of
“ Cakacaka ki na Matanitu,” and witness said it meant a “ legitimate engagement,” i.e.,
not kidnapping; and that “paid at Nasova ” means same thing, to wit, “Government
supervision.”
(Signed) W. M. M.
Enclosure 6 in No. 1.
Mr. J. C. Smith to the Governor.
Dear Sir, _ February 23, 1877.
I have read with much interest the depositions now returned, they have certainly
enlightened my mind on the question dealt with yesterday. Evans is a thorough
blackguard, and I trust that the police will be able to deal with him for this offence ;
such men bring disgrace on the Colonists at large, and the sooner they are disposed of'
the better. They deserve no sympathy, and will, I think, get none. These scoundrels
necessitate stringent laws which honest men feel irksome. I admit the necessity where
wc have such men as Evans to deal with.
I am, &c.
(Signed) J, C. Smith.
No. 2.
The Right Hon. the EARL OF CARNARVON to Governor Sir
the Hon. A. H. GORDON, K.C.M.G
Sir, Downing Street, June 27, 1877-
I have the honour to convey to you Her Majesty’s gracious confirmation and
allowance of the Ordinance of the Legislature of Fiji, No. 10 of 1877, entitled “An
“ Ordinance to regulate and control the hiring and service of Native labourers within
“ the Colony,” a transcript of which accompanied your Despatch of the 12th of
March.*
In this Ordinance, ■ which is much more suitable to the wants of the Colony than
that which it repeals, the instructions conveyed to you in my Despatch, of the
18th of September last,f have for the most part received due consideration. I notice,
however, that the directions in the 7th paragraph of my Despatch as regards the
insertion of a provision subjecting rules and regulations made under the Ordinance to
disallowance by the Secretary of State, have escaped your attention. Such regulations
ought always to be submitted to the revision of the Secretary of State; for though they
are likely in most cases to be unobjectionable, this power of informal legislation is liable
to be sometimes carried too far, and a Governor, without intending to exceed the
powers conferred upon him by Ordinance, may occasionally make regulations which,
going beyond the matters of detail to which they ought to be confined, and being
ultra vires , are void in law. As no provision to this effect has been inserted in the
amending Ordinance, I have to instruct you to be careful on all occasions to send home
such regulations as may be approved by the Legislative Council.
3. As regards the 17th section of the Ordinance, I would observe that when labour
contracts are cancelled for ill-usage or breach of contract on the part of employers, the
expense of sending home the enfranchised immigrant should have been made to fall upon
the delinquent employer, and not on the Colony.
# No. 1.
| Not printed.


4. In view of the irregularities connected with recruiting for labour in the Colony
to which you have drawn attention in the despatch forwarding the present
Ordinance, and in your further Despatch, of the 10th of April,* it is manifest that
legislation of this nature is both necessary and opportune. I conclude that after
the proceedings which you have described, the recruiter Evans will, if possible, be
brought to justice ; and I observe, that for cases of this description, the 9th section of
the repealed Ordinance is kept in force. Should he in any event apply for a licence, it
will, of course, be refused to him.
I have &c.
Sir A. H. Gordon. (Signed) CARNARVON.
No. 3.
Governor the Hon. Sir A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the
EARL OF KIMBERLEY. (Received January 20, 1881.)
My Lord, Mua Levu, Fiji, November 15, 1880.
I have the honour to transmit herewith, for Her Majesty’s gracious allowance
and confirmation, an Ordinance to amend Ordinance No. X. of 1877, entitled “An
“ Ordinance to regulate and control the hiring and service of Native labourers within
“ the Colony.”
2. The Ordinance of which this is an amendment, although it provides that labourers
from other islands of Fiji are to be returned to their homes after the termination of
their engagement, specifies no time within which they are to be so returned, and imposes
no penalty for a neglect of the obligation.
3. The consequence has been that some employers have taken advantage of this
state of things to retain the services of their labourers for a long period after the
termination of their engagement, professing to intend to send them home, but taking no
steps to provide a vessel for the purpose.
3. A great deal of ill-feeling has been thus created, but it is hoped that the evil will
be. corrected by the present Ordinance.
4. I have also the honour to enclose the Report of the Acting Attorney-General upon
this Ordinance.
I have, &c.
(Signed) A. GORDON.
The Right Hon. the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 1 in No. 3.
Report on Ordinance No. XXIII., 1880.
An Ordinance to amend Ordinance No. X. of 1877, entitled £c An Ordinance to
“ regulate and control the hiring and service of Native labourers within the
u Colony.”
This Ordinance is passed for the purpose of rectifying an omission in Ordinance
No. X. of 1877, entitled cc An Ordinance to regulate and control the hiring and service
“ of Native labourers within the Colony.”
2. The Ordinance referred to failed to provide compulsorily for the return to their
homes of servants hired under the Ordinance.
3. This is now rectified, and employers are compelled to provide each labourer with
a return passage to the place whence he came; such passage to be provided within
14 days of the expiration of the contract of service.
4. The penalty for non-compliance is a fine not exceeding five pounds, or one month’s
imprisonment.
I am of opinion that the Royal Assent may be given to this Ordinance.
P. S. Solomon,
Levuka, 9th November 1880. Acting Attorney-General.
* Not printed,
C 4


Enclosure 2 in No. 3.
Fur. No. XXIII., 1880.
An Ordinance (enacted by the Governor of the Colony of Fiji, with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council thereof), to amend Ordinance No. X. of 1877,
entitled “ An Ordinance to regulate and control the hiring and service of Native
“ labourers within the Colony/’
(1.5.) Arthur Gordon,
6th November 1880.
Whereas it is expedient to amend Ordinance No. X. of 1877, entitled “An
“ Ordinance to regulate and control the hiring and service of Native labourers within
“ the Colony.”
Be it there enacted by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Council as follows :
I. Whenever the contract of any Native labourer shall have expired the employer
shall wdthin fourteen days of the expiration of such contract provide such labourer
with a return passage to the place from whence he came and in default of so doing
shall on conviction before any Stipendiary Magistrate upon the prosecution of the
Agent-General of Immigration or any person authorised thereto by him in writing
be liable to a fine not exceeding the sum of five pounds or one month’s imprisonment.
Passed in Council this thirtieth day of October in the year of Our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and eighty.
No* 4.
The Right Hon, the EARL OF KIMBERLEY to Administrator
J. B. THURSTON, C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, February 9, 1881.
I have the honour to convey to you Her Majesty’s gracious confirmation and
allowance of the Ordinance of the Legislature of Fiji, No. XXIII. of 1880, entitled
“ An Ordinance to amend Ordinance, No. X. of 1877, entitled e An Ordinance to
“ 4 regulate and control the hiring and service of Native labourers within the Colony,’ ”
a transcript of which was enclosed in Sir A. Gordon’s Despatch of the 15th of
November last.*
The 17th section of Ordinance, No. X. of 1877 should have been amended in
accordance with the instructions contained in the 3rd paragraph of my predecessor’s
Despatch of the 27th of June 1877-f
I have, &c.
(Signed) KIMBERLEY.
The Officer Administering the Government of Fiji.
No. 5.
Governor G, WILLIAM DES VCEUX, C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the EARL OF
DERBY. (Received March 9, 1883).
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, January 18, 1883.
I have the honour to forward copies of a message which I recently addressed
to the Legislative Council in connexion with a new Ordinance for the regulation of the
engagement of native labourers. Owing to delay in printing I am unable to forward
the Ordinance itself by this mail: but as the passing of this measure has caused much
excitement among the white inhabitants of the Colony, I think it well to lose no time
in acquainting your Lordship with the reasons which have appeared to me to render
it necessary.
No. 3.
t No. 2.


2. The message may in other respects be not uninteresting to your Lordship, as it
contains a reply to attacks which have been made from various quarters upon the native
policy of this Government.
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. W. DES VCEUX.
The Eight Hon. the Earl of Kimberley,
&c. &c. See.
Enclosure in No. 5.
Message of His Excellency the Governor to the Legislative Council with reference
to the proposed Native Labour Ordinance, 1883.
G. W. Des Vceux.
The Ordinance having for its short title “The Native Labour Ordinance, 1883,”
which is now before the Legislative Council, is a measure of very great importance
to the future of this Colony, and has been prepared only after long and anxious
consideration.
In three successive years the Chiefs assembled in the Bose Vakaturaga have complained
of the misery and suffering to the old, and to the women and children of certain provinces,
through the withdrawal to distant plantations of an undue proportion of the able-bodied
men; and as it is known that these complaints have not been without very substantial
foundation, Her Majesty’s Government has drawn special attention to them with a view
to the provision of such remedies as may be practicable.
The necessity of amending the Native Labour Ordinance of 1877 had, however, for
a long time occupied the attention of this Government during the administration both
of the late and the present Governor, and it is only because of the exceeding difficulty
of the subject, and the necessity of attention to affairs of even more pressing importance,
that it has not been already dealt with, both for the reason specially referred to by the
Chiefs, and for others.
It is now well known, though it cannot be too often repeated, that one of the first
objects which the Government of this Colony is bound to keep in view is the preservation
of the Natives; but it is less generally recognised that this policy is dictated not merely
by considerations of honour and humanity, but by the simplest economical expediency.
In temperate climates such as those of the neighbouring colonies the aborigines as they
disappear are replaced by a superior race, and the general result, however deplorable
may be the means of arriving at it, is probably in the end beneficial to the world at large.
But in this as in other tropical countries where whites cannot be the tillers of the soil,
the only possible substitutes for the Natives are other coloured labourers imported at
heavy expense from a distance.
Leaving out of consideration the very considerable and increasing quantity of exports
produced by Natives working for themselves, the Fijian labour available for white
employers, though not as abundant as they would like it to be, is yet of unquestionable
value, as to produce the same results without it would involve far greater cost. The
supply might no doubt be considerably increased for a time if all restrictions were
removed; but if restrictions are, as the Government believes, absolutely necessary for
the preservation of the native race, their removal, even from the whire man’s point
of view would be a benefit to the present generation at unduly heavy cost to their
successors.
Apart, therefore, from the question of humanity and from the special consideration
which is due to a people by whose free gift Her Majesty obtained the sovereignty of
these islands, the preservation of the native race, and restrictions upon labour engage-
ments, as conducing to that end, may be justified on economical grounds alone, it being
evidently better for the Colony to retain a certain quantity of labour for ever than to
take a course which, while increasing the supply for the moment, would in no long time
bring about its exhaustion. It is better in fact to live on the interest of the labour
supply than to squander the capital.
The exceptional efforts of various kinds which have been hitherto made for the
preservation of the Natives have so far met with a success which, though by no means
complete, affords much ground for encouragement. The depopulation which, according
to the best authority on the subject, had been going on for many years previous to the
cession, has been arrested, and each succeeding year is showing a small but increasing
i 17270. D


surplus of births over deaths. The margin of excess is, however, still very small, having
been only 200 in 1881, or only one-sixth of one per cent, of the population; and it is
evident that, when the scales are so evenly poised, any substantial weight either added
to that of death or withdrawn from that of life, would throw the balance in the opposite
direction.
That the numbers of a community which is almost entirely dependent for its existence
upon food obtained by tillage of the ground are certain to be diminished both by decrease
of births and increase of deaths through the withdrawal of an undue proportion of the
able-bodied men, is too obvious to require pointing out, while of the misery and suffering
produced from the same cause we have in certain provinces very striking illustrations.
The ill effects are, however, by no means confined to the people abandoned. Where
men are suddenly emancipated from the severe, and to a great extent wholesome
restraints which have for generations been imposed on them by their social organization
they commonly fall into irregularities which are conducive neither to their own well
being nor to that of the communities into which they intrude their presence. Complaints
are frequent with respect to the seduction and prostitution of women, and of other evils
brought about under these circumstances, and consequently the absence of these
wandering labourers is often as much desired in the place of their temporary residence
as it is regretted at their homes.
Though these evils, all tending as they do towards depopulation, do not of course
justify the retention of the whole people in their home districts, they do appear to
furnish strong ground for. restricting migration within due limits, whether for labour
engagements or for any other purpose, when the very slight excess of births over deaths
is taken into consideration.
It is sometimes urged on behalf of employers that the Fijians, being now British
subjects, are entitled to all the freedom usually attached to that condition, and should
be permitted to go where and to contract with whom they please, whatever the results
to them and their race.
Without reference to the consideration that even in civilized countries people are not
free to leave their wives and families to the support of the community, the above is not
the principle on which this Government has been hitherto conducted, and on which, it
is to be hoped, it will continue to be conducted.
No disinterested person who knows the Fijians would venture to assert that they are
generally fit for the freedom of civilized men. Accustomed for unnumbered generations
to be subject to the direction of their Chiefs and elders in the minutest details of everv-
day life, they are now much in the position of children, and are for their own sakes
equally unfit to be free of control. For this reason, therefore, and not merely on
economical or other more obvious grounds of policy, the government of their Chiefs has
been upheld, their own traditional laws have been to a large extent retained, their
contracts of all kinds with white men have been placed under supervision, their tendencj r
to incur debt has been subjected to special checks, and indulgence in intoxicating drink
has been entirely prohibited.
With regard to the latter prohibition it is worthy of note that it was generally if not
universally approved by the same section of the community which objects to the control
of labour engagements, and yet apart from the interest of the whites it is difficult to
understand why restriction of freedom is more justifiable in the one case than the other.
The Governor believes that the justification for both restrictions is equally strong, each
being necessary to save the lives of those subject to it, and being at the same time an
indirect benefit to the white community also.
Another objection which was raised to Sir Arthur Gordon’s Ordinance of 1877, and
which is sure to recur with respect to this Ordinance is, that in diminishing the facilities
for leaving home the people are more subjected to the power of their Chiefs. While
such a result is no doubt possible, the Governor would not look upon it as by any means
an unmixed evil, or an evil at ail in the majority of cases. He is of course well aware
that Fijian Chiefs are commonly represented as avaricious tyrants, who seize all the
property worth owning upon which they can lay their hands, and whose rule, as having
reference solely to self interest, is a yoke under which their people continually groan. It
is hardly necessary, therefore, to say that he regards this description of the Chiefs
generally as grossly false and unjust, though it is not difficult to understand, and it may
be well for various reasons to indicate, how it has come to be entertained.
In stating what is matter of notoriety that, apart from considerations of individual
character, the mere position of the Chiefs is generally regarded with disfavour by the
white community and by the press which is conducted in its interest, the Governor does
not in the least intend to impute that the views of both are not honestly expressed; but


while giving full credit for the philanthropy which is usually put forward as their motive,
though it occasionally proceeds from unexpected quarters, he deems it probable that
those whose professions in this respect are quite genuine are nevertheless unconsciously
influenced, and have their judgment warped, by other considerations. But however this
may be, the fact cannot be ignored that the possession of power by others is never
agreeable to those who desire it for themselves, and that the government of Chiefs is
unquestionably an obstacle to that influence over the people, and that command of
labourers, which planters and others not unnaturally wish to possess. Hence, probably,
it has happened that some of the Chiefs, such as the late Ratu Isikeli, who have incurred
the bitterest hostility from the white community, have best fulfilled their duties to their
people; while others again, such as the dismissed Bulis, Sabeto, and Vuda, who were
detected in real oppression, have been generally regarded with favour.
The feeling against Chiefs being well known to the Natives, and as strong Chiefs like
strong Governments are apt to have the more bitter enemies, there are never wanting
men ready to invent or exaggerate stories to their prejudice—men who, being mal-
content with their rule (often on account of misdeeds for which they owe or have
received punishment), are on that very account the more desirous to curry favour with
white men.
These stories, even when they have a certain foundation of truth, sometimes receive
an entirely wrong complexion from the ignorance of the nature and working of the
native social organization which prevails even among persons who have resided for a
long time in Fiji; and hence many acts, which have been done by the Chiefs as the
instrument of the expressed will of the communities and for the general behoof, have
appeared to superficial observation as simply the product of arbitrary caprice, or dictated
solely by self interest.
But whatever may be the origin of such stories the Governor is glad of the opportunity
of mentioning that all, or nearly all, of those which have been published have on
investigation proved to be either wholly false, in so far as they involved discredit, or so
exaggerated as to have little semblance of truth. In the few instances where there has
been real oppression an account of it has rarely been published, and this silence was
specially significant in the cases of two high Chiefs who were dismissed from office in
1881 for compelling people against their will to leave home under labour engagements
with white employers.
It is commonly said that the more favourable and, as the Governor believes, the
correct view of the Chiefs’ character is induced by ignorance of the truth, and that the
pe6ple wffien really aggrieved are afraid to complain. That this fear is much exaggerated
is shown by the complaints of a very trivial kind which are not unfrequently made to
the Native Department; and when it is considered that the Chiefs are for the most part
surrounded by unfriendly eyes, it is unlikely that any of their serious misdeeds entirely
escape notice. Native officers, no doubt, sometimes commit acts deserving of blame,
and not unfrequently perhaps, if they are to be judged according to the standard of an
advanced civilization. But serious misconduct on their part has, it is believed, been
rare, and is likely for the future to be still rarer, now that it’ is known from signal
examples that the highest rank will not protect from punishment. Though a considerable
number of Chiefs have been dismissed or suspended from office, it is entirely untrue, as
has been readily taken for granted, that these punishments were exclusively or even
generally for oppression, the misconduct in the majority of cases having consisted merely
of neglect of duty, or of irregularities for which parallels could readily be found among
the doings of public officers in more civilized countries. The absence of anything like
general oppression is, to say the least, indicated by the profound peace which reigns in
the Colony, and by the fact that (with the exception of the outbreak of the mountain
tribes of Viti Levu at a time when they had not been subjected to British rule) there
has not been since the cession a single rising against the Chiefs or the Government.
But granting that a certain amount of ill-doing takes place—and abuses will occur
in every human system —the Governor has good reason to know that a balance of benefit
is to be found on the other side of the account, and considering what the Fijians have
recently been he deems it a subject of wonder that the Chiefs’ rule should be of so
creditable a character. Many instances might be quoted of their collective and individual
good sense, and their regard for other interests than their own, while there is good
reason to believe that very many of them are really striving to do their best for their
people, according to their lights, under extremely difficult conditions, and by no means
without a considerable measure of success. In short after three years exceptional
experience, the Governor has gradually formed the opinion, which now amounts to
conviction, that relations between the Chiefs and people are on the whole mutually
D 2


beneficial, and that though together with the communal system and other ancient
institutions, they are sure sooner or later to come to an end, he is satisfied that their
cessation, if otherwise than very gradual, would be quite as disastrous to one side as
the other.
Thus much as regards the general reasons for the restriction and supervision of labour
engagements, which is the object of the proposed Ordinance. The particular provisions
of this measure are to a certain extent the same as those of the Ordinance of 1877, now
in force, which was passed for the same purpose by Sir A. Gordon. While this latter
law for a time well fulfilled its object, experience of its working has disclosed some
serious omissions, as might have been expected in connexion with so novel and difficult
a subject, and it is in consequence becoming more and more inadequate to meet the new
condition of things which is being brought about by the large influx of capital.
The principal amendments which it has been found necessary to introduce are (1) for
increased security that labourers desire to engage, by providing for the previous regis-
tration of their wish to do so, and for the punishment of bribery practised with a view
of compelling them to do so ; (2) to encourage in certain cases engagements to work
near home rather than at a distance from it; (3) to put an end to the system of monthly
contracts which has arisen in contravention of the spirit of the existing law.
The provisions by which it is hoped to attain these objects have been drawn in the
most stringent form in the first instance, in order that the alterations may, as far as
possible, be only m the way of modification. Some important amendments of this kind
(one of them relaxing the restrictions with regard to married people, and another
providing for the enlargement of the field of local labour) have already been made, and
will be explained when the sections which they affect come under consideration; while
the Governor has no doubt that die local experience of honourable members will be able
to suggest further improvements which do not touch fundamental principles.
But while leaving these provisions for the most part for discussion at the Board, the
Governor deems it necessary to refer shortly to the subject of bribery and to that of the
monthly contracts described.
Bribery of Chiefs and others, with a view to their inducing labourers to engage, has
lately received a very serious impetus from the large increase of capital in the Colony.
It is a practice which, owing to the loyalty of the people to their hereditary superiors,
renders it impossible to know with certainty whether labour contracts are entered into
willingly. In some instances it is known that people have been compelled to engage
against their will, and though the severe punishment of the offending Chiefs no doubt
gave a check to this abuse, it would be expecting too much of human nature to suppose
that Fijians can invariably withstand the large bribes which are now being offered
to them.
The system of monthly contracts above referred to has arisen in consequence of a
well-known decision of the Supreme Court. Under it men are carried away from their
homes nominally under monthly engagements, but really for much longer periods.
These contracts, being made subject to no supervision, have been found to lead to much
abuse, and the employers not being bound to return the labourers to their homes on the
expiration of their engagements, the latter have in too many instances become wanderers,
working nowhere long, and causing much mischief among the Fijians, of whose too
readily extended hospitality they have thought fit to avail themselves,—doing in fact
much harm and little or no'good either to themselves or any one else.
The Governor deems it now necessary to notice an objection which was taken to the
proposed Ordinance at the first reading, to the effect that, if passed, it will practically
cut off the native labour supply df the Colony.
On this point the Governor and his advisers hold an entirely contrary opinion. It is
possible that those may be to a certain extent affected who live at great distance from
all the places where long engagement labourers are usually obtained, and upon islands
held in fee simple from which the native inhabitants have been extruded.; but even in
these cases, where the treatment of the employed is known to he good, it is doubtful
whether the sanction of legitimate engagements to be given by, and in connexion with,
this measure will not cause any deficiency in labourers obtained from a distance to be
to a large extent made up by people living in the more immediate neighbourhood who
have hitherto furnished very few labourers to plantations. But, however, this may be,
while the Ordinance will unquestionably make this difference, that a larger proportion
of labourers will engage nearer to their homes, the Governor is satisfied that it will not
permanently decrease the general stock of labour available for the benefit of white men,
but will rather tend to increase it as saving to a great extent the time lost in long
■passages to and from the scenes of labour. While the measure will afford security that


indentured labourers have really wished to go abroad to earn wages, and have not merely
succumbed for the moment to the blandishments of the recruiter, it will not be used,
and indeed effectual means will be taken to prevent its being used, to hinder from going
men who really wish to go, so long as there are sufficient left behind to prevent the
disastrous consequences above referred to; in fact, the Governor believes that after the
lapse of a sufficient time to bring the Ordinance into full operation, it will be found that
as many Natives are working for white men as now, and that is many more than the
number similarly employed at any previous time.
If such a result should not occur, it would be to the Governor a subject of sincere
reoret as he need scarcely to say that to oppose in any way even the immediate interests
of & his*own countrymen is by no means an agreeable duty. At the same time his view
as to the necessity of the Ordinance would in that event be in no way altered, believing
as he does that it will be for the ultimate benefit even of the white race, anil that it is
in any case required for the vital interests of those who constitute an enormous majority
of the population.
To another objection which was raised against the Ordinance of 18/7, and which
is sure to be renewed now—viz., that these measures are intended to assist the system
of native taxation, and are, therefore, chiefly for revenue purposes —the Governor would
scarcely deem it necessary to make reply if the statement had not attained credence by
frequent reiteration.
So far from intending to increase the revenue by these means, the Governor is quite
well aware that it will have the contrary effect, or rather that, while not actually
decreasing receipts, it will hinder them from increasing as rapidly in the immediate
future as they would otherwise do.
There cannot be a doubt that if the capital at disposal were allowed free play, and
the whole male population were thus transferred to the plantations, the exports and
imports, and consequently the revenue of the Colony, would, within the next few years,
increase much more rapidly even that it is likely to do under any circumstances.
It is believed, however, that this commercial and financial gain would be acquired
only at the cost of the life of the native race, and for reasons above indicated would in
the end be not even economically advantageous. So far, then, from desiring to increase
revenue by this Ordinance, the Government is making a deliberate sacrifice of it, and
also of the credit that would be gained by prosperity, however ephemeral, brought about
under its auspices.
Unless the existing law should be amended, and largely amended, in the directions
indicated, increasing capital, and the more urgent demand for labour thereby produced,
by increasing indefinitely the use of the loopholes which have been discovered for
evading its spirit, will render it continually more ineffective, and the ultimate result
is not difficult to foresee. The Natives, instead of, as now, being generally in the position
of peasants, cultivating their own land, will, as regards the men, be gradually but surely
transformed into bands of migratory labourers. The women, no longer married, will
form only temporary and irregular connexions which are not conducive to the birth and
rearing of children, and the whole population will in no long time, probably within a
single century, be entirely extinct.
Though the opinions above expressed are supported by many lessons of history, if
they were mere theory raised on such a foundation alone, or if they were held only by
himself, the Governor would have hesitated long before giving them expression in this
practical and serious form. They are, however, strongly confirmed by facts now
occurring within the local experience, and are, as regards their general principle, held
to the extent of conviction not only by the present Governor but by his able predecessor;
by the Colonial Secretary, and by the Receiver-General, now absent; by the late
Chairman of the Lands Commission, whose connexion with the Colony was only of a
temporary character; by the late and present Commissioner for Native Affairs, and he
believes by all the prominent public officers in the Colony,—in fact, by everyone with
whom the Governor has conversed on the subject, and who, having had the capacity
and the opportunity required to form a correct opinion, has at the same time been in a
position to regard the question from a disinterested point of view.
It will no doubt be suggested, as usual, that this body of concurrent opinion is to a
large extent due to its accord with the policy of the Government of the day; and
though the officers named need no defence against such an attack, the Governor thinks
it may not be without influence upon the opinion of those to whom they are unknown
to mention the fact that he for the most part learnt their views when his own were only
very imperfectly formed, and when he was desirous of learning all sides of a ‘debated
question, which was naturally a subject of much anxiety,
D 3


As regards the unofficial members of Council, while the Governor fears the attempt
would be hopeless to convince them as against prejudices which are created by their
surroundings, and are in their case only‘natural and to be expected, he trusts that they
will at all events not permit themselves to be influenced by one form of pressure which
it has been attempted to bring to bear upon them.
Though for the most part members of the planting body, and therefore not likely to
neglect its interests, they are not, any more'than are the Governor and the other official
members, representatives in a parliamentary sense of that or any other class. They have
been appointed by the Queen to act for the whole community, and not for any particular
section of it—certainly not for the special interests of a class which after all constitutes
only a very small minority.
While the Governor does not in the least under-estimate the importance, and relatively
to its numbers the superior importance, of the class in question, and is willing and
anxious to advance the interests of its members by every legitimate method, he is unable
to give way to their views on this question ; indeed he could not do so even if he were
less satisfied than he is that the proposed Ordinance will prove to be for their own
ultimate benefit, and that that fact will one day be generally recognised when the
passions and prejudices of the moment have passed away.
By his Excellency’s command,
(Signed) John B. Thurston,
Suva, January 8, 1883. Colonial Secretary.
No. 6.
The Hon. Sir A. H. GORDO’N, G.C.M.G., to COLONIAL OFFICE.
(Received April J 7, 1883.)
The Red House, Ascot,
Sir, April 1883.
I have the honour to return Mr. Des Voeux’s Despatch of the 18th January,*
enclosing a copy of his message to the Legislative Council of the Bth of that month
on the subject of an Ordinance for the amendment of the Native Labour Law.
2. In the reasoning of that message I most heartily and unreservedly concur, and I
think Lord Derby will agree with me in considering the arguments it contains to be
ably and temperately put forward.
3. When I was in Fiji last year Mr. Des Voeux did me the honour to consult me on
this subject, and requested me to prepare the draft of an Ordinance for the better
regulation of what may be called the Local Labour Trade. So far as I can judge from
Mr. Des Yocux’s message the lines of that draft Ordinance have been pretty closely
adhered to in the measure which Mr. Des Voeux has now passed through the Legislative
Council.
4. One grave abuse not dwelt on in Mr. Des Voeux’s message will probably be
corrected by the proposed modification of the law with regard to monthly engagements,
for lam very confident that it has not escaped Mr. Des Voeux’s attention. I refer to a
practice which has arisen of evading all the restrictions of the Ordinance of 1877 by
entering into a contract with some Native to perform a piece of work, for which he
provides the labour, thus depriving the labourers of the advantage of the provisions for
securing to them the payment of their wages, proper lodging and food, medical attendance,
&c. of which the observance is required as regards labourers directly engaged under the
Ordinance of 1877.
5. I trust that even if some features of the Ordinance may appear unusual or even
harshly restrictive, no hesitation will be felt by Lord Derby in cordially approving of
the proposed measure, for I am most thoroughly convinced that Mr. Des Voeux is
nerfectly right in his view that the destruction or maintenance of the Native race
depends, in a very great degree, upon the course now adopted.
6. It is, perhaps, hardly a matter for my comment, but I cannot refrain from
expressing a hope that the ability shown in the preparation of this message will not be
unnoticed by the Secretary of State.
I have, &c.
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) A. GORDON.
Colonial Office.
* No. 5.


No, 7.
Governor G. WILLIAM DES VCEUX to the Right Hon. the EARL OF DERBY.
(Received May 7, 1883.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, March 19* 1883.
I have the honour to forward to your Lordship an Ordinance (No. IV. of 1883)
« with respect to the engagement and service of Native labourers ” which recently passed
the Legislative Council.
2. With my Despatch of 18th January last,* was enclosed a message which I
addressed to the Legislative Council on the subject of this Ordinance, and I now
forward a report on it by the Acting Attorney General.
3. Having only to-day, as the mail is closing, received the Ordinance from the
printers, I am compelled to defer until the next opportunity some further observations
which I deem it necessary to make on the subject of this law.
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, (Signed) G. W. DES VCEUX.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 1 in No. 7.
Fiji, No. IV., 1883.
An Ordinance (enacted by the Governor of the Colony of Fiji, with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council thereof) to repeal Ordinances No, X. of 1877
and No. XXIII. of 1880, and to make other Provisions in lieu thereof with respect
to the Engagement and Service of Native Labourers.
(i,.5.) G. \V . Des Vceux.
19th March 1883.
Be it enacted by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council
as follows :
I. Ordinance No. X. of the year 1877 entitled “An Ordinance to regulate and
“ control the hiring and service of Fijian labourers within the Colony ” and Ordinance
No. XXIII. of the year 1880 entitled “ An Ordinance to amend Ordinance No. X. of
cc ” are hereby repealed Provided that no charge or incumbrance upon any real or
personal property or any personal or other liability at present subsistent under or by
virtue of any of the provisions of the said repealed Ordinance shall be affected by such
repeal.
11. This Ordinance may be cited as “ The Native Labour Ordinance 1883.”
HI. In this Ordinance the term “ Native Commissioner ” shall mean the officer by
whatever name he may be known for the time being occupying the position of Head of
the Department of Native Affairs <s A labourer ” shall mean a native person employed
in any form of service The word “ Employer ” shall mean the proprietor or other
person having the chief authority on any plantation on which any labourer shall be
employed or to whom any labourer may be engaged The word “ Plantation ” shall
mean and include any place premises or property at or in which any labourer is
employed.
Part I. — Districts.
IV. For the purposes of this Ordinance it shall be lawful for the Governor in Council
by Proclamation to divide the Colony into districts herein-after termed “ Home Districts”
and to alter their boundaries as occasion may require Provided always that no such
district shall include any two or more different Provinces of the Colony or any parts of
two or more such Provinces.
V. The “ Home District ” of any native shall mean that in which the “ Mataqali ”of
such native resides or the district of the person in whose domestic service a native has
resided for a period of not less than two years immediately preceding the coming into
force of this Ordinance Provided that on the expiration of such domestic service such
native shall oe held to have reverted to the Home District in which his u Mataqali 99
resides.
* No. 5.


Part 11.
Contracts to labour within Home Districts for periods not exceeding one month.
VI. Contracts for the hiring and service of a labourer in respect of any plantation
situated in his Home District for any period not exceeding one month shall not except
as herein-after stated be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance Provided that if
in the case of any monthly contract the wages of any native labourer shall be in arrear
whether the service of such labourer shall have been in his Home District or elsewhere
he shall be deemed to have been employed under a contract of service for a period
exceeding one month For the purposes of the above proviso the wages of any labourer
shall be held to accrue from day to day.
VII. Notwithstanding anything in the next preceding section contained it shall be
lawful for the Governor by Proclamation in the Royal Gazette to declare that native
male labourers of upwards of fifteen years of age of any Home District engaging in
adjacent districts specified by such Proclamation shall be held to have engaged within
their Home District.
Part TIL
Contracts to labour beyond the limits of the Home District or for periods exceeding
one month.
VIII. Every native who may be desirous of leaving his Home District under contract
of service in respect of an estate or plantation situated beyond the limits of such district
or who may be desirous of contracting to serve for any period exceeding one month
whether within or beyond his Home District shall notify his wish to the Turaga ni Koro
of his village and to his Buli and if such native belongs to none of the classes of persons
prohibited by this Ordinance from entering into such contracts his Buli shall transmit
his name to the European Stipendiary Magistrate of the District who shall thereupon
enter the name of such native in a Register herein-after called “ The Register” to be
kept by him for that purpose in such form as may be sanctioned by the Governor The
Register shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by any person desirous of
engaging native labourers belonging to the District The persons whose names are
entered in the Register shall be taken and held to be for the twelve months ensuing the
date of their registry the only natives entitled to enter into contracts of service beyond
the limits of their Home District or for periods exceeding one month Provided
always that there shall not be entered in the Register persons of any of the following
classes :
(1.) Married men except under such conditions as may hereafter be prescribed by any
Native Regulation passed for the purpose.
(2.) Men whose absence from their home district is inconsistent with engagements into
which they have previously entered or with obligations imposed by law or whose
presence in their districts shall be required by the District Council as provided in
the next succeeding section.
(3.) Women.
(4.) Children under the age of fifteen years.
IX. In the presence of an actual necessity for the services of the whole community a
District Council may interdict the employment for any purpose other than in connection
with such necessity during the continuance of such necessity and it shall be the duty of
the Buli of the District to acquaint the European Stipendiary Magistrate of such
interdiction forthwith.
X. If any person be desirous of obtaining for himself or others the services of any
native labourers not belonging to the same Home District as the plantation or estate on
which it is proposed to employ such labourers or of any labourers for a period exceeding
one month he shall apply personally or by letter to the Native Commissioner stating the
number of labourers he requires the name and situation of the plantation on which they
are to serve the time for which he requires them the nature of the work to be performed
and the wages he proposes to offer and the Native Commissioner may thereupon deliver
to him on payment of the fee herein prescribed a permit in the form contained in
Schedule A hereto annexed to engage in the districts named therein the number of
labourers applied for or any less number among those whose names are enrolled on the
Register aforesaid and who may be willing to enter into engagement with him Any
such permit shall contain the name of the employer on whose behalf contracts are to be
made under it and the name and situation of the plantation as aforesaid When any
person is desirous of engaging labourers for any person other than himself he shall before


obtaining such permit forward to the Native Commissioner a letter of agency in the form
contained in Schedule B hereto annexed filled in and signed by tne person for whom he
XI It*shall not be lawful for the Native Commissioner to give any permit to engage
labourers in favour of any person who is in default in regard to any payment due to the
Crown for advances made in respect of immigrants or native labourers unless security
for the payment of wages be given to the satisfaction ot the Native Commissioner.
XII. The Native Commissioner may refuse to furnish such permit or may at any
time cancel any permit already granted for reasonable cause.
XIII Any person in possession of a permit as in the preceding Sections described
shall be entitled while it remains in force within the Districts named therein to engage the
services of any person whose name is entered in the Register as aforesaid and who since
such entry of his name has not become disqualified for engagement Provided that the
total number engaged under such permit shall not exceed the number specified therein
XIV It shall be lawful for the Governor by Proclamation m the Royal (xazette
when it shall appear to him to be necessary for the welfare of the native inhabitants of
any Home District or Districts to prohibit the engagement of any labourers belonging to
the Home District or Districts specified in such Proclamation for service outside the
Province in which their Mataqali reside and in like manner to cancel or suspend such
prohibition with respect to all or any of the Home Districts so specified During the
continuance of such prohibition no permit to engage labourers in such Home Districts
shall be furnished by the Native Commissioner and any permit which shall have been
previously given and may be then in force shall be deemed to be cancelled or suspended
with respect to any District to which it may apply that may be included 1.1 such
Pr °XV lt The fee payable in every year by any person intending to engage labourers
shall be ten shillings when the person to whom such permit is given is the intending
employer or is engaged in permanent service as overseer on the plantation of the intending
employer of all the labourers to be engaged under it; and in the case of any person
intending to engage labourers for or on behalf of any other person the fee shall be ten
pounds where the number of labourers allowed by such permit to be engaged shall not
exceed in the aggregate one hundred, and two shillings per caput tor any number
exceeding one hundred In no case shall a permit be in force for a longer period than
twelve months from the date of its being given. .
XVI. Every contract for the service of a native beyond his Home District or tor a
period exceeding one month shall be in the form contained in Schedule C hereto annexed
shall be in duplicate and shall be entered into in the presence of the European Stipendiary
Magistrate of the Home District of such native and if the permit of the person engaging
the services of the native be produced and shown to such Magistrate, and if the latter
be satisfied that such contract is fully understood, and is voluntarily enteied into by the
intending labourers be shall endorse on such contract the words following that is to say
“ I hereby certify that the parties to the within contract fully understand the nature and
“ terms of the said contract and entered into the same voluntarily and of their own free
<c will ” Provided always that no such endorsement shall be made by any Stipendiary
Magistrate in respect of any person whom he knows to be comprised within any ot the
classes specified in Section VIII. of this Ordinance. Ihe Stipendiary Magistrate shall
make entry on the permit of the number of labourers engaged under it and when the full
number expressed in such permit has been engaged the Stipendiary Magistrate shall
retain such permit and shall forthwith transmit it to the Native Commissioner.
XVII. No contract under this part of this Ordinance shall be for a longer period than
twelve months and within fourteen days after the expiration of the contract of
labourer the employer of such labourer shall provide him with a return passage to the
place from whence he first embarked for the purpose of fulfilling his engagement to
labour, and with proper accommodation and maintenance on the way, and in default of
so doing, on conviction before any Stipendiary Magistrate upon the prosecution of the
labourer s entitled to such passage or of any public officer, shall be liable to a fine not
exceeding twenty pounds or in default of payment to imprisonment for any period not
exceeding one month ; and any expenses which may have been reasonably incurred in
consequence of such default by or on behalf of the Government in returning such
labourer to his Home District and for his maintenance until such return may be
recovered from the employer in a summary manner at the suit of the Receiver-General
or of any person duly authorized by him for that purpose.
XVIII. Upon the expiration of any contract of service within the operation of this
part of this Ordinance it shall be the duty of the employer to inform the labourers ot the
i 17270. E


means provided for their return passage and that it is their duty to avail themselves
thereof and any employer who shall have failed to inform his labourers as aforesaid shall
be deemed to have made default in providing a return passage if for any reason any of
such labourers shall fail to return home by the means provided for the purpose.
XIX. Native labourers shall be bound to return home upon the expiration of their
contract and any such labourer who shall wilfully neglect to avail himself of a return
passage duly provided and offered to him shall be liable to imprisonment for any term
not exceeding one month and to have deducted from his wages the amount of any
expenses incurred by or on behalf of the Government in returning him it being the duty
of the Magistrate witnessing the payment of the same to forward such amount to the
Receiver-General.
XX. The wages due to labourers upon any contract under this part of this Ordinance
shall be paid to them by their employer or his authorised agent immediately after their
return to their Home District or if the employment has been within the Home District
immediately upon the termination of the contract in the presence of the European
Stipendiary Magistrate of such District In case of the absence of the Stipendiary
Magistrate at an inconvenient distance payments may be made before the Roko Tui of
the Province and such Magistrate or Roko Tui shall then endorse on the contract that
such labourers have been duly paid in his presence The Roko if payment has been
made before him shall forthwith forward the contract so endorsed to the Magistrate
aforesaid, and the Magistrate shall forward the contracts endorsed as above either by
himself or the Roko to the Native Commissioner together with any notes of death which
may have been forwarded to him in accordance with Section XLIII. of this Ordinance
The wages due on account of any labourer who may have died during the term of his
engagement and the wages due to any labourer who for any cause may not hate been
returned to his Home District shall be paid or forwarded to the Stipendiary Magistrate
of such District to be disposed of by him in such manner as the Governor may by any
general instructions direct.
XXI. Native labourers’ shall not be embarked or carried in vessels of less tonnage
than is set forth in Schedule D hereto or in excess of the number of persons propor-
tionate to each ton of the vessel’s registered tonnage as is therein mentioned Tor any
breach of the provisions of this section the master or person at the time having charge
or control of any such vessel shall be liable to a fine not exceeding the sum of tweuty
pounds or in default of payment to imprisonment for any term not exceeding three
months.
XXII. The Stipendiary Magistrate may refuse to endorse a contract of service or
note a transfer under Section XXVII. hereof when he has good reason to believe that
such contract or transfer is not likely to be advantageous to the labourer On such
refusal the Magistrate shall report the reason for it to the Native Commissioner.
XXIH. The Native Commissioner before entering the name of an employer on a
permit or the Stipendiary Magistrate before endorsing a contract or noting a transfer
under Section XXVIT [shall require security for the payment of the wages of the
labourers about to be engaged when there appears to be reasonable doubt as to the
ability of the employer to pay such wages or when owing to the intending employer
having insufficient real property there is a doubt whether the payment of such wages
can be enforced When the Native Commissioner has obtained such security he shall
mention the fact on the permit.
XXIV. Should any person by representing that the entry of the name of a native in
the Register renders him bound to enter into a contract of service or that the Governor
has ordered any person to engage or by any other fraud falsehood intimidation coercion
or misrepresentation induce any native to enter into any contract under this Ordinance
the person so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanour and shall be liable on
conviction before any Stipendiary Magistrate either to imprisonment not exceeding six
months with or without hard labour at the discretion of the Court or to pay a fine not
exceeding fifty pounds; and such contract shall be held void And the Stipendiary
Magistrate may order such person to return such native labourer to his home or to pay
intcTCourt such a sum of money as will cover any expenses incurred in the support and
return passage of such labourer to his ordinary place of abode.
XXV. No intending employer or person ‘in his service or recruiting agent shall give
any money or goods to a native as an inducement to such to enter into a contract
to labour or with a view to such native inducing others to enter into a contract to labour
and any such person who shall give any money or goods as such inducement or with a
view to any such inducement of others shall on conviction thereof forfeit the sum of
five pounds per head for every native to whom such money or goods shall have been given


as aforesaid and in default of payment shall be imprisoned for a period of three months
No money or goods given as aforesaid shall be recoverable and no deduction from wages
shall be made on account of the same having been given.
XXVI. Any person who shall give sell lend or supply anything to a Native Chief
with intent to induce such Chief to procure or assist in procuring labourers for the
service of such person or other or with intent to recompense such Chief for having so
procured or assisted in procuring labourers for such purpose shall be liable to a fine
not exceeding one hundred pounds or to be imprisoned for any term not exceeding three
months Such intent may be gathered by the Court from the surrounding circum-
stances and shall be presumed and the onus of proof to the contrary thrown on the
defendant when the latter being not permanently resident in the Province of such Chief
shall have engaged or taken part in the engagement of labourers within such Province
during the six "months immediately preceding and succeeding the date of such gift sale
loan or supply.
XXVII. The services of a native labourer under any contract entered into as herein-
before provided may with the consent of such labourer and of his employer and of the
Native Commissioner be transferred to any other employer desirous of obtaining the
services of such labourer and every such transfer shall be made before the Stipendiary
Magistrate of the district in which such labourer shall be serving under contract and
such Magistrate having obtained the consent of the labourer in person before him and
likewise of the employers hereinbefore mentioned or the consent of such employers in
writing and the consent of the Native Commissioner in writing shall cause a note of such
transfer to be entered on the contract of such labourer and shall forward a note of the
same to the Native Commissioner within one month from the date of such entry The
transferee shall be subject to all such liability for the payment of wages for the return of
the labourer to his Home District or otherwise as would have attached to the transferor
under this Ordinance if no such transfer had been made Upon any such transfer the
parties may arrange for the payment by the transferee of such part of the wages and
recruiting expenses or by the transferor of such part of the estimated cost of return
passage as may be fair having regard to the period of service remaining at the date of
transfer and any such arrangement and the terms thereof must be stated to the Magistrate
at the time of the application for transfer Save as aforesaid no bonus or other considera-
tion shall be given for such transfer and any person who shall fail to state the true nature
of any such arrangement as aforesaid or who shall give or receive any such bonus or
other consideration shall on conviction thereof in a summary manner forfeit and pay any
sum not exceeding fifty pounds.
XXVIII. Where it shall appear to the Native Commissioner that a labourer serving
under contract as hereinbefore provided has been ill-used by his empioyer or in case of
any serious breach of contract or neglect of duty on the part of such employer the
Native Commissioner may with the consent of the Governor cancel the contract of such
labourer or of any other native labourer who may be serving under contract on the same
plantation Notice of any such cancellation shall be given in the Royal Gazette and the
contract shall be held to have been cancelled at and from the date of the publication of
such notice.
XXIX. Where it shall appear to a Stipendiary Magistrate from facts elicited in a
Court of Justice that owing to the serious neglect or ill-treatment of any labourers under
contract or for any good cause it is undesirable that they should remain under contract
it shall be lawful for such Magistrate to suspend the contract of such labourers and to
provide for their maintenance at the expense of the Colony pending the report of the
circumstance to the Native Commissioner and the Native Commissioner on receipt of
the report may either cancel the contract in accordance with the preceding Section or
may renew it on such terms as to the Governor may seem fit Every labourer whose
contract shall have been cancelled shall be returned to his home at the expense of the
Colony and shall receive the wages due to him from Colonial funds and any expenses
properly incurred in returning any such labourer and for his maintenance from the date
of the cancellation of his contract or of its suspension under the next preceding section
until such return together with the amount of any wages which shall have been so paid
him shall be recoverable from the employer in a summary manner at the suit of the
Receiver-General or of any person duly authorized by him for that purpose.*
XXX. The cancellation of a contract under this Ordinance shall not be held to
preclude other proceedings as herein prescribed for breach of such contract while in force
or in respect of any ill-usage of the labourer while serving under such contract.
XXXI. The employer of any native labourer whose contract shall be cancelled as
herein provided shall pay to such labourer such amount of wages as shall be propor-
tionate to the term of service.


XXXII. No labourer shall be chargeable with stores supplied to him during his
term of service nor for moneys advanced to him and on his account unless such moneys
should be any sum or sum? which the employer may have paid in discharge of any fine
or penalty inflicted upon such labourer by a Court of Justice Provided that any
labourer serving under any agreement within his Home District may be chargeable with
stores supplied to him or moneys advanced to him and on his account but in no case
shall the amount recovered exceed a sum equivalent to one-half of the total amount of
wages to be paid to such labourer under such agreement and in every case any sum so
charged shall be acknowledged to be due by the labourer charged therewith before the
Stipendiary Magistrate of the District Where any such charge is disputed the Stipen-
diary Magistrate shall forthwith hear and determine the claim between the parties but in
no case shall the sura adjudged to be paid by the labourer exceed one-half of his wages
as aforesaid.
XXXIII. The Magistrate of a District where a labourer is serving under a contract
shall have it within his discretion to order a deduction of a portion of the wages to
become due under such contract in respect of any imprisonment awarded to the labourer
for an offence unconnected with the contract and in no way attributable to the default
of the employer.
XXXIV. Any labourer under contract as who shall unlawfully absent
himself from work during the term of his contract or shall refuse to fulfil the same unless
for some reasonable cause or shall by negligence or other improper conduct lose throw
away or damage the property of his employer or shall endanger snch property by a
careless or improper use of fire shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding ten
shillings or to imprisonment with hard labour for any term not exceeding one month.
XXXV. Any labourer under contract as aforesaid who shall maim wound or
ill-use any horse cattle or other live stock belonging to his employer when the act is due
to negligence and not to intention or is otherwise not such as would subject the offender
to indictment shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding one pound or to im-
prisonment with hard labour for any term not exceeding two months.
XXXVI. Any labourer who shall enter into a contract under the provisions, of this
Ordinance and who shall during the term of such contract absent himself without
reasonable cause for more than five consecutive days not counting Sundays or public
holidays from the plantation on which he shall have contracted to serve shall be deemed
to have absconded from such plantation and where any such labourer shall be convicted
of such absence before the Stipendiary Magistrate of the district in which he shall be
serving under contract such Magistrate shall cause a note to be made of the number of
working days of such absence to be given to the employer Provided that for a second
or any subsequent offence of a like nature on the part of the labourer the Stipendiary
Magistrate before whom the conviction shall be obtained may if he shall see fit order
such labourer to be imprisoned with hard labour for any time not exceeding sixty days
and in every such case shall cause a note of the number of days for which such labourer
shall be committed to be delivered to the employer.
XXXVII. The Stipendiary Magistrate of the district in which a labourer shall be
serving under contract shall have power on the application of the employer of such
labourer and production of the notes of absence aforesaid to order the wages in respect
of such working days or such part of them as he may deem just to be deducted from the
amount to be received by the labourer on the expiration of the contract and shall also
endorse on the contract the amount of any such deduction.
XXXVIII. Where any labourer serving under contract as aforesaid shall be
committed to prison for any offence other than an offence against the provisions of this
Ordinance it shall be lawful for the committing Magistrate upon application of the
employer to order the term of such contract to be extended for any period not exceeding
the number of days exclusive of Sundays or public holidays contained in any such
sentences of imprisonment but such extension shall not relieve the employer from any
liability which he may have incurred in respect of the contract with such labourer In
the case of any such extension the Magistrate aforesaid shall endorse such contract to
that effect and shall also report the same to the Native Commissioner.
XXXIX. If an employer shall ill-use his labourer or shall neglect to supply him with
the articles or accommodation stipulated for in the contract or shall supply such articles
of an inferior quality or shall fail to provide for him when sick reasonable medical
comforts and attendance such employer shall be liable on conviction to a penalty
not exceeding twenty pounds or imprisonment for any term not exceeding three
months.


XL. Wages due to a labourer may be sued for either by such labourer or by the
Native Commissioner or any person appointed by him before the Magistrate of the
district to which such labourer belongs or of the district in which the wages have been
earned or before the Magistrate of Suva or Levuka.
XL I. All wages due to any native labourer under any contract under this Ordinance
together with any cost incurred for the return of a labourer to his home and interest
on the amount after the rate of eight per cent, per annum shall together with any costs
which may be incurred in recovering the same be a charge upon the lands of the
plantation* in respect of which the service of such labourer shall be rendered and such
charge may be enforced at the suit of the Native Commissioner and shall take precedence
of all mortgages or other charges whatsoever save and except charges in respect of
moneys due to or on account of Polynesian or Indian immigrants.
XLII. Prior to the execution of any contract under this Ordinance between any
native labourer and the person desirous of employing such labourer under such contract
the intending employer or his agent shall pay to the Stipendiary Magistrate a sum of
money calculated at the rate of two shillings for every month of the term of such
contract and such sum shall be paid in by such Magistrate to the Receiver-General to
the account of the assessed native taxes of the Province of such labourer.
XL 111. Every case of death or desertion of a labourer engaged under this Ordinance
or of the failure of a labourer to return home on the expiration of his engagement shall
be immediately reported by his employer to the Stipendiary Magistrate of the district
within which he had contracted to serve and in the case of death such report shall if
possible be accompanied by a medical certificate of the cause of death and the length
of illness previous to death and such Stipendiary Magistrate shall forward a note of the
same to the Stipendiary Magistrate of the Horne District of such labourer.
XLIV. Labourers shall not be employed in field or plantation work on Sundays
except in cases of great emergency. Working hours shall not exceed five hours on
Saturdays and nine hours on any other day exclusive of the time allowed for meals. It
shall not be lawful to employ a labourer beyond working hours without extra pay or
except in case of great emergency without the consent of such labourer. Such extra
pay shall be at the rate of not less than two pence per hour and shall be paid within
the week in which any such extra work shall be performed. Any person who shall be
guilty of a breach of any of the provisions of this section shall be liable to pay a fine not
exceeding ten pounds and may also be ordered to pay to the labourer so employed the
amount which in the opinion of the Magistrate may be due to him in respect of such
extra work.
XLV. Nothing in the above provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to extend to
the employment for any period exceeding one month of any number of native servants
not exceeding five who may be employed in purely domestic work in any dwelling-house
situated in the Province in which their Mataqali resides. Provided that it shall not be
lawful to employ such domestic servants on field or other than domestic work and any
person so employing any such native domestic servant shall be guilty of an offence
against this Ordinance And provided further that the provisions of Sections XXXIX.
XL. and XLI. shall apply to such employment.
XLYI. Tne employer of any native domestic servants qualified to be entered in the
Register shall in or before the month of December in each year or if the service shall
determine before the month of December then within one month of the determination
of such service pay to the Stipendiary Magistrate of the Home District the sum of two
shillings for every month or part of a month during which each of such servants shall
have been engaged and all moneys so paid shall be forwarded by the Magistrate to the
Receiver-General and be placed to the account of the assessed native taxes of the
Province. An employer who shall make default in such payment shall be liable to pay
double the amount due together with interest at the rate of eight per cent, per annum
on such doubled amount and costs to be recovered in a summary way by the Receiver-
General or any person authorised by him for that purpose.
Part IV.— Job Contracts.
XLVII. Job Contracts for work to be done by labourers beyond the limits of their
Home District and the Districts adjacent thereto as may be proclaimed in any Pro-
clamation by the Governor in accordance with the provisions of Section V. of this
Ordinance shall be illegal except when such labourers have been engaged under the
provisions of Part 111. of this Ordinance.
XLVIIL When a person requiring work to be done enters into a job contract with
another for its performance and one of the conditions (expressed or implied) of such
E 3


contract is that native labourers shall be procured for such performance the person
requiring the work shall forward the contract for registration to the Stipendiary Magis-
trate of the district wherein the work is to be done and no such contract shall be
registered or be of any force or effect unless it contains provisions for the payment to
the labourers by whom the work is done according to the rate prevailing in the said
district and for their food and lodging if the place at which they are employed be at a
distance exceeding five miles from their ordinary place of residence. Any such contract
so forwarded for registration if it contains the above last-mentioned provisions shall
unless the Magistrate has reason to believe that such contract is in any respect contrary
to public policy or that there is a likelihood of any of the contracting parties being
unable fully and fairly to carry it out be registered by him in like manner as contracts
relating to trade transactions with natives where the consideration exceeds five pounds
are by law directed to be registered The making of any such contract not containing
the above-mentioned provisions as to payment and as to food and lodging or the
employment of natives under any unregistered job contract shall be regarded as an
offence against this Ordinance and shall render the parties so contracting or so employing
natives liable on conviction to a penalty not exceeding fifty pounds or in default of
payment to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months.
XLIX. Upon the completion of any job contract whether registered or unregistered
or other labour engagement not within Section XVI. of this Ordinance the wages agreed
upon shall be paid at the place where the work is done and immediately upon the
termination of the same. Such wages may be recovered at the suit of the labourer
by application to the Stipendiary Magistrate of the district in a summary way and such
Magistrate may order the immediate payment of such wages or such part of them as
may be owing together with such costs and payment of such compensation for the delay
in payment of wages as he may deem the applicant entitled to.
L. Where in accordance with the conditions (expressed or implied) of such job
contract labourers have been supplied by one party to the contract for the performance
of the work required by the other party to the contract it shall be lawful for the
Stipendiary Magistrate to issue proceedings in a summary manner against either or
both of such parties for the recovery of the wages of such labourers and such parties
shall be jointly and severally liable for such wages or such part of them as may be owing
together with such costs and payment of such compensation for the delay in payment
of such wages as the Magistrate may deem the applicant or applicants entitled to.
LI. Where any person liable to pay wages in respect of any job contract shall refuse
to pay the full amount of such wages upon the ground that the work agreed to be done
has not been completed or that the work done is insufficient the Magistrate if he shall
be satisfied that the contract has not been fully completed on the part of the labourer
may take into consideration the nature and extent of the work actually done and may
award in respect thereof such sum on the “ quantum meruit ” as he may deem just or
if he is satisfied that the failure to complete the contract has been wholly the fault of
the labourer the Magistrate may order the payment of wages to such labourer to be
conditional upon the completion of the contract.
LII. Every employer entering into a job contract with labourers where the total
amount of consideration exceeds five pounds shall cause the same to be in writing and
in the Fijian language and any employer who shall fail to comply with the provisions
of this section shall be liable on conviction to a penalty of ten pounds.
Part V.—General Provisions.
LII I. Every person who shall engage or attempt to engage a native for service except
in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance or who being the owner of the
plantation on which the labourer shall have contracted to serve shall be accessory to
any such unlawful engagement or who shall employ or allow to be employed in his
behalf any native under an engagement for labour not authorised or permitted by this
Ordinance shall on conviction before a Stipendiary Magistrate be liable to a penalty not
exceeding fifty pounds and in default of payment to imprisonment with or without hard
labour for any period not exceeding six months.
LIV. A person charged with an offence against or a violation or failure to comply
with the provisions of this Ordinance for which no penalty shall have been herein-before
provided or of any Regulations made as herein-after provided shall on conviction before
a Stipendiary Magistrate be liable to a fine not exceeding the sum of twenty pounds or
in default of payment to imprisonment for one month with or without hard labour.
LV. The Native Commissioner or any person authorised by him in writing or any
Stipendiary Magistrate or Inspector of Immigrants may at any time enter into or upon


any plantation on which native labourers may be employed and inspect the state and
condition of such labourers and may enquire into any complaint which the employer
may make against such labourer or such labourer against his employer In every case
of such entry upon any plantation for the purpose of such inspection the officer or
person inspecting shall forthwith cause the employer and the labourers to be informed
of his being on the plantation And any person who shall wilfully obstruct or incite
others to obstruct the Native Commissioner or any such person Magistrate or Inspector
in any such entry inspection or enquiry or shall by wilful misrepresentation force or
fraud prevent or endeavour to prevent any such entry inspection or enquiry from being
held shall be guilty of a misdemeanour and upon conviction thereof before a Stipendiary
Magistrate shall be liable to be imprisoned with or without hard labour for any term not
exceeding six months or to pay a line not exceeding fifty pounds.
LVI. Any charge for any breach of the provisions of this Ordinance or of the
Regulations made thereunder may be made by the Native Commissioner or by any
person authorised by him within twelve months after the commission of the offence
and may be determined in a summary manner.
LVII. Every charge for any offence against the provisions of this Ordinance made
by any employer against a labourer or by a labourer against his employer shall be
made within thirty days from the day on which such offence was committed Provided
that where any labourer shall have absconded from any plantation such charge shall be
made within thirty days after such labourer shall have returned or shall, have been
brought back to the plantation on which he shall be under contract to serve.
LVIII. The Governor may from time to time make Regulations for carrying this
Ordinance into effect which when approved by the Legislative Council and published
in the Royal Gazette shall have the force of law but all such Regulations shall be
subject to disallowance by Her Majesty By any such Regulation the form of contract
in the Schedule C. hereto may be altered or amended in any manner not inconsistent
with the above provisions of this Ordinance.
LIX. When at any time after the lapse of one year from the date at which this
Ordinance shall come into force it shall appear to the Governor in Council that any
duties assigned to the Native Commissioner by this Ordinance cannot be conveniently
discharged in connection with the Native Department it shall be lawful for the Governor
to order by Proclamation that the head officer of any other public department shall be
charged with such duties or any of them and that this Ordinance shall be thenceforward
read as if the designation of such other head officer were substituted for “ the Native
“ Commissioner ” in all such clauses of the Ordinance as may be in the said Proclama-
tion specified. Such head officer shall thereupon be vested with all the responsibilities
and powers which are by such sections vested in the Native Commissioner.
LX. This Ordinance shall come into force by Proclamation of the Governor the date
of such Proclamation being subsequent to the first day of June 1883.
Passed in Council this ninth day of March in the year of our Lord One thousand
eight hundred and eighty-three.
SCHEDULE A.
Permit
A.B. of district of is hereby permitted to engage from
the Home Districts herein specified (subject to the provisions of Section VIII. of
Ordinance No. IV. of 1883) any number of native labourers not exceeding in the
aggregate for service with to be employed at
plantation at work for months at the rate of not less than
per
This permit to be in force for twelve months from the date hereof unless the above
number of labourers shall have been engaged under it at any time within such period
and subject to cancellation or suspension according to law.
Received the sum of £ s, being the fee payable on the above permit for the
year ending
Dated this day of
Commissioner for Native Affairs.


SCHEDULE B.
Letter of Agency.
I of do hereby authorise to engage for
me and on my behalf in accordance with provisions of the Native Labour Ordinance,
1883,” natives as labourers on plantation
(Signature of Employer.)
Witness to signature—
SCHEDULE C.— Form I.
Memorandum of Agreement made this day of 18 between
of
of the first part and native of of the second pait.
The conditions are that the said party of this second part engages to serve the said
party of the first part as on and otherwise to make
himself general!}' useful for the term of months and also to obey all lawful
and reasonable commands of the said or of his overseer or
authorised agents during that period in consideration of which services the said party of
the first part doth hereby agree to pay the said party of the second part wages in the
coin of the realm at the rate of per annum at the expiration of the term
of service to provide him with the understated rations daily and to provide suitable
clothing and proper accommodation and to provide for him when sick reasonable medical
comforts and attendance and to defray the cost of conveyance to the place at which the
said party of the second part is to be employed and to provide him on the expiration of
the within contract of service with a return passage to the place from whence he was
first embarked in any vessel by the said party of the first part or in his behalf.
Daily Ration.
Yams taro or sweet potatoes or other vegetable equivalent
as may hereafter be allowed by any Regulation
Salt - ~ - - - -
10 lbs.
2 oz.
2 lbs.
3 oz.
Meat or fish per week
Tobacco per week -
Soap
1 oz.
Clothing , fyc. (per annum.)
Four Sulus j Two Mats
Mosquito Curtains.
SIGNATURE OF NATIVES
X V/ It i-J X X ’ iA- x x f X-i Kj 0
Age. Wages.
,0 the within contract fully
;red into the same volunt
I hereby certify that the parties to the within
terms of the said contract and entered into the
will.
contract fully understand
same voluntarily and of
the nature and
their own free
Stipendiary
Magistrate


SCHEDULE D.
Boats authorised to carry Labourers under Section XXL
Inside the reefs of any Island
Boats of not less than three- tons.
Outside such reefs
Boats of not less than nine tons.
Scale of Passengers.
Boats under nine tons not more than two passengers for every ton of registered
tonnage.
Boats of nine tons and over not more than three passengers for every ton of registered
tonnage.
Enclosure 2 in No. 7.
Report on Ordinance No. IV., 1883.
To repeal Ordinances No. 10 of 1877 and No. 23 of 1880, and make other
provision in lieu thereof with respect to the engagement and service of Native
Labourers.
The object of the law now under report is to remedy and supply certain defects and
deficiencies which experience has shown to exist in the above Ordinances, hereby
repealed, and which have practically resulted in the diversion of the intention and effect
of those laws from the principles and lines which it was the intention of their framers to
have followed.
By section 3 the executive administration of the new law is vested in the head of the Native
department instead of, as formerly, in the Agent-General of Immigration, who has hitherto
exercised the control for purposes of convenience, the work of inspection, &c., being more
easily performed by the officers of his department, who were appointed for that duty in
the case of Indian and Polynesian indentured immigrants. From the nature of the
transactions connected with the recruiting and engagement of Fijian labourers, it appears
but natural that the control should be exercised by the Native Department, and the
necessary steps for carrying the change into effect will be made by the Executive. In
case, however, of paramount difficulties proving to be in the way of carrying out the
provisions of the law under the Native Department, the Governor is empowered, by
section 58, after the lapse of one year from the coming into force of the Ordinance, to
transfer the control, with its accompanying powers and responsibilities, to the head of
any other public department.
Part 1., sections 4 anti 5, denote the intention of the Ordinance to make the labour
districts within which labourers may engage without complying with certain of the
formalities required in other cases correspond practically with the natural tribal divisions
of the country, the principle being that, so long as a Native is working within his own
tribal territory, he may be considered to be working at or close to his home.
A proviso in section 5 further allows Natives who have for two years before the
coming into force of the Ordinance resided in service with Europeans residing in other
districts, or who may have become attached to their employers and followed them from
their own home district elsewhere, to consider the district where the employer resides to
be their own home district as long as their services with that employer continues.
Part 11., section 6, after exempting contracts made for service within the home district
for periods not exceeding one month from the formalities otherwise required by the
Ordinance, provides against default in the monthly payment of wages to labourers so
contracting.
Section 7 empowers the Governor to proclaim, that the district immediately adjacent
to the labourers home district, may be considered to be part of his home district for the
purposes of this law.
Part 111., section 8, introduces two principles, upon which it may be said that the
whole Ordinance is based. The first of these is that the Native, after due deliberation
and not impelled by the considerations or attractions of the moment, can apply to have
his name entered on a Labour “ Register,’ * in which are to be entered the names of all
those who may be engaged for service outside their home districts, or within them, for
periods exceeding one month; the second one being that he must be eligible to engage
i 17270. F


for service under contract, the proviso specifying those classes who are to be considered
to be ineligible and therefore not to be registered.
Section 9 empowers the proper authorities, in cases of urgency which demand the
services of the whole community, to prohibit all members of the community from engaging
in any other service during the continuation of such necessity.
Section 10 provides for the granting of a permit, in the form set forth in Schedule A.,
by the Native Commissioner to an intending employer, upon being satisfied that the
conditions upon which the labourers are to be engaged are satisfactory. The permit
entitles the holder to engage any number of men whose names may be found in the
Labour Register of the districts specified in the permit, not exceeding in the aggregate
the total number for which application was made and permission granted (section 13).
Section 11 provides for the demand of due security from an applicant for a permit,
who is in default to the Crown for the payment of any labourers wages.
Section 12 empowers the Native Commissioner to refuse a permit for good cause.
Section 14 empowers the Governor, where necessity arises, to prohibit by proclama-
tion the engagement of any Natives for service beyond their home districts during the
continuance of the proclamation.
Section 15 prescribes the fees payable on permits, and limits their operation to 12
months.
Section 16 prescribes the form in which the contracts are to be made (Schedule C),
and for their endorsement by a magistrate.
Sections 17, 18, and 19 limit the operation of a contract to 12 months, and provide for
the return of the labourers to their homes by the employer on the expiration of the con-
tract, and impose an obligation on the labourer to return to his home when means are
provided for his so doing.
Section 20 introduces an important alteration in the old law, under which labourers
have been always paid off in the district where their contract of service was performed,
the result being that in many cases they spent orlgave away all they earned amongst
strangers, and returned to their families or relatives, for whose welfare they had as a
general rule undertaken to serve, without any appreciable result of their labours, thus
impoverishing their own homes while gratifying the desires or greed of those who were
aliens to them. By this section of the Ordinance now under report they are to be paid
off before the European magistrate or the chief Native executive officer of the district in
which their own homes are situated. By this means the grave abuses which have proved
to attend the former method, as above described, will be avoided.
Section 21, Schedule D, provides for the conveyance of return labourers in proper
vessels, in numbers proportionate to the size of the vessel.
Section 22 empowers the magistrate for sufficient reason to refuse to endorse a
contract or to note a transfer of labourers from one employer to another.
Section 23 empowers the Native Commissioner and the magistrate to require security
for the payment of the labourers’ wages if they deem it necessary before granting a permit
or endorsing a contract.
Sections 24, 25, and 26 provide for the infliction of penalties against persons who, by
fraud, intimidation, or misrepresentation, induce a Native to register his name for labour
contracts, or to enter into a contract, or who bribe a Native to engage, or to induce
others to engage, or who bribe a Native Chief to use his authority to procure labourers.
In consequence of the gross abuses which have been occasioned by this last, and of the
extreme difficulty in proving the charge, the latter part of the 26th section raises a pre-
sumption that bribery of a Chief has occurred on proof of the facts that the accused, not
being a permanent resident in the province of the Chief to whom he has been found
to have given any valuable consideration, has engaged or has been a party to the engage-
ment of labourers in that province within six months of the date of the giving of such
consideration, and the burden of proof to the contrary is in this case thrown upon the
accused.
Section 27 provides the method by which transfers of labourers from one employer to
another can be made, and for the corresponding transfers of the responsibilities attaching
to the contract, from the transferors to the transferee.
Sections 28, 29, 30, and 34 provide for the cancellation or suspension of contracts
upon proof of ill-usage of the labourers by the employer, or of serious breach of contract,
and for the recovery from the employer of any expense w T hich the public funds of the
Colony may have in the first instance to incur in returning the labourer, whose contract
has been so cancelled, to his home, and for the payment to the labourer of a proportionate
part of the wages payable under the contract.


Section 32 provides that the only sums which can be charged against the wages of a
labourer serving under contract, outside his home district, are those which may have
been paid by his employer in his behalf, in satisfaction of a money penalty inflicted on a
labourer by a court of law. But when the labourer is working within his own home
district he may be chargeable to the extent of one half of his wages with moneys or
stores advanced to him by his employer during his term of service. The object of this
may be said to be identical with the provisions for the payment of wages in the
labourer’s districts before mentioned, for the intention again expressed here is to prevent
him anticipating his wages by borrowing them in advance from his employer, and
squandering them amongst the people of the district among whom he is working, to the
loss of his own relations at home.
Section 33 provides for the deduction of w r ages in certain cases where the labourer has
been imprisoned for an offence unconnected with his contract, or for one that is not
attributable to his employer (e.g., where a labourer not being provided with sufficient
food by his employer, has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment for stealing food
from a neighbouring plantation. In such a case an application by the employer for an
order for deduction from the labourer’s wages, of an amount proportionate to the term of
his imprisonment, would not be entertained by the magistrate).
Sections 34 and 35 provide for the punishment of labourers for wilful breaches of
contract or negligent damage to live stock and. other property of the employer.
Sections 36 and 37 provide for the punishment of a labourer unlawfully absenting
himself from hired service, a second offence constituting an “ absconding ” and rendering
him liable to imprisonment. In any case the employer is entitled to an order for a
deduction from the labourer’s wages proportionate to the number of working days
contained in the period of unlawful absence, and to the term of imprisonment to which
he may be sentenced.
Section 38, while providing for extension of a contract for a time equivalent to the
number of working days contained in any term of imprisonment to which a labourer
may be sentenced for an offence unconnected with this labour contract, also specially
precludes the employer from being thereby released from any obligation which he has
incurred in respect to the labourer, such as returning him to his home.
Section 39 provides a penalty for the ill-usage of a labourer, or the neglect on'the part
of an employer to supply him with the necessaries and comforts stipulated for by the
contract.
Sections 40 and 41 provide for the recovery of wages due to a labourer, and for a
judgment for the same being a charge upon the plantation on which he has served,
taking priority of all other charges except those in respect of w r ages or other sums due
on account of Polynesians or Indian immigrants ; the payments on account of either of
those classes of labourers being considered of first importance.
Section 42 provides for the payment to the Treasury of a sum calculated at 2s. per
month, proportionate to the terms of the contract, as a composition for the labourer’s
contribution to the assessed native taxes for that period.
Section 43 provides for the due report being made of the death or desertion or failure
of a labourer to return to his home on the expiration of his contract.
Section 44 prohibits labourers from being worked, except in cases of urgent necessity,
beyond the legal working hours, and for their due payment for any extra work they may
have to perform.
Sections 45 and 46 except from the operation of this Ordinance the case of domestic
servants (not exceeding five) who may be employed in purely domestic work by an
employer residing in their own home district; with the provision, however, that sections
39, 40, and 41, which concern the treatment and payment of labourers, are to be held
applicable to the above case.
Section 41 provides for the payment by the employer of a composition for the
contribution to the assessed native taxes by any person who, being qualified to register
for labour contracts, may be employed in domestic service as provided for in the preceding
section.
Part IV.—Job Contracts.—Experience has proved that a very large number of
labourers have been continually employed outside the former labour law on unrecognised
contracts for the performance of piece work, here called “ Job Contracts ” ; and, being
unprotected, were often without the hope of obtaining redress when the wages were not
paid on the ground that their contract had not been fulfilled. It was also found that
where one person had entered into a contract to perform some particular work for
another, and had engaged labourers for that purpose, and, finding himself unable to carry
F 2


out his contract without loss to himself or for other cause, he abandoned the contract
the labourers were practically without relief, the contractor being generally a man of
straw engaged in a speculation; and the person for whose benefit the work was to he
done, being no party to the contract between them and their employer, could not be
made responsible.
In other cases the employer, though able and willing to pay, may have suffered
considerable loss from the labourers themselves throwing up a half-finished contract,
finding that they had engaged on a more tiresome work than they had anticipated, and
preferring to abandon their claim to payment and leave their contract unfinished.
It is to meet these cases that this portion of the Ordinance is now enacted.
Section 47 prescribes that job contracts can only be entered into within the labourers’
home district, unless they are engaged under contract as prescribed in Part 111 above.
Sections 48, 49, and 60 provide for the mode in which such contracts made by one
person with another for the carrying out of any job contract in which native labourers
are to be employed are to be duly registered, and for the due provision for the supply of
proper accommodation and maintenance, and for the payment of wages to the labourers.
Both parties to the contract are made jointly and severally liable for the wages.
Section 51 provides for cases in which the payment of wages to the labourers may
have been refused by the employer on the ground that the work has not been performed
by them according to agreement. If the magistrate be satisfied that this be so, lie may
adjudge the payment of wages to them to be proportionate to the amount of work
already performed; and may further, if the failure be proved to be wholly the fault of
the labourers, adjudge the payment of any wages to them to be conditional on their
completing their work.
Section 52 provides that every such contract where the total consideration exceeds
51, is to be made in writing and in the Fijian language, in order to avoid the numerous
disputes as to what the European employer and the Fijian labourer respectively under-
stood to be the terms of the contract made between them.
PartV.—General Provisions.—Sections 53 and 54 provide penalties for the illegal
engagement of a Native for service, and for the breach or failure to complv with the
requirements of the Ordinance.
Section 55 applies to the inspection of labourers serving under contracts by the duly
authorised officers, and provides penalties for wilful obstruction of any such inspection.
Sections 56 and 57 limit the time within which charges are to be brought for breaches
of contracts or offences against the Ordinance by the Native Commissioner or the
parties to the contract respectively.
Section 58 has already been dealt with in conjunction with Section 3 above.
Section 59 empowers the Governor to make regulations for carrying the Ordinance
into effect, subject to the ordinary limitations.
Section 60 postpones the operation of the Ordinance until after proclamation to be
made at a date subsequent to Ist June 1883.
I am of opinion that the Royal Assent may be properly given to this Ordinance.
(Signed) G. Ruthven Le Hunte,
Suva, 19th March 1883. Acting Attorney General.
No. 8.
Governor G. WILLIAM DES VCEUX, C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the EARL OF
DERBY. (Received June 1, 1883.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, April 10, 1883.
With my Despatch of 19th March 1883,* I forwarded to your Lordship
Ordinance No. IV. of 1883, of which the short title is “ the Native Labour Ordinance,
“ 1883,” and with a previous Despatch, of 18th January 1883,f was forwarded
a message addressed by me to the Legislative Council with reference to this Ordinance.
I now propose to make some further observations, which appear to be necessary to a
full acquaintance with the extremely difficult and important subject dealt with by this
measure.
* No. 7.
f No. 5.


The principal reasons which make this kind of legislation necessary for the
regulation of Native labour engagements m this Colony, are forcibly pm in the despatch
of my predecessor of 12th March 1877* forwarding Ordinance No X. of 18/7.
While 7 this latter law largely fulfilled its object, I hays reason to believe, that Sir Arthur
Gordon in the latter years of his administration, had become convinced that it required
much amendment with reference to several important points and his opinion in this
respect had been so strongly confirmed by my own experience, that some of the principal
changes introduced by the Ordinance now under consideration were contemplated by me
as loner ago as the earlier half of the year 1881. , .
Owfng S to the pressure of other duties, I was unable to deal with the subject
myself (beyond noting from time to time points which newly acquired experience showed
to deserve attention), until the arrival of Sir Arthur Gordon m July 1882.
As his views in all material respects were found to be in accordance with my own,
with reference to the provisions required, he kindly consented to devote some days o
leisure to the preparation of the draft, which has formed the basis of the present
some provisions with reference to the bribing of Chiefs, and other less
important matters, I deemed it advisable, before introducing to the Legislature a Bill
involving points of such exceptional difficulty and importance, to have a full discussion
of the various provisions with the Executive Council and other Government officers such
as the Acting Agent General of Immigration and the Commissioner of Native Affairs,
whose experience was likely to throw light on the subject. . „ ,
In the" course of several afternoons devoted to this object, every clause of the
Ordinance was very carefully considered with the assistance ot these officers, the result
being a considerable number of valuable amendments in matters of detail, which con d
not probably have been arrived at in any other way.
As soon as the draft Ordinance was published, great excitement arose among the
planters; and meetings at which the measure was denounced in somewhat violent
language, were held in different parts of the Colony. .... , ~
With a view to convince the more reasonable of the necessity ot some law of the
kind, I, at the opening of the meeting of Council for the consideration ot the Ordinance,
caused to be read the message which has been already forwarded to your Lordship : but
while I have since had good reason to believe that this, together with an able speech of
the Colonial Secretary, to a large extent modified the preconceived opinions of the
unofficial members, they were, I am inclined to think, too deeply pledged to Jiose
whom they regard as their constituents, to relax the opposition upon which they had
previously determined. . , i 3 u
Consequently most of the more important and necessary changes introduced bv
this law were resisted by all, or nearly all, the unofficial members, and the Governor
was very frequently compelled to give his casting vote to prevent their rejection
After all this show of opposition, I was somewhat amused, though not altogether
surprised, to hear, alter the passing of the Ordinance, that two leading unofficial
members had expressed a highly favourable opinion of the measure and that the
general opinion on the subject has been, to say the least, much modified, is clear from
the fact that not one of the threatened appeals to the Secretary of State has actually
been made; and that while the unofficial members have neither resigned their offices nor
entered any protest, the press which urged them to these courses during the consider-
ation of the measure, have ceased to do so now that it has become law.
My reason for not being surprised at what appears to be the real view or some
of the unofficial members, is that the Ordinance, while probably operating to a certain
extent as a check upon the engagement of Fijians for long periods on islands at a
distance from their homes, and, at all events, securing that none shall so engage, without
a real desire to do so, or for the purpose of deserting their families, will on the other
hand unquestionably increase the supply of what is called “ local labour, or m other
words, will encourage more free people to engage as labourers in the neighbourhood ot
their homes. . • • i. r u
With regard to the various provisions of the Ordinance, it is difficult tor me, wno
am so well acquainted with the subject, (and have discussed it almost “ ad ) to
judge whether there are any points which require explanation beyond what is lurnished
by the Ordinance itself, and the various papers already forwarded. If there are any suen,
I do not doubt that Sir Arthur Gordon will be able to supply what is required, while
* No. 1.
F 3


his interest in the subject will render him glad to do so. I may, however, say generally,
that in order to understand some of the clauses, it is necessary to bear in mind the
principle which underlies much of the Government policy in this Colony, namely, the
expediency of protecting the people against their own weakness. It is believed by all
who are best acquainted with them, that the lower class of Fijians, as regards all the
transactions of life beyond the routine of their own villages, are practically children, and
that to allow them to do as they please would be fatal to their happiness and welfare.
It is this principle which, for instance, accounts for a clause such as XXV., which
prohibits the giving of money or goods to a Native, with a view to induce him to enter
into a labour contract; it being found by experience that a very small present will often
tempt a man to enter into a long engagement for which he has really no inclination, and
which he bitterly repents as soon as the temporary gratification is forgotten.
This consideration is by no means as merely sentimental as it appears ; the Native
knows that advantage has been taken of his weakness, and resents it accordingly, with
the result of much trouble and difficulty both to the employer and the Government.
I enclose a copy of a memorandum of Sir Arthur Gordon, which accompanied his
draft Ordinance. As I have indicated above, though the Ordinance, as passed, is, in parts
of it, very much altered, the more important principles of the draft have been everywhere
retained. The memorandum applies equally, therefore, to the law as it stands.
Your Lordship will observe that Sir Arthur Gordon, while drafting a provision for
the registration of persons who desire to enter into labour contracts, is inclined to doubt
its advantage, or rather its practicability. After much consideration of the subject with
my advisers, I have, as your Lordship will observe, decided upon retaining the principle
of registration, as being the only means of ascertaining with certainty whether persons
who engage have previously desired to do so, and have not merely succumbed at the
moment to the blandishments of the recruiter. At the same time the mode of regis-
tration which has now been adopted, will, it is believed, be found easy in practice, as
w T as probably not the case with that provided for in the original draft.
On the question (to which Sir Arthur Gordon refers) whether the Native or the
Immigration Department should have charge of the working of this Ordinance, my first
impressions were that the labour engagements of Natives, in common with other Native
affairs, should be under the supervision of the Native Department. Feeling, however,
that the reasons urged by Sir Arthur Gordon gave a slight preponderance of advantage
to the contrary view, I allowed the Ordinance to go before the Council with the words,
44 Agent General of Immigration,” inserted in all places where there now appear the
words C£ Native Commissioner.”
At the same time, I was inclined to think that the change in the heads of both
departments, which has occurred since Sir Arthur Gordon’s time, had invalidated his
third objection to the granting of the control to the Native Department: namely, that
the change would be “ and unnecessarily unpopular with the planters.” I had
reason to suppose that the recently increased efficiency of the supervision of
immigrants, and the substitution of Mr. Blyth for Mr. Wilkinson as Native
Commissioner, had rendered the immigration the more unpopular department of the two,
as w r as certainly not the case in Sir Arthur Gordon’s time; and so the event proved.
The unofficial members unanimously urged that the work should be in the hands
of the Native Department, and as I had been compelled to resist them on a number of
much more important points, I deemed that it would not be unwise to give way on this.
While making this concession, however, I caused a clause, No. LIX., to be inserted,
which will enable the Governor to revert to the arrangement originally contemplated,
should experience render such a course advisable. It is probable that this compromise
had no inconsiderable effect in conciliating the members, and in preventing the subse-
quent agitation and appeals to your Lordship’s Department, which at the time, seemed
imminent.
I have, &c.
The Hight Hon. the Earl of Derby, (Signed) G. W. DES YCEUX.
&c. &c. &c.


Enclosure in No. 8.
Memorandum of Sir Arthur Gordon on Proposed Labour Ordinance of
date about August 1882.
Memorandum.
In submitting the accompanying draft
Ordinance to the Governor, it may be as
well to note the principal points in which it
differs from that relating to the same sub-
ject, which is now in force.
1. Provision is made for the division of
the Colony into labour districts by order
of the Governor in Council.
2. The duration of contracts of service
within any district is limited to one month.
Subject to this condition, all such engage-
ments are absolutely free, and may be made
orally or in writing, on any conditions to
which the parties agree, without any official
interference or supervision.
3. Contracts to labour beyond the limits
of the district can only be entered into by
those who have previously placed their
names on a register, as desirous of such
employment, and certain classes of persons
are precluded from effecting such registry.
4. Wages of labourers, whose contract has
expired, are to be paid after their return to
their own district, and not, as at present,
in that where they work, or at Levuka.
5. Job contracts are regulated by making
the omission from them of certain pro-
visions a penal offence.
6. The functions of the stipendiary
magistrate in the engagement and discharge
of labour may be performed by a justice
of the peace, authorized by the Governor.
The provision as to registry has been
introduced in compliance with the wish
of the Governor. 1 fear it will prove
somewhat difficult to work, and am not
sure that I should not, in the first
instance, at all events, have contented my-
self by prohibiting by law the engage-
ment of the classes enumerated, and
endeavouring to enforce more strictly the
provisions about presents, now generally
disregarded.
This, I believe, to be practically the most
mportant and useful change suggested,
and that it is impossible to over-rate the
evils caused by the present system of pay-
ment in Levuka.
I have left a blank where the name of the “ Agent General of Immigration ”
occurs in the present Ordinance, for I know that the question whether his functions,
as regards Fijian labour, should not be transferred to the Commissioner of Native
Affairs, is under consideration. My own opinion is very strongly in favour of leaving
these duties in the hands of the Agent General.
1. It is only as a species of immigration that the importation of labourers from other
districts and islands can be regarded; it is only is so, that we are justified
in legislating in such a manner with regard to it; and it is most important to keep the
Home Government alive to this fact, which would be obscured by the transfer of the
Agent General’s functions to another quarter.
2. Uniformity of system as to inspection, and greater economy of administration, are
secured by having all labour concerns treated by one and the same department.
3. The grant of control over Native labour to the Provincial Office would be an
intensely and unnecessarily unpopular act with the planters.
F 4


The Right Hon. the EARL OF DERBY, to Governor Sir G. WILLIAM DES
VCEUX, K.C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, August 10, 1883.
I have the honour to convey to you Her Majesty’s gracious confirmation and
allowance of the following Ordinance of the Legislature of Fiji, a transcript of which
accompanied your Despatch of the 19th of March last,* entitled No. IV. 1883, “ An
“ Ordinance to repeal Ordinances No. X. of 1877 and No. XXIII. of 1880, and to
“ make other provisions in lieu thereof with respect to the engagement and service of
“ Native Labourers.”
1 have also received your Despatch of the 10th ult.,f containing observations on the
subject dealt with in the above measure.
There appears to be an ambiguity in the wording of the 12th section of the Ordinance,
which should be rectified whenever any amendment of the Ordinance is under
consideration.
It would be a matter for regret if the assignment of “ reasonable cause ” should be
held to apply to the first as well as to the last part of the section.
It would have been better if the Native Commissioner (as no doubt was intended) had
been expressly made free to refuse to furnish a permit in the first instance, at his discretion,
and should not be exposed to the risk of a law suit on every occasion as to the
“ reasonableness ”of his refusal; while it is fair enough that he should be bound to give
such reasons for the cancellation of an existing permit.
I do not now direct any amendment of the 23rd section, but it should have expressed
more clearly that the doubt referred to means a doubt in the mind of the Native
Commissioner.
I have, &c.,
Sir G. W. Des Voeux. (Signed) DERBY.
No. 10
Governor Sir G. WILLIAM DES VCEUX, K.C.M.G., to the Right Hon. thR
EARL OF DERBY. (Received October 20, 1883.)
Government House, Silva, Fiji,
My Lord, September 3, 1883.
I havß the honour to forward, together with the usual report of the Attorney-
General, an Ordinance entitled “ The Native Dealings Ordinance, 1883,” which recently
passed the Legislative Council.
2. The principal objects of this Ordinance are—
(l.) To enable the punishment of persons who induce Natives to break Native
regulations ; and
(2.) To provide greater security against imposition on the part of whites in their
contracts with the Natives.
3. So much wrong has, within my experience, been done in both of the above respects,
and, in the absence of remedy, so much is likely to be done until the people generally
attain a much higher order of intelligence, and much more experience of the white man’s
dealings than they at present possess, that I have no hesitation in recommending this
Ordinance for Her Majesty’s gracious allowance and confirmation.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) G. WILLIAM DES VCEUX.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby,
&c. &c. &c.
* No. 7.
t No. 8.


Enclosure 1 in No. 10.
Report on Ordinance No. X. of 1883.
For the better Regulation of Dealings between Natives and other Inhabitants of the
Colony.
This Ordinance has for its main object the protection of the native parties to contracts
made between Natives and white men.
These contracts, termed by the Ordinance <c Native contracts/’ have been constantly
on the increase throughout the group, and not unfrequently they involve very substantial
considerations. They consist generally either of agreements for the performance of work
or supply of native materials by Natives to white men, or of the sale of boats or other
valuable chattels by white men to Natives, the payment being either in cash or native
produce, and made by instalments extending very often over a considerable period. It
has always been the practice in connexion with these contracts that the native party
should perform his part of the agreement first, i.e ., that the labour to be done by him
shall be all done, or the cash or produce to be given by him shall be all given, before he
can benefit by the white man’s obligation. This is natural enough considering the native
character, and is perfectly understood by the Natives, but it has a very important
bearing upon the amount of protection which should be afforded them.
Ordinance No. IX. of 1878, which was designed for the protection of native contractors,
provided for the registration under certain conditions of trade transactions with Natives
where the consideration exceeded five pounds (5/.), and also that no action should lie for
the recovery of any debt arising out of any such transaction if unregistered. Except
that the right of action was barred as last mentioned, there was no penalty provided for
non-registration, nor was there any direction as to which party should register. The
result may easily be conceived. The Native never registered because he knew nothing
about it. The white man never registered because, as he was always paid beforehand,
it was not necessary for him to preserve any right of action under the contract.
Had the Ordinance been acted upon according to the letter, it would have been a
snare rather than a protection to the native party, but, as a matter of fact, I believe it has
been practically a dead letter.
With a similar obiect of protecting Natives in their dealings with white men, native
regulations have been passed forbidding Natives entering into certain transactions except
as therein provided, e.g ., Natives were forbidden to buy boats except through the inter-
vention of the Native Office. Inasmuch as Natives perfectly understand that a breach
of any of these regulations may involve punishment by the native tribunals, the
restrictions "thus imposed have no doubt afforded a considerable amount of protection.
These regulations are, however, in no way binding upon white men, some of whom have,
in cases within the Government’s knowledge, induced native contractors to defy the
provisions of the regulations. It is easy to successfully represent to Natives burning
with a desire for some new purchase, that the prescribed Government intervention will
add expense and cause delay, and that they will consult their own interest by dealing
with the white man direct. By these means purchases by Natives of tawdry articles at
exorbitant prices and other unfair transactions, very often closely approximated to fraud,
have become common, and the conviction that very stringent measures were necessary
for the protection of the Natives forced itself upon the Government. By the present
Ordinance, which repeals Ordinance No. 9 of 1878, it is sought to prevent the above
abuses by—
(1.) Making the procuring by white men of the breach of certain of the native
regulations a criminal offence (Section 2).
(2.) Rendering a contract involving a breach of any native regulation void as against
the native party (Section III.).
(3.) Retaining the necessity of registering contracts when the consideration exceeds
five pounds (Sections 4 and 5).
(4.) Imposing the duty of presenting native contracts for registration upon the
non-native party under the sanction of a penalty in case of neglect (Sections 5 and 6).
(5.) Forbidding registration if the contract presents certain objectional features
(Section 7).
(6.) Making unregistered contracts void, at the option of the native party
(Section 8).
i 17270. Q


On the other hand, provision is made for the enforcement of legitimate native contracts
against the native party by summary order, and for the imprisonment of the latter in case
of his neglect of or disobedience to any such order.
I am of opinion that the Royal assent may be properly given to this Ordinance.
(Signed) Fielding Clarke,
Suva, 4th September 1883. Attorney-General.
Enclosure 2 in No. 10.
Fiji, No. X., 1883.
An Ordinance (enacted by the Governor of the Colony of Fiji, with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council thereof) for the better regulation of Dealings
between Natives and other Inhabitants of the Colony.
(1.5.) G. William Des Vgeux.
September 1, 1883.
Be it enacted by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council
as follows :
I. In this Ordinance the term <c Native Contract 5 ’ shall mean any contract made
between any native or natives and any non-native party other than a contract under
“ The Native Labour Ordinance 1883 ” or any amendment thereof.
The term “ Native ” shall mean an aboriginal native of Fiji.
The term “ Party shall include a body of persons.
The term “ Non-native party ” shall refer to the party to a native contract other than
the native party thereto.
11. Any person other than a native who shall aid or abet any native in committing
a breach of any of the Regulations of the Native Regulation Board which are specified
in Schedule A of this Ordinance or who shall procure or attempt to procure or shall
counsel or advise the commission of any breach of any such regulation by any native
or natives or who either for himself or as agent for another shall enter into any native
contract whether oral or in writing the making or carrying out of which according to its
terms would necessarily involve a breach of any such regulation on the part of any
native or natives shall be guilty of an offence against this Ordinance and on conviction
thereof in a summary way before a Stipendiary Magistrate shall be liable to a fine not
exceeding one hundred pounds or to imprisonment with or without hard labour for any
term not exceeding three months Provided that the Governor in Council may from
time to time add to the said Schedule A any Regulations of the said Board which are
now or may hereafter come into force and when any decision of the Governor in Council
with such object shall be made known by Proclamation of the Governor and published
in the Royal Gazette any regulations which may be referred to therein shall be deemed
to be thenceforward included in such schedule and to be within the scope of the
provisions of this section.
111. Any native contract the making or carrying out of which necessarily involves
the breach by the native party thereto of any regulation of the Native Regulation Board
shall be deemed absolutely void as against the native party And any money which may
have been paid to any non-native party or the value of any goods which may have been
delivered or of any services which may have been rendered to him under such contract
may be recovered from him by the native party thereto.
IV. In every native contract when the consideration moving from the native party is
the payment of money or the delivery of goods to an extent not exceeding five pounds
or its value such money or goods shall be paid or delivered at the time the contract is
made and no action shall lie for the subsequent recovery of the same.
V. Where the consideration moving from either party exceeds five pounds or its value
the non-native party before such contract is acted upon shall forward to the Stipendiary
Magistrate of the District wherein such contract was made a memorandum in the form
contained in Schedule B of this Ordinance attested by two witnesses one of whom shall
be a native The failure to forward any such memorandum as aforesaid shall be an
offence against this Ordinance and any person convicted thereof in a summary way
before a Stipendiary Magistrate shall be liable to a fine not exceeding twenty pounds or
in default of payment to an imprisonment with or without hard labour for any term not
exceeding one month.


VI Upon receipt of any memoranda of native contracts the Stipendiary Magistrate
saving the exceptions in the next section stated shall register them by filing them
consecutively in book form with an index ; and upon payment of the fee of one shilling
he shall deliver a copy of any such registered memorandum to any party to the contract
who shall apply for the same.
VII. A Stipendiary Magistrate shall refuse to register any memorandum of a native
contract in any of the following cases...
(1) If it appears that the contract is not to be fully performed on both sides within
the space of one year from the making thereof. . , ™ .
(2) If the terms of the contract are not stated in the memorandum with sufficient
clearness.
(3) If he has reason to suppose that the carrying out of the contract by the native
party will involve the exercise by such party of any undue authority over other native
persons or will induce or probably involve the breach of any Native Regulation.
(4) If in his opinion the contract is contrary to equity or sound public policy.
VIII. Every native contract requiring registration under the provisions of this Ordinance
which owing either to the default of the non-native party or to the refusal of the
Magistrate shall not have been registered shall be absolutely void as against the native
party and any monev paid or the value of any goods delivered or any services rendered
by the native party under such contract may be recovered from the non-native party.
IX. In any action under sections 111. and VIII. of this Ordinance the Court may
order" a return to the defendant of any goods delivered by him under the contract
or may allow such set-off in respect of the value of any partial execution of the contract
by him as may be just and reasonable.
X. When in an action brought by the non-native party to a native contract against
the native party for breach of the same judgment is.given for the plaintiff the Court
may make such order as shall seem just for the fulfilment of the contract and for the
payment of damages for the breach thereof by instalments or otherwise In case of the
refusal or wilful neglect of any person to obey any such order or of his inability to pay
any damages awarded against him the Court may order his imprisonment with or without
hard labour for any term not exceeding three months. Provided that any order for
imprisonment under this section shall be specially reported forthwith to the Colonial
Secretary for the information of the Governor.
XI. No proceeding for an offence against this Ordinance shall be held to bar any
civil action brought under any of its provisions nor shall any such civil action be a bar
to any such proceeding for an offence Any such proceeding or action against the
non-native party to a native contract may be taken or brought in the name of the
Commissioner for Native Affairs on behalf of the native party.
XII. Ordinance No. IX. of 1878 entitled “ An Ordinance for the Limitation of
Actions in certain Cases ” is hereby repealed.
XIII. This Ordinance may be cited as the “ Native Dealings Ordinance 1883.”
Passed in Council this twenty-seventh day of June in the year of our Lord One
thousand eight hundred and eighty-three.
SCHEDULE A,
Number and Date of Regulation.
Subject matter.
Regulation VI., 1878
„ 1., 1880
„ IV., 1880
„ 11., 1881
„ V., 1881
„ IV., 1882
VII., 1882
With regard to the planting and cutting of Sandalwood.
Respecting Forest Reserves.
With regard to the purchase of Vessels and Boats.
Respecting the preservation of Turtle and Beche-de-mer.
Respecting Leases,
In regard to certain Contagious Diseases.
Concerning the sale of Mangrove.
G 2


SCHEDULE B.
Memorandum of Native Contracts.
Names and Description of Parties.
Date.
Terms of
Contract.
Date of Complete
Execution
of Contract.
We hereby testify that the parties to the within contract subscribed the same in our
presence, and that they well understood the same.
E.F.
r . G.H.
One of the witnesses must be a native.
No. 11.
Cjovernor Sir G. W ILLIAM DES VCEUX, K.C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the
EARL OF DERBY. (Received October 20, 1883.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, September 3, 1883.
I have the honour to forward to your Lordship an Ordinance, entitled
“ The Native Labour Amendment Ordinance, 1883,” which recently passed the
Legislature.
2. The necessity and object of this law are fully explained in the enclosed message
on the subject, which was addressed by me to the Legislative Council, and which I
would request your Lordship to read at once, as necessary to the explanation of what
follows.
3. There is now no longer any doubt that the articles in the newspaper referred to in
this message were written in consequence of incorrect statements, furnished to the
editor by one or two of the Members of Council, as to the amendments effected by them
in the original draft of “ The Native Labour Ordinance, 1883,” which was forwarded to
your Lordship with my Despatch of the 18th of, January 1883.*
4. During the passing of the Amendment Ordinance now forwarded, only one of the
unofficial members was present, and he, on behalf of himself and two other members
(from whom he represented himself as having received plenary power and discretion to act
for them in the matter), made the explanation which is contained in the minutes of
Council, of which I enclose two extracts.
5. How the misunderstanding came about cannot of course be ascertained with
certainty. Some of the unofficial members had, lam inclined to think, by the language
used before the session of Council, practically pledged themselves to strong measures;
and it is possible that the story of their actual performances did not lose in the telling.
I am informed also, that people here are so accustomed to rough modes of address, that
a conciliatory demeanour with regard to a proposal is apt to be misunderstood for
* No. 5,


acceptance, and a promise to consider a suggestion to be regarded as a promise to
adopt it.
6. But, however this may be, it is fortunate that, in view of the strong feelings which
were entertained on the subject of the proposed Ordinance, and taught by experience
gained in another Colony, I took the precaution to procure the record of the debates by
a shorthand writer. His notes, which were very full, and indeed appear to contain
almost every word that was uttered, place beyond all doubt the correctness of the
official account of what took place, while, on the other hand, the action of at least one
of the unofficial members has been such as almost to preclude a charitable construction
of his conduct. ...
7. Enclosed with this despatch, your Lordship will find copy of a letter in which
Mr. Chalmers, an Acting Member of Council, resigned his seat. He had made no
communication on the subject to the Government, and the only if any, in
which he had published his views, was by means of the anonymous articles in the
“ Fiji Times.”
8. If he had had the manliness to make his complaint from his place in Council, and
had resigned his office only on the refusal of redress, his position would at least have
been intelligibly consistent with good faith ; but, as it is, it is impossible to reconcile his
conduct with his professed motive.
9. He has, on several occasions, mentioned the inconvenience caused to him by the
time lost in attendance at meetings of Council; an inconvenience which must have
greatly increased since the removal of the seat of Government to Suva; and as he,
presumably on this account, has been much more often absent than present at them, and
the newspapers have recently been rebuking members of Council, who after accepting
the position make no effort to discharge its duties, there would seem to be at least some
probability that, while really consulting his private interests only, he seized the
opportunity to pose as a martyr to principle.
10. With reference to the articles in the “ Fiji Times ” (a newspaper which is forwarded
to your Lordship’s Department), I may mention as accounting for their virulence, that
the great majority of its subscribers consist of planters and other white persons in
sympathy with them, and that the immediate interests of the whites, and especially
their views of those interests, are, and are ever likely to be, opposed to the acts and
policy of any Governor, which are directed to the permanent interest of the whole
Colony.
11. But besides this general motive for opposition, the proprietor and editors of both
the leading newspapers have personal reasons for hostility to the present Governor, which
can scarcely be without some, though it is to be hoped unconscious, influence upon their
writings.
12. Mr. Griffiths, the owner of both these journals, is also the Government contract
printer, a presumably remunerative position, which he is about to lose through the
establishment of a Government printing office. Mr. Solomon, the editor of the “ Suva
Times,” acted for a long time as Attorney-General after the resignation of Mr. Garrick,
but for reasons known to your Lordship’s Department was not selected by me to fill the
temporary vacancy which recently occurred in the same office, while Mr. Pritchard,
the editor of the “ Fiji Times,” is the paid secretary of “ The Planter’s Association,”
whose correspondence with myself on the subject of Polynesian labour inspection was
forwarded in mv Despatches, of sth August 1882, of 22nd December 1882, and of 10th
April 1883.*
13. Since the publication of that correspondence, the attendance at the meetings of
the society has been very scanty, and it would appear that its action has been paralysed,
and its very existence jeopardised thereby. But, however this may be, the tone of
the “ Fiji Times ” has acquired a very evident increase of virulence since Mr. Pritchard’s
return to the Colony, after a temporary absence, some four months ago; and maliciously
coloured, and sometimes absolutely false representations of the conduct of the Govern-
ment and its officers occur in almost every issue.
14. As a specimen of the materials, which, presumably for want of better, are used
for the purpose of attack, I may mention that, for the verification of one of the
paragraphs of my last minute in the correspondence above referred to, it was necessary
to know accurately the names of the committee of the Planter’s Association. I therefore
requested information on the subject from the Colonial Secretary, who not knowing
himself, made a similar request to the superintendent of police, in the event, the Chief
* Not printed.
G 3


Officer of Police at Levuka asked for the required list of names from the acting secretaiy
of the society there; and this very harmless proceeding was immediately tortured into
into one of “ police espionage,” and has been again and again used by the “ Fiji Times 95
to arouse public indignation!
15. I am fully aware that Sir Arthur Gordon was assailed here quite as virulently as
I have ever been; and, indeed, as having for a long time considered the bitterness of
attack upon the acts of the Governor of a Crown Colony as, to a certain extent, a
measure of the faithful performance of his duty, I shall, I need hardly say, always regard
such abuse with no other feeling than indifference, so long as I continue, as now, to
believe that its true value is recognised by your Lordship’s Department and by my
friends in England.
16. But for greater security on this point, I would mention that the correspondents
of the newspapers in Australia and New Zealand belong to the same classes which
furnish the readers of the local journals. Most of the falsehoods which are pub-
lished by the latter are thus reproduced in the former, sometimes with considerable
embellishment ; and so, owing to their wide circulation, statements come to be
accepted as facts, which, in reality, have not the slightest foundation of truth.
17. As an instance of what credence is given even to the most absurd statements with
regard to Fiji, because they happen to have been often repeated without contradiction, I
may mention that the Melbourne “ Argus,” which is one of the most ably-conducted
journals of Australia, recently had a leading article, criticising unfavourably a supposed
measure of the Governor of Fiji for the abolition of actions for breach of promise of
marriage I And this, though there never was such an action here, either before or after
the Session.
18. If, therefore, any story to the prejudice of this Government or its officers, either on
account of its publication outside the Colony, or for any other reasons, should assume
a more than ordinary specious appearance, I trust that no consideration for personal
feeling will cause your Lordship to hesitate for a moment in asking me for
explanation.
10. But while taking this safeguard against the increasing malevolence of my
opponents, I think it well at the same time to assure your Lordship, that I shall do
nothing to increase this feeling, except when absolutely compelled by duty, and
that I shall seize every opportunity which may occur for conciliating the white
inhabitants.
20. The prospect of satisfying them, however, I regard as a hopeless one ; and I fear
that for many years to come Her Majesty’s Government must expect chronic discontent
on their part, if even the barest justice is extended to the indentured labourers, and to
the native inhabitants of the Colony.
21. Before closing this despatch, I think it well to mention, with regard to
Mr. Chalmers, that with the object of conciliation, I had wished to overlook his libellous
insinuations, and to endeavour to induce a withdrawal from the position which he had
taken up; but after considering the matter with my Executive Council, I became
satisfied that besides the more obvious objections to this course, there was a fatal one
in the almost certain uselessness of the attempt, and I therefore accepted his
resignation.
22. Returning now to the Ordinance, which is the immediate subject of this despatch,
I trust that your Lordship will be able to recommend it for Her Majesty’s gracious
allowance and confirmation.
I have, &c. ,
(Signed) G, WILLIAM DES YGEUX.
P.S. —I enclose, as usual, the report upon the Ordinance of the Attorney-General.
(Signed) G. WILLIAM DES VCEUX.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby,
&c. &c. &c.


Enclosure 1 in No. 11.
Fiji, No. XIL, 1883.
An Ordinance (enacted by the Governor of the Colony of Fiji, with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council) to amend the Native Labour Ordinance
No. IV. of 1883.
(1.5.) G. William Des Vieux,
September 1, 1883.
Be it enacted by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council
as follows: —
I. Section XXV. of the Native Labour Ordinance 1883 hereinafter called the Principal
Ordinance is hereby repealed and instead thereof the following provisions of this section
shall be read — .
« Yaqona or the customary payment preliminary to a labour contract and made by
or on behalf of the intending employer to the intending labourer shall be permitted, in
the form of a cash payment only to the extent of one pound or less to such intending
labourer and not otherwise Save as aforesaid no intending employer or person in his
service or recruiting agent shall give any money or goods to a native as an inducement
to such native to enter into a contract to labour or with a view to such native inducing
others to enter into a contract to labour and any such person who shall so give any
such inducement or with a view to any such inducement of others shall on conviction
thereof forfeit the sum of five pounds per head for every native to whom such money or
goods shall have been given as aforesaid and in default of payment shall be imprisoned
for a period of three months No money or goods given as aforesaid shall be recoverable
and no deduction from wages shall be made on account of the same having been given.”
11. In Section XLVII. of the said Ordinance and in the fourth line thereof instead of
“ Section V.” there shall be read the word and figures “ Section VII.”
111. Section XLVIII. of the Principal Ordinance with reference to the registration of
Job Contracts shall not apply to any such contract the consideration of which is any
sum less than Twelve Pounds. Provided that there shall be no necessity to register
under any other Ordinance a Job Contract which by this Section it is unnecessary to
register under the Native Labour Ordinance.
IV. This Ordinance may be cited for all purposes as “ The Native Labour Ordinance
1883 Amendment Ordinance” and shall come into force together with the Principal
Ordinance upon its proclamation by the Governor.
Passed in Council this twenty-seventh day of June in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and eighty-three.
Enclosure 2 in No. 11.
Council Paper, No. 3.
Message to the Legislative Council.
G. William Des Vieux.
The Ordinance, of which the short title is the “ Native Labour Amendment Ordinance,
1883,” is introduced to the Council for the purpose of correcting two errors in the
Native Labour Ordinance passed early in the year.
One of these is merely a misprint in the number of the clause referred to in
Clause XLVII. The other error is as follows :
While the Ordinance was under discussion, an addition to Clause XXV. was
unanimously agreed upon, with the object of permitting an intending employer to give
a present of a value not exceeding one pound to each labourer agreeing to engage with
him. The amendment was, however, accidentally left out when the Ordinance was
finally printed, and the omission unfortunately escaped notice.
The omission from the original Ordinance which it is now proposed to supply, forms part
of a long series of instances in which, as alleged in the recent issues of a local newspaper,
the Governor has misled the Council, and this charge assumes an importance which has
not belonged to former attacks from the same quarter, inasmuch as, being stated to be
made on the responsibility of certain unofficial Members of Council, it has not been
disavowed by them.
G 4


While at once recognising that, except as regards the omission above referred to, these
statements were untrue, the Governor deemed it well to enquire whether there were any
expressions of his which might have given rise to misconception, and what were the
impressions of others as to what occurred. He therefore requested the Colonial Secretary
and the Attorney-General (Acting Chief Justice) to examine into and report upon the
subject, and he has received from them the following communication :
“ Having been requested by his Excellency the Governor to report on the accuracy
of certain statements contained in recent issues of the Fiji Times , and purporting to be
made on the authority of unofficial members of the Legislative Council, with reference
to proceedings in Council during the discussion of c The Native Labour Ordinance,
1883,* and having examined the minutes of proceedings and the notes of the shorthand
writer who was present, both of which we find to be in full accordance with our
recollection ; we hereby certify that, except as to the omission (which had previously
escaped our notice) of an amendment of Clause XXV., permitting of a present not
exceeding one pound to each engaged labourer, the whole series of statements which
are made the groundwork of a charge against the Government are entirely untrue.
Some of the amendments referred to as improperly admitted, were proposed, but the
only promise made by his Excellency in regard to any of them was—that of his careful
consideration. To some others of the proposed amendments his Excellency most
distinctly refused assent, while in one instance the important amendment which is
alleged to have been conceded, and improperly omitted, was actually carried to a
division and lost.
“ Fielding Clarke,
“ Acting Chief Justice.
“ John B. Thurston,
“ Colonial Secretary.”
As it thus appears that the whole series of statements is untrue, except as to the
omission about to be repaired, it is to be expected that the members who may be
responsible for the above statements will either express their regret at having made
them, or will repeat them openly by a notice of motion in Council. And the Governor
deems it well to notice, in this connexion, that when members have complaints as to 1
proceedings in Council, it would be well for them always to take this latter course,
rather than to make private communications to the press, and thus become morally
responsible for all imputations of motive and other ornamental additions which garnish
their announcement to the public.
With reference to a provision of the Principal Ordnance which appears to have given
rise to misconception, viz., that of Clause VII. under which Home Districts may by
Proclamation be enlarged so as to include adjacent districts for certain purposes, the
Governor deems it well to mention that, as soon as the Ordinance comes into force, a
Proclamation will be issued assigning to each Home District its adjacent districts, in
accordance with the official amendment communicated to the Board before the discussion
of the measure, and in conformity with the list of “ adjacencies ” which was then read
by the Governor.
While repairing the omission above referred to, the Governor takes the opportunity of
making another amendment of the Principal Ordinance.
It was proposed by one of the unofficial members to exclude from the necessity of
registration under Section LXYIII. —Job Contracts—for amounts under Ten Pounds.
The Governor, while inclined to regard the suggestion favourably, promised it his
consideration, but as shown by the shorthand writer’s notes, twice made it clearly
understood that he could give no promise of his consent. After weighing the arguments
that had been used in favour of the amendment, the Governor did not see sufficient
reason to justify him in including it at the time the Ordinance was passed. Now,
however, that he has received fuller information on the subject, he is inclined to modify
his views, and has therefore inserted in the draft Ordinance now submitted a clause
providing for the exemption from registration, of contracts of which the consideration is
less than Twelve pounds.
By his Excellency’s command,
John B. Thurston,
Suva, 23rd June, 1883. Colonial Secretary.


Enclosure 3 in No. 11.
Extract from Minutes of Proceedings of the Legislative Council, June 27, 1883.
Native Labour Ordinance Amendment Ordinance , 1883.
“ The Order of the day for the second reading of the Native Labour Ordinance,
Amendment Ordinance having been read, the Hon. the Commissioner of Native Affairs
moved that the Ordinance be now read a second time.
“ Seconded by the Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
“ The Hon. George Morgan asked permission of the Board, before the question for
the second reading of the Ordinance was put, to make explanation regarding the conduct
of non-official members in connexion with certain publications issued by the Press, to
the effect that the Governor had misled the Council in respect of the principal Ordinance,
an amendment of which was now before the Board.
“ The hon. member then proceeded to make a statement explaining the position of
the unofficial members (a transcript of which he afterwards delivered to the clerk of the
Council), and is as follows :
“ I was not aware until my arrival that an opportunity would occur enabling me to
address a few words on the subject of the Native Labour Ordinance. lam pleased the
opportunity has occurred, as I hope to be able to remove a false impression that
unfortunately seems to prevail regarding the conduct of non-official members.
“ Although the Bill was left in Committee last January, it was formally completed,
and, as you are aware, many amendments and alterations took place. When the
Ordinance was finally published and circulated, it became apparent that these alterations
could not be reconciled with the rough memoranda of non-official members. Finding
this the case, it is to be regretted, and indeed no one is more deeply grieved than myself,
that the proper and constitutional form of question in Council was not adopted rather
than furnishing matter for newspaper paragraphs.
“ I should not feel it my duty even to refer to articles emanating from an editors pen,
were it not for the fact that the subject-matter upon which these articles were based had
been furnished by non-official members. Ido not, however, believe for one moment
that any member would endorse or acquiesce in the sentiment or inferences drawn
therein; indeed it would be a matter of much pain to me did I not feel assured that
ray honourable friends would repudiate all sympathy with the articles in question.
“ I find by the amended Ordinance now before me that an error has been corrected
regarding the Yaqona money ; that a concession has been made relative to non-registration
of contracts up to 12 1, ; and 1 further learn that by proclamation his Excellency purposes
dealing with home districts and their adjacencies.
“ Herein are the three principal points of dispute, and it is most distressing to think
that so many objectionable articles have been published upon a subject so easy of
explanation in Council.
“ There are two amendments, I find, upon reference to the shorthand writer’s notes
referred to by the paper in question, in which non-official members have evidently
misconstrued a ‘ promise to consider 5 into an e intention to grant,’ for so far from a
distinct promise to grant, his Excellency’s words convey no such impression.
“ I cannot now do more than express my deepest regret at the course pursued, and in
the names of my honourable friends Messrs. Mason and Leefe, whose written authority
1 hold, to act in their interest, and from whom I am confident of support in the statement
I have made.
“ His Excellency having expressed his satisfaction with the explanation made by the
hon. member in so far as it concerned himself, the business was proceeded with.”
Extract from Minutes of Proceedings of the Legislative Council, August 18, 1883.
Minutes of previous meeting read.
The hon. the Colonial Secretary called the attention of the Board to the explanation
given by the hon. G. Morgan, in writing, to the clerk of the Council subsequently to
the meeting of the 27th June, and which had been entered by the clerk on the minutes
of that meeting.
“ As the explanation so given did not embrace the whole of the hon. member’s
remarks orally made to the Council, in fact omitted two points which he, the hon.
Colonial Secretary, thought should have been entered upon the minutes,
i 17270. H


“ The hon. Mr. Morgan had clearly stated ;
“ (1.) That the only note made by him when the Board was sitting for the consideration
of the Native Labour Bill that would positively support the several exceptions which
had been taken to the Bill, as passed, was one relating to the giving of 205. Yaqona
money, a provision made in the Ordinance then before the Board ; and (2.) That, as
regarded other matters, he was satisfied there had been misconception as to what had
actually transpired in Council.
“If his (hon. Colonial Secretary) recollection of this matter was supported by that
of other hon. members present when the explanation referred to was made, he would
move that the two statements he had quoted be, for the purposes of record, entered
upon the minutes of Council.
“ The motion having been seconded by the hon. the Commissioner of Native Affairs,
and supported by the hon. the Acting Chief Justice, the statement of the hon. G. Morgan,
as recorded in the minutes of the 27th June, was supplemented accordingly.
“ The minutes were then confirmed.”
Enclosure 4 in No. 11.
To his Excellency the Governor.
Your Excellency, Penang, Raki Raki, June 8, 1883.
I herewith tender my resignation as a member of the Legislative Council of this
Colony.
I do so with some regret, but I consider that I should be wanting in self-respect,
should I continue to hold ray seat, after the manner in which your Excellency has
thought proper to cause the Native Labour Ordinance, 1883, to be placed on record as
one of the Ordinances to be enforced in this Colony ; and I take this opportunity of
once for all protesting in the most solemn and emphatic manner against the treatment
which I (in common with other the unofficial members of the Legislative Council) have
experienced at your Excellency’s hands, by the production of this Ordinance as it now
stands ; utterly at variance, as it is, with the amendments passed by the Council in
January last, and in spite of your Excellency’s definite and repeated assurances that
modifications would be introduced in accordance with the wishes of members, but the
wording of which, as was stated at the time, required more care in preparation than
could reasonably be taken up during the sitting of the Council.
I would at the same time point out to your Excellency that the Home districts
have received no enlargement; the 205. yaqona, as passed, is by this Ordinance a
misdemeanour; that the contract law is not amended in the direction in which it was
carried, and that the ration scale is absurdly run together, no alternation of rice and beef
being allowed to diminish the proportion of other vegetables. By the new Polynesian
Labour Regulations it is provided that at least 1 lb. of meat be allowed per week ; in the
Native Labour Ordinance 2 lbs. is insisted upon. The manifest absurdity of this needs
no comment.
Your Excellency has many well-wishers in this Colony; myself, I need hardly say,
among them ; but such treatment and such actions will reduce us to a very small
minority.
I am, &c.
To his Excellency the Governor. (Signed) Nathl. Chalmers.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Suva,
Sir, July 4, 1883.
1 am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated the Bth June 1883,
addressed to the Governor, and in reply have the honour to forward you herewith a
copy of his Excellency’s minute thereon.
I have, &c.
N. Chalmers, Penang, Raki Raki. (Signed) John.J3, Thurston.


Minute by his Excellency.
The Governor has received to-day Mr. Chalmer’s letter of Bth June 1883, resigning
hl *l iTaccenth ng* Mr.' Chalmer’s resignation, the Governor refers him to the message read
to the Legislative Council last week, in which statements similar to those of his letter
in resigning, charges the Governor with intentionally misleading
the unofficial members of Council, the Governor, while acknowledging Mr. Chalmers
o-ood wishes, cannot but be. under the circumstances, surprised at their expression.
5 (Signed) G. William Des Yceux.
29/6/83.
Enclosure 5 in No. 11.
Report on Ordinance, No. XII. of 1883.
To amend the Native Labour Ordinance, No. IV. of 1883.
By this Ordinance the Native Labour Ordinance, 1883, is amended in three particulars.
The first amendment modifies Section No. XXV. of the principal Ordinance by the
permission of the customary payment previous to a labour contract to the extent of 1/.
to everv intending labourer/ This amendment was rendered necessary by the accidental
omission of a similar provision on the passing of the principal Ordinance.
The second amendment is one of a mere typographical error.
The third amendment modifies Section XLVIII. of the principal Ordinance; by
excepting job contracts where the consideration does not exceed 12/. from the operation
of that section. This is a concession to employers, which was discussed and rejected
on the passing of the principal Ordinance, but which, on reconsideration, the Government
think may be safely made. . .
I am of opinion that the Royal Assent may be properly given to this Ordinance.
(Signed) Fielding Clarke,
Suva, September 4, 1883. Attorney General.
No. 12.
GEORGE ANDERSON, Esq., M.P., to COLONIAL OFFICE.
My Lord Dunbar, N. 8., November 8, 1883.
I had the honour of writing to your Lordship a few days ago on the subject of
Gibraltar. , . . . . . . ,
I am sorry to say that in other Crown Colonies’, similar complaints exist as to wnat
are, rightly or wrongly, considered high-handed proceedings on the part of the Governors.
Such complaints are before me from British Honduras, Trinidad, and Fiji.
To-day I will only mention the last-named, where it is said that the Council consists of
six elected members and six officials, besides the Governor, who has thus a majority ; but
that on a recent occasion, as to a Labour Ordinance, one of the official members voted
against the Governor ; that he thereupon claimed a right to two votes, a deliberation
and a casting vote, and only by ihat means the Ordinance was carried. I see a seeming
inconsistency here, because, if an official voted with the six elected, that would make
seven to five, and, therefore, his casting vote would not have been operative, unless
perhaps one of the elected was absent, which is not stated.
It is alleged that the Ordinance in question, following previous ones, has made the
labour question so strained, that the employment of Natives (Fijians) becomes almost
impossible; also, that since Sir A. Gordons time, 1876, the cost for Polynesian labour
introduced has been raised by the Governor from 61. 126*. 7d. to 35/. per head. The
complaints are accompanied by extracts from “ The Fiji Times,” speaking of great
discontent in the Colony. They say that the Governor’s power is so absolute that he
can do what he pleases ; and even their complaints are “ gagged,” if they attempt to
make them to higher authorities at home. That on a recent occasion, a petition,
sent through the Governor to the Secretary of State, went with the “ preliminary
“ damnification of a memorandum to the effect that it was unworthy of consideration.”
H 2


The article in question goes on to advocate annexation to New Zealand or an
Australian Colony, “ as an escape from their present intolerable position.”
% These statements have been sent to me by a highly respectable constituent of mine in
Glasgow, who has received them from correspondents in Fiji, who complain they are
being ruined by new difficulties thrown in the way of getting labour. lam well aware
that is a kind of complaint requiring a good deal of confirmation. lam not in a position
either to say whether the discontented portion of the community is numerous or not;
but it is evident they have a newspaper organ, and I do not think that their complaints
should be made so very light of.
On the one hand, Colonial Governors require, and should have, fair support from the
Home Government; on the other hand, such absolute power as they seem to have in
Crown Colonies is a temptation to abuse which must be guarded against.
I fear the system is at fault.
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, K.G., (Signed) GEORGE ANDERSON.
&c. &c. See.
No. 13.
Governor Sir G. WILLIAM DES YCEUX, K.C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the
EARL OF DERBY. (Received November 15, 1883).
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, September 27, 1883.
Referring to my Despatch of 3rd September last,* with which was enclosed
the Native Labour Amendment Ordinance, 1883, I have the honour to forward for your
Lordships perusal, copy of the minutes of a meeting of the Legislative Council held on
the 6th of September, at which Mr. Hill, one of the unofficial members, had the courage
to express views in accord with those of the official members with reference to the charges
of the “ Fiji Times.”
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. WILLIAM DES YCEUX.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby,
&c. &c. &c.
P.S. —Lest I should be misunderstood, I think it well to say that the above favourable
opinion of Mr. Hill’s speech is simply with reference to his frank acknowledgment of the
truth, and does not cover his views generally, or the manner in which they are stated.
G. William Des Yceux.
Enclosure in No. 13.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Legislative Council.
Thursday, 6th September.
Present: His Excellency the Governor, the Hon. the Attorney-General, the Hon. the
Receiver-General, Hon. H. Anson, Acting Agent-General of Immigration, Hon.
John Hill, and Hon. Alexander Barrack.
Minutes of previous meeting were read and confirmed.
The Hon. the Receiver-General, in the absence of the Colonial Secretary, moved the
first reading of an Ordinance with regard to fencing.
The order of the day for the second reading of “ An ordinance for the regulation of
6C the relations between employers and workmen in the case of contracts for labour made
“ beyond the Colony ” having been read, his Excellency informed the board that, owing
to the great pressure of public business, the draft Ordinance now in the hands of hon.
members had been inadvertently forwarded to them by the clerk of the council without
his Excellency’s sanction. His Excellency would therefore postpone the second reading
of the bill until the next meeting of council, when the measure would be presented to
hon. members in a more complete form, and would be taken in committee either at the
regular meeting of December, or at another meeting, of which special notice would be
given.
* No. 11.


The Hon. John Hill moved the adjournment of the board, for the purpose of making
a personal explanation, which was as follows :
Explanation.
« gj r ] r i se to move the adjournment of this board, in order that I may make an
explanation, or, rather, a statement which I think is due, not necessarily on my own
account, but in the interests of truth and justice. I refer to certain statements made m
a series of articles that appeared in the ‘Fiji Times ’ of May last, in reference to the
Native Labour Ordinance, discussed and passed by the board in January. Ihese articles,
in detailing the different clauses of the Bill, stated that some of these clauses did not
appear in the newly published Ordinance, in the same state as they left the hands ot the
board and they further went on to charge the Government with a most dishonourable
act Now Sir lam not going to champion either the Governor or his Executive ; they
can defend’themselves. All I have to do is to state that I kept very full notes of what
occurred during the passing of that Bill, and on carefully going over these, I failed to
find the discrepancies urged in the newspaper referred to. I did most decidedly find one
very marked error, that in reference to yaquona, but this has since been explained and
altered. I also found out what 1 consider was an omission, I mean the leaving out the
districts and adjacencies. My notes on this point say, 4 Governor promised to make
‘ districts include their adjacent districts.’ But talking this over since, I remembered
the Governor stated that this would appear in a proclamation or some such form.
“ There was also a very slight verbal error, as I thought, in some other clause, but it
was so trifling that I cannot call it to mind.
“Now, Sir, with the exceptions I have stated, I know of no other errors or dis-
crepancies. As to whom was the author of the information given to the writer of the
articles in question, of course, I have nothing to do with,
“ I certainly on that occasion, had no inclination to give either particulars of what
occurred in council, or the result \ for the very good reason that, at the end of that sitting,
the feeling I had was of the deep humiliation and mortification at the miserable failure
of non-official members to oppose with the many important points in which they
disagreed. So that with two or three exceptions, the unanimous vote of the whole six
non members, all through the discussion of that Ordinance, fell to the ground;
and I, for one, felt that our presence there at all, was almost superfluous. Therefore I
did not see anything to boast of or proclaim.
u However, Sir, this is not the time to go into that aspect of the case. I may mention
that 1 took the trouble to speak to the proprietor of the “ Fiji Times” in July last, and
told him that I considered the articles were wrong and the charges untrue. He seemed
to say that while I said this, others equally in a position to know, had said the opposite,
so he could not make it out. He, however, was reasonable enough to admit, that if the
articles were incorrect, they would have the effect of injuring the cause the paper wished
to serve. I will not detain the board further than to state that in a Crown Colony of a
severe type, such as this is, with the Governor having almost despotic powers, I fail to
see what necessity there would be for him to lower himself to the perpetration of so con-
temptible an expedient as to alter Bills before publication, when he can, perfectly within
his own right, signify his wishes to his official members, who must vote accordingly ;
and as these, with the Governor’s dual vote will always make a majority, anything can
be carried he wishes. And besides, however much certain Governors may be abused
or peculiar views they may have, it will be granted by most people, that the gentlemen,
of which British Governors are made, are not the men to descend to such dishonest
expedients. They certainly may and do strain their privileges to the utmost to gain
their point; such, for instance, as dual voting; but I should be sorry to imagine for a
moment they were aught but English gentlemen in the fullest sense. And I am quite
satisfied that there is not the slightest reason to believe otherwise in respect to this
unfortunate occurrence.”
His Excellency replied that while he could not of course agree with the whole of the
views expressed by the lion, member, it was satisfactory to find that the hon. members’
notes taken at the meeting of council referred to, as well as his recollection of what
took place there, were entirely in accord with the shorthand writer’s notes, and with
the notes and recollections of the official members, and also with those of the Hon.
Mr. Morgan, who had made an equally frank disavowal with regard to the false charges
of the “ Fiji Times.” And it was still more satisfactory that some, at least, of the
unofficial members had had the courage to break silence upon this matter, and to run
the risk of attack by openly stating the truth.
H 8


Moved by the Hon. the Attorney-General, and seconded by the Hon. Alexander
Barrack, that the explanation be recorded on the minutes of council.
The Hon. John Hill, with the permission of the board, begged leave to move, without
previous notice; that a Select Committee be appointed for the purpose of considering and
recommending to the Governor any amendments that may be deemed advisable in the
regulations, recently published, regarding Polynesian Immigrants.
Seconded by the Hon. Alexander Barrack.
His Excellency stated if the hon. member would furnish in writing sufficient evidence
to show that any particular sections pressed with undue hardship upon employers, he
would give the matter his careful consideration; and, if the hon. member showed
sufficient cause, he would consent to the appointment of a committee. His Excellency
at the same time took the opportunity to say that the regulations passed had been
rendered necessary by recent experience. That lie did not doubt they were susceptible
of improvement, and that he should be most willing to adopt any provisions which, while
modifying their stringency, would equally well secure the end desired. The great
difficulty in all these cases was to allow reasonable latitude to those who would use it
without injustice, and not at the same time to open the door to grave abuses on the part
of those who had shown themselves capable of committing them.
The other business was postponed, and the board then adjourned.
No. 14.
The Right Hon, the EARL OF DERBY to Governor Sir G. WILLIAM
DES VGEUX, K.C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, November 17, 1883.
I have the honour to convey to you Her Majesty’s gracious confirmation and
allowance of the Ordinance, No. XII., of 1883 of the Legislature of Fiji, entitled, “ An
Ordinance to amend the Native Labour Ordinance, No. IV., of 1883,” a transcript of
which accompanied your despatch of the 3rd September last.*
With regard to the observations contained in that despatch upon the opposition which
you experience from the Fijian Press, I need scarcely remark that I should not accept
any statement concerning yourself which might appear in a Colonial newspaper, without
giving you an opportunity of refuting or explaining it.
I have received your despatch of the 27th of September,! enclosing a copy
of the Minutes of a meeting of the Legislative Council on the 6th of September, at
which Mr. Hill, an official member, contradicted mis-statements in the “ Fiji Times.”
I have, &c.
Sir G. W. Des Vavux. (Signed) DERBY.
No. 15.
COLONIAL OFFICE to GEORGE ANDERSON, Esq., M.P.
Sir, . Downing Street, December 6, 1883.
I have laid before the Earl of Derby your letter of the Bth ultimo,J respecting
certain alleged proceedings on the part of Sir William Des Voeux, in Fiji, more especially
in connexion with the passing of the Native Labour Ordinance, 1883.
2. His Lordship desires me to explain to you that it is usual, in the case of a Colony
possessing a large number of native inhabitants not represented in the Council, for the
Crown to retain under its control a majority of the votes. In Fiji, the members are all
nominated by the Crown, none being elective, and the Governor, as in many other
Colonies, has two votes, a deliberative and a casting vote, by an express provision of the
Royal instructions.
3. In the case of the “ Native Labour Ordinance, 1883,” to which you refer, the
interest of the Natives was directly in question and in conflict with the wishes of
the planters from whom the unofficial members are largely chosen. The passing of the
Ordinance in question was in great measure brought about by the complaints of the
Chiefs during three consecutive years in their Annual Council. They represented strongly
the misery caused by the withdrawal of so large a proportion of able-bodied men from
* No. 11.
f No. 13.
t No. 12.


their native districts. It was considered that these complaints would be besb_.net by
prohibiting engagements for more than a month m what are called Home Districts,
and for more than 12 months elsewhere. ~. . . ,
4 i n these circumstances Lord Derby thinks that you will probably admit the present
case to be a striking illustration of the advantage of the provision which exists in the
Royal Instructions in the case of Fiji for the protection of native interests
5 As regards the increased expense of Polynesian labour, lam to observe that this
has arisen mainly from the difficulty of obtaining recruits from the various islands, in
consequence of the diminution of their population, and other causes; and as this expense
is of course, borne by those planters for whose benefit labourers are introduced, and
could not, in justice to the population generally, fall on the public revenues, it has,
no doubt, fallen heavily upon some individuals. , _ ~
6 For this state of things the Government cannot be held responsible, nor lor the
necessity which became apparent for further legislative protection in the interests ot a
peculiarly helpless class of indentured labourers, whose condition has been recently shown
to have been very far from satisfactory. ~ , . r ,
7. The amended “Polynesian Immigration Ordinance, 1883, which it was found
requisite to introduce with this view, and which has received Her Majesty’s sanction,
may not improbably have been found to press upon individual planters by the provisions
which it contains for the increased care of imported labourers.
8. With reference to your observations as to the necessity of supervising and controlling
the proceedings of Colonial Governments in which the Crown has a majority in the
Legislature, I am to remind you that while this form of constitution is essential for the
protection of the coloured population, there is a safeguard against any serious abuse of
the power so conferred, in the constant attention given by the Colonial Othce to the
affairs of all Crown Colonies, and ultimately in the notice which is always taken m
Parliament of any wellfounded and serious complaints of maladministration or
unfairness.
1 am, &c.
George Anderson, Esq., M.P. (Signed) JOHN BRAMSTON.
No. 16.
The Right Hon. the EARL OF DERBY to Governor Sir G. WILLIAM
DES VCEUX, K.C.M.G.
q IR Downing Street, December 17, 1883.
I have the honour to transmit to you, for your information, extracts from a letter*
addressed to me by Mr. George Anderson, M.P., respecting affairs in Fiji, together with
a copy of a letterf which I caused to be addressed to him in reply.
I have, &c.
Sir G. W. Des Voeux. (Signed) DERBY,
No. 17.
Administrator J. B. THURSTON, C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the EARL Of
DERBY. (Received January 19, 1884.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, November 27, 1883.
In s his despatches of the 3rd and 2?th September last 4 Sir William Des Voeux
communicated to your Lordship the passing of the Native Labour Ordinance, and the
misunderstandings and misrepresentations in which, from the beginning, that Ordinance
has been unfortunately enveloped.
2. The return to the Colony of the Hon. R. B. Leefe, a Member of Council, whose
recent proceedings in Australia have already been made known to your Lordship by
his Excellency Lord Augustus Loftus and also by Sir William Des Voeux’s despatch of
the 26th ultimo, has revived for the moment an interest in the subject which otherwise
appeared to be dying out.
* No. 12,
d _
t No. 15.
% Nos, 11 and 13.


3. Mr. Leefe has again left the Colony, and proceeded to Sydney; but before doing
so, addressed a letter to the President of the Council (publishing it simultaneously in
the columns of the “ Fiji Times ”), explaining his share in the misrepresentations which
led to the long continued attacks upon the Government by the journal named.
As I am aware that this letter has been carefully prepared with the object of damaging
the reputation of this Government abroad, and will be widely circulated, I feel it my
duty to convey to your Lordship tny views with reference to the position generally of
non-official Members of Council in respect of the measure in question, and the unusual
action they thought fit to take in connexion with their objection to it.
4. I may premise by observing that the non-official Members attended Council in
January last with the openly declared intention of opposing every clause and line in the
new Ordinance, and from the outset they adopted a course of opposition which could
only be regarded by the Government as unreasonable and obstructive. In short, they
endeavoured to prevent even discussion upon the Draft Ordinance submitted to the
Board, determining, as they said, to reject it “ in toto.”
Mr. Leefe upon this occasion acted, if I may so express it, as the leader of the
Opposition.
5. After the message of the Governor to the Council (forwarded to your Lordshin
with Despatch, No. 8, of 18th January 1883), introducing the Draft Ordinance, had been
read, a message which, I venture to say, conveyed forcibly and temperately the difficulties
of the Government and the imperative necessity for an amendment of the existing law
with respect to the hiring and employment of native labourers, the Native Commissioner
moved the first reading of the Ordinance, and on its being seconded, Mr. Leefe rose and
moved, as stated in his letter attached (paragraph 42), “ that the Bill be read a second
“ time this day six months.”
6. The Governor, in a conciliatory tone, pointed out to Mr. Leefe that it was an
unusual thing to endeavour to arrest the progress of a measure at that stage ; that the
Hon. Member could make any motion he might deem proper at its second reading, when
the mover of the Bill would speak to its principles ; but he presumed that Members did
not purpose to prevent discussion. Further, his Excellency stated that a motion that a
Bill be read that day six months had, in a Colony wherein Council was constantly
sitting, not the significance attached to it by the mover of such a motion in the session
of an annual Parliament.
7. Mr. Leefe intimated that he and those acting with him intended to offer every
opposition to the measure, whether at its first or any other reading, and that they
objected to it both in detail and in its entirety, and would do their utmost to prevent its
becoming law.
8. After some debate the question was put, and the first reading passed. During the
course of this sitting, Mr. Leefe asked the Governor whether there was any foundation
for a report that he (the Governor) had threatened “ that if the Ordinance did not pass
he would resign?” His Excellency, in reply, said “No”; and added that, if the
Hon. Member would consider his question, he would see that any expression such as
alleged would be meaningless; that whatever might be understood from such words
when used by the leader of a Parliamentary Government, they would be entirely out of
place and unnecessary if used by the Governor of a Crown Colony. Mr. Leefe
expressed himself satisfied with this answer ; but I regret to observe that he repeats the
story in his letter, and doubtless does so for the sake of its “ ad captandum ” effect upon
the general mass of the public.
9. Upon the Board assembling for the despatch of business on the second day of
meeting, non-official Members began to contest the clauses almost word for word, and
then to make motions for the mere purpose of obstructing business.
Upon this the Governor said that, while he was both ready and desirous to permit,
and even provoke, the freest discussion at the Board, he would most positively “ put
down ” anything like concerted obstruction.
10. I have thought it well to mention these matters first to your Lordship, because
they are characteristic of the line adopted by the non-official Members, and indicate the
temper animating them in all things connected with the Native Labour Ordinance from
the day of its introduction to the time when at least two Members (the Hon. George
Morgan and the Hon. John Hill) admitted in Council that they had not been tree from
mistakes, and disavowed any participation in the personal attack made upon the
Governor.
11. I have no doubt whatever that the minds of the non-official Members of the
Board present when the Labour Ordinance was under consideration were so inflamed


and that they had by warm and constant discussion between themselves at their hotel
so acted and reacted upon one another, that they neither understood the meaning and
purport of the measure, nor the explanation in respect of it offered by the official
Members, and I ventured to express that conviction to them in Council. They came to
Suva pledged to vote in a body, and in the hope of overbearing the Government by the
vehemence and pertinacity of their opposition. By the time that these efforts had failed,
it appeared to me that the Honourable Members were so exhausted and disappointed as
to be quite unable to follow further the course of business before them.
12. I have already, in conjunction with Mr. Clarke, the Attorney-General (and after
a careful scrutiny of the minutes, the shorthand writer’s report, my own papers, and
those of my colleagues), certified that the Ordinance passed and signed by the Governor
(with one exception as to “ Yagona,” i.e., bounty), is the Ordinance as passed in
Committee ; and the conviction upon which that certificate was signed is in no way
shaken, but confirmed, by the perusal of Mr. Leefe’s letter under consideration.
13. With regard to Mr. Leefe’s share in the communication to the editor of the “ Fiji
Times,” which led to its somewhat more than usually offensive and personal attacks
upon the Governor, I need not trouble your Lordship. One thing is, however, abun-
dantly evident, and that is, that, although Messrs. Leefe, Mason, Hill, Chalmers, and
Morgan, were corresponding on the subject of the supposed mistakes in the Ordinance,
and although a very violent letter had been prepared by Mr. Chalmers for publication in
the local newspaper, not one of the gentlemen named addressed the Governmerit on the
issues they had raised ; but I have the strongest reason for believing that the draft letter
prepared by Mr. Chalmers, and given in paragraph 26 of the inclosure to this letter, was
seen and read by the editor to whom it was addressed, though he was not allowed to
publish it.
14. 1 will now proceed to make the following observations upon those paragraphs of
Mr. Leefe’s letter which refer to a “ copy of the Bill,” with the marginal notes made in
Council by himself and Mr. Chalmers, for they show conclusively that, with one
exception (which relates to “ Yagona”), the complaints and charges made by non-official
Members in respect of the present Native Labour Ordinance have no substantial
foundation, but are, with good grounds of probability, attributable to their own
misconceptions :
Paragraph No. 6 (of enclosure). —The provisions as to adjacencies here indicated
were provided for and stand part of the Ordinance.
Paragraph No. 7 and part of 31. —No engagement whatever was made as to where
copies of (S the register” should be posted. In answer to a question wdiether
any means would be taken to have copies of “ the register ” kept elsewhere
than with the magistrate of “ the district,” it was promised that direction would
be given 10 make copies ( i.e ., Executive directions), and that such copies should
be placed at one or more places in the district as might appear most convenient.
This complaint is founded on misconception.
Paragraph 8. —The provision as to married men stands in the Ordinance. “ No. 2 ”
is struck out. No. 3 stands modified in the Ordinance, and as passed in
Committee.
Paragraph 9- — Recruiting is permitted in “ any province ” or provinces named in
the permit, and was so passed in Committee. In the original draft the words ran
“in the districts named therein,” and was never altered. Mr. Leefe is in error
here.
Paragraph 10. —Mr. Leefe, in this paragraph, confounds the IX. and XIV. sections
of the Ordinance, and shows with what ease he can not only make, but adhere to
serious mistakes. Section IX. interdicts the employment of any members of a
community -when, as in the case of flood, fire, epidemic, or other urgent cause,
the whole of its members are wanted at home, and such members are then to be
employed only on duties connected with, and during the continuance of, such
necessity. Section XIV. provides for a very different set of circumstances,
viz., the prohibition, by proclamation, of the engagement of the Natives of any
home district for service outside the province in which their families reside, and is
intended to provide against a state of things which has not infrequently happened ;
that is to say, when a district is, by continued engagement of <c male labourers,”
so deprived of the strength of its male population that women and children
complain to the Government of starvation and other distress, then the Governor
may close the district until the return of the absent men belonging to it shall have
restored the effective strength of the community.
i 17270. I


Paragraphs 11 and 12 require no notice; the provisions referred to stand in the
Ordinance.
Paragraph 13.—The provision here referred to was, by an oversight, omitted, and
subsequently introduced into an amending Ordinance, as already reported by the
Governor in his Despatch, No. 108, of 3rd September.
Paragraphs 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, and 19. —The provisions referred to all stand part of
the Ordinance.
Paragraph 20 and Part 4 of paragraph 31.—N0 such promise was made, as alleged,
to extend the consideration in contracts requiring registration to 10£. The
Governor merely said he would “ give the matter consideration.”
Paragraph 21, —The provision referred to stands part of the Ordinance.
Paragraphs 22 and 23. —As to the last, the alteration stands part of the Ordinance;
as to the first, Mr. Leefe is in error. In the one instance, a specific penalty is
provided for persons being guilty of, or accessory to, unlawful engagements. In
the other, which is a saving clause, provision is made for breaches of the
Ordinance, for which no penalty is otherwise provided. It is not probable that
the limits of penalty, whether of fine or imprisonment, would be identical in these
two clauses.
Paragraph 24 requires no observation. The section of the Ordinance as it stands
is substantially the same as indicated in Mr. Leefe’s note.
Paragraph 25. —The provisions noted stand part of the Ordinance.
15. Thus, to recapitulate, all the provisions save one positively alleged by Mr. Leefe
to have been passed in Committee stand part of the Ordinance as passed and published.
The exception is the one relating to Yagona (Bounty), admitted by the Government to
have been an omission, and remedied as soon as discovered.
16. To the “finding” of Mr. Leefe, as given in the 31st paragraph of this letter, I
reply :
pq rs t, —That the places for the exhibition of copies of “ the register ” referred to is" a
matter of executive direction, and was so stated in Council. Such places will
probably be altered from time to time, and their number lessened or increased as
experience dictates. The “ 3rd sub-clause ” stands in the Ordinance as passed,
according to my notes and those of my colleagues as well as the notes of the
short hand-writer.
Second. —That permits are confined to districts named therein, but the name of
any district will be inserted in the permit, if such district is not at the time
subject to the provisions of sections IX. or XIV. The possibility and probability
of the provisions of one or the other of these sections being not infrequently in
operation rendered it undesirable that a form of permit fixed by statute should
refer to “ the Colony at large.”
Third. —That Mr. Leefe confuses and misunderstands the meaning and effect of
sections IX. and XIV.
• Fourth.— Admitted.
Fifth. —That no new clause was promised . To Mr. Leefe’s strictures, based upon
the fact that an amending clause was subsequently submitted to Council and
passed, it may suffice to say, that Mr. Leefe and other non-official Members
should have "remained in town for the next meeting of the Board, and
endeavoured to overcome objections which, in the first instance, presented
themselves to the official Members, and which were never altogether removed.
Instead of doing this, however, they availed themselves of the excuse afforded by
the difficulties and delays of printing, and left the seat of Government in a body,
as indicated in paragraph 3 of the attached letter.
17. Whether the recommendations of the departing Members were considered or not,
and whether good faith was or was not kept with them, I trust your Lordship may be
able to judge in spite of the necessary prolixity of this letter. t
18. There now remains only two paragraphs of Mr. Leefe’s letter appearing worthy ol
comment, viz., paragraphs 34 and 42. ~ l l ~ ~
19. The first admits that the Ordinance, as published, is the one passed in Council,
with the one exception so often referred to, but beyond this admission the whole
paragraph is only useful as exemplifying the tone and spirit in which the senior
non-official Member of the Council prefers to address the President of the Board ancl
the offensive manner in which he charges the Governor and the whole of the official
Members of the Council with dissimulation and falsehood. I say the whole of the
official Members, for I may be permitted to remind your Lordship that the Attorney-
General and myself, as a Committee of Government have certified, after long and


careful examination, that, excepting in the case of one unfortunate and purely accidental
omission there are no grounds whatever for the allegations forming the subject of ou
inquiry, and, I may here add, none whatever for the libellous and offensive expressions
directed at the Governor by the local press and by Messrs. Leefe and Chalmers.
20 If there was any “ mala fides ” in this matter, then the whole of the official Members
of Council are as equally blameworthy as the Governor, but I venture to thnik it not only
improbable but impossible that the Governor of a British Colony and the whole of his
official advisers, who, excepting as regards subordination m the higher sense of the word,
are quite as independent as Mr. Leefe or Mr. Chalmers could or would resort to
dissimulation and direct falsehood for the purpose of hoodwinking their non-official
21 last paragraph requiring my observations is the one which I have marked 42.
In this Mr Leefe refers to his opening address, in which, as he says, he denounced the
measure then under consideration. It is true that he did denounce it, but when m
debate 1 ventured, as one quite as experienced as himself in Fijian affairs, to invite his
reasons for such denunciation, he failed entirely to give any ; m tact, he never attempted
to give one reason for the strong opinions to which he gave expression, contenting
himself with the declaration, that if the Draft Ordinance became law, it would rum the
country, that it would bring the Natives to misery and slavery, and that it was a
“disgraceful measure.” . . . . , T i. n . ,1
These expressions were merely expressions of opinion, which I challenged at the time
of their utterance as I do now.
22. It would have been incumbent upon me, before concluding this subject, to have
submitted to your Lordship my opinion as to the cause or origin of the strong feelings
operating upon Mr. Leefe, and of which, perhaps, he was not himself sensible ; but I am
saved from such a disagreeable task, which could not have been otherwise than in some
degree personal, by the discovery among the Council papers of a Native Labour
Amendment Ordinance introduced by Mr. Leefe himself on the 20th of June 1878, but
rejected by Council at its second reading.
23. This amending Ordinance, which I think may interest your Lordship, speaks for
itself! It indicates clearly what Mr. Leefe and those who support him desire; and it
indicates still more clearly the kind of measure which, in Mr. Leefe’s opinion, would be
creditable to the British name. _ , ,
24. The following, briefly stated, is the purport of the IN ative Labour Amendment
Ordinance prepared and introduced by Mr. Leefe : •
Clause I. provides that proprietors of estates may make agreements with the whole
of the adult male inhabitants of towns situated on, or in the immediate vicinity
of, such estates for periods not exceeding five years.
25. It may be asked, “ Could a native town possibly be on an estate held by an
European in fee simple ? ” and under ordinary circumstances the answer would be “ No.”
But under a law of the Colony such as that prepared by Mr. Leefe, a town could easily
be created by invitation to the unruly, the discontented, and the fugitive from family or
tribal control. Nothing would be easier, especially in that part of Fiji in which
Mr. Leefe resides, than to foster intrigues and breed ill-blood between Chiefs and
people, and to create colonies of Adullamites “ upon estates ” or in their “ immediate
vicinity.’’ What the final result would be it is not difficult to imagine, but at the outset
the Natives, led away by wild ideas as to the impunity with which, under the boundless
protection of the white man, they could do as they pleased and be free from the
consequences of any delinquency, would probably accept the terms of the contract
offered them under Mr. Leefe’s Ordinance.
26. Clause 11. provides for the recording of the contract.
27. Clause 111. binds the proprietor of any estate entering into such contract to pay
the assessed taxes of the Natives contracting with him under the provision of the
Ordinance. ...... p ,
28. Clause IV. provides that one-third of the male adult inhabitants ol such town
may be compelled to work for four months at a time, when called upon according to a
roster; the adult males so called must work whether they wish to do so or not, and on
neglect or refusal may be fined ten shillings or be imprisoned for one month.
29. Clause V. provides that the Natives when so called upon to work [and not otherwise]
shall each be paid at the rate of five shillings per calendar month, that is to about
twopence a day, with usual rations and allowances provided by the amending Ordinance,
which does not provide for any animal or fish food being supplied. The two-thirds
male adults not called upon for service are not provided for in any way, excepting that
I 2


before the law they shall be “ generally in the same condition as labourers ” under the
Principal Ordinance,
30. Clause VI. provides that Natives so engaging shall not be liable to any communal
obligation, but all adult male Natives entering into such a contract as aforementioned,
and whether as regards the one-third at work or the two-thirds at rest, shall be generally
in the same condition as a labourer under the Native Labour Ordinance of 1877, that is
to say, they shall not be under the control of their Chiefs or other tribal authorities, and
shall be under some control of the proprietor or planter, even though, as to some ofsuch
Natives, he neither feeds, clothes, nor pays them.
31. It is not necessary to examine Mr. Leefe’s Ordinance further, though there is
much more to be said upon it. Its effect, whether intended or not, would be to destroy
the Fijian as a member of his family and tribe, and to degrade him into a helot for the
benefit of the proprietor of an estate wanting labourers, and regarding the Native as a
mere means to an end.
32. The measure which the Hon. Mr. Leefe considers will meet the wants of the
Colony is one by which gentlemen of his own class would become monopolists of labour
in the worst form ; it is one that would give the sanction of law for the enforced
employment by estate proprietors of one-third of their native tenants at will, at a paltry
wage and the minimum of a vegetable ration, with not an ounce of flesh or fish diet
during the long period of five years mentioned in the agreements. It is to be observed
also that the issue of the one trifling luxury allowed, viz., tobacco, is made, dependent
upon the justice or the injustice of the employer acting as judge in his own cause. Finally,
it is a law which would enable Mr. Leefe and other gentlemen similarly circumstanced
to lock up the labour of the remaining two-thirds of the Natives in bondage to them
from other proprietors equally desirous of finding means to an end, and quite willing also
to give twopence a day wages and one pennyworth of food, or even a trifle more.
33. Such is the brief sketch of an Ordinance proposed by the gentleman who,
criticising the recent measure introduced by the Government, uses such strong terms as
“ tyranny,” “ oppression,” ss misery,” “ slavery,” and “ disgrace.”
34. It is, of course, not impossible that Mr. Leefe’s Ordinance might have worked
well in his particular case. It is charitable also to believe that he foresaw the operation
and effect of his own Ordinance no more clearly than he understood the intention and
effect of the recent Government measure he so roundly denounces, but unfortunately
it is not possible to legislate for Mr. Leefe alone.
35. In conclusion, I must ask your Lordship to excuse the length and imperfections
of this letter. I have abstained ers far as possible from making reference to the offensive
language of the Hon. Mr. Leefe, sharing in this particular the opinion of Sir William
Des Voeux, that the amount of abuse heaped upon a public officer often furnishes a
correct measure of the faithfulness with which he discharges his duty; but I venture to
hope that your Lordship will, after its perusal, feel able to support the Governor in
respect of the public attack made upon him by Mr. Leefe as a Member of the
Legislative Council, and also that I may have afforded some means by which your
Lordship can judge of the nature of the legislation affecting the welfare of Her Majesty’s
Native subjects in this Colony which will in all probability be adopted if the direct
control of Her Majesty’s Government be ever lessened or withdrawn.
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, (Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 1 in No. 17.
Native Labour Ordinance Amendments .
The following copy of a communication on the above subject, addressed by the Hon.
R. B. Leefe to his Excellency the Governor, as President of the Legislative Council,
has been forwarded to us for publication :
Sm 3 Ellington, November 5, 1883.
I have the honour to furnish herewith a statement relative to certain occurrences
which have taken place during my late absence from the Colony, in the discussion
of which my name has been freely used, and as your Excellency was pleased immediately
unon my arrival, fully to explain the matter as it appeared from your Excellency’s point
of view, although the transcript of the shorthand writer’s notes has not yet arrived, still
as your Excellency is about to leave the Colony, and as I have seen Mr. Chalmers


concerning whose letter of resignation your Excellency made certain remarks, and more-
over, as 1 shall not, as I should have wished, have an opportunity of making a statement
in Council as to the matters referred to previous to your Excellency’s departure, I have
thought it better to delay no longer in stating the amount of my implication with the
acts complained of, and my appreciation generally of the circumstances of the case in so
far as they appear to me to call for remark.
2. The facts themselves are, I believe, as follows :
1. A series of articles in the “ Fiji Times” in May last commenting generally on
the asserted want of faith as between the Governor and the non-official
Members of the Council.
2. A committee appointed by the Governor to inquire into the truth of the
allegations contained in the said articles.
3. Its report denying generally their veracity.
4. The Governor’s Minute thereon.
5. Explanations made in Council by the Hon. George Morgan denying any
connexion with the said articles on behalf of himself, the Hon. Jas. Mason,
and myself.
6. Explanation made in Council by the Hon. John Hill for the most part
following the same lines.
3. I now proceed to mention what my share in the trouble has been.
After the discussion of the Native Labour Bill in committee in January last was
ended, your Excellency remarked that consequent on the disorganisation in the printing
office, and the numerous changes which had been made in the Bill, rendering its entire
reprinting a matter of necessity, a considerable time would elapse before its third reading
and passing, and that it would be therefore unreasonable to expect honourable non-
official Members to remain, but that they might rely on your giving their recommendations
your most earnest attention, and that no alterations of any importance should be made ;
and acting on your Excellency’s kind suggestion and assurance, the Hons. John Hill
and Jas. E. Mason returned home in the “ Ocean Queen,” and the Hons. N. Chalmers,
Geo. Morgan, and myself went to Levuka.
4. Shortly after arrival at the late capital, the editor of the “ Fiji Times ” called upon
Mr. Chalmers and myself, and requested us, as the Bill had excited considerable interest
in the Colony, to give him information as to the changes which had been effected by
hon. non-official Members (whom I need hardly mention were all hostile to its passing at
all) during its consideration in Committee; we therefore, in compliance with his very
laudable wish, on a clean copy of the Bill, in the margin, wrote our impression of the
alterations so made, and fresh as we were from the divisions at the Council Board, it was
unlikely that those impressions were erroneous, fortified also as they were by the notes
made in our official copies in Council.
5. This information gave rise to the leader which appeared in the “ Fiji Times ” last
January on the subject, and for which we (Mr. Chalmers and myself) are responsible,
but in no way so for the series of articles in May which I have not either seen or read,
and which were published after my departure from the Colony; I hold the copy of the
Bill referred to in which appears the following notes in our handwriting:—
6. Clause IV.—“ The home districts include not only the province in which the
intending labourer resides, but also the adjacencies or say for example.”
Province of Serua; also Namosi, Colo, Kadavu, and Bega.
7. Clause VI., now VIH.—“ The Register is to be copied and posted in conspicuous
parts of the province, so that no difficulty may be experienced by intending employers.
His Excellency further states that at the Veibose ki Macuata it is his intention to inform
Rokos, Bulis, &c., that no single man who wishes to go to work shall be in any way
hindered, and that he will punish severely any native authority who throws any obstacles
in the way.”
8. Sub-Clause No. 1. —“ Married men may engage in their home districts not
exceeding three or four months. No. 2 struck out. No. 3, modified to the utmost
possible extent, tantamount to almost excision.”
9. Clause VII., now X.—“ Permit allows recruiting in any province just as at
present.”
10. Clause X., now XIV.—“ Only in case of sudden epidemic or any extremely urgent
necessity, and then only after consultation in Bose Vakatikina, and then the people are
not to be employed on any other duty than is connected with such necessity.”
11. Clause XL, now XV.—“ Or his overseer.”
12. Clause XVI., now XX.—“ Or Roko, or if (paid off before) the Roko to the
stipendiarv magistrate.”
1 3


13. Clause XXII., now XXV.—“ Yaqona legalised and limited to 205.”
14. Clause XXVI., now XXIX.—“ From facts elicited in a court of justice.”
15. Clause XXIX., now XXXII.—“ Governor undertook to draft a clause for half
wages to be advanced if asked for.”
16. Clause XXXI., now XXXV. —“ Twenty shillings substituted for ten.”
17. Clause XXXVIII., now XLIII.—•“ Or on the neglect of the labourer to return
home on the completion of his engagement.”
18. Clause XXXIX., now XLlV.—After the words hours in sth line; “without
“ extra pay or in case of great emergency without his consent.”
19. Clause XLIL, now XLVll.—After the word district in the 2nd line : “ and the
“ districts adjacent to it as described in any proclamation to be made under Section
“ LVIII.”
20. XLIII.—New clause ; “It shall be lawful to enter into job contracts with Natives
within their home districts, the consideration to be paid being due on the completion of
certain work, such job contract, if the consideration exceeds 10/. (Governor said he
would extend the sum), but not otherwise, shall be registered by the stipendiary
magistrate of the district where such job contract is to be performed, in like manner as
contracts are to be registered under the next succeeding clause.”
21. Clause XLVI. (or clause to this effect) now LL, “ Magistrate may order comple-
tion of contract.”
22. Clause XLVII., now LIIL, “ six (months) altered to one.”
23. Clause XLVIIL, now LIV., “ three (months) altered to one.”
24. Clause XLIX., now LV., “ Governor stated that it was not his wish or intention
that any officer should inspect other than in the daylight and with the knowledge of the
employer, but in the cases of emergency he must have the power.”
“ Ordinance not to come into force till July, 1883.”
25. Clause LL, now LVIII., “ Notice first to all M.L.C.’s Schedule A. to be altered,
and provision made where yams are impossible to obtain.”
26. On the 21st April I went to Levuka on business, and there found the published
Ordinance as passed in Council, but which I had not at first time to examine. A few
days afterwards I received a letter couched in most indignant terms, from the Hon.
N. Chalmers, asking me to get all the non-official members to sign the following, and
publish in “ Fiji Times
Rough draft. Editor “ Fiji Times,” —Sir, —Be good enough to publish the follow-
ing:—
“ The undersigned unofficial Members of the Legislative Council do hereby enter our
unanimous protest against the publication or enforcement of the Native Labour Ordinance,
1883, as at present printed. The alterations or amendments passed in Council at Suva,
many of them of the most vital importance have been purposely left out. The conces-
sions yielded to the firm position taken b} r us at that time have now no existence in the
new Ordinance, the Ration Scale is not as passed, an alternative one, and we have no
hesitation in saying that the action of the Governor in this instance is a deliberate insult
to unofficial members, and through them to the Colonists at large, and we trust the
general public will join with us without delay in petitioning Her Majesty to set this
unjust and fraudulent transaction aside as a disgrace to the Colony, and an insolent
attempt to enforce unjust laws upon the Colonists.”
27. This drew my attention to the Ordinance, which I then opened and found that
some of the promises and amendments made and carried in Council did not appear in the
published Ordinance, I accordingly drew up a letter which I signed, and which the Hon.
Geo. Morgan countersigned with the proviso, (as he said he had mislaid his Council copy
of the Bill and would not like to trust memory) that the shorthand notes bore out the
objections raised, and forwarded to the Hons. J. E. Mason and J. Hill for their signa-
tures, protesting most strongly to your Excellency against the issuing of the Proclama-
tion calling the Ordinance into force until hon. unofficial Members had time to petition
Her Majesty against giving her consent (this I believe was the purport of the letter, but
I regret I have not got a copy of it).
28. The shorthand notes which the Hon. Geo. Morgan and myself wrote for, were, I
understand, refused b y your Excellency on account of their voluminousijess.
29. After an interval of a few days, I received the following from the Hon. J. E.
Mason Taviuni, May 9, 1883. My dear Leefe, —By last mail I received a proof
copy of the Fijian Labour Ordinance, and on comparing it with my draft, I found it by no
means tallied with, not only what was decided on in committee, but those clauses pro-
mised by the Governor, the purport of which was distinctly stated, but the wording of
which was deferred, contrary, if you remember to my opinion.


To-day I have received yours of April 28th, so I destroy the letter I had written to
you to go by this mail on the subject, and now endorse your letter and forward it to
Hill already endorsed by Morgan, and it might have been by Chalmers, and put
myself in jour hands to attend when and where you wish to carry out our duty “ Verbum
(( Stip
And the following letter from the Hons. Mason and Hill, conjointly :
Rambi, 14th May, 1883. Dear Leefe,—We have gone carefully over the Fijian Labour
Ordinance, and compared it with our drafts we had with us in the Council, and find three
points do not agree with what we understood had passed in committee.
The first is Clause IV. with regard to Home Districts.
The second is Clause XXV. with regard to the total disallowance of yaqona, and third
with regard to Schedule C., daily rations we consider the minimum of yams and taro as
too high, while the addition of meat without a reduction of the scale of vegetables is
(t *
We are willing to co-operate with you in bringing the matter before the Governor at
the earliest possible opportunity. . . .
We think it will be well for you to take initiative in this matter with assistance ol
Messrs. Chalmers and Morgan, who are close to you. _ ,
30. Upon the 17th May, and before I had received the last letter, and therefore
before I was in a position to address your Excellency on behalf of all the non-official
members, I left in the Suva for New Zealand, but before doing so, after consultation
with him, left the following with the Hon. Geo. Morgan.
“ I hereby authorise the Hon. Geo. Morgan to act for me in any measures he may
consider necessary to take, relative c to the amendments passed in Council and not printed ’
in the Native Labour Ordinance, 1883, and in similar manner to act for Hon, Jas. E.
Mason whose authority to act in like manner I hereby transfer.”
31. This was the state of matters, with a good deal of vituperation, and unpleasant
newspaper articles on side issues added upon my return to the Colony and interview with
your Excellency, when my attention was drawn to the subject, and it became evident
that I was expected to make a statement upon the different points at issue; fortunately
I had not to trust to memory alone as I found on arrival here that my Council copy was
still in existence, and that, together with the notes given last January to the editor
“ Fiji Times 55 will be quoted by me only, when my memory, a pretty good one coincides
therewith.
First. —“ I find then that in the Bth clause the engagement to have a copy of the
register at the Roko’s office, and other places in the province has not been carried out,
and that the 3rd sub-clause remains unmodified.”
Second. —“ That the permit is confined to certain districts named therein, instead of
as passed, limited only to the Colony at large.”
Third.—“ That clause 14 remains essentially as first printed, your Excellency’s own
words and proposal i.e. that it should only be m cases of epidemic or other extremely
urgent cause, and then to be employed only on duties connected with such necessity,
that the Proclamation should issue, are entirely omitted.”
Fourth. —“ That the legalising yaqona in the 25th clause is entirely omitted.”
Fifth. —“ The new clause in part 4as to Job Contracts is also omitted.”
31. I am aware that your Excellency explained that this latter was due to objections
subsequently raised in Executive Council to your admission of the clause in Council, and
that the 4th has been met by an Amendment Act, but the former only shows that the
ordinance should not have been published until those objections had been, as they after-
wards were, removed, and the latter proves that gross carelessness exists in the department
concerned, and indubitably leads to the conclusion that, where such culpable negligence
is possible, others of a less glaring nature are probable.
32. It is unfortunate that the Proclamation defining the adjacencies to the several
home districts was not published together with the Ordinance.
33. Mr. Chalmers most emphatically denies your Excellency’s statement to me that he
had withdrawn all his objections except to the Scale of Rations.
34. Under these circumstances I can only come to the conclusion that the Ordinance
as published, is not the Ordinance as passed in Council, to this extent, that in one admitted
instance, the amendment was entirely ignored until attention was drawn to the fact by
unofficial Members, and in others that alterations not actually passed as amendments,
were left by the Council in your Excellency’s hands, and from your Excellency’s some-
what verbose and ambiguous language, you were perhaps the innocent cause of leading
hon. Members to suppose they had gained their point, thereby disarming opposition and
I 4


preventing the different proposals going to a division, but at the same time, leaving a
loophole to escape the necessity of giving them effect, as the shorthand notes, on for
instance, the New Job Contract Clause, show you availed yourself of.
35. It here becomes me te state whether or to what extent the Hon. Geo. Morgan
was justified in acting for me in the manner he has done, and on the authority he held.
36. He was perfect right in repudiating on my behalf any connexion with the articles
of “ Fiji Times ” in May, as I was then out of the Colony, but, although he w'as
authorised to act for me, he was only authorised to act in a certain direction i.e. “ relative
“ to the amendments passed in Council and not printed ” if he went, as I understand he
did, beyond this, he committed an error of judgment as he knew full well that when I
left the Colony I was exceedingly indignant with the apparent want of faith towards
unofficial Members.
37. Mr. Morgan’s own explanation to me it is only just to that gentleman to give, and
it is that upon attending the next meeting of Council an amending Ordinance was put
into his hands, and being by nature a man of peace, and seeing that it embraced most of
the principal objections raised by unofficial Members, he thought it best not to continue
the unpleasantness, instead of doing as I think he should have done, considering the
extreme gravity of the accusations made, quoted amending Ordinance as conclusive
proof that the indignation of unofficial Members had not been either in vain, or without
good cause.
38. With reference to the entire business of this Ordinance, I think the irregular and
somewhat slipshod way in which it was conducted from first to last reflects little credit
on those principally concerned.
39. First there were your Excellency’s too distinct threats i.e. that to which I referred
in Council as to your resigning if the Ordinance were not passed, repeated by two unofficial
Members present at the time, and the still more objectionable one in my presence i.e.
that “ you would put your foot down on anything approaching obstruction most firmly ”
a threat absolutely unnecessary and unbecoming, unnecessary because no obstruction
had been attempted, and unbecoming, because the Governor even in this unique little
Colony, has, for at any rate a portion of the population, free born Englishmen as fellow
subjects, with whom threats have in all times proved an inefficacious argument.
40. Then again during a short adjournment several very important clauses in manu-
script were brought to our hotel by the clerk to the Council which hon. members had to
read, if they read them at all, over each others shoulders.
41. Again in committee when the votes w r ere even, and, on some occasions in favour
of the opposition, your Excellency carried clause by clause by your casting votes as
President, and by your dual vote as Governor, when instead, you should have withdrawn
the Bill and not have acted in a high handed and entirely unconstitutional manner
opposed alike to the practice of the Houses of Lords and Commons in England and to
every assembly of every Colony of the empire.
42. In my opening address when moving that “ The Bill be read a second time that
“ day six months ” I said, that I would never lend myself to anything tending, as this
Bill did, to tyranny and oppression. lam more convinced than ever that I was right in thus
denouncing this measure, and I again consider it my duty to raise my voice against what
if not mitigated in deference to public opposition, will bring misery to thousands enslaved
thereby, and ruin to many after the perpetrators of this, to the British name most
disgraceful measure, have in all probability left the scene of their injustice.
I have, &c.
(Signed) R. Beckwith Leefe,
Unofficial Senior, M.L.C.
43. I have to request you will put this with the records of the Legislative Council,
and as it is a matter which has excited considerable interest, I beg leaves to inform your
Excellency that I have sent a copy of this explanation to the press.
R. Beckwith Leefe,
Senior Unofficial Member of the Legislative Council.
To the Editor of the “Fiji Times. 5 ’
Dear Sir, —1 have sent original of the above to the President of the Legislative
Council. Please allow time for same to reach Suva before publishing this.
R. B. Leefe.


Enclosure 2 in No. 17.*
Fiji Royal Gazette.
No. 10, Vol. IX. Saturday, July 14, 1883.
Council Paper, No. 3.
Message to the Legislative Council.
Enclosure 3 in No. 18.
A Bill to amend the “ Native Labour Ordinance , No X . o/’1877.”
(Mr. 11. B. Leefe, June 20, 1878.)
Whereas it is expedient to amend the “Native Labour Ordinance of 1877.” Beit
therefore enacted by his Excellency, the Governor, with the advice and consent of the
Legislative Council as follows :
I. After the passing of this Ordinance it shall be lawful for proprietors of estates to
make agreements with the whole of the adult male inhabitants of any town situated on
or in the immediate vicinity of such estates for periods not exceeding five years. Such
agreements to be made in accordance with the Schedule attached to this Ordinance and
in presence of the Stipendiary Magistrate of the district within which such town may be
situated, and if such Magistrate be satisfied of the ability of the intending employer to
perform the conditions of the contract, and that such contract is fully understood and
voluntarily entered into by the intending labourers he shall endorse on such contract the
words following; that is to say, “ I hereby certify that the parties to the within contract
“ fully understand the nature and terms of said contract, and entered into the same
voluntarily and of their own free will”; and no such contract shall be valid or have any
force or effect without such endorsement, dr unless every adult male of such town is a
party thereto.
11. Every contract shall be in duplicate, one to be retained by the employer, the other
to be forwarded by the Stipenditry Magistrate endorsing the contract to the Agent-General
of immigration within one week of the date thereof.
111. The proprietor of any estate entering into such contract with the adult male
inhabitants of any town, shall pay half-yearly in advance into the hands of the Stipendiary
Magistrate of the district the commutation tax of such male inhabitants, such tax to be
assessed by the with reference generally to the assessment of the
district in which such town may be situated as decided by the last preceding annual
resolution of the Legislative Council.
IV. It shall not be lawful for any proprietor, entering into any such agreement as
aforesaid, to call upon for service at any one time a greater number than one-third of
such male adult inhabitants, or for a longer period than four months, and shall do so by
name only in the order in which such names appear on the Schedule of Agreement, and
any such male adults failing to so come when called upon, may, on conviction thereof, be
punished under the XXL clause of the said “ Native Labour Ordinance of 1877.”
V. Such male adults when so called upon for service as in the last preceding section,
shall be paid in coin of the realm at the rate of five shillings per calendar month, without
any deductions whatever, and shall be entitled to the same rations, house accommodation,
clothing, and medical attendance, as labourers now are under the last recited Ordinance.
VI. No adult male entering into such contract as aforementioned shall be liable to any
calls to work in any native district plantation, or to the “ lada ” of any native chief, but
shall be generally in th£ same condition as labourers now are under the “ Native Labour
Ordinance, 1877.”
VII. That the following shall be inserted at the end of Clause III.: Provided always
that should the Stipendiary Magistrate of the district be absent from the place where he
* See Enclosure 2 in No, 11,
i 17270.


usually resides, then it shall be lawful to bring the labourers before the next nearest
Stipendiary Magistrate, who, if he thinks fit, shall endorse the contract as above.
VIII. Clause XXL shall be, and is hereby repealed, and the following substituted in
lieu thereof:—
“If any labourer, under contract as aforesaid, shall unlawfully absent himself from
work during the term of his contract, or shall refuse to fulfil the same, unless for some
reasonable cause, or shall, by negligence or other improper conduct, lose, throw away, or
damage the property of his employer, or shall endanger the same by a careless or
improper use of fire, or shall wilfully or carelessly maim, wound, or cruelly ill-use any
live stock belonging to his employer, every such offender, on conviction thereof, shall
suffer such punishment by fine or imprisonment with hard labour for the whole or any
part of such imprisonment, or both, as the convicting magistrate shall see fit, and it shall
be lawful for such magistrate in cases of wilful or careless damage to property or live
stock to assess the amount of such damage, and if he sees fit and it is demanded to order
compensation to be paid by the labourer to the employer, and if necessary to extend the
labourer’s time of service at the rate of two shillings and fourpence per week until such
compensation is made good.”
IX. Anything in this first recited Ordinance, or in this Ordinance to the contrary, it
shall be lawful for employers to make contracts with Fijians, other than plantation
labourers, for the performance of work to be paid for, either at the expiration of a given
time or on the completion of certain work, and in such form other than that laid down in
Schedule , as the circumstances of the case may require, such engagements to be
inquired into, and if bond fide endorsed by the Stipendiary Magistrate as other engage-
ments under the above recited Ordinance.
X. That the scale of rations be repealed, and the following substituted in lieu
thereof: —
Daily Rations
Vegetables, yams, sweet potatoes, taro, breadfruit, 7 lbs
or Beans, \\ lbs.
or Maize meal, 2 lbs.
Salt, \ oz.
Tobacco, 2 ozs. per week —subject to good behaviour
Clothing , per annum.
Four sulus.
Two mats.
Mosquito curtains.
XI. This Ordinance may be cited as the “ Native Labour Ordinance Amendment
Ordinance of 1878.°
Schedule.
Memorandum of Agreement.
Made this day of between
of of the first part, and being the whole of the
adult males of the town of * of the second part.
The conditions are. that the said parties of this second part engage to serve the said
party of the first part as labourers, and otherwise to make themselves generally useful
for the term of years, and also to obey all lawful and reasonable commands
of the said or of his overseers or authorized agents during that
period, in consideration of which services the said party of the first part doth hereby
agree to pay the said parties of the second part wages, in the coin of the realm, at the
rate of five shillings per calendar month, whenever called upon for service at the
expiration of such service in accordance with the fourth clause of the “ Native Labour
Ordinance Amendment Ordinance of 1878,” and to provide them with rations, clothing,
and accommodation, in accordance with clauses V. and X. of the same Ordinance.


No. 18.
Administrator J. B. THURSTON, C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the
EARL OF DERBY. (Received May 9, 1884.)
My Lord, Government House, Suva, Fiji, March 18, 1884.
I had the honour upon the 20th February, to acknowledge the receipt of your
Lordship’s Despatch of the 17th December last,* transmitting for my information
extracts from a letter addressed to you by Mr. George Anderson, M.P., together with a
copy of a letter which your Lordship caused to be addressed to that gentleman in reply.
2. In case it should be deemed convenient to furnish Mr. Anderson with further
information to that contained in Mr. Bramston’s letter to him of the 6th December,f I
beg leave to make the following observations upon the subjects giving rise to the
correspondence.
3. With regard to an allegation that has reached Mr. Anderson in respect of certain
proceedings in council “ that on a recent occasion one of the official members voted
“ against the Governor, who thereupon claimed two votes, a deliberative and casting
“ vote, and only by that means the ordinance was carried.” I may at once say that
the facts were not as have been stated. The inconsistency observed by your Lordship’s
correspondent are supported by the facts of the case which were that while the Native
Labour Ordinance was under consideration in committee, (the whole Board of six
official and six non-official members being present), one of the official members was
compelled to withdraw upon urgent business connected with his department.
4. During his absence, the Board was unexpectedly pressed to a division, and the
Governor exercised the power of giving a deliberative and casting vote as provided for in
the Royal Instructions.
5. I observe that Mr. Bramston (paragraph 3 of his letter) writes that the complaints
in respect of the misery caused by the withdrawal of so large a proportion of able bodied
men from their native district, have been met “by prohibiting engagements for more
“ than a month in which are called Home Districts, and for not more than twelve months
“ elsewhere.”
6. I beg leave to point out for the information of your Lordship’s department that the
provisions of the Native Labour Ordinance, 1883, are of a much more liberal character
than is implied by the above quotation as may be observed by referring to section VIII.
of the Ordinance. Natives may, and do, engage within their Home Districts for periods
of twelve months , but it is prohibited to enter into any engagement, if over a month,
excepting in the manner prescribed in the section quoted. Any engagement for one
month or under is not subject to the provisions of any law so long as the labourer is
working within his Home District.
7. What is really wanted by a large number of persons in this Colony I have described
in my letter to your Lordship of the 10th March,J paragraphs 20 and 21. But if such
wholesale and unregulated intermigration were allowed, it would soon result in a state
ot things which I incline to think Mr. Anderson would deplore in common with the
Colonial Government, to whom the welfare of the natives of Fiji is intrusted.
8. The explanation given to Mr. Anderson with reference to the increased cost of
Polynesian labour is correct in every particular.
9. Until comparatively lately, the Government assumed the responsibility of introducing
Polynesian immigrants, the cost being recoverable from the planter on allotment. But
experience having shown that the increasing competition for these labourers, their
diminishing numbers, and the great distances of the islands wdiere they are now princi-
pally sought, involved an expense which the planter could not afford, and which the
Government was unable to charge upon the Revenue of the Colony, the old system of
immigration was, at the beginning of 1883, partly abandoned.
10. Planters have now to charter their own ships and incur all liabilities. The
Government employs the agent accompany each ship, and the whole of the business of
the voyage is conducted under the watchful eye of the Agent-General of Immigration,
and through his department.
* No. 16.
f No. 15.
K 2
J Not printed.


At present therefore' the charterers have to usstain any losses arising with respect to
their vessels, and as I have reported to your Lordship in my Despatch of 10th
March,* the cost of immigrants now being introduced is often ruinously high.
For this, however, the Government is in no way responsible, and the losses, as very
properly observed by Mr. Bramston, could not in justice fall upon the public revenue.
1 have, &c.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, (Signed) J. B. THURSTON.
&c. &c. &c.
No. 19-
Administrator J. B. THURSTON, C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the EARL OF
DERBY. (Received May 9, 1884.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, March 18, 1884.
Since addressing your Lordship, with reference to Mr. W. Fillingham Parr’s
letter of the 20th February * and its accompanying pamphlet, it has occurred to me
that I should, perhaps, have made a more complete answer to the last paragraph on
page 16 of the paragraph in question; for, owing to the ardour of Mr. Parr’s opposition
to the Government, it is not improbable that the subject of “ collecting food in payment
“ of Native taxes ” may be brought to your Lordship’s notice by some Member of
Parliament with whom Mr. Parr corresponds, and especially so if it is supposed that
the Natives in many parts of Fiji are “existing on bananas and such like,” as Mr. Parr
avers.
2. I have, therefore, the honour to offer the following observations upon this matter.
3. Yams have been received from the Natives by way of Native tax to a very small
degree, and under the following conditions: —
(1.) That the Natives of the district or place paying any part of its tax in yams
decided in their local council, and of their own motion, so to do.
(2.) That the yams to be so paid as taxes should be produced by a corresponding
extension of area of cultivation, and should not be in any case taken from
ordinary crops.
(3.) That good reasons were given why this article of produce was more convenient
to the Native than any other.
4. 1 may, therefore, say that in no case lias the Government collected or accepted the
food of the people as alleged.
5. In consequence of the Government being a large consumer of yams in connexion
with the establishment of gaols, police, immigration depots, Armed Native Constabulary,
&c., it is necessary to procure that class of food from somewhere.
6. There are two ways of doing this :
(1.) Bu}dng yams from a European contractor, who has previously bought from the
native; or
(2.) Procuring them directly from the Native, partly in cash, and partly by way of
taxes under the conditions above mentioned.
7. In either case the Native will only dispose of what he can part with conveniently
to himself, and in the one case he has assured the convenience by growing yearns for the
specific purpose of paying his tax to Government.
8. It may be well to mention here that the Native has been growing and selling yams
for at least the last half century. Planters like Mr. Parr, and contractors for planters
all through the group are large buyers, and generally speaking the Native obtains far less
from them than the actual value of the yams sold. From the Government he obtains
and learns the full value, and in this lies the real gravamen of the Governments offence
in the eyes of many persons.
9. There can be no objection to the payment, by way of taxes, of yams any more than
of coffee, sugar, or cotton, subject, of course, to the condition that they are grown for
the purpose of taxation, and, as a production, are convenient to the taxpayers.
10. The total quantity of yams received by way of taxes since the year 1876 amounts
to 665 tons 4 cwt. 2 qrs. 17 lbs. only, which is equivalent to the production of acres.
* Not printed.


The annual quantities received have beenas under
1878 - - 58 13 3
iQ7Q _ 24 8 2 3
1880 - - 21 7 1 I
1881 - - - 110 *0 8
1882 - - 240 6 3 2
' 1883 - - - 209 17 1 18
11 The increase during the years 1881, 1882, 1883, was consequent upon the fact
that the Government consented to take part of the tax in yams, if planted for the
purpose although it had previously discouraged this form of produce as a tax, and
Staged the frowth of others, fit for export, such as cotton, sugar, &c. The largest
quantity* of yamf was received in 1882, and amounted to 240 tons, the average produce
of 24 acres, and, as there were nine contributing districts, the average area cultivated in
each of them for this purpose was under three acres.
12 By way of refuting, in some small degree, Mr. Parr s unfounded statement, that
Natives are in want of food, and are living on bananas, &c., 1 have the honour to enclose
you the copy and translation of a letter I have recently received from the Roko Tui Ra.
J l3 In explanation, I may state that a large town named Navumtogolo, m the province
of Ra was recently burnt down by some Native incendiaries, and under circumstances
that induced me to authorise assistance being given to the people in rebuilding the
14 The chief cost of house building is the food supplied to the builders who assemble
from considerable distances to undertake such a work, and having heard from the Roko
of Ba in person (Ba and Ra are adjoining provinces) that there was a veiy large supply
of yams in bis province which they were about to sell, 1 had proposed to purchase
10 tons of yams, and present them to the Ra people to aid them m the rebuilding of the
town named percejve that upon this becoming known to the Roko or Chief
of Ra, he writes to say that they have plenty of food at Ra, and are not in want of the
p'oposecl |j cation of tilis incident lies in the fact that Ba and Ra are two of the
poorest and most sterile provinces in Fiji. Yet one of them, Ba is largely selling its
surplus yams to planters, and the other is so well supplied that it does not want them
when offered by the Government. It also serves to show the actual relations existing
between the Government and people, who, according to Mr. Parr, are commonly heai
sighing and saying, “ 1 wish I was dead.” . , „
17 As another illustration of the hostility and mendacity with which the Government
has to contend, I have the honour to quote the following remark, made a few aays ago
by Mr. J. H. Garrick (ex-Attorney General), chairman of the Levuka Planters
Association, and printed by local newspapers: ,
« The chairman mentioned the case of Motunki, where the copra had for years been
sufficient to pay taxes, and the Natives had grown bananas, and brought them to Levuka,
to sell for their few necessaries. Last year the copra insufficient, and the Govern-
ment took the bananas as well, leaving the people nothing.”
18. This story is sure to be reproduced in the papers, and it may be well, therefore,
to state the facts of this case, as it also seems well to expose what I do not hesitate to
call wilful misrepresentation. „ _ . , ,
19 The island of Moturiki lies about 5 miles south of Levuka, and is thickly covered
with cocoanut trees, and, in consequence, its taxes are invariably paid m copra (the dried
kernel of the cocoanut). In 1880, its assessed taxes were equal to 205/., but in
consequence of the Moturiki people having made away with a part of the tax after it had
been made, the local Native Council ordered them to make it up, which they did m 1882,
under the following circumstances ,
20 The Chief of the island, and one or two elders, were brought to my office (Colonial
Secretarv’sl bv Mr. Wilkinson, the Native Commissioner, who informed me that they
wished to pay the arrears of tax due for the year 1880, but that as they had paid the
tax for 1882 (the then current year) in copra, and had promised their remaining copra to
certain traders in the town in liquidation of petty debts, they desired I would accept the
sum of 38/. os. 9 d. (the amount of arrears due) in money. .
21 This lat once refused to do, as it touched the most vital principle ot the system.
A somewhat long and friendly discussion followed, in which I told them that sooner than
K 3


permit any innovation in the manner of paying taxes, I would recommend the Governor
to remit the balance which their own district council ordered to be paid.
22. In reply, the headman stated that they wished to make good the deficit for 1880,
but that as they had promised their copra it was difficult for them to pay, excepting in
money, and in order to acquire the money they proposed to sell a lot of bananas upon
the arrival of the next large Australian steamer (which usually carries away 8,000 or
10,000 bunches of this fruit) and pay the proceeds into Government.
23. I at once said, but why not pay the bananas to the receiver of taxes, in the same
way as if it were copra ?
24. The Natives were delighted at this proposal, and went away with the understand-
ing that they would deliver the fruit to the receiver of taxes in Levuka (Mr. Vaughan,
Government storekeeper), the day preceding the steamers departure.
25. They did so, one party delivering their fruit and going back for more. In the
meantime the receiver had sold the fruit to buj'ers in the trade for Is . 3d. per bunch.
The proceeds of the sale of the bananas first brought sufficed to pay the deficit owing by
the Moturiki people.
26. Upon the arrival of the second lot of fruit, the bearers were astounded to find it
was not required, and that no more could be received from them.
27- They then sold their fruit in their own way to the person usually dealing with
them, and towards the close of the day went to Mr. Vaughan for an explanation.
28. To that officers preliminary statement, “ I sold each bunch of bananas for one
shilling and threepence,” they observed, “ but the man to whom you sold never gives
“ us more than sixpence per bunch. We have been cheated all tins time.”
29. It is perhaps unnecessary to continue the subject further. The Government upon,
this one occasion, received from the Moturiki people 38/. worth of bananas (at the
instance of the people themselves), and procured the current market value for the article
sold.
30. The European fruit buyers of Levuka, to whom the Natives had been in the habit
of selling fruit in order to obtain “ their few necessaries,” as Mr. Garrick puts it, had
combined to systematically rob the Natives to an extent of more than 50 per cent, of the
value of the thing bought, precisely in the same manner that they do when there is
anything to be sold to a Native.
31. The intervention of the Government in the foregoing case was purely accidental,
but whether accidental or intentional as in recent cases noted in the annexure to this
letter, when the Government protects the Native by bringing an action against the
dishonest trader, a large number of settlers will lose no opportunity of maligning the
Government, and misrepresenting its action by way of venting their anger at not being
allowed to make use of the Native at their individual will and pleasure.
32. I have to apologise to your Lordships for the length of this communication, but
trust it may be found convenient, should any reference be made to your Lordship with
regard to the statements dealt with.
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby. (Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON.
Enclosure 1 in No. 19-
Translation.
To His Honour the Administrator, Naisereeagi, February 25, 1884.
I write Sir to you concerning your instructions with regard to the rebuilding of
Navunitogolo, that as we are very busy building houses for the approaching annual
meeting of Chiefs, and that as the people are comfortable, having been provided with
temporary buildings erected by the Ranravi people, we beg to suggest that we do not
build their houses (permanent ones) until we have finished with those for the coming
meeting.
Will your Excellency kindly ask Roko Tui Ba not to provide any food, as we have
plenty and can do so.
I send, &c.
(Signed) Tevita Roko Tui Ra.


Enclosure 2 in No. 19-
At the last sittings of the Supreme Court the following cases were down for trial.
Ratu Epeli v. Bruce. —Here the Government acting for the protection of the plaintiff
got a verdict for 189/. and costs, and succeeded in exposing a very questionable transaction
on the defendant’s part.
Bull Denha v. Rennie. —This was an action in which the Government acting for the
plaintiff claimed the delivery up of an agreement in obtaining which it was alleged the
defendant had taken an undue advantage of the plaintiff. The defendant gave up the
agreement without going to trial.
Ratu Veceli v. Rennie. —In this case the Government acting for the plaintiff claimed
the return of 59/. as having been improperly obtained by the defendant from the plaintiff
on a pretended contract. The defendant without going to trial paid the amount
claimed.
Contract (set aside by Government) by which in consideration of 50/. the Denba
tribe agree to sell all the bush and timber growing on their land, apparently for ever to
one John Rennie.
Denba, August 19, 1882.
We the undersigned have this day sold to John Rennie of Na Sali, Rewa,
Contractor, the sole right to cut and remove by his servants or others whom he may
appoint or employ, all the growing timber and bush whatever belonging to us and our
Matagalis, comprising all the bush and timber growing on any and all of the lands of
the people under the Buli of Denba, situated on the Denba river and its tributaries so
far as not already sold to white men. Also on all our lands situated beginning at the
mouth of Wainivideo Creek along the coast and up the Tongom Creek, and all other
creeks on said land. And the said John Rennie, or those whom he may appoint or
employ shall have the right, at any and all times, to go on said lands to cut and remove
said timber and bush, but he or they shall have no further right to the land, and we
hereby reserve our right to all cocoanut and fir trees, also the right for ourselves or
those whom we may appoint or employ to go on to said lands at any and all times, to
cultivate and gather the fruit of said trees, or for any other legal purpose. And in
consideration for said right to cut and remove said timber and bush as above, we have
this day received from John Rennie value in cash to the amount of 50/. sterling, receipt
of which as payment in full of all claims for said right we hereby acknowledge
his
Ratu Viliami x Na Buli.
mark
Ratu Meli X Turaga ni Roro.
mark
Stamp h* s
is. Vonivate X Turaga in Roro na Savu.
mark
his
Stamp AISEA X
Is. mark
his
Tumatio X
mark
(Signed) Eliesa Rokubu
his
Epeli X
mark
Sakiasi X
mark
We hereby testify that Ratu Yiliami and
and that they well understood the same.
others subscribed the same in our presence,
(Signed) Jacob Lazarus.
„ Epeli Lawacala.
Note. —As some indication of the value of the timber on the Denba Land, Rennie
agreed to supply firewood to Sharpe, Fletcher, & Co.’s sugar mill for a term of years,
for which he alleged they were to pay him 2,000/.
(Signed) J. B. T.


Cases of Boats negotiated for or purchased contrary to the Regulation.
Rennie and Bega men; Action pending. -In this case the trader has 59/. of Native
money in hand, for which the Natives have had no return. The money was the amount
of wages earned by them when working for Mr. Rennie. He persuaded them to agree
to buy a boat for 140/. from a half-caste, Pickering, a man greatly in Rennie’s debt.
He, at the same time, got the men to hand over to him the money they had iust
received as wages. J
Plaistead and Bull Sawaieke Sanction was asked for the sale of a cutter called the
Osea, to Buli Sawaieke, for 400/. She was surveyed by the harbour-rnaster who
reported her to be worth 350/., with some alterations. Mr.'' Plaistead was informed by
Mr. Wilkinson that the sale would not be allowed; nevertheless, during his absence
from town, the sale took place for 450/,, of which 364/. was paid in cash. Messrs. Brod-
ziack advanced the rest of the money, and were paid in yams, at 3/. a ton, at* a time
when they would have fetched 5/. ; altogether, the boat cost some 150/. more than it
was worth.
Buli , Dreketi , and Harris , and Akers.- Messrs. Harris and Akers importuned the
Buli to buy a whale boat, to be paid for in food. They attempted to get 100/. for it
the actual value being about 35/. to 40/. Fortunately, by orders received from the
Native offices, the Buli stopped further payment after having sent in sufficient food to
pay for it at its right value.
Simpson and Kadavu This boat was purchased without sanction, and the money,
150/., paid over direct. The harbour-master reports the value to be 120/. on the'
completion of certain things not supplied. These things have not been supplied, and
there is no remedy against Simpson.
Olive and Ra Natives . —Several boats were given as yaqona money ; one, built by
Mr. Smith, of Ninkanbi, was taken at 400/. The outside value of the vessel is 250/.
Bailey and Nadi Natives. —The “ Tom Cat ” was taken as yaquona as equivalent to
400/. The vessel is sound and in good condition; but, considering her age, could not be
considered w r orth more than 300/.
Hennings and Nazan Natives. —Here Hennings sold a boat contrary to regulation, to
be paid for in copra at 51. a ton, at a time when it was worth 9/.
Hennings also tried to sell a boat to Tui Naradvo, which turned out to be useless.
After some delay, he gave money for the produce received.
Bruce and Ratu Epeli. —ln this case, Bruce acted as agent for Ratu Epeli, and
obtained from him 1,100/. for a vessel which only cost 760/. Action is pending.


PART I S.
CONDITION OF THE NATIVE POPULATION.
No. 1.
Acting Governor G. WILLIAM DES VGEUX, C.M.G., to the Right Hon.
Sir M. E. HICKS-BEACH, M.P. (Received August 5, 1879-)
(Extract.)
Nasova, Fiji, May 26, 1879*
In your despatch of the 12th March 1879?* (received on the 21st instant) after
referring to the speech made by me on the 7th of November last, to the Native chiefs
assembled at Bua, and to a passage in that speech in which you suppose allusion to be
made “ to the suspension or dismissal of certain Rokos,” you direct me to inform you
“ who these officers are, under what circumstances they were either dismissed or
“ suspended, and whether such suspension or dismissal was carried out in conformity
“ with the 83rd and following sections of the Colonial Regulations ; or, if not, on what
“ grounds these regulations have been deemed inapplicable.”
In compliance with this direction, I have the honour to state as follows :
The Rokos referred to were Roko Tui Dreketi, the Roko of the Province of Rewa; and
Ratu Timoci Roko of the Province of Lomai Yiti.
Roko Tui Dreketi was not either suspended or dismissed. He was merely ordered
to return to his Province, and forbidden to attend the meeting at Bua, this order being
intended to mark my disapprobation of the manner in which he had disgraced his order
by appearing drunk on several consecutive days in the streets of Levuka and in front of
the Government buildings at Nasova.
This Chief had, I regret to say, for some time previously given way to habits of
intemperance, so that the deliberations of the meeting suffered no loss from his absence.
I am informed by Mr. Wilkinson, Commissioner for Native Affairs, and have otherwise
good reason to believe, that my action in this case was generally approved by the Chiefs.
Ratu Timoci, who is a younger son of the Yunivalu (Cakobau), had, lam informed,
on a former occasion been dismissed from the Rokoship by Sir Arthur Gordon ; and
when subsequently restored to it, was informed that he was to hold the office only on
probation.
In the month of November last several serious charges having been brought against
him, I interdicted him, pending their investigation, from discharging the duties or using
the powers.attached to his office.
The principal of the offences alleged against him was that of extorting tax-produce
from his people, under pretence of its being required for Government; and of appropria-
ting the same to his own use; and this and the other charges were subsequently
investigated by Mr. Wilkinson, the head of the Native Department, in conjunction with
Mr. Thurston, the Colonial Secretary.
Their report upon the case was to the effect that he had been proved guilty of
extortion of the kind described in several instances, and also of several other offences,
which, though of a less grave character, were nevertheless serious.
* Not piriftfed.
i 17270.


Both to these officers, and afterwards to myself, he admitted the truth of the
charges ; and I therefore decided to dispense with his further services, informing him at
the same time that he might consider himself fortunate in escaping a criminal indictment.
It appeared to me that until the moral standard of the Native has been raised by a longer
contact with civilization it would probably be unjust, as it would unquestionably be
impolitic, to require a prosecution in such a case.
Besides dispensing with Ratu Timoci’s services, I have for two years deprived
him of the powers and dignity of a chief, and directed him to live under his father’s eye
at a village near Bau on the mainland of Yiti Levu.
My action in both these cases had the full concurrence of Messrs. Wilkinson and
Thurston (whom Sir Arthur Gordon usually consulted in native affairs of this nature),
and I may also mention with regard to Ratu Timoci, that his father (Cakobau) had
previously conversed with me on his case, and had, in a spirit worthy of his position,
suggested to me the expediency of severity, as the only chance of saving his son from a
career of vice and crime.
No. 2.
The Right Hon. Sir M. E. HICKS BEACH, M.P., to Governor the Hon.
Sm A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G.
(Extract.)
Downing Street, August 13, 1879.
1 have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Des Voeux’s Despatch of the
26th of May,* reporting the circumstances in which he had felt it to be his duty
to forbid the attendance of Roko Tui Dreketi at the meeting of Chiefs at Bua, and to
dispense with the services of Ratu Timoci, Roko of the Province of Lomai Viti.
I approve of the action taken by Mr. Des Voeux in both cases.
No. 3.
Governor G. WILLIAM DES VCEUX, C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the EARL
OF KIMBERLEY. (Received June 30, 1882.)
My Lord, Government House, Fiji, April 26, 1882.
I have the honour to report that I have felt it my duty to remove from office
Ratu Rabici, the Roko Tui of Rewa, better known as Tui Dreketi, for long continued
neglect of duty, which the present disgraceful state of his province has rendered it
impossible to overlook any longer.
2. This Chief has for some years been addicted to habits of intoxication, and has
frequently been warned and reprimanded on that account both by Sir A. Gordon and
myself. His example has been followed by at least one of his chief subordinates, Ratu
Namudroka, Buli of Rewa, and by many of the people living around him; and in
consequence the “ town ” of Rewa, where he resides, has become a bye-word for scenes of
debauchery and prostitution ; a fact the more unfortunate as its situation at the mouth
of the river, the banks of which have become the chief seat of the sugar industry,
causes it to be more frequently visited by whites than, perhaps, any other native town in
the Colony.
3. Entirely through his neglect, after repeated warnings, the sugar cultivation of a
large portion of his people has become almost valueless, and the deficit which has already
shown itself in the revenue of the province will, this year, probably be larger than ever.
4. In consequence of the new Intoxicating Liquor Ordinance passed in April last
year, alcoholic drink became very difficult to obtain, and a very marked improvement
was reported both in this Chief and his “ town.” But since the enactment under your
Lordship’s instructions of the Amending Ordinance abolishing the minimum penalties,
a serious relapse has occurred, and things are now, if possible, worse than before.
5. Under these circumstances, after consulting with the Commissioner for Native
Affairs, I came to the conclusion that no improvement could be looked for while Tui
* No. 1, Part 11.


Dreketi retained his post, and I have therefore removed him, and required him to reside
at “ Ban,” where good care will be taken of him by the Yunivalu (Cakobau).
6. The difficulty of replacing one, who, by birth as well as office, is of the highest
rank, has been very great; but after much consideration, I have appointed to act, on
probation, Ratu Marika, the principal Native magistrate of the Colony. Though not
a Chief of the Province, he is “ Vasu ” to it, or closely connected maternally with its
ruling family. This circumstance, together with the prominent position which he has
held for a long time will, I trust, render his task a somewhat less difficult one than it
would be to an unknown stranger.
7. In order to strengthen his influence with the local Chiefs, I determined to pardon
Ratu Namudroka, the Buli of Rewa (whose faults of commission and omission have
been scarcely less serious than those of his Chief), and have, after warning, consented
to retain him in office on his promising, not only amendment, but support to Ratu
Marika.
8. As the separation of so high a Chief from his people would, if he were left without
support, be a heavy tax on those among whom he lives, I propose that fifty pounds of
the salary of Tui of Rewa should still be paid to Tui Dreketi, leaving one
hundred and fifty pounds for Ratu Marika.
9. I have further to report to your Lordship that I have found it necessary to apply
a similar measure of punishment in the case of another high Chief, Ratu Epeli (the
eldest son of Thakombau), who until lately held the offices of Roko Tui of the three
Provinces —Tai Levu, Naitasiri, and Lomai Viti, and is now, perhaps, the most influential
Chief in the Colon}^.
10. Three charges were brought against him by the Governor’s Native Commissioner
to the following effect:
(1.) 'That he has been living in open adultery, and by causing the performance of
certain Native ceremonies in connexion with the child of his adulterous
connexion, he has made his contravention of law to become a grave public
scandal.
(2.) That he has, in connexion with the purchase of a very expensive vessel, ignored
a regulation which provides that such transactions should be supervised by the
Native Office, and having been (as almost invariably happens in such cases)
much overcharged, has thereby caused a serious and unnecessary burthen to
bis people.
(3.) That, by example and direct encouragement, he caused one of his immediate
subordinates (Bulis) to commit a similar offence.
11. With regard to the first charge, while expressing no opinion as to the expediency
of the penal law against adultery and fornication, during the first years of British rule,
I am becoming very doubtful whether it is advisable to maintain them any longer, if for
no other reason, because 1 believe that the majority of offenders escape punishment. But,
however this may be, the law is still in existence, and many are punished every month
for breaches of it. If, therefore, a high Chief were allowed in so open a manner to
disregard it, it is scarcely necessary to say that respect for the Government would be
lowered throughout the group.
12. Owing to the extreme difficulty of punishing these Native potentates, and other
causes, it is no doubt politic that a certain latitude should be allowed them, but this
has, in my opinion, reached its limit, and to permit the idea to become prevalent that
any person or class of persons is above the law, is only to create greater difficulties for
the future.
13. Ratu Epeli, having been summoned to my office, fully admitted the truth of the
above charges, and I thereupon communicated to him the following decision at
which I arrived, I need scarcel} 7 say, not without the most careful and anxious
consideration.
14. My order was that he be relieved of the office of Roko Tui in respect of the two
Provinces of Naitasivi and Lomai Viti; that he continue to hold it in respect of Tai
Levu, only on probation ; and that he absent himself for one year from the Island of
Ovalau, where the chief scandal has arisen.
15. I have lately had abundant reason to believe that, whether from too exclusive
attention to his private interests and concerns, or from the aggregate extent of his three
provinces being too large for a single Roko Tui, a considerable portion of his people had
been very much neglected, if not in some cases something more than neglected ; and
for this reason alone I think it well that the area of Ratu Epeli’s duties should be
restricted.
L 2


16. The Province of Naitasiri was, I understand, never intended to be under this
Chief other than temporarily. Ratu Beni, son of his sister and of the late Roko Tui
(who died during the measles -epidemic), would probably, but for his minority, have
been appointed to it. He is now, however, nearly of age, and though I should have
preferred to delay his advancement somewhat longer, I have felt that it would be unwise
to replace a Chief like Ratu Epeli, by any other than one, who, according to native
opinion, could command influence and respect by right of birth.
17. I have therefore appointed Ratu Beni to act on probation, and having announced
his appointment to the assembled Chiefs of the Province on a recent visit to the Upper
Rewa, I am happy to say that it was apparently very well received.
18. In order that the young Chief may not be without, guidance on the spot, I have
instructed him to take important steps only after consultation with Mr. Carew, the
Commissioner of Colo East, who, having been a friend of his family for many years, will,
I trust, be able to retain considerable influence over him.
19. In the case of the Province of Lomai Yiti (which comprises the Islands of Ovalau,
Gnau, Koro, and others in their immediate neighbourhood), I have had much difficulty
in finding a successor to Ratu Epeli, and have postponed making any arrangement of a
kind likely to be permanent. For the present, however, Ratu Seru, who has hitherto
been chief native officer of the armed constabulary, will act under the immediate
supervision of the Governor.
20. As regards salary, Ratu Epeli will retain 300/. for the important Province of Tai
Levu, the remaining 140/. of his full salary of 440/. being divided between Ratu Beni
and Ratu Seru, 75/. to the former and 65/. to the latter.
21. In all these measures I have had the support and approval of the Governor’s
Native Commissioner, and also of those members of the Executive Council who have
any experience of Native affairs.
22. I am also glad to be able to report that, in so far as I am able to judge, Ratu
Epeli received, and continues to bear, his sentence in an excellent spirit. He surprised
me by a distinct acknowledgment of its justice, and has since, I am told, advised some
of the Bulis concerned to conform strictly to the new order of things.
23. Ratu Epeli’s power had latterly come to be too great to be altogether agreeable
even to his own family. Partly, perhaps, for this reason, as w r ell as from an unaffected
respect for justice, bis father, the Vunivalu is, I understand, by no means displeased at
his punishment.
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Kimberley, (Signed) G. W. DES YGEUX
&c. &c. &c.
No. 4.
The Right Hon. the EARL OF KIMBERLEY, to Governor G. WILLIAM
DES VCEUX, C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, July 11, 1882.
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Despatch of the 26th of
April last,* reporting that you had removed Ratu Rabici from his office as Roko Tui of
Rewa, and Ratu Epeli from his office as Roko Tui of Maitasivi and Lomai Viti.
I approve the steps you have taken in regard to the removal of these tw T o Chiefs, and
the arrangements you have made as to their successors.
In the circumstances which you report I should not object to the restoration of
the minimum penalties contained in the Intoxicating Liquor Ordinance (No. 2
of 1881), if you are satisfied that they are indispensable to the efficient working of the
law.
I have, &c.
Governor G. W. Des Vceux. (Signed) KIMBERLEY.
* No. 3, Part 11.


Governor G. WILLIAM DES VXEUX. C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the EARL OF
KIMBERLEY. (Received February 12, 1883.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, December 21, 1882.
I have the honour to forward to your Lordship copies of a correspondence
which has recently been carried on between this Government and the Reverend
F. Langham, Chairman of the Local Board of the Australian Wesleyan Mission Society,
on the subject of certain grave charges against the native Government of this Colony
which he made last year in the columns of the Melbourne “ Argus.”
2. I forward also copies of Mr. Langham’s two letters to “ The Argus,” the second of
which, your Lordship will observe, is a reply to a letter which was very unwisely
published in the same newspaper by Mr. Wilkinson, the late Commissioner for Native
Affairs.
3. Though Mr. Wilkinson applied for my permission to publish this letter, it is to be
regretted that he should have forwarded the letter to its destination before he had
received my reply* As soon as I lead a copy of the lettei m question, 1 at once
required its publication to be withheld, but the order was unfortunately too late.
4. But while I regret a publication which was sure to give an importance to
Mr. Langham’s charges that would not otherwise have attached to them, i feel no
doubt that the views- expressed by Mr. Wilkinson are substantially correct.
5. As the circulation of this correspondence among the natives would be by no means
an advantage to the local administration of the Wesleyan “ Mission,” while it would in
no way injure the Government, 1 think it prob able that, owing to the expression of my
intention on the subject, Mr. Langham will change his mind with regard to publication.
6. If Mr. Langham chooses to publish, it is a matter of much importance that the
natives should have a correct version of the correspondence, but 1 have not thought fit
to order publication myself.
7. The society of which Mr. Langham is the local head has conferred very great
benefits upon Fiji, and though he is, in my opinion, a very unwise guardian of their
interests, I should be most reluctant to take a course which would be in every way
injurious to them, unless actually compelled to do so for the defence and security of the
Government.
8. Your Lordship will observe that Mr. Langham does not sign his letters in his official
capacity. I understand that a majority, if not all, of his brother missionaries disagree
with his views on the Government policy and the condition of the natives, and this
information, which has come to me from various quarters, is confirmed by the fact that
the annual conference of the local society has just taken place and has apparently taken
no notice of the subject.
9. I have, however, not drawn attention to this point, from a fear that, if Mr. Langham
were made to appear to stand alone, a not unnatural esprit-de-corps might give him a
support which would not otherwise be accorded to him.
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. WILLIAM DES VCEUX.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Kimberley,
&c. &C. &c.
Enclosures in No. 5.
Fiji and Sir A. Gordon’s Policy.
To the editor of the (Melbourne) “ Argus.”
Sir,
In the article on the above which appeared in your issue of yesterday, you have,
as it appears to me. done some injustice to the gentlemen who have expressed themselves
as opposed to Sir A. Gordon’s native policy in Fiji. I have lived in that colony as a
Wesleyan missionary for over 20 years, and know many of these gentlemen, and I quite
believe that not a few of them are as disinterested and benevolently disposed towards
the natives as the late Governor of Fiji. Your impression that only “ a section of the
white population,” and these the u unscruplous itinerant traders,” denounced the system,
and that they did so only for a time, is not correct I think. And the fact is overlooked
that not merely traders, merchants, planters, believe the policy as in operation at present
to be injurious to the natives’ best interests, but that the natives themselves, whom you
L 3


represent as contented and happy, cry out against the tyranny and oppression to which
they are subjected to under this policy.
It has been pointed out in your columns that it is the small minority of natives, the
paid chiefs and other native officials, who are contented and happy under the present
state of things. Yet not a few of these pronounce against the policy pursued. In a
copy of the Fiji “ Times ” of last April now before me the following statements of native
chiefs and others are published, and I have seen no contradiction of them yet: —“ Fiji is
“ like a prison-house. When shall the people be free ? They are greatly to be pitied,
“ for they are like captives.” Another says—“ When we gave our lands to the Queen
“we thought we should have rest, but we have never seen it yet. We are only
“ miserable.” Another says —“ Fiji is fast going to destruction. No one cares for the
“ people. Our rulers (native) care only for themselves. 55 Another says this—“ This
“ is the regime of terror. The rule is only for the chief; the people of the land are
“ wretched and oppressed. 55 I can give you many more statements of this tenor, with
instances of cruelty, injustice and oppression, that would, I am sure, greatly surprise
you.
The Chamber of Commerce expressed its opinion in a memorial to Her Majesty the
Queen, in which these words occur:—
“ The whole of the non-official members of Council, including as well those who
“ originally supported the bringing in of the Ordinance, others who have replaced such as
“ have retired, are now unanimous in their strong and unqualified condemnation of its
“ working. These gentlemen were described by the hon. the Auditor-General 55 (the
present Colonial Secretary) “in his address on the first reading of the bill as ‘ very
<c ‘ competent from their long residence in the colony, their intimate acquaintance with
r< € the native race, and their knowledge of and large interests in its commercial
“ ‘ prospects, to express opinions upon the soundness or otherwise of the proposed
“ ‘ measure. 5 The gentlemen referred to supported it as an experiment. They denounce
“ it without qualification after experience of three years of its working. . . . Your
“ Majesty's petitioners forwarded to the various white residents throughout the colony
“ a circular letter containing 30 questions on the subject of native taxation. The result
“ of these inquiries is as complete in its unanimity as shocking in its revelations. The
“ condition of the natives is everywhere described as deplorable, their feeling that of a
“ sullen, brooding discontent. Men, women, and children are compelled to labour in
“ order that the quantity of produce assessed as taxes may be collected.
Surely the unanimity of these complaints on the part of all classes of the community,
white and brown, even though it be contended that they are somewhat overstated, is, to
say the least, extraordinary, and must induce hesitation to accept your statement that
“ the taxation scheme appears now to be contentedly acquiesced in by the great mass of
“ the natives. 55
It is also very doubtful whether the problem you refer to, viz., the perservation of
the native race, is “ being worked out with highly successful results. 55
Only just recently the Rev. I. Rooney called attention to “the excessive death-rate in
Fiji, 55 ami the Fiji “ Times 55 also, while discussing the report of the royal commission
appointed to inquire into the reported decrease of the native population, speaks of “ the
appalling death-rate 55 therein disclosed. And, Sir, if the evils connected with # Sir
A. Gordon's native policy, if the licentiousness, the drunkenness, the excessive exactions
of food, and the native and English merchandise, the neglect of food planting, &c.,
associated with the annua l and other councils of chiefs, are not put a stop to, the natives
will unquestionably soon be “ civilised off the face of the earth. 55 It is only, however,
right to say here that the new Governor seems alive to the danger, and has, I believe,
taken steps that must be beneficial to the morals of the natives.
You do only justice to Sir A. Gordon and his opponents when you state chat “his
disinterestedness and benevolent zeal are not denied by them. They cheerfully and
frankly allow that his policy has been well meant, while they maintain that so far it has
proved unsuccessful. So far as lam concerned, I regrpt very much to have to controvert
the views put forth by you, for I —and I speak for my colleagues too —have felt grateful
to Sir A. Gordon for the generous assistance which he has in various ways rendered to
the Wesleyan mission, and for the valuable testimony which he has on many occasions
spontaneously borne to the work of the mission in Fiji.
With the report of murder and cannibalism to which you refer, I received other
information that satisfied me the rumour was not trustworthy, and I at once wrote to
that effect to the leading journal of South Australia, where I was at the time. But I
am not surprised, under the circumstances, at such a rumour receiving credence in Fiji.
The circumstantial account given, the well-known state of irritation in which the natives


were, and the fact that the natives of that particular district (which is situated in the
very heart of the interior) had not so very long ago abandoned their heathen customs,
would make the acts seem anything but so very improbable.
Murder and cannibalism were committed in the same neighbourhood, if not by the
same people, not more than five years ago. Indeed some 350 persons were killed and
eaten in the same neighbourhood only about nine or ten years ago. And in view of past
history, I should be sorry to commit myself to the assertion that we shall not have, even
as the 'result of Sir Arthur Gordon’s policy, if it be persisted in, acts of murder and
cannibalism.
I have, &c.
(Signed) Frederick Langhaim.
4, Lansdowne-terrace, East Melbourne,
September 3.
Sir Arthur Gordon’s native policy in Fiji.
To the Editor of the “ Argus.”
Sir, . . .
The Reverend Mr. Langham, 20 years a Wesleyan missionary in Fiji, publishes
a letter in your widely-circulated paper, which is reprinted in the “ Fiji Times” of the
12th of November, and purports to be that gentleman’s opinion of Sir Arthur Gordon’s
native policy in this colony, and is evidently written in support of his own opinions and
those of others in accord with him on the subject. Such a course is, however, so
manifestly unfair, and the statements and quotations so misleading, that, notwithstanding
being pressed for time, I feel it is a duty to reply, and, if not to confute them, to place
such facts before your readers that will at least show that there is another and more
truthful side to the subject which Mr. Langham and his co-agitators condemn in such
unqualified terms. To deal thoroughly, however, with such a subject, and as it deserves,
would be impossible in a communication of this kind. I will, therefore, as far as I can,
confine my remarks to the statements and inferences in the reverend gentleman’s letter,
and should I too far digress cn any particular point, I must claim your indulgence, and
my apology must be the deep interest I feel in the welfare and permanence of the
native race," whose very existence is at stake.
If what the reverend gentleman states, and says he is further “ prepared to substantiate
by facts,” be true, the system of “ tyranny, cruelty, injustice, and oppression,” is most
truly calculated to astonish not only your readers but Christendom. That any people
in a British colony should be subjected (under a policy with Imperial sanction) to any
system the practical effect of which would justify such sweeping denunciations might
well be matter for surprise, but by those who know it is not so and who know the whole
truth, such statements can only be received with a feeling approaching indignant wonder,
especially when they have had equally good opportunities as the detractors of judging
of the real state of the whole case. Again, it can hardly fail to strike a really dis-
interested reader that the reverend gentleman sought to support his arguments in a
rather roundabout way. Why make use of information gained through the “ Fiji
Times,” or the action taken by the Chamber of Commerce, with so “ many instances of
cruelty, injustice, and oppression,” at first hand so much more calculated to be successful
in attaining the object desired than theories, opinions, or inferences, be they ever so
feasible, clear, conclusive, or unprejudiced.
Personally I have a strong dislike to anything approaching notoriety, and respecting
and honouring as I do both the men and the work that h:is been done by the mission
agents in Fiji, a true estimate of which c;:n probably never be made, —a work that has
at once raised the race from heathen savagedom, and to which is practically and mainly
due the pacific unity of the tribes under one form of civilized government,—l deeply
regret to be thus forced into antagonism (apparent or real) with one of their number so
eminent and highly respected as the Rev. Mr. Langham. It is indeed a most painful
duty, but if 1 have one feeling stronger that another it is to state plainly and con-
scientiously that 1 know of no “cruelty, injustice, or oppression attributable to the
native policy ” under which the people are being governed that would justify its
unqualified denunciation as such by that gentleman or his co-agitators.
On the contrary, facts can be given to prove contentment and some material advance
in prosperity amongst the natives of the colony within even the short time since the
initiation of the denounced “ policy,” and that in the face of an insidious and incessant
hostility, the nature and effect of which upon the native mind can only be understood
here upon the spot and by those who have to meet the ill effects.
L 4


My own personal opportunities, and the opportunities of those connected with me,
of seeing and hearing, not through any particular class or channel, but direct from the
people themselves, in and from every part of the group, their true condition and wants
are, I think, at least equal to those of any single individual or class within the colony.
That there ar e complaints almost as numerous and diversified as their own complex
tribal divisions, and sub-divisions, and ceremonial systems, out of which they chiefly
arise, is a fact that demands the continual attention, inquiry, and settlement of the
Government, and while such receive the consideration they claim and the most equitable
settlement possible in all cases of complaint, there are often, of course, two parties, and
much as may be said of the docility of the Fijian to his superiors, it can hardly be
expected that the worsted party will always recognise the justice of the decision. I would
ask, is it so elsewhere ?
Amongst such a race, and in the position Fiji was at the time of annexation, could
any thinking man expect but that occasional instances would occur that might justify,
perhaps, in the particular case even the terms of cruelty or tyranny, and especially so
in the opinion of a person antagonistic to the measure being carried out.
But such cases are surprisingly rare and when they do occur are chiefly due to the
over zeal and officiousness of subordinates; and I would ask the reverend gentleman,
is the “ native policy 55 or government the only institution in Fiji under which cases
have occurred deserving the appellation of “cruelty or oppression,” and do not police
courts records also illustrate that such excesses occur under the most popular and
perfect institutions amongst our own race, and are such institutions therefore to be
condemned in fofo ?
The quotations said to represent “ the opinions of native chiefs and others” are
perhaps a little coloured in the translation, but as to the one “ This is the regime of
terror,” I confess to some little difficulty in deducing the Fijian words used, neither do I
know a saying by which a Fijian would either understand or express his idea of the
French Revolution. I have, however, no doubt that these sayings have been heard, nor
have I any doubt that they have arisen from as great a variety of causes or occasions as
the quotations themselves*or that the “ many more of the same tenour” can be given.
No one, I am sure, is better able to estimate the value of such sayings than the
Rev. Mr. Langham, with his knowledge of the native proverbial loquacity, wit, and
disposition to say things at once sharp and fitting in with the occasion and feelings of
his auditory, and also out of the “many more” that might be given a goodly number
would probably be found hitting the opponents of the present “ native policy ” as hard
as those given are supposed to express the native feeling against it. 1 would give one
instance to show how some of the saying arise, and how different they of necessity appear
when directly connected with the circumstances that called them forth; e.g. “ Fiji is like
a prison-house,” I heard a man say (not very long ago) “ laws are bad, Christianity is
deception ; before, in the olden time, I could do as I liked the cause of his complaint
arose from the fact that the speaker had been four times in prison since annexation.
That there was amongst the natives, and especially in some districts, a feeling that
might have been very truly characterised as “ sullen brooding discontent,” no one here
will be likelv to deny. It is also true that the feeling so described has been found to
disappear wherever the Lands Commission inquiry have sat, and where the decision of
the Governor in Council has been made known, notwithstanding that large grants of
land have been made to claimants, and that “ sullen, brooding feeling of discontent ”
of the natives has given way to one of relief, and the thoroughness of the inquiry, with
the justice meted out in each particular case, has given him a cheerful confidence in his
Government that right is being done to all in spite of the representations that the
Government rob him of his all.
That “ men, women, and children are compelled to labour in order that the quantity
of produce assessed as tax may be collected,’ can only be true in the same sense that all
have to labour for their owm and mutual sustenance and comfort, and perform such
duties, individual or communal, as are according to custom or usage, but I know of
no regulation or custom that “ compels women or children to produce assessed taxes.
As regards “the taxation scheme appearing to be now contentedly acquiesced in by
the mass of the natives,” if this refers to tax in kind and money tax it has always been
acquiesced in. From the very first the chiefs, on behaif of their people, have opposed
money taxation, no doubt from past experience of the consequences and effects of
non-payment of a money tax upon the people, who have cried out «If we are taxed,
let it be in kind,” and this the chiefs have advocated, manifestly to their own personal
discomfort and a great increase of labour, as a produce tax naturally demands from every
ruling chief an incessant exercise of vigilance and tact that more than quadruples the


labour that would be necessary in the collection of a poll-tax in money, and especially
with the law courts to enforce the same.
A produce tribute is natural to the native ; it is the only kind of tax he understands,
and there has never been any opposition to it since its commencement on the part of
the people. The opposition has been exclusively with the opponents of the system, and
only when their agitation amongst the natives has reached some disaffected person,
family, or tribe, has there been the slightest response, and that as a rule passed away
with the echo of the agitator’s denunciations of the system of government, or it is heard
in the shape of a complaint, asking for relief and protection, “ from the incessant talking
“ and government-denouncing white man.”
In reference to the “ unanimity of feeling ” said to exist between the Europeans and
the natives, I am sorry to be obliged to assure you that the very opposite is the fact.
There is no unanimity between the two races, and the course pursued by the Europeans
as a body, excluding no class, who clamour and oppose the native policy generally, and
the taxation scheme in particular, is widening and defining the division.
The native suspicion has been excited; he reasons from the fitness of things, and no
greater mistake can be made than to suppose he is not observant; he sees, hears, and
judges all that passes before him, and from the'facts that come under his observation
he arrives at his own conclusions, and he asks this question of his fellow : Wherefore
all this clamour ? Are not these enemies of our Government the same men who urged
us to give our land to England ? True, while suspicion has been excited on the one
hand, confidence in the Government that he now sees protects his rights, has, no doubt,
been strengthened on the other —a fact of no small importance when considered in con-
nexion with the maintenance of peace and good order in the country, and if anything
further was needed to consummate their confidence in the Government, it has been
supplied in the passing of the Native Lands Ordinance, the thoroughness and fairness
of the Lands Commission inquiry, the unswerving maintenance of the native form of
government, and especially taxation in kind.
To suppose the native is either a simple passive agent under the Government, or that
he is indifferent to all that is going on around him, is an error few would fall into, who
have had much direct intercourse with them. They discuss together by families and
tribes the pros and cons of any and every question that affects their rights and interests,
and in the most practical way make known their views and wants, and they are now, I
believe, as a body more consolidated and attached to their Government than at any
time since the establishment of the colony. Personally, I should court inquiry (which
may be said to be boastful), but I have no fear of the result of thorough and disin-
terested inquiry that would recognise and take in the whole facts of the case. The
result could only be to the benefit of* the race, and the vindication of a form of govern-
ment at once natural to the people, adapted to their circumstances, and understood and
participated in by them, and not, as would appear to be represented, a system of hard
and fast inflexible rules, some “ kill or cure ” system. In fact, judging from the past,
if I know anything of the theory or principle in practice, the native policy is seeking to
secure the permanence and improvement of the race by promoting and fostering their
industries and self-government in accordance with their usages and customs, and, I think
it will be admitted by the disinterested observer, with some success.
In reference “ to the appalling death-rate which Mr. Rooney recently called attention
to,” and, it would appear, is supposed to have discovered, I am entirely at a loss to
understand how the reverend gentleman or his coalitionists, with their experience and
knowledge in the group running over a period of three times that of annexation, can in
fairness, either directly or indirectly, attribute such decrease of the population to either
the taxation scheme or any other department of the native government. First, because
they cannot but know that the “ appalling decrease ” has been going on for years
previous to annexation; and secondly, the births and deaths returns show a slight
improvement for the last three years over the whole colony. From January to
September 1879 there were 3,553 births registered and 3,246 deaths, increase in popula-
tion 307. In the *year ending September 1880 the births were 4,011 and the deaths
3,923, increase 88. In the present year, as far as ascertained, one province being as yet
incomplete, the births are 4,077 and the deaths 3,870, again giving a balance of 207 in
favour of the population.
While nothing to boast of from a population of over 115,000, still the balance is on
the right side, and so far encouraging to every labourer for the well being of the race.
Of course, the correctness of these returns may be questioned, still, in the opinion of the
Royal Commission, quoted by the reverend gentleman, and from investigation and
continuous inquiry made, they are found as a whole to be “ sufficiently reliable for all
• i 17270. M


practical purposes,” with this one great defect, that there are no comparative statistic s
of former years of the whole group of even a decade previous to annexation. But the
fact is so notorious to all who have been resident any time in the islands, that the
people were rapidly passing away, and to none more than the missionaries, who have
deplored the “ appalling decrease of the population,” but to stay which they have
confessed themselves powerless. Their estimate, less than 20 years ago, that there was
a population of over 200,000 in the group, as subsequent events and census show, was,
in all probability, under rather than over the actual fact; then allowing 40,000 as
having been carried oh by the measles, there is still nearly the same number to be
accounted for that had disappeared in the few years previous to that epidemic. Now,
sir, supposing that even the same rate of decrease was still continued up to the present
time, ought it even then in fairness to be attributed solely to Sir Arthur Gordon’s
native policy, or is it just on such grounds to represent it as “ most unquestionably to
soon civilize the native race off the face of the earth ? ”
The best reply to the statement that “ the condition of the natives is everywhere
described as deplorable, is to give the returns for the statistical year ending on the
31st day of October last, which show that the people possess over 60,000 pigs, 45,000
fowls and other poultry, 51 head of cattle, 839 goats, 32 horses. In accordance with a
resolution of last year’s annual council of chiefs, 2,881 bags of arrowroot and 2,116
bales of turmeric had been specially prepared for the use of children and the sick.
Chiefs of towns were advised to obtain goats in order to promote the use of milk and
the number in possession of the natives has more than doubled during the year. The
returns of the year’s planting are not yet to hand, but each year’s report shows a
gradual increase, and this year is said to have far surpassed any previous since the
passing of the planting regulations. Where, then, is “ the neglect of food planting ”or
the deplorable condition ? In many districts where formerly, during two or three
months of the year, the people had to live upon articles quite unfit for human food, i.e.,
the fruit of the mangrove, fibrous roots, &c., &c., it is now reported that for the past
three or four years in these districts there has been no necessity for them to eat anything
of the kind, their supplies of cultivated food have not only lasted from one season to
another, but there has been to spare, and in some of these there is a very favourable
increase of population.
With the plentiful food supply there is an increase everywhere of native industry,
and the manufacture of articles for use and comfort, and their houses and towns are
being gradually improved. Prior to annexation, it w T as a notorious fact that their
dwellings were often miserable and much overcrowded ; it was no uncommon thing for
there to be found two, three, and sometimes four married couples in the same house.
During the year there have been 4,567 new houses built, or an average of over three in
each village over the colony. The last census returns show the average now to be five
persons to a house ; surely an improvement.
Whatever may be the desires and feelings of the anti-native policy agitators, the
Fijians themselves understand, appreciate, and prefer the present age to the past, and, as
a body, are content therewith. That there are some chiefs who personally would like
a change of government, I think is most likely as that there are individual grumblers,
and where is there a country without them ?
I am at a loss how to conceive the charge of “ licentiousness and drunkenness” is to
be supported as attributable to the native policy, unless its sins and evils are so heinous
and terrible that the endeavour to expose and correct them is such a demand upon the
time and talents of the teachers and preachers of religion that their other duties of
preaching the gospel and moral teaching are thereby neglected, and the good morals of
the people are in that way suffering in consequence.
Court returns do not, however, support the allegation, and the most stringent
prohibitive measures have been from time to time enforced to check and prevent the
vices and evil consequences of drinking upon the race, and certainly with some degree
of success.
In all large gatherings of people various evils necessarily follow, there can be no
doubt, and these are not likely to be any less when natives are brought together, what-
ever may be the object. But any conscientious thinking man, who may have had even
a less extensive and varied experience than your correspondent has had of the past
history of Fiji, knowing the tendencies and proclivities of its easily excited warlike and
scattered tribes (over 150 in number) knows but too well that if their unity is so essential
to good order and progress is to be practically maintained without positive coercion and
force, there must be some cohesive agent or element. Dp to the present that has been
found in the annual gathering of the chiefs’ council. In former times, in order to retain


the loyalty and support of his people, every petty chief had to call them together on
every occasion when there was any stir or anything to be done, and submit the ways and
means for discussion. And in order to maintain the mutual good will, and to secure
any improvement even in a district amongst its people, it has been found necessary to
enforce the regular holding of the district monthly meetings, any one of wdiich is a very
insignificant part of the whole colony. I would like to ask those who ought to know if
the cause and permanent spread of Christianity amongst the islands has not been greatly
aided and advanced by the periodical and annual gatherings of the missionaries and their
agents. Practices which the first missionaries evidently regarded as necessary to their
work, and fitting in with the usages of the people, and further, which have in my own
opinion very materially aided and rendered practical the political union of the different
chiefdoms under one form of government, composed, as it is well known they were, of
the most incongruous and jarring elements.
The annual and periodical gatherings of the superior chiefs, heads of tribes, and chiefs
of towns (whatever may be the evils of the system to which from the beginning the
Government have been by no means indifferent) have preserved the union of the-group
up to the present time intact without the exercise of any show, even of force from
without. These gatherings have been an indispensable necessity to secure anything
like uniformity or progress in organisation, and they have as well promoted industry,
and the natural productions of the country, and the manufacture of useful articles is
shown to have enormously increased. At all events, whatever may be the rights and
claims to be heard of the anti-native policy agitators, I think it must be conceded that
the evidences of material progress and improvement are sufficiently numerous to justify
the claim put forth by the people themselves that the present form of government shall
at least have a fair trial, and that they shall be heard before it is abandoned. But the
outspoken steadfastness of his Excellency the present Governor has removed any
apprehension they had begun to entertain of possible change, and has probably done
more than anything else to confirm the people’s loyalty and confidence in the good will
and stability of the Government.
It is perhaps hardly within my sphere to reply to the concluding paragraphs of the
reverend gentleman’s letter, but there does seem some inconsistency in the “ fairly
u allowing disinterestedness and benevolent zeal as an expression of gratitude to
“ Sir A. Gordon ” with the statement and belief that “ if Ids policy be persisted in acts
“ of murder and cannibalism are likely to be the result,” and especially coupled with
the statement which shows the people can neither have forgotten or hardly lost the
relish for such scenes and barbarisms; yet if they should fall back and “lust after the
flesh pots,” it must be chargeable to the “ native policy,” though it could hardly be to
the working of the “ taxation scheme,” as no taxes have yet been levied in the district
where the case of cannibalism was supposed to have been committed. Although the
whole of Colo is estimated to pay 400/., the 14 different districts have not been assessed,
and what they contribute is voluntary.
In one thing, however, I agree with your correspondent. lam not surprised, under
the circumstances, at such a rumour receiving credence in Fiji, the truth being that
“ the circumstantial account given ” is very much in keeping with other misleading
statements, and the misrepresentation of facts pursued by the denouncers “ at any price”
of the present native policy. Surely the transparent, cautious, non-committal wisdom
expressed in the last paragraph might in all honest fairness be extended in some slight
degree to the other side of the question.
Apologising for trespassing at such length on your valuable space, and hoping I may
not have altogether failed in showing that there is at least another side to the subject,
though it be not so bright as every well wisher of the race could desire, still there is
ground for encouragement and hope even under the denounced policy.
I remain, &c.
Delaicawagai, Levuka, (Signed) D. Wilkinson.
December 12th.
The Native Taxation Policy in Fiji.
From the Melbourne “ Argus.”
Sir,
I have just read in your issue of December 31st a letter signed “ D. Wilkinson,”
which purports to be a reply to a letter of mine which appeared in the columns of your
paper on the 9th September on “ Sir Arthur Gordon’s Native Policy in Fiji.”
M 2


Mr. Wilkinson challenges the accuracy of statements and inferences made in my
letter—made not by me alone, but by the Chamber of Commerce, by English and
native Government officials, by many native chiefs, and large numbers of people ; in
fact, by all classes of the community.
This being the case, one gentleman, and he thoroughly committed to Sir A. Gordon’s
native policy, disputing the united testimony of all classes in the colony, it seems
scarcely necessary for me to reply. Nevertheless, as it gives me an opportunity of
furnishing additional information, which I consider is abundantly confirmatory of my
“ opinions and inferences,” I avail of the occasion.
I have just heard that ray letter referred to above was read by Mr. Wilkinson to the
chiefs assembled in council in the month of November at Ba, when “ representatives of
the native population ” from every part of Fiji were present, and that some of these
responded —Mr. Langham’s letter is true.” “ That letter is emphatically true.”
“ Fiji is a prison house.” “ The people are oppressed.” It was further said, “ The
“ burdens of the people are too heavy; they are heavier now than they ever were.
“ The people of the land weep under their oppression. The Government plantation
“ overseers are harsh and tyrannical, and men and women are compelled to work, sick,
“or well, under pain of imprisonment.” And instances illustrative were mentioned by
some of the chiefs present. One case referred to was that of a woman who, with the
rest of her townsfolk, was ordered to the Government plantation, distant some six miles.
She worked until her condition attracted the attention of other women working with
her, and they advised her to retire at once to a neighbouring village. She left the
plantation, w r as delivered of a child the same night, and a few days after both mother
and child died. The people of the district not unnaturally say that these two lives were
sacrificed to the Government plantation scheme.
I ask your attention to this case, more particularly because Mr. Wilkinson writes:—
“ I know of no regulation or custom that compels women or children to produce
“ assessed taxes,” and because Sir A. Gordon, when addressing the Royal Colonial
Institute, speaking of the native women before annexation, says :—“ Women are
“ respected, hold a high social position, and are exempt from agricultural labour.” Yet
under his garden scheme, women of many villages have been compelled to travel long
distances, crossing mountain streams, under threat of imprisonment if they were absent
from the gardens ; and in one district, until the teacher represented that the rule was a
cruel one, no person was allowed to retire for the purpose of eating, drinking, or
smoking, except when the trumpet shell was blown by the overseer! Such a state of
things could not exist under the olden rule—the rule of chiefs. The people complain
that they are overworked, driven like slaves, harassed and oppressed, and no wonder
that they are discontented, sullen, and brood over their wrongs. And this was admitted
by Government officials assembled in the Bose vaka-turaga last November. And yet,
Sir, thev have been represented as having the warmest attachment for the Government
garden scheme, and are prepared, like Mark Twain, to sacrifice all their nearest and
dearest relatives rather than give it up.
While I am writing, several trustworthy natives tell me that the people of a village
were ordered to the Government plantation. One was sick, but he was accused of
malingering, and compelled to go. He soon had to leave work, and tried to get home,
but fainted on the road. He was found by a policeman, who sent for help and had him
carried to the nearest village, where he died shortly after. When the policeman
inquired why some of his friends did not assist him home when it was evident he was so
ill, they answered—“ We were afraid of being imprisoned if we left the plantation.”
Another case they give is that of a man who refused to go to the Government garden
because his wife was lying ill, and there was no one but himself to attend to her and
cook her food. For this monstrous offence he was sentenced to 14 day’s imprisonment.
I could mention many other cases but simply give these as samples.
But to return to the council of Qhiefs where my letter was discussed. One party is
said to have confirmed my statements, another party defended themselves, throwing all
the blame of the harsh and cruel treatment upon the officers and overseers; and it was
proposed that all these latter be dismissed, and their duties be discharged hereafter, as
in the olden days, by the mata-ni-vanuas.
These particulars come to me from the lips of some who were in the council. I have
their names, and I have confirmation of them from many parts of Fiji. In the council
and out of it, the natives say, “ Mr. Langham’s letter is true.”


I desire to know why Mr. Wilkinson did not refer in his letter to these statements
made in the Bose ? They were made early in November, and| he wrote to you early in
December. , , . ~
If he knew of them, and withheld them, I ask —Is his testimony on the matters upon
which he writes trustworthy ? And if he did not know of them, if he say that he never
heard them, I say that if such statements as the above can be made, and such things as
I have named can occur, and he be unaware of them, I ask again—Of what value is his
advocacy of Sir A. Gordon’s policy, or his assurances that the people are so very
contented and happy ? . . , .
Mr. Wilkinson tells us that, “ My own personal opportunities of seeing and hearing
“ direct from the people themselves in and from every part of the group, their true
“ condition and wants'are, I think, at least equal to those of any single individual within
“ the Colony.”
I do not think it would be difficult to give substantial reasons why Mr. W. is not
likely to know the true condition and wants of the people in every part of the group, or
that he has the opportunities which he thinks he has. It is a significant fact that when
my letter was read some of the people present said, “ We are surprised that Mr. Langham
“ should be bold enough to publish the wrongs done to us. We thought no one dare
“to publish the harsh treatment we suffer at the hands of those who govern us.” My
opinion is that the natives generally dare not speak their minds to the authorities. I
know that some, when interrogated by their Chiefs and other Government officials, say
what they think will please. ' I know of cases where the parties wronged have denied
that they ever complained, and even denied that the injustice had been done them,
because they feared punishment from their Chiefs for complaining. I could give
instances illustrative. I know of cases where, natives have gone at night to their
European friends to complain of wrongs done, and have explained that they dare not
come in the day time lest they should be seen and suspected of going to publish their
grievances. And I know of a case where the names of members of the council of Chiefs
were asked for, it having been mentioned that some of the council had condemned some
act of the authorities !
Now, as another example of the incorrect information given respecting native affairs.
I give the following statement penned by Sir Arthur Gordon himself:—
“The number of attendants, &c. at the Bose Vakaturaga coming with the Roko and
minor Chiefs from each province is limited to 40 for the whole of them. There are
12 provinces, so excluding the province in which the Bose is held 440 is the limit of
persons coming from a distance. But as a matter of fact, at the last Bose (Lomaloma)
the full 40 came from few provinces, and several of the Rokos had with them only two
or three servants, and the officers (two Bulls and one or two magistrates) bound to attend
the meeting from each province.”
Sir A. Gordon of course believed this statement when he penned it in contradiction
of the assertion that large crowds attended these annual Boses, and it is only fair to add
that he did not write for publication. But is there another person who has been present
at these Boses who would pen such a statement or who could possibly accept it as
accurate ? How can this assertion be reconciled with the actual facts ? The “ Ocean
Queen” brought to Levuka from Lomaloma Bose over 300 natives, besides the large
numbers that arrived there in their own vessels, to say nothing of the large numbers who
went to various provinces which the “ Ocean Queen ” did not visit.
At the previous Bose over 400 persons came from one province alone.
At the Rewa Bose it was estimated that on some days there were from 3,000 to
5,000 persons present.
Mr. Wilkinson’s letter contains not a few assertions equally inaccurate and misleading
with the foregoing, but it would take up more of your space than I can ask for on this
occasion to answer them. Let me point out one more in addition to those already
referred to, where he puts words into my mouth that I never used, and then denies their
accuracy.
He says :
“ In reference to the e unanimity of feeling ’ said to exist between the Europeans and
natives, I am sorry to be obliged to assure you that the very opposite is the fact.”
Now, Sir, I said nothing whatever about the general feeling between Europeans and
natives, and never used the words “ unanimity of feeling,” which Mr. Wilkinson
attributes to me. What I did say, after quoting the statements of Europeans and
natives condemnatory of Sir A. Gordon’s policy in Fiji, was this :
“ Surely the unanimity of these complaints on the part of ail classes of the community,
white and brown, even though it be contended that they are somewhat overstated, is to
M 3


say the least, extraordinary, and must induce hesitation to accept your statement that
4 the taxation scheme appears now to be contentedly acquiesced in by the great mass of
6 natives.’ ”
Mr. Wilkinson leaves unanswered the assertion I make, and substitutes for it
something that I never said.
Mr. Wilkinson suggests that I am chargeable with inconsistency because I credit
Sir A. Gordon with the best intentions, while I remark upon his unsuccess. Sir, I see
not the slightest inconsistency in allowing to the full, as 1 and others readily do, that
Sir A. Gordon has been moved by the very best intentions, while regard for facts, as far
as we can ascertain them, compels the confession that his intentions have been far
beyond his success. When Sir A. Gordon arrived in Fiji, everybody, I think, believed
he was the right man in the right place. It is true that most people were disappointed
that the late lamented Commodore Goodenough was not appointed to the Governorship
of Fiji, as was desired and hoped. But from the reports that preceded Sir Arthur, and
from what he said of himself and his purposes on his arrival, we all hailed his appoint-
ment with satisfaction—we believed that he was animated by the purest motives, the
noblest purposes. But after more than five years’ experience of his rule, will any but a
very inconsiderable pronounce his administration a success ?
That he entered upon the duties of High Commissioner with the very best intentions,
who will venture to dispute ? But does the history of the Pacific while under his rule—
the existing state of things throughout those islands —do the recommendations of the
intercolonial conference—do the united deliverances of the press of the colonies—
indicate that he has been a success ?
I will not say anything about New Zealand, Samoa, or Tonga. Enough, I think,
has been said to show that the gravest, errors may be made while under the inspiration
of the best intentions, the purest motives, and the highest aspirations. No one, Sir, can
regret more than I do that Sir A. Gordon has not been the success which we had hoped
he would be.
Mr. Wilkinson says : —“ lamat a loss how to conceive the charge of ‘ licentiousness
“ and drunkenness’ is to be supported as attributable to the native policy.” (With the
sneer that follows this remark I need not trouble myself.) When all the fairest women
from the whole districts are ordered to be present at these Boses, and when husbands,
fathers, and brothers complain that they are ordered thither for the purposes of prostitu-
tion ; when dances are performed by foreign native women of so disgustingly indecent a
character that Fijians protest against it; when intoxicating liquors are drunk by natives
contrary to the ordinance to an extent unknown on any other occasion, or on ail other
occasions put together during the year, then I think the authorities responsible for these
unnecessarily large assemblies, some of whom live in the very midst of these scenes, are
certainly responsible for them. But I will close by quoting a part of the present
Governor’s address to the Chiefs on opening the' Council last November :
“ I desire that this Bose should show an improvement in comparison with all previous
ones, both in the quality of its work and in the rapidity with which the business is
transacted. Partly with this object, I have forbidden the coming of women. Their
numbers increased the cost of provisions, and their presence was, as a rule, neither good
for them nor conducive to the main object of the meeting. Moreover, too long a time in
previous years, especially last year, was taken up by the meeting, which thus became
an undue burden upon the neighbouring people, and kept you unduly from the work of
your provinces. * * * * 1 wish you also to devote your attention to a matter
which was brought to my notice at the close of the last Bose, and which, through my
very recent arrival in the Colony, I was unable to give that attention to at the time
which might have been desirable, I mean the murmuring among the people. I regret to
be obliged to believe that the murmuring, although much exaggerated as regards the
whole of the Colony, is in some districts not altogether without foundation. I fear that
there are places where some Chiefs have been unduly exacting, and have obtained
contributions, and called upon them to supply labour for other than the legitimate needs
that the Government recognise.”
I leave your readers to judge between Mr. Wilkinson’s words and the words of his
Excellency the present Governor, words that indicate a determination to remedy
existing evils and abuses. #
I am, &c.
Bau, 4th February. (Signed) Frederick Langham.
•i L : ji , 71 Vi» V. 'i <\C-. > rtf;
* f‘


The Colonial Secretary to the Rev. F. Langham.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Levuka,
Sm? May 12, 1882.
In your letter to the “ Melbourne Argus,” republished in the “ Fiji Times” of
the 26th ultimo, you, while mentioning alleged wrongs suffered by the Fijians as the
direct consequence of Sir Arthur Gordon’s policy, give certain instances as to which
the Governor would be glad of information.
2. Quoting certain statements which you allege were made in the last annual council
of Chiefs held at Ba, you observe: “ One case referred to was that of a woman who,
“ with the rest of her townsfolk, was ordered to the Government plantation, distant
“ some six miles. She worked until her condition attracted the attention of other
“ women working with her, and they advised her to return at once to a neighbouring
“ village. She left the plantation, was delivered of a child the same night, and a few
££ days after both mother and child died. The people of the district not unnaturally
££ say that these two lives were sacrificed to the Government plantation scheme.”
3. His Excellency would feel obliged by your informing him with regard to this case
as to —
a. The name of the woman.
b. The district and village.
c. The date (approximate) of the alleged occurrence.
4. You observe (writing apparently from your .own knowledge), “ Yet under his (Sir
“ Arthur scheme, (1) women of many villages have been compelled to travel
££ long distances, crossing mountain streams, under threat of imprisonment if they were
££ absent from the gardens ; and (2) in one district, until the teacher represented that the
C£ rule was a cruel one, no person was allowed to retire for the purpose of eating,
££ drinking, or smoking, except when the trumpet shell was blown by the overseer.”
1 am to invite you to furnish information with regard (1) to cases in which women
were compelled to travel under threat of imprisonment, and of the name of the district
in which the rule referred to in case (2) was observed, and the name of the teacher who
brought about its abolition.
5. You go on to state, While I am writing several trustworthy natives tell me that
“ the people of a village were ordered to the Government plantation. One was sick,
“ but he was accused of malingering, and compelled to go. He soon had to leave work
« and tried to get home, but fainted on the road. He was found by a policeman, who
“ ‘sent for help, and had him carried to the nearest village, where he died shortly after.
“ When the policeman inquired why some of his friends did not a>sist him home when
“ it was evident he was ill, they answered, ‘We were afraid of being imprisoned if we
“ £ left the plantation.’ ” In this instance also, lam to request you will be good enough
to inform me as to the district in which the alleged circumstances took place, the name
of the man said to have died, and the name of the policeman.
6. Another case you quote is that of a man who “ refused to go to the Government
££ garden because his wife was lying ill, and there was no one but himself to attend to
££ her and cook her food. For this monstrous offence he was sentenced to 14 days
££ imprisonment. I could mention many other cases, but simply give these as
££ samples.”
7. The Governor would be glad to learn from you the name of the district in which
££ the Government garden ” (as you term it) is situated, and the name of the man
imprisoned, and the approximate date of the alleged punishment.
8. As it would be beyond expectation that Fijians should be otherwise than impatient
of direct taxation, the Governor apprehends that there would be danger in a roving-
inquiry respecting it as being likely to suggest grievances, even when they had not
hitherto been felt as such, and has no doubt that where a whole people is concerned any
serious evils will make themselves otherwise known.
9. At the same time his Excellency is most anxious to ascertain and remedy such
abuses in the system as may really exist, and in order to estimate the gravity of these
and the necessity of further investigation, he desires in the first instance, to have the
fullest particulars of the cases above quoted.
I have, &c.
(Signed) John B. Thurston.
03 i (i ' HUV AfO II 0
M 4


Rev. F. Langham to the Colonial Secretary.
Sir, Bau, June 5, 1882.
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of 12th ult., in which you
inform me that his Excellency the Governor would be glad of information respecting
some of the cases referred to in a letter of mine published in the “ Melbourne Argus,”
and republished in the “ Fiji Times 55 of 26th April.
2. In reply I beg to state that I shall be glad to furnish his Excellency with all the
information which I can give, without violating confidence reposed in me, and exposing
my informants to persecution from those whose doings they have named, and this I am
sure is all that is desired.
3. Will you, however, in the first place be good enough to ask his Excellency’s
attention to the fact that my letter written in reply to Mr. Wilkinson’s letter to the
“ Melbourne Argus ” was based in part upon statements made publicly in the council
of Chiefs, held at Ba in November last, by various Government officials, statements
which were not disputed by the majority present, but endorsed as a correct representation
of abuses and grievances then existing.
4. The information, therefore, which his Excellency desires to have, is already I
presume, in possession of the Native Department, certainly at its command, and I
suppose that I may take it for granted his Excellency would consider it more satisfactory
to learn the particulars of the cases given, from those Government officials whose
names and whose statements Mr. Wilkinson will have on record than to have them at
second hand.
5. When my first letter to the “Melbourne Argus” was read in the Ba council a
number of Government officials said, “ That letter is quite true.” Mr. Wilkinson then
inquired, “ What grounds had Mr. Langham for writing these things. Whereupon it
was proposed that a committee of the council, the Rokos being excluded, should discuss
the letter, one of the Bulis giving as a reason for asking the Rokos to retire that
“we are afraid to speak out our minds in their presence.” Another Buli then gave the
particulars of the case first-named in my letter written in reply to Mr. Wilkinson’s
letter.
6. Then a provincial scribe stated, w T hat he has since repeated to me at my request,
the case of a man who was ordered to the Government plantation, whose wife was ill and
whose child was dying. “ But for my interference,” said the scribe, “ the man under
“ fear of imprisonment or fine would have gone to work, instead of doing as I directed
“ him to do, viz., ‘ take the woman and child to a missionary, who gave both medicine
“ e and food to the child, and both recovered ’ I believe that the child at least would
“ have died if the father had gone to the plantation.” (I may mention here a case that
came under my notice here only a few weeks ago. A man was lined for not obeying the
order to go to the cane plantation, though he was too ill to go so far. I know of my
own knowledge that he was unfit to work. One of the magistrates said he saw the man
was ill, when he was sent for to appear at the court, but another magistrate said
they must make an example of some one, as the people were shirking work on the
plantations.)
7. One of the Rokos then said, he had heard of the way the people were worked on
this plantation; that the people were so worried that they were ready to fight, that it
was better to be in prison than to have to work on the plantation. His words were
endorsed by another Roko.
8. This is one only of the plantations on which women have been obliged to work
under fear of punishment. Women work in the cane, maize, and coffee plantations on
Yiti Levu. lam told by one who says he lias seen them, that at the present time this
is the case, that women big with child, and others carrying small children, are working
now in these plantations, and I know that such was the case very recently. In fact, most
people on Yiti Levu know that such is the case. One Roko, referring in the Ba council
to this state of things, said, “ the people, men, women, and children, are forced to work
“ in the Government gardens,” (I submit that this is a correct translation of the words
were rakamatanitu). “ The police proclaim through the towns that if any are absent
“ therefrom, they shall be put in prison. Men, women, and children live in a state of
“ fear (tiko rere) and consternation (tagaya). They do not know where to turn or
“ what to do.” The Government work is hard, painful, and gata, (the meaning given
me of this last word is snakes), something which people are in dread of, and shrink
from. ~ . , , , ,
9. His Excellency’s Native Commissioner, I am told by one who says he heard the
words, then said, “ I confirm the words of the last speaker, for I was in a town whose
« name I will not give, and heard the police officers calling upon the people to go to the


“ Government work, and the way they did it, surprised me. It wap like war time. If
“ the Governor knew of this kind of thing he would do something serious.” (Ena
cakava e dua na ka levu). He then urged upon the Chiefs to “ luva vakamalua, not to
“ allow women big with child to be sent upon the plantations, nor sick women, or women
“ with their children.”.
Another Roko asked, “What are we to do? Our people are groaning (vutuguj
46 under their burdens, and are oca. It was never like this in the olden times. If we
“ pity the people we are cudruvid, and if we push them to do the work imposed upon
“ them, thev are distressed, and cry out that they are grievously oppressed.”
10. Surely such deliverances as these, which were given over and over again by
leading men in the Bose; men who spoke from their own personal knowledge, and whose
utterances were not for a moment challenged, but on the contrary, were admitted to be
a correct representation of the state of things in the various places referred to, must, I
think, make the impression that serious grievances do exist; grievances which in my
opinion are calculated to arouse such a feeling of despondency and discontent that very
serious consequences may, in some parts of the Yiti Levu, be apprehended. Only this
week, the particulars of a most gross outrage, committed by a man in the service of Her
Majesty’s Government, were supplied to me, and on my asking why an information was
not sworn against him, or the case reported to his Excellency, the reply given me was
in these words, “ Who would dare to swear an information against him ? No one dares
“ to report him to the Governor. It is because of the British Government that such
“ outrages upon vs are possible .”
Unquestionably such a feeling as this is most dangerous to the peace of Fiji.
I am, &c.
(Signed) Frederick Langham.
The Colonial Secretary to the Rev. F. Langham.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Levuka,
Sir, July 27, 1882.
I have laid before the Governor your letter of the sth June, and am directed in
reply, to express his Excellency’s regret that having made specific charges against the
Government of this Colony, you should have failed to seize the opportunity afforded
you of substantiating them, and should have declined to give categorical replies to the
questions put to you in my letter of 12th May. His Excellency is unable to understand
that, there are any substantial grounds for the fear of results to your informants, which
you allege as the cause of your reticence, inasmuch as, according to your own admission,
the subjects of their information have already been made publicly known.
2. As you have failed to specify the cases of ill-treatment to which you refer in your
letter to the <c Melbourne Argus,” his Excellency is unable to identify them with
certainty, but if they tvere indeed ail discussed at the late Bose Vaka-Turaga, his
Excellency is satisfied from inquiries made that you were completely misinformed as to
the facts, and he can therefore only express his regret that you should have published
such a statement at all without ascertaining its correctness beforehand, and without in
the first instance seeking redress from the Government.
3. With regard to the meetings called Bose Vaka-Turaga, your information proves
to be equally incorrect. The knowledge has apparently been withheld of the many
bitter reflections that have been cast upon the present local government of the mission,
wdiile according to evidence on wdiich his Excellency is able to place implicit reliance,
the occurrences which are mentioned by you as having taken place at the late meeting
at Ba, either did not take place at all, or had a totally different complexion to that
given them in your letter of June sth.
4. Though at the request of one of the Chiefs, your first letter to the Ci Argus ” was,
as you say, read to the meeting ; it was not in the slightest degree discussed there, and
the general, if not universal feeling of the Chiefs with regard to it, as expressed outside
and since, was certainly not of approval, but rather that of a very just indignation.
5. Moreover, though the cases of alleged hardship, to which you must be presumed
to have referred in your second letter to the “ Argus,” were mentioned in the meeting;
they were so mentioned, not in any discussion with reference to your letter, but at various
times in the ordinary reports of the different Rokos, and with a view to show how they
had been respectively dealt with.
6. So far then from giving support to your allegations, this fact furnishes a complete
disproof of some of them, and shows that the ordinary native machinery, even without
i 17270. N


assistance from head-quarters, is far better able to deal with abuses than his Excellency
had been previously aware of.
7. By way of further illustration of the extent to which you have been misled with
regard to the meeting in question, his Excellency desires me to mention, that the high-
handed proceedings to which the Native Commissioner referred with disapproval in your
letter were taken not on the part of the Government, but by a Tuirara ni lotu (village
officer of the church ) on behalf of the Wesleyan Mission.
8. With regard to the reluctance to complain against Chiefs, the Government has good
evidence that it can have no very good or substantial existence, inasmuch as complaints
against them, often with regard to very trifling matters, are continually being* made
to the Native Department. Moreover, that such complaints when made are necessarily
without result, as your letter would appear to indicate, is, his Excellency considers,
disproved by the severe punishments which have been meted out within the last few
years to some of the highest, as well as many of the inferior Chiefs.
9. When the power of Chiefs has been seriously abused, the Government is able and
ready to afford substantial redress, and his Excellency therefore invites you to furnish
him with the particulars of the new cases referred to in your letter of June sth, and if
on inquiry, that described in its last paragraph should prove in any way to deserve the
name of 44 gross outrage, 55 his Excellency will take care that the offender shall receive
according to his due.
I have, &c.
(Signed) John B. Thurston.
Rev. E. Langham to the Colonial Secretary.
Sir, Bau, August 9 5 1882.
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated July 27th, in reply to
mine of June sth, and request that you will be good enough to lay before his Excellency
the Governor the following observations thereon.
2. I did not understand that your communication, dated 12th May, gave me an
opportunity of substantiating the statements made by me respecting the oppressive
operation of the native policy. The categorical replies to questions put to me in your
letter were invited 44 with a view to estimate the gravity of such abuses in the native
“ taxation system as may really exist, and the necessity of further investigation. 55 This,
I apprehend, is a different thing to having the opportunity of substantiating the facts
which I gave in my letter to the 44 Melbourne Argus. 55
3. There is evidently some misapprehension with regard to my letter of June sth,
inasmuch as 1 have not 44 declined to give categorical replies to the questions put to me
44 in your letter of May 12th. 55 On the contrary, I wrote thus ; — 44 I shall be glad to
44 furnish his Excellency with all the information which 1 can give, without violating
“ confidences reposed in me, and exposing my informants to persecution. And this
44 lam sure is all that is desired. 55 And 1 was then, and am now, prepared to give
much more than was requested in your letter. The limitation indicated, as I thought
would be perfectly clear, could not apply to the majority of cases, these having already
been mentioned in the Council of Chiefs. At the same lime, I stated clearly whence
my information came, and gave such details as I felt sure would enable his Excellency
to obtain particulars of the principal cases. I pointed out that my second letter to the
44 Melbourne Argus 55 was based in part on statements publicly made in the Council
of Chiefs at Ba in November last, by various Government officials ; statements that were
not disputed by the majority present, but admitted to bq a correct representation of
abuses and grievances then existing. And I added that I presumed a lull report of
these cases would be in possession of the Native Department, or at all events at its
immediate command, and that his Excellency would prefer, when thus informed, to hear
from the officials connected therewith the particulars referred to. At the same time, I
was ready, should this not be the case, to forward them myself. After waiting six
weeks, I drafted a letter on the subject, dated July 19th, but illness first, and afterwards
absence from home, prevented ray copying and forwarding it to you.
4. From your letter now received, I judge that my reference to the Native
Department has enabled his Excellency to discover 44 what the cases of alleged hardships
44 to which I must be presumed to have referred in my second letter to the 4 Melbourne
44 Argus 55 5 were, mentioned in the meeting. This is what I anticipated. The cases
referred to were so notorious, and the publication of them in the u Bose Yakaturaga 55
so emphatic, that I- felt sure it was only necessary to indicate the place of their first


publication to enable his Excellency to obtain the fullest particulars. And lam
gratified to learn that I was not mistaken. Whether they were mentioned in connexion
with the reading of my letter to the “Argus,” as I have been over and over again
distinctly assured was 'the case, or whether, according to your informants, they were
reported in some other connexion is, I imagine, a matter of comparative unimportance,
the main question, I apprehend, being whether these hardships and abuses have really
existed. And that they have existed your letter, as I read it, most frankly and fully
admits. You observe that the hardships and abuses “to which ” lam presumed to
refer, were mentioned in the ordinary reports or the Rokos, and with a view to show
how they had been respectively dealt with, and that this fact shows that the ordinary
“ native machinery without assistance from headquarters is far better able to deal with
“ abuses than his Excellency had been previously aware of.
5. Moreover, my allegation that serious grievances and abuses existed, receives, I
submit, further confirmation in the assertion you make; “ I hat complaints.against Chiefs,
“ often with regard to very trifling matters, are continually being made to the Native
« Department.' Some of these are shown to be of a very serious character, wholly
“ beyond remedy by c the ordinary native machinery, by the fact- tnat severe punish*
“ ments have been meted out to some of the highest and to many of the inferior Chiefs.”
I may remark here, that I have nowhere stated that punishments were never inflicted,
or that no wrongs were ever redressed. 1 am well awaie the contraiy has been the
case, especially during the last few months, and 1 venture to express the opinion that
had'the conduct, for which it is reported certain. Chiefs have recently been punished,
not been permitted at an earlier period, there would not now be the necessity for such
extreme measures, and a different state of things among the people would most probably
exist.
6. I fail to see how the fact of the mention in the Bose of these hardships and abuses,
and of the way in which they were dealt with “ furnishes a complete disproof of some
« of my allegations, and that I was completely misinformed as to the facts mentioned
sc j n m y letter to the ‘ Argus.’ ” On the contrary, it seems to me that their mention
there is confirmatory of my allegation, that these abuses and hardships have existed.
Nor do I see how the mention, in the meeting, of some abuses proves that none others
exist. Or, that because some wrongdoers are punished many more do not go un-
punished. 5 Neither can I understand how the mention in the meeting of some abuses
disproves my allegation that large numbers of women were compelled, under threat of
punishment, to travel long distances to the Government plantations ; that one woman
wrought in a plantation until the pains of maternity overtook her; that she and her
child & died shortly after, and that the people of that district not unnaturally say these
two lives were sacrificed to the Government plantation scheme. The same remark
mio'ht be made with regard to the other cases. Nor do I see how the fact that “ many
complaints are made to the Native Department against Chiefs,’* disproves my assertion
that many persons are afraid to forward their complaints. I know, of my own know-
ledge that many persons have been deterred from complaining by the fear of punishment.
1 have been desired not to mention the fact that persons have named their grievances to
me lest they should suffer for so doing, and I know of persons being threatened and
persecuted, because they were suspected of naming to me their wrongs, as it was believed
I reported them to his Excellency.
7. You go on to say that “ his Excellency desires you to mention, by way of further
« illustration of the extent to which I have been misled, that the high-handed proeeed-
“ ings to which the Native Commissioner referred with disapproval, as mentioned in
“ my letter, were taken not on the part of the Government but by a village officer of
“ the church on behalf of the Wesleyan mission.”
That some such abuse of authority on the part of a village officer of the church did
really occur, and that it was so condemned by his Excellency’s Native Commissioner,
I am quite prepared to believe, though I have made inquiry of some who were present,
and so far can learn nothing of the case. But no one knows better than his Excellency’s
Native Commissioner that such conduct would be dealt most severely with by the
authorities of the church.
I beer, however, most respectfully to assert that I have not been misled in the matter
referred to. Before I penned my statement I made careful inquiry. I have done so
again, since I received your letter, of persons who I believe are thoroughly trustworthy,
who were present at the Bose, and they assure me that the Native Commissioner did
speak the words I wrote, and therefore I am persuaded that his Excellency’s Native
Commissioner is in error , and I most emphatically re-assert ray previous statement. I
may add in further confirmation, that the Native Commissioner urged that <c the
N 2


officers ” not “ Tuirara ni lotu 55 should be forbidden to kaci vakaukauwa, as, he said
was done in his hearing on that occasion, and as others said was a common practice,
that they should be required to kaci vakamalumaluinu, that sick persons and women
who were enciente should not be required to work in the Government plantations. I
underline the foregoing words because of the grave discrepancy between that direction,
and his assertion, published shortly after in the “ Melbourne Argus,” that he knew of
no regulation or u custom that compels women or children to produce assessed taxes.”
8. Your remark that “ though my letter to the 4 Argus ’ was read in the meeting, it
was not in the slightest degree discussed there,” suggests that there is some misappre-
hension between us as to what is meant by “ meeting or Bose,” If your suggestion is
that my letter was not discussed in the Bose as the Rokos were absent, their presence
being necessary to constitute the Bose proper, then I have nothing to say. My
statement is, that after reading my letter in the Bose, the Native Commissioner asked,
“ what grounds had Mr. Langham for writing these words.” Then it was suggested
that my letter should be considered, and one of the Bnlis proposed the retirement of the
Rokos, saying, 44 we are afraid to speak our minds in their presence.” The Rokos
retired, and then the facts I have repeated were mentioned. That this was the course
pursued is distinctly affirmed by persons present.
9. That e< the feeling of the Chiefs with regard to my letter as
“ expressed outside, and since, was not of approval, but rather that of
44 indignation,” will doubtless be correct if, by 44 the Chiefs,” you refer to those who
felt they had exposed themselves to the strictures contained in my letter, or to those
against whom complaints are continually being made, or to the many who have been
subjected to severe punishment. But that this feeling was, or is, 44 general if not
universal,” I am persuaded is not correct. A number of Chiefs, some of high standing,
have expressed to myself, and to others, their hearty endorsement of ray letter. This
testimony is from various parts of the Colony.
10. Perhaps it is not out of place to mention here, to show the feeling of the people
as well as that of the Chiefs, that before my return to Fiji, last December, the people of
one district stated their intention to give a large contribution, when the missionary
meetings were held, as an expression of their gratitude for the publication of my letter
to the 44 Argus.” And it is a fact that their contributions, which, as his Excellency the
late Governor, and also yourself, have more than once, in reply to unjust remarks on this
subject, publicly stated, are purely voluntary on the part of our people were much
larger than in any previous year.
11. With respect to his Excellency’s expression of regret that I should have published
my letter to the 44 Argus ” without, in the first instance, seeking redress from the
Government, I have to say that the reception given to‘ previous communications
of the same tenour, and the results thereof, were not of such a character as to invite a
continuance of them.
12. For a considerable period I pursued the coarse which his Excellency regrets I did
not take in this instance, but he will not, I think, be surprised that I ceased to do so, when
he learns that on one occasion I was informed my complaints of injustice to the people
“ indicated an unfriendly feeling towards the Government,” and on another occasion
I was informed that “ the Chiefs must be allowed to do some wrong things.” I could
mention other intimations even more discouraging. I may also remind you that my first
letter to the “ Argus ” was written in Melbourne, in reply to remarks in that paper,
which, as it appeared to me, presented an inaccurate account of the state of this Colony.
And second letter was written in reply to his Excellency’s Native Commissioner,
who challenged my statements.
13. Regarding 44 the many bitter reflections cast upon the present local government
c< of the mission,” I most respectfully ask that his Excellency will be pleased to direct
that Ibe informed of the alleged grounds for such reflections. Ido not ask for names
of persons, in order that, if possible, they may be removed. We are sensible
that, notwithstanding our sincere desire and untiring efforts to improve or rightly to
administer the government of our church, a system which, it is admitted, has effected so
much good in Fiji, and which his Excellency the late Governor, and others equally well
qualified to pronounce thereon, have described as 44 the admirable church organization
“ of the Wesleyan mission,” it is very possible that abuses may creep in. And I shall,
therefore, be most glad to receive from his Excellency, or from any other well-wisher to
the mission, such information and such suggestions, as shall enable us to discover and
eliminate any evils or abuses that may exist.
14. In conclusion, I feel bound to say that since my informants have been fully
qualified, and have been positive and consistent in their statements, I am driven to one


of these two alternatives, to suppose either that they have grossly and wilfully deceived
me, or that his Excellency has been misinformed regarding some of the matters referred
to in your letter. In the very serious conflict of testimony therefore which his Excel-
lency believes to exist, I most respectfully suggest, for his Excellency’s consideration,
the desirability of appointing a Commission to inquire into all the matters respecting
which there is this discrepant testimony, as well as into the hardships and abuses
generally which are reported to exist among the native population. And if the inquiry
be conducted on the admirable principles laid down in his Excellency’s Minute, addressed
to the Planters’ Association, 1 have no doubt that my allegations, and more, will be
shown to be substantially correct. No fitter words than those of the Minute could be
found to describe the circumstances of the Fijians, and to indicate the course for
ascertaining whether or not they have just cause of complaint.
I have, &c.
(Signed) Frederick Langham.
The Colonial Secretary to the Rev. F. Langham.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sir, Suva, October 3, 1882.
I have the honour to forward you the copy of a Minute, which I have received
from the Governor, with reference to your letter of the 9th August.
I have, &c.
(Signed) John B. Thurston.
Minute by His Excellency.
I have read and considered Mr. Langham’s letter of the 9th August.
The confidence with which Mr. Langham accepts and* asserts as facts, statements with
regard to the Bose Vakaturaga, which are entirely denied by officers of unimpeachable
character, would lead me in any case, to distrust his information with regard to the much
more important matters which formed the subject of his letters to the “ Argus,” even if
there were not other and stronger reasons for doing so.
Taking it for granted that as Mr. Langham believes the cases of alleged oppression
mentioned by him in those letters, were among those reported at the Bose Vakaturaga,
I am quite satisfied that I am sufficiently acquainted with their particulars to render
further enquiry unnecessary.
As Mr. Langham must be supposed to have brought forward those cases which were
the most effective for his purpose, the conclusion forced on me by this knowledge is
exactly the opposite of that intended by him.
If, with the command of the remarkable organisation of the mission extending to
nearly every village in the colony, and with his evident anxiety to discover the defects
of the native government he can bring against it only cases such as these, which, while
bearing on investigation a very different aspect to that given to them by him, were sach
reported by the Chiefs themselves in the ordinary course and cf their own accord, I am
led to the belief that the system is much more free from abuse than I had at one time
deemed possible.
As this view is confirmed by various indications of general contentment, each of them
of considerable force, and which, in their aggregate strength, I regard as completely
convincing, I must, in the absence of positive instructions from Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment, decline to take the very serious responsibility involved in the appointment of a
commission of enquiry of the kind proposed.
Such a measure would create undesirable disturbance in the native mind, even if
abuses were absolutely non-existent, and would in my opinion require for its justification,
a very far stronger primd facie case than Mr. Langham" has been able to present.
Having come to a definite determination on this point, I must decline discussing the
various issues raised by Mr. Langham. I however deem it necessary to note, that
nothing has appeared from this correspondence which the Government can regard as
a “ conflict of testimony,” on any point of importance, there being on the one side as
witnesses, various officers whom it knows and has good reason to trust, and on the other
only hearsay evidence derived from unknown informants.


I may note also that Mr. Langham is mistaken in his supposition that all or even a
majority of the Chiefs who have been recently punished, were charged with misconduct
which could be rightly termed oppression of their people.
As a matter of fact, the complaints against Chiefs on the part of the people are in the
great majority of cases, of a very trivial character, and as they are not the less likely to
produce resentment on that account, their number in itself affords a strong indication
that the dread of reporting grievances cannot be very great.
I must further notice that Mr. Langham has ignored altogether my request to be
furnished with the means of identifying the alleged “ gross outrage 51 on the part of a
high Chief to which he had drawn my attention.
This was a case that would have afforded a useful test of the correctness of
Mr. Langham’s views, and of the assertions to which he commits himself, and his present
silence on the point tends to confirm my original impression, that the story as related to
him was a malicious exaggeration.
With regard to the reflections cast by natives upon the present administration of the
mission, I must decline to respond to Mr. Langham’s invitation.
As they had reference to matters which did not call for Government interference,
I have paid no regard to them, and the fact of their having been made w 7 as mentioned
merely to show 7, that if there is some grumbling against the Government, the latter is not
the sole object of it. *
The frequency and bitterness of these reflections, moreover, tend to show that if equal
anxiety were shown to obtain it, information as to their subject matter would be quite as
readily forthcoming, as that which has misled Mr. Langham, though it would doubtless
be equally unworthy of credit.
(Signed) G. W. Des Vceux.
September 27, 1882.
Rev. F. Langham to the Colonial Secretary.
Sir, Ban, October 18, 1882.
1 beg to acknowledge the receipt of your favour dated 3rd instant, covering
minute by his Excellency the Governor, on my letter to you of August 9th.
I desire that you will kindly inform me if 1 am right in assuming that the corre-
spondence is now closed, and that it may be handed to the newspapers for publication.
I have, &c.
(Signed) Frederick Langham.
The Colonial Secretary to the Rev. Frederick Langham.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sir, Suva, November 14, 1882.
I have laid before the Governor, your letter of the 18th October 1882, with
reference to my letter of the 3rd of the same mouth, and have the honour to enclose you
a copy of the Minute which his Excellency has made thereon.
I have, &c.
* (Signed) John B. Thurston.
Minute by the Governor.
As notoriety has been evidently Mr. Langham’s object from the first, I have no
reason to suppose that he would regard the convenience of the Government, with reference
to the question of publication, and I must therefore decline to express any opinion on the
subject. . . .
However, in order to show 7 clearly hov/ untrue I regard his description or the condition
of the natives, and in order preclude them from being misled by false reports ol what
has taken place, I am having the correspondence with Mr. Langham translated into the
native language, and shall cause it to be circulated throughout Fiji, as soon as
Mr. Lannham’s intimated publication appears in the newspapers.
(Signed) G. W. Des Yieux.
November 14, 1882.


Memorandum by tne Native Commissioner on Mr. Langham’s Letter to the
<c Melbourne Argus,” dated February 4, 1882.
Mr. Langham has again written to the e< Melbourne Argus,” on the question of the
native policy and the taxation scheme in particular, in the Colony of Fiji; and while he
says that it is scarcely necessary for him to reply to a letter I wrote last December, thus
ignoring the facts then made public, yet (as he says) it “ gives him an opportunity of
u furnishing additional information in support of the position he has taken up. But in
these also, it is necessary to direct attention *to his misstatement of at least some of the
facts, indicating either that his sources of information are unreliable, or that there is
some perverting bias.
I beg to lay the following remarks upon his letter before your Excellency, and first
(following the order of his letter) that his previous letter to the “ Argus” was read by
myself to the Bose Vakaturaga at Ba. So far this is true. At the request of some
member of the council, the time for adjournment having arrived, I read Mr. Langham s
letter. The Chiefs separated without anyone making remark within the chamber, and,
to the best of my recollection, the subject was never again introduced into the Bose.
Mr. Collet, the clerk and shorthand’ writer of the council, says that the subject never
again came up, and there is no further reference to it in the notes taken by himself.
Since the publication of Mr. Langham’s letter, I have questioned two or three Chiefs,
members of the council, all of whom confirm the above.
That the letter was a great deal talked about outside amongst the people, and in the
social gatherings amongst the Chiefs in their different bures, is quite true, and to say
that strong indignation was expressed, and the severest comments made against the
course of obstruction pursued by Mr. Langham, is also true.
He says, further on, that “ he desires to know why I did not refer to these statements
“ made in the Bose,” to which I reply, for the simple reason that they were never made,
and if I had any other reason for not mentioning the general opinion, it must have been
because I wished to avoid personalities, and confine myself to the subject.
The cases of hardship and cruelty given by Mr. Langham, I think I can identify, in
part, as having been reported, or as having come under my notice in one way or another.
Some came out during the discussion of the question of the excessive number of deaths,
and were adduced in illustration of some of the causes, but these discussions had no
reference to Mr. Langham’s letter or its subject, and I think was before it was
heard of.
The case of the woman referred to 1 do not remember, as put by Mr. Langham, but
one case was given, though it was not mentioned in connexion with any so-called
government or other plantations, but was reported by Roko Tui Ba, illustrating the
w r anton earelessness on the part of women when near their confinement. His report
was that he met the woman on the road some distance from his own town, and, seeing
her condition, that he ordered her to be taken at once to his own house, where she was
cared for by his own household, until mother and child were sufficiently strong to
return to the town. It was not reported that they died, as Mr. Langham states, and it
may not, therefore, be the identical case.
As to the second case of the man going to work in the plantation when sick, and
having soon to leave, trying to get home, and fainting on the road, I do not now
remember the special case, but such instances are of so common occurrence, that it
probably did occur. It is a notorious fact that natives from some cause or other are
liable, even in a state of good health, to these sudden fits of exhaustion and fainting,
even dropping down and dying on the spot, while pursuing their ordinary and common
avocations, but the surrounding circumstances given are very improbable.
That any policeman or other would be deterred from rendering assistance in such a
case as is quoted, I think most unlikely, especially for the reasons given that “ they
“ would be afraid of being imprisoned, if they left the plantation.” as I do not know
if any imprisonments have ever been ordered in connexion with plantation work.
I heard of a case at Bau very similar to the one reported Mr. Langham, that a
man could not go the garden because his wife or child was sick, and being imperatively
ordered by the officer, he appealed to the Roko, who being absent, the Vunivala, hearing
of his case, went and told him to return and take care of his sick, and ordered the officer
to go about his business.
Subsequently a number of others were brought up and punished, who, by a subter-
fuge, had shirked their duties, and their work had to be performed by others, the
particulars of which I do not at present remember, but it was duly reported at the time,
and this man may have been one of them, that is if the cases are the same.
N 4


These are the three cases which Mr. Langhain quotes, to which 1 could add many
others, but I do not know of one that has not been enquired into, when it has come to
light, by the local authorities or by myself, or direct from the office, and the culpable
parties dealt with, but no very recent cases have come to my knowledge, and I do not
think there have been many during last year. The officials are getting (as they put it)
“ to understand the way of things better.”
As to Mr. Langham’s opinion that the natives dare not speak their minds to the
authorities, all I can say is that they do do so, and when I say they do so by hundreds
over the year, I make no hyperbolical statement, but a truth that can be verified
any day.
Complaints come on all sorts of subjects, and against all classes of the community.
A Fijian who has a grievance, considers it his privilege to take it, if necessary, to the
highest authority in his own way, even when it is against his own Chief, and he does so
without let or hindrance, and I do not think any Fijian who has a good case “ will go
“ to a European by night to complain of wrongs done.”
I have known of Fijians going to Europeans by night, but I have never found one
bona fide complaint that would bear inquiry. The rule is in that class of complaints
that they are either prompted, or the complainant is seeking to evade some duty or home
responsibility, or gain an advantage over his opponent.
I do not now remember, and 1 can hardly think it possible that any cc names of
“ members of the council of Chiefs were ever asked for,” who had condemned some act
of the authorities, as in this particular the Chiefs have always had and exercised the
utmost freedom in their council.
“ The attendance at the Boses.” The following has been the limit to each
Bua, 40 from each province.
Bau, 40 „ „
Lau, 40 „ „
Ba, 30 ~ ~
Generally, during the first two or three days, inquiry is made into the numbers of
visitors from each province, and the list of names given (which can be referred to at
any time), and in each case, when it is found that the limit fixed by the Governor is
exceeded, the lloko Tui is desired to send those in excess home which is done at once.
The people of the province in which the Bose is held, are allowed to come and go at
their pleasure. Instead of it being necessary to order people to attend these gatherings,
as is put by Mr. Langham, the real difficulty the Chiefs have is to prevent the people
going, and numerous complaints are made, that the people are not allowed to follow their
own "bent, and this illustrates what the reverend gentleman quotes their having said
“ Fiji is a prison house.”
In rnv letter to the “ Argus,” I admitted that excesses had occurred, and that with
such a people, and the material available by the Government for its executive functions,
it would be impossible for it to be otherwise, but I maintained that it was manifestly
unfair to take such a position, and that it was not necessarily any evidence of the
failure of the native form of Government, or in fact of any other institution, because
certain excesses occurred either from the over-zeal or officiousness of its officers.
I do not think I could better illustrate what I mean than by quoting a few cases of
cruelties, deaths from fatigue and exposure, and others of even cannibalism, the details
of which are almost too horrible to think of, which have occurred under the rule of the
Wesleyan Mission, and connected with its institutions, and not a few at the instigation
of its agents; and thus show how the tables could be turned upon the mission if the
same tactics were followed by an observer, as are followed by Mr. Langham towards
the Government. Men have been publicly flogged for Sabbath-breaking. I know a
case of a man who on a Sunday killed, cooked, and ate a crab that crawled into his
house, and was in the following week brought before the magistrate by his spiritual
teacher, and whipped for his offence. Another, a case of five women whom I very
narrowly saved from a public whipping for Sabbath-breaking, under the following
circumstances; they were proceeding to a neighbouring town to attend a service called
in the Wesleyan Church a love-feast. They had to cross a stream of water, and,
because they took a bath, the teacher brought them before the native magistrate,
and I was just in time to hear them sentenced to receive three lashes. I remonstrated
with the magistrate, and, on account of the teacher’s importunity, with difficulty got
their sentence remitted ; but the magistrate said he feared to disregard the teacher s
complaint altogether, and he therefore ordered the women to make a mat each.
Such cases as these are numerous enough all over the country, but no one thinks ot
condemning the mission on that account.


Against the cases where deaths are alleged to have occurred when travelling in
connexion with the taxation scheme, supposing the n to be true, while I may expose
myself to the charge of employing the “tu quoque ” argument, yet complaints ot
oppression and of fatigue from having to travel many miles to attend mission meetings,
are sufficiently frequent and well-founded enough ; even deaths have occurred m connexion
with and when employed in mission work. A case occurred quite lately on Macuata,
when a youth carrying two basket* of food to a teacher’s meeting, dropped down dead
on the road, but no one in reporting the case deemed (? dreamed) of connecting it with
the work he was engaged on. Canoes have been upset, and persons drowned passing
to and from their regular meetings. The instances mentioned last year at Mualevu in
answer to Mr. Rooney’s letter of a canoe being sent away from a church meeting at
Rewa, presided over by that gentleman himself, was upset on the way down the coast
near to Raki Raki, and two men were drowned, and their death was attributed to
exhaustion arising from their having been sent away without food from their meeting,
for the canoe was capsized but a short distance from shore, and the men were too weak
to either right the canoe or swim to land.
Such things as these are to be met with all over the group, and are m truth more
illustrative of the ordinary accidents of life, improvidence and idiosyncrasies of the
people, than of wrong doing in wilful intention of the officers of the Government or
agents of the mission. There are also individual cases where the agents of the mission
have taken advantage of and abused their position, and it is also a fact that licentiousness
is not by any means all outside the church.
Besides the cases of excessive zeal, the mission have also had some painful experiences
of Chiefs willing to please, and excel their neighbours, in their show of devotion to the
lotu, and perhaps the most extraordinary case is that of the slaughter by night of the
innocent inhabitants of three villages in the district of Nadi, in order that the Chief’s
provision for the children’s school feast the following day, should exceed that of some
of his neighbours, who had only provided turtle and pigs for the teachers. Navula
(the Chief of Nadi), having neither turtle or pigs, determined to provide “ bokola.
But who would think of bringing such a case as a charge against the mission work in
Fiji, or that it was willed or even permitted by its agents ; no better testimony of which
could be shown than the horror with which the native minister received the news next
morning, that the dead bodies of the slain were being brought to be presented to him.
And again, notwithstanding his wail of genuine anguish that such a horror should have
been perpetrated in the name of, and within the pale of Christianity, though he begged
and besought the astonished Chief that the bodies should be buried, it is said numbers
were taken off to the neighbouring towns, cooked and eaten. Yet who would think of
ascribing such horrors and disgusting practices, even in this particular case, to the
mission or Christianity.
It may not be considered my province as Native Commissioner in Fiji to defend
Sir Arthur Gordon’s policy in the Western Pacific, but as the Rev. Mr. Langham
condemns that also, and tries to prove it an “ unsuccess,” I should like to call upon the
reverend gentleman to publish those notes he furnished to Commodore Goodenough
of the state of things in Polynesia, not excluding Fiji itself, and allow any number of
disinterested persons to judge whether the present state of things is not better than that
which he represented as existing then and prior to 18/4. The deeds and tales of wrong-
doing, hardship and suffering, and of villany therein recorded were simply appalling ;
and how any right-minded man, believing them to be true, and with a knowledge of
and the evidence of the improved state of things before his eyes, can conscientiously
pursue the course the reverend gentleman has done for the last four or five years I
cannot understand. Conduct I think that cannot be regarded but as vicious, knowing,
as he does, that he is creating difficulties and even dangers where none would have
existed, to a work, the primary object of which is, conjointly with his own mission in
Fiji, the preservation and improvement of the race, in which he might have rendered
incalculable service, and probably have prevented many of the evils he now so officiously
flaunts before the public, and which has made him an object of astonishment and a
by-word among the natives, who wonder that he dare act as he does, and publish such
mis-statements, and who ask why he is not prohibited.
I would recommend that the reverend gentleman be applied to for the particulars
of the cases he quotes, or any others he may wish to furnish, the names of the persons
concerned, their towns and districts, the dates as near as possible at which they occurred,
in order that your may know whether they have been already reported and
inquired into or not.
(Signed) D. Wilkinson.
April 26, 1882.
i 17270.


Memorandum by the Native Commissioner on Mr. Langham’s letter to Melbourne
Argus, dated 4th February 1882.
I have asked Mr. Collet to put down what he knows on the subject of this letter,
especially such parts as have reference to the Bose at Ba, and what occurred therein.
His note is attached, and is sufficiently full as to render it unnecessary for me to more
ban note the particulars of some of the paragraphs.
1. I cannot tell what possible force there can be in the caution mentioned in the first
paragraph, if the other statements are true, that Mr. Langham’s letter to the Argus was
based upon statements made publicly in the council of Chiefs held at Ba, and again as
in paragraph 10, “ surely such deliverances as these which were given over and over
“ again.” The statements and whole tenour of the letter, go to show that he at least
cannot believe in the dread of “ persecution ” being very strictty entertained by
“ informants,” if he believes there was such full and frank outspokenness in the Bose on
the subject he is writing upon.
2. I am disposed to think we are in possession of all cases of abuse, hardship, and
cruelty, he tries to make so much of, and that he can tell us nothing more than is true. I
believe every one has been reported, enquired into, and dealt with, as they merited, and as
he can give no new or additional ones, it only goes to show how exceedingly few they
are over the Colony.
In paragraph four, excepting the part that I did read his letter to the Argus at the
request of some member of the council, who, I do not remember, the whole is I believe
as Mr. Collet states, false.
5. The case mentioned by the provincial scribe (lonacaui of Tailevu), was reported,
but not in any way connected with Mr. Langham’s letter, but illustrative of the fact,
that officers did commit excesses, and of the necessity for their control, but what of it ?
No excess was committed, and according to his own showing, a Government official
prevented it, and directed the mother to take her child, or it might get medicine, &c. with
the best results. The scribe “ believed the child would have died if the father had gone
“ to the plantations,” but the father did not go, and the child recovered. But what the
scribe really did say was that if he had not persevered, and almost forced the mother to
take the child, he having to tell her that she certainly would be brought up for neglect
of her child if she did not follow his advice. He had to go himself and get a canoe, and
he says, that but for this, he believes the child would have died. The particulars of the
case were given to me personally at Ba.
6. The case of the man being fined for not going to work because he was ill. The
second magistrate is reported to have said they “ must make an example of some one.”
This case is to some extent founded on fact, that is, there was a case, but what the
magistrate really said was, “ that man ought to have been punished, as on the day he did
“ not go to the work, 1 saw' him myself bathe and well able to work,” (natives never
bathe when ill). At present lam not able to state whether a fine was inflicted or not.
7. The case of the Roko having heard of the way people are worked on the plantations
was, Roko Tui Ba speaking on the question of proper authorised control over the men
when at work. That on one of the sugar plantations there had nearly been a row
through a misunderstanding which arose on the ground, and there being no person of
sufficient authority present to check the contention.
8. That women do go to work on the plantations is true enough all oyer the country,
on their own plantations too, very nearly all the year round, but there is no case yet of
force or punishment come to my notice. In fact it is not necessary. The difficulty is
to keep the women from going. What Mr. Collet says on this head is to the point, and
just as it is put by the Chiefs, it is next to impossible to get the women in certain
conditions to take due care of themselves, or of their young children. Women work on
their own gardens in different seasons of the year from morning to night, and it would
require force to keep them at home.
As to the meaning of the words u were vakamatanitu,’ that is the term by which the
whites call their community gardens nearly all over the Colony. A Fijian speaking ot a
garden always calls it a plantation by the name of the produce grown in it, without any
reference to the object for which that may be grown, but in discussing any question
relative to the work, they always speak of these gardens as “ were vakavanua.
9. There is something very amusing about the words attributed to me in this
paragraph. The discussion was on town criers, a very important institution in a Fijian
community, and the use of harsh and disrespectful language used by persons crying
matters in the town was being denounced, and as arising from those not of the
matanivanua class. The instance I quoted was a Tuirara of the lotu (steward of the


Church), crying through the town some church matter or gathering for the next day
for which the people were to make the necessary preparation of food, &c., and the remark
that it was like war time was made by an old man in the house in which I was at the
time. The rest of the paragraph I know nothing of, excepting that it would be a likely
kind of advice for me to give, but it is worthy of remark here, that there is no subject
so often before the Bose vakaturaga and the Bose vakayasana, as questions of the
people’s murmuring at the exactions and levy of contributions to the lotu ; of their being
called upon to pay monthly and quarterly supplies of food and native property for the
payment of catechists and teachers of various kinds, to assist in the provisioning at church
gatherings and feasts. A very long list of grievous complaints, hardships, aye! and
deaths, connected with the lotu work would be made if all the people complain of was
put down. No one can be long connected or associated with the people’s boses without
discovering that they do and will discuss their grievances, be they what they may, and
if a native grievance be a good one, I do not think he entertains much fear of persecution
as Mr. Langham tries to make out.
His not giving the names, place, and the particulars of the “gross outrage,” committed
by a man in Her Majesty’s Government is, I think most reprehensible, and shows more
than anything else, his want of honest purpose, and goes to prove that he can have no
sincere desire to assist in putting down abuses. From the enquiries we have been able
to make, I am quite unable to hear of any such case anywhere within a circuit of fifty
miles from Bau, but no particulars being given, of course it is difficult. Still the report
of a gross outrage amongst Fijians travels very fast, but there are some circumstances
that would seem to point to its being one of those cases that occurred during last year
at Cakaudrovi, in which each of the complaints was made at once, publicly and by the
party aggrieved. They were enquired into, and disposed of on their merits which, if
either of these be the case quoted, could not have been done in Fiji, “except because it
“is under British Government,” and no one knows this better than Mr. Langham. I may
add in conclusion, it is an undeniable fact that the course the reverend gentleman is
pursuing is unquestionably dangerous to the peace of Fiji, or in such parts at least, where
he has any influence.
1 have, &c.
July 1, 1882. (Signed) D. Wilkinson.
Memorandum by Mr. Collet on Mr. Langham’s letter to “ Melbourne Argus,”
dated February 4, 1882.
The statements contained in this letter and in the previous letter to the “ Melbourne
Argus,” and rc-published in the “ Fiji Times ” of the 26th April, are said to be based
principally upon statements made in the Bose at Ba, on the discussion of Mr. Langham’s
first letter to the “ Melbourne Argus.” The fact that Mr. Langham’s letter was never
discussed at all in the house would be sufficient to throw discredit on the reverend
gentleman’s ability, to obtain correct information from natives.
The facts of the case are as follows; —When the letter arrived at Ba, Mr. Wilkinson
showed it to Roko Tui Cakau, and mentioned it to one or two other Chiefs. In the
sitting of Saturday morning the 19th of November, I was asked by Ratu Marika, Ratu
Epeli, and I think, Roko Tui Ba, to translate the letter to them after breakfast, but at
the end of the morning’s w T ork, Mr. Wilkinson translated it to the meeting.
No remark was made during the reading, and Mr. Wilkinson adjourned the meeting
immediately.
Mr. Langham’s letter never was mentioned again in the council. The most charitable
view that can be put on Mr. Langham’s action, is that the native teachers under him,
have so far taken the measure of his vanity, and have so little respect for their superior
minister, or so little belief in his desire to know the truth that they will tell him
anything thev think will minister to his self-love, with a total disregard of facts, and
have done so in this case.
But although this statement disposes of the principal sting of Mr. Langham’s letter,
he may contend that his statements of what occurred are substantially true, even though
his letter was not the visible cause of the speeches reported by him, and it will be well
to state clearly what small amount of truth there may be in them.
It was proposed on the Tuesday following the reading of Mr. Langham’s letter, that
the Bulis should have a separate meeting of their own. But the reason given was that it
was the usual thing when the death-rate and murmuring (kukudru) of the people were
G 2


discussed. Nothing was said about their being afraid to speak their minds before the
Rokos. The reports from the provinces being closed, they had their separate meeting
as a matter of course. Neither myself or Mr. Wilkinson attended the Bull’s meeting,
but each day Ratu Marika gave in a report to the whole council. These reports I
have almost verbatim, they do not anywhere refer to Mr. Langham’s letter, nor bear out
his statements.
Mr. I angham says, “ another Buli then gave the particulars of the case first named
“ in my letter written in reply to Mr. Wilkinson’s letter.” No Buli reported such a case
in the lull house, nor did Ratu Marika mention such a one in his reports, but the case is,
as far as I can recollect, identical with one mentioned by the native minister at Ba, one
evening that he dined with us. He did not speak in the Bose.
The’statement said to be made by a provincial scribe, I know nothing whatever about.
If such a case had been reported in the house, I should most certainly have put it in
my notes.
‘No Roko made such a statement as “that the people were so worried they were
“ ready to fight,” and the only foundation for the whole paragraph is that Roko Tui
Cakau observed, during the discussion on deaths and sick people, “ that the Kaisis
“ were afraid if they stopped at home to mind the sick, of appearing to disregard the
“ orders of their Chief, and of being punished for n.”
This is the strongest expression that was given, and reads much stronger than it
appeared at the time, for it was thrown out rather as a suggestion of a reason for the
carelessness 'as regards the sick that was complained of. No other Roko supported
him, but Roko Tui Ba expressed the opinion that it was not so. He denied also
that men died from having to work when ill. Children, he said, died, but certainly not
from work.
A case of a woman bearing a child in a coffee plantation, and one of another leaving
her child in the mud while she was fishing were given, the first by Sailosi, native
stipendiary magistrate of Tailevu, and the second by Roko Tui Ba. The first case was
given in the report of the Buli’s meeting, and nothing was said as to whether she was
ordered to go or not; in the second, the case was reported as illustrative of the difficulty
of getting women to take care of themselves and their children, and keeping them away
from work.
Mr. Langham submits that “ Government gardens ” is a correct translation of the
words “ were vakamatanitu.” lam not aware that anybody ever said it was not, but
the words do not appear anywhere in my note book. If they had been used, however
trivially, 1 think I should have remembered it, as I have noticed the words used by the
natives for these so-called Government gardens are “ were makavanua,” plantations
belonging to the land (or community). It may appear of small importance, but the
fact that they generally say “ were vakavanua,” is a proof t hat they regard them as their
own matters; not as something put upon them by the executive.
A Roko is reported to have said, “ Our people are groaning (vutugu) under their
burdens, and are oca (tired out). It was never like this in the olden times, &c.”
No Roko said anything, of the kind, but it will be as well to see what was said in
the Bulis’ report. It is this, “ groaning (vutugu) is an old thing with us, the malanitu
“ is not the cause when a man groans.”
Of course things were not reported as being perfection, and if they had been it would
have been a stronger argument against the veibose, than any I have yet heard.
Imperfections were picked out everywhere, and faults confessed by every section. There
was no bitterness in any of the great discussions on the death-rate, tending the sick,
and murmuring. They occupied considerable time, and of course the more searching
the inquiry the more would come out for opponents of the policy to lay hold of, but that
the whole of the reverend gentleman’s statements are founded on fiction can clearly be
proved. He has been so little informed as to what took place that he has been unable
to name any of the matters which, if truly reported, would have given some slight hold
to such as are eager to attack the form of native government, and if a commission as
suggested were publicly held, it would not only show to everybody who cares to learn
what an animus there is, and how charges without foundation are made by men who
people would expect to be the last to spread false reports, but would give a feeling
of relief and support to many Chiefs who wonder that such statements are allowed to
pass unpunished.
(Signed) Wilfred Collet.
30th June 1882.


Rev. F. Langham to the Colonial Secretary.
~ Bau, November 24, 1882.
‘ IR ’ I have to-day received your letter of the 14th instant, covering his Excellency’s
Minute on my letter of the 18th ultimo, and feel compelled to make the following
remarks thereon, which I beg you will be good enough to lay before his Excellency.
With regard to his Excellency’s statement that “notoriety has been evidently
“ Mr Langham’s object from the first,” I desire to repeat what I wrote in a previous
letter that my first communication to the “ Melbourne Argus, ’ was written in reply to
an editorial, which in my opinion, did not give a correct representation oi the state ot
this Colony. Until that editorial appeared, I had no intention of writing to the news-
papers, and I do not know that I should have written again if my statements had not
been challenged by his Excellency’s Native Commissioner. When Mr Wilkinson
disputed the accuracy of my assertions, I felt bound to reply. Had I not done so my
silence would doubtless have been represented as a confession that I had written
previously under a misapprehension. And as I believed then, and do still believe, that
what I wrote was substantially true, and that a state of things existed which appeared to
me to be injurious to the interests of the Government, as well as to those of the natives,
Chiefs and commoners, I wrote again to the “ Argus,” in reply to Mr Wilkinson,
and lam persuaded that the publication of those letters has done good 01 this,
I have been advised from various quarters, and I know of my own knowledge that,
such is the case. “We had better cease doing this or it will be published was the
remark of a Chief only this week, in reference to something he and others were doing,
which he thought was wrong. . . , , .
I beo* most emphatically to say that in writing to the newspapers, my desire was to
aid in the prevention of injustice and oppression, that the “ murmuring of the people,
(respecting which his Excellency said, “I regret to be obliged to believe that that
<fc murmuring, although much exaggerated as regards the whole Colony, is in some
“ districts not altogether without foundation. I fear that there are places where some
“ Chiefs have been unduly exacting, &c.”) might cease, and that the Government might
not be evil spoken of by them. .
Neither in the origin of the correspondence, nor in any part ot it, is there anything
to justify his Excellency’s remark, and I beg to assure his Excellency that he does me
great injustice in attributing to me a motive so unworthy. I trust that his Excellency
will reconsider this accusation against me.
His Excellency is also in error, in thinking, that I should be unwilling to regard the
convenience of the Government with reference to the question of publication. It did
not occur to me that the publication of the correspondence could possibly mislead any
person. I judge from cne of his Excellency’s communications to me, that my first
letter to the Melbourne “ Argus,” which was read in the Ba Bose, but “was not in the
slightest degree discussed there,” did not mislead any one, on the contrary, indeed his
Excellency intimates that very correct and proper views of it were entertained by those
who simply heard it read. In writing my letter of the 18th instant, I thought I was
doing an act of courtesy, in intimating my desire that the correspondence should be
published. . My reasons for desiring publication are, —
Ist. Because a better state of things among the native population is sure to be the
result. And I would here say that if his Excellency will cause the entire
correspondence to be accurately translated into the native language, and circu-
lated throughout Fiji, very great good will result both to his Excellency’s
Government, and to the native population.
2nd. Because correspondence on other public questions has been published in the
colonial newspapers, and from references made to the “ Argus” letters, I judge
the public will be interested in the subject also.
3rd. Because I have been informed, on what appears to be good authority, that his
Excellency has represented that I have “ refused to substantiate the letters
“to the Melbourne ‘ Argus/ because I was really unable to do so. And I
therefore wish the public to have an opportunity of judging thereon.
4th. Because it is rumoured, whether on good authority or not, I cannot say, that
the English magistrates alone, have been invited to reply to the statements
respecting the punishment of natives who fail to work in the Government
plantations, while, perhaps, through some oversight, no such request has been
sent to the native magistrates, whose duty it has been for some time past to
deal with defaulters. And whether this rumour is without foundation or not,
the more thoroughly the whole question is ventilated in public the more,
O 3


accurate and full will be the information circulated. And this, as indeed, his
Excellency intimates, is of the first consequence to the natives, as well as to
the colonists.
I have, &c.
(Signed) Frederick Langham.
Colonial Secretary to Rev. F. Langham.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Suva,
Sir, December 21, 1882.
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, dated the 24th
November 1882, and in reply to forward you, the enclosed copy of his Excellency’s
Minute thereon.
I have, &c.
(Signed) John B. Thurston.
Minute by the Governor.
By publishing his charges against the native Government in the Melbourne “ Argus,”
with his signature attached, Mr. Langham showed that his object was notoriety, or, in
other words, to make the charges known, and his name in connexion with them.
Without expressing any further opinion on the propriety of this proceeding (which it
may be remarked has afforded much comfort to the many planters and others who
oppose the Government native policy), the Governor does not doubt that Mr. Langham’s
motive may have been unexceptionable. Whether that was so, or not, can only be
known to Mr. Langham himself, and as the Governor has expressed no opinion to the
contrary, he is unable to reconsider an accusation which has not been made.
The Governor is Quite willing to give Mr. Langham credit for all the disinterestedness
which he claims, and thinks it probable that he has been misled by some of the many
native and other persons in the Colony, who are ever ready to invent or exaggerate
stories which they think likely to fall in with the prejudices of their superiors.
With regard to the publication of this correspondence, the Governor must still decline
to express any opinion. If Mr. Langham considers that it would be beneficial he can,
of course, try the experiment on his own responsibility.
On the latter paragraph of Mr. Langham’s letter, the Governor makes no comment,
except that he is unable to take further notice of what Mr. Langham hears, on however
good authority, unless that authority be specified, and unless also the matter be one
upon which he has a right to information.
(Signed) G. William Des Yceux.
11th December 1882.
No. 6.
The Hon. Sir A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G., to COLONIAL OFFICE.
(Received April 17, 1883.)
Sir, The Red House, Ascot, , 1883.
I have the honour to return the correspondence between the Rev. F. Langham
and the Fijian Government enclosed in your letter of the 30th ultimo.*
2. The greater part of this correspondence had already been seen by me when in Fiji
last year. _
3. I quite agree with Mr. Des Voeux as to Mr. Langham’s inability to make good his
allegations ; and I think it not improbable that, as is suggested, he listened too
credulously to reports from his native teachers which they thought it would be
agreeable to him to receive.
4. On the correspondence itself it seems hardly necessary for me to offer any remarks,
but it may perhaps be not altogether useless if I endeavour to explain, for the informa-
tion of Lord Derby, why the system of native Government now established in Fiji is
viewed with jealousy and unfriendly eyes by some at least of the older missionaries, and
especially by Mr. Langham.
# Not printed.


5. It is almost impossible to overrate the benefits which have been conferred on Fiji
by the Wesleyan Mission. Not only is the marvellous change effected in the habits,
belief, and character of the Fijian people almost wholly their work, but the all-pervading
influence of the mission is, even at the present day, a power for good, the withdrawal of
which would be very seriously and most injuriously felt. Nevertheless, great as are
the benefits they have conferred, the members of the mission are not free from human
infirmity. For some time after the general establishment of Christianity, the missionaries
practically ruled the country with a power almost absolute and wholly irresponsible. As
was said at a meeting of the Bose Yaka Turaga in 1880, “ Formerly we were governed
“ by our Chiefs, and the missionaries governed our Chiefs. No one could speak his
“ mind of or to a missionary, for he knew that thus his Chief’s anger would be brought
“ upon him.” It was natural that this should be so. Causes very similar to those
which in the middle ages gave to the clergy an ascendancy in the affairs of secular life,
gave a like influence to the Wesleyan clergy in Fiji. They were superior in intelligence
and knowledge to those among whom they lived; education was in their hands ; they
read and wrote with a facility not often equalled by their converts; and above all they
were regarded as the depositories of mysterious and superhuman powers. On the whole,
their rule was a beneficial one, but it was not free from abuse. How harsh and rigid it
in many respects was, and how freely secular puuishments were resorted to for the
enforcement of ecclesiastical censures, it is difficult for a stranger to believe. In one
case, a man who, on a Sunday, killed, cooked, and ate a crab which had crawled into
his house, was, during the following week, brought before the native magistrate by his
spiritual guide, and whipped for his offence. In another case, my Native Commissioner,
Mr. D. Wilkinson, informed me that he had been only just in time, owing to his
opportune but accidental arrival at the place, to save five women from being publicly
flogged for bathing in a stream of water on a Sunday. In this case Mr. Wilkinson had
great difficulty in the native magistrate to remit the sentence owing to the
importunity of the Wesleyan native minister for the imposition of punishment, an
importunity which the magistrate said he dared not disregard.
6. Since annexation of course a very different state of things has arisen. The
missionaries have still great influence, but a disregard of their .injunctions is no longer
followed by a legally inflicted punishment.
7. That the civil tribunals would no longer take cognizance of ecclesiastical offences
must have been foreseen by the missionaries, and has been accepted by them with a
fairly good grace ; but the institution of the Bose Vaka-turaga, and the establishment of
the native system of taxation, have both been very distasteful to many of them, at least
to most of those long established in the country.
8. It had long been their policy to discourage ail gatherings except those of a
more or less ecclesiastical character. The Bose Vaka-turaga is not only purely secular,
but also, although always respectful in tone to religion, has by no means shown any
undue subservience towards its ministers. It has strongly supported the existing
marriage law against the attacks of the clergy, who would have desired to treat as
invalid all marriages they had not themselves performed. It brought to light the
scandal of an European minister attempting by spiritual censures to punish a native
magistrate for a decision given by him on the bench. It has condemned an attempt to
extort money for missionary purposes, and has, in many instances, shown its conviction,
as expressed in 1880, that “ now we know that the Government is the head, and that all
“ are under it. The liberty which has been thus given the missionaries do not
“ like,”
9. The taxation of the Natives by communes, and in kind, is a standing reproach to the
Mission, which insists on the payment of money by each individual, and the system is
consequently regarded with strong disfavour by many of, at least, the older missionaries.
There are others, however, who are well aware of the gravely mischievous results of
their present system of collection money for missionary purposes, and who would gladly
take a lesson from, and follow the example of, the Government,
10. On the whole, then, there are very intelligible reasons why the Bose Vaka-turaga,
and the taxation scheme in particular, and the whole present system of government in
general, should be displeasing to those among the missionaries who remember the palmy
days of their political influence. I believe, however, that they are, to a great degree,
unconscious of the tendency of their own views (even in such a case as that of
Mr. Langham, who for years before annexation had wielded an authority greater than
O 4


that of any mediaeval bishop), and that the ugly features of selfish ambition are masked
to the consciences even of those in whom the lust for power is most strongly developed,
by a sincere belief that they are solely animated by a zeal for pure religion and the
spiritual welfare of the Church.
I have, &c.
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) ARTHUR GORDON.
Colonial Office.
No. 7.
The Right Hon. the EARL OF DERBY to Governor G. WILLIAM
DES VCEUX, C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, May 3, 1883.
I have had under my consideration the correspondence forwarded in your
Despatch of the 21st of December,* which has taken place between your Government
and the Rev. Frederick Langham arising out of a letter addressed by that gentleman to
the editor of the Melbourne “ Argus ” on the 3rd of September.
2. I am glad to have this opportunity! of bearing testimony, as has been done on
various occasions by my predecessors in office to the valuable services which have been
rendered to the native race in Fiji by the Wesleyan Mission.
3. I am, however, disposed to think that on the present occasion Mr. Langham
would have better consulted the interests of the native community by abstaining from
the publication in the Australian press of statements calculated to bring into discredit
that carefully considered native policy which has received the general approval of Her
Majesty’s Government; and lam the more inclined to regret the course taken on this
occasion in view of the fact that the allegations in respect of oppression brought forward
by Mr. Langham do not appear to be sufficiently supported by the evidence which he
w r as able to adduce.
4. Looking to all the circumstances of the case, I approve of the course taken by you
in declining in your Minute of the 27th of September to adopt Mr. Langham s suggestion
that a Commission should be appointed to inquire into matters in which there appeared
to be discrepant testimony, as well as into the hardships and abuses which he believed
to exist among the native population.
5. I request that you will inform Mr. Langham that Her Majesty’s Government rely
upon him and the missionaries generally to assist the Government of the Colony by
giving their best support to such measures as, with the approval of Her Majesty’s
Government, have been or may be adopted for the protection and advancement of the
native race, whose welfare is a matter of deep interest to all concerned in the affairs of
Fiji.
I have, &c.
Governor G. W. Des Voeux, (Signed) DERBY.
No. 8.
Governor Sir G. William DES VCEUX. K.C.M.G,, to the Right Hon. the
EARL OF DERBY. (Received August 14, 1883.)
Government Flouse, Suva, hiji,
My Lord, June 14 ’ 1883 *
I have the honour to inform your Lordship that on my return from the meeting
of native Chiefs, held this year at Nauduri, on the northern coast ot Yanua Levu, 1 too
* No. 5, Part 11.


trie opportunity of* paying a visit to the native industrial school at Yanawai on th£
southern coast of the same island.
2. Leaving Nauduri at noon on the 6th June, H.M.S. “ Dart,” in which I was a
passenger, arrived at the mouth of the Yanawai river the following evening at sunset.
3. Early on the morning of the Bth I proceeded up the river by boat, and spent some
hours in inspecting the school.
4. A description of this establishment and its present condition is contained in the
interesting report (herewith enclosed) of Mr. Thurston, the Colonial Secretary, whose
visit was made, under my instructions, some months ago.
5. I agree generally with Mr. Thurston’s remarks as to the progress made by the
boys, and especially as to the proficiency which they are rapidly acquiring in boat
building. Six fine boats, of a value probably exceeding 300/., were either finished,
or nearly finished ; and it was evident that the hoys took much interest in the work,
and had already, after but a few months’ teaching, acquired a remarkable dexterity in
the use of tools.
6. I also agree with Mr. Thurston as to the poorness of the soil, and was sorry to
observe how much labour upon it had been unproductively expended. It is evident
that food must henceforward be supplied from outside, and that agricultural operations
must be directed exclusively to the object of teaching the cultivation of new products.
7. The success in the case of sawing, carpentering, and boat building is an encourage-
ment to supply teachers of other mechanical arts, and it is intended to make further
appointments of this kind as soon as we can overcome the difficulty of finding suitable
men; men, that is, who combine the requisite knowledge with good character and a
knowledge of the Fijian language.
8. As mentioned in my speech at the funeral of the late Vunivalu (Cakobau),
1 propose to commence this }'ear the establishment of the second school for the south-
western provinces, which, at the time of the passing of Ordinance No. XVIII. of 1880,
it was intended to found simultaneously with that above referred to, but which it has for
various reasons been hitherto deemed impossible, or undesirable, to provide for. This
latter school will have the advantage of being much more under the eye of the Governor,
and if, as may be hoped, it is possible to find a site which combines other requisites with
a more fertile soil, it may perhaps be advisable in a few years to combine the two schools
in one.
8- An inspection of the school at Yanawai by an officer proceeding from Suva cannot
occupy less than three days, even when a steam-vessel is specially employed for the
purpose, and would probably take a week on the average when ordinary means of
communication are used.
10. While for the above reason visits to the school on the part of the Governor, and
the higher white officials cannot be otherwise than rare until the staff of the Colony is
considerably increased, I am glad to say that the native Chiefs are showing signs of
increased interest in the institution, and at the meeting just concluded spontaneously
passed a resolution under which the Rokos of the provinces immediately concerned will
pay monthly visits.
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. WILLIAM DES VCEUX.
The Right Hon. the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure in No. 8.
His Excellency the Governor,
Sir,
I have the honour to state that, in accordance with your Excellency’s instructions,
I have paid a visit to the Government “ Industrial School” at Yanawai, Vanua Levu,
and to submit the following report:
2. 1 left Suva in the steamer “ Clyde” at noon of Monday the 9th instant, and at
4 o clock on the following morning lay-to off the Kombelan reefs waiting for daylight
to enter the passage. In consequence of my ignorance as to the exact locality of the
school we entered by Soni island passage, and, coasting round Kombelan point," arrived
off the Yanawai river at 10.30 a.m.
3. 4he most direct and the safest way of approaching Yanaw r ai is by the Nyavu
passage. Had this route been taken, the steamer might have been at anchor by seven,
instead of half-past ten o’clock in the morning.
i 17270. p


4. For the benefit of other officers who may visit the school I may observe that if the
steamer or other vessel is run upon a north course between the islands of Namena and
Karo, until a conspicuous round hummock on the north end of the latter island bears
south-east, she may then be kept away north-west, and will arrive at Nyavu passage,
which is both wide and clear, and not distant from the Yanawai river.
5. My first feeling upon arrival at the Yanawai river was one of disappointment, and
when I state that, although a boat was at once sent to communicate with the superin-
tendent of the school, it was nearly night before any reply reached me, it will not be
difficult to understand that the feeling was Intensified.
6. A sandy bar extends for a considerable distance seaward of the river’s mouth, and
over this bar runs a constantly shifting shallow channel, impracticable at low water for
anything larger than a light pulling boat.
7, Considerable delay must therefore always occur, together with some risk, when
supplies for the school are landed from outside. And if vessels such as the “ Clyde” or
“ Barb ” cross the bar at high water and discharge within the mouth of the river, there
is then not only a possibility, but a strong probability, that a fresh in the river or a
south wind outside may silt up the bar. and detain her there indefinitely. The “ Mary ”
schooner, belonging to Captain Barrack, was recently shut up in this way for some
twenty days.
8. The approach to the school from seaward is therefore exceptionally inconvenient.
9. In the absence of the boat I could only employ myself in observing the physical
configuration of the land through which the Yanawai river and its numerous affluents
descends to the sea, and after doing so could easily believe all that Mr. Tripp, the
superintendent of the schools, has from time to time written respecting the rainfall, and
excessive humidity of the place.
10. Yanawai is the main drain of a natural and irregularly formed half basin, lying
between the Kombelan ranges on the west and the highlands lying at the back of Natu
Yatu on the east. This roughly described area is broken up by innumerable small
valleys, so deep and narrow that they are but one remove from ravines, and all testifying
to the frequency and force of the torrents by which they have probably been formed.
The character of the river mouth, and the large quantity of drift wood, trunks, and roots
of huge trees, piled upon the bar and neighbouring foreshore on each side, give evidence
that Yanawai is an exceptionally wet and flooded locality.
11. Leaving the ship at daylight on the morning of the 11th instant, I proceeded up
the river in the school boat which had been sent for me. The boat was entirely manned
by boys, if such an expression is permissible. They rowed “ double banked,” and with
great regularity and skill. These boys were scrupulously clean, and all appeared
healthy and well fed.
12. For more than a mile up the Yanawai river the banks are subject to the daily
inundation of the tides. Dense forests of the tree and shrub mangrove line these
banks, and growing among them I noticed the “ sagali ” (lumnitzera coccenea), the
“ dabk’ (xylocarpus granatum), and several other durable and valuable woods.
13. On reaching the limits of the mangrove forest, hills were met with coming down
abruptly to the water edge. The character of the vegetation at once changed, and
consisted for the most part of dacridiums, dammaras, casuarinas, &c., all, according to
my experience, indicative of a comparatively poor soil.
14. The school is situated on the left bank of the river, at a distance of about two
and a half miles from the mouth. There is a convenient stage at the landing place.
At this spot a few acres of low-lying land, perhaps ten acres in all, seem to offer a
convenient site for the school gardens. At varying distances from the river bank
numerous hill spurs run down to the small flats referred to, and upon these spurs the
school and the dwelling-houses of the superintendent, teachers, and pupils are built.
15. These hills having been cleared of trees, it was easy to examine the soil, and this
I found to be of anything but a fertile appearance. Of a deep red brown, hard above,
and harder below, and probably containing a large quantity of ferric oxide, it is not
likely to bear much beyond the indigenous vegetation natural to it.
16 Yams cannot be cultivated successfully in such soil. Neither could coffee, nor
any other tree having a tap root. Bread-fruit might grow and hear well, having large
and numerous surface feeders, and Mr. Tripp has been advised to plant a number of
these useful trees.
17. The flat lands are of scarcely any value in consequence of—
(1.) Their limited area,
(2.) Their low-lying situation.


The surface soil is of the light alluvial character, common to most river banks in the
Colony, but it is shallow, and overlies a cold yellow or reddish yellow clay, and is
saturated with water. To drain it would be difficult, perhaps impossible, for the bank
of the river is higher than the foot of the hills, as is always the case when a river raises
its own bed. Dalo would <:row admirably, and so would bananas in the drier parts of it,
and also in patches probably in other places. These articles bread-fruit, are the
only food crops likely in my opinion to be produced at Yanawai. But these might
be grown to a very large extent.
18. Mr. Tripp informed me that there was some magnificent soil upon a range situated
about three miles inland of the school, and I have many reasons for believing his
information correct. But in a broken forest country like that under notice, a distance
of three miles appears a great, if not an absolute, bar to the schoolboys cultivating any
part of it. For reasons, to which I shall advert in the concluding part of this report,
I do not think the inability to grow yams, or other similar root-crop, of any serious
consequence.
The houses are numerous and in very good order, excepting the one known as “ the
Governor’s House.” This building has never been occupied, and is simply rotting and
falling to decay for want of use, and an occasional fire in it. I directed Mr. Tripp to
have it occupied and kept in good order, so that in the event of the Governor visiting
the place, it might be in proper condition.
20. There is a visitor’s house adjoining that of the superintendent.
21. A large and well-built hospital has just been completed. Its dimensions are
42 X2O feet. It is lofty, cool, strong, and very well situated. Up to the time of my
visit no need, I was informed, had arisen for a hospital, the health of the boys being
very good. Both Mr. and Mrs. Tripp had suffered severely from rheumatism, and the
latter is now visiting the Australian Colonies in the hope of shaking it off. Mr. Tripp
appeared in excellent health.
22. The boys’ houses are well-built, comfortable places. Each house accommodates
eight boys. Bed-places for four boys on each side of the house, are raised well off the
ground." Mosquito screens are provided, and also one lamp, hung out of harms way.
In each house is suspended, upon a board, the regulations of the school. A leading
boy is in charge of each house.
23. The teachers’ and elders* houses are similarly built, but differ in their interior
arrangements, being divided into an inner and outer apartment. The former is
occupied by boys under the elders’ special charge, he himself sleeping and living injffie
outer one.
24. After visiting the buildings, I proceeded to the school, where the scholars and
native teachers had assembled, and examined the boys first in arithmetic.
25. I found them all fairly up in the first four rules, both simple and compound.
Some of the smaller boys were particularly quick, and I observed with much interest,
that the boys worked out the questions set them on the blackboard by different modes,
each lad doing his work in the way that pleased him best, e.g ., one question was :
“ 10 men worked for days at Is. per diem ; what amount was due to them ? ”
One boy’s slate showed his wav of working thus :
10
120
2©) 12,5
£6 5 0
Another boy’s slate had upon it, the following brief solution
20)125
£6 5 0
26. It appeared to me that the boys understood what they were doing, and the only
fault I had to find was with the figuring, which on the whole, was not good.
The teacher Aisake Ratudradea seemed a very intelligent man, and I had some
conversation with him upon the manner in which he taught.
P 2


Before my departure from the school, he presented me with a letter, of which a
translation is attached (A), and which I informed him should be laid before the
Governor.
27. The boys then read from the New Testament, and read fairly well, some of them ;
again the small boys, very well. The chapter read was the sth chapter of Matthew,
and here, I regret to say, that they did not seem to at all understand what they
were doing. They read fluently and glibly, but beyond that, nothing remains to
be said.
28. It is a subject for regret that the missionaries in Fiji have never published any
reading book for their schools. The Bible and Runyan’s Pilgrims Progress are the only
books to which Fijians have as yet had access.
In Tonga the Mission College, under direction of the Rev. Mr. Moulton, has
published books on geography, natural history, travels, and even ASsop’s Fables. This
last I forward with this report, believing it will interest your Excellency, and probably
lead, upon the establishment of our own printing office, to the publication of similar
translations for the use of the natives in this Colony.
29. After examining the boys’ writing books, Mr. Tripp went through one of the
daily lessons in English, and of this, it would not be fair, either to pupils or master, to
say much. The boys knew the alphabet, and pronounced the letters very well ; they
also gave a fairly correct pronunciation to a number of monosyllables written on the
black board, but of the meaning of which they knew nothing.
30. But as neither books, nor indeed anything required for the use of the English
class has yet been supplied to the superintendent, my surprise is that the boys have
learnt anything, and especially so if the amount of clearing, building, and mechanical
work done is taken into account.
According to a return furnished by the superintendent, I find that there are from
the —
Province of Bua 34 scholars.
„ Lomai Viti 24 „
„ Cakaudravi 27 ~
„ Macuata 22 „
5, Lau 23 j?
Total
130 „
31. From the schools I proceeded to the worksheds, and I may here at once express
to your Excellency the feelings of surprise and satisfaction, which I felt upon entering
the buildings. , , r ,
32. Five and twenty or thirty boys were working at various branches ot carpentry,
and all usin o- their tools with a deftness and skill that left nothing to be desired.
33. Two'very fine boats have just been completed. One I valued at 65/., and the
other at 90/. They were most excellent models, and were not only faithfully and even
beautifully built, but were built of the most lasting woods known.
34 Near these finished boats were being prepared the keels for others, together with
stem 'and stern posts, chocks, knees, timbers, and the other parts required for them.
The boys were doing the whole of the work, the instructor, Mr. Cheyme, walking about
and superintending. T e ,
35 Adjoining these worksheds were the sawpits, and here I found native sawyer
employed sawing up some of the valuable timber, of which an inexhaustible supply exists
in the neighbourhood. Mr. Cheynie, who superintends this branch of work also, gave
me much information on the subject of native woods, and exhibited samples ot which
he had a considerable quantity sawn, notably one which he termed Red Cedai or
“BauVudi” of the natives, and another durable and easily worked wood named
“ Ko-Sa.” I sent into the woods, hoping to obtain specimens of the flowers ot the trees
from which these woods came, but without success. I greatly regretted that 1 could
not stay a week in the place, in order to spend it in the neighbouring forests. It it he
possible to obtain a week or 10 days’ leave of absence at the proper season, I should
like to revisit the school, and make a collection of botanical specimens for transmission
to Kew of the woods growing near, including one or two varieties of Dammaua, wlncn
think have not yet been described. . , T , .
36. A menu other things being made are shingles, or which I brought ava} on
bundle, lor the purpose of putting them upon some small outbuilding m Suva, and
testing their durability. Mr. Cheynie, however, assured me. that he had known them
to be°good after 10 years’ exposure upon some of the French mission houses a.


Wainunu. They are made from a wood known locally as “ Dakua Salusalu,” but from
the days of Seemann in Fiji there is a doubt existing as to whether this is identical with
the Dakua Vitiensis, a Dammara pine, not unlike the Kauri of New Zealand, or a local
name for the “ Danydium Elatura.” In either case, however, it is reported to be a
sound and lasting wood. . „ .. . . , . . a A
37 Before o-oing further, I cannot refrain from noticing the imminent risk from floods
to which the workshop, tool houses, and sawpits, together with everything in them are,
exnosed The whole of the flat before referred to is only a foot or two above the level
of the river and the river is virtually nothing more than the confluence ot a number of
mountain torrents. A long spell of rain, a sudden and violent thunderstorm, or the
breaking of a waterspout (a thing which I once saw happen on Ovalau) must result m
the destruction and loss of ever>thing not above the reach of water. Already the place
has been once inundated, the school boat (cost 85/.) swept to sea and only picked up at
a distance of nearly 60 miles from the mouth of the river. Mr. Tripp, the superin-
tendent, informs me that the late Native Commissioner is of opinion that it is impossible
“ such a thing can occur again.” I cannot share this opinion, as I feel morally certain,
from the evidences before me, that such an event happens at least once a year.
38. I therefore strongly recommend that the workshops (now built of native material)
be moved down the river some little distance to a spot in an angle of the stream where
there is land on the banks sufficiently high to avoid the risk referred to. And 1 would
further recommend that, as the initiatory stages of work have now been surmounted, the
new shops and sheds be built of wood, and shingled so as to lessen danger from fire.
The superintendent and Mr. Cheynie are both in favour of this course being taken.
3Q. It apnears convenient at this point of my report to offer some observations upon
the question of the success of the school, and whether, in addition to its success as a
school for instructing native youths in various mechanical pursuits, and also something
of agriculture and horticulture, it can, in some degree, be made self-supporting
40 Upon this point I entertain little doubt. The boys are quick and anxious
to learn, and cannot fail to do so under competent instruction. Sawing, boat-buildmg,
and o-eneral carpentry, they can learn under Mr. Cheynie, who, m addition to being a
clever artisan, is a well-informed man, a perfect master of the Fijian language, and con-
versant with native manners and habits of thought. The boys respect him, and his
manner towards them leaves nothing to be desired.
41. But beyond Mr. Cheynie we at present have no one, although it is proposed to
teach the boys blacksmith’s work and sail-making; the latter a necessary art, now that
Fijians are everywhere abandoning their canoes, and taking to the use of boats and
small vessels. , , . .. . ~ r . r
42 Something should, I think, be at once done in this direction. One applicant lor
employment as sailmaker, roperaaker, shingle splitter, and general “ all round ” work,
has been recommended in the person of Mr. Gains Anderson, a native of ]Ncw
Brunswick, a steady respectable man, and long resident in the country. Mr. Anderson
holds a certificate as master mariner. He might therefore, and in addition to other
things, take charge of a navigation class, and if he only taught the principles of
“plane sailing,” would impart much valuable knowledge to youths who are nearly all
born seamen. . ... . ,
43. That the school can be made to support itself, I think quite possible, and the
Government might become its best customer. 1 would suggest tliat, as far as possible,
all the boats required by Government be built at this school. The Service requires one
or two classes of boats only, e.g., pilot boats, magistrates’ boat? for sea-going purposes,
ditto, for river work. Let models and frame sections of such boats be prepared by
competent officers, and let them be forwarded to the school for use when wanted.
44. The Government annually requires many boats, and with the progress of the
Colony will require more than it does at present. The school will thus get sale for its
work/and the Government will get a better article at a less price than if, as now, it
employed tradesmen whose whole endeavour, whether as regards work or material, is to give
as little as possible for the largest amount of money. But outside of the Government
there is an enormous and increasing demand for boats among natives, and when your
Excellency remembers the gross frauds that are daily perpetrated by boat builders
upon natives, I think the advantages of obtaining a boat from the Government school
will be apparent. , , , ,
45. In the same way, I would recommend that a plan of certain houses be settled
upon, such as are required for medical officers, magistrates, police, &c. These houses
might be either a wooden frame with thatched roof and reeded sides, or of wood
altogether In either case the frames could be made to plan, marked and fastened up
° P 3


for shipment to any place where they were required. The saving and convenience to
Government would, 1 believe, be great.
46. In respect to furniture also, your Excellency is aware of the demand there
constantly is for plain office furniture, and that from your Excellency’s own office down
to that of the most subordinate official of the Government, there is hardly a properly
turnished office in the Colony. In the provinces there are officers who have had to
wait for years for a set of pigeon holes, and had to make empty cases do duty for
magisterial tables. Upon the whole, officers have been well aware of the extravagant
rates demanded by local artificers for any work required of them, and equally well
aware of the urgent necessity for the exercise of the strictest economy in respect of
public expenditure, and consequently have not pressed for anything not urgently
necessary.
47. But benches, tables, desks, pigeon holes, and many other things could be
admirably made at the school workshop, and if your Excellency employed a joiner
there to instruct some of the boys (and I may here observe that a carpenter, who it may
be said is already provided, is not necessarily a joiner) the money paid as salary would
be more than covered by the work done, plus the instruction in one of the most useful
trades.
48. My suggestions on this subject are capable of much amplification, but as my
immediate object is only to show that the receipts from the school need not be
problematical it is unnecessary for me to say more.
49. Upon returning to the school house the teachers collectively handed me two
letters, copies of which are attached. In reply, I said what the occasion seemed to
require, ana promised to place the letters in your Excellency’s hand, and ask that the
subjects referred to may be brought up at the approaching council of Chiefs at Macuata.
50. With reference to the supplies of food, I beg leave again to reiterate my opinion
that for such food as yams, the school must be supplied from outside. But this, I
venture to think, is of minor importance. If it is desirable to teach the boys agriculture,
yam planting is not the thing to begin with, for of that the native knows more than we
do. With the scheme of Mr. Wilkinson, the late Native Commissioner, to essay the
cultivation of considerable areas of ground, I cannot agree. It would be impossible
to make such areas pay, and in order to merely teach boys what is necessary in cultiva-
tion, and incline them to take an intelligent interest in it, one acre of a thing is as good as
50, whether it be coffee or cabbages.
51. Garden husbandry should, I think, be encouraged, every sort of vegetable suited
to soil and climate should be grown, or attempted to be grown. The boys should be
induced to use such vegetables as they grow, in order to acquire a taste for them, and
small prizes should be given to the most successful and intelligent gardeners.
52. An acre of manioc or cassava has been planted, and I have promised Mr. Tripp
to procure for him information on the subject of making cassava and flour bread.
53. Having an hour to spare before the close of what had been a long but interesting
day, I went lor a walk into the bush with Mr. Tripp, following a forest track leading
from his house. We walked for about a mile, but without increasing our altitude at
any time to more than 150 or 200 feet above the sea level. The day had been exceed-
ingly dry and clear, in fact, I was assured that there had not been such a day during
the present year. The under shrubs, ferns, and mosses, were nevertheless saturated with
moisture. The little palm, “ ptychosperma semanii,” was in abundance, though in the
moist climate of Taviuni it is seldom found below an altitude of 500 feet, and it, as well
as those of all ferns, was covered with minute mosses and fungi, such as I have never
met with before at such a low altitude. Everything was indicative of excessive
moisture. Returning to the river at sunset, I only reached the steamer some time after
it was dark.
54. In concluding this long, and I fear, digressive report, I would respectfully make
the following suggestions :
1. That the requisitions made by the superintendent, but held in abeyance pending
my visit, be now complied with.
2. That especially the maps and sheets of natural objects asked for some time ago
be now procured from Sydney.
3. That a not expensive magic lantern, and suitable and instructive slides be supplied.
The boys must have something to interest and amuse them. At present they
have absolutely nothing.
4. That the school be visited frequently by one, or other of the members of the
executive, or such persons as your Excellency may desire should visit the place.
The distance from Suva is about 115 miles, and the “ Clyde ” can make the


passage in from 14 to 19 hours, according to wind and weather. Thus, anyone
leaving Suva at 1 p.m., could reach Yanawai very early the next morning, spend a
day and night there, and reach Suva again on the third night. TLA might be
severe, perhaps, on bad sailors, but it is really necessary that the school be
visited often. Situated in a broken, rugged country, surrounded by dense
forests, completely out of sight of the sea, there is an aspect of loneliness about
the place that cannot but have a telling effect upon the residents, and which can
only be remedied in some such way as that proposed.
5. That arrangements be made for supplying the place with about 50 tons of yams
per annum, to be grown and delivered by natives about Savusavu bay or else-
where, at no great distance, and paid for by Government. The time of the boys
is usefully employed at work, and it will be cheaper and in every way better,
that they work at their trades rather than at yam planting.
6. That a medicine chest be prepared under direction of the Acting Chief Medical
Officer, and forwarded at once. The medicines should, of course, be such as
could be safely entrusted to an intelligent man. Mr. Tripp, however, has some
knowledge of medicine, and he was specially employed by the Government
during the epidemic of measles in 1874-5.
In conclusion, I may add that in my opinion, there is nothing about the locality of
the school to recommend it, and that but for the apparently inexhaustible supply of
timber close at hand, the work that has already been done in building and clearing, and
that excepting on the part of the superintendent and his wife, there is no complaint of
sickness, I should feel it my duty to strongly recommend the removal of the institution
to a better and more approachable situation.
(Signed) John B. Thurston.
26.4.83.
Translations.
Dawara Industrial School,
Sir, April 11, 1883.
I write to you regarding my position here, the work of which is exceedingly
heavy, but I am in nowise faint hearted at of it.
You, sir, are well acquainted with the difficulties connected with teaching. My
salary is but 12/. per annum, and my wish is that the amount may be increased to 24/.
per annum. This, sir, is my wish, and I consider it but a fair recompense for my work
in the school.
It is I, Sir,
To Mr. Thurston. (Signed) Aisake Ratudrada.
Sir, Dawara, April 10, 1883.
I WRITE to you concerning my duties, religious, in this institution. I commenced
my duties in the month of October, and fo» three months I continued doing so, but for
which I received no pay. I received no pay for that quarter, although I performed my
work and assisted in teaching in the school. I ask, sir, if the Government do not pay
the teachers of religion.
o
(Signed) Sefanaia C.,
To Mr. Thurston. Teacher.
S «b b Dawara, April 11, 1883.
Concerning our meeting in wdiich we discussed the matter of our salaries, for it
is our desire that we receive 12/. per annum, and trust, sir, that it may be forwarded to
on ; possible at the yearly meeting of the Chiefs at Macuata. Regarding our
respective duties, we are assiduous in performing them, and are anxious to receive
our pay.
Will you be kind enough to bring this under the notice of the Rokos, that they may
be aware of our assisting the superintendent of this institution.
P 4


We do not care to ask the Chiefs, they are careless in these matters, as you know
but do you, sir, arouse them from their lethargy, that they may move in the matter
and thus hasten to us our pay.
. This, Sir, is our request,
(Signed) Waiseb, "j
Tevita,
Aporosa,
Karai,
Juta,
Peniasi, j
J OELI / J
To Mr. Thurston. Your obedient Servants.
Sir Dawara Institution, April 11, 1883.
We desire to speak our minds, sir, in connexion with things supplied for the
boys, viz, tabakans, mats, oil, and food; they are insufficient, and the fault lies with the
Chiefs who do not take interest in them. We have written to the Chiefs, Rokos, but they
have failed to supply what was asked for. This is like their promises, the Government
part is done, but theirs is not.
We therefore wish, sir. that you will bring the matter under the notice of the Chiefs
(Rokos), and then they will take some interest in us.
Regarding the eiders, let there be appointed three more, one from Lau, and one from
Macuata, and one from Cakaudrovc, for there are too few here.
These should be paid. Will you bring this also under the Rokos’ notice.
One thing we are anxious about, that is for fear the children be divided into too many
branches (classes) of learning, and the plantations be neglected.
It is us,
(Signed) Jofesa, Chief of Town.
Tinta,
Juta,
Aisake,
Koroi,
# Aparosa,
JoELI.
To Mr. Thurston. Your obedient Servants.
No. 9.
Governor Sir G. William DES VCEUX, K.C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the
EARL OF DERBY. (Received September 11, 1883.)
Government House, Suva,
My Lord, * 18* 1883.
Referring to my Despatch of 6th June 1883,* I have now the honour to
forward to your Lordship a letter in the original Fijian (together with a translation
into English), addressed to Her Majesty the Queen, by the Chiefs of Fiji assembled in
their annual Council.
I also enclose printed copies, extracted from a local newspaper, of my speech at the
opening of the meeting, the original (with translation) of the Chiefs report at its close,
and printed copies (extracted from a local newspaper), of the resolutions passed by them,
together with my replies.
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. WILLIAM DES VCEUX.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby,
&c. &c. • &c.
Not printed.


Enclosure 1 in No. 9.
To Her Majesty Our Lady Queen of Fiji and Britain.
Council House, Naduri, Macuata,
$ May 31, 1883.
Our Council of Chiefs has assembled here in Macuata, and the reply to our letter to
your Majesty from our last meeting at Ba has been read to us.
We thank your Majesty most heartily for this further assurance that we are still
remembered. We might think, as we have written on a former occasion, that in such a
vast dominion we might slip out of memory, but again your Majesty’s letter has come to
us, and deep gratitude rests within us when we are assured of the love that your
Majesty continues to bear to us.
And in respect of your Majesty’s gift to us, which is here present in our Council, it is
indeed but a representation or picture, but to us it is as if your Majesty were really
present when we are thus met together.
And now with regard to our great Chief the Vunivalu, who has died, as our great
Chiefs have died in the past years, and we have from time to time made mention of them
to your Majesty, for they, with him, made the beginning of that peace and prosperity
which we have enjoyed, and are still enjoying ; his loss is indeed a great grief to us, and
our hearts are now stayed on your Majesty alone.
With reference to the industrial school which has now been two years in progress; we
are glad to see that it is a success, and we are greatly pleased that our children, on their
part, are able to do what they are taught. We realise that this school is useful to us,
and that it will become increasingly useful in after years, and when we see that they
have already been taught, and what they have already done, as stated above; we have
decided to go on with the second school which is to be in Vitilevu, and will be begun
this year.
[ii respect of our people in Fiji, we thought that we were decreasing in numbers, and
we find that now we are rather increasing, and we are greatly rejoiced that our people
are not diminishing as in some other lands.
We would also say one thing about our Governor’s Native Commissioner, who has so long
been with us, and helped us in our work. He was a man whose heart right in all
things connected with our work, and now he is no longer among us. But we are glad
that his successor is one who, we think, will give us equal assistance.
Referring to the law which our Governor has just made about men who go to work for
hire for Europeans, it is truly a good law, and we feel that our Governor has our best
interests at heart.
We close our letter with the prayer that the love of God may continue to rest with
your Majesty.
We—
(Signed) Joseph Lala, Roko Tui Cakau.
„ Nakulanikou, Roko Tui Nadroga
„ Qorasi, Buli, Mualevu.
„ Rosauturaga, Buli Nanuyamalo.
„ Semisi, Magistrate Kadavu.
„ Sailosi, Magistrate Tailevu.
The committee appointed by the Council.
Enclosure 2 in No. 9«
Resolutions passed at the Meeting of Chiefs held at Macuata, 10th May 1883, with his
Excellency’s replies.
1. — Concerning Rokocegu.
After hearing all that Buli Dreketi and Rokocegu have to say on their own behalf, we
have talked the matter over, and it is our mind that Rokocegu having undergone his
sentence of one year’s imprisonment, should now be released and return to his own town
and to his obedience to Buli Dreketi.
I assent to Rokocegu’s return in case a good report is received of his conduct after he
has resided three months at Naduri.
i 17270. Q


2. Concerning the Industrial School at Vanualevu .
Your Excellency has desired us to confer at our present council about some things
that require more attention from the provinces interested in this school. Tui Bua, in
making his report of all he saw during his recent visit' to Ya#awai, said he found that
much had been accomplished, but that there were still some shortcomings; among which
he mentioned the supply of food for the boys, also their mats, and some other smaller
matters in which the provinces from which they came ought to have assisted in a greater
measure. It is clear to us that the provinces should look after these things, and after
some conversation we are agreed about what is to be done, namely, that every month
the Chiefs of these provinces should pay a visit to the school, and take such things as the
boys require, and that the first visit be made by Roko Tui Bua in the month of June,
Roko Tui Cakaudrove following in the month of July, Roko Tui Lau in August, Roko
Tui Lomaiviti in September, and Roko Tui Macuata in October, and that Roko Tui
Bua should then take the month of November, and the other Rokos should follow in the
order mentioned. This arrangement we submit to your Excellency, and trust that it will
remove the ground of complaint.
I approve, and I hope that the attention which appears to have been given to the
subject indicates an increasing interest in the school on the part of the chiefs.
3. — Concerning the land in dispute between Buli Koroalau and Buli Navatu.
We have discussed this matter, and in our judgment the best course is to appoint
Roko Tui Cakaudrove to go and divide the land, in order that the Koroalau people be
not removed to the mountains, but live as taukeis on the land on the sea coast.
The suggestion is good. I desire that the Roko be assisted by Buli Wailevu and
Ratu Eroni, and that report of what is done be made to me.
4. Concerning the Kai Mataso who are scattered in different places.
Roko Tui Ra has described these people as living, some in the district of Nakorotubu,
some in Nakuailava, and some in Navitilevu, and that it is their wish to be united, and
re-occupy their own land in the last-mentioned district. We think it would be well that
they should do so, and if your Excellency approve, we recommend that Roko Tui Ra
should superintend their return, and reinstate them in their towns.
On the distinct understanding that it is the wish of the people, I approve.
5. — Concerning the boundary between Bewa and Naitasiri .
This boundary.is in dispute, and the questions having been brought before the council,
we have heard all the evidence advanced by both provinces, and have come to the con-
clusion that the true boundary is the creek called Nasinu. But, while making this
representation, we leave the matter entirely in your Excellency’s hands for consideration
and decision, that it may be settled once and for all.
I concur in your suggestion
6. — Concerning our boats .
We discussed this subject at a previous council, and there is a regulation about it, but
it is not followed out so closely as it ought to be. From the report from Lau we hear
that Buli Ono’s cutter has been lost, and twenty-one persons drowned. This is a serious
matter, and we have given it careful consideration. It is clear to us that the cutter was
lost in a gale of wind, but it is also evident that there was some want of judgment
regarding the passengers and cargo. When, therefore, your Excellency s cuculai let ei
was read about the license required for our boats under freight or charter, it commended
itself to us at once, and we are getting ready all the vessels that require a license to e
sent up to procure them, and when they arrive in Suva or Levuka, it is our wish that
they should be measured and registered, that we may know the tonnage and the number
of passengers each may carry inside and outside the reef, and also what amount of cargo
they may carry, or to what depth they may be loaded. It appears to us that many ot


our people who have European-rigged boats do not know much about these matters, ana
are very careless about them.
The object of your suggestion is good, but probably experience will show that
something more is required to attain it effectually. This, however, will be a good
beginning.
7; r —Concerning the two Chiefs of Rakiraki under surveillance.
Considering the-length of time these two Chiefs have been away from their people, and
living under to wit, Nasova at Lau, and Nagilolevu at Cakaudrove, and
that they are the only two of those removed from the province of Ra who have not yet
returned, and that the report of their conduct is now good, we respectfully submit to
your Excellency our, wish that they be released, and be allowed to return to their
homes.
They may return.
8. — Concerning the birth and nurture of illegitimate children.
There is one matter that is a source of anxiety to us, which we will mention, as the
report has reached us, namely, that it is forbidden in some provinces for those in church
fellowship to assist at the birth and in the nurturing of children born out of wedlock.
This is a new thing among us, and it places both mother and child in a painful and
pitiful position. We have conversed together about it, and it seems to us that the
nurture of these children is not a matter to be judged by the Lotu; it is rather a matter
becoming us as human beings and as a people to decide; and we are of one mind to
follow our old customs in respect of this thing, seeing that it is right to care for children
and their mothers.
I have already exnressed my opinion strongly on this subject in connexion with the
Lomaiviti Provincial Bose. The abstention from assisting mothers in child-birth,
whatever the origin of the child is so inhuman and so repulsive to true Christian
principle, that I cannot but hope there is some mistake as to the instructions of the
Mission Authorities, notwithstanding the general impression on the subject which prevails
in certain districts, not by any means, I am glad to find, in the whole Colony. But
whatever may be the truth as to this, I entirely concur with your opinion on the subject,
and I deem it well to make known that if any death or serious injury result from
neglect of the kind referred to, those who have been guilty of it will be very severely
dealt with.
9. — Concerning women who go to other provinces , thoughtlessly and contrary to our
customs.
One thing we wish to represent to your Excellency respecting some of our women
who go to other provinces heedless of any ties or connexions in their own, and who may
wish to marry there without the knowledge of their friends, and not after the manner of
marriage amongst us. It it be allowed, there is a danger of the magistrate giving licenses
to marry to persons who ought not to have them. There are two .women from Magodro
who have thus gone contrary to custom from their own district to the district of
Dawasamu, in the province of Tailevu, and desire to settle in marriage there. But when
their friends and relations heard of it, they were displeased. We have considered the
case, and recommend that the decision arrived at at the provincial meeting at Bau be
followed, and that the tw T o women be sent back to their own district, and that everything
be made clear to their friends.
So serious a contravention of w T hat has hitherto been the custom of the land deserves
my careful attention. I shall enquire into the matter.
10.— Concerning the Kai Nasoqo.
We have again discussed the divided state of this tribe, and are of one mind to
recommend to your Excellency that they should return to their own land from which
they sprang and be re-united.
Let them return.
Q 2


11. — Concerning 'patients who go to the public hospital .
In regard to the patients who have been admitted to the public hospital, and whose
expenses have not been paid, there are some who. go without the authority of their Chiefs,
or the knowledge of their friends, who are supposed to be responsible for the fees, and
we, therefore, now ask that printed forms in duplicate be provided for us, on which may
be entered the names of those who go, and the districts from which they go. And when
anyone is discharged, let him report himself to the Provincial Department, and receive
a note of the expense he has incurred, that he may take it back to the*Roko or Buli.
We humbly submit also our wishes that, if possible, the rate of hospital fees may be
reduced of the limited means of many of our people who desire the benefit
of the institution.
I will consider of this matter, with the desire to comply with your wishes.
12. — Concerning men who go to work for hire.
The regulation respecting labourers who go to work for hire has been read to us, as
your Excellency directed; also the Ordinance on the same subject that has been already
printed, and we have listened to them, and deliberated fully upon them, and our con-
clusion is that they suit us well. There are, however, a few paragraphs in the regulations
which we should be pleased to see altered. (1.) In the first paragraph we ask the
following addition to be made : “ and report also to the Roko Tui of the province.”
(2.) That the tenth paragraph should run thus: “No married man shall go to work for
hire beyond his own province.” (3.) In the twelfth paragraph, concerning those who
return to their province after completing an engagement or contract which has extended
to twelve months, it is our desire that they should remain in their own district at least
one year before again offering themselves for work.
These suggestions will be considered by the Regulation Board with, no doubt, a
favourable disposition to adopt them.
13. Concerning the Industrial School for Vitilevu
We have considered this subject well, and it is our wish that the school should be
begun this year. We again name Navesi, in the district of Vina and the province of
Naitasiri, which is, in our judgment, the most suitable place, as we stated in the council
held at Bau, or, if your Excellency would prefer a site on the sea-coast, we suggest
Kalokolevu as the only suitable one we think of at present; it is in the province of
Rewa. When your Excellency has decided on the best position, and the boundaries
have been settled, the land will be cleared by the province in which it is situate, and it
is our desire that our own gardens for this year be planted first, and then we shall put
up the school houses. The house building will be done by Rewa, Tailevu, Naitasiii,
Namosi, Wainimala, and the district of Nalawa, in the province of Ra, and the food
planting of tiie boys will be done next season. The food of the boys for this year will be
cared for by all of us, each providing for the boys of his own province. And when the
houses are put up, the food provided, and a superintendent appointed, the boys shall be
nominated by districts, each Buli nominating two boys, and the Roko Tui of each
province shall select a good and true man to go with them, and be their senior
caretaker. If a married man be selected for this post, it will be well. In respect of
such things as mats, tabakaus, malo, oil, and so forth, these shall be provided by the
provinces which are not engaged in putting up the houses.
I approve generally of your suggestions, and will select the site of the new school
after a medical inspection of the different places suggested.
14. —Concerning yaqona drinking.
In view of the change that has come over this custom in these our days, with respect
not so much to the quantity of yaquna which is drunk, as to the unwise extension of the
custom to a class of persons who never drank yaqona before, we have discussed the
subject and now represent to your Excellency that it is our desire to forbid young men
and youno’ women to drink yaqona, and also women who are suckling children. It is
our desire” further, that yaqona should not be drunk indiscriminately or immoderately,


but only in the houses of the heads of the Mataqali. We beg that a resolution on the
subject be framed, and that all who do not follow it be punished.
I approve generally of your suggestion, and hope that a regulation of the kind
proposed will prove of valuable assistance to the movement already begun by the mission
authorities.
15. — Concerning a prison for women.
We have discussed the subject of a prison for women, to which your Excellency has
directed our attention, and it appears to us that it would not be well that all our women
who may be convicted of any offence should go to a prison out of their province; it
appears rather that it is better they should remain among us, that we may ourselves take
care of them; but there are some women convicted of grave offences, and of crimes,
who ought to be sent to a prison, and as their number is not large in any one province,
one prison at Suva for ail would, in our opinion, be enough.
I will consider of this suggestion, with a present inclination to adopt it.
\Q-—Concerning the regulation about boats and vessels.
The regulation respecting boats and vessels, which, as your Excellency has pointed
out, has not been closely observed in all the provinces, has been again carefully
considered, and we are agreed that the regulation itself is a good one, and well adapted
for its purpose, but it has one defect to which its partial failure may be attributed,
namely, the absence of any penalty. And we now mention this omission that a penal
clause may be added.
I approve, and I may mention as having a special bearing on this subject, that I am
at present considering a law providing for the punishment of white men who encourage
or assist in the breach of native regulations.
17. — Concerning the people of Cawaro.
Is has been stated to us that the people of Cawaro are living in disagreement, some
being bent on a connection with Cakaudrove, and some on a connection with Macuata.
We call to mind that the boundaries of this land were discussed at the Council held at
Waikava, and afterwards confirmed, and cannot now be changed. The boundary is the
mountain ridge. The people, however, have continued divided, and in disagreement.
We sent for them, therefore, and heard all they had to say, and we are agreed, after a
careful hearing of the case, that the soil remains Macuata soil; that thoge who wish to
be connected with Cakaudrove may remove to Cakaudrove, and that those who wish to
be connected with Macuata remain on Macuata land.
I approve.
18. — Concerning Regulation I. of 1880.
We observe that the schedule mentioned in this Regulation is not appended, and
recommend that it be now added, and that paragraph 10 shall run as follows : —“ Every
“ man above the age of sixteen years shall plant yearly two of the fruit trees, and also
u two of the forest trees enumerated in the schedule hereto attached, choosing those for
“ which he considers his soil is best adapted, and the Bose Vakatikina in the month of
“ January each year shall question the Chiefs of towns as to the performance of this
“ obligation.” We recommend, also, that every one who does not obey this Regulation
may be brought before the district court, and may on conviction be fined a sum not
exceeding four shillings, to go to the provincial funds, or in default of payment may be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding fourteen days.
(1.) Fruit trees —Breadfruit, ivi, dawa, cocoanut, kavika, vutu, tarawau, orange, wi,
or such trees as yield a fruit that is edible.
(2.) Forest trees —Vesi, damanu, dakua, buabua, dilo, sagale, lauci, sacau,
nokonoko, raakita, nokosoi, bitu, vaivai, or such trees as are useful for their wood.
These suggestions will require the consideration of the Native Regulation Board, hut
I do not doubt that they will be in principle adopted.
Q 3


19- —Concerning district officers .
It appears to us that there has been confusion in the work of the courts in many of
the provinces, on account of the dismissal of the district officers, and after some
consideration, we find out that the Regulation made at the Council at Ba, has been
misunderstood by many of us. Our deliberations at the Council held at Ba were in
regard to the elevation of the Matanivanuas to the position in the land which they
formerly occupied, and the importance of their duties, which of late years has not been
sufficiently recognised,'but it was not our intention that they should also discharge the
duties of the district officers. We now again state our meaning. We are of opinion
that the duty of town officers should be confined to the town and town work; that the
district officers should attend at the various courts, and do court work; and that the
Matanivanuas should perform all the services and ceremonies connected with the land,
and the customs of the land.
I see no objection.
20. Concerning the salaries of Government officials.
Some who hold Government appointments have represented to us their desire to ask
your Excellency for an increase of salary, and we have considered the matter, and
would rather suggest a general increase, if possible, but if your Excellency should decide
there is some difficulty in doing so this year, we respectfully request that the case of
those who have a small salary be considered, and also of those who have been a long time
in the service, and whose duties are onerous.
I will give the subject my best consideration, with a view to form my own opinion
upon it. But the decision in such a case rests with Her Majesty’s Government
alone.
21. — Concerning the Magistrate for Kadavu being sole Magistrate.
We notice that there is but one magistrate in Kadavu to attend to all the work
connected with the district and provincial courts, and that is a great strain on him ; we
therefore now ask that another magistrate be appointed to help him in his various
duties, and if your Excellency approve, we submit the name of Joave Tumailevu for the
office.
I am disposed to approve.
22. Concerning the Regulation about marriage and divorce.
It appears to us that the manners and customs of our land are not now so well
observed by many, in assuming marriage relationships, as could be desired, inasmuch
as importance is attached solely in some instances to the likings and preferences of
individuals, to the exclusion of any consideration for the desires or wishes of the parents
or guardians, and the tribal relations and ceremonies, and we are agreed that these
matters should be better regulated. In respect of divorce, it is our opinion that a fee
ouo-ht to be charged on application for divorce, as a check to haste and inconsideration,
as there is evidence that divorce is sometimes asked for without a just estimation of the
graveness of the request, and of all that it means. The amount of the fees is the
important point, and in that we are not agreed, and beg to submit it to your Excellency
for decision.
I will give the subject my best consideration, and I deem it well to take this
opportunity to draw your serious attention to the present condition of women. I feai
there is much justice in the general complaint with respect to the rough treatment of
women by their husbands, and I regret to find the common opinion as to the exemption
of Fijian women from tilling the field and other hardwork is quite untrue with regard to
certain provinces, including nearly the whole of Vitilevu. From all lean learn on the
subject I feel little doubt that the inclination so frequently shown by your women to
live in concubinage with white men is due to a belief that they will receive from them
better treatment than may be expected from a Fijian husband, and I feel confident that
if more consideration were shown to the weaker sex there would be less desire and reason
for divorce, and, moreover, the chance would be greatly improved of saving your race
from dying out. It is well for you to know and bear in mind that one ot the principal
causes of the progress made by the English and other civilized nations has been, the


high position occupied by women and the fact that the men have generally relieved the
weaker sex of the hard work of the world. Both on this account and for other reasons
the sight which is not uncommon in Fiji, such as that of a man carrying nothing and
a woman following with a heavy burthen, is not a pleasant one to well-wishers of your
race; not merely as being itself nn evil, but ns indicating so much as to the subjection
of women. It is my earnest desire that you should ponder on this subject and promote
its consideration by your people, feeling well assured that if you would each of you
promote improvement in your immediate neighbourhood, want of courtesy and
consideration to women would possibly come to be regarded as disgraceful, and you
would have contributed much, not only to the peace of householders, and to the health
of families, but to the continuance of the life of your race.
23. (Joneevninp indecent assaults on and the pvactice called Dvau ni hau.
(1.) The present regulation in respect of indecent assaults applies to women alone,
and we now request that it be extended to the other sex also, and if your Excellency
approve, it is our wish that whipping be an addition to the penalty of imprisonment m
very bad cases. (2.) In respect of the practice called Drau ni kau (incantation or
sorcery) it is true that the means used are in themselves harmless, but the intention and
effect is to cause fear and work mischief, an intention too often successful, and we are
agreed that a regulation, with a heavy penalty, should be made to hold the practice in
check.
I approve of the purpose of your suggestions on this unspeakable subject. They can,
however, be adopted only after consideration by the Regulation Board.
24,. — Concerning the Kai Sokena.
The land upon which these people at present live is in the province of Macuata, in
the district of Labasa, and as the people belong to Cakaudrove, and their desire is to
o-ive their service to that province, we are agreed that they ought to remove thither, and
if that course be approved, we recommend that the Buli of Koroalau should superintend
their removal and instalment in their own land. It is not right, in our judgment, that
they should live on Macuata land, and do service to Cakaudrove.
I fully concur.
25. — Concerning those who are living as strangers in provinces other than their own .
We have discussed the wanderings abroad of the people and its evils, and are agreed
that when this Council is over and we return home, we shall go into the matter
thoroughly, each Roko at his own Provincial meeting, that we may know who are absent
from the province. And when the numbers are known and the places where they are,
we shall correspond about them and have the people returned. There is a class of
persons that we wish to mention in this connection;—This class may be divided into
three —(1.) Some persons who are appointed from one province to go as teachers to
another province, are married men and have children, and it sometimes happens that the
man may die and leave his children and wife unprovided for, and they are not known in
the land in which they are living as strangers, and it is but right that they should be
returned to the places from which they were taken. (2.) Again, amongst these teachers
(or preachers) there are some who are dismissed from their office on account of an offence,
and are thrown upon the province to which they were appointed and are of no use to it.
It is our wish that they also should be returned to the place from which they were
brought, and be of some use there. (3.) Lastly, in respect of followers or those who
accompany teachers to other provinces and whose going is not clear to us; they are of
no use in the province to which they go, and they also, we think, should be returned by
those who brought them.
This is a matter which, for its decision, requires more information than I at present
possess. When I receive this and know the number of people to whom your suggestions
relate, I will give the subject my consideration.
The Governor then spoke as follows
Having now dealt with all the Resolutions, I desire to refer to some other subjects
which are not included in them. I understand from a petition presented to me that there
is a desire for the return to the province of the Roko Tui Macuata. With some
Q 4


reluctance I consent to this on the condition that those Chiefs who have been adminis-
tering the province so successfully during his suspension, and also have headed the
movement for his return, shall assist him in his duties. As the Roko’s faults were
rather of omission than commission, it is possible that under such an arrangement he
may give no further cause for dissatisfaction. With regard to the suggested re-union of
the two families in Macuata who have lived apart since the civil war of years ago, I
concur in your opinion of its expediency, but am unable to decide now as to the place of
their joint residence. With regard to Buli Matailobau, lam disposed to think that the
warning he has received is sufficient and he has my permission to return to the district.
Buli Cakaudrove has caused me dissatisfaction by the passive obstruction be has offered
to his Roko, but as I have reason to believe that he has been misled I shall for the
present be content with this warning. With regard to the Buliship of Nakuailava, I
much regret that I should have been misled as to the desires of the people. I now
finally confirm the choice of the Bose Yakayasana and appoint Ratu Islsikeli to be Buli.
Naluve may return to Colo. As all the survivors of the mountain war were pardoned
more than a year ago, I regret that this man’s case was not brought to my notice with
the others. Wiih regard to Buli Yuda, as the act for which he was dismissed was by no
means of the same gravity as that of Buli Sabeto, whose case was dealt with at the same
time, lam willing that he should return to his district. Finally, with regard to the
question of native taxes, which I understand you have been considering, I entirely feel
with you that the uncertainty as to the amount of produce to be paid, owing to the
fluctuation of its price, is a defect of the system, and I have already been considering
the matter with a view to providing a remedy. I take the opportunity of saying also,
that as one of the principal reasons for the direct tax upon you was your small con-
sumption of European goods from which is derived the principal part of the taxation
paid b} 7 Europeans, and as your consumption has, since the cession, very much
increased, I expect to be able to recommend to Her Majesty’s Government a small
decrease of the total assessment for next year. Such a reduction, if only sanctioned,
will be a small one and will not affect those provinces which provide their quota with
comparative ease, but it will at least serve to show the untruth of the belief which has
been created among you that the Government contemplates a steady increase of this
taxation. And now, I have merely to wish you a speedy and safe return to your homes,
and an early renewal of labour for the health and happiness of your people.
Enclosure 3 in No. 9.
Speech of the Governor read by His Excellency’s Commissioner for Native Affairs
at the opening of the Annual Meeting of Chiefs, at Naduri, Macuata, on
May ip, 1883.
Chiefs of Fiji. —My first duty in connexion with the opening of this meeting is to read
to you the gracious reply of the Queen to the letter addressed by you to Her M ajesty at
the last Bose at Ba.
a S IR Dowming Street, October 2, 1882.
“ I have received and laid before the Queen the letter addressed to Her Majesty
by the Chiefs in Fiji, dated Nailaga in Ba, the 30th of November, 1881, accompanying
your Despatch of the 23yd of June, with which the report of the recent Bose
Yakaturaga, and the resolutions adopted on the occasion, were at the same time
transmitted. _ # .
“ 1 am commanded by the Queen to instruct you to inform the Chiefs, by whom this
letter was signed, that Her Majesty is glad to notice the appreciation which they
continue to show of the benefits resulting from the establishment oi British rule in the
Islands, and more particularly their remarks respecting the measures which have been
taken for the settlement of the land claims of Europeans. . .
u Her Majestv has not failed, also, to observe, with pleasure, that the visit of the
Princes, her grandchildren, to the Islands in the course of last year, has called forth
expressions of satisfaction from her loyal subjects in Fiji.
“ It is Her Majesty’s earnest wish that the result of the introduction of industrial
schools into the colony may be that the children ot her people may acquire the knowledge
of useful subjects, and the general good of the community may be thereby advanced.
I have, &c.
(Signed) Kimberley.’ ’


In further proof of the interest taken by the Queen in her Fijian subjects, Her
Majesty has commanded me to present to you Chiefs, on her behalf, the portrait of
herself, which you see before you, and you will observe, as giving it additional value,
that her Majesty has placed upon it her name, written with her own hand.
It will be for you to decide with regard to Her Majesty’s gracious present as to the
person by whom and the place where it shall be duly preserved.
Turning to events which have occurred in the colony since our last meeting. I refer
first to that of the greatest importance—the death of the Vunivalu. Having so recently
spoken to you in public of the irreparable loss which has thus been caused both to the
Government and to yourselves, I refrain from dwelling further on that sad subject, and
content myself with renewing the expression of my hope that the loyal spirit of the
deceased Chief may continue to guide your deliberations.
Another event, which I feel no doubt has caused you sorrow, was the retirement from
the Government service of the gentleman who was recently the Governor’s Native
Commissioner. On this, the first occasion of your meeting without his assistance, I feel
bound to express my sense of his valuable service to the Government, and of his untiring
devotion to your interests. At the same time, while much regretting his loss, lam happy
to feel that his place is likely to be worthily filled by the officer whom Her Majesty has
appointed to succeed him, and whom I do not doubt you will in no long time find to be
equally worthy of your confidence and esteem.
I am glad to be able to inform you that the Industrial School at Vanua Levu, in which
Her Majesty has expressed her gracious interest, after passing through a period of much
difficulty, is at length giving hopes of an encouraging success; though I may mention
there are still some matters of complaint which deserve your attention. Many of the
boys have already shown much aptitude for learning such mechanical arts as it has been
so far possible to teach them, and it is intended gradually to increase the number of
these, so that, in time, Fijians may be able to make for themselves many useful things
which they now either must forego altogether or are compelled to purchase from white
men.
As this school serves only half of the provinces of the colony, I request you to consider
the preliminary arrangements for the institution of a second school for the other provinces,
as to which, as I have already told you, I desire that it should be for ever connected
with the name of Cakobau.
As regards the subject to which you have in several successive Boses drawn the
Governor’s attention —1 mean that of labour engagements on the part of natives—l am
happy to inform you that a law has been passed, and will shortly come into operation,
which it is hoped will remedy all the evils complained of. There has also been prepared
a native regulation on the same subject., which is required as a supplement to the
Ordinance, and on this I desire your advice.
Other laws and regulations have been passed, viz.:
I. A Regulation amending Regulation No. XI., 1877, in regard to adultery and
fornication.
11. A Regulation in regard to “ Na Dara,” or the better protection of married women
in their homes.
111. A Regulation in regard to the care of the sick, of epidemics, and segregation of
dysentery patients.
IV. A Regulation in regard to certain contagious diseases.
V. A Regulation for the better preservation of wells and drinking water.
VI. A Regulation in regard to Latrines (or “ Savusavu.”)
VII. A Regulation concerning the sale of mangrove.
With regard to the project of introducing a breed of cattle suitable for native use,
I regret that lam as yet unable to inform you of its accomplishment. I am, however,
in hopes that the difficulties which have been met with, have now been overcome.
A Commission for the selection and despatch to Fiji of the animals required, has been
intrusted to Mr. Wilkinson, lately the Governor’s Commissioner, who happens to be in
Australia, and I trust that in no long time, perhaps before the close of this meeting,
I may hear of, and be able to announce to you, the successful performance of liis task.
My Commissioner has been instructed to bring before your notice various subjects
deserving of your consideration. Among them I may specially mention: (1.) The
excessive drinking of Yaqona, especially by women, to which Ministers of the Wesleyan
Mission have been directing a very useful attention. (2.) The expediency of providing
a prison for women. (3.) The purchase of European boats.
In conclusion, l am glad to be able to say that, during the interval which has elapsed
since the last meeting, there has been a decided improvement in the Native Government,
i 17270. ft


and notwithstanding some instances to the contrary, there has unquestionably been
shown among your Chiefs a more general appreciation of the fact, that the Government
is intended not merely for the benefit of the few but for the happiness of all Her
Majesty’s subjects alike. Let this consideration be ever present to you in preparing
such resolutions of advice as you may think fit to present.
And now, I have nothing further to say but to inform you that I intend closing the
meeting four weeks from this date, and to express a hope that you will utilise to the
utmost the intervening time for the benefit of your country and its people.
No. 10,
The Right Hon. the EARL OF DERBY to Governor Sir G. WILLIAM
DES VCEUX, K.C.M.G.
£ jr Downing Street, October 8, 1883.
I HAVE received and laid before the Queen the letter addressed to Her Majesty by
the Chiefs of Fiji, dated from Macuata on the 31st of May last, accompanying your
Despatch, of the 18th of July,* with which the Report on the recent Bose Vaku
Turao’a and the resolutions adopted on the occasion were at the same time transmitted
1 am commanded by the Queen to instruct you to inform the Chiefs by whom this
letter was signed, that Her Majesty has read their letter with much interest, and that it
is a matter of gratification to Her Majesty that the people of Fiji are not diminishing,
but rather increasing in numbers.
I have, &c.
Sir G. W. Des Voeux. (Signed) DERBY.
No. 11.
Governor Sir G. WILLIAM DES VGEUX, K.C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the
EARL OF DERBY. (Received November 15, 1883.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord September 27, 1883.
Herewith I have the honour to enclose the report of the Secretary for Native
Affairs on the Vital Statistics of the Native population for the statistical year ending the
30th September, 1882. . . T - r
2 With reference to the latter portion of paragraph 41 of the report, I may inform
vour Lordship that I have at present under consideration, and hope soon to have carried
out under the direction of Dr. McGregor, the Chief Medical Officer, a scheme suggested
bv him for the training at the public hospital of a certain number of r yian students in
the nursing and care of the sick. It is intended that this training shall have special
reference to the treatment to be followed, when professional aid is not available, in cases
of dysentery, diarrhoea, bronchitis, colds, and such other of the ordinary diseases of the
country which can be easily recognized, and are not of a complicated character, from
what has already been effected by a few Chiefs whom circumstances have placed m such
positions that they have acquired the necessary knowledge to direct the preparation of
proper food for the sick, there is reason for hoping that a measure of the kind indicated
may cause an appreciably favourable effect future death returns.
(Signed) G.’WILLIAM DES VGEUX.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby,
&c. &c. &C.
* No. 9, Part IX.


Enclosure in No. 11.
The Secretary for Native Affairs to the Governor.
To his Excellency the Governor, Ptovi „ dtl Depsrtmen ,, July 18, 1883.
I have the honour to submit the fourth annual report of the Vital Statistics of the
Native population of this Colony for your Excellency’s information.
2 The tables show a net increase during the statistical year ending September 30th,
■ sB o of 114 There is a very marked improvement, however in the last quarter ot the
vear (1882), and the record from Ist January to 31st December shows an increase of 204,
which is exactly the same as the previous year, and is 135 in excess of the year
A tQ F > which may be explained by a brief summary, as
foikiws.—ie , g com iled from the registers kept in each province by the Vunivalas,
and'shows the numbers of marriages, births, deaths, and divorces recorded during the
12 months from Ist October 1881 till 30th September 1882. It exhibits a synopsis ot
all the Registers of the Colony.
5 The first division is “ marriages ” and the foot of the column shows a total ot 1,138
or 9-91 per mil. an increase of 79 over the year ending September 1881, though it comes
short by 216 of the year ending September 1880. , , .
6. The fluctuations of the different provinces m different months and years, and the
diversity of rate presented are very puzzling, and I do not know of any clue to an
explanation. Any ordinary observer will note, during even a hurried visit, that in some
districts there are comparatively few young girls to be seen in many of the towns, but
that is only removing the question one step back, and it remains to be explained wh\ there
are fewer marriageable women in one district than anothei, the effects of wars and
epidemics (such as measles) probably account for some results, but when applied to the
tables, it is by no means generally satisfactory ; the highest marriage rate is 15-48 in
Colo (Wainimala), and this may fairly be attributed to more settled government; and
the next highest is \as-awa, which one would hardly have expected, considering the
proverbially wandering life of the men. Yas-awa was also in the van last year, while
Wainimala was amongst the lowest, showing a rate of only 6’ 1 per mile. _ .
The lowest rate in these tables is Rewa, which has only 376 per mil., and even this is an
improvement on the last year, which gives 2‘44 per mil., the lowest point reached in the
reason q oes no t li e in the vitality of the people is evident from the fact
that the birth rate in Rewa is not exceptionally low; a comparison, however, of the
marriages and births columns will show that there is not always a close connexion
between the two. The province of Ba, for example, has a marriage rate of 9 4 04, and a
birth rate of 42 - 91, while Serua, with the same birth rate, has a marriage rate of only 6 - 37
per mil. . „ , ,
8. In 11 of the provinces, a greater number ot marriages were performed last year
than in the year previous, and in six a less number. lam not prepared to say that any
definite conclusion can be drawn from the numbers merely of the marriages.
In some districts the Mataqalis are much more strict than in others, and marriages, if
not so numerous, are more binding.
In some provinces the facilities for divorce are greater than in others. But the
people generally are awakening to the truth that marriage is a matter of grave concern,
and affects two Mataqalis, at any rate, if not more, and not simply two persons; or
rather, I should say, they realize that some of the recent marriages and the new license
lately allowed to women are not in accordance with approved usage, tending, as they do,
to change the social unit, and a strong feeling has arisen against a hasty and incon-
siderate conduct of these affairs.
9. The number of births registered during the year ending 30th September 1882, is
4,275 or 37-25 per mil., being 149 in excess of the births recorded in the year previous,
and an improvement of I -13 In the rate per mil. for that year, and of 2“27 per mil. in the
rate of the preceding year.
10. The number of deaths is 4,16 l or 36-26 per mil., an excess over the previous year
of 219 and l-gi per mil. higher rate and 2 02 higher than the year preceding.
11. The unfavourable comparison between the statistical year under review and the
previous years is owing therefore, not to a failing fecundity, but to an increased
mortality.
R 2


12. The number of children still-born is very large, the column showing 143 males and
84 females, or a total of 227, being 1*97 per mil. against 173 in the previous year, or an
excess of 54.
13. The number of children who died “ under the age of one month” is 533 or 12*81
per cent, of the total deaths; the deaths of persons “ under one year” number 936, or
22*49 per cent. These two taken together give a total of the deaths of persons “ under
one year” of 1.469 or 35*3 per cent, of the total deaths. An excess of 6*54 over the
previous year.
14. “ Under ten years of age ” the number is 714, or 17*15, as compared with 23*39 of
the previous year.
15. Under the head of “youths,” the number of deaths is given as 337 or B*o9 per
centum against 8*67 of the previous year.
16. Among the “adults” or middle aged, there were 872 deaths or 2095 per cent,
against 21*79 of the previous year, and under the head of “aged persons” there are
769, or 18*48 per cent against 17*37 of the year previous.
17- The increase of the mortality, therefore, during the present statistical year has
been chiefly amongst children under one year old, and slightly also amongst the aged.
In all the intermediate classes the rate of mortality has improved, which would point to
the conclusion that want of care is the principal cause of the decline.
18. Relatively to the sexes, this table shows that there has been 7*37 per cent, greater
mortality amongst males than females.
19. Relatively to diseases the figures indicate that the highest mortality arises from
diseases of the abdomen, being equal to nearly one half of the mortality from all the
diseases tabulated, or 49*17 per centum of the total number of deaths, a result singularly
like the rate of the year previous, which is given as 49*47 per cent., or *3 higher.
20. In my judgment, however, it is possible to place too much reliance on information
of this kind from tins source. I do not know that the natives can diagnose in all
diseases, and 1 cannot think that the diseases under the several headings are always
properly differentiated with the exception of dysentery. The second highest rate, e.g.,
is for diseases under the heading of “ Skin,” which is very indefinite, comprehending, as
it does, in the native idea, all tumours, swellings’, boils, &c., which have no connexion
except superficially with the skin. The rate for the year is rather higher than the
previous year, the present table showing 15*14 per cent, against 14*79 per cent for the
year before. The deaths from dysentery are proportionately fewer than in the year
antecedent, the rates per centum respectively being 13*53 and 15*4.
21. There are 69 sudden deaths recorded, and 50 violent deaths, of which one half are
from droAvning, and there are 75 deaths from unknown causes. Together these three give
a rate of 4*66 per centum.
22. An analysis of Table A. shows that the fluctuations of increase and decrease in
the several provinces are great, and in some provinces unaccountable. Five provinces,
viz., Ba, Bua, Lan, Rewa, and Serua, that had a decrease in the year ending Sep-
tember 1881, show an increase now, but four provinces, viz., Macuata, Naitasiri, Ra, and
Taibera, show a decrease now and had an increase then. Six provinces, viz., Yasawa,
Cakaudrove, Wainirnala, Kadavu, Lomaiviti, and Nadroga, maintain an increase in both
years, and two, viz., Narosa and Narnosi, continue to decrease, though the latter is
decidedly improving.
23. The largest increase is 67 in Kadava, which showed 63 in the previous year, and
the largest decrease is 80 in Ra, which had an increase of 13 the year previous. The
province of Tailevu had also an increase (of six) last year, and now has a decrease of 35.
One or two provinces are almost stationary; as, for instance, Macuata, which is ranked
with those provinces which had an increase and now have a decrease, the variation being
but three, but it used to have a large decrease. It improves slowly.
24. The last column of Table A. contains the number of “ divorces ” granted, namely,
55, which is less by 11 than the previous year, and by far the largest number is in Lau,
namely, 16 (many of which are divorces of persons not purely Fijian), and considering
that the number of marriages is 81 only, the conclusion is not satisfactory. Lomaiviti
would appear to be the most exemplary province, having 104 marriages and no divorces
at all, but the visits of the European stipendiary magistrate are not so frequent as in
some other provinces. Macuata, Naitasivi, and Serua have each one only. But these
figures are not really any guide to the social state of matters. It is within my own
knowledge that there were over 20 applications for divorce in the province of Macuata
in the month of May of this year and in Cakaudrove, and in other provinces, I regret
to say that couples are living estranged without a divorce.


25 Referring now to Table 8., which records the marriages, births, and deaths of each
province in each quarter, I find that the results obtained are not quite the same as those
recorded in the previous years. In the present table the highest mortality in the four
quarters is in the meahs and the lowest in the extremes, that is, there are more deaths
recorded in the second and third quarters than in the first and fourth, whereas in the
previous year the greatest number of deaths occurred in the third and fourth quarters,
and the conclusion was that the cold and dry weather from April to September was more
trying than the warm and humid days from October to Maich.
It appears that the seasons were less healthy in the present statistical year noted in
Table 8., from January to June, and that the three months prior to January 1882, and
subsequent to June, were attended with less sickness or fewer deaths.
26. Table C. is an extension of Table A., and details in districts what was summarized
in provinces. The practical value of this table is found in the provincial meetings,
where the Native Commissioner (or his assistant) is able by means of the figures
extended in various columns to point out the districts in each province which demand
the attention of the Bulis and other executive officers, and of the people generallylt
may be hoped also that the usefulness of these tables will be appreciated by the Bulis at
their own district meetings. In too many cases these meetings have been but formal
gatherings, where stereotyped questions have been asked, and, it is to be feared, stereotyped
answers given also. A feeling is being awakened now, that unless the district meetings
are properly organized and intelligently conducted, great difficulties will be thrown in
the way of the provincial meetings, and much embarrassment created in the council of
Chiefs. # .
27. A province may have an increase in the total of the districts, and yet some
particular district or districts be in a very unsatisfactory condition. Bua, for example,
has an increase of 14, which is small indeed, but still an improvement on the year ante-
cedent to that now represented, which showed a decrease of 11, and one of the districts,
Kubulau. which had an increase of eight, has now a decrease of 13. The Bulis’ attention
was called to this rather alarming fact at the last provincial meeting, but that meeting
was not in a position to examine the case thoroughly, and the inquiry was referred to
the district meeting. The province of Cakaudrove also has an increase (21), but one
of the districts, Wailevu, the largest, has a steady decrease, being noted in this table as
29, and in the last as 7. In Lau, too, there is an increase (24), and yet Onq has a
decrease of 16, to which must be added (next year 1883), I regret to say, the major part
of 21 persons drowned in the boat accident mentioned in the resolutions of the Bose
Vakaturaga held in May. In the same way it will be the duty of the Roko Tui, of
Nadroga, who has an increase of 37 over the province (the same as in the preceding year),
to invite the notice of the Buii of Naruku to the fact that his district which had an
increase of 19 last year, shows now a decrease of 19-
28. Especial notice will be taken of the Provinces of Ra and Tailevu, both of which
are large provinces and with a large decrease, largest decrease recorded in the
Colony is in the Province of Ra. It is in the district of Nakovotubu. The number is
given as 32, and Ualawa is not far behind, being marked 25. In Tailevu the contrast is
greater even than in Ra. This province had an increase of 66 in the year ending
September 1881, and the year ending September 1882 shows a decrease of 35, of which
23 is in the district of Dawasama, and 19 in Suwa Kasa. It is very desirable that the
cause or causes of this excessive decrease should be investigated in each district, and the
information supplied in this table will be invaluable in the various district meetings.
29. The district with the largest increase is Nailaga, in the province of Ba, the number
being 43, or 34*54 per mil. The birth-rate of the district is 73*89 and the death-rate
is 39*36 per mil. If these figures are to be accepted as correct, they favour a state-
ment made in another part of this report, namely, that want of care is the principal or
radical cause of decline in many districts where there is a decline, and that proper care
will be followed generally by good results.
The town of Nailaga (modern Sagunu) is in the district of Sagunu, and is the
residence of the Eoko Tui of Ba. It is in many respects a model town, well situated,
regularly built, scrupulously clean, and personally superintended by the chief of the
province. In confirmation of this view, I may instance the better condition of Rewa
under the careful administration of the present acting Roko, Ratu Marika, and, if I may
say so, without undue prejudice to the Roko of Ra, it is not without significance that the
largest decrease should be found in the district of Nakorotubu. The late Chief lived
there, and it prospered. His successor lives elsewhere, and the people grumble ; are
dissatisfied. —Decrease. There has been a great drain on this district for labour,
R 3


admittedly, but it must be admitted also that sometimes people leave their province to
go to labour because they are unhappy at home, and I think that such may be the case
in Ra. There is a decrease also in the large province of Tailevu, from which many men
have also gone to labour under engagement to Europeans, and there may be some
connexion between these two facts. „My own impression is that there is some connexion
wdiere unduly large numbers have gone; but Ido not at present press these tables into
a support of the assertion. A large number of men go to work under yearly contracts
from the provinces of Ba and Yasawa, and also from Kadava, and yet these are the very
provinces that have the largest increase, and districts from which men do not go to
work at all, such as Kubulau in Bua, Wailevu in Cakaudrove, and Soloira in Naitasiri
(yearly contracts, I mean), besides some districts in Colo (Narosa) have the largest*
decrease next to Ra and Tailevu. It must be remembered, however, at the same time,
that the labour traffic has been better regulated of late than formerly, both in Ba and
Kadavu.
30. Thirty-three districts show an increase in the tables now before me that had a
decrease in the year previous, and thirty-five districts have a decrease that showed an
increase before, which proves nothing except that the more minute the sub-divisions
recorded are the more liable they are to fluctuations, and the less reliance can be placed
on results for short periods.
31. Table D. shows the percentage in total deaths in each age period in each province
throughout the colony. The highest death-rate of children “ under one month ” is in
the province of Namosi, being 35T8 per cent., which is the less, singular as that is, of all
provinces, the one where the women have departed least from their old habits, and may
be said to be following still the instincts of the past. The next highest is Naiiasiri
(24T7) and Cakaudrove (20*12), neither of which can be placed under the same
category as Namosi, and the reason must be sought elsewhere. The lowest death-rate
at this period is in Macuata (1*30), one of the provinces which shows a slight decrease,
and Bua (2*75), where the increase is trifling. lam strongly impressed that increased
care and attention has had much to do with the good results in Bua and Macuata, and
that the want of care and attention has affected the others; Cakaudrove particularly, as
formerly reported.
32. Among children “ under one year ” (but over one month) the lowest death-rate
is in Kadavu (9*33), and the highest is Yasawa (37*28). Among the adults or u middle-
aged ” the lowest rate is in Ba (9'45), and is the highest in Rewa (32*72), per centum.
33. A careful study of Table D. brings out many interesting facts, and none more
clearly than that no one rule applies alike to all provinces. Each must be studied
separately. The causes of increase or decrease at the several periods of life are doubtless
different in each. Different districts, probably even in the same province, labour under
different conditions, and, must be considered apart, and the only way, in my judgment,
to attain a result that shall be generally satisfactory is to secure a particular enquiry and
discussion in the meetings of each district, which will be compared first at the provincial
meetings and ultimately at the council of Chiefs.
34. Table E. shows the proportions per centum of each class of disease in the total
number of deaths in each province. Abdominal diseases, which I have already pointed
out, are the highest in their rates of mortality, reach their highest point in Bua, namely,
66*92 per centum, or two thirds of the whole. Macuata is very little behind Bua,
showing 63*47 per cent., and Navosa comes next with 60*4. The lowest rates are in
Wainimala and Ba, both of which, however, are over 38 per cent, over the whole colony
the rate shown is 49*17, or nearly one-half of the entire list given. The next in point of
gravity is “ Skin ” disease, which, I have said, is somewhat indefinite ; and then follows
“ Dysentery,” 13°53 per cent. The highest rate given is in Ra, 29*62, and next to Ra is
Ba, 29*27. The lowest is Navosa, 3*2, and Lau, 4*51. Amongst other items this table
shows also the percentage of deaths from tc unknown causes ” (T 8), of “ sudden deaths ’
(1*66), and of t£ violent deaths ” (I*2).
35. The sixth Table F., following the practice of last year, is made out to show at a
glance ; Ist. The provinces with an increase and the comparative rate of increase; and
2nd. The provinces with a decrease and the comparative rate of decrease.
36. There is another table among those presented in the last report which was added
to exhibit the rate of increase and decrease in the different Buliships classified according
to their population, but I do not know that any use has been made of it, or that it
establishes any fact not noted elsewhere.
37. In the report of the year ending September 1881 it is stated that “ the birth rate
“ of the Colony has shown a steady increase for the last four years,” and it will be seen
that this increase is maintained in the year ending September 1882 now under review,


the mean rate over the Colony being 37*25 per mil. against 36*12 per mil. in the previous
year, a difference in favour of the present statistical year of I*l3 per mil.
38. Unfortunately, however, there has been more than a corresponding increase in the
death-rate, the present tables showing a mean rate of 36*26 per mil. against 24*35 in the
previous year, or an increase in the mortality of I*9l per mil., and 2'04 per mil. higher
than the preceding year ending September 1880.
39. This continuous increase in the rate of mortality calls for attention, the more so
as it is steady, and not due apparently to any extraordinary exciting cause. The
deliberations (on this subject) of the Bose Vakaturaga in May last brought forth very
little regarding the causes of the large mortality that had not been well ventilated before,
but they decided, as stated in a previous paragraph, that an effort should be made to
discover the local causes at each district meeting, and if the several district meetings will
only take the subject up and go into it heartily there can be no doubt of the good it
will do.
40. More careful registration may possibly partly account for the increasing rates
both of births and deaths, but speaking generally, the causes of the higher death rate over
the Colony and the decrease in some districts are principally two. Ist. Carelessness in
general; and 2nd. Unsettledness in particular districts, Each of these may be sub-
divided according to the various forms carelessness takes, or according to the agencies at
work in. unsettling the districts. There are various grounds of unsettledness. Some of
these are being gradually removed, and others are cropping up anew. People are
unsettled, e.g ., when they are not on their own land, and they are unsettled also when
they are not ruled by their proper Chief, although the Chief appointed may be the best
available or deemed the best available at the time. They are unsettled also when asked
to do what they do not understand, or what is foreign to their ideas or customs, to
precedent, in short. And there are different grounds of carelessness. Women, whose
husbands do not live happily with them are careless about their children. People whose
Chiefs are selfish and hard are careless about themselves and about the young and aged.
Sometimes carelessness is a form of mute dependence. One hears a great deal about
the old times, and how much more careful the people were then than they are now of
their offspring, of their sick and aged. I take leave to doubt, however, if the people
themselves were more careful then than now. They have always depended greatly,
altogether, I may say, on their Chiefs, and some Chiefs were more careful of their people
than others. These Chiefs ordered matters better then than now. Food and firewood
for the aged, tendance for the sick, and nursing for the young. Now the people are
divided in their dependance. They still expect orders, and to have things done for them,
and when the Chief is doubtful of his position, or not equal to it, he has not infrequently
favoured an idea that has entered the heads of too many, that the Government is to
think for them, and when Government has given no orders, nothing has been done. The
remedy lies with the Chiefs themselves. They ought to see that “the Vanua ” (the old
land laws and customs) .are carried out, and in order that they may do this effectively
their position should continue to be steadily recognized. Especially should be recognized
the responsibility attaching to Chiefs of towns who ought to be encouraged to interest
themselves in their district councils. Care for the very young especially, as well as care
for the aged, is a matter for the natives themselves, and a Buli, or the Chief of a town
(if the proposed district reports are drawn up regularly and faithfully), will be obliged to
interest himself in these things, or be put to shame at the provincial gatherings.
But failure in their case for the sick arises sometimes from ignorance as well as apathy.
As has been pointed out, a sick man cannot eat the food to which he is accustomed, and
his culinary resources are either not drawn upon or are not equal to the emergency.
The Government propose, arrowroot, but arrowroot is savourless by itself, and the
concomitants are not known or not procured. The introduction of cattle, will, it is hoped,
keep those who will avail of help, but more should be made of the resources already at
command before one can be sanguine of anything new, and it is often disheatening to see
sick people famishing for want of thought (or want of heart) when so many poultry are
about the very doors, or ought to be.
41. Considering the overwhelming majority of deaths from bowel complaints, called
in the tables abdominal diseases, and dysentery together, 62*70 per cent., to which may
be added complaints affecting the “ head ” 8*34 per cent., or in all 71*04 per centum of
the total deaths, it is my wish to enlist the sympathy and earnest efforts of Chiefs of
towns in an inquiry into the causes and proper treatment of these affections, not only to
the care for proper medicine and proper food, but also to greater care in controlling the
patients. As it is too true that however careless any may be about their sick, there is
R 4


none so careless as the patient himself, and there are very many deaths through the
sheer and wilful neglect of the most ordinary precautions.
42. I have given prominence in the foregoing brief remarks to some of the leading
causes of the high rate of mortality, with the practical object of removing them as far as
possible, and I have stated the course that has been adopted with that end in view.
43. But the last year may be regarded hopefulty by the people, for though the margin
of increase is small, it is an increase, and therefore an improvement on any period of the
past of which we have authentic records.
I have, &c.
(Signed) James Blyth,
Secretarv for Native Affairs.
f/
No. 12.
The Right Hon. the EARL OF DERBY to Governor Sir G. WILLIAM DES
V(EUX, K.C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, November 28, 1883.
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Despatch of the
27th September last,* forwarding the report of the Secretary for Native Affairs on the
Vital Statistics of the Native Population for the year ending the 30th September 1882.
The suggestion made by Dr. McGregor that Fijian students should be trained at
the public hospitals in the nursing of the sick, appears to have much to recommend it,
and I trust that the project may prove beneficial to the Native race.
I have, &c.
Sir G. W. Des Voeux. (Signed) DERBY.
No. 13.
Administrator J. B. THURSTON, C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the EARL OF
DERBY, K.G. (Received August 18, 1884.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, June 21, 1884.
I have the honour, to forward (1), a letter to Her Majesty the Queen from the
Chiefs assembled at the recent Bose vaka turaga or annual meeting of Chiefs ; (2), their
report on the meeting with the recommendations attached to it; and (3), my replies to
the latter. I also enclose a copy of my address at the opening of the meeting.
2. The proceedings of the Council were marked by a very friendly and contented
spirit, and the most perfect absence of any objectional features. The various subjects
referred to in the recommendations will shortly be brought before the Native Regulation
Board for consideration.
I have, &c.
(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, K.G.,
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 1 in No. 13.
Translation.
To Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen of Fiji and Great Britain
Council of Chiefs, Naiserelagi Ra,
You it Majesty, May 16, 1884.
We report to your Majesty that we have received a reply to our letter of last
year, which assured us of your Majesty’s continued regard for us.
* No. 11, Part 11.


There is one thing above all in which your Majesty has our heartfelt sympathy, for
when his Honour the Administrator told us of the death of your dear son, whom you
loved so much, we were deeply impressed with a feeling of the sustained pain your
Majesty must bear in thinking of him.
But we have cause for rejoicing, only when we think of the many ways in which your
Majesty’s regard for us is apparent, and not only on this account, but also when we
bear in mind that your Majesty’s power and influence is still exercised in Fiji.
And first, in respect of our taxes, which we represented to the Governor at our last
council at Macuata, and he has been so good as to reduce them a little in some
provinces, we now express to your Majesty our thankfulness for his kind consideration.
Secondly, we are grateful because some of our lands which had been unfairly sold,
have, on appeal been restored to us.
Thirdly, we are pleased to see that the form of Native Government under which we
Chiefs and some Europeans hold appointments is so well adapted to our people.
Fourthly, it is a matter of gratification to find that the officer whom your Majesty has
appointed to administer the Government during the temporary absence of our Governor,
continues a good policy to us.
Fifthly, there is a great mortality at present in Fiji among our old people and our
children from the extension over the whole country of an epidemic (whooping cough) of
the treatment of which we are ignorant.
It is true that there are several European doctors but there are not enough for all our
provinces, and when his Honour the Administrator invited us to appoint some of our
men to go to Suva to be taught something of the art of healing, we discussed the matter,
and are very much pleased and grateful.
Sixthly, we pray that your Majesty will not at any time change the form of your
Majesty’s Government of us, because we see plainly that it is suitable to us and to Fiji.
Our letter to your Majesty the Queen of Fiji and Great Britain is ended.
May the love of God remain with your Majesty always.
We are, &c.
(Signed) Loganimoce,
Roko Tui Lau,
Beni Tanoa,
Roko Tui Naitasiri.
for “ the Chiefs in council.”
Enclosure 2 in No. 13.
Translation.
To His Excellency the Governor Acting
Council of Chiefs, Naiserelagi, Ra,
SlR > May 26, 1884.
We have the honour to present to your Excellency the ninth report of the
proceedings of our annual Council, held this year at Naiserelagi, in the province of Ra.
The accompanying eighteen resolutions embrace the various subjects introduced in
your Excellency’s opening speech, and others which have been brought before the
Council by its members for its united deliberation, and we now submit in that form our
suggestions on these subjects for your Excellency’s information and final decision.
Other matters have also occupied our attention which have not been put in the form
ot resolutions, but which are submitted in the report of the proceedings of the Council
for consideration and judgment, and we trust that your Excellency will regard them as
the true expression of our wishes, and continue to help us as heretofore, by the adoption
of such measures as ycur Excellency may deem best for the welfare of our country and
people. J
We heartily thank your Excellency for your kind attention to the suggestions
presented by our Council last year, many of which have been confirmed and carried out,
and our hopes for the future are thereby strengthened.
It is proposed to hold our next Council at Kadavu, subject to your Excellency’s
approval, in the month of May next year, and we have named Namosi and Serua
together for the following year.
i 17270. §


We pray that your Excellency may continue to have health and strength in carrying
out your arduous duties, and that the blessing of God may rest upon you and your
work.
We are, &c.
(Signed) “ The Chiefs in Council.”
Roko Tui Bua.
Roko Tui Taileou.
Roko Tui Lomaiviti.
Roko Tui Lau.
Roko Tui Macuata.
Roko Tui Rewa.
Roko Tui Ra.
Roko Tui Namosi.
Roko Buli Serua.
Roko Tui Naitasiri.
Ai Sosomi Tui Kadavu.
Resolution I.
Concerning the town of Navola.
The land on which the town of Navola stands belongs to Serua, but the people came
from Nasikawa in Colo, and render their services to Natuatuacoko, with which they
desire to remain connected. Under these circumstances we are of opinion that the
people ought to remove from Navola on to their own land, as it is not in accordance
with our usages, that they should occupy Serua land while under submission to another
province, and we submit the question for your Excellency’s decision.
Answer.—lt appears to me that this recommendation is sound in principle, and if on
farther inquiry it is found that the facts are as stated, I shall endeavour to give effect to
this resolution.
Concerning the care of our boats and vessels of European build.
We have considered the proposal made at the provincial Council of Cakaudrove, in
regard to the care of our boats and vessels of European build, and are of one mind that
the provisions of Regulation 111., 1878 “with reference to canoes,” might be extended
with advantage to decked vessels and open boats, to prevent overcrowding and over-
loading, and to guard against neglect of duty by those responsible for the maintenance
in good order and condition of all craft of this description belonging to the people.
Answer. —A regulation shall be prepared for the consideration of the Native
Regulation Board.
111.
Concerning divisions among the people of Nacula-Yasawa.
A report of divisions among the .people of Nacula, in Yasawa, has been read to us,
and after careful inquiry and full consideration we are agreed that they arise, not from
differences or disagreements in matters of religion, but from disaffection to the Chief,
and discord sown by other hands. It is evident to us that the prime mover in the
discord and disaffection is the Roman Catholic teacher from Rewa, who resides in
Nacula, and we respectfully request that the recommendation of the Provincial Council
held at Yasawa, in September last may be confirmed, and the teacher sent back to his
own province, that the people of Nacula may be relieved of his disturbing influence.
Answer. —I am inclined to accept your explanation of this matter, and as I feel
satisfied that the Roman Catholic mission will not permit any of its agents to promote
discord, the objectionable teacher will without doubt be removed. Let it be most clearly
understood, however, that any removal of people from their homes, unless with the
concurrence of the Governor, will lead to the punishment of the offending officer, and in
no case are women to be whipped.


Concerning the conduct of the two Chiefs and others.
We desire to submit to your Excellency a subject of much talk at present among us,
and of lengthened discussion in Council, respecting the conduct of two of our Chiefs who
are absent°frorn our annual gathering. It is true that we have discussed their conduct in
their absence, when they are unable to speak for themselves and give their own
explanation of the various reports in circulation about them and the bad conduct laid to
their charge, but we consider that it was their duty to be present, and we are not satisfied,
in one case, with the excuse sent.
The evidence we have heard in the Council confirms the truth of the reports that have
reached us, and we have resolved to represent the matter to your Excellency.
We are in bad odour oh account of this thing. The evil is on the increase, and we are
powerless of ourselves to prevent it spreading. It is in the mind of many to follow the
example so openly set before them, unless it is checked.
Such men are a discredit to their religion, to their position as Chiefs, and to the
deliberations of this Council.
We therefore pray your Excellency to deal with these two Chiefs as may be fitting,
and to give the subject, generally, your earnest attention that you may decide upon some
course that will be best for us and for our people.
Answer. —Although no names have been mentioned, I understand the reference made
in this suggestion. The matter would have been dealt with by me already, but knowing
that the Governor w T ould soon return, I deemed it proper to submit the cases for
his consideration. I am, as you know, not disposed to deal with Chiefs hastily, nor
without full information ; but, at the same time, Ido not forget them. Your views on
this subject do you credit, and I trust that all Chiefs and officers of Government
will remember that it is their duty to themselves and the Government to keep their
reputation good.
V.
Concerning the Kai Nagilogilo.
It has been reported to us that many of the people of Nagilogilo are absent from their
town, having settled in Baa and other provinces, with the consent of the Chiefs of the
provinces where they have settled, and after a careful consideration of all the circumstances,
and especially of the length of time during which they have been absent, we have decided
to recommend that they be not asked to return ; but if any of them desire to return of
their own accord, we think that they ought to be allowed to do so.
Answer. —I concur.
VI.
Concerning those of our people who go to sell their produce in Suva.
We are much concerned about some of our people who are in the habit of going, or
desire to go, to the town of Suva to sell their produce, but who at present labour under
great disadvantages from the want of a suitable place in which to expose their produce
for sale, and of any sleeping accommodation for those from a distance. Our people have
to dispose of their produce at present by the wayside, and have to sleep in the open air
or in the verandahs or kitchens of European houses. We respectfully submit that if
proper accommodation were provided, a greater number of our people would take the
produce of their gardens to Suva for sale, to the mutual advantage of the buyer and
seller, and we beg your Excellency to give a kind consideration to our request that a
suitable market place and rest house may be provided.
Answer.—The matter shall receive attention.
VII.
Concerning the visits of Chiefs and other to Suva on Government business.
With regard also to those of us who go to Suva to see the Governor, or on Government
business, there is a great difference between the present and former times. We feel
S 2


ourselves to be strangers in Suva, and not “ vakaitaukei ”as at Draiba. There is no
more room inside the Governor’s fence for additional houses, and the houses already
placed there are often overcrowded when visitors arrive. It is our desire, if possible, to
have a native town to which we can go, and we would suggest that a piece of ground at
Muanivatu be given to us for that purpose, if your Excellency should approve of the
site for a town.
Answer.—Proper accommodation shall be provided for native officers visiting the
Governor.
VIII.
Concerning the Kai Wakaya.
The present circumstances'of the natives living on the island of Wakaya have been
reported to us, and we are all agreed that they ought to return to Ovalau where lands
have been set apart for their use at Toki.
Answer.—l concur.
IX.
Concerning “ Vasu ” (the ancient right of nephews and nieces).
This custom, as it at present exists, is variously followed in different provinces, and in
some is falling into disfavour and disuse.
After some conversation we have come to the conclusion that we should not abandon
it, nor other customs of a like nature, at once and altogether, because they are amongst
the oldest customs of our land, and mingle with many modes of our domestic life. But
we think that such customs ought to be followed with prudence and moderation, and in a
manner suited to the times in which we live.
We desire to guard against the high-handedness lately reported, and to favour the
continuance of such customs by consent only, and as bonds of friendship ; and if one
offends in any way and exercises what he may deem his rights as “ vasu ” or “ tanou”
in a lofty spirit, and by force, let him be punished, according to the gravity of his
offence, as the law directs, for “ vakausausa ” (oppression), or for conduct calculated to
create a breach of the peace, or any such offence written in the law.
Answer. — 1 concur.
Concerning the salaries of magistrates and scribes.
We have heard what the magistrates and scribes have to say, after a consultation
among themselves, about their petition for an increase of salary, which was presented to
the council at Macuata, and was laid before your Excellency. They do useful work,
and some of them have been a long time in the service. Their salary is small, and their
duties are onerous.
We recommend the petition to the favourable consideration of your Excellency.
Answer. —I will recommend the subject to the Legislative Council.
Concerning Luveniwai and Kalouvere (superstitious practices opposed to civil
law and good order).
Your Excellency has directed us to consider well the present practice of Luveniwai,
with a view to the passing of a regulation about it. The subject has commanded our
most serious attention, and it is clear to us that it is an evil thing, and must be put a
stop to at once and for ever, by strong measures. To our minds, however, it appears
to be a “ ka ni vanua ” (thing of the land or people), and that it would be more properly


punished and put down by the Lawavakavanua (Regulation VI., 1881), but if your
Excellency judges it better to frame a separate regulation respecting such practices, we
shall use every effort to give it effect.
Answer. I consider this offence brought to your notice should be dealt with as a
“ ka ni vanua,” and dealt with firmly. •
XII.
Concerning gun licenses.
The increase of birds and the effect on our crops is a cause of anxiety in some parts.
Formerly we used to “ burn off” our lands every year, and the birds were less numerous.
The wild pigs were also scared away by those fires. But now we are prohibited by law
from “burning off.” And though we see the beneficial effect of the law in the
springing up everywhere of bush on lands that had become denuded, and bare, and
barren, yet along with this improvement, which we thankfully acknowledge, there has
been an increase of birds, such as the “ teri ” and “kaka,” and others, and the wild pigs
are becoming bold, and root about near our towns. Our gardens are invaded by bird and
beast, and the only expedient that occurs to us is the possession of fowling-pieces. The
law about guns is strict, and the license is heavy. We, therefore, lay the burthen of our
care before your Excellency with the hope that we may be allowed to have fowling-
pieces to protect our gardens, and that the cost of the license may be reduced to us.
Answer. This subject shall receive consideration, with the object of meeting your
wishes within reasonable and proper limits.
XIII.
Concerning the appointment of medical students.
We have heard with pleasure what your Excellency has said about a proposal that
some of our young men should be sent to Suva to be instructed in the use of medicine,
more especially in view of the strange epidemics that come to us at present, of the
treatment of which we are ignorant, and which carry off so many of our people.
The manner also in which it is proposed to pay for the maintenance of the students
and for the liquidation of our debts to the hospital, by a stated charge on our taxes,
commends itself to us.
When the houses for the students are ready we shall gladly avail of the advantage by
sending our best men to be instructed.
Answer.—l am glad to hear that you appreciate the proposal.
XIV.
Concerning some dogs.
We have discussed the question of dogs mentioned in your Excellency’s opening
speech, and confess that there are, in some of our towns, many useless and ill-bred animals,
that should be killed. Some of us did kill all or most of these objectionable animals
when your circular letter reached us sometime ago, but in some districts the order was
not carried out fully, and the nuisance remains.
We recommend that a law be passed, for those who will not obey without a law, that
the number of dogs may be reduced, and that all useless and dangerous dogs may be
destroyed.
We suggest that each district council should appoint two or more persons, whose duty
it will be look after the dogs of the district and to report to the Chief, who shall cause
all condemned dogs to be killed forthwith.
Answer. —I concur.
S 3


XV.
Concerning those who do not plant food or attend to their plantations.
In another part of the opening speech, your Excellency mentions that many young
men go idling about and do n©t attend to their food plantations. This is true. *lt is
true also that we have a regulation about planting (Regulation V. 1877), and though
many have been punished under it, yet the number of those who neglect their obligations
in this respect is not diminished. We are of opinion, therefore, that all such “ ne’er do
wells ” should be brought up under the lawa vakavanua, that they may be publicly
whipped. The obligation to plant is so intimately connected with other Mataqali
obligations, that we think the lawa vakavanua will bear most directly upon it, and that,
if wisely administered, good may result.
Answer. —I concur generally, but will consider the subject further.
XVI.
Concerning the lawa vakavanua.
We are informed that the lawa vakavanua has not been properly conducted in some
provinces, and have admonished those who have not complied with the conditions under
wdnch it is sanctioned.
The law is of great use to us in many matters on which it bears directly, and we are
anxious that it should not fall into disrepute.
In advising its extension in the last resolution, we have been careful to warn the
Chiefs that it cannot be applied in any case for which a regulation has been provided,
and that in no case can any sentence be put into execution until the consent of the Roko
of the province has been obtained, and the assent of the Governor requested.
Answer. —I hear } 7 our views with pleasure, and it will be well to understand that if
the references required by this regulation are not made, and the Governor’s approval
obtained, before proceeding to action in such matters as these to which I have
referred.*
XVII.
Concerning Yaqona ni viti (a drink prepared from the macro piper mythisticum).
Your Excellency has directed us to re-consider our recommendation of last year in
regard to the drinking of yaqona ni viti, with a view to the drafting of a regulation
on a broader basis than that proposed by us at Macuata.
Yaqona drinking has been a custom with us on ceremonial and other occasions from
a remote past, but we see that the custom is changing with the times, and that the
change is productive of harm.
Formerly, yaqona was drunk by Chiefs alone, and only in the day-time, but now it is
drunk by all classes, including women, and at any idle time. We do not think that the
people should drink on all occasions, and at any idle time, but only on such proper
occasions as house-building, boat-building, planting, turtle fishing, burials, the enter-
tainment of strangers or friends from a distance, and such like times.
And we recommend that the contemplated regulation should forbid the use of yaqona
ni viti to young men under 20 years of age (unless excepted by the Governor, such as
soldiers), and to young women under 25 years, also to all women who are suckling
children, and generally, that it should forbid the drinking of Yaqona indiscriminately,
and at untimely hours.
Answer. —A regulation shall be submitted to the Native Regulation Board.
Sic in the original.


XVIII.
Concerning the high rate of mortality.
We have again discussed the high rate of mortality among our people, and are of
opinion that there are many causes contributing to this end, but chiefly do we view with
apprehension the advent in quick succession of epidemics, such as that which is pressing
so heavily upon us at present. It is true that in the absence of such epidemics the rate
continues to be too high, amd after hearing all that has been said at this and former
councils we have one recommendation only to offer, namely, that greater care of the
and aged, and of the sick be enjoined everywhere.
We think it is vain to make new regulations on this subject when the old ones are
not attended to and carried out properly, and that every means should be used to arouse
the Chiefs and people to exert themselves in this vital matter. *
Answer. —I cannot add to what has been said by me at the opening of this Council.
It is upon you, the Chiefs and leaders of the people, that the life of your race
depends.
The Government thinks unceasingly of your welfare. Its desire for your real good
is like that of a mother for its child.
The Government is not a strange Government, it is the true Government of the land.
Its hope is to see the land full of contented, happy people ; but it cannot realise this
hope if you do not aid wisely and well by constantly attending to the care of yourselves.
It should be regarded as a disgraceful thing for children to die as they do in Fiji. If
you could come to regard the loss of children as dishonourable the mortality would soon
lessen itself.
Enclosure 3 in No. 13.
Opening Speech of his Honour the Administrator at the annual meeting of Chiefs,
held at Naiserelagi, Yiti Levu Bay, Friday, May 2nd, 1884.
The following is a translation of the address of his Honour, the Administrator,
recently delivered to the Native Council now sitting at Naiserelagi, Viti Levu bay.
Roko Tuis, Bulis, Chiefs, and other officers of the Government.
I have come to open your Council of this year in the place of the Governor, who, as
you know, is temporarily absent from the Colony ; and it is, therefore, my duty, in
virtue of the Queen’s instructions, to assume the functions of his office. •
1 regret that the Governor is not here to-day and am sure that you will be sorry to
learn that his Excellency’s absence is owing to the severe illness of Lady des Voeux and
her children, whose strength has been much tried by the heat of the climate.
Having given you the reason which has presented the Governor coming to this
Council, I will now read to you the reply* of Her Majesty the Queen to the letter which
you addressed to Her Majesty on the 31st May last.
It is now my sorrowful duty to acquaint you that our most Gracious Queen has
suffered a great and enduring loss in the death of her youngest son, Prince Leopold,
who died very suddenly on the 28th of March. You are fully aware of the deep
interest, the Queen has always taken in your welfare. It was only this day one year
ago that the Governor by the Queen's command presented to you Her Majesty’s portrait
as a token of love and remembrance of her Fijian people.
It was decided by you last year that the opening ceremony of every annual Council
should be the hanging of the Queen’s portrait over the Governor’s seat in the Council
House, and it is now before you as the continued expression of a regard which should
remain ever fresh in your minds.
I am sure that I only express your feelings in saying that the Chiefs and people of
Fiji all deeply sympathise with Her Majesty, and pray that God may be graciously
pleased to strengthen her in her great and sudden sorrow.
I will now refer to several subjects discussed at your last Bose before proceeding to
invite your attention to new matters.
With reference to your recommendation that a prison should be provided for women
guilty of such grave offences that they ought not to be detained in a provincial prison,
1 have to inform you that effect has been given to your suggestion. A prison has been
built at Suva, but I cannot refrain from expressing a hope that the elders, magistrates,
* Not printed.
S 4


and Chiefs of the people will by their good counsel and vigilence prevent the commission
of such offences by women as may call for their imprisonment beyond the limits of their
own districts.
An examination has been made of the localities named by you as fitting sites for the
Industrial School for Viti Levu, but I have not been- able to decide upon one of them as
being in all respects fit and proper. To Vina, one of the places you suggested, I have
several objections, the greatest being its distance from the sea, and the difficulty being:
consequent upon long river navigation of furnishing it with, supplies.
I am strongly of opinion that any locality decided upon should be on the sea coast or
its vicinity, and it seems to me advisable that it should not be far from the seat of
Government.
Navesi and Kalokolevu, the other places named by you have been examined, and my
Commissiouer will lay before you a map of these localities and read to you a report that
has been furnished me with regard to them.
I wish you to consider carefully what the Commissioner will lay before you in
connection with this subject; and I desire, also, to know your opinion as to whether the
island of Bcqa would not present greater advantages to all concerned than any other spot
within reasonable distance of Suva.
Before leaving the subject of the school, I must point out that the Chiefs as a whole
have not done their duty nor performed their promises with respect to Yanawai. Roko
Tui Bua especially, and next to him, Roko Tui Lau and Buli Wai Levu have alone shown
themselves sensible of their obligations in this matter.
Adverting now to the subject of the charges for numerous native patients who are sent
for treatment to the public hospitals, and which, as you will remember, formed the
subject of resolution No. XL of your last Council, I desire to speak my mind plainly.
The object sought to be attained by your proposal is good, but it will never be carried
out. Discharged patients may, as you suggested, take back to their Roko or Buli a
note from the hospital of the expenses incurred upon their behalf and upon the receipt of
the Roko or Buli of such a note there the matter will end. Nothing but discussion
would ensue as to whether the patients’ relations, or the district to which they belong,
should pay the bill. The matter would then be dropped and the expenses would finally
have to be paid by the Government.
I have instructed my Commissioner to submit to you a scheme by which native taxes,
the amount of which next year may be somewhat reduced, shall be charged with five or
eight per centum, for the purpose of paying the hospital fees referred to, and for bearing
part of the cost of another thing which I will presently explain. I cannot promise that
this proposal shall take effect this year, for in that case it would disturb the financial
estimates, but the opinion of the Legislative Council will be taken on the matter, and if
no insurmountable objections present themselves the scheme may be adopted. The
medical aid provided for yourselves and people at the hospital is of inestimable value,
and it is but just that you should endeavour to pay something towards its cost.
Let every district, therefore, pa} 7 its assessed taxes, and then the difficulty you have
for two years had under consideration will, by this plan, be removed.
1 now proceed to mention another matter which will be of interest to you.
In view of the sudden epidemics which sometimes visit a town or district and cause
great loss of life, the Government purposes appointing a certain number of the most
intelligent men it can find among you to be medical students.
It is not to be hoped that such men can ever attain the knowledge and skill of
European doctors, but after the course of tuition they will go through they will be able
at least to afford the sick some intelligent assistance until the nearest European medical
officer or the Government can be communicated with. By this means the Government
hopes in some degree to reduce the alarming death-rate which still continues, and to
alleviate much pain and suffering.
A house will shortly be built at Suva for the reception of these students. They will
live near the hospital at which they will receive instructions how to. recognise the nature
and treatment of disease, how to administer medicine, and how the sick should be
nursed.
This is a most important thing and one calling for your warm sympathy and co-
operation. I will merely add that part of the percentage with which I propose charging
the native tax will, in addition to the discharge of hospital fees due by natives, be devoted
to the maintenance of these medical students.
The calling of the students will be a most useful and honourable one; and in
appointing and educating them for this work you will recognise a fresh instance of the
Government’s concern for your welfare.


My commissioner will bring to your notice the following matters, and will assist you,
in discussing them. They have come under my notice during the past year. Some of
them may require to be dealt with by regulation.
(1.) Your suggestion of last year with regard to a regulation for restricting the use of
yaqona was loose and unpractical. While concurring with you that it will be well
to restrict the use of this intoxicant, I cannot think the interdiction of its use by
grown up men, among whom will be found some who have used it all their lives and
not improperly, will be attended with success.
(2.) I wish you‘to consider and consider carefully the subject of the increase of dogs
and how best to restrict their numbers within reasonable limits. This matter is a
most serious one and must be. dealt with effectively.
It is the habit of many Fijians to keep dogs as mere pets, and increase their numbers,
so that at the present moment Fiji is infested with hundreds of useless ill-bred animals,
forming a source of annoyance and loss both to yourselves ami Europeans. Villages are
full of dogs, and where formerly poultry was plentiful it is now seldom that a fowl or duck
or an egg can be found.
Year after year you have decided that the breeding and use of fowls for food and sale
should be encouraged; but instead of breeding fowls you breed mongrel dogs which,
having destroyed all your own poultry to the great loss of the young and sick, then
proceed to destroy the fowls, turkeys, and goats, of your European neighbours.
To give you an instance of how much damage can be done by these useless animals, I
may cite a case in which two dogs only having been landed last year by some Macuata
people and left upon an island not far from this spot, destroyed over forty Angora goats
before they were killed.
Now, such injuries are without excuse and it is my intention to appoint three of your
number a commission for the purpose of advising me who shall make compensation for
the loss of these valuable animals. I read in a report of one of your recent Boses that
a Fijian at or near Nadi owns 200 dogs.
The Commissioner for Native Affairs will place before you my views on this subject,
and 1 wish for your advice before proceeding to legislate upon the subject. He will
inform you that measures have been taken to protect your plantations from depredations
of white men’s cattle, and that I expect your cordial co-operation in protecting the
property of Europeans, and, I may add, your own, from the numerous dogs infesting
your towns.
Moreover, it is upon another ground my duty to insist upon these dogs being reduced
in numbers. Dogs are subject to a dreadful and dangerous disease—this disease has, I
am officially informed, appeared in Australia. Should it be brought to Fiji and in-
troduced among dogs here the result would be fearful. Let this matter therefore, be
considered wisely so that a great nuisance and source of danger may be removed.
Another subject I wish brought before you is that of the great death-rate which
still remains but little abated among the Fijian population.
Why should this be P You are a fine race, strong, active and prolific. The children
born annually number, proportionately to your numbers, as many as among the people
of the nations of Europe. But an unduly large number of young children die, and in
the aggregate the number of deaths among you exceeds, or at least equals, the births.
This subject has engaged your attention at many sessions of your council, and from
time to time you have endeavoured to give reasons for this mortality, but I confess to
you that none of them appear to me sufficient.
The Governor has pointed out to you in clear language that very much of this sad
slate of things is owing to your treatment of women —treatment which requires very
great improvement if you aspire to become a populous, contented, and civilized people.
I now add my voice to his, and you will remember that I have spent the best years of
my life among you and am no stranger to your customs. In my opinion there are three
principal things required to check this death-rate among your people ;
(1.) More attention must be paid to the sick and to infant children.
(2.) Women should work less than they do now, and nursing women should do little
beyond taking care of herself and child.
(3.) A Fiji man, like a white man, should provide all or nearly all the food required
for his family, and he should provide it in full sufficiency.
In the present day, a number of men, and particularly the younger men, who, according
to your customs, should aid and assist their Mataqali, pass the most of their time in
idling about instead of making plantations and keeping their towns and houses in proper
order as their fathers did. They eat up the food planted by the elders, and in some
seasons women and children go hungry. The weaker children die, for their mothers are
i 17270. rp


tired and disheartened and do not attend to them. Let the mother of children be kindly
treated by the husband, and be respected by the people of the land ; then she will be
proud of her child and take care of it, and then the quali will be made strong. What
did Roko I ui Ba say last year “When European children are born they are at once taken
“ care of, ours are simply allowed to lie on the mats.” Let this matter again be discussed,
and let the truth be admitted. Do not any of you say, “ The smell of a foreign land
“ has entered us. Mawacawa has found entrance by our navels and thus afflicts us.”
This language, which was used last year, is that of a man who desires to find a cover or
excuse for his own neglect and foolishness.
It is reported to me that the heathen customs connected with Luvre ni Wai, have been
much practised in some districts during the last year. Let this matter be ’ considered
with a view to passing a regulation concerning it for such practices must be abandoned.
I am pleased to hear from many quarters that the supply of food this year is plentiful
—let it be used providently and without display, neither waste it nor dispose of it without
due consideration.
It now only remains for rne to express my pleasure in finding it my duty to open your
council. The occasion brings back to my mind the time when, years gone by, we sat in
council together and endeavoured according to our respective lights and ability to
provide for the welfare of the land. 1 recall to memory many old and able chiefs who
have passed away too soon and thus thrown the responsible work of Native Government
upon younger and less experienced men. But I venture to hope that here as in other
countries, occasion will make the men. I hope that all the young Chiefs and officers
whom with me the elders in the council see rising into place and power, will recognise
their duty and obligations and do their best to perform them.
There is little more for me to say, but in concluding, I will repeat a few words spoken
to you five years ago, “On you men of this generation everything depends. If you,
“ each one of you, bear always in mind the importance of your positions and act
“ accordingly with a full sense of your responsibility, all will go well. But if you
“ neglect your trust it will be too late hereafter either for you or your to
“ retrieve what you have lost.”
Let me beg of you to weigh and remember the import of these words, for as you
observe or neglect this friendly warning so will you succeed or fail in rising into place
among the millions of the Queen’s subjects who are known as “ Kai Peretania.”
I now declare this council open, and that it is my intention to return this day four
weeks for the purpose of closing it.
No. 14,
Governor Sir G. William DES VGEUX, K.C.M.G., to the Right Hon.
the EARL OF DERBY, K.G. (Received August 29, 1884.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, July 2, 1884.
I have the honour to forward to your Lordship copy of the report on the vital
statistics of the native population of Fiji for the year ending 30th September 1883.
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. WILLIAM DES YCEUX.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby,
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure in No. 14.
Secretary for Native Affairs, Fiji, to the Administrator.
Sir, Provincial Office, Suva, June 6, 1884.
I have the honour to submit the fifth annual report on the vital statistics of the
native population of this Colony for your Honour's information.
2. The net increase over the whole Colony is 33, which, comparatively with the
increase of the preceding year ending 30th September 1882 of 114, and the increase of
the year ending 30th September 1881 of 204, would seem to denote a steady decline.


A reference to Table 8., however, shows the falling off this year to be wholly in the
first quarter of the year 1883, when there was a decrease of 195. The first and third
quarters of the present statistical year give an increase of 214, which compares favourably
with former years.
The very small margin of 33 is due to the excessive mortality during the months of
February and March 1883, when some severe form of influenza was epidemic.
3. In laying before your Honour the accompanying seven tables (A. to G.) I remark
that the most prominent feature they exhibit is their fluctuations. To whatever column
the attention is directed, marriages, births, deaths, or divorces, a comparison of the
various provinces with each other and with themselves in former years, reveals a most
mutable state of affairs.
4. Table “ A. 5 ’ begins with marriages. The total number is set down at 1,0/8, or
9 • 37 per mille of the population, which is 60 less than the previous year, 9 * 91 per
mille, and 11 less than the year ending September 1881, which gave the number as
1,089, or 9 ’ 49 per mille.
5. In confirmation of the remark about the fluctuation in the various provinces,’ it may
be pointed out that the largest number of marriages last year, ending September 1882,
in proportion to its population, was Wainimala Colo East, the rate being 15 *4B per
mille, and this year it is absolutely the lowest, 7 marriages only being recorded, or
3 * 27 per mille.
The highest marriage rate is 16*29 in the province of Nadroga, which was amongst
the lowest last year, or 5* 11 per mille. In seven of the provinces the rate is higher
than it was last year, and in ten it is lower; and in nine of the provinces the rate is
lower than the average rate of the Colony, namely, 9 * 37. The difference between the
two years is very marked in some provinces. In Lau, for instance, the rate this year is
3*69, and in the year previous it was 11 * 12, whereas Rewa, which was the lowest last
year, is 9 * 99 this year, which is above the average.
6. The number of births recorded is 4,425, of which 2,276 are males and 2,149 are
females, giving a rate of 38 * 47 per mille.
This is a steady improvement on previous years, being 1 * 22 per mille higher than in
the year ending September 1882, and 2 * 35 higher than in the year ending September
1881.
7. There is a greater proportion of females born this year than last, the numbers being
2,149 and 1,969 respectively.
The excess of males, however, over females born is still maintained, but not in the
same undue proportion, the excess this year being 127 against 337 the year previous.
8. The highest birth rate is in Wainimala, 51 *42 per mille, and this province had the
highest marriage rate in the year previous. The lowest birth rate is Cakaudrove, 25 * 75,
which was also amongst the lowest in the year previous, and also in the year ending
September 1881,
9. The number of deaths is 4,392, of whom 2,429 are males and 1,963 females. The
excess of the births over the deaths among the females is 186, and the excess of deaths
over births among males is 153. The proportion, therefore, of males to females in the
Colony has been disturbed to the extent of an increase of the females of 339. In other
words there were 466 more males died than females.
# 10. The average death rate of the Colony is set down at 38 * 18, or 1 •92 per mille
higher than last year, and 3 * 85 per mille in excess of the year ending September 1881.
The rate of mortality is therefore increasing.
11. The number of still-born children recorded is 245, an increase of 18 over last year,
and of 72 on the year previous.
12. Table <c B. 5 shows the number of births, deaths, and marriages throughout the
Colony for each quarter; and here the variation before mentioned is again observable.
Last year the greatest mortality was in the means, and the lowest in the extremes. This
year the highest rates are in the second and fourth quarters, but chiefly in the second
quarter, in which twelve out of the seventeen provinces show a decrease, and all are
affected.
In the year previous ending September 1881, the greatest mortality is in tbe third and
fourth quarters, April to September inclusive, and the generally accepted opinion is that
these dry and cold months are more trying to the natives than the wet and warm weather
from October to March.
13. Table “C. shows the number of births and deaths in each district, and also the
increase and decrease for the year previous.
14. There is one province only with an increase this year that had a decrease last year,
to wit, Namosi, 13*7. There are five provinces with a decrease that had an increase last
T 2


year, viz Ba, 16-28 ; Cakaudrove, 26-21; Kadavu, 24-67; Lomaiviti, 6-47; and
Serua, 17-3. Six provinces that had an increase continue to increase, viz :—Yasawa,
71-22; Bua, 15-14; Lau, 88-24; Rewa, 17-3; Wainimala, 12-7, and Nadroga, 35-37;
and there are five that continue to decrease, Macuata, 3-2 ; Naitasiri, 26-12 ; Ra, 46-80 ;
Tailevu, 25-35 ; and Navosa, 29-23.
15. An analysis of Table “ C ” shews that in 14 districts the birth rate is under 20 per
millc
30 districts the birth rate is over 20 and under 30 per rnille
50 „ „ 30 „ 40
41 „ „ 40 „ 50
II „ „ 50 „ 60
/ >» j) 60 ~ /0 jj
1 „ 70 „ 80
2 „ „ 80 „ 90
16. The next column contains the death rate, as follows
In 17* districts the death rate is under 20 per millc
32 „ over 20 and under 30 „
43 „ 30 „ 40 . „
44 j, 40 ~ 50 ~
11 ~ 50 „ 60
4 „ 60 „ 70
3 » / 0 j, 80 ~
I „ 80 „ 90
1 „ .90 „ 100
17- Table “I) ” is an extension of Table tc A,” and shews the age periods of the
deaths recorded, and the percentage in total deaths.
18. The number of those who died under the age of one month is 681, or 15'51 per
centum of the total number of deaths; a much higher rate last year, which gives 12 *Bl
as the rate at that age. The deaths of children over one month and under one year is
given as 865, or 19 ‘69 per centum, an improvement of 2*Bo per cent, on the previous
year. The two columns added together shew that the total number of deaths under one
year is 1,546, or 35'2 per cent., being ' 1 per cent, lower than last year.
In the year ending September 1881 the rate was 28*76 or 7’44 lower than the present
year.
The number of those who died before they had reached their tenth year is 583, or
13*27 per cent., that is 3*BB less than last year, and 10 *l2 less than the year previous.
Under the head of “Youths” the number of deaths is 322, or 7*33 per cent.* an
improvement of *76 on last year and of 1 *34 on the year previous.
The “ Adults and Middle Aged” number 867, or 19*74 per centum, against 20*95
last year, and 21 *79 the year previous.
The “ Aged ” aggregate 1,074, or 24*45 per cent., a rate 5*97 higher than last year,
and 7'oB higher than the preceding year.
19. The increase in the excess of mortality this year is found among the very young
and the aged, the intermediate ages shewing a slight improvement on the years imme-
diately preceding.
20. Table “ E ” shows the proportion per cent, of each class of diseases on the total
number of deaths in each province, and the column headed “ Abdomen ” contains as
usual the largest number, giving a rate equal to about one half of the whole viz., 49*98;
last year the rate was 49* 17, and the year previous 49*47.
Little reliance, however, can be placed in the diagnosis of disease by Natives. In some
of the provinces whose registers I examined carefully I found that coughs, whooping
cough (which has been prevalent of late), &c. are placed under the heading of
“ Abdomen ” ; and the Natives sincerely believe that they are right in doing so, it is not
done carelessly.
21. There are fewer *‘ Sudden ” deaths recorded this year than last year, the numbers
being 51 and 66 respectively. There are also fewer “ Violent ” deaths in the present
year, viz.:—42 against 50 last year, but the deaths from “unknown causes” are more
numerous, namely, 54 males and 47 females, in all 101 against 75 last year.
22. Tables “ F ” and “ G ” require no comment.
23. Twelve months ago the attention of the heads of provinces and districts was
drawn to the subject of births and deaths, and the reports from the provinces received
since show that inquiry has been made, and not a little trouble taken to find out the
cause or causes of the increasing high mortality.


24. One o-ood result of the inquiry made in the different districts is that the interest
of the people has been excited, and a beginning made in the investigation of this most
important subject. . , . , ,
25. The first attempts made to solve the question are in some instances simple ana
crude. There are those who say that “ the smell of the ground is different now.
Others think the cause may be found in'changed environments and the change ot the
seasons. Many more suggest that as they are subject to white men s diseases and
epidemics as well as to what they have been accustomed to as their own ai.ments they
run greater risks than formerly. Some attribute the cause to the late marriages of the
women, or the preference shewn by young men for marriage with comparatively elderlv
persons, whom they regard as more staid and more likely to attend to domestic duties
than the young marriageable girls, who often, they say, acquire in these days a habit ot
wandering about paying visits to their neighbouring tribes. Several report* especially
frpm one of the largest provinces give prominence to a custom or condition of things
which they sav is spreading called “ Dauvakadabedabe,” a word applied to women who
have children quickly, or as they otherwise express it, who have not weaned one child
before another is born. I am persuaded, however, that this custom is by no means
widely prevalent, as the Natives have an instinctive shame about such things which is not
shared by Europeans, and this sha i.c is itself a safeguard.
There are numbers of intelligent Chiefs, however, who cling to the belief that the
excessive mortality among children is owing to this cause, and certainly the numbei of
children who die a few days after birth is large.
There is one cause of mortality which is general and undoubted. There is consensus
of opinion that the Natives do not take that care of the very young and the very old
which they used to take. They also admit that they do not take that care of the sick
which they were wont to do in old times. ....
The/ are becoming increasingly careless in providing food and native medicine, fuel
and water; or at all events it is their own testimony that all these things received greater
attention in the days of their grandfathers.
27. Since the foregoing was written the annual meeting of Chiefs has taken place, and
the results shewn by the accompanying Tables have been the subject of consideration and
discussion.
It was unfortunate, however, that during the deliberations of the Council whooping
cou‘ y h was widely prevalent not only in the adjacent district hut all over the Island ot
Vitf Leva, if not throughout the entire group, and this epidemic has been attended with
much more fatality than is usual in some other countries. As a consequence, attention
was diverted from other causes of mortality and was almost exclusively concentrated on
the one absorbing topic of the occurrence of these, to them, strange disorders. The
more so as they have been told that medicine avails little comparatively in whooping
cough, and that care and careful nursing is the one requisite, precisely that in which they
acknowledge themselves to be most deficient.
The conclusion arrived at somewhat despondently may he summed up in the last para-
graph (26) of this Report, and the remark of one of the Chiefs must have found an echo
m the hearts of all present, namely, that it is useless and disheartening to consider further
regulations on sanitary matters so long as the present regulations are so little heeded.
It was carefully explained to them that there is no cause of apprehension from a
falling off of the birth rate, and that in this respect they compare favourably with other
nations, but it was no less clearly demonstrated that the increasing high rate of mortality
calls for their more serious attention, and that, humanly speaking, the remedy is in their
own hands.
I have &c.
(Signed) James Blyth,
His Honour The Administrator. Secretary for Native Affairs.
No. 15.
The Right Hon. the EARL OF DERBY, K.G., to Governor Sir G. William
DES VGEUX, K.C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, September 9, 1884.
I received and laid before the Queen Mr. Thurston’s Despatch of the
21st June,* forwarding an Address to Her Majesty from the Chiefs of Fiji assembled at
* No. 13, Part 11.
T 3


the recent Bose Vaka Turaga, together with a report of the recommendations adopted
by the Council.
2. I am commanded to instruct you to inform the Chiefs that Her Majesty has
received their letter, and that Her Majesty gratefully appreciates their expressions of
loyal sympathy in Her bereavement.
3. The Queen is concerned to hear of the great mortality among the old men and
children of the Native race, and trusts that this evil may be stayed by the hearty
co-operation of the people with the efforts of Her Colonial Government to ensure their
health and well being.
4. Her Majesty learns with satisfaction that the Chiefs continue to be convinced of
the suitability to their wants of the Government under which they live, and she trusts
that their annual deliberations may advance the welfare of the whole Fijian people.
I have, &c.
Sir G. W. Des Voeux. (Signed) DERBY.
No. 16.
The Right Hon. the EARL OF DERBY, K.G., 1o Governor Sir G. William DES
VCEUX, K.C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, September 23, 1884.
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Despatch of the
2nd July last,* forwarding a copy of the Report on the Vital Statistics of the native
population of Fiji for 1883.
It appears from Mr. Blyth’s Report to be more than ever desirable to persuade the
people to pay attention to the existing regulations on sanitary matters.
I have, &c.
Sir G. W. Des Voeux. (Signed) DERBY.
No. 17.
Governor Sir G. William DES VCEUX, K.C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the EARL
OF DERBY, K.G. (Received January 15, 1885.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, November 22, 1884.
I have the honour to forward to your Lordship transcript of certain questions
which were recently put to the Government in Council with reference to the native
policy of the Government, and to the alleged discontent and oppression of the natives,
together with the reply which was made to them by Dr. MacGregor, Acting Colonial
Secretary.
3. Dr. MacGregor’s statement, while containing nothing of importance which is new,
at the same time comprises in a convenient form all the principal arguments in favour of
our native policy and of the present system of native taxation, and may therefore be of
use and interest to your Lordship.
3. Ido not deem it necessary to add to this statement; my views on the subject
remaining much the same as they have been ever since I was in a position to form a
judgment on the subject, and having been but little modified since the time—now six
years ago —when in my message to the Legislative Council in connection with the
Estimates of 1879 I gave the various reasons which appeared to me in the special
circumstances of this Colony to outweigh my strong a priori objections to a tax in kind.
While there no doubt are, and always will be, occasional abuses in the system, I am
satisfied that the most valid objections to it are rather to the amount collected than to the
mode of collection ; and while, for the reasons given in the above message, I should deeply
regret the total abolition of the system for a long time to come, 1 nevertheless look
* No. 14, Tart 11.


forward to the time when the revenue of the Colony derived from other sources shall oe
sufficient to enable a reduction in the assessments.
4. On one point Dr. MacGregor might have spoken even stronger than he did. Not
only am I not aware of the existence of the general discontent alleged in the questions,
but I have strong reason to believe in its non-existence. There are no doubt grumblings
here and there when an unfavourable season has rendered produce difficult to obtain, and no
doubt occasionally when the tax has been levied with injustice, or when produce collected
has been wasted by failure to transport it in due time. But the second of these causes is, I
believe, gradually disappearing as the Chiefs become more and more educated to their
duty and begin to feel assured by examples within their experience that anything like
serious and intentional injustice is sure to meet with punishment; while the third cause
of o-rievance is now infinitely less so than formerly on account of the largely increased
number of vessels owned by natives. When it is considered how scanty have been our
means of transport, and that the produce has to be collected from 80 different islands
covering a wide expanse of ocean and with difficult navigation between them, I venture
to think it to the credit of the administration that the waste has not been larger than it
has been. It may be taken for granted that all instances of such loss have been made
the most of by the enemies of the system, and after all they have been extremely few by
comparison w r ith the great number of places to be visited.
5. But granting that there has been occasional cause of dissatisfaction, I am, I repeat,
satisfied that anything like general discontent with the Government, or anything like the
universal oppression alleged by the white inhabitants who, for other reasons, disapprove of
the native policy, is absolutely without existence. Time is wanting to me to give in
full now the grounds for this decided opinion ; but it may I think, be at least regarded
as strong evidence of its correctness that in the ten years which have now elapsed
since the tax was instituted though the Government has been without the slightest
sunport from alien force, there has been on the part of the natives subject to it not only an
entire absence of outbreaks against the Government but none of the signs of bitterness
which are apt to be evinced in many forms by people who are really oppressed.
6. As the Governor is regarded by Fijians as the impersonator of the Government it is
indeed scarcely conceivable that an attempt would not long ere now have been made
on his life, if there had been in truth suffering as is represented. For it is to be borne in
mind that the allegations on this subject are no stronger than they were six or seven
years ago, and that during the whole of the intervening time the Governor and his family
have lived surrounded by natives at a considerable distance from any other house
inhabited by white men.
7. It is, moreover, worthy of note that these natives living in contiguity to Government
House supply an argument much stronger than the above negative one against the
existence of general oppression. They are a portion of the armed native constabulary
which with exception of a few police is the only force maintained for the preservation of
order, and which, like the police, the warders of the gaol, and the crews of the boats of
the native Commissioners, has always been levied in each province by a kind of
conscription. Men leave their homes for this duty for the most part with reluctance,
and simply as a matter of loyalty to their Chief and the Government. During their two
years’ service they are, of course, well fed and w r ell clothed, and though their pay is small
their work is extremely light; yet when their period of engagement expires it is only in
very rare instances that they can be induced to re-engage. The great majority prefer to
return to the so-called oppression of their chiefs at home.
8. In view of the unmistakeable good temper of these men during their time of
service, and of the indications of happiness among them which I have the opportunitj r of
witnessing almost daily ; having regard, moreover, to the fact that the great majority of
them are not chiefs, but when at home are subject to all the obligations of commoners, I
venture to think that there could scarcely be a stronger proof that the average lot of the
Fijian is not a hard one.
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. WILLIAM DES VCEUX.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, K.G.,
&c. &c. &c.
T 4


Enclosure in No. 17.
(Extract from the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Legislative Council*
sth November 1884)
Inter alia .
Questions.
When the Honourable Mr. Hill was called upon to put to the Acting Colonial
Secretary the questions standing in his name on the business paper, the Acting Colonial
Secretary rose and said:—
“ Before the honourable and gallant member opens fire I would crave leave to ask that
he may be so good as to discharge his whole broadside at once. No doubt these
questions, from their form and number, are admirably adapted to demonstrate to the
public the reckless valour of the gallant member in heading a forlorn hope in a cause
that is popular and against the Government. Still they are so closety connected with
each other, and contain so much repetition, that it will be better to answer them all at once
so that 1 may thus be spared having to repeat 15 times what I may have to say to the
honourable member.”
The Honourable Mr. Hill said: —
“ 1 disclaim all attention of discharging a broadside against the Government, or of
attacking it or its native policy in any way.”
(1.) Mr. Hill then read the following questions :
(1.) It is a fact that the Roko of Ba has been removed or suspended by the Govern-
ment from his position as Roko ?
(2.) What were the causes that lead to such removal or suspension ?
(3.) Was not the oppression of his people the principal cause for such removal or
suspension ?
(4.) Has the Roko of Cakandrove been suspended by the Government?
(5.) What were the causes for such suspension ?
(6.) Has he been found guilty of oppressing his people and of other misconduct ?
(7.) Is the Government aware that there is a widespread discontent amongst the
native race in Fiji, which is believed to be owing principally to the oppression and
malpractices of their chiefs ?
(8.) Has the Government taken any thorough measures for arriving at a knowledge
of the true state of feeling amongst the mass of the native race ?
(9.) If not, does the Government intend to make such inquiry through persons
perfectly impartial and capable of arriving at the true state of affairs ?
(10.) Is the Government aware that the system of “ Lala” as now practised by the
chiefs in Fiji is the cause of great oppression to the natives and consequent
discontent ?
(11.) Does the Government intend to stop the system of “ Lala ” or take such
measures as will in the future prevent the natives being made victims of that
robbery and oppression which this system fosters.
(12.) Does the Government now, after some years of trial, consider that the scheme
of native taxation is a sound and satisfactory one and the most suitable for the
native race here?
(13.) Is the Government aware that the manner in which the system of taxation is
carried out amongst the natives is such as to cause a great waste of time and
produce and a proportionate amount of dissatisfaction and discontent ?
(14.) Is it the intention of the Government to make a thorough, searching, and
effective inquiry into this matter ?
(15.) Does the Government intend to initiate any new scheme o( taxation for the
natives ?
The Acting Colonial Secretary replied as follows: —
“In reply to the first six questions which deal specifically with the cases of the Roko
of Ba and the Roko of Cakandrove, I may state briefly that these officers have been
temporally suspended from office, and that their suspension has been brought about more
through other misconduct than on account of direct oppression of their people. It is
only fair to state on their behalf that the misconduct of these chiefs, for which they
now undergoing punishment, was of a kind for which they should not be too
severely treated, as it was principally through associating with and listening to much to
white men that they were led into errors against which they were not proof. One of
them was induced to enter into forbidden transactions connected with the purchase of


vessels, which if allowed to proceed, would have embarrassed his province financially, and
have laid unjust burdens on his people. The other was beginning to show habits of such
ireo-ularity that both for the good of the young man himself as well as for the weal
of his people it was necessary to check them at once with firmness; he was at the same
time entering on a course of action with regard to the use and cultivation of certain lands
in his province that would have clearly had as a result that an unfair advantage as between
the chief and his people would have been secured for the former. One of these chiefs is
a man of ability and experience, who on a former occasion rendered good service to the
country ; a fact I can affirm from personal observation. He now sees clearly the mistake
he made, and he acknowledges frankly the justness of the punishment that his
Excellency has deemed it necessary to inflict upon him. With age and
experience the other will most probably become better qualified for the duties of his
office. The next three questions deal’ with the general subject of oppression by the
chiefs and consequent widespread discontent among the native race. To this general
question I give the general answer, No ! His Excellency is not aware of the existence
of such discontent, nor of the oppression alleged by the honourable member to be the
cause of it. At the same time his Excellency, as an experienced man of the world, Is
well aware that no system of government can be conducted among any people without
the existence of a greater or less degree of unfairness which may be considered as
oppression. The stronger always have and always will treat the weaker more or less
unfairly; the wiser have ever taken and will always take more or less advantage of those
knowing less. We see this in school boards, parish vestries, and town boards, as well as
in dealings between principalities. No one save a blinded enthusiast, or a mere novice,
would expect that the native race of Fiji couid be ruled by their own chiefs without the
occurrence of not a few acts of a character more or less oppressive, and without a certain
number of people being discontented. No one can, therefore with honesty, affirm the
absolute non-existence of oppression and discontent among the native race of Fiji. But,
to minimise the former, his Excellency, as supreme chief, is always on the watch ; and 1
venture to state that no one who knows his Excellency will say that he has ever
hesitated to correct and punish wherever disciplinary measures have been shown to be
necessary, as in the case of the two high chiefs before mentioned. A watchfulness on
the part of his Excellency on the doings of the chiefs is necessary —less on account of
incompetency or of any inherent bad qualities in the chiefs than on account of the great
difference between our habits and customs and those which they and their forefathers
have looked upon as right and proper. Taking into consideration how short a time it is
since the chiefs were first brought into contact with our rule, our ways of thought and
action; how recently they have emerged from the most confirmed state of barbarism;
and, bearing in mind how little guidance and instruction they have had from us in
remodelling many of their ancient institutions to suit our views and customs, I say, most
emphatically, that the government of the chiefs has been a marked success, and has been
distinguished by tact, wisdom, and moderation, to an extent that cannot but command
the respect and admiration of any unprejudiced person. It would indeed, according to
my experience of the world, be no easy task to select a body even ofAvhite officers that,
given the same authority, and the same opportunities of studying their own interests,
would prove more honest and more unselfish than the chiefs of Fiji. The chiefs,
however, are of necessity very much left to themselves on account of the distance at which
many of them live from the seat of government, and also by reason of the limited number
of white officers of ability and experience that the finances of the Colony will permit to
be employed among them, so that it is only reasonable to expect that they frequently do
wrong, and sometimes make grave mistakes; but there can be no doubt that any rule in
which the chiefs did not play an important part would be felt by the people as far more
oppressive than the existing rule, and w T ould create infinitely greater discontent than
exists at present. Unfortunately the honourable member, in common with what would
really seem to be the majority of white people in this country, appears to demand of the
native policy of- the Government that it must either give perfect results or must give
way to some better scheme, which, however, the honourable member has not as yet
begun to devise. Why should the Native policy of the Government be condemned
because Fijians have not yet arrived at that millennial stage of moral developement that
would make it impossible for them to do wrong ? Why should the honourable member,
and those with whom he thinks and acts in regard to this subject, exact from this race
on the threshold of civilisation a freedom from fault of which we ourselves cannot boast ?
The answer is a simple one: “ Because a majority of the white settlers believe that their
“ interests are not so well served by the native policy of the Government as they would
“ be were they allowed to take greater advantage of the inexperience of the natives, and
i 17270. U


“ were they permitted to break up the communal and domestics ties of the race. 5 ’ It is
therefore, from the desire to bring the native policy of the Government into disrepute,
that so much alacrity is shown in raking up, parading, and magnifying every act of
injustice committed hy a chief and every instance of real or pretended hardship endured
by any of the people. Many of these occurrences have been grossly exaggerated ; not
a few have been pure inventions. I venture to say that the charge of exaggeration can
without injustice be made against the questions now before the board. The particular
form of phraseology used by the honourable member in these questions would show
that he in his public capacity is hostile to the native policy all round; that he
believes that the chiefs are tyrants and that widespread discontent exists among the
people. But it may safely be assumed that the honourable member has in his private
capacity no belief in the existence of serious oppression or of grave discontent,
because he has furnished the Government with. no example of the former, and given
no warning as to the presence of the latter. For omitting to do this, however, the
honourable member might with truth reply that he has had little more opportunity
of making personal observation on these points than if he had lived all his days beyond
this Colony. One must therefore assume that his questions are based on hearsay,
floating rumours, newspaper paragraphs, and probably on stories retailed to him with
evil or roguish intent. It is, however, only fair to the honourable member that we bear
in mind what he has just told us, that he disclaims all wish or intention of attacking the
native policy of the Government, of which, in short, he approves. The difficulty is,
however, to reconcile what he now tells us here with the alarming form and dogmatic
assumptions of the questions he has put. The next subject touched upon by the
honourable member is the “ Lala,” which he associates at random with oppression and
robbery. “ Lala ”is simply a name for the help or service rendered by the community
to any person to whc3m the same is due according to the rule understood and clearly
defined usage and customs of the natives. By its exercise, also, services required for the
public purposes of the community are performed, such as the erection of the public
buildings of a district, &c. It is therefore closely entwined into the whole communal
structure, from which it is consequently inseparable. It is therefore superfluous to say
that his Excellency has no intention whatever of putting a stop to the system. At the
same time his Excellency will in the future, as he has done in the past, take care that
the people are not made the victims of robbery or oppression by the perversion of the
“ Lala/’ In coupling the term “ Lala with the opprobrious.epithets of “ robberyand
“ oppression,” the honourable member, like many others, either forgets or ignores the
fact that what he calls “ robbery ” and “ oppression ” may neither be regarded nor felt as
such by people whose usages are different from ours. An elector of Middlesex would
probably consider himself oppressed were he called upon to plant the potatoes of the
Lord Mayor of London; and his objection would perhaps principally arise from the fact
that his father and grandfather had not done so; but a Fijian, from the force of custom,
considers it no hardship to prepare the garden of his chief. The tenants of a Scotch
laird would in these days probably consider themselves robbed and oppressed had they to
furnish their landed proprietor with the means of preparing a feast for a visitor, or of
building a house for his reception; but such things are as much a matter of course in a
Fijian community as they were in the glen of a Highland clan in Scotland 200 years ago.
The limits within which “ Lala ” can be exercised are well known, and when those are
exceeded, “ Lala ” ends and oppression begins. The cases in which this border line is
crossed are not many, and they will in in most instances be reported to his Excellency
and dealt with promptly. I may for a moment direct attention to one exercise of the
ct Lala ” that is of special interest as affecting ourselves in common with the natives. I
allude to road making by the latter. It is largely owing to the “ Lala ” that roads and
bridle paths, estimated by the Native Office at upwards of 2,000 miles in extent, have
been made within the last few years in this Colony. The great subject of native
taxation is taken up by the honourable member in the last four questions, with need I
remark, the usual retrain of “ discontent.” The scheme of native taxation, on its main
lines, as now r existing may at once be shown to be both politically and financially a
necessity. Politically it is better adapted to the present condition of the race than any other
system that has been put to the test of practice, and I shall show later on how strongly
pecuniary considerations w T eigh in its favour. The amount to be paid as taxes by each
province is fixed by the Government; the chief of each province with the principal
people of his districts sub-assess the districts, and so on descending the scale. Through
the existence of the communal ties one town or one district can assist another in making
up its assessment, wdiile the work in each case, being done by the community, is less
felt than if it were done by individuals. The whole work is directed, and to a large


extent supervised, by the chiefs. There can be no doubt whatever that in this manner
heavier taxes are paid in kind with less hardship than could be raised by any other plan.
No doubt the fact that the system is well adapted to communal institutions and well
calculated to maintain rather than to weaken the influence and authority of the chiefs
among and over the people, constitutes with many its chief fault. But I would ask
those that wish to break the power of the chiefs how they would propose to rule the
people and preserve order without them. The chiefs represent the army and navy, and
practically the police, of the country. The maintenance of their influence is therefore
necessary, even on these somewhat selfish grounds alone. The and devotion of
the chiefs to the Government has hitherto been such that the discharge of the above
functions could be safely entrusted to them, a fact which speaks volumes for their good
sense in the face of the chronic condemnation of the Government by the local press and
by many reckless agitators. But suppose the power of the chiefs overturned and they
discontented, and their people no longer controlled by their influence, save for evil, what
force of alien policemen and soldiers would be needed to make the administration
effective and respected? Be it remembered, that order would have to be maintained
among 130,000 people of the aboriginal races living at centres widely apart, with a large
number of men, powerful on account of superior intelligence and hereditary influence
scattered through them, deeply discontented and suffering from a sense of grievous
wrong. Ido not pretend to be able to answer this question, but it is not easy to
believe that less, but probably much more than a half, of the present revenue would
be required for that service alone. The financial aspect of the question is of itself
sufficient to render the abolition of the native taxation scheme an impossibility, not
only at present but in all probability for a long time to come. The services required
to carry on the administration, already reduced to the most slender proportions
possible, will not allow of any considerable reduction in receipts. Any change that could
be hoped for would therefore be only in the incidence of taxation. If native taxes
are reduced to any large extent Customs dues must be increased, or export duties must
be levied, or a land tax would have to be imposed. Probably it would be necessary to
have recourse to more than one of these means of obtaining revenue, perhaps to all three
together. It may "well be doubted that 18,000/. more than at present could be raised by
any modification of the Customs tariff’, as the quantities of articles consumed would
diminish greatly with heavily increased Customs dues. An export duty on sugar at the
present moment would go far towards the extinction of that most important industry ;
and probably few would be prepared to advocate export duties on copra and green fruit.
For the same reason a land tax would be felt to be burdensome if not oppressive, more
especially as it would practically fall exclusively on the white settlers. There appears to
exist in many quarters a vague idea that the abolition of the native taxes would in some
mysterious manner give rise to a large increase in Customs dues. Suppose the whole
of the produce paid by way of taxes in kind by the natives were sold by them and the
proceeds laid out on goods liable to an ad valorem duty of 10 per centum. On the
goods thus purchased, not more, but probably much less, than 1,500/. would be paid as
customs dues. But in the first place much of the produce now utilized by the natives
in preparing their taxes, would, but for the taxes, never be used at all; and in the second
place the natives would most probably receive prices considerably less than now, not
only on what is given as taxes, but also on the surplus produce, the price of which is
refunded to the natives. The honourable member apparently wishes, judging from the
form and phraseology of these questions, to proclaim to the world with the authority of
his official position that he condemns the scheme because the manner in which it is
worked causes great waste of time and produce. In consequence of the great distance
of some of the districts and islands from the seat of government, and the difficulty of
transport, there will no doubt be a loss of produce, but I do not believe that such loss is
now considerable. As to loss of time, the natives are allowed to do many things in their
own way in connexion with the preparation of their taxes, and there is consequently
from our way of thinking doubtless loss of time, but the natives have not yet learned
our high-pressure ways, and do not and will never value time by our standard. There
can be no doubt that, were native taxes abolished, the profits of traders would be greater
than now, but the greater their profits and spending power, the less the purchasing
power of the native; so that so far as the division of profits goes the Custom House is
but little affected. I may sum up this part of the subject by saying that the Govern-
ment has no intention of radically or hurriedly changing the system of native taxation. I
should not, however, like to be misunderstood on this point. The native tax scheme as
conducted has many and some grave imperfections in its details. Efforts will not be


spared to remove these, but any changes that will be made will be alterations in detail
and not of principle. I venture to say that no other plan of taxation could be put into
practice that would yield as satisfactory results as the present scheme. In conclusion, I
may be permitted to state that the opinions and views I have had the honour to put
before the board are those I have arrived at after personal observation extending over a
period of eight or nine years, covering in fact the whole time the native policy of the
Government has been in force. So far as lam concerned, these views are honestly
entertained ; they are the result of conviction which has been further confirmed by a large
amount of investigation and consideration devoted recently to this question. Before
1 sit down 1 would ask that in fairness to the honourable member himself, as well as to
enlighten the members of the board, he may be allowed to explain the curious discrepancy
between the hostile form and matter of these questions, which will go out to the world
in their present form, and the disclaimer we have heard from the honourable member
against any wish or intention to find fault with the native policy of the Government.
The Honourable John Hill said in reply,—
“ I do not remember all that has been said by the honourable gentleman, and so cannot
reply to it at length. 1 had no intention in putting these questions to attack the general
policy of the Government, the native policy, or the taxation scheme. It was competent
to me to ask the questions if 1 had the impression on my mind. It was for the
representative of the Government to deny the statements. Regarding the native
taxation scheme, lam not prepared to offer a better system. Ido not wish to see a
change in the system of government by chiefs, nor any violent change whatever. The
natives are not like the whites either in their lives or mode of thought. Even if things
were otherwise I would not advise any violent change. But Ido hope that by these
questions the Government will be led to make inquiry as to whether there is any truth
in these rumours. Ido not know that this state of matters exists of my own knowledge.
I have to gather information and to hear of these things. But there are other gentlemen
present who are better able to give reasons than I am. My intention was honestly to
draw the attention of the Government to these floating rumours, so that they might
deny them if false, or make inquiry. It is just possible that such discontent may exist
and the Government not know it. What I want to know is this : Has the Government
taken adequate means to arrive at the facts ? Ido not know. If the Government is
satisfied that the rumours are incorrect, I have nevertheless done my duty in asking the
questions. With reference to the honourable gentleman’s assumption that I had obtained
my information from newspaper reports and had been led by such like statements. I
know my own mind. It was out of a sincere disposition to do good that I asked the
questions. I was not led by any one. No one expects that the native tax system
shall be free of fault. But every one fairly expects that the system shall be as free from
faults as possible ; and the question that arises is, —Is this scheme so? The honourable
o-entleman has taken exception to my use of the words robbery and oppression with
reference to the lala. Well, perhaps those were strong words. There is legitimate lala
and lala that becomes oppression. I once heard a speaker say in public that after lala passes
its proper uses it was legalised robbery, and I quite concur in the remark. The Colonial
Secretary has acknowledged that chiefs may do what is wrong, and has intimated that
they will be punished for so doing. So far this is satisfactory. There are chiefs in Fiji
(I don’t refer to any of the Rokos) who exact the lala beyond its legalised use. I am,
however, <dad to see that in cases where this has been detected the punishment has been
summary. I have never abused or decried the native taxation scheme. I can t see any
other system that could take its place. It is not the system that I want to attack, out
abuses in the details. The Colonial Secretary has acknowledged that there are such
abuses. I hope they will not be lost sight of, for it is a fact that a great deal ot time
and labour is lost in the details. The Colonial Secretary has said that there would be
more abuses in connection with the employment of any other scheme. But the natives
would have a greater incentive to work—they would have more to sell, and more money.
In the native towns now’ there are piles of produce wasting and rotting. I have myself
seen it within the last three months in towns in Natewa Bay. The cocoanut trees were
in all stages of growth and growing up together like a jungle.”
(2.) Pursuant to notice foven, the Honourable Captain Barrack asked the Honourable
the Acting Colonial Secretary, —In view of a recent statement by his Excellency the
Governor that in a certain interview with the representative of a Melbourne newspaper
his Excellency’s language was completely misunderstood and misreported, whether, as
the subject has created much public interest, there would be any objection to state
particulars with regard to the misunderstanding and incorrectness of report r


In reply, the Acting Colonial Secretary read the following statement from his
Excellency the Governor
“ I am glad that the honourable member has asked this question, as it gives me the
opportunity of clearing away the ground of much misrepresentation. It may be well to
explain in the first instance how the reports in question came to be published. Late in
the evening of the 19th March last, the reporter of a daily newspaper called upon me in
Melbourne 5 , and informed me that his employers would be much obliged if 1 would
supply them with certain information on the subject of the labour trade. Explaining
that I was much occupied with arrangements for a journey to Fiji, which news received
only a few hours before had rendered suddenly necessary, I somewhat reluctantly
complied with a request which was urged with much courtesy. In giving the desired
information, however, I look it for granted that the usual course would be followed, and
that any report of the interview would be submitted to me for correction before
publication ; this being all the more necessary with reference to a subject which for its
proper understanding requires a considerable amount of special knowledge. To my
surprise, however, I found in the paper published the next morning, 20th March, an
account of what I had said, which was in many respects incorrect, and which in some
instances attributed to me expressions and opinions which were absurd on their face.
Having at once requested to see a representative of the newspaper on the subject, the
same reporter called upon me in the afternoon, immediately before my departure for
Sydney. 1 informed him of the extreme inaccuracy of the report, pointing out two or
three instances as a sample of many others, and explaining at the same time that complete
correctness could only be obtained by rewriting the whole, for which it was then
impossible to give the requisite time. To his inquiry, what should be done, I replied
that the only proper course would be to explain what had occurred, and to withdraw the
whole report as inaccurate, in which case, if asked to do so, I might probably be able to
furnish the necessary corrections on my return from Fiji. Proceeding to Sydney
immediately afterwards, I on the next day, March 21st, embarked for Fiji, and therefore
had no opportunity of seeing the issue of the newspaper published that morning in
Melbourne, and it was not until my return thither, nearly two months afterwards, that I
found the report had not been withdrawn at all, and that the only corrections made had
been in respect of inaccuracies which, as I have mentioned, I had given merely as a few
instances out of many—the matter being thus rendered worse by giving an appearance
of correctness to all the rest. I found, moreover, that on the same morning had been
published portions of my message to Council with reference to the Native Labour
Ordinance, prefaced by what purported to be a statement of mine, the incorrectness of
which furnishes a good illustration of the misapprehensions which characterised the
whole ‘ interview.’ In answer to a request from the reporter that I would give him my
views with regard to the native labour question in Fiji, I informed him that they had
been fully expressed in my message to Council, adding at the same time, that whether from
want of interest in the subject, or from some other cause, it had been kept out of the
Jocal press, by which I meant of course the press of Melbourne. The reporter, however,
evidently understood me to mean the press of this Colony, and in his report attributes
to me the absurd statement that my message had been suppressed by the journals of
Fiji. It is impossible for me to believe that anyone here who w T as aware of the facts
even for a moment supposed that I ever made such a statement as this. That there was
some mistake was apparent, and this renders it the more difficult to attribute to honest
motives the language which has been used on the subject. Similar misapprehension of my
language is evident throughout the whole report on the subject of the Polynesian labour
traffic. Could anyone in Fiji really believe for an instant that I, with my knowledge of
the West Indies, should hold it as necessary to put an end to 6 working by night in
the sugar houses,’ knowing as I do that that is inseparable from the manufacture of
sugar on a large scale, and that this kind of work is, as a rule, preferred by labourers
when it is not given in addition to day, work in the fields. Again, could I really be
supposed to have said that Polynesians in Queensland were fed upon a purely vegetable
diet when it is notorious that any objection to their diet in that Colony has been of an
opposite kind and based on the undue proportion of animal food. Even the first four
sentences given in the report on the subject of the labour traffic contain an entirely
mistaken application of my language. 1 was referring, not to the labour trade as a whole,
but to it as recently conducted in New Britain, New Ireland, and the other islands of
Northern Melanesia, where the people have specially weak constitutions even for
Polynesians, and where the absence of interpreters rendered it impossible for the
labourers recruited to have anything but the vaguest idea of the nature of their
engagements. Though, even with regard to this portion of the labour trade, ray
U 3


language has been coloured by the mind of the reporter, who evidently had a strong
prejudice against the whole system, I do not doubt that I termed it, as I had coine to
believe it to be, infamous. Reports received from various quarters had furnished a
complete justification of my language, and it is remarkable that within a few weeks
afterwards not only the Government of Fiji, but Her Majesty’s Government and the
Government of Queensland, had separately condemned the trade for the same reasons.
For, on the 19th of June, the Government of Queensland put an end to the labour trade
in all islands north of the Solomons, and when Her Majesty’s Government had, in a
despatch dated Jime 6th, directed similar action on the part of the Government of Fiji,
I was able to report that it had already been taken several weeks before the issue of
the Queensland proclamation, by notice to the different parties interested that no further
licenses would be issued for recruiting in the islands in question. It is satisfactory to
find that some of the employers who have had most experience of these northern
Melanesians fully concur in the expediency of this measure on account of the dispro-
portion between the value and cost of their labour j so that the prohibition is thus shown
to have been required scarcely less on economical grounds than for the sake of humanity.
A similar mistaken application appears in the report on the subject of the death rate!
I did not say that 10 per cent, was the average return of mortality for the whole of Fiji,*
but that the average mortality on estates had recently been 10 percent, and more m
one or two districts. Moreover, I was not in a position to speak with reference to
Queensland generally, but only with regard to one or two districts as to which I had
seen reports; nor did I say that one-and-a-half per cent, mortality among the coolies in
Demerara was deemed a high rate, knowing, as I did, that this, though nor an uncommon
rate, was about the lowest general rate experienced there. What 1 did say was much
the same as I had previously stated in Fiji, that even one-and-a-half per cent., though
an extremely low rate by comparison with the mortality of Polynesians in Queensland
and Fiji, was nevertheless a high one among a population composed to such a large
extent of adults in the prime of life, in view of the fact that to the total deaths of°a
country those of children under five usually bear a proportion varying from 40 per cent,
upwards. It is unnecessary to enter further into the specific inaccuracies of the report,
which is throughout coloured, though no doubt unintentionally, by the mind of the
writer, and this the more especially, inasmuch as the incorrect statement of my views
does not on the whole convey a stronger condemnation of the labour traffic than I believe
to be absolutely just. So long ago as the beginning of 1882 I represented to the
Secretary of State the expediency of putting an end to the system by international
agreement, on the ground that to carry out regulations such as would alone put an
effectual end to abuses would be so expensive as to be- altogether prohibitive of the trade.
Even before the end of that year evidence received by the High Commission in
confirmation of my view accumulated to such an extent as to outweigh the reasons
which I had urged against the prohibition of the payment of Polynesians in arms,
and I therefore made a proposition to the Government of Queensland for a
simultaneous prohibition in both Colonies such as has recently been put in force#
Though the working of the system has, as regards Fiji, been very greatly improved
in various particulars since that time under the vigilant supervision of the present
head of the Immigration Department, no impartial person who has had the opportunity
of reading the numerous reports in the possession of the High Commission (not
only from resident missionaries, but from naval officers, deputy commissioners, and
others), together with the evidence supplied by the incidental admissions of persons
interested in the trade, can for a moment doubt that there are very serious evils and
abuses which are absolutely inseparable from the system, and which cannot be effectually
checked without putting an end to it altogether. Indeed, so strong are my views on
this subject that 1 should not for a moment hesitate to introduce a law for the total
prohibition of the trade as regards Fiji, if it were not for a belief that in the absence of
an international agreement the people would be inevitably carried away to other countries,
where there would be by no means the same security for their good treatment. As the
interview above referred to has furnished by no means the only ground of misrepre-
sentation with regard to statements which 1 am supposed to have made in Australia,
I take the opportunity of saying, once and for all, that in no single instance did I use
language there on the subject of Fiji, except with a view to advance the general
interests of the Colony. While it is possible that some of my remarks may have
incidentally affected the supposed interests of individuals, there was certainly no intention
of this kind, and if any such persons feel themselves aggrieved, I shall, if a question
on the subject be put in Council, be glad to show them that I have done them no
injustice. While there have, I understand, been false reports with regard to what I


have said, or am supposed to have said, in private, it is fortunate that the bitterest
acrimony has been created by the colour given to my published writings, namely, my
memorandum to the Australian Convention on the future of New Guinea and Polynesia,
and my despatch to the Secretary of State reporting the action which I had taken with
respect to that Convention. It was partly on account of these misrepresentations, and
of the credit that appeared to be given to them here, that I determined to forego the
leave of absence to visit England (which was granted me by the Secretary of State),
and decided to come back to Fiji for the purpose of facing all that could be said on the
subject; and it has, therefore, been matter for surprise that no questions similar to this
one have before now been put to me in Council, and that, except by newspaper abuse,
and the representation to the Secretary of State of a single individual, my attention has
been in no way directed to any one of the points on which, I am given to understand,
strong public feeling has been excited. As the false colour which has been given to
the larger portion of my report to the Secretary of State, with regard to the Convention,
is sufficiently obvious and does not affect Fiji, it is unnecessary to refer to it further.
On one point, however, as having been made the instrument of creating much irritation
among the colonists, I think it well not to forego the occasion of showing how slender
is the foundation upon which has been built up a large superstructure of imaginative
reflection. I refer to my use of the words ‘ Fijian w hites,’ by which, in accordance with
the statements of certain press writers, one of the colonists has not hesitated to inform
the Secretary of State that I meant what used to be conveyed in the Southern States
of America by the term ‘ mean whites.’ It is scarcely necessary to say that, if the
Secretary of State had understood any such meaning in my use of the word 4 whites,’ he
would not have been slow to censure such a slander upon a large portion of the
community. But neither did he understand such a meaning, nor had I the slightest
idea of such, or, indeed, of any sinister meaning whatever. As a matter of fact, the
word whites without a qualifying adjective, such as 4 mean,’ or ‘ low,’ never did have,
even in the Southern States, the meaning now ascribed to it. So far from this, the
terra w T as always applied to themselves by those to whom it referred as indicative of
their pride in superiority of race. I am, moreover, informed by persons who have had
long experience of the country that the same is true of Fiji also. But, however this may
be, I simply used the word as a convenient expression to cover those colonists who
(though by no means all of European birth) are of European descent. In this entirely
innocent sense it has, as was recently pointed out to me, been used by persons of all
classes in Fiji, unofficial as well as official, and it is remarkable that, though an evil
meaning in the use of the term has been ascribed to me by the correspondent of the
‘ Sydney Morning Herald,’ the same word was used only last year by his predecessor in
that capacity (both correspondents being reverend gentlemen of the same Mission) and
has since been more than once quoted by the press of Fiji without any adverse comment
whatever —the last occasion being on the sth December, or about the same time that
I was using the word in Melbourne. In conclusion, I desire to thank the honourable
member for having put this question, and I should be glad if other members would
follow his example, with a view to ascertain the correctness of any representations which
arouse strong public feeling.”
No. 18.
Governor Sir G. William DFS VCEUX, K.C.M.G., to the Right Hon, the EARL
OF DERBY, K.G. (Received February 14, 1885).
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, December 23, 1884.
I have the honour to inform your Lordship that to my great regret I have recently
been obliged to suspend two Roko Tuis of provinces.
2. The first case was that of Roko Tui Ba, who was charged with various offences, of
which the following are the principal:—
Ist. Purchasing a vessel with money belonging to his people at an exorbitant price,
thereby not only breaking one of the Native regulations, but disobeying a
stringent order which had been conveyed to him with special reference to this
very vessel.
2nd. Intriguing for the purpose of securing his appointment as Roko Tui of Lomaiviti
at a time when he had been specially entrusted with the duty of assisting in
U 4


the installation of Ratu Marika, and thereby causing troubles and difficulties
which, though they have proved to be only temporary, nevertheless occasioned
considerable embarrassment at the time.
3rd. Exceeding his right of “ lala” by compelling large numbers of the people of his
province to plant yams, not merely for his or their own consumption, but for
the purpose of sale to white men.
3. The case was carefully investigated by a commission, consisting of Mr. Blyth,
the Governor’s Native Commissioner, and Mr. Ross, stipendiary magistrate, and the
charges were proved, besides being subsequently admitted before lAe by the Roko Tui
himself, whom I summoned to see me on the subject.
4. In this interview I carefully explained to him the gravity of the charges, and
informed him of the special pain that was caused to meby such acts on the part of one
in whom I had previously had so much confidence, and whose brave and loyal conduct
on former occasions had not only earned the thanks of the Government, but had procured
for him a mark of* special consideration from Her Majesty. Finally, I informed him
that while I had always been disposed to overlook misconduct on the part of native
Chiefs that was not of a very serious kind, in view of the difficulties of their position,
and their as yet imperfect acquaintance with the English standard of official conduct,
I nevertheless could not pass by acts such as his without forfeiting all claim to a
reputation of justice among the people of the country. In view, however, of his previous
services, I should assign him a punishment which, under other circumstances, would be
an extremely light' one. I informed him that he was suspended from his office for a
year, and would be required to absent himself from his province and to reside at Ban
under the charge of Roko Tui Tailevu; and I finally expressed an earnest hope that
this warning would cause him to be more careful in future, and would render his services
even more valuable than they had been in the past, when the time came for his
restoration to office.
5. The other case was that of the Boko Tui Cakaudrove, Ratu Lala. The officer in
question is a young man who was for two or three years educated in Sydney, I believe
at the charge of Sir Arthur Gordon. Shortly after his return to Fiji, he was in 1880
appointed by Sir Arthur Gordon Roko Tui Cakaudrove in the place of his father, who
had recently died.
6. It appears that shortly after his appointment he began to make use, in European
fashion, of lands which he considered to belong to him, but which were, as regards a
considerable portion of them, quite as much the property of others. This system he has
gradually extended, until at the time when the subject was brought under my notice
he had five plantations which he was working for his own benefit, two of them with
European overseers.
7. The serious part of the matter is that he had been using his power as Chief for the
purpose of compelling his people to work upon these lands ; and though the fact that
he, to a certain extent, paid them wages in money, no doubt indicated a certain sense of
obligation to them, it at the same time showed plainly that he must have known himself
to have been acting entirely outside Fijian custom. That these people were at work
unwillingly is shown by the~ fact that when I had dealt with the case, and had given
them the option of leaving at once, or of remaining for the rest of the year, for the
purpose of taking off the crop, and of thus earning their wages, they all elected to go
home. . .
8. Ratu Lala had further used his influence among his people for the purpose of
obtaining a number of concubines, some-of them of high rank among their people, and
the existence of this harem had become a grave public scandal.
9. Both of these subjects were brought to the attention of the Government by the
Chiefs assembled at the Bose Vakaturaga, recently held in the province of Ea, and it is
matter of certainty that if they had not received serious notice, the evil example would
have very quickly spread. There were, however, circumstances of the case that rendered
it a difficult one” to deal with, and while for various reasons I could not regard this
youno- officer as deserving of a blame proportionate to the gravity of his acts, I at the same
time ?elt it absolutely necessary to publicly mark my sense ol them by some punishment,
and I accordingly, after considering the matter carefully with the Governor’s Native
Commissioner, determined to suspend the inculpated officer until such time as it might
be possible to re-employ him. . ... _ ... ,
10. It may possibly be just to Ratu Lala to give him another trial, but 1 am inclined
to question whether he will ever be a useful Roko for the reason that his education has
* H e was awarded a aword for specially gallant, conduct during the Viti Levu disturbances in 1877.


£175
£
Salary of Roko Tui Cakaudrove
- 300
Allowance to suspended Roko Tui
- 150
„ to Commissioners; three at 20/.
- 60
Unappropriated -
- 90
£300
evidently caused him to be out of sympathy with his people. He is, however, still very
youno*, and the warning may possibly have a valuable effect.
11. In the case of Ba, in accordance with a previous precedent adopted by Sir Arthur
Gordon in Lomaiviti, the Governor has temporarily become the nominal Roko Tui, and
Nemani, a local Chief of considerable influence, has been appointed as his agent
[Vakatawa]. In the case of Cakaudrove, a commission, consisting of three Bulis, has
been appointed to discharge the functions of Roko, in accordance with precedents which
proved successful in Lau and Macuata, as well as in Cakaudrove itself, after the death
of Ratu Lala’s father.
12. The salaries of the suspended Rokos have been distributed as follows :
Salary of Roko Tui Ba - 175
Allowance to suspended Roko Tui - - 50
„ to Governor’s Agent - 50
Unappropriated - - - - 75
13. At a meeting of Roko Tuis summoned recently for this special purpose, I referred
in strong terms to the abuse of the lala, which had already necessitated the punishment
of Roko Tui Ba, and which had been reported of another "Roko Tui (Ratu Lala), whose
case had not then been finally dealt with, and expressed the determination of the
Government to repress with increased severity any future instances of the kind.
14. The Roko Tuis all dined with me afterwards, and from my own observation, and
from competent opinions expressed by others, I am satisfied that they accepted my
words in good part, and that the feeling produced was most satisfactory.
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. WILLIAM DES VCEUX.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, K.G.,
&c. &c. &c.
No. 19.
Governor Sir G. William DES VCEUX, K.C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the
EARL OF DERBY, K.G. (Received March 11, 1885.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, January 6, 1885.
I have the honour to forward to your Lordship a short report of Mr, Commis-
sioner Gordon upon the present condition of Rotumah, which I do not doubt that your
Lordship will find interesting.
2. Your Lordship may possibly regard as incorrect Mr. Gordon’s contrast between
the condition of women in Rotumah and Fiji in view of the description of the life of
Fijian women given by Sir Arthur Gordon in the paper read by him in 1879 before the
Colonial Institute. In this case, however, the mistake is that of Sir Arthur Gordon who
erroneously attributed the immunity from labour enjoyed by women in one or two
districts to the women of the whole Colony. In by far the greater part of Fiji I regret
to say that the women do all the hardest labour required lor the family, and in some
provinces are occupied even in the tillage of the ground.
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, K.G., (Signed) G. W. DES VCEUX.
&c. &c. &c.
i 17270.


Enclosure in No. 19-
Sir, Rotumah, November 24, 1884.
As I am now on the point of leaving Rotumah, after nearly three years’ residence
here as Commissioner, I think that some observations on the island and people may not
be without interest and even value.
1. It is unnecessary to touch upon the extraordinary fertility of the soil of Rotumah.
No island or district in the whole Fiji group, so far as I am aware, can for a moment be
compared with it in this respect.'
2. But it appears improbable that the resources of the island can ever be developed
to any great extent, either by the people themselves, or by the enterprise of Europeans.
The growing of frujt for export, which could be most profitably engaged in by the
people, were the island within the Fiji group, is rendered impracticable by the great
distance to Levuka and Suva, that to Levuka being almost 400 miles, and to Suva about
450.
3. The Chiefs entered heartily some three years ago into the proposal to introduce
coffee into the island. Unfortunately, the seed, which was specially procured, I believe,
for the Government, proved to be bad, or at all events incapable of germination. And
as it seems now somewhat doubtful whether the cultivation of coffee be a profitable
industry in the Fiji islands or not, it would perhaps be well to wait before again
attempting to introduce the berry in Rotumah.
4. The people are, and have for some years, been planting considerable areas with
cocoa-nuts. In nearly every case the land cleared tor the planting of a season’s root-
crops, is also planted with young cocoa-nuts, so that year by year the area under
cocoa-nuts is steadily increasing. The result of this will doubtless be shown by an
increased export of copra in the future.
Dried “ Kava ” has this year again, after an interval of some years, been exported to
Fiji, but, probably owing to its being carelessly cut or dried, has failed to find a sale
except at a very low price.
5. The Rotumah men are, and have for a long time been, both by profession and
inclination, sailors. In former times the island was a favourite recruiting ground for the
Pacific whaling vessels. In ray opinion any attempt to check the freedom of engagement
in foreign-going vessels would be a distinct hardship to the men. The wages earned by
Rotumah men as seamen range from 21. I Os. up to 6/. per month, and in many cases
those who have been long at sea and can speak English well, obtain considerably higher
pay. The majority of the men return and settle down in Rotumah after they come to
middle age.
6. A very considerable number of men also go to Torres Straits to obtain employment
in the pearl fisheries, where exceptionally high wages can be earned. There are at
present over one hundred Rotumah men at Torres Straits. Of these the majority are
merely employed in the management of the boats at a comparatively small wage.
About forty or fifty, however, are engaged as divers. The rate of wages for these
latter varies according to a man’s skill. The best men are paid 13/. per month, with a
commission of 13/. per ton on all the pearl shell they raise, and I am informed that in
very favourable weather, two tons of shell may be obtained in a month, thus bringing
the diver’s wages up to nearly 40/. per month. Few, however, attain to this large wage,
only two of the Rotumah men now at Torres Straits being engaged on such conditions.
Unfortunately the fishing season lasts only for a few months. The divers then go to
Sydney, often with 200/. to 300/. in money. The Rotumah men are excessively foolish
with their money, and, I am told, are almost invariably cheated out of it by sharpers
and prostitutes of the lowest class, who are on the watch for them on their arrival in
Sydney.
7. Liquor can unfortunately be obtained by Rotumah men in any quantity in
Queensland, and I believe a large quantity is consumed on the pearl stations, the men
loafing and drinking ashore on the days when the weather does not admit of their diving.
Probably the nature of their work renders a recourse to some stimulant almost a necessity
to the divers, but from what I have heard, it would be very desirable that some
restriction should be placed on the quantity of liquor supplied to Rotumah men, were
it practical to do so.
8. The Chiefs possess in Rotumah little or no real power. Their people are rapidly
leaving off their old customs of bringing food to their Chiefs on certain occasions.
Amongst other things, the Chief is, according to old custom, entitled to have the first
fruits of every man s crop brought to him. The Chiefs are very desirous of having some
fixed revenue from their people, whether in the nature of a fixed share of their produce,
or, as they strongly desire, a commutation in money. There is, in fact, on the part of


the Chiefs, an exactly similar motive to that which in England, a few hundred years ago,
induced the lord of the manor to commute the produce tithes leviable by him on the
townsfolk within his domains for a fixed annual sum in money. The Chiefs feel it to
be becoming a more and more difficult and uncertain matter to obtain their customary
food tithes, and are therefore very anxious to have the latter fixed or commuted for
some settled dues, before they disappear altogether.
Since the cession of Rotumah the Chiefs have undoubtedly lost in a pecuniary sense,
for previous to that time, they obtained from the European traders a royalty of six
shillings per ton on all copra exported, and for this their official salaries are by no means
an equivalent. I have, however, adverted to this matter in a separate letter.
9. With regard to the material comforts of life the people of Rotumah are exceptionally
well off. Food trees of all kinds grow profusely and luxuriantly everywhere. All the
ordinary root-crops of the Pacific Islands are commonly cultivated. Nearly every
householder can easily obtain sufficient money by the sale of copra, to buy such
necessaries as soap, kerosene, matches, clothes, &c. ; while many now use tea and sugar
as well as tinned provisions.
Substantial stone-and-lime houses, which are well-built and accurate in dimensions, are
rapidly taking the place of the present thatch houses. The latter, owing to the scarcity
of good thatch, are wretched dwellings, far inferior to those of the Fijians.
10. Disease is unhappily very prevalent in Rotumah in various forms. The most
common form is that of scrofulous sores, from which a very considerable per-centage of
the people suffer, inflammation of the eyes, rheumatism, often accompanied by swellings
in various parts of the body, diarrhoea, dysentery, low fever with headaches, and
elephantiasis.
It is somewhat strange that although a large proportion of the men are sailors, con-
stantly returning to and leaving the island, there is little or no venereal disease.
11. The tendency of population is, 1 am inclined to think, distinctly towards increase,
although owing to an epidemic of dysentery in 1882 and of whooping-cough in 1884,
there is a decrease in both these years. This tendency towards increase, which is
observable in spite of the fact of most of the men being absent from the island during
a considerable period of their lives, and which seems contrary to the facts observed in
most of the Pacific Islands, may very probably be due to the fact that in Rotumah, the
women do no manual labour as in Fiji, and are therefore able to attend better to their
children during their infancy.
Indeed, women have, in Rotumah, a far higher position in the social scale than in
Fiji. They do not even assist in any way in planting food, nor do they ever do any
cooking, their sole occupations being fishing within the reef and plaiting mats.
12. With regard to the ownership of lands, the few claims of Europeans amount in
the aggregate to a very trifling area, probably less than 130 acres. Land disputes
between Natives have been very frequent during the last two years, the majority of cases
requiring a very tedious and searching investigation by the magistrates. The evidence
has in every case been carefully filed for reference, together with the judgment
pronounced.
13. The Ordinance about to be passed providing for a system of registration of
contracts for the sale or lease of lands between Natives “ inter se,” will not only be a great
safeguard to native purchasers, but will, in my opinion, be the means of preventing
much litigation in the future.
14. With regard to the sale (or lease) of foreshore between Natives “ inter se,” while I
am aware that, according to English law, such foreshores belong to the Crown, I
venture to point out that it would be, in Rotumah, a very real grievance were the
proprietary rights of individuals in foreshore waters in any way interfered with. Every
foot of the foreshore is owned by some person or persons, and boundaries are well
defined and jealously watched. More than one case has been brought before me as
Magistrate of an owner of foreshore charged with moving the boundary between his
neighbour and himself. The women fish daily at low tide, and their daily “ catch ”
forms no inconsiderable portion of the food supply of each family.
As Rotumah is, with the exception of one place, entirely encircled by a shore or
fringing reef, which is nearly dry at low spring tides, it is obvious that the rights of the
Crown to the foreshores can be of no value for any practical purposes.
15. The bitter feelings of mutual hatred and distrust which existed between the
Wesleyans and Roman Catholics are undoubtedly dying out to a great extent. Since
the readmission of the Catholics to their lands in the districts of Oinafa and Malhaha,
and parts of other districts, and the maintenance by the Government of their rights to
erect churches on such lands, every subject of discontent on the part of the Catholics
i 17270. Y


has been practically removed. They have now no unjustly-withheld rights left to strive
for; and although in all their feasts and ceremonials the two sects hold aloof from each
other, their general intercourse with each other is yet of a friendly character.
For some months I have been in the habit of inviting the Chiefs composing the
Council to spend the evening before the monthly meeting at my house, and I have
noticed with pleasure the cordiality and absence of constraint with which the Wesleyan
and Catholic Chiefs have met and conversed together. Several times they have talked
of the fighting between the two sects with the greatest good feeling. I feel certain that
in a short time, if no exciting cause should intervene all feelings of personal bitterness
will have disappeared. It is to be regretted that the canons of both Churches, as
applied in Rotumah, forbid any friendly intercourse between the members of the one
body and those of the other.
J 6. I regret to say that the effect of the hurricane which occurred here last February
has been very serious. In one district, that of Humutu, it will be quite impossible for
the people to pay their taxes next year. Even now, after the lapse of nearly 10 months,
the cocoanuts in the greater part of that district have not fully recovered their leaves',
and there are no nuts to be seen on the trees. But I think that, with the exception of
one or two portions of Ituteu, the rest of the island will probably be able to pay the
taxes, though not perhaps in the beginning of the year. In the event of this being so
the loss will not be great, not more, I think, than 8 or 10 tons of copra.
* I have, &c.
(Signed) W. M. Gordon,
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Fiji. Resident Commissioner.
No. 20.
Governor Sir G. William DES VCEUX, K.C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the
EARL OF DERBY, K.G. (Received March 11, 1885.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, January 10, 1885.
A few months ago there appeared in “ The Times ” (London) a letter of a
Mr. Gordon enclosing another letter received from his brother, Mr. A. B. Gordon, of
Savusavu, Fiji. This latter letter, in common with others which have appeared in the
same journal on the same subject, contained so many misstatements reflecting upon this
Government that I much question whether it was ever intended for publication, and
whether it was not* written with the object of furnishing telling reasons for the writer’s
non-success as a planter.
2. Among the most palpable of these misstatements were :
Ist. That the Government refuses to pay Polynesian immigrants in money, and
insists upon their receiving “ trade ”as wages of their labour; the fact being
that though they have never been paid in money they unquestionably would
be if they desired it, and that as they prefer to make purchases of goods the
Government, for their protection, exercises strict superintendence "over the
sales made to them, and obtains for them far better value than they could
possibly obtain by themselves.
2nd. That though employers are ready and desirous of paying higher wages, the
Government limits the amount to 31. a year; the fact being that any inter-
ference of the Government in this matter has been always with a view to
obtain better wages, an object in which, as regards re-engaged labourers
• (whose services are of much greater value than those of new arrivals), the
Agent-General has been successful, though having on that account incurred
much abuse and misrepresentation.
3. It affords a good illustration of the dishonesty of the press in this Colony that,
though they have noticed Mr. Gordon’s letter, and one of the newspapers has even
accorded it commendation, none of them have drawn attention to these falsehoods.
4. I have now the honour to forward printed copies of a correspondence which has
taken place with regard to another of Mr. Gordon’s statements which proves to be
equally without foundation.
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. WILLIAM DES VGEUX.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, K.G.,
&c. &c. &c.


Enclosures in No. 20.
Re-engagement of Polynesian Immigrants.
Memorandum by the Acting Agent-General of Immigration to the Superintendent,
Polynesian Depot.
Mr. Milne,
In the “Fiji Times ” of the 18th of October 1884, I find the following paragraph
in a letter by A. B. Gordon of Savu Savu Bay to his brother in England, dated
June Bth, 1884 :
“ A fortnight ago, when I was at the depot trying to engage some men, one man told
me he had been ordered to return to his own island, while several said they wished
to re-engage, but that Mr. Milne, the depot-keeper, would be very angry if they
did so.”
Did you have any conversation with Mr. Gordon at the time ? Can you throw any
light upon the facts of the case?—H.A., 23/10/84.
Memorandum by the Superintendent, Polynesian Depot, to the Acting
Agent-General of Immigration.
I remember Mr. A. B. Gordon coming to the depot. He came to my office and
presented the usual permit—the permit is dated 17th May 1884. It would be on
or about that date that Mr. Gordon came to the depot. After leaving the permit with
me, he went to the houses, and soon afterwards came back to the office, saying he could
get no one to go with him. To the best of my recollection Mr. Gordon said nothing to
me except that the men would not go with him. He did not repeat to me what the
men said as stated in his letter to his brother. He appeared disappointed, and left the
depot. I have not seen him since. On the 17th May 1884 (date of permit), there
were seventy-nine time-expired people in depot; sixty-five of whom were on the
passenger list for “ John Hunt,” which sailed on the 22nd of May. I give immigrants
at least twenty-four hours to consider the matter before I put their names on passenger-
list to return to their homes. They are given clearly to understand that if they wish
to work they can do so, but if they place their names on the passenger-lis't they are not
to change their minds. All then who have decided to go home are entered on passenger-
list of ship about to sail. This is never of course done unless we have received notice
of sailing from agents. It is unnecessary for me to say how confusing it would lie if this
rule was not carried out. Men, however, have, when expressing a strong desire to
remain, been struck off list. Mr. Gordon, however, brought no men before me for that
purpose; and, I think, if the cause of his unsuccessfulness was as stated by him he
would not have had the least hesitation in going personally and representing the matter
to the Agent-General.
Men, I am inclined to believe, do tell intending employers what is not the truth, simply
as relief from being pestered to re-engage when they have made up their minds to go
home. Some have the firmness to say plainly they will not work again, others have
not, and hence I think the cause very often of misunderstanding. If men really wish to
engage they come forward without the least hesitation ; and I do not doubt had the
men Mr. Gordon spoke to been brought before me they would have told a different
story, presuming that all that gentleman has said is true; and I am sure had Mr. Gordon
thought in his own mind that the men really wished to re-engage he would not have
been contented to let the engagement lapse simply because the boys said this, that, and
the other, by way of excuse—all of which was untrue. Every reasonable advantage is
given to intending employers, and any reflections to the contrary are false.—H T M
24/10/84. ,
Memorandum by the Acting Agent-General of Immigration to the Acting Colonial
Secretary.
1. On the 22nd of May the “John Hunt” sailed. She was announced as being
ready to proceed to sea on the 20th of May 1884, by a memorandum from
Messrs. Brodziak & Co.
Y 2


2. On or about the 6th of May, I informed his honour the Administrator that there
were m dep6t sixty-five time-expired Polynesian immigrants who would not re-engage
but desired to go home.
3. The “ Sea Breeze” had left with return labourers on the 23rd of March, and no
opportunity offered itself, or was likely to offer itself, for several months, with the
exception of the “ John Hunt ” offered by Messrs. Brodziak & Co. on certain terms.
4. The next vessel that left after the “ Sea Breeze ” was the “ Winifred,” on July 21st.
The cost of keeping these sixty-five immigrants in depot would have been 41/. 19$. 7d.
per mensem for two months.
5. It was decided to pay 20/. out of the dep6t fees as part salary for a Government
agent for the “ John Huntand Mr. Musson, the owner of the “ John Hunt,” finding
that he could get sixty-five passengers at 4/. per caput, agreed to despatch the vessel.
6. The agreement was not signed until the 21st of May, but, as Mr. Milne says, all
the immigrants had been shortly before questioned by him as to whether they wanted
to go home, and a passenger-list made out accordingly.
7. Sixty-five immigrants was the number offered by me to Mr. Musson or his
representatives early in May, and sixty-five were sent in the vessel.
8. Mr. Gordon could not have visited the depot more than four days before the
agreement was signed. He visited the depot at a time when the preliminaries had been
concluded.
9. The Colonial Secretary will doubtless remember that, on my seeking advice under
similar circumstances, I was advised in some such terms as the following:—
10. When the passenger-list was made out in the case of a vessel about to prepare or
preparing for sea, —that an employer should on re-engaging an immigrant who had
voluntarily placed his name on the list pay a sum equivalent to that which the owners of
the vessel would suffer loss by, in consequence of a deduction from the number of
passengers.
11. As far as I can see from my diary I was in Suva at the time, yet Mr. Gordon, to
the best of my knowledge, never came near me to complain : he does not seem to have
done so to Mr. Milne. I know Mr. Gordon, and used to know his brother very well.
12. I have had some experience of Polynesians, and your experience is much greater ;
and you know, I have no doubt, how difficult it is to get a direct answer from a
Polynesian who is doubtful or disinclined with regard toye-engagement.
13. Of one thing I am certain, that no immigrant desirous of working was ever
prevented from doing so by myself; and if Mr. Milne had attempted to do such a thing,
the immigrants would have certainly come to me.
14. Instead of trying to prevent re-engagements, I have done more than was ever
done before to encourage the same by improvement in wages, and some elasticity in
the mode of payment of wages, and explaining carefully the work that is to be performed,
and taking care that the agreements between the employer and employed are carried out,
as far as is in my power so to do.
About 42 per cent, of all the Polynesian immigrants that could have re-engaged did
re-engage in 1883; the proportion will be about the same this year. Re-engagements
have about trebled themselves during my tenure of office.
15. I refused to re-engage a Polynesian woman to a person who was, I understood,
a woman of ill-fame, and also to a few people who could not furnish or find security for
wages, &c.
16. Owing to the different complaints formulated in articles of the “ Suva Times ”
and “ Fiji Times,” as to stopping re-engagements, I desired the editor of the “ Suva
Times ” to favour me with a few of his hard cases, through the sub-agent, but he has
not done so. 1 have directed the depot-keeper to keep a Register, similar to those kept,
or recommended to be kept, in India, stating the number of immigrants rejected, and the
reasons for doing so, which latter are always endorsed by me on permits.
17. As economical maintenance of depot and the cost of return passages must, to a
great extent? depend upon some certainty as to the number of return labourers, and the
date at which vessels can be despatched, I should be glad to know if paragraph 10 be
St the Government is about to take up the “ Meg Merrilies ” to return labourers,
loss sustained will be borne by the Crovernment■
19 The charges for maintenance in depot before departure on the return passage, are
fixed at 5s , representing 10 days’residence in depot. I have had the average stay of
Polynesians in depot for two years made out, and the average residence for such a period
as above mentioned is actually 30 days.


20. It is open to any planter, when the “ Meg Merrilies ” is ready for sea, with a
complement of from 140 to 180 immigrants, by such inducements as are at times offered
in money and other considerations, to persuade 20 or 30 men to re-engage, and delay
the vessel sailing, unless she be despatched at a loss.
21. Such immigrants may have been open to re-engagement for a period of 30 days,
and resisted all blandishments for that period, but, becoming tired of waiting and with
sickness in depot, they might re-engage within a few hours of the actual despatch of the
vessel.
22. No person is more aware than I am how badly off certain planters are for
labourers, and how necessary it is that all reasonable assistance should be given to them.
At the same time, if the question be broadly looked at, it will be seen that the planting
body in general is the portion of the community on which any increased expenditure,
with regard to returning men, will unquestionably fall; and unless some system be
observed economy is impossible.—H.A., 24/10/84.
Minute by the Acting Colonial Secretary.
Submitted, —
During the absence of his Excellency in Australia, complaint was made by some
one wishing to engage certain Polynesians, that the Immigration Department threw
obstacles in the way.
Mr. Anson explained that he had entered into an agreement for the return of a
specified number of immigrants by a certain ship, at a fixed capitation rate. The
nnmber agreed on was arrived at after each Polynesian had been asked whether he
wished to go home or stay. Once an arrangement is made with a ship, and the bargain
completed, the department naturally objects to ihe men entering into engagements with
planters or others. It was therefore directed by the Officer Administering the Govern-
ment, that a man that had declared his intention of going home, and whose passage had
been taken for him, might, nevertheless, be allowed to remain here, provided that the
employer paid his ’passage-money to the ship. Mr. Anson wishes to know whether
what was ordered then is to hold good in all other cases. I respectfully submit that
I cannot now see any other rule more fair in its operation that could be applied to these
cases.—W. McG., 29/10/14.
Minute by His Excellency the Governor.
When immigrant has entered his name for passage to his home, employer cannot
re-engage him without paying the amount of loss which would be suffered by the
Government by reason of the non-fulfilment of intention. —G.W.D.V., 6/11/84.
No. 21.
Governor Sir G. William DES YCEUX, K.C.M.G., to the Right Hon. the
EARL OF DERBY, K.G. (Received March 11, 1885.)
Government House, Suva, Fiji,
My Lord, January 12, 1885.
In the event of your Lordship’s attention being attracted by a paragraph in the
“ Fiji Times,” which forms the first enclosure of this despatch, I have the honour
to forward various papers illustrating the incorrectness of the statements contained
therein.
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. WILLIAM DES VGEUX.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, K.G.
&c. &c. &c.
Y 3


Enclosure 1 in No. 21.
Extract from “ Suva Times,” 15th November 1884.
“ A Vanua Levu correspondent says ; —The people are dying out in these parts very
rapidly. During the last twelve months in one town of Wainunu between 90 and 100
souls have passed away. Of the few children born the greater portion die. The
people are dying for want of nourishment. China bananas is the only food in the
district. The natives will not plant because they cannot ensure to themselves the
result of their labour. The lala comes in and robs at will. The systems of the people
have no resisting pow T er against disease, and the mildest form of sickness carries them
off. Added to this is the want of any stimulus to exertion. Hope even has abandoned
them; they simply lie down and die. The weather here lately has been beautifully fine
for growing purposes but no yams have been planted ; the people have no yams to
plant. Bananas and kumalas, neither of which can be laid by, are the food of these
parts. The Government will have to feed the people ere long. It appears to me that
this tax system is rapidly working out its own destruction in the wasting away of the
race. Fifty years from now there will not remain enough Fijians to fill an ordinary
sized church. Can language be more lamentably yet more terribly significant than
this ? And still the writer tells only of what he sees ! ”
Enclosure 2 in No. 21.
Provincial Department, Suva,
December 4, 1884.
Sir,
In reply to your letter of the 18th ultimo (received to-day), calling my attention
to a paragraph in the “ Suva Times,” of the 15th ultimo, about the decrease in the
population of Wainunu in the province of Bua, I have the honour to state :
First.—That the statement that “ during the last twelve months, in one town
“ of Wainunu, between 90 and 100 souls have passed away,” is manifestly
incorrect.
The total population of the district of Wainunu, on the 30th September 1883, was
556, and in the year following, ending 30th September 1884, there were 25 births and
54 deaths, showing a decrease* of 29 in twelve months. There are seven towns in
Wainunu, one only of which has a population of over 100, viz., Nukubalavu, 257, and
I have reliable information that the decrease in that town is not more, proportionately,
than in other towns.
Secondly.—“ Of the few children born the greater portion die.” The birth-rate for
the district of Wainunu is 44*96 per mille. It is not true, therefore, that few
children are born. That the mortality is great among children is true of Wainunu,
as well as of the whole of Fiji. Wainunu is not singular in having a decrease this
year, but this year is singular in having a decrease owing to the epidemic of
whooping-cough.
Thirdly. —The statement that “ China bananas is their only food,” is not true.
Ordinarily Wainunu has the most, the largest, yams, and the earliest yams in the
whole province of Bua. This year was no exception. Besides yams they planted
largely of kawais and kumalas, and shipped a large quantity of the latter to
Levuka. They have also as a reserve store a stock of “ madrai ” (native bread).
If they happened to be living on bananas when the writer was there (if he ever was
there) he might have learned that during a short season in the* year, before the
yams are ripe, bananas is a favourite food, and in many districts the people are very
glad to have bananas to eat.
Fourthly.—“ The natives will not plant because they cannot ensure to themselves the
“ result of their labour. The lala comes in and robs at will.”
It is singularly unfortunate for the writer that this remark should be made about
Bua Province, whose Chief is perhaps the most enlightened, judicious, and unselfish of
all the chiefs of Fiji, and one of the most careful of his people. Any lala he ever makes
is for the common good. Buli Wainunu is not given to excessive “ lala.”
Fifthly.—The other statements are general. Ido not say that there is no truth in
what the writer says about the resisting power of the Fijian against disease, but
when he goes on to say,
* There was increase of eight in the year before.


Sixthly—That the Wainunu people “have no yams to plant,” although it is also
quite true, he ought to state the reason, viz., that all the yams are already planted,
and that the Wainunu people have helped their neighbours this year largely with
seed yams. Tui Kubulau, who is at present my guest, is vasu to Wainunu, and he
confirms all I have written above. I may add, in conclusion, that I was in Bua a
few days ago, and heard nothing about these complaints, and on the contrary, my
predecessor called my attention to their singular inaccuracy.
I have, &c.
(Signed) James Blyth,
The Hon. the Acting Colonial Secretary. Secretary for Native Affairs.
Enclosure 3 in No. 21.
The Stipendiary Magistrate, Vanua Levu, to the Acting Colonial Secretary.
S IRj S.M.’s Office Valeci, December 15, 1885.
As directed in your letter of 18th November, I have made inquiry into the
truth of the statement contained in the marked paragraph of the “ Suva Times ’ of the
15th ultimo, and I have the honour to inform you that—
1. On my arrival at Nabowalu, on the 10th instant, on my way to make the said
inquiry, I met a raft of taro which was being taken from Wainunu to Bua. This was
not “ Magiti,” but food begged by those in distress from those who had abundance.
2. At Raviravi and Solevu, I was informed that they were rather in distress for food,
and had again and again this year been supplied with food by Wainunu.
3. I came to Buli Wainunu’s town on the 11th, and I saw at the landing place 150
bunches of bananas placed there ready for exportation to Sydney. 1 sent for the Buli
and his Chiefs of towns, and made a strict inquiry into the condition of the people as
regards food. While this was going on I set one of the constables to make private
inquiries amongst the people.
4. The result of which inquiries, both public and private, went to prove beyond a
shadow of doubt that not only have the people had plenty of food during the whole year
up to date, but that they have plenty now, and an excellent prospect of good crops in
the coming season.
5. Out of their abundance this year the people of Wainunu have given 500 bags of
kumalas as produce tax. (This was their own proposal, as they wished to keep the nuts
for other purposes). Have sold at a rough estimate, 2,000 bunches of bananas, and for
the past two months have been largely supplying the tribes on either side of them,
Kubulau, Nadi Solevu, Raviravi, and Bua with all kinds of food.
Few yams were sold out of the district this year because the people sent to the Bose
Vaka turaga and Dawara all the yams not required for their own use, or for seed.
6. It is unfortunate that the correspondent of the Fiji Times ” should have chosen
the only district in the whole of Vanua Levu thoroughly well supplied with food, in this
season of scarcity, as the spot in which to locate his moving picture of distress. And
still more unfortunate that the “ Suva Times ” should have selected that particular
paragraph from the “ Fiji Times ” to exemplify the fact that “the Press publishes
“ truth.”
7. Now as to the deaths “ between 9d and 100 ” said to have occurred during the
year in one town of Wainunu.
As I passed Bua on my way to make this inquiry, I procured from the scribe, an
extract from his books of the number of births and deaths, Wainunu, 1884.
8. You will see in this paper that the number of deaths for the whole of Wainunu
district, although alarming as compared with the births, come up to but little more than
half the number said to have occurred in one town.
9- The great number of these deaths were of children, and occurred after the return
from the Bose at Naiserelagi, from which place it is said the whooping-cough and another
disease were introduced.
. 10. It does not appear that these children were neglected in their illness ; on the
contrary, the Taukeis seem to have become alarmed, and have had meetings to discuss
the matter, and to have purchased little luxuries for the sick children which they thought
suitable, such as biscuits, tea, and sugar.
11. The small number of births struck me as much more alarming than the number
of deaths from assignable causes, and I was surprised to find that the people of Wainunu
had also been much exercised in mind at what they called “a falling down of the
Y 4


44 people/’ and had discussed the probable causes at several of their 44 Boses ni Tikina ”
even calling in female experts to give evidence, and in one instance causing the women
to have a Bose of their own to endeavour to account for the fact of so few births as
compared with the number of young married women.
12. I was told by the chiefs the conclusions they had arrived at at these Boses, and
I had some of the experts called in and examined, but it appeared to me that they were
all, males and females, mistaking effect for cause.
The Buli certainly maintained, and most present agreed with him, that the practice of
taking drannikan to prevent conception or produce abortion is almost universal after a
woman has had one child. But they could give no sufficient reason why this custom
should obtain. Nor will this apply to the newly married women who have not yet
borne a child.
1 must say I have no belief either in the drannikan or in the universal practice of
taking it.
I have, &c.
(Signed) E. O’B. Heffernan,
The Acting Colonial Secretary. S. M„ Vanua Levu
Translation.
Bua, December 15, 1884.
District of Wainunu from the month of February
Return of Births and Deaths in the
to the month of December.
Deaths •
Males
Females
Births .
Males
16
7
Females
The births took place between the months of February and October.
There were no births during the months of January, November, and December. The
above refers to the year 1884.
No. 22.
The Right Hon. the EARL OF DERBY, K.G., to Administrator W.
McGREGOR, C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, March 12, 1885.
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Sir W. Des Voeux’ Despatch
of the 23rd of December,* and to convey to you my approval of his action in suspending
the Roko Tui Ba and the Roko Tui Cakaudrove in the circumstances stated.
1 trust that the punishment which it has been found necessary to inflict on these
Chiefs will produce a salutary effect.
I have, &c.
The Officer Administering (Signed) DERBY,
the Government.
# No. 18, Part 11.
LONDON: Printed by Etee and Spottiswoohe
Printers to the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty.
For Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.




presenteb to both Rouses of parliament bp Command of ijcr iWajest
May lBBs.
