

John G. Paton
D.D.
Missionary to the New Hebrides
AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY
EDITED BY HIS BROTHER
JAMES PATON, D.D.
St. Paul’s, Glasgow
LONDON: HODDER 6 STOUGHTON
Price Sixpence


A ste
Either Or, a lighter and thinner
the most nutritious and drink, refreshing and stimulating.
strength-giving u a 5
rppq’c EPPS b
■Jr iiMiiiw JiL «eM» (Improved)
Grateful—Comforting.
COCOA
A delicious drink and
a sustaining food.
COCOA
ESSENCE
Welcome at any hour of the day.
A FRESH CHAPTER IN THE
TRIUMPH OF THE GOSPEL
LOMAI OF LENAKEL
A HERO OF THE NEW HEBRIDES
By FRANK H. L. PATON, B.D.
(Son of Dr. JOHN G. PATON)
Illustrated. Crown B vo. Cloth, 6s.
A RARE inspiration breathes through the pages of Mr. Frank Paton’s striking book,
which will assuredly take its place, with the autobiography of his revered father, among
the few really great records of pioneer missionary work in the dark places of the earth.
“Lomai of Lenakel” is a real hero, and a magnificent example of the Divine conquest
of Love. The story of his life is a fresh chapter in the triumph of the Gospel, and a
fitting sequel to the “Autobiography of John G. Paton.”
“The name of Dr. John G. Paton is held in warm affection in Christian homes all over the
world ; and, if for no other reason, his son’s book, 1 Lomai of Lenakel,’ would be assured of a kindly
welcome. But Rev. Frank H. L. Paton proves his personal right to a place in the front rank of
missionary writers, by adding a fresh and profoundly interesting chapter to the story of the triumphs
of the Gospel.”— Christian.
HODDER <5 STOUGHTON, Publishers, LONDON.
ZOX Cures Neuralgia.
3T The Proprietors of ZOX are so con'ident of its efficacy that they offer readers
of this novel Sample Powders Free on receipt of stamped envelope.
NEURALGIA is a disease of the Nerves, and most commonly attacks the
nerves of the face. The illustration presents in the prominent lines the
nerves of the fifth-branch, which are most liable to the attacks of
neuralgia. All who suffer will be glad to know of ZOX, a simple and sure
'wPkSeSj remedy, certified free from injurious substance o .
e* The Proprietors of the remedy offer to send two free sample ZOX Powders
|nM|| to any reader of this novel who will send them a stamped addressed
envelope.—ZOX Powders can be obtained of Chemists, Stores, etc., at
is. and 2s. 6d. a box, or post-free from
Where the pain strikes. THE ZOX CO., n Hatton Garden, London, E.C.


Waterman's
Ideal Fountain
% Pen
■#/ v.
I - ¥c^C/i>vC<,'-s ,^fS
FREEDOM FROM
the holiday nuisances, public pens of the boarding
house, hotel, or post office type, is yours for a
moment’s thought. Just take the precaution of
packing Waterman’s Ideal in your valise when
you go away
EVERY PEN TROUBLE
vanishes with a Waterman’s Ideal, a portable little writer
which makes writing at once a luxury and a pleasure.
Waterman’s Ideal is pen perfection, pen satisfaction, and
pen luxury in every detail —it is the mechanically perfect pen.
A Popular Author
Mr. Frankfort Moore wrote over 2,000,000 words with one Waterman’s Ideal,
and it was as good then as it was the day he bought it.”
Mr. S. R. Crockett says: —“To give away a Waterman’s Ideal is to make a
friend for life.”
From 10s. 6d. In Silver and Gold for Presentation. Of Stationers, Jewellers, etc.
Catalogue post-free from L. and C. HARDTMUTH, 12, Golden Lane, London, E.O.


POPULAR NOVELS
BY
FAMOUS AUTHORS
THE FOLLOWING WORKS BY FAMOUS AUTHORS, PRINTED IN LARGE
CLEAR TYPE, ARE NOW INCLUDED IN
NE WN ES’ SIXPENNY NOVELS
Most of these are Illustrated by the most
F. T. BULLEN-
THE CRUISE OF THE CACHALOT.
HALL CAINE—
DRINK.
W. W. JACOBS-
AT SUNWICH PORT.
H. SETON MERRIMAN—
FLOTSAM. I TOMASO’S FORTUNE.
FROM ONE GENERATION TO ANOTHER.
THE SOWERS. | WITH EDGED TOOLS.
THE SLAVE OF THE LAMP.
IN KEDAR S TENTS. | THE VULTURES.
RODEN’S CORNER. | THE GREY LADY.
BARLASCH OF THE GUARD.
H. RIDER HAGGARD-
MONTEZUMA’S DAUGHTER.
PEARL MAIDEN.
ALLAN QUATERMAIN. I SHE.
JESS ; A Story of the First Boer War.
LEONARD MERRICK—
THE WORLDLINGS.
CHARLES GARVICE—
JUST A GIRL.
G. B. BURGIN—
THE BREAD OF TEARS.
TUXTERS LITTLE MAID.
D. CHRISTIE MURRAY-
RAINBOW GOLD.
THE MARTYRED FOOL.
RICHARD MARSH-
THE DEATH WHISTLE.
WILFRID S. JACKSON-
NINE POINTS OF THE LAW.
MAX PEMBERTON-
THE HOUSE UNDER THE SEA.
J. E. MUDDOCK-
FOR GOD AND THE CZAR
EDEN PHILLPOTTS-
A DEAL WITH THE DEVIL.
THE UNLUCKY NUMBER.
A. CONAN DOYLE-
MICAH CLARKE. | THE SIGN OF FOUR.
ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES.
MEMOIRS OF SHERLOCK HOLMES.
THE EXPLOITS OF BRIGADIER GERARD.
RODNEY STONE. | THE WHITE COMPANY.
THE GREEN FLAG. | UNCLE BERNAC.
THE TRAGEDY OF THE KOROSKO.
CHARLES MARRIOTT-
THE COLUMN.
J. s. LE FANU-
THE WYVERN MYSTERY.
WYLDER’S HAND : A Romance of Mystery.
MISS BRADDON-
ONE LIFE, ONE LOVE.
PHANTOM FORTUNE.
THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT.
HOSTAGES TO FORTUNE.
FENTON S QUEST. | RUN TO EARTH.
E. W. HORNUNG-
A BRIDE FROM THE BUSH.
HENRY HARLAND-
MY FRIEND PROSPERO.
THE CARDINAL S SNUFF-BOX.
THE LADY PARAMOUNT.
celebrated Black and White Artists of the Day
GEORGE R. SIMS—
MEMOIRS OF A MOTHER-IN-LAW.
WILLIAM LE QUEUX-
SECRETS OF MONTE CARLO.
ANON-
THE MANUSCRIPT IN A RED BOX.
GUY BOOTHBY-
A MILLIONAIRE’S LOVE STORY.
MYSTERY OF' THE CLASPED HANDS.
LOUIS BECKE-
RODMAN THE BOAT-STEERER.
JOHN OLIVER HOBBES-
THE HERB MOON.
GRANT ALLEN-
MISS CAYLEY’S ADVENTURES.
HILDA WADE.
WHAT’S BRED IN THE BONE.
AN AFRICAN MILLIONAIRE.
R. S. WARREN BELL-
BACHELORLAND.
REV. S. BARING-GOULD—
JOHN HERRING.
GEORGE MACDONALD-
MALCOLM. 1 THE MARQUIS OF LOSSIE.
MRS. MEADE-
STORIES FROM THE DIARY OF A
DOCTOR.
K. & HESKETH PRICHARD-
A MODERN MERCENARY.
MRS. CLIFFORD—
A WILD PROXY.
W. CLARK RUSSELL-
THE ROMANCE OF A MIDSHIPMAN.
MAXWELL GRAY-
in THE HEART OF THE STORM.
THE REPROACH OF ANNESLEY.
THE SILENCE OF DEAN MAITLAND.
F. ANSTEY-
VICE VERSA. I A FALLEN IDOL.
MRS. BANKS-
THE MANCHESTER MAN.
BART KENNEDY-
A SAILOR TRAMP.
MRS. HUMPHRY WARD-
LADY ROSE’S DAUGHTER,
HELBECK OF BANNISDALE.
ROBERT ELSMERE.
THE HISTORY OF DAVID GRIEVE.
MARCELLA. | ELEANOR.
BEATRICE HARRADEN-
SHIPS THAT PASS IN THE NIGHT.
IN VARYING MOODS.
MRS. HUNGERFORD-
MOLLY BAWN. 1 PHYLLIS.
W. H. FITCH ETT, LL.D.—
FIGHTS FOR THE FLAG.
DOUGLAS SLADEN-
TRINCOLOX.
C. E. OSBORNE-
THE LIFE OF FATHER DOLLING.
Of all Booksellers, price 6d. each; or, post-free, Bd. from
GEORGE NEWNES, Ltd., Southampton St., Strand, LONDON, W.C.
AT SIXPENCE EACH


JOHN G. PATON, D.D
MISSIONARY TO THE NEW HEBRIDES
AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY
EDITED BY HIS BROTHER
THE REV. JAMES PATON, D.D.
st. Paul’s, Glasgow
HODDER AND STOUGHTON
PUBLISHERS LONDON


> -:'v;


newed year by year, and never allowed
to remain in disrepair at any season.
But the beauty of the construction was
and is its durability, or rather the per-
manence of its oaken ribs ! There they
stand, after probably not less than four
centuries, japanned with “ peat reek ”
till they are literally shining, so hard
that no ordinary nail can be driven
into them, and perfectly capable of
service for four centuries more on the
same conditions. The walls are quite
modern, having all been rebuilt in my
father’s time, except only the few great
foundation boulders, piled around the
oaken couples ; and part of the roofing
also may plead guilty to having found
its way thither only in recent days ;
but the architect’s one idea survives,
baffling time and change—the ribs and
rafters of oak.
Our home consisted of a “ but ” and
a “ ben ” and a “ mid room,” or
chamber, called the “ closet.” The
one end was my mother’s domain, and
served all the purposes of dining-room
and kitchen and parlour, besides con-
taining two large wooden erections,
called by our Scotch peasantry “ box-
beds ” ; not holes in the wall, as in
cities, but grand, big, airy beds,
adorned with many-coloured counter-
panes, and hung with natty curtains,
showing the skill of the mistress of the
house. The other end was my father’s
workshop, filled with five or six “ stock-
ing frames,” whirring with the constant
action of five or six pairs of busy hands
and feet, and producing right genuine
hosiery for the merchants at Hawick
and Dumfries. The “ closet ” was a
very small apartment betwixt the
other two, having room only for a bed,
a little table, and a chair, with a dim-
inutive window shedding diminutive
light on the scene. This was the
Sanctuary of that cottage home.
Thither daily, and oftentimes a day,
generally after each meal, we saw our
father retire, and “ shut to the door ” ;
and we children got to understand by
a sort of spiritual instinct (for the thing
was too sacred to be talked about) that
prayers were being poured out there
for us, as of old by the High Priest
within the veil in the Most Holy Place.
We occasionally heard the pathetic
echoes of a trembling voice pleading as
if for life, and we learned to slip out
and in past that door on tiptoe, not to
disturb the holy colloquy. The out-
side world might not know, but we
knew, whence came that happy light
as of a new-born smile that always was
dawning on my father’s face : it was
a reflection from the Divine Presence,
in the consciousness of which he lived.
Never, in temple or cathedral, on
mountain or in glen, can I hope to feel
that the Lord God is more near, more
visibly walking and talking with men,
than under that humble cottage roof
of thatch and oaken wattles. Though
everything else in religion were by
some unthinkable catastrophe to be
swept out of memory, or blotted from
my understanding, my soul would
wander back to those early scenes, and
shut itself up once again in that Sanc-
tuary Closet, and, hearing still the
echoes of those cries to God, would hurl
back all doubt with the victorious
appeal, “ He walked with God, why
may not I ? ”
A few notes had better here be given
as to our “ Forebears,” the kind of stock
from which my father and mother
sprang. My father’s mother, Janet
Murray, claimed to be descended from
a Galloway family that fought and
suffered for Christ’s Crown and Cove-
nant in Scotland’s “ killing time,” and
was herself a woman of a pronouncedly
religious development. Her husband,
our grandfather, William Paton, had
passed through a roving and romantic
career before he settled down to be a
douce deacon of the weavers of Dum-
fries, like his father before him.
On the other side, my mother, Janet
Rogerson, had for parents a father
and mother of the Annandale stock.
William Rogerson, her father, was one
of many brothers, all men of uncommon
strength and great force of character,
quite worthy of the Border Reivers of
an earlier day. Indeed, it was in some
such way that he secured his wife,
though the dear old lady in after-days
was chary about telling the story.
She was a girl of good position, the
ward of two unscrupulous uncles who
John G. Paton, D.D.


JOHN G. PATON, D.D.
CHAPTER I
THE HOME LIFE
A.D. 1824-1834. /ET. X-10.
I was born in a cottage on the farm
of Braehead, in the parish of Kirkma-
hoe, near Dumfries, in the south of
Scotland, on 24 May, 1824. My father,
James Paton, was a stocking manu-
facturer in a small way ; and he and
his young wife, Janet Jardine Rogerson,
lived on terms of warm personal friend-
ship with the “gentleman farmer,”
so they gave me his son’s name, John
Gibson; and the curly-haired child
of the cottage was soon able to toddle
across to the mansion, and became a
great pet of the lady there. More
than once, in my many journeyings,
I met with one or another, in
some way connected with that family,
and heard little incidents not needing
to be repeated here, showing how
beautiful and tender and altogether
human was the relationship in those
days betwixt the landlord and the
cottars on his estate. On my late
visit to Scotland, sixty years after,
I drove to Braehead in company with
my youngest brother James and my
cousin David, —the latter born the
same week as I, and the former nearly
twenty years my junior ; and we found
no cottage, nor trace of a cottage, but
amused ourselves by supposing that
we could discover, by the rising of the
grassy mound, the outline where the
foundations once had been ! Of ten
thousand homes in Scotland, once
sweet and beautiful, each a little
possible Paradise in its own well-
cultivated plot, this is true to-day ;
and where are the healthy, happy
peasant boys and girls that such homes
bred and reared ? They are swelter-
ing and struggling for existence in our
towns and cities. I am told that this
must be —that it is all the result of
economic laws ; but I confess to
a deepening conviction that it need
not be, and that the loss to the nation
as a whole is vital, if not irreparable.
While yet a mere child, five years or
so of age, my parents took me to a new
home in the ancient village of Tor-
thorwald, about four and a quarter
miles north from Dumfries on the road
to Lockerbie.
There, amid wholesome and breezy
village life, our dear parents found
their home for the long period of forty
years. There, too, were born to them
eight additional children, making in all
a family of five sons and six daughters.
Theirs was the first of the thatched
cottages on the left, past the “ miller’s
house,” going up the “ village gate,”
with a small garden in front of it, and
a larger garden across the road ; and
it is one of the few still lingering to
show to a new generation what the
homes of their fathers were. The
architect who planned that cottage
had no ideas of art, but a fine eye for
durability ! It consists at present of
three, but originally of four, pairs of
“ oak couples ” (Scottice hippies ),
planted like solid trees in the ground
at equal intervals, and gently sloped
inwards till they meet or are ‘ 1 coupled ’*
at the ridge, this coupling being man-
aged, not by rusty iron, but by great
solid pins of oak. A roof of oaken
wattles was laid across these, till
within eleven or twelve feet of the
ground, and from the ground upwards
a stone wall was raised,as perpendicular
as was found practicable, towards these
overhanging wattles, this wall being
roughly “ pointed ” with sand and
clay and lime. Now into and upon
the roof was woven and intertwisted
a covering of thatch, that defied all
winds and weathers, and that made the
cottage marvellously cosy —being re


had charge of her small estate near
Langholm ; and while attending some
boarding school she fell devotedly in
love with the tall, fair-haired, gallant
young blacksmith, William Rogerson.
Her guardians, doubtless very properly,
objected to the “ connection ” ; but
our young Lochinvar, with his six or
seven stalwart brothers and other
trusty “ lads,” all mounted, and with
>ome ready tool in case of need, went
aoldly and claimed his bride, and she,
willingly mounting at his side, was
borne off in the light of open day,
joyously married, and took possession of
her “ but and ben,” as the mistress of
the blacksmith’s castle.
J anet J ardine bowed her neck to the
self-chosen yoke, with the light of a
supreme affection in her heart, and
showed in her gentler ways, her love
of books, her fine accomplishments
with the needle, and her general air of
ladyhood, that her lot had once been
cast in easier, but not necessarily
happier, ways. Her blacksmith lover
proved not unworthy of his lady bride,
and in old age found for her a quiet
and modest home, the fruit of years of
toil and hopeful thrift, their own little
property, in which they rested and
waited a happy end. Amongst those
who at last wept by her grave stood,
amidst many sons and daughters, her
son, the Rev. James J. Rogerson,
clergyman of the Church of England,
who, for many years thereafter, and
till quite recently, was spared to occupy
a distinguished position at ancient
Shrewsbury, and has left behind him
there an honoured and beloved name.
From such a home came our mother,
Janet J ardine Rogerson, a bright-
fiearted, high-spirited, patient-toiling,
and altogether heroic little woman ;
who, for about forty-three years, made
and kept such a wholesome, indepen-
dent, God-fearing, and self-reliant life
for her family of five sons and six
daughters, as constrains me, when I
look back on it now, in the light of all
[ have since seen and known of others
ar differently situated, almost to
vorship her memory. She had gone
vith her high spirits and breezy dis-
Kasition to gladden, as their com-
panion, the quiet abode of some grand"
or great-grand-uncle and aunt, fami-
liarly named in all that Dalswinton
neighbourhood as “ Old Adam and
Eve.” Their house was on the outskirts
of the moor, and life for the young girl
there had not probably too much ex-
citement. But one thing had arrested
her attention. She had noticed that
a young stocking maker from the
“ Brig End,” James Baton, the son of
William and Janet there, was in the
habit of stealing alone into the quiet
wood, book in hand, day after day,
at certain hours, as if for private study
and meditation. It was a very ex-
cusable curiosity that led the young
bright heart of the girl to watch him
devoutly reading and hear him rever-
ently reciting (though she knew not
then, it was Ralph Erskine’s “ Gospel
Sonnets,” which he could say by heart
sixty years afterwards, as he lay on his
bed of death); and finally that curiosity
awed itself into a holy respect, when
she saw him lay aside his broad Scotch
bonnet, kneel down under the shelter-
ing wings of some tree, and pour out
all his soul in daily prayers to God.
As yet they had never spoken. What
spirit moved her, let lovers tell—was
it all devotion, or was it a touch of
unconscious love kindling in her to-
wards the yellow-haired and thought-
ful youth ?Or was there a stroke of
mischief, of that teasing, which so
often opens up the door to the most
serious step in all our lives ? Any-
how, one day she slipped in quietly,
stole away his bonnet, and hung it on
a branch near by, while his trance of
devotion made him oblivious of all
around ; then, from a safe retreat,
she watched and enjoyed his perplexity
in seeking for and finding it! A
second day this was repeated ; but his
manifest disturbance of mind, and his
long pondering with the bonnet in
hand, as if almost alarmed, seemed to
touch another chord in her heart—■
that chord of pity which is so often the
prelude of love, that finer pity that
grieves to wound anything nobler or
tenderer than ourselves. Next day,
when he came to his accustomed place
of prayer, a little card was pinned
7
The Home Life


against the tree just where he knelt,
and on it these words :—-
“ She who stole away your bonnet is
ashamed of what she did ; she has a
great respect for you, and asks you to
pray for her, that she may become as
good a Christian as you.”
Staring long at that writing, he for-
got Ralph Erskine for one day ! Taking
down the card, and wondering who
the writer could be, he was abusing
himself for his stupidity in not suspect-
ing that some one had discovered his
retreat and removed his bonnet, in-
stead of wondering whether angels had
been there during his prayer—when,
suddenly raising his eyes, he saw in
front of old Adam’s cottage, through
a lane amongst the trees, the passing
of another kind of angel, swinging a
milk-pail in her hand and merrily sing-
ing some snatch of old Scottish song.
He knew, in that moment, by a Divine
instinct, as infallible as any voice that
ever came to seer of old, that she was
the angel visitor that had stolen in
upon his retreat —that bright-faced,
clever-witted niece of old Adam and
Eve, to whom he had never yet spoken,
but whose praises he had often heard
said and sung—“ Wee Jen.” I am
afraid he did pray “ for her,” in more
senses than one, that afternoon ; at
any rate, more than a Scotch bonnet
was very effectually stolen ; a good
heart and true was there virtually
bestowed, and the trust was never
regretted on either side, and never
betrayed.
Often and often, in the genial and
beautiful hours of the autumntide of
their long life, have I heard my dear
father tease “ Jen ” about her maidenly
intentions in the stealing of that bonnet;
and often have heard her quick mother-
wit in the happy retort, that had his
motives for coming to that retreat been
altogether and exclusively pious, he
would probably have found his way to
the other side of the wood, but that
men who prowled about the Garden of
Eden ran the risk of meeting some day
with a daughter of Eve !
Somewhere in or about his seven-
teenth year my father passed through
a crisis of religious experience ; and
from that day he openly and very
decidedly followed the Lord Jesus.
His parents had belonged to one of the
older branches of what is now called
the United Presbyterian Church ; but
my father, having made an indepen-
dent study of the Scotch Worthies, the
Cloud of Witnesses, the Testimonies,
and the Confession of Faith, resolved
to cast in his lot with the oldest of
all the Scotch Churches, the Reformed
Presbyterian, as most nearly repre-
senting the Covenanters and the attain-
ments of both the first and second
Reformations in Scotland. This choice
he deliberately made, and sincerely
and intelligently adhered to ; and was
able at all times to give strong and
clear reasons from Bible and from
history for the principles he upheld.
Still his sympathes and votes always
went with the more progressive party
in that ancient Church. He held it
to be right that Cameronians, like other
citizens, should exercise the municipal
and political franchise, and he adhered
to the “ Majority Synod,” which has
since been incorporated with the Free
Church of Scotland. While glorying
in the Psalms, he rejoiced to sing other
hymns and spiritual songs (thanks to
Ralph Erskine’s “ Sonnets,” perhaps,
for that !) from his earliest days—at
least, everywhere except in the ordinary
Public Worship ; and long before he
died, though he still held the Psalms to
be supreme, he had learned to hear with
glowing delight vast congregations
singing the Hymns of modern days,
had learned joyfully to join in these
songs of Zion, and was heard often to
confess his belief that God had greatly
owned and blessed the ministry of song
in the service of the Gospel.
Besides his independent choice of a
Church for himself, there was one other
mark and fruit of his early religious de-
cision, which looks even fairer through
all these years. Family Worship had
heretofore been held only on Sabbath
Day in his father’s house ; but the
young Christian, entering into confer-
ence with his sympathizing mother,
managed to get the household per-
suaded that there ought to be daily
morning and evening prayer and read-


ing of the Bible and holy singing.
Phis the more readily, as he himself
igreed to take part regularly in the
same, and so relieve the old warrior
iff what might have proved for him
too arduous spiritual toils ! And so
oegan in his seventeenth year that
ffessed custom of Family Prayer,
morning and evening, which my father
Dractised probably without one single
avoidable omission till he lay on his
ieathbed, seventy-seven years of age;
vhen, even to the last day of his life,
i portion of Scripture was read, and
xis voice was heard softly joining in
:he Psalm, and his lips breathed the
norning and evening Prayer-—falling
n sweet benediction on the heads of
,11 his children, far away many of
hem over all the earth, but all
neeting him there at the Throne
d Grace. None of us can remember
hat any day ever passed unhallowed
hus ; no hurry for market, no rush to
•usiness, no arrival of friends or guests,
Loijtrouble or sorrow, no joy or excite-
nent, ever prevented at least our
meeiing around the family altar,
vhile the High Priest led our prayers
;o God, and offered himself and his
children there. And blessed to others,
is well as to ourselves, was the light
)f such example !
My father had a strong desire to be
i Minister of the Gospel; but when he
inally saw that God’s will had marked
>ut for him another lot, he reconciled
limself by entering with his own soul
nto this solemn vow—that if God gave
lim sons, he would consecrate them
mreservedly to the Ministry of Christ,
f the Lord saw fit to accept the offer-
ng, and open up their way. It may
>e enough here to say that he lived to
>ee three of us entering upon and not
mblessed in the Holy Office—myself,
;he eldest born ; my brother Walter,
several years my junior; and my
mother James, the youngest of eleven,
;he Benjamin of the flock.
Our place of worship was the Re-
ormed Presbyterian Church at Dum-
mies, under the ministry, during most
ff these days, of Rev. John McDermid
—a genuine, solemn, lovable Coven-
inter, who cherished towards my father
A 2
a warm respect, that deepened into
apostolic affection when the yellow
hair turned snow-white and both of
them grew patriarchal in dieir years.
The Minister, indeed, was translated
to a Glasgow charge, but that rather
exalted than suspended their mutual
love.
Each of us, from very early days,
considered it no penalty, but a great
joy, to go with our father to the
church ; the four miles were a treat
to our young spirits, the company by
the way was a fresh’ incitement, and
occasionally some of the wonders of
city-life rewarded our eager eyes.
A few other pious men and women, of
the best Evangelical type, went from
the same parish to one or other
favourite minister at Dumfries—the
Parish Church during all those years
being rather miserably served ; and
when these God-fearing peasants “ fore-
gathered ” in the way to or from the
House of God, we youngsters had
sometimes rare glimpses of what
Christian talk may be and ought to be.
We had, too, special Bible Readings
on the Lord’s Day evening,—mother
and children and visitors reading in
turns, with fresh and interesting ques-
tion, answer, and exposition, all tend-
ing to impress us with the infinite
grace of a God of love and mercy in
the great gift of His dear Son, Jesus,
our Saviour. The Shorter Catechism
was gone through regularly, each
answering the question asked, till the
whole had been explained, and its
foundation in Scripture shown by the
proof-texts adduced. It has been an
amazing thing to me, occasionally to
meet with men who blamed this “ cate-
chizing ” for giving them a distaste
to religion ; every one in all our circle
thinks and feels exactly the opposite.
It laid the solid rock-foundations of
our religious life. After-years have
given to these questions and their
answers a deeper or a modified mean-
ing, but none of us have ever once
even dreamed of wishing that we had
been otherwise trained. Of course,
if the parents are not devout, sincere,
and affectionate—if the whole affair
on both sides is taskwork, or worse.
3 t
9
The Home Life


hypocritical and false, results must
be very different indeed !
Oh, I can remember those happy
Sabbath evenings ; no blinds down
and shutters up to keep out the sun
from us, as some scandalously affirm ;
but a holy, happy, entirely human day,
for a Christian father, mother, and
children to spend. How my father
would parade across and across our
flag-floor, telling over the substance
of the day’s sermons to our dear mother,
who, because of the great distance and
because of her many living “ encum-
brances,” got very seldom indeed to
the church, but gladly embraced every
chance, when there was prospect or
promise of a “ lift ” either way from
some friendly gig ! How he would
entice us to help him to recall some
idea or other, praising us when we got
the length of “ taking notes ” and read-
ing them over on our return ; how he
would turn the talk ever so naturally
to some Bible story or some martyr
reminiscence, or some happy allusion
to the “ Pilgrim’s Progress ” ! And
then it was quite a contest, which of
us would get reading aloud, while all
the rest listened, and father added
here and there a happy thought, or
illustration, or anecdote. Others must
write and say what they will, and as
they feel ; but so must I. There were
eleven of us brought up in a home like
that; and never one of the eleven,
boy or girl, man or woman, has been
heard, or ever will be heard, saying
that Sabbath was dull or wearisome
for us, or suggesting that we have
heard of or seen any way more likely
than that for making the Day of the
Lord bright and blessed alike for
parents and for children. But God
help the homes where these things are
done by force and not by love !
The very discipline through which
our father passed us was a kind of
religion in itself. If anything really
serious required to be punished, he
retired first to his “ closet ” for prayer,
and we boys got to understand that
he was laying the whole matter before
God ; and that was the severest part
of the punishment for me to bear !
I could have defied any amount of
mere penalty, but this spoke to my
conscience as a message from God.
We loved him all the more when we
saw how much it cost him to punish
us ; and, in truth, he had never very
much of that kind of work to do upon
any one of all the eleven —we were
ruled by love far more than by fear.
CHAPTER II
SCHOOL AND EARLY COLLEGE DAYS
A.D. 1834-1847. JET, 10-23.
In my boyhood Torthorwald had one
of the grand old typical Parish Schools
of Scotland; where the rich and the
poor met together in perfect equality ;
where Bible and Catechism were
taught as zealously as grammar and
geography ; and where capable lads
from the humblest of cottages were
prepared in Latin and Mathematics
and Greek to go straight from their
Village class to the University bench.
Besides, at that time, an accomplished
pedagogue of the name of Smith, a
learned man of more than local fame,
had added a Boarding House to the
ordinary School, and had attracted
some of the better class gentlemen and
farmers’ sons from the surrounding
county; so that Torthorwald, under
his regime , reached the zenith of its
educational fame. In this School I
was initiated into the mystery of letters,
and all my brothers and sisters after
me, though some of them under other
masters than mine—my youngest
brother, James, trained there under a
master named William Lithgow, going
direct from the Village School to the
University of Glasgow in his fourteenth
year ! *
When still under twelve years o
age I started to learn my father’s
trade, in which I made surprising pro
gress. We wrought from six in th(
morning till ten at night, with an hou:
at dinner-time and half an hour a-
breakfast and again at supper. Thes<
spare moments every day I devoutlj
spent on my books, chiefly in the rudi
10
John G. Paton, d.d.


nents of Latin and Greek ; for I had
jiven my soul to God, and was resolved
;o aim at being a Missionary of the
'ross, or a Minister of the Gospel,
ifet I gladly testify that what I learned
)f the stocking-frame was not thrown
iway ; the facility of using tools, and
)f watching and keeping the machinery
n order, came to be of great value to
ne in the Foreign Mission field.
How much my father’s prayers at
his time impressed me I can never
;xplain, nor could any stranger under-
itand. When, on his knees and all of
is kneeling around him in Family
Worship, he poured out his whole soul
vith tears for the conversion of the
deathen World to the service of Jesus,
md for every personal and domestic
iced, we all felt as if in the presence
>f the living Saviour, and learned to
mow and love Him as our Divine
"riend. As we rose from our knees,
' used to look at the light on my father’s
ace, and wish I were like him in spirit,
—hoping that, in answer to his prayers,
' might be privileged and prepared to
tarry the blessed Gospel to some portion
>f the Heathen World.
I saved as much at my trade as
nabled me to go for six weeks to
)umfries Academy ; this awoke in me
.gain the hunger for learning, and I
esolved to give up that trade and turn
o something that might be made help-
ul to the prosecution of my education,
tn engagement was secured with the
iappers and Miners, who were mapping
nd measuring the county of Dumfries
a connection with the Ordnance Sur-
'ey of Scotland. The office hours were
rom 9 a.m, till 4 p.m. ; and though
ay walk from home was above four
liles every morning, and the same by
eturn in the evening, I found much
pare time for private study, both on
he way to and from my work and also
fter hours. Instead of spending the
lidday hour with the rest, at football
nd other games, I stole away to a
uiet spot on the banks of the Nith,
nd there pored over my book, all
lone. Our lieutenant, unknown to
le, had observed this from his house
n the other side of the stream, and
fter a time called me into his office
and inquired what I was studying.
I told him the whole truth as to my
position and my desires. After con-
ferring with some of the other officials
there, he summoned me again, and in
their presence promised me promotion
in the service, and special training in
Woolwich at the Government’s ex-
pense, on condition that I would sign
an engagement for seven years. Thank-
ing him most gratefully for his kind
offer, I agreed to bind myself for three
years or four, but not for seven.
Excitedly he said, “ Why ? Will
you refuse an offer that many gentle-
men’s sons would be proud of ? ”
I said, “ My life is given to another
Master, so I cannot engage for seven
years.”
He asked sharply, “ To whom ? ”
I replied, “To the Lord Jesus ; and
I want to prepare as soon as possible
for His service in the proclaiming of
the Gospel.”
In great anger he sprang across the
room, called the paymaster, and ex-
claimed, “ Accept my offer, or you are
dismissed on the spot ! ”
I answered, “ I am extremely sorry
if you do so, but to bind myself for
seven years would probably frustrate
the purpose of my life ; and though
I am greatly obliged to you, I cannot
make such an engagement.”
His anger made him unwilling or
unable to comprehend my difficulty ;
the drawing instruments were delivered
up, I received my pay, and departed
without further parley. The men,
both over me and beside me, wera
mostly Roman Catholics, and their talk
was the most profane I had ever heard.
Few of them spoke at any time with-
out larding their language with oaths,
and I was thankful to get away from
hearing their shocking speech. But to
me personally both officers and men
had been extremely kind, for which,
on leaving, I thanked them all very
cordially, and they looked not a little
surprised—as if unused to such recog-
nitions !
Hearing how I had been treated,
and why, Mr. Maxwell, the Rector of
Dumfries Academy, offered to let me
attend all classes there, free of charge^
11
School and Early College Days


so long as I cared to remain ; but that,
in lack of means of support, was for the
time impossible, as I would not and
could not be a burden on my dear
father, but was determined rather to
help him in educating the rest. I
went therefore to what was known as
the Lamb Fair at Lockerbie, and for
the first time in my life took a “ fee ”
for the harvest. On arriving at the
field when shearing and mowing began,
the farmer asked me to bind a sheaf ;
when I had done so, he seized it by the
band, and it fell to pieces ! Instead
of disheartening me, however, he gave
me a careful lesson how to bind ; the
second that I bound did not collapse
when shaken, and the third he pitched
across the field, and on finding that it
still remained firm, he cried to me
cheerily :
“ Right now, my lad ; go ahead ! ”
The male harvesters were told off to
sleep in a large hay-loft, the beds being
arranged all along the side, like
barracks. Many of the fellows were
rough and boisterous ; and I suppose
my look showed that I hesitated in
mingling with them, for the quick eye
and kind heart of the farmer’s wife
prompted her to suggest that I, being
so much younger than the rest, might
sleep with her son George in the house
•—an offer, oh, how gratefully accepted!
A beautiful new steading had recently
been built for them ; and during cer-
tain days, or portions of days, while
waiting for the grain to ripen or to
dry, I planned and laid out an orna-
mental garden in front of it, which gave
great satisfaction—a taste inherited
from my mother, with her joy in flowers
and garden plots. They gave me, on
leaving, a handsome present, as well
as my fee, for I had got on very plea-
santly with them all. This experience,
too, came to be valuable to me, when,
in long-after days, and far other lands,
Mission buildings had to be erected,
and garden and field cropped and
cultivated without the aid of a single
European hand.
Before going to my first harvesting,
I had applied for a situation in Glasgow
apparently exactly suited for my case ;
but I had little or no hope of ever
hearing of it further. An offer of
per annum was made by the West
Campbell Street Reformed Presby-
terian Congregation, then under the
good and noble Dr. Bates, for a young
man to act as district visitor and tract
distributor, especially among the absen-
tees from the Sabbath School; with
the privilege of receiving one year’s
training at the Free Church Normal
Seminary, that he might qualify him-
self for teaching, and thereby push for-
ward to the Holy Ministry. The can-
didates, along with their application
and certificates, were to send an essay
on some subject, of their own composi-
tion, and in their own handwriting.
I sent in two long poems on the Cove-
nanters, which must have exceedingly
amused them, as I had not learned to
write even decent prose ! But, much
to my surprise, immediately on the
close of the harvesting experience, a
letter arrived, intimating that I, along
with another young man, had been put
upon the short leet, and that both were
requested to appear in Glasgow on a
given day and compete for the appoint-
ment.
Two days thereafter I started out
from my quiet country home on the
road to Glasgow. Literally “on the
road,” for from Torthorwald to Kil-
marnock—about forty miles—had to
be done on foot, and thence to Glasgow
by rail. Railways in those days were
as yet few, and coach travelling was
far beyond my purse. A small bundle,
tied up in my pocket-handkerchief,
contained my Bible and all my per-
sonal belongings. Thus was I launched
upon the ocean of life. I thought on
One who says, “ I know thy poverty,
but thou art rich.”
My dear father walked with me the
first six miles of the way. His coun-
sels and tears and heavenly conversa-
tion on that parting journey are fresh
in my heart as if it had been but yester-
day ; and tears are on my cheeks as
freely now as then, whenever memory
steals me away to the scene. For the
last half-mile or so we walked on to-
gether in almost unbroken silence, —
my father, as was often his custom,
carrying hat in hand, while his long.
12
John G. Paton, d.d.


flowing yellow hair (then yellow, but
in later years white as snow) streamed
like a girl's down his shoulders. His
lips kept moving in silent prayers for
me ; and his tears fell fast when our
eyes met each other in looks for which
all speech was vain ! We halted on
reaching the appointed parting place ;
he grasped my hand firmly for a minute
in silence, and then solemnly and affec-
tionately said :
“ God bless you, my son ! Your
father’s God prosper you, and keep you
from all evil ! ”,
Unable to say more, his lips kept
moving in silent prayer ; in tears we
embraced, and parted. I ran off as
fast as I could ; and, when about to
turn a corner in the road where he
would lose sight of me, I looked back
and saw him still standing with head
uncovered where I had left him—
gazing after me. Waving my hat in
adieu, I was round the corner and out
of sight in an instant. But my heart
was too full and sore to carry me
further, so I darted into the side of the
road and wept for a time. Then,
rising up cautiously, I climbed the
dyke to if he yet stood where I had
left him ; and just at that moment I
caught a glimpse of him climbing the
dyke and looking out for me ! He did
not see me, and after he had gazed
eagerly in my direction for a while he
got down, set his face towards home,
and began to return—his head still un-
covered, and his heart, I felt sure, still
rising in prayers for me. I watched
through blinding tears, till his' form
faded from my gaze ; and then, hasten-
ing on my way, vowed deeply and oft,
by the help of God, to live and act so
as never to grieve or dishonour such a
father and mother as He had given me.
The appearance of my father, when we
parted—his advice, prayers, and tears
—the road, the dyke, the climbing up
on it and then walking away, head un-
covered —have often, often, all through
life, risen vividly before my mind, and
do so now while I am writing, as if it
had been but an hour ago. In my
earlier years particularly, when ex-
posed to many temptations, his parting
orm rose before me as that of a guardian
angel. It is no Pharisaism, but deep
gratitude, which makes me here testify
that the memory of that scene not only
helped, by God’s grace, to keep me
pure from the prevailing sins, but also
stimulated me in all my studies, that
I might not fall short of Lis hopes, and
in all my Christian duties, that I might
faithfully follow his shining example,
I reached Glasgow on the third day,
having slept one night at Thornhill,
and another at New Cumnock; and hav-
ing needed, owing to the kindness of
acquaintances upon whom I called by
the way, to spend only three-halfpence
of my modest funds. Safely arrived,
but weary, I secured a humble room
for my lodging, for which I had to pay
one shilling and sixpence per week.
Buoyant and full of hope and looking
up to God for guidance, I appeared at
the appointed hour before the exam-
iners as did also the other candidate;
and they having carefully gone through
their work, asked us to retire. When
recalled, they informed us that they
had great difficulty in choosing, and
suggested that the one of us might
withdraw in favour of the other, or
that both might submit to a more test-
ing examination. Neither seemed in-
clined to give it up, both were willing
for a second examination ; but the
patrons made another suggestion.
They had only per annum to give ;
but if we would agree to divide it be-
twixt us, and go into one lodging, we
might both be able to struggle through ;
they would pay our entrance fee at
the Free Normal Seminary and pro-
vide us with the books required ; and
perhaps they might be able to add a
little to the sum promised to each of us.
By dividing the mission work appointed,
and each taking only the half, more
time also might be secured for our
studies. Though the two candidates
had never seen each other before, we
at once accepted this proposal, and
got on famously together, never having
had a dispute on anything of common
interest throughout our whole career.
As our fellow-students at the Normal
were all far advanced beyond us in.
their education, we found it killing
work, and had to grind away inces-
13
School and Early College Days


saqtly, late and early. Both of us,
before the year closed, broke down in
health; partly by hard study, but
principally, perhaps, for lack of nourish-
ing diet. He, however, never entirely
recovered, though for some years he
taught in a humble School ; and long
ago he fell asleep in Jesus, a devoted
and honoured Christian man.
I, on the other hand, after a short
rest, nourished by the hill air of Tor-
thorwald and by the new milk of our
family cow, was ere long at work again.
I rented a house, and began to teach
a small School at Girvan. There I
received the greatest kindness from
Rev. Matthew G. Easton of the Re-
formed Presbyterian Church, after-
wards Dr. Easton of the Free Church,
Darvel, and gradually but completely
recovered my health.
Having saved £lO by my teaching,
I returned to Glasgow, and was enrolled
as a student at the College ; but before
the session was finished my money was
exhausted—l had lent some to a poor
student, who failed to repay me—and
only nine shillings remained in my
purse. There was no one from whom
to borrow, had I been willing ; I had
been disappointed in attempting to
secure private tuition ; and no course
seemed open for me, except to pay what
little I owed, give up my College career,
and seek for teaching or other work
in the country. I wrote a letter to my
father and mother, informing them of
my circumstances ; that I was leaving
Glasgow in quest of work, and that
they would not hear from me again till
I had found a suitable situation. I
told them that if otherwise unsuccess-
ful, I should fall back on my own trade,
though I shrank from that as not tend-
ing to advance my education ; but
that they might rest assured I would
do nothing to dishonour them or my
own Christian profession. Having read
that letter over again through many
tears, I said, —I cannot send that, for
it will grieve my darling parents ; and
therefore, leaving it on the table, I
locked my room door and ran out to
find a place where I might sell my few
precious books, and hold on a few
weeks longer. Passing through one
short street into another, I marched on
mechanically ; but the Lord God of
my father was guiding my steps, all
unknown to me.
A certain notice in a window, into
which I had probably never in my life
looked before, here caught my eye,
to this effect—“ Teacher wanted, Mary-
hill Free Church School ; apply at the
Manse.” A coach or ’bus was just
passing, when I turned round ; I leapt
into it, saw the Minister, arranged to
undertake the School, returned to
Glasgow, paid my landlady’s lodging
score, tore up that letter to my parents,
and wrote another full of cheer and
hope ; and early next morning entered
the School and began a tough and try-
ing job. The Minister warned me
that the School was a wreck, and had
been broken up chiefly by coarse and
bad characters from mills and coal-
pits, who attended the evening classes.
They had abused several masters in
succession; and, laying a thick and
heavy cane on the desk, he said :
“Use that freely, or you will never
keep order here ! ”
I put it aside into the drawer of my
desk, saying, “ That will be my last
resource.”
There were very few scholars for the
first week—about eighteen in the Day
School and twenty in the Night School.
The clerk of the mill, a good young
fellow, came to the evening classes,
avowedly to learn book-keeping, but
privately he said he had come to save
me from personal injury.
The following week, a young man
and a young woman began to attend
the Night School, who showed from
the first moment that they were bent
on mischief. By talking aloud, joking,
telling stories, and laughing, they
stopped the work of the School. On
my repeated appeals for quiet and
order, they became the more boister-
ous, and gave great merriment to a
few of the scholars present. I finally
urged the young man, a tall, powerful
fellow, to be quiet or at once to leave,
declaring that at all hazards I must
and would have perfect order ; but he
only mocked at me, and assumed a
fighting attitude. Quietly locking the
14
John G. Paton, d.d.


door and putting the key in my pocket,
I turned to my desk, armed myself
with the cane, and dared any one at
his peril to interfere betwixt us. It
was a rough struggle—he smashing at
me clumsily with his fists, I with quick
movements evading and dealing him
blow after blow with the heavy cane
for several rounds—till at length he
crouched down at his desk, exhausted
and beaten, and I ordered him to turn
to his book, which he did in sulky
silence. Going to my desk, I addressed
them, and asked them to inform all
who wished to come to the School,
That if they came for education, every-
thing would be heartily done that it
was in my power to do ; but that any
who wished for mischief had better
stay away, as I was determined to
:onquer, not to be conquered, and to
secure order and silence, whatever it
might cost. Further, I assured them
:hat that cane would not again be
ifted by me, if kindness and forbear-
ance on my part could possibly gain
;he day, as I wished to rule by love
md not by terror. But this young
man knew he was in the wrong, and it
vas that which had made him weak
igainst me, though every way stronger
;ar than I. Yet I would be his friend
md helper, if he was willing to be
■riendly with me, the same as if this
light had never been. At these words
l dead silence fell on the School;
wery one buried face diligently in
>ook ; and the evening closed in un-
;ommon quiet and order.
On the following day, the parents of
ome children, getting alarmed by the
umours of these exploits, waited on
ne accompanied by the Minister, and
aid their children were terrified to
ome. I said that no child had been
>eaten by me, but that I insisted upon
»rder and obedience ; I reminded the
Minister that of my immediate pre-
lecessors three had suffered from these
owdies in the evening class—one
ictually going wrong in the mind over
he worry, another losing his health
md dying, and the third leaving in
lisgust ; and finally I declared that
must either be master, at whatever
ost, or leave the School. From that
time perfect order was established,
and the School flourished apace. During
next week, many of the worst charac-
ters returned to their class work in the
evening ; but thenceforward the be-
haviour of all towards me was admir-
able. The attendance grew, till the
School became crowded, both during
the day and at night. During the
midday hour even, I had a large class
of young women who came to improve
themselves in writing and arithmetic.
By-and-bye the cane became a for-
gotten implement ; the sorrow and
pain which I showed as to badly done
lessons, or anything blameworthy,
proved the far more effectual penalty.
The School Committee had promised
me at least ten shillings per week, and
guaranteed to make up any deficit if
the fees fell short of that sum ; but if
the income from fees exceeded that
sum, all was to be mine. Affairs went
on prosperously for a season ; indeed,
too much so for my selfish interest.
The Committee, regarding the arrange-
ment with me as only temporary, took
advantage of the large attendance and
better repute of the School, to secure
the services of a master of the highest
grade. The parents of many of the
children, resenting this, offered to take
and seat a hall, if I would remain and
carry on an opposition School ; but,
besides regarding this as scarcely fair
to the Committee, however unhand-
somely they had treated me, I knew
too well that I had neither education
nor experience to compete with an
accomplished teacher, and so declined
the proposal, though grateful for their
kind appreciation. Their children, how-
ever, got up a testimonial and sub-
scription, in token of their gratitude
and esteem, which was presented to
me on the day before I left; and this
I valued chiefly because the presenta-
tion was made by the young fellows
who at first behaved so badly, but
were now my devoted friends.
Once more I committed my future to
the Lord God of my father, assured that
in my heart I was willing and anxious
to serve Him and to follow the blessed
Saviour, yet feeling keenly that intense
darkness had again enclosed my path.
15
School and Early College Days


CHAPTER 111
IN GLASGOW CITY MISSION
A.D. 1847-1856. JET. 23-32.
Before undertaking the Maryhill
School, I had applied to be taken on
as an agent in the Glasgow City Mission ;
and the night before I had to leave
Maryhill, I received a letter from Rev.
Thomas Caie, the superintendent of
the said Mission, saying that the
directors had kept their eyes on me
ever since my application, and request-
ing, as they understood I was leaving
the School, that I would appear before
them the next morning, and have my
qualifications for becoming a Mission-
ary examined into. Praising God, I
went off at once, passed the examina-
tion successfully, and was appointed to
spend two hours that afternoon and
the following Monday in visitation with
two of the directors, calling at every
house in a low district of the town,
and conversing with all the characters
encountered there as to their eternal
welfare. I had also to preach a
“ trial ” discourse in a Mission meet-
ing, where a deputation of directors
would be present, the following even-
ing being Sunday ; and on Wednesday
evening they met again to hear their
report and to accept or reject me.
All this had come upon me so un-
expectedly, that I almost anticipated
failure ; but looking up for help I went
through with it, and on the fifth day
after leaving the School they called
me before a meeting of directors, and
informed me that I had passed my
trials most successfully, and that the
reports were so favourable that they
had unanimously resolved to receive
me at once as one of their City Mission-
aries. It was further explained that
one of their number, Matthew Fairley,
Esq., an elder in Dr. Symington’s con-
gregation, had guaranteed the half of
my salary for two years, the other half
to be met by the resources of the
Mission voluntarily contributed—the
whole salary at that time amounting
to /40 per annum. The district allo-
cated to me was one especially needful
and trying, that had never been thus
heretofore occupied, in and around the
Green Street of Cal ton, and I was
enjoined to enter upon my duties at
once. After receiving many good and
kind counsels from these good and kind
men, one of them in prayer very
solemnly dedicated me and my work
to the Lord ; and several of them were
appointed to introduce me to my dis-
trict, taking a day each by turns, and
to assist me in making arrangements
for the on-carrying of the work.
Deeply solemnized with the responsi-
bilities of my new office, I left that
meeting praising God for all His un-
deserved mercies, and seeing most
clearly His gracious hand in all the
way by which He had led me, and the
trials by which He had prepared me
for this sphere of service. Man pro-
poses-—God disposes.
I found the district a very degraded
one. Many families said they had
never been visited by any Minister ;
and many were lapsed professors of
religion who had attended no church
for ten, sixteen, or twenty years, and
said they had never been called upon
by any Minister, nor by any Christian
visitor. In it were congregated many
avowed infidels, Romanists, and drunk-
ards, —living together, and associated
for evil, but apparently without any
effective counteracting influence. In
many of its closes and courts sin and
vice walked about openly—naked and
not ashamed. We were expected to
spend four hours daily in visiting from
hpuse to house, holding kitchen prayer-
meetings amongst those visited, calling
them together also in the evenings for
worship or instruction, and trying by
all means to do whatever good was
possible amongst them. And the only
place in the whole district available
for a Sabbath evening Evangelistic
Service was a hay-loft, under which a
cow-feeder kept a large number of
cows, and which was reached by an
outside rickety wooden stair.
After nearly a year’s hard work, I
had only six or seven non-church-goers,
who had been led to attend regularly
there, besides about the same number
who met on a week evening in the
ground-floor of a house kindly granted
for the purpose by a poor and Indus-


rious but ill-used Irishwoman. She
supported her family by keeping a little
shop, and selling coals. Her husband
was a powerful man —a good worker,
but a hard drinker ; and, like too many
others addicted to intemperance, he
abused and beat her, and pawned and
drank everything he could get hold of.
She, amid many prayers and tears,
ibore everything patiently, and strove
to bring up her only daughter in the
fear of God. We exerted, by God's
blessing, a good influence upon him
through our meetings. He became
a Total Abstainer, gave up his evil
ways, and attended Church regularly
with his wife. As his interest increased,
he tried to bring others also to the
meeting, and urged them to become
Abstainers. His wife became a centre
of help and of good influence in all the
district, as she kindly invited all and
welcomed them to the meeting in her
house, and my work grew every day
more hopejful.
Seeing, however, that one year’s hard
work showed such small results, the
directors proposed to remove me to
another district, as in their estimation
the non-church-goers in Green Street
were unassailable by ordinary means.
I pleaded for six months’ longer trial,
as I had gained the confidence of many
of the poor people there, and had an
invincible faith that the good seed
sown would soon bear blessed fruit.
To this the directors kindly agreed.
At our next meeting I informed those
present that, if we could not draw out
more of the non-church-goers to attend
the services, I should be removed to
another part of the city. Each one
there and then agreed to bring another
to our next meeting. Both our meet-
ings at once doubled their attendance.
My interest in them and their interest
in me now grew apace; and, for fear
I might be taken away from them,
they made another effort, and again
doubled our attendance. Henceforth
Meeting and Class were both too large
•r any house that was available for
3 in the whole of our district. We
instituted a Bible Class, a Singing
Class, a Communicants’ Class, and a
Total Abstinence Society; and, in
addition to the usual meetings, we
opened two prayer-meetings specially
for the Calton division of the Glasgow
police—one at a suitable hour for the
men on day duty, and another for
those on night duty. The men got up
a Mutual Improvement Society and
Singing Class also amongst themselves,
weekly, on another evening. My work
now occupied every evening in the
week ; and I had two meetings every
Sabbath. By God’s blessing they all
prospered, and gave evidence of such
fruits as showed that the Lord was
working there for good by our humble
instrumentality.
At that very time a commodious
block of buildings, that had been
Church, Schools, Manse, etc., came
into the market. Mr. Thomas Binnie
persuaded Dr. Symington’s congrega-
tion, Great Hamilton Street, in con-
nection with which my Mission was
carried on, to purchase the whole
property for Mission purposes. Its
situation at the foot of Green Street
gave it a control of the whole district
where my work lay ; and so the Church
was given to me in which to conduct
all my meetings, while the other Halls
were adapted as Schools for poor girls
and boys, where they were educated
by a proper master, and were largely
supplied with books, clothing, and
sometimes even food, by the ladies of
the congregation. The purchasing and
using of these buildings for an Evan-
gelistic and Educational Mission be-
came a blessing—a very conspicuous
blessing—to the district in the Calton
of Glasgow; and the blessing still
perpetuates itself, not only in the old
premises, now used for an Industrial
School, but still more in the beautiful
and spacious Mission Halls, erected
immediately in front of the old, and
consecrated to the work of the Lord
in that poor and crowded and clamant
portion of the city.
Such toils left me but small time for
private studies. The City Missionary
was required to spend four hours daily
in visitation-work ; but often had I to
spend double that time, day after day,
in order to overtake what was laid
upon me.
1 7
In Glasgow City Mission


Almost the only enemies I had were
the keepers of Public-Houses, whose
trade had been injured by my Total
Abstinence Society. Besides the Satur-
day night meetings all the year round,
we held, in summer evenings and on
Saturday afternoons, Evangelistic and
Total Abstinence services in the open
air. We met in Thomson’s Lane, a
short and broad street, not open for
the traffic of conveyances, and admir-
ably situated for our purposes. Our
pulpit was formed by the top of an
outside stair, leading to the second flat
of a house in the middle of the lane.
Prominent Christian workers took part
with us in delivering addresses ; an
intimation through my Classes usually
secured good audiences ; and the
hearty singing of hymns by my Mission
Choir gave zest and joy to the whole
proceedings. Of other so-called “ at-
tractions ” we had none, and needed
none, save the sincere proclamation
of the Good Tidings from God to men !
Though Intemperance was the main
cause of poverty, suffering, misery, and
vice in that district of Glasgow, I had
also considerable opposition from Ro-
manists and Infidels, many of whom
met in clubs, where they drank together,
and gloried in their wickedness and
in leading other young men astray.
Against these I prepared and delivered
lectures, at the close of which “ dis-
cussion ” was invited and allowed ;
but I fear they did little good. These
men embraced the opportunity of
airing their absurdities, or sowing the
seeds of corruption in those whom
otheryjse they could never have
reached, while their own hearts and
minds were fast shut against all con-
viction or light.
One infidel Lecturer in the district
became very ill. His wife called me
in to visit him. I found him possessed
of a Circulating Library of infidel books
by which he sought to pervert unwary
minds. Though he had talked and
lectured much against the Gospel, he
did not at all really understand its
message. He had read the Bible, but
only to find food there for ridicule.
Now supposed to be dying, he confessed
that his mind was full of terror as to
the Future. After several visits and
frequent conversations and prayers,
he became genuinely and deeply inter-
ested, drank in God’s message of sal-
vation, and cried aloud with many
tears for pardon and peace. He
bitterly lamented the evil he had done,
and called in all the infidel literature
that he had in circulation, with the
purpose of destroying it. He began to
speak solemnly to any of his old com-
panions that came to see him, telling
them what he had found in the Lord
Jesus. At his request I bought and
brought to him a Bible, which he re-
ceived with great joy, saying, “ This
is the book for me now ” ; and adding,
“ Since you were here last, I gathered
together all my infidel books ; my wife
locked the door, till she and my
daughter tore them to pieces, and I
struck the light that reduced the pile
to ashes.”
As long as he lived, this man was
unwearied and unflinching in testify-
ing to all that crossed his path how
much Jesus Christ had been to his
heart and soul ; and he died in the
possession of a full and blessed hope.
About this time there was an election
of Elders for Dr. Symington’s congre-
gation, and I was by an almost unani-
mous vote chosen for that office. For
years now I had been attached to them
as City Missionary for their district,
and many friends urged me to accept
the eldership, as likely to increase my
usefulness, and give me varied ex-
perience for my future work. My dear
father, also, himself an Elder in the
congregation at Dumfries, advised me
similarly ; and though very young,
comparatively, for such a post, I did
accept the office, and continued to act
as an Elder and member of Dr. Syming-
ton’s Kirk Session, till by-and-bye I
was ordained as a Missionary to the
New Hebrides—where the great lot of
my life had been cast by the Lord, as
yet unknown to me.
All through my City Mission period,
I was painfully carrying on my studies,
first at the University of Glasgow, and
thereafter at the Reformed Presby-
terian Divinity Hall ; and also medical
classes at the Andersonian College.
1 8
John G. Paton, D.D.


Vith the exception of one session,
/hen failure of health broke me down,
struggled patiently on through ten
r ears. The work was hard and most
exacting ; and if I never attained the
cholarship for which I thirsted —being
>ut poorly grounded in my younger
lays—l yet had much of the blessed
Master’s presence in all my efforts,
vhich many better scholars sorely
acked ; and I was sustained by the
ofty aim which burned all these years
might within my soul, namely,—to be
[ualified as a preacher of the Gospel
d Christ, to be owned and used by Him
or the salvation of perishing men.
CHAPTER IV
FOREIGN MISSION CLAIMS
A.D. 1856-1857. MT. 32-33.
lappy in my work as I felt, and suc-
essful by the blessing of God, yet I
ontinually heard, and chiefly during
ay last years in the Divinity Hall, the
/ail of the perishing Heathen in the
buth Seas ; and I saw that few were
aring for them, while I well knew that
aany would be ready to take up my
/ork in Calton, and carry it forward
icrhaps with more efficiency than my-
elf. Without revealing the state of
ay mind to any person, this was the
upreme subject of my daily meditation
nd prayer ; and this also led me to
nter upon those medical studies, in
/hich I purposed taking the full course;
ut at the close of my third year, an
icident occurred, which led me at
nee to offer myself for the Foreign
lission field.
The Reformed Presbyterian Church
f Scotland, in which I had been
rought up, had been advertising for
nother Missionary to join the Rev.
ohn Inglis in his grand work in the
lew Hebrides. Dr. Bates, the excel-
mt convener of the Heathen Missions
bmmittee, was deeply grieved, be-
ause for two years their appeal had
died. At length, the Synod, after
luch prayer and consultation, felt the
laims of the Heathen so urgently
ressed upon them by the Lord’s re-
peated calls, that they resolved to cast
lots, to discover whether God would
thus select any Minister to be relieved
from his home-charge, and designated
as a Missionary to the South Seas.
Each member of Synod, as I was in-
formed, agreed to hand in, after solemn
appeal to God, the names of the three
best qualified in his esteem for such a
work,and he who had the clear majority
was to be loosed from his Congrega-
tion, and to proceed to the Mission
field—or the first and second highest,
if two could be secured. Hearing this
debate, and feeling an intense interest
in these most unusual proceedings,
I remember yet the hushed solemnity
of the prayer before the names were
handed in. I remember the strained
silence that held the Assembly while
the scrutinizes retired to examine the
papers ; and I remember how tears
blinded my eyes when they returned
to announce that the result was so
indecisive, that it was clear that the
Lord had not in that way provided a
Missionary. The cause was once again
solemnly laid before God in prayer,
and a cloud of sadness appeared to
fall over all the Synod.
The Lord kept saying within me,
“ Since none better qualified can be
got, rise and offer yourself ! ” Almost
overpowering was the impulse to
answer aloud, “ Here am I, send me.”
But I was dreadfully afraid of mistaking
my mere human emotions for the will
of God. So I resolved to make it a
subject of close deliberation and prayer
for a few days longer, and to look at
the proposal from every possible aspect.
Besides, I was keenly solicitous about
the effect upon the hundreds of young
people and others, now attached to all
my Classes and Meetings ; and yet I
felt a growing assurance that this was
the call of God to His servant, and
that He who was willing to employ
me in the work abroad, was both able
and willing to provide for the on-carry-
ing of my work at home. The wail
and the claims of the Heathen were
constantly sounding in my ears. I
saw them perishing for lack of the
knowledge of the true God and His
Son Jesus, while my Green Street
19
Foreign Mission Claims


people had the open Bible and all the
means of Grace within easy reach,
which, if they rejected, they did so
wilfully, and at their own peril. None
seemed prepared for the Heathen field ;
many were capable and ready for the
Calton service. My medical studies,
as well as my literary and divinity
training, had specially qualified me
in some ways for the Foreign field, and
from every aspect at which I could
look the whole facts in the face, the
voice within me sounded like a voice
from God.
It was under good Dr. Bates of West
Campbell Street that I had begun my
career in Glasgow —receiving £25 per
annum for district visitation in connec-
tion with his Congregation, along with
instruction under Mr. Hislop and his
staff in the Free Church Normal
Seminary—and oh, how Dr. Bates did
rejoice, and even weep for joy, when I
called on him, and offered myself for
the New Hebrides Mission ! I returned
to my lodging with a lighter heart than
I had for some time enjoyed, feeling
that nothing so clears the vision, and
lifts up the life, as a decision to move
forward in what you know to be entirely
the will of the Lord. I said to my
fellow-student, who had chummed
with me all through our course at
college, “ I have been away signing
my banishment ” (a rather trifling way
of talk for such an occasion). “ I have
offered myself as a Missionary for the
New Hebrides.”
After a long and silent meditation,
in which he seemed lost in far-wander-
ing thoughts, his answer was, “ If they
will accept of me, I am also resolved
to go ! ”
I said, “ Will you write the Convener
to that effect, or let me do so ? ”
He replied, “ You may.”
A few minutes later his letter of offer
was in the post office. Next morning,
Dr. Bates called upon us early, and
after a long conversation, commended
us and our future work to the Lord
God in fervent prayer.
This fellow-student, Mr. Joseph Cope-
land, had also for some time been a
very successful City Missionary in the
Camlachie district, while attending
along with me at the Divinity Hall
The leading of God, whereby we both
resolved at the same time to give our-
selves to the Foreign Mission field, was
wholly unexpected by us, as we had
never once spoken to each other aboui
going abroad. At a meeting of the
Foreign Missions Committee, held im-
mediately thereafter, both were, aftei
due deliberation, formally accepted
on condition that we passed success-
fully the usual examinations requirec
of candidates for the Ministry. Anc
for the next twelve months we were
placed under a special committee foi
advice as to medical experience, ac-
quaintance with the rudiments o;
trades, and anything else which might
be thought useful to us in the Foreign
field.
When it became known that I was
preparing to go abroad as Missionary,
nearly all were dead against the pro-
posal, except Dr. Bates and my fellow-
student. My dear father and mother,
however, when I consulted them,
characteristically replied, that “ they
had long since given me away to the
Lord, and in this matter also would
leave me to God’s disposal.” From
other quarters we were besieged with
the strongest opposition on all sides.
Even Dr. Symington, one of my pro-
fessors in divinity, and the beloved
minister in connection with whose con-
gregation I had wrought so long as
a City Missionary, and in whose Kirk
Session I had for years sat as an Elder,
repeatedly urged me to remain at
home. He argued, that “Green Street
Church was doubtless the sphere for
which God had given me peculiar qualifi-
cations, and in which He had so largely
blessed my labours ; that if I left those
now attending my Classes and Meet-
ings they might be scattered, and
many of them would probably fall
away ; that I was leaving certainty
for uncertainty—work in which God
had made me greatly useful for work
in which I might fail to be useful, and
only throw away my life amongsf
Cannibals.”
I replied, that “ my mind was finally
resolved; that, though I loved m 3
work and my people, yet I felt tha
20
John G. Paton, d.d.


I could leave them to the care of Jesus,
who would soon provide them a better
pastor than I ; and that, with regard
to my life amongst the Cannibals, as
I had only once to die, I was content
to leave the time and place and means
in the hand of God, who had already
marvellously preserved me when visit-
ing cholera patients and the fever-
stricken poor ; on that score I had
positively no further concern, having
left it all absolutely to the Lord,
whom I sought to serve and honour,
whether in life or by death.”
The house connected with my Green
Street Church was now offered to me
for a Manse, and any reasonable salary
that I cared to ask (as against the
promised £l2O per annum for the far-
off and dangerous New Hebrides), on
condition that I would remain at home.
I cannot honestly say that such offers
or opposing influences proved a heavy
trial to me ; they rather tended to
confirm my determination that the
path of duty was to go abroad.
Amongst many who sought to deter
me, was one dear old Christian gentle-
man, whose crowning argument always
was, “ The Cannibals ! you will be
eaten by Cannibals ! ”
At last I replied, “ Mr. Dickson, you
are advanced in years now, and your
own prospect is soon to be laid in the
grave, there to be eaten by worms ;
I confess to you, that if I can but live
and die serving and honouring the
Lord Jesus, it will make no difference
to me whether I am eaten by Cannibals
or by worms ; and in the Great Day
my resurrection body will arise as fair
as yours in the likeness of our risen
Redeemer.”
The old gentleman, raising his hands
in a deprecating attitude, left the room
exclaiming, “ After that I have noth-
ing more to say ! ”
My dear Green Street people grieved
excessively at the thought of my leav-
ing them, and daily pled with me to
remain. Indeed, the opposition was
so strong from nearly all, and many of
them warm Christian friends, that I
was sorely tempted to question whether
1 was carrying out the Divine will, or
Dnly some headstrong wish of my own.
This also caused me much anxiety,
and drove me close to God in prayer.
But again every doubt would vanish,
when I clearly saw that all at home had
free access to the Bible and the means
of grace, with Gospel light shining all
around them, while the poor Heathen
were perishing, without even the
chance of knowing all God’s love and
mercy to men. Conscience said louder
and clearer every day, “ Leave all
these results with Jesus your Lord,
who said, ‘ Go ye into all the world,
preach the Gospel to every creature,
and lo ! I am with you alway.’ ”
These words kept ringing in my ears ;
these were our marching orders.
Some retorted upon me, “ There
are Heathen at home ; let us seek and
save, first of all, the lost ones perishing
at our doors.” This I felt to be most
true, and an appalling fact ; but I un-
failingly observed that those who made
this retort neglected these Home
Heathen themselves ; and so the
objection, as from them, lost all its
power. They would ungrudgingly
spend more on a fashionable party at
dinner or tea, on concert or ball or
theatre, or on some ostentatious dis-
play, or worldly and selfish indulgence,
ten times more, perhaps in a single
day, than they would give in a year,
or in half a lifetime, for the conversion
of the whole Heathen World, either
at home or abroad. Objections from
all such people must, of course, always
count for nothing among men to whom
spiritual things are realities. For
these people themselves—l do, and
always did, only pity them, as God’s
stewards, making such a miserable
use of time and money entrusted to
their care.
On meeting with so many obstruct-
ing influences, I again laid the whole
matter before my dear parents, and
their reply was to this effect: —“ Here-
tofore we feared to bias you, but now
we must tell you why we praise God
for the decision to which you have been
led. Your father’s heart was set upon
being a Minister, but other claims
forced him to give it up. When you
were given to them, your father and
mother laid you upon the altar, their
21
Foreign Mission Claims


first-born, to be consecrated, if God
saw fit, as a Missionary of the Cross ;
and it has been their constant prayer
that you might be prepared, qualified,
and led to this very decision ; and we
pray with all our heart that the Lord
may accept your offering, long spare
you, and give you many souls from the
Heathen World for your hire.” From
that moment, every doubt as to my
path of duty for ever vanished. I saw
the hand of God very visibly, not only
preparing me for, but now leading me
to, the Foreign Mission field.
When I left Glasgow, many of the
young men and women of my Classes
would, if it had been possible, have
gone with me, to live and die among
the Heathen. Though chiefly work-
ing girls and lads in trades and mills,
their deep interest led them to unite
their pennies and sixpences, and to
buy web after web of calico, print, and
woollen stuffs, which they themselves
shaped and sewed into dresses for the
women, and kilts and pants for men,
on the New Hebrides. This continued
to be repeated year after year, long
after I had left them ; and to this day
no box from Glasgow goes to the New
Hebrides Mission which does not con-
tain article after article from one or
other of the old Green Street hands.
I do certainly anticipate that, when
they and I meet in Glory, those days
in which we learned the joy of Christian
service in the Green Street Mission
Halls will form no unwelcome theme
of holy and happy converse !
CHAPTER V
THE NEW HEBRIDES
a.d. 1857-1858. mt. 33-34.
On the first of December, 1857, the
other Missionary-designate and I were
“ licensed ” as preachers of the Gospel.
Thereafter we spent four months in
visiting and addressing nearly every
Congregation and Sabbath School in
the Reformed Presbyterian Church of
Scotland, that the people might see
us and know us, and thereby take a
personal interest in our work. That
idea was certainly excellent, and might
well be adapted to the larger Churches,
by allocating one Missionary to each
Province or to so many Presbyteries,
sending him to address these, and train-
ing them to regard him as their Mis-
sionary and his work as theirs. On
the 23rd March, 1858, in Dr. Syming-
ton’s church, Glasgow, in presence of
a mighty crowd, and after a magnifi-
cent sermon on “ Come over and help
us,” we were solemnly ordained as
Ministers of the Gospel, and set apart
as Missionaries to the New Hebrides.
On the 16th April, 1858, we left the
Tail of the Bank at Greenock, and set
sail in the Clutha for the Foreign Mission
field.
Our voyage to Melbourne was rather
tedious, but ended prosperously, under
Captain Broadfoot, a kindly, brave-
hearted Scot, who did everything that
was possible for our comfort. He
himself led the singing on board at
Worship, which was always charming
to me, and was always regularly con-
ducted —on deck when the weather
was fair, below when it was rough.
I was also permitted to conduct Bible
Classes amongst both the crew and the
passengers, at times and places ap-
proved of by the Captain—-in which
there was great joy. Nearly thirty
years after, when I returned the second
time to Scotland, a gentleman of good
position, and the father of a large
family in the West, saluted me warmly
at the close of one of my meetings,
and reminded me that he was my pre-
centor in the Bible Class on board the
Clutha! It was gratifying to hear
him say that he had never forgotten
the scene and the lessons there.
Arriving at Melbourne, we were
welcomed by Rev. Mr. Moor, Mr. and
Mrs. Samuel Wilson, and Mr. Wright,
all Reformed Presbyterians from Gee-
long. Mr. Wilson’s two children, Jessie
and Donald, had been under our
care during the voyage ; and my
young wife and I went with them for
a few days on a visit to Geelong, while
Mr. Copeland remained on board the
Clutha to look after our boxes and to
watch for any opportunity of reaching
our destination on the Islands. He
22
John G. Paton, D.D.


heard that an American ship, the
Francis P. Sage, was sailing from
Melbourne to Penang ; and the Cap-
tain agreed to land us on Aneityum,
New Hebrides, with our two boats and
fifty boxes, for We got on
board on the 12th August, but such
a gale blew that we did not sail till the
17th. On the Clutha all was quiet,
and good order prevailed ; in the
F. P. Sage all was noise and profanity.
The Captain said he kept his second
mate for the purpose of swearing at
the men and knocking them about.
Fhe voyage was most disagreeable to
ill of us, but fortunately it lasted only
twelve days. On the 29th we were
dose up to Aneityum ; but the Captain
•efused to land us, even in his boats ;
some of us suspecting that his men were
>0 badly used, that had they got on
ihore they would never have returned
;o him ! In any case he had before-
land secured his
He lay off the island till a trader’s
Doat pulled across to see what we wan-
;ed, and by it we sent a note to Dr.
Teddie, one of the Missionaries there.
2arly next morning, Monday, he ar-
ived in his boat, accompanied by Mr.
dathieson, a newly arrived Missionary
from Nova Scotia ; bringing also Cap-
;ain Anderson in the small Mission
ichooner, the John Knox, and a large
vlission boat called the Columbia, well
nanned with crews of able and willing
Natives. Our fifty boxes were soon on
joard the John Knox, the Columbia,
ind our own boats—all being heavily
oaded and built up, except those that
lad to be used in pulling the others
ishore. Dr. Geddie, Mr. Mathieson,
drs. Paton, and I were perched among
he boxes on the John Knox, and had to
told on as best we could. On sheering
»ff from the F. P. Sage, one of her
lavits caught and broke the mainmast
if the little John Knox by the deck ;
,nd I saved my wife from being
rushed to death by its fall, through
nanaging to swing her instantaneously
.side in an apparently impossible man-
ler. It did graze Mr. Mathieson, but
ie was not hurt. The John Knox, al-
eady overloaded, was thus quite dis-
bled ; we were about ten miles at sea,
and in imminent danger; but the
Captain of the F. P. Sage heartlessly
sailed away, and left us to struggle
with our fate.
We drifted steadily in the direction
of Tanna, an island of Cannibals, where
our goods would have been plundered
and all of us cooked and eaten. Dr.
Geddie’s boat and mine had the John
Knox in tow ; and Mr. Copeland, with
a crew of Natives, was struggling hard
with his boat to pull the Columbia and
her load towards Aneityum. As God
mercifully ordered it, though we had a
stiff trade wind to pull against, we had
a comparatively calm sea ; yet we
drifted still to leeward, till Dr. Inglis,
going round to the harbour in his boat,
as he had heard of our arrival, saw us
far at sea, and hastened to our rescue.
All the boats now, with their willing
Native crews, got fastened to our
schooner, and to our great joy she be-
gan to move ahead. After pulling for
hours and hours, under the scorching
rays of a tropical sun, we were all safely
landed on shore at Aneityum, about
six o’clock in the evening of August
30th, just four months and fourteen
days since we sailed from Greenock.
We got a hearty welcome from the
Missionaries’ wives, Mrs. Geddie, Mrs.
Inglis, and Mrs. Mathieson, and from
all our new friends, the Christian Na-
tives of Aneityum ; and the great
danger in which both life and property
had been placed at the close of our voy-
age made us praise God all the more
that He had brought us to this quiet
resting-place, around which lay the
Islands of the New Hebrides, to which
our eager hearts had looked forward,
and into which we entered now in the
name of the Lord.
Mr. Copeland, Mrs. Paton, and I
went round the island to Dr. Inglis’s
Station, where we were most cordially
received and entertained by his dear
lady and by the Christian Natives
there. As he was making several addi-
tions to his house at that time, we re-
ceived for the next few weeks our first
practical and valuable training in
Mission house-building, as well as in
higher matters. Soon after, a meeting
was called to consult about our settle-
23
The New Hebrides


■ment, and, by the advice and with the
concurrence of all, Mr. and Mrs. Ma-
thieson from Nova Scotia were located
on the south side of Tanna, at Umai-
rarekar, now Kwamera, and Mrs.
Paton and I at Port Resolution, on the
same island. At first it was agreed
that Mr. Copeland should be placed
along with us ; but owing to the weakly
state of Mrs. Mathieson’s health, it was
afterwards resolved that, for a time at
least, Mr. Copeland should live at either
Station, as might seem most suitable
■or most requisite. Till the close of the
sailing season, his time was spent
chiefly in the John Knox, helping Cap-
tain Anderson in loading and disloading
the wood and house-building materials
betwixt Aneityura and Tanna ; while I
was occupied chiefly with the house-
building and preparatory arrange-
ments.
Dr. Inglis and a number of his most
■energetic Natives accompanied us to
Kwamera, Tanna. There we pur-
chased a site for Mission House and
Church, and laid a stone foundation,
and advanced as far as practicable the
erection of a dwelling for Mr. and Mrs.
Mathieson. Thence we proceeded to
Port Resolution, Tanna, and similarly
purchased a site, and advanced, to a
forward stage, the house which Mrs.
Paton and I were to occupy on our
settlement there. Lime for plastering
had to be burned in kilns from the
coral rocks ; and thatch, for roofing
with sugar-cane leaf, had to be pre-
pared by the Natives at both Stations
before our return ; for which, as for all
else, a price was duly agreed upon,
and was scrupulously paid. Unfortu-
nately we learned, when too late, that
both houses were too near the shore,
exposed to unwholesome miasma, and
productive of the dreaded fever and
ague,—the most virulent and insidious
enemy to all Europeans in those
Southern Seas.
At both Stations, but especially at
Port Resolution, we found the Natives
in a very excited and unsettled state.
Threatened w'ars kept them in constant
terror —war betwixt distant tribes, or
adjoining villages, or nearest neigh-
bours. The Chiefs, at both Stations,
willingly sold sites for houses, and ap-
peared to desire Missionaries to live
amongst them ; but perhaps it was
with an eye to the axes, knives, fish-
hooks, blankets, and clothing, which
they got in payment, or hoped for in
plunder, rather than from any thirst
for the Gospel, as they were all Savages
and Cannibals. They warily declined
to promise protection to the Mission
families and the Teachers ; but they
said they would not themselves do
them any harm, though they could not
say what the Inland people might do ;
—not a bad specimen of diplomacy,
leaving an poen door for any future
emergency, and neither better nor
worse than the methods by which the
civilized European nations make and
break their treaties in peace and in
war ! Such promises meant, and were
intended to mean, nothing. The Na-
tives, both on Tanna, and on my second
home at Aniwa, believed that they had
kept their promise, if they inflicted no
injury with their own hands, even
though they had hired others to do so.
No Heathen there could be trusted one
step beyond what appeared to be his
own self-interest for the nonce ; and
nothing conceivable was too base or
cruel to be done, if only it served his
turn. The “ depths of Satan," out-
lined in the first chapter of the Romans,
were uncovered there before oufi eyes
in the daily life of the people, without
veil and without excuse.
My first impressions drove me, 1
must confess, to the verge of utter dis-
may. On beholding these Natives in
tjieir paint and nakedness and misery
my heart was as full of horror as oi
pity. Had I given up my much-
beloved work and my dear people in
Glasgow, with so many delightful asso-
ciations, to consecrate my life to these
degraded creatures ? Was it possible
to teach them right and wrong, tc
Christianize, or even to civilize them :
But that was only a passing feeling
I soon got as deeply interested in them
and in all that tended to advance them
and to lead them to the knowledge and
love of Jesus, as ever I had been in m>
work at Glasgow. We were surprised
and delighted at the remarkable change


reduced on the Natives of Aneityum
irough the instrumentality of Drs.
reddie and Inglis in so short a time ;
nd we hoped, by prayerful persever-
nce in the use of similar means, to see
re same work of God repeated on
anna. Besides, the wonderful and
lessed work done by Mrs. Inglis and
[rs. Geddie, at their Stations, filled our
ives with the buoyant hope of being
istruments in the hand of God to pro-
uce an equally beneficent change
nongst the savage women of Tanna.
rs. Baton had been left with Mrs.
iglis to learn all she could from her of
ission Work on the Islands, till I re-
irned with Dr. Inglis from the house-
hiding operations on Tanna ; during
hich period Mr. and Mrs. Mathieson
ere also being instructed by Dr. and
rs. Geddie.
To the Tannese, Dr. Inglis and I were
)jects of curiosity and fear ; they
.me crowding to gaze on our wooden
id lime-plastered house ; they chat-
red incessantly with each other, and
ft the scene day after day with un-
sguised and increasing wonderment,
issibly they thought us rather mad
an wise !
Party after party of armed men
ing and coming in a state of great
citement, we were informed that
ir was on foot; but our Aneityumese
sachers were told to assure us that the
arbour people would only act on the
fensive, and that no one would
alest us at our work. One day two
stile tribes met near our Station ;
511 words arose, and old feuds were
hved. The Inland people with-
ew ; but the Harbour people, false
their promises, flew to arms and
shed past us in pursuit of their ene-
es. The discharge of muskets in the
joining bush, and the horrid yells of
3 Savages, soon informed us that
3y were engaged in deadly fights,
icitement and terror were on every
untenance ; armed men rushed about
every direction, with feathers in
sir twisted hair, —with faces painted
i, black, and white, and some, one
3ek black, the other red ; others, the
aw white, the chin blue—in fact, any
our and on any part, —the more
grotesque and savage-looking, the
higher the art ! Some of the women
ran with their children to places of
safety ; but even then we saw other
girls and women, on the shore close by,
chewing sugar-cane and chaffering and
laughing, as if their fathers and bro-
thers had been engaged in a country
dance, instead of a bloody conflict.
In the afternoon, as the sounds of
the muskets and the yelling of the
warriors came unpleasantly near to us,
Dr. Inglis, leaning against a post for a
little while in silent prayer, looked on
us and said, “ The walls of Jerusalem
were built in troublous times, and why
not the Mission House on Tanna ? But
let us rest for this day, and pray for
these poor Heathen.”
We retired to a Native house, that
had been temporarily granted to us for
rest, and there pled before God for
them all. The noise and the discharge
of muskets gradually receded, as if the
Inland people were retiring ; and to-
wards evening the people around us
returned to their villages. We were
afterwards informed that five or six
men had been shot dead ; that their
bodies had been carried by the con-
querors from the field of battle, and
cooked and eaten that very night at a
boiling spring near the head of the bay,
less than a mile from the spot where my
house was being built. We had also a
more graphic illustration of the sur-
roundings into which we had come,
through Dr. Inglis’s Aneityum boy,
who accompanied us as cook. When
our tea was wanted next morning, the
boy could not be found. After a while
of great anxiety on our part, he re-
turned, saying, “ Missi, this is a dark
land. The people of this land do dark
works. At the boiling spring they
have cooked and feasted upon the
slain. They have washed the blood
into the water ; they have bathed
there, polluting everything. I cannot
get pure water to make your tea. What
shall I do ? ”
Dr. Inglis told him that he must try
for water elsewhere, till the rains came
and cleansed away the pollution ; and
that, meanwhile, instead of tea, we
would drink from the cocoa-nut, as
25
The New Hebrides


they had often done before. The lad
was quite relieved. It not a little as-
tonished us, however, to see that his
mind regarded their killing and eating
each other as a thing scarcely to be
noticed, but that it was horrible that
they should spoil the water ! How
much are even our deepest instincts
the creatures of mere circumstances !
I, if trained like him, would probably
have felt like him.
Next evening, as we sat talking
about the people and the dark scenes
around us, the quiet of the night was
broken by a wild wailing cry from the
villages around, long-continued and
unearthly. We were informed that
one of the wounded men, carried home
from the battle, had just died ; and
that they had strangled his widow to
death, that her spirit might accompany
him to the other world, and be his ser-
vant there, as she had been here. Now
their dead bodies were laid side by side,
ready to be buried in the sea. Our
hearts sank to think of all this happen-
ing within earshot, and that we knew
it not ! Every new scene, every fresh
incident, set more clearly before us
the benighted condition and shocking
cruelties of these Heathen people, and
we longed to be able to speak to them
of Jesus and the love of God. We
eagerly tried to pick up every word of
their language, that we might, in their
own tongue, unfold to them the know-
ledge of the true God and of salvation
from all these sins through Jesus
Christ.
Dr. Inglis and I, with the help of the
Natives from Aneityum, having accom-
plished a' that could be done for lack
of lime and sawn wood to finish the
new Mission House on Tanna, made an
agreement with the Natives for knives,
calico, and axes, to burn lime and pre-
pare other things for our return. We
then hastened back to Aneityum, that
we might, if possible, get ready for set-
tling on Tanna before the Rainy Season
set in. That was rapidly approaching,
and it brings with it discomfort and
unhealth to Europeans throughout all
these Pacific Isles.
CHAPTER VI
LIFE AND DEATH ON TANNA
A.D. 1858-1859. JET. 34-35.
Our small Missionary schooner, the
John Knox, having no accommodation
for lady passengers, and little for any-
body else except the discomfort oi
lying on deck, we took advantage oJ
a trader to convey us from Aneityum
to Tanna. The Captain kindly offered
to take us and about thirty casks and
boxes to Port Resolution for £s, which
we gladly accepted. After a few
hours’ sailing, we were all safely landed
on Tanna on the sth November, 1858.
Dr. Geddie went for a fortnight tc
Umairarekar, now known as Kwamera
on the south side of Tanna, to assist ir
the settlement of Mr. and Mrs. Mathie-
son, and to help in making their house
habitable and comfortable. Mr. Cope-
land, Mrs. Pa ton, and I were left a 1
Port Resolution to finish the building
of our house there, and work our wa>
into the goodwill of the Natives as besl
we could. On landing, we found the
people to be literally naked and painted
Savages ; they were at least as desti-
tute of clothing as Adam and Eve aftei
the fall, when they sewed fig-leaves
for a girdle ; and even more so, foi
the women wore only a tiny apron o:
grass, in some cases shaped like a skirl
or girdle, the men an indescribable
affair like a pouch or bag, and the
children absolutely nothing whatever
At first they came in crowds to looi
at us, and at everything we did or had
We knew nothing of their language
we could not speak a single word tc
them, nor they to us. We looked ai
them, they at us; we smiled, anc
nodded, and made signs to each other
this was our first meeting and parting
One day I observed two men, the one
lifting up one of our articles to the
other, and saying, “ Nungsi nar
enu ? ”
I concluded that he was asking.
“ What is this ? ” Instantly, lifting
a piece of wood, I said, “ Nungsi nari
enu ? ”
They smiled and spoke to each other.
I understood them to be saying, “ He
has got hold of our language now.’-
26
John G. Paton, d.d.


hen they told me thek name for the
ting which I had pointed to. I found
lat they understood my question,
Tiat is this ? or, What is that ? and
iat I could now get from them the
ime of every visible or tangible thing
ound us ! We carefully noted down
r ery name they gave us, spelling all
lonetically, and also every strange
und we heard from them ; there-
ter, by painstaking comparison of
fferent circumstances, we tried to
certain their meanings, testing our
m guess by again cross-questioning
e Natives, One day I saw two
ales approaching, when one, who
is a stranger, pointed to me with his
iger, and said, “ Se nangin ? ”
Concluding that he was asking my
me, I pointed to one of them with
y finger, and looking at the other,
“ Se nangin ? ”
They smiled, and gave me their
mes. We were now able to get the
mes of persons and things, and so
r ears got familiarized with the dis-
ictive sounds of their language ; and
ing always keenly on the alert, we
ide extraordinary progress in at-
npting bits of conversation and in
iucing their speech for the first time
a written form—for the New Hebri-
ans had no literature, and not even
3 rudiments of an alphabet. I used
hire some of the more intelligent
is and men to sit and talk with us,
d answer our questions about names
d sounds ; but they so often de-
ved us, and we, doubtless, misunder-
>od them so often, that this course
s not satisfactory, till after we had
ned some knowledge of their lan-
age and its construction, and they
;mselves had become interested in
ping us. Amongst our most inter-
ed helpers, and most trustworthy,
re two aged chiefs—Nowar and
uka —in many respects two of
ture’s noblest gentlemen, kind at
irt to all, and distinguished by a
tain native dignity of bearing,
t they were both under the leader-
p of the war-chief Miaki, a kind of
dl-king over many villages and
3es. He and his brother were the
ognized leaders in all deeds of dark-
ness : they gloried in bloodshedding,
and in war, and in cannibalism ; and
they could always command a follow-
ing of desperate men, who lived in or
about their own village, and who were
prepared to go anywhere and do any-
thing at Miaki’s will.
My first house on Tanna was on the
old site occupied by Turner and Nisbet,
near the shore for obvious reasons,
and only a few feet above tide-mark.
So was that of Mr. Mathieson, handy
for materials and goods being landed,
and, as we imagined, close to the
healthy breezes of the sea. Alas !we
had to learn by sad experience, like our
brethren in all untried Mission fields.
The sites proved to be hot-beds for
Fever and Ague, mine especially ; and
much of this might have been escaped
by building on the higher ground, and
in the sweep of the refreshing trade-
winds. For all this, however, no one
was to blame ; everything was done
for the best, according to the know-
ledge then possessed. Our house was
sheltered behind by an abrupt hill
about two hundred feet high, which
gave the site a feeling of cosiness. It
was surrounded, and much shaded, by
beautiful bread-fruit trees, and very
large cocoa-nut trees ; too largely
beautiful, indeed, for they shut out
many a healthy breeze that we sorely
needed ! There was a long swamp
at the head of the bay, and, the ground
at the other end on which our house
stood being scarcely raised perceptibly
higher, the malaria almost constantly
enveloped us. Once, after a smart
attack of the fever, an intelligent Chief
said to me, “ Missi, if you stay here,
you will soon die ! No Tanna-man
sleeps so low down as you do, in this
damp weather, or he too would die.
We sleep on the high ground, and the
trade-wind keeps us well. You must
go and sleep on the hill, and then you
will have better health.”
I at once resolved to remove my
house to higher ground, at the earliest
practicable moment; heavy though
the undertaking would necessarily be,
it seemed my only hope of being able
to live on the island.
My dear young wife, Mary Ann
27
Life and Death on Tanna


Robson, —daughter of Peter Robson,
Esquire, a well-known and highly-
esteemed gentleman, at Coldstream on
the Borders, —and I were landed on
Tanna on the sth November, 1858, in
excellent health and full of all tender
and holy hopes. On the 12th Feb-
ruary, 1859, she was confined of a son ;
for two days or so both mother and
child seemed to prosper, and our island-
exile thrilled with joy ! But the great-
est of sorrows was treading hard upon
the heels of that joy. My darling’s
strength showed no signs of rallying.
She had an attack of ague and fever,
a few days before her confinement ; on
the third day or so thereafter it re-
turned, and attacked her every second
day with increasing severity for a fort-
night. Diarrhoea ensued, and symp-
toms of pneumonia, with slight de-
lirium at intervals; and then in a
moment, altogether unexpectedly, she
died on the 3rd March. To crown my
sorrows, and complete my loneliness,
the dear baby-boy, whom we had named
after her father, Peter Robert Robson,
was taken from me after one week’s
sickness, on the 20th March. Let
those who have ever passed through
any similar darkness as of midnight
feel for me ; as for all others, it would
be more than vain to try to paint my
sorrows !
I knew then, when too late, that our
work had been entered on too near the
beginning of the Rainy Season. We
were both, however, healthy and
hearty ; and I daily pushed on with
the house, making things hourly more
comfortable, in the hope that long lives
were before us both, to be spent for
Jesus in seeking the salvation of the
perishing Heathen. Oh, the vain yet
bitter regrets, that my dear wife had
not been left on Aneityum till after the
unhealthy Rainy Season ! But no one
advised this course ; and she, high-
spirited, full of buoyant hope, and
afraid of being left behind me, or of
me being left without her on Tanna,
refused to allow the thing to be sug-
gested. In our mutual inexperience,
and with our hearts aglow for the work
of our lives, we incurred this risk which
should never have been incurred ; and
I only refer to the matter thus, in th
hope that others may take warning.
Stunned by that dreadful loss, i
entering upon this field of labour t
which the Lord had Himself so evi
dently led me, my reason seemed fo
a time almost to give way. Ague ani
fever, too, laid a depressing an>
weakening hand upon me, continuous!
recurring, and reaching oftentimes th
very height of its worst burning stages
But I was never altogether forsaker
The ever-merciful Lord sustained me
to lay the precious dust of my belove
Ones in the same quiet grave, dug fo
them close by at the end of the house
in all of which last offices my ow:
hands, despite breaking heart, had t
take the principal share ! I built th
grave round and round with core
blocks, and covered the top wit
beautiful white coral, broken small a
gravel ; and that spot became m
sacred and much-frequented shrim
during all the following months an
years when I laboured on for the salva
tion of these savage Islanders amids
difficulties, dangers, and deaths. W T her
soever Tanna turns to the Lord, an
is won for Christ, men in after-day
will find the memory of that spot sti
green,—where with ceaseless prayei
and tears I claimed that land for Go
in which I had “ buried my dead
with faith and hope. But for Jesus
and the fellowship He vouchsafed m
there, I must have gone mad and die
beside that lonely grave !
Soon after her death, the good Bisho
Selwyn called at Port Resolutioi
Tanna, in his Mission Ship. He cam
on shore to visit me, accompanied b
the Rev. J. C. Patteson. They ha
met Mrs. Paton on Aneityum in th
previous year soon after our arriva
and, as she was then the picture c
perfect health, they also felt her los
very keenly. Standing with me besid
the grave of mother and child, I weej
ing aloud on his one hand, and Patteso
—afterwards the Martyr Bishop c
Nakupu—sobbing silently on the othe:
the godly Bishop Selwyn poured or
his heart to God amidst sobs and tear;
during which he laid his hands on m
head, and invoked Heaven’s riches
28
John G. Paton, d.d.


consolations and blessings on me and
my trying labours. The virtue of
that kind of Episcopal consecration
[ did and do most warmly appreciate !
They urged me by many appeals to
take a trip with them round the Islands,
is my life was daily in great danger
from the Savages ; they generously
offered to convey me direct to Aneit-
yum, or wherever I wished to go, as I
greatly needed rest and change. But,
with a heart full of gratitude to them,
[ yet resolved to remain, feeling that
1 was at the post of duty where God
lad placed me ; and besides, fearing
:hat if I left once the Natives would
lot let me land again on returning to
;heir island, I determined to hold on
is long as possible, though feeling very
veak and suffering badly from ague.
Ever since the day of our happy
narriage, a strange presentiment pos-
sessed my heart that I should lose her
;oon and suddenly. Perhaps I am
lot the first who has wrestled through
■uch unworthy forebodings—that that
which was so precious and blessed was
ibout to be withdrawn ! Our short
mited life had been cloudless and
)appy ; I felt her loss beyond all con-
;eption or description, in that dark
and. It was very difficult to be re-
igned, left alone, and in sorrowful
ircumstances ; but feeling immovably
.ssured that my God and Father was
00 wise and loving to err in anything
hat He does or permits, I looked up
0 the Lord for help, and struggled on
1 His work. Ido not pretend to see
hrough the mystery of such visitations
—wherein God calls away the young,
he promising, and those sorely needed
3r His service here ; but this I do
now and feel, that, in the light of
ach dispensations, it becomes us all
a love and serve our blessed Lord
is, so that we may be ready at His
for death and Eternity ! *
CHAPTER VII
MISSION LEAVES FROM TANNA
A.D. 1859-1860. JET. 35-36.
< the first letter, sent jointly by Mr.
opeland and myself from Tanna to
* v. Appendix A.
the Church at home, the following
statements occur :
“ We found the Tanneseto be painted
Savages, enveloped in all the super-
stition and wickedness of Heathen-
ism. All the men and children go in
a state of nudity. The older women
wear grass skirts, and the young women
and girls, grass or leaf aprons like Eve
in Eden. They are exceedingly ignor-
ant, vicious, and bigoted, and almost
void of natural affection. Instead of
the inhabitants of Port Resolution
being improved by coming in contact
with white men, they are rendered
much worse ; for they have learned
all their vices, but none of their virtues,
—if such are possessed by the pioneer
traders among such races ! The San-
dalwood Traders are as a class the most
godless of men, whose cruelty and
wickedness make us ashamed to own
them as our countrymen. By them
the poor, defenceless Natives are
oppressed and robbed on every hand ;
and if they offer the slightest resistance
they are ruthlessly silenced by the
musket or revolver. Few months here
pass without some of them being so
shot, and, instead of their murderers
feeling ashamed, they boast of how
they despatch them. Such treatment
keeps the Natives always burning
under a desire for revenge, so that it
is a wonder any white man is allowed
to come among them. Indeed, all
Traders here are able to maintain their
position only by revolvers and rifles ;
but we hope a better state of affairs
is at hand for Tanna.”
The novelty of our being among
them soon passed away, and they began
to show their avarice and deceitful-
ness in every possible way. The Chiefs
united and refused to give us the half
of the small piece of land which had
been purchased, on which to build our
Mission House, and when we attempted
to fence in the part they had left to us,
they “ tabooed ” it, i.e., threatened
our Teachers and us with death if we
proceeded further with the work.
This they did by placing certain reeds
stuck into the ground here and there
around our house, which our Aneityum-
ese servants at once knew the mean-
29
Mission Leaves from Tanna


ing of, and warned us of our danger ;
so we left off making the fence, that
we might if possible evade all offence.
They then divided the few bread-fruit
and cocoa-nut trees on the ground
amongst themselves, or demanded such
payment for these trees as we did not
possess, and threatened revenge on us
if the trees were injured by any person.
They now became so unreasonable and
■offensive, and our dangers so increased,
as to make our residence amongst them
extremely trying. At this time a
vessel called ; I bought from the
Captain the things for payment which
they demanded ; on receiving it, they
lifted the Taboo, and for a little season
appeared to be friendly again. This
was the third payment they had got
for that site, and to yield was teaching
them a cruel lesson ; all this we felt
and clearly saw, but they had by some
means to be conciliated, if possible,
and our lives had to be saved, if that
could be done without dishonour to
the Christian name.
After these events, a few weeks of
■dry weather began to tell against the
growth of their yams and bananas.
The drought was instantly ascribed to
us and our God. The Natives far
and near were summoned to consider
the matter in public assembly. Next
day, Nouka, the high chief, and Miaki,
the war-chief his nephew, came to
inform us, that two powerful Chiefs
had openly declared in that assembly
that if the Harbour people did not at
once kill us or compel us to leave the
island, they would, unless the rain
came plentifully in the meantime,
summon all the Inland people and
murder both our Chiefs and us. The
friendly Chiefs said, “ Pray to your
Jehovah God for rain, and do not go
far beyond your door for a time ; we
are all in greatest danger, and if war
breaks out, we fear we cannot protect
you.”
But this friendliness was all pre-
tence ; they themselves, being Sacred
Men, professed to have the power of
sending or withholding rain, and tried
to fix the blame of their discomfiture
on us. The rage of the poor ignorant
Heathen was thereby fed against us.
The Ever-Merciful, however, agair
interposed on our behalf. On the
following Sabbath, just when we wen
assembling for worship, rain began t(
fall, and in great abundance. Tin
whole inhabitants believed, appar
ently, that it was sent to save us ir
answer to our prayers ; so they mei
again, and resolved to allow us te
remain on Tanna. Alas ! on the othei
hand, the continuous and heavy rains
brought much sickness and fever ii
their train, and again their Sacrec
Men pointed to us as the cause. Hurri
cane winds also blew and injured theii
fruits and fruit-trees, —another oppor
tunity for our enemies to lay the blame
of everything upon the Missionaries
and their Jehovah God ! The tria
and the danger daily grew of living
among a people so dreadfully benightec
by superstition, and so easily swayee
by prejudice and passion.
On Sabbath afternoon, the 6th o
January, iB6O, in a severe gale, w<
were surprised to see a large Sydnej
vessel come to anchor in the Harboui
at Port Resolution, right opposite oui
house. Though wind and sea wen
both dangerously high, the Captair
and all hands, as we were afterwards
informed, coolly went to sleep. Gradu
ally, but quite perceptibly, the vesse
was allowed to drift as if by deliberate
intention, till she struck on the bead
at the head of the Bay, and there was
soon broken up and became a tota
wreck. For this also the ignoranl
Natives gave us credit, as for every'
thing uncommon or disagreeable or
Tanna ; .but we were ever conscious
that our Lord Jesus was near us, anc
all trials that lead us to cling closei
in fellowship with our Saviour are
really blessings in disguise. The Cap-
tain of that vessel, known to us as
“ Big Hays,” and his wife, said to be
the wife of a man in Sydney, who hac
run away with him, and his like-minded
crew became by their shocking condud
a horrible curse to our poor Islanders
and greatly embittered the feeling
against us. They were armed with
deadly weapons, and did their wicked
will amougst our Natives, who dursl
not attack so large a party of desperate
30
John G. Paton, d.d.


md well-armed men. But they were
vhite people, and so were the Mission-
iries ; to the savage mind that was
mough, and revenge would be taken
ipon the first white faces, however
nnocent, who came within their power.
The Natives of Tanna were well-nigh
onstantly at war amongst themselves,
very man doing that which was right
n his own eyes, and almost every
[uarrel ending in an appeal to arms,
besides many battles far inland, one
/as fought beside our house, and several
round the Harbour. In these con-
icts, many men were bruised with
lubs and wounded with arrows, but
;w lives were lost, considering the
avage uproar and frenzy of the scene,
n one case, of which we obtained
nrtain information, seven men were
died in an engagement; and accord-
ig to Tannese custom, the warriors
id their friends feasted on them at
ie close of the fray, the widows of
ie slain being also strangled to death,
id similarly disposed of. Besides
Lose who fell in war, the Natives
dng in our quarter had killed and
asted on eight persons, usually in
crificial rites.
It is said, that the habitual Canni-
d’s desire for human flesh becomes so
irrible that he has been known to
sinter and feast upon those recently
iried. Two cases of this revolting
irbarism were reported as having
:curred amongst the villagers living
;ar us. On another occasion the
eat chief Nouka took seriously un-
sll, and his people sacrificed three
imen for his recovery ! All such
uel and horrifying practices, how-
■er, they tried to conceal from us ;
id many must have perished in this
ly of whom we, though living at
eir doors, were never permitted to
Amongst the Heathen, in the New
ebrides, and especially on Tanna,
)man is the down-trodden slave of
in. She is kept working hard, and
ars all the heavier burdens, while he
dks by her side with musket, club,
spear. If she offends him, he beats
abuses her at pleasure. A Savage gave
> poor wife a severe beating in front
of our house and just before our eyes,
while in vain we strove to prevent it.
Such scenes were so common, that no-
one thought of interfering. Even if
the woman died in his hands, or im-
mediately thereafter, neighbours took
little notice, if any at all. And their
children were so little cared for, that
my constant wonder was how any of
them surviv ed at all ! As soon as they
are able to knock about, they are left
practically to care for themselves ;
hence the very small affection they
show towards their parents, which
results in the aged who are unable to
work being neglected, starved to death,
and sometimes even more directly and
violently destroyed.
A Heathen boy’s education consists
in being taught to aim skilfully with
the bow, to throw the spear fault-
lessly at a mark, to wield powerfully
the club and tomahawk, and to shoot
well with musket and revolver when
these can be obtained. He accom-
panies his father and brothers in all
the wars and preparations for war, and
is diligently initiated into all their cruel-
ties and lusts, as the very prerequisite
of his being regarded and acknow-
ledged to be a man and a warrior,.
The girls have, with their mother and
sisters, to toil and slave in the village
plantations, to prepare all the mate-
rials for fencing these around, to bear
every burden, and to be knocked about
at will by the men and boys.
Oh, how sad and degraded is the
position of Woman where the teaching
of Christ is unknown, or disregarded
though known ! It is the Christ of
the Bible, it is His Spirit entering into-
Humanity, that has lifted Woman, and
made her the helpmate and the friend
of Man, not his toy or his slave.
To the best of our observation, the
Heathen, though vaguely following
some division of the week into seven
days, spent the Sabbath on Tanna
much the same as their other days,
were spent. Even when some were
led to give up manual labours on that
day, they spent it, like too many
Christians elsewhere, in visiting friends-
and in selfish pleasures, on feasting
and drinking. After we had been
31
Mission Leaves from Tanna


about one year on the island, we had
a morning Church Service, attended
by about ten Chiefs and as many
women and children belonging to them;
though, once the Service was over,
they paid no more attention to the
Lord’s Day. On some of the more
Northern Islands of the group, the
Heathen had a sacred day. Twice,
sailing with the Dayspring , we cast
anchor at an Island, but could not see
a single Native till next day, when one
who could speak broken English in-
formed us that none of the people
had been seen moving about because
they were “ keeping their Sunday.”
A number of the Tannese spoke a little
English, but they were the worst and
most treacherous characters of all.
They had imbibed the profane Trader’s
language and his hatred of Mission-
aries and their work ; and these, added
to their own Heathen prejudices,
made them the most troublesome and
dangerous of men.
After the Sabbath Morning Service
we used to walk many miles, visiting
all the villages within reach, even
before we had got so much of their
language as to be able to speak freely
to the people. Sometimes we made a cir-
cuit amongst them, ten or twelve miles
away and as many back again. We
tried to talk a little to all who were
willing to listen ; and we conducted
the Worship of Jehovah, wherever we
could find two or three disposed to
gather together and to sit or kneel
beside us. It was to flesh and blood
weary work, and in many ways dis-
heartening—no responsive faces and
hearts there to cheer us on and lift
us up into fellowship with the Lord !
But it helped us to see the people, and
to get acquainted with the districts
around ; it also secured for us very
considerable audiences, except when
they were engaged in war.
Twelve Aneityumese Teachers were
at this time living on Tanna, but they
had no Schools, and no Books in Tan-
nese, for that language had never yet
been reduced to forms that could be
printed. The work of the Teachers,
besides telling to the people around
all that they could regarding Christ
and the Christian religion, found i'
highest value in presenting throug
their own spirit and character a nobk
type of life than any that Heathenisi
could show.
Word had reached Tanna, that, in
a quarrel with Sandal-wooders, the
Erromangans had murdered three
white men and a number of Natives in
their employment, in revenge for the
white men’s shamefully entreating
and murdering the Erromangans. On
Tanna all such news were reported
and talked over, when the Chiefs and
their men of war met for the evening
repast —an event accompanied by the
excessive drinking of Kava, which first
produced intoxication, like whisky,
and then stupefaction, like a dose of
laudanum. Excited by the rumours
from Erromanga, they had drunk more
than usual, and lay about their Village
Drinking-Hall—a helpless host. Ene-
mies from an inland tribe stealthily
drew near, and discharged their muskets
amongst them in the dark, killing one
man ; and so, according to their
custom, war was known to be declared.
Early next morning, Miaki, the war-
chief, despatched his herald to sound
the Conch and summon the people to
battle. He made the Harbour and all
the country resound with it for six
miles around, and the savage hordes
gathered to the call. Putting our
trust in God, we quietly resolved to
attend as usual to our work and await
the result. Excitement and terror
drove the Natives hither and thither.
One man close to us being nearly
killed, his friends assembled in great
force, and with clubs and spears,
tomahawks and muskets, drove the
offending tribe more than a mile into
the bush. They, in turn, being rein-
forced, drove their enemies back again
to the beach. There, seated within
hearing distance, they carried on a
grand sort of barbarous-Homeric scold-
ing match, and exhausted their rage
in javelins of reproach. A great relief
seemed thereby to ensue, for the rival
Chiefs thereon approached our house
and entreated me to dress their wounds!
I did so, and appealed to them for
peace, and got their promise to let that
32
John G. Paton, d.d.


inflict come to an end. Alas for the
assing influence of such appeals,—
•r I learned shortly after this, on my
;turn from Aneityum, where I had
me for a fortnight to recruit from
xe effects of an almost three months’
mtinuance of recurring ague and
ver, that eight of the Harbour people
ad been murdered near our house at
ort Resolution. The natives got into
dreadfully unsettled state, each one
ondering in terror who would be the
sxt to fall.
The inhabitants for miles around
aited in seeking our destruction, but
od put it into even savage hearts
> save us. Old Nowar, the Chief
rider whom we lived, and the Chief
sxt under him, Arkurat, set them-
ilves to rescue us. Along with Manu-
ian and Sirawia they opposed every
lan in the public assembly for taking
ir lives. Some of their people also
imained friendly to us, and by the
sip of our Aneityumese Teachers,
arned us of danger and protected our
ves. Determined not to be baffled,
meeting of all our enemies on the
land was summoned, and it was
üblicly resolved that a band of men
2 selected and enjoined to kill the
hole of those friendly to the Mission,
.d Nowar among the rest, and not
ily to murder the Mission party,
ut also a Trader who had lately landed
) live there, that no one might be left
) give information to the white men
r bring punishment on the Islanders,
renzy of excitement prevailed, and
le blood-fiend seemed to override
ie whole assembly ; when, under an
npulse that surely came from the
ord of Pity, one great warrior Chief
ho had hitherto kept silent, rose,
vung aloft a mighty club, and smash-
ig it earthwards, cried aloud, “ The
tan that kills Missi must first kill me,
-the men that kill the Mission Teachers
Lust first kill me and my people,—
•r we shall stand by them and defend
lem till death.”
Instantaneously, another Chief thun-
sred in with the same declaration ;
ad the great assembly broke up in
ismay. All the more remarkable
as this deliverance, as these two
Chiefs lived nearly four miles inland,
and, as reputed disease-makers and
Sacred Men, were regarded as amongst
our bitterest enemies. It had hap-
pened that, a brother of the former
Chief having been wounded in battle,
I had dressed his wounds and he re-
covered, for which perhaps he now
favoured us. But Ido not put very
much value on that consideration ;
for too clearly did our dear Lord Jesus
interpose directly on our behalf that
day. I and my defenceless company
had spent it in anxious prayers and
tears ; and our hearts overflowed with
gratitude to the Saviour who rescued
us from the lions’ jaws.
The excitement did not at once sub-
side, men continuing to club and beat
the women for the smallest offence.
At every opportunity I denounced
their conduct and rebuked them
severely,—especially one wretch, who
beat his wife just in front of our house,
as well as one of the women who tried
to protect her. On the following day,
he returned with an armed band, and
threatened our lives ; but I stood up
in front of their weapons, and firmly
condemned their conduct, telling that
man particularly that his conduct was
bad and cowardly. At length his
wrath gave way ; he grounded his
club in a penitent mood, and pro-
mised to refrain from such evil ways.
Leaving all consequences to the
disposal of my Lord, I determined to
make an unflinching stand against
wife-beating and widow-strangling,feel-
ing confident that even their natural
conscience would be on my side. I
accordingly pled with all who were in
power to unite vand put down these
shocking and disgraceful customs.
At length, ten Chiefs entered into an
agreement not to allow any more
beating of wives or strangling of
widows, and to forbid all common
labour on the Lord’s Day ; but alas,
except for purposes of war or other
wickedness, the influence of the Chiefs
on Tanna was comparatively small.
One Chief boldly declared, “ If we did
not beat our women, they would never
work ; they would not fear and obey
us ; but when we have beaten, and
33
Mission Leaves from Tanna


killed, and feasted on two or three,
the rest are all very quiet and good for
a long time to come ! ”
Another war-burst, that caused
immense consternation, passed over
with only two or three deaths ; and
I succeeded in obtaining the consent
of twenty Chiefs to fight no more ex-
cept on the defensive, —a covenant to
which, for a considerable time, they
strictly adhered, in the midst of fierce
provocations. But to gain any such
end, the masses of the people must be
educated to the point of desiring it.
The few cannot, in such circumstances,
act up to it, without laying themselves
open to be down-trodden and swept
away by the Savages around.
About this time, several men, afraid
or ashamed by day, came to me regu-
larly by night for conversation and
instruction. Having seen the doors
of the Mission House made fast and the
window blinds so that they could not
be observed, they continued with me
for many hours, asking all strange
questions about the new Religion and
its laws. I remember one Chief par-
ticularly, who came often, saying to
me, “ I would be an Awfuaki (i.e., a
Christian) were it not that all the rest
would laugh at me ; that I could not
stand ! ”
“ Almost persuaded ” —before you
blame him, remember how many in
Christian lands and amid greater
privileges live and die without ever
passing beyond that stage.
Confessedly, however, it was uphill,
weary, and trying work. For one
thing, these Tannese were terribly dis-
honest ; and when there was any
special sickness, or excitement from
any cause, their bad feeling towards
the Worship was displayed by the more
insolent way in which they carried off
whatever they could seize. When I
opposed them, the club or tomahawk,
the musket or kawas {i.e., killing stone),
being instantly raised, intimated that
my life would be taken, if I resisted.
Their skill in stealing on the sly was
phenomenal ! If an article fell, or
was seen on the floor, a Tanna-man
would neatly cover it with his foot,
while looking you frankly in the face,
and, having fixed it by his toes or t
bending in his great toe like a than
to hold it, would walk off with i
assuming the most innocent look
the world. In this way, a knife, aps
of scissors, or any smaller artid
would at once disappear. Anoth
fellow would deftly stick somethii
out of sight amongst the whip-co:
plaits of his hair, another would co
ceal it underneath his naked an
while yet another would shamless
lift what he coveted and openly can
it away.
With most of them, however, th
shame was not in the theft, but i:
doing it so clumsily that they wer
discovered ! Once, after continuou
rain and a hot damp atmosphere
when the sun shone out I put my bed
clothes on a rope to dry. I stood a
hand watching, as also the wives c
two Teachers, for things were mysteri
ously disappearing almost under ou
very eyes. Suddenly, Miaki, who wit'
his war-companions had been watchin
us unobserved, came rushing to m
breathless and alone, crying, “ Miss:
come in, quick, quick ! I want to te'
you something and to get your advice!
He ran into my house, and I fol
lowed ; but before he had got into hi
story, we heard the two women cryin
out, “ Missi, Missi, come quick ! Miaki’
men are stealing your sheets and blan
kets ! ”
I ran at once, but all were gone inf
the bush, and with them my slice
and blankets. Miaki for a momer
looked abashed, as I charged him wit
deceiving me just to give his men the
opportunity. But he soon rose to tl
occasion. He wrought himself inf
a towering rage at them, flourished h
huge club and smashed the bushes a
around, shouting to me, “ Thus wi
I smash these fellows, and compi
them to return your clothes.”
One dark night, I heard thci
amongst my fowls. These I had pu:
chased from them for knives and calic<
and they now stole them all away, dea
or alive. Had I interfered, they won!
have gloried in the chance to club t
shoot me in the dark, when no or
could exactly say who had done tl
34
John G. Paton, D.D.


ed. Several of the new goats, which
had for milk, were also killed or
iven away ; indeed, all the injury
at was possible was done to me,
ort of taking away my life, and that
is now frequently attempted. Hav-
r no fires or fireplaces in my Mission
iuse, such being not required there,
though sometimes a fire would have
en invaluable for drying our bed-
)thes in the Rainy Season, —we had
house near by in which all our food
is cooked, and there, under lock and
y, we secured all our cooking utensils,
ts, dishes, etc. One night, that too
is broken into, and everything was
flen. In consternation, I appealed
the Chief, telling him what had been
ne. He also flew into a great rage,
d vowed vengeance on the thieves,
ying that he would compel them to
turn everything. But, of course,
thing was returned ; the thief could
tbe found ! I, unable to live with-
t something in which to boil water,
length offered a blanket to any one
at would bring back my kettle.
,aki himself, after much professed
fficulty, returned it minus the lid—•
at, he said, probably fishing for a
jher bribe, could not be got at any
ice, being at the other side of the
and in a tribe over which he had
control ! In the circumstances,
was glad to get kettle minus lid—
ulizing how life itself may depend on
small a luxury !
Having no means of redress, and
fling ourselves entirely at their mercy,
; strove quietly to bear all and to
ike as little of our trials as possible ;
ieed, we bore them all gladly for
sus’ sake. All through these sor-
vs, our assurance deepened rather
in faded, that if God only spared
to lead them to love and serve the
le Lord Jesus, they would soon
n to treat us as their friends and
[pers. That, however, did not do
ay with the hard facts of my life—
mg now entirely alone amongst
;m, opposed by their cruelty at
sry turn, and deceived by their un-
ling lies.
One morning, the Tannese, rushing
vards me in great excitement, cried,
“ Missi, Missi, there is a God, or a ship
on fire, or something of fear, coming
over the sea ! We see no flames, but
it smokes like a volcano. Is it a
Spirit, a God, or a ship on fire ? What
is it ? what is it ? ”
One party after another followed
in quick succession, shouting the same
questions in great alarm, to which I
replied, “ I cannot go at once ; I must
dress first in my best clothes ; it will
likely be one of Queen Victoria’s Men-
of-war, coming to ask of me if your
conduct is good or bad, if you are steal-
ing my property, or threatening my
life, or how you are using me.”
They pled with me to go and see it;
but I made much fuss about dressing,
and getting ready to meet the great
Chief on the vessel, and would not go
with them. The two principal Chiefs
now came running and asked, “ Missi,
will it be a ship of war ? ”
I called to them, “ I think it will ;
but I have no time to speak to you
now, I must get on my best clothes ! ”
They said, “ Missi, only tell us, will
he ask you if we have been stealing
your things ? ”
I answered, “ I expect he will.”
They asked, ‘ 1 And will you tell him ? ”
I said, “ I must tell him the truth ;
if he asks, I will tell him.”
They then cried out, “ Oh, Missi,
tell him not ! Everything shall be
brought back to you at once, and no
one will be allowed again to steal from
you.”
Then said I, “Be quick ! Every-
thing must be returned before he
comes. Away, away ! and let me get
ready to meet the great Chief on the
Man-of-war.”
Hitherto, no thief could ever be
found, and no Chief had power to
cause anything to be restored to me ;
but now, in an incredibly brief space
of time, one came running to the
Mission House with a pot, another with
a pan, another with a blanket, others
with knives, forks, plates, and all sorts
of stolen property. The Chiefs called
me to receive these things, but I re-
plied, “ Lay them all down at the door,
bring everything together quickly ;
I have no time to speak with you ! ”
35
Mission Leaves from Tanna


I delayed my toilet, enjoying mis-
chievously the magical effect of an
approaching vessel that might bring
penalty to thieves. At last the Chiefs,
running in breathless haste, called out
to me, “ Missi, Missi, do tell us, is the
stolen property all here ? ”
Of course I could not tell, but, run-
ning out, I looked on the promiscuous
heap of my belongings, and said, “ I
don’t see the lid of the kettle there
yet ! ”
One Chief said, “ No, Missi, for it is
on the other side of the island ; but
tell him not, I have sent for it, and it
will be here to-morrow.”
I answered, “ I am glad you have
brought back so much ; and now, if
you three Chiefs, Nauka, Miaki, and
Nowar, do not run away when he comes
lie will not likely punish you ; but,
if you and your people run away, he
will ask me why you are afraid, and
I will be forced to tell him ! Keep
near me and you are all safe ; only
there must be no more stealing from
me.”
They said, “ We are in black fear,
but we will keep near you, and our
bad conduct to you is done.”
The charm and joy of that morning
are fresh to me still, when H.M.S.
Cordelia, Captain Vernon, steamed into
our lovely Harbour. The Commander,
having heard rumour of my dangers
on Tanna, kindly came on shore as
soon as the ship cast anchor, with two
boats, and a number of his officers and
men, so far armed. He was dressed
in splendid uniform, being a tall and
handsome man, and he and his attend-
ants made a grand and imposing show.
On seeing Captain Vernon’s boat near-
ing the shore, and the men glittering
in gold lace and arms, Miaki the Chief
left my side on the beach and rushed
towards his village. I concluded that
he had run for it through terror, but
he had other and more civilized in-
tentions in his Heathen head ! Hav-
ing obtained, from some trader or
visitor in previous days, a soldier’s
old red coat, he had resolved to rise to
the occasion and appear in his best
before the Captain and his men. As
I was shaking hands with them and
welcoming them to Tanna, Miaki re-
turned with the short red coat on
buttoned tightly round his otherwise
naked body ; and, surmounted by his
ugly painted face and long whipcords
of twisted hair, it completly spoiled
any appearance that he might other-
wise have had of savage freedom, and
made him look a dirty and insignificanf
creature.
The Captain was talking to me, his
men stood in order near by—to m>
eyes, oh how charming a glimpse o:
Home life ! —when Miaki marched uj
and took his place most consequentially
at my side. He felt himself the mosl
important personage in the scene, and
with an attempt at haughty dignity
he began to survey the visitors. A 1
eyes were fixed on the impudent little
man, and the Captain asked, “ Whal
sort of a character is this ? ”
I replied, “ This is Miaki, our great
war Chief ” ; and whispered to the
Captain to be on his guard, as this mar
knew a little English, and might under-
stand or misunderstand just enough
to make it afterwards dangerous to me,
The Captain only muttered, “ The
contemptible creature ! ” But such
words were far enough beyond Miaki’s
vocabulary, so he looked on and grinned
complacently.
At last he said, “ Missi, this greai
Chief whom Queen Victoria has seni
to visit you in her Man-of-war, cannoi
go over the whole of this island, so as tc
be seen by all our people ; and I wish
you to ask him if he will stand by £
tree, and allow me to put a spear or
the ground at his heel, and we wil
make a nick in it at the top of his head
and the spear will be sent round th<
island, to let all the people see how tal
this great man is ! ” They wen
delighted at the good Captain agreeing
to their simple request ; and that speai
was exhibited to thousands, as th(
vessel, her Commander, officers, anc
men, were afterwards talked of rounc
and round the island.
About this time also, the London
Missionary Society’s ship, the John
Williams, visited me, having on board
the Rev. Messrs. Turner, Inglis, Baker,
and Macfarlan. They urged me to go
3 6
John G. Paton, d.d.


ith them on a three weeks’ trip round
e Islands, as I had lately suffered
uch from fever and ague, and was
eatly reduced by it. But a party of
ash Natives had killed one of our
arbour people the week before, and
dly bruised several others with their
abs, and I feared a general war of
venge if I left—for my presence
ciongst them at least helped to keep
e peace. I also was afraid that, if
left, they might not allow me to
turn to the island, —so I declined
ice more the pleasure of much-
eded change and rest. Further, as
e John Williams brought me the
x>d for building a Church which I
,d bought on Aneityum, the Tannese
•w plainly saw that, though their
nduct had been very bad, and I had
ffered much on their island, I had no
tention of leaving them or of giving
> the work of Jehovah.
Too much, perhaps, had I hoped for
)m the closely succeeding visits of
e good Bishop Selwyn, the gallant
iptain Vernon, and the Mission ship
<hn Williams. The impressions were
idoubtedly good, but evanescent;
d things soon went on as they had
■ne before among our benighted
mnese, led by Satan at his will, and
pelled to the grossest deeds of
Dathen darkness. The change by
vine grace, however, we knew to be
ssible; and for this we laboured
d prayed incessantly, fainting not,
if fainting, only to rise again and
ride every duty in the name of the
nd who had placed us there.
Fever and ague had attacked me
irteen times severely, with slighter
mrring attacks almost continuously
;er my first three months on the
and, and I now felt the necessity of
ring the hint of the Tannese Chief
fore referred to —“ Sleep on the
jher ground.” Having also received
;dical counsel to the same effect,
iugh indeed experience was painfully
ficient testimony, I resolved to
rove my house, and began to look
>ut for a suitable site. There rose
hind my present site a hill about
o hundred feet high, surrounded on
sides by a valley, and swept by the
breezes of the trade winds, being only-
separated from the ocean by a narrow
neck of land. On this I had set my
heart; there was room for a Mission
House and a Church, for which indeed
Nature seemed to have adapted it.
I proceeded to buy up every claim by
the Natives to any portion of the hill,
paying each publicly and in turn, so
that there might be no trouble after-
wards. I then purchased from a
Trader the deck planks of a ship-
wrecked vessel, with which to construct
a house of two apartments, a bedroom
and a small store-room adjoining it,
to which I purposed to transfer and
add the old house as soon as I was able.
Just at this juncture, the fever smote
me again more severely than ever ; my
weakness after this attack was so
great, that I felt as if I never could
rally again. With the help of my
faithful Aneityumese Teacher, Abra-
ham, and his wife, however, I made
what appeared my last effort to creep
—I could not climb—-up the hill to
get a breath of wholesome air. When
about two-thirds up the hill, I became
so faint that I concluded I was dying.
Lying down on the ground, sloped
against the root of a tree to keep me
from rolling to the bottom, I took fare-
well of old Abraham, of my Mission
work, and of everything around ! In
this weak state I lay, watched over by
my faithful companion, and fell into
a quiet sleep. When consciousness re-
turned, I felt a little stronger, and a
faint gleam of hope and life came back
to my soul.
Abraham and his devoted wife
Nafatu lifted me and carried me to the
top of the hill. There they laid me on
cocoa-nut leaves on the ground, and
erected over me a shade or screen of the
same ; and there the two faithful souls,
inspired surely by something diviner
even than mere human pity, gave me
the cocoa-nut juice to drink and fed
me with native food and kept me living
—I know not for how long. Con-
sciousness did, however, fully return.
The trade wind refreshed me day by
day. The Tannese seemed to have
given me up for dead ; and providen-
tially none of them looked near us for
37
Mission Leaves from Tanna


many days. Amazingly my strength
returned, and I began planning about
my new house on the hill. Afraid
again to sleep at the old site, I slept
under the tree, and sheltered by the
cocoa-nut leaf screen, while preparing
my new bedroom.
Here again, but for these faithful
souls, the Aneityumese Teacher and
his wife, I must have been baffled, and
would have died in the effort. The
planks of the wreck, and all other
articles required, they fetched and
carried ; and it taxed my utmost
strength to get them in some way
planted together. But life depended
on it. It was at length accomplished ;
and after that time I suffered com-
paratively little from anything like
continuous attacks of fever and ague.
That noble old soul, Abraham, stood
by me as an angel of God in sickness
and in danger ; he went at my side
wherever I had to go ; he helped me
willingly to the last inch of strength
in all that I had to do ; and it was
perfectly manifest that he was doing
all this not from mere human love,
but for the sake of Jesus. That man
had been a Cannibal in his Heathen
days, but by the grace of God there he
stood verily a new creature in Christ
Jesus. Any trust, however sacred
and valuable, could be absolutely re-
posed in him ; and in trial or danger,
I was often refreshed by that old
Teacher’s prayers, as I used to be by
the prayers of my saintly father in my
childhood’s home. No white man
could have been a more valuable helper
to me in my perilous circumstances ;
and no person, white or black, could
have shown more fearless and chival-
rous devotion.
CHAPTER VIII
MORE MISSION LEAVES FROM TANNA
A.D. iB6O. 36.
The Peace-party, my band of twenty
Chiefs already spoken of, kept all the
tribes around the Harbour acting only
on the defensive for a season. But
the Inland people murdered eight
Chiefs from a distance who, after
paying a friendly visit to the Harbou
people, were returning to their homes
At the same time, one of the Inlanc
Chiefs, who had pled with his people
to give up war and live at peace witl
surrounding tribes, was overthrowi
and murdered by his own men, as als(
his brother and four wives and tw<
children, and was supplanted b)
another leader more akin to thei:
wishes and tastes. They proceeded
according to their custom of declaring
war, to shoot one of the Harbour mei
and to break down their fences anc
plantations. So, once again, the blood
fiend was unleashed,—the young mer
of Tanna being as eager to get up i
battle, as young men of the world a'
home seem eager to get up a concer
or a ball.
The Harbour people advised me tc
remove a mile farther away from thes<
warriors ; but the Inland Tribes sen'
me word not to desert my house, les 1
it might be burned and plundered
for that they themselves had no quarre
against me. Early next morning, I
accompanied by Abraham and anothei
Aneityumese, started off to visit tin
Bush-party, and if possible avert th(
impending war, but without informing
my Harbour people. About four mile;
from our Station, we met the Chie;
of our farthest inland friendly tribe
with all his fighting men under arms
Forcing me to disclose our errand, h<
reluctantly allowed us to pass. Pray
ing to Jesus for guidance and protec
tion, we pressed along the path througl
the thick bush four miles farther still
My two attendants sinking into silence
betrayed growing fear ; and I, afte)
trying to cheer them, had at their mosl
earnest appeal to walk on also ii
silence, my heart and theirs going uj
to Jesus in prayer. We passed man)
deserted villages and plantations, bui
saw no living person. At last, un
expectedly, we stumbled upon th(
whole host assembled on the Villag<
Common at a great feast; and ai
sight of us every man rushed for hi:
weapons of war. Keeping my Teacher:
close beside me, I walked straight intc
the midst of them, unarmed of course
and cried as loud as I possibly could ix
38
John G. Paton, d.d.


eir own tongue, “ My love to all you
sn of Tanna ! Fear not; lam your
end ; I love you one, and am
me to tell you about Jehovah God
d good conduct such as pleases Him!”
An old Chief thereon came and took
3 by the hand, and, after leading me
'Out among the people, said, “ Sit
iwn beside me here and talk with
3 ; by-and-bye the people will not
afraid.”
A few ran off to the bush in terror.
hers appeared to be beside them-
ives with delight. They danced
und us frantically, striking the
sund and beating a canoe with their
ibs, while shouting to each other,
dissi is come ! Missi is come ! ”
ic confusion grew every moment
Ider, and there was a fiendish look
out the whole scene. Men and
iys rushed thronging around from
ery quarter, all painted in varied
d savage devices, and some with
eir hair stuck full of fantastic fea-
ers. Women and children peered
rough the bush, and instantaneously
Even in that anxious
3ment, it struck me that they had
my more children amongst them
an the people around the shores,
lere women and children are de-
oyed by the cruelties and vices of
flvilized ” visitors ! After spend-
l about an hour, conversing and
swering all questions, they appar-
tly agreed to give up the war, and
owed me to conduct the Worship
rongst them. They then made me
present of cocoa-nuts and sugar-cane
d two fowls, which my attendants
;eived from them ; and I, in return,
esented a red shirt to the principal
def, and distributed a quantity of
h-hooks and pieces of red calico
rongst the rest. The leading men
ook hands graciously, and invited
often to come and see them, for
:er that visit they would harm no
rson connected with our Mission,
jantime, the Harbour people having
irned where we had gone, had con-
ided that we would all be killed and
isted upon. When we returned,
th a present of food, and informed
em what we had heard and seen,
their astonishment was beyond mea-
sure ; it had never been so seen after
this manner on Tanna ! Ihe peace
continued for more than four weeks,
an uncommonly prolonged truce. All
hands were busy at work. Many yam-
plantations were completed, and all
fences were got into excellent condition
for a year.
The prejudices and persecutions of
Heathens were a sore enough trial,
but sorer and more hopeless was the
wicked and contaminating influence
of, alas, my fellow-countrymen. One,
for instance, a Captain Winchester,
living with a native woman at the
head of the bay as a Trader, a dissi-
pated wretch, though a well-educated
man, was angry forsooth at this state
of peace ! Apparently there was not
the usual demand for barter for the
fowls, pigs, etc., in which he traded.
He developed at once a wonderful
interest in their affairs, presented all
the Chiefs around with powder, caps,
and balls, and lent among them a
number of flash-muskets. He urged
them not to be afraid of war, as he
would supply any amount of ammuni-
tion. I remonstrated, but he flatly
told me that peace did not suit his
purposes ! Incited and encouraged
thus, these poor Heathen people were
goaded into a most unjust war on
neighbouring tribes. The Trader im-
mediately demanded a high price for
the weapons he had lent; the price of
powder, caps, and balls rose exorbi-
tantly with every fresh demand ; his
yards were crowded with poultry and
pigs, which he readily disposed of to
passing vessels ; and he might have
amassed great sums of money but for
his vile dissipations. Captain Winches-
ter, now glorying in the war, charged a
large hog for a wine-glass full of powder,
or three or four balls, or ten gun-caps ;
he was boastful of his “ good luck ”
in getting rid of all his old muskets
and filling his yards with pigs and
fowls. Such is the infernal depth to
which we can sink, when the misery
and ruin of many are thought to be
more than atoned for by the wealth
and prosperity of a few who trade in
their doom !
39
More Mission Leaves from Tanna


Miaki the war Chief had a young
brother, Rarip by name, about eighteen
years of age. When this war began,
he came to live with me at the Mission
House. After it had raged some time,
Miaki forced him to join the fighting
men ; but he escaped through the
bush, and returned to me, saying,
“ Missi, I hate this fighting ; it is not
good to kill men ; I will live with
you ! ”
Again the war Chief came, and forced
my dear young Rarip to join the hosts.
Of course, I could only plead ; I could
not prevent him. This time, he placed
him at his own side in the midst of his
warriors. On coming in sight of the
enemy, and hearing their first yells as
they rushed from the bush, a bullet
pierced young Rarip’s breast, and he
fell dead into the arms of Miaki. The
body was carried home to his brother’s
village, with much wailing, and a
messenger ran to tell me that Rarip
was dead. On hasting thither, I
found him quite dead, and the centre
of a tragic ceremonial. Around him,
some sitting, some lying on the ground,
were assembled all the women and
girls, tearing their hair, wounding
themselves with split bamboos and
broken bottles, dashing themselves
headlong to the earth, painting all
black their faces, breasts and arms,
and wailing with loud lamentations !
Men were also there, knocking their
heads against the trees, gashing their
bodies with knives till they ran with
streaks of blood, and indulging in
every kind of savage symbol of grief
and anguish. My heart broke to see
them, and to think that they knew not
to look to our dear Lord Jesus for
consolation.
I returned to the Mission House,
and brought a white sheet and some
tape, in which the body of dear young
Rarip was wrapped and prepared for
the grave. The Natives appeared to
be gratified at this mark of respect ;
and all agreed that Rarip should have
under my direction a Christian burial.
The men prepared the grave in a spot
selected near to his own house ; I read
the Word of God, and offered prayer
to Jehovah, with a psalm of praise,
amidst a scene of weeping and lament
tion never to be forgotten ; and tl
thought burned through my very so
—oh, when, when will the Tanne
realize what I am now thinking ar
praying about, the life and immortalii
brought to life through Jesus ?
All through this war, I went to tl
fighting ground every Sabbath, an
held Worship amongst our Harboi
people. Hundreds assembled aroun
me, and listened respectfully, but the
refused to give up the war. One da]
I determined to go through the bus
that lay between and speak and pra
with the enemies also. Our Harbor
folks opposed me, and one leading ma
said, “ Missi, pray only for us, an
your God will be strong to help us an
we will not be afraid ! You must nc
pray with the enemy, lest He may he!
them too.”
After this episode, I made it m
duty always to visit both camps, whe
I went to the fighting ground, and t
have Worship with both—teachin
them that Jehovah my God was angr
at all such scenes and would not figh
for either, that He commanded ther
to live at peace.
About this time, our Sabbath aud
ences at the Mission numbered fort
or so. Nowar and three or four mor<
and only they, seemed to love and serv
Jesus. They were, however, change
able and doubtful, though they exerte
a good influence on their villages, an
were generally friendly to us and t
the Worship. Events sometimes fc
a season greatly increased our useful
ness. For instance, one of the Sacre
Men when fishing on the coral ree
was bitten by a poisonous fish. Afte
great agony, he died, and his relative
were preparing to strangle his tw
wives, that their spirits might accorc
pany and serve him in the other work
Usually such tragedies were complete'
before I ever heard of them. On thi
occasion, I had called at the villag
that very day, and succeeded in pei
suading them to bury him alone—hi
wives being saved alive at my appea
Thus the idea got to be talked of, am
the horrible custom was being undei
mined—the strangling of widows !
40
John G. Paton, d.d.


)ne morning at daybreak I found
house surrounded by armed men,
I a Chief intimated that they had
imbled to take my life. Seeing that
r as entirely in their hands, I knelt
ra and gave myself away body and
I to the Lord Jesus, for what seemed
last time on earth. Rising, I went
to them, and began calmly talking
ut their unkind treatment of me
contrasting it with all my conduct
ards them. I also plainly showed
m what would be the sad conse-
nces, if they carried out their cruel
pose. At last some of the Chiefs,
) had attended the Worship, rose
said, “ Our conduct has been bad ;
now we will fight for you, and kill
those who hate you.”
hasping hold of their leader, I held
fast till he promised never to kill
one on my account, for Jesus
;ht us to love our enemies and
iys to return good for evil ! During
scene, many of the armed men
k away into the bush, and those
remained entered into a bond
>e friendly and to protect us. But
n their Public Assembly resolved
: we should be killed, because, as
t said, they hated Jehovah and
Worship ; for it made them afraid
io as they had always done. If
ould give up visiting the villages,
praying and talking with them
at Jehovah, they intimated that
r would like me to stay and trade
1 them, as they liked the Traders
hated the Missionaries! I told
n that the hope of being able
each them the Worship of Jehovah
e kept me living amongst them ;
I was there, not for gain or
sure, but because I loved them,
pitied their estate, and sought their
I continually by leading them to
n and serve the only true God.
ne of the Chiefs, who had lived in
tley and spoke English, replied for all
rest, “ Missi, our fathers loved and
shipped whom you call the Devil,
Evil Spirit; and we are determined
d the same, for we love the conduct
ir fathers. Missi Turner came
and tried to break down our
ship, but our fathers fought him
and he left us. They fought also Peta,
the Samoan Teacher, and he fled.
They fought and killed some of the
Samoan Teachers placed on the other
side of the Harbour, and their com-
panions left. We killed the last
foreigner that lived in Tanna before
you came here. We murdered the
Aneityumese Teachers, and burned
down their houses. After each of
these acts, Tanna was good ; we all
lived like our fathers, and sickness and
death left us. Now, our people are
determined to kill you, if you do not
leave this island ; for you are changing
our customs and destroying our wor-
ship, and we hate the Jehovah Wor-
ship.”
Then, surrounded by a number of
men, who had spent some years in the
Colonies, he continued in a bitter
strain to this effect: “ The people of
Sydney belong to your Britain ; they
know what is right and wrong as well
as you ; and we have ourselves seen
them fishing, feasting, cooking, working,
and seeking pleasure on the Sabbath
as on any other day. You say, we do
not here need to cook any food on
Sabbaths or to toil at our ovens, but
you yourself cook, for you boil your
kettle on that day ! We have seen the
people do all the conduct at Sydney
which you call bad, but which we love.
You are but one, they are many;
they are right, and you must be wrong ;
you are teaching lies for Worship.”
After many such speeches, I an-
swered all the questions of the people
fully, and besides I cross-questioned
my assailants on several subjects;
regarding which they grossly contra-
dicted each other, till the majority of
voices cried out, “ They are lying !
Their words are crooked ! Missi knows
all the truth about the people of
Sydney ! ”
Alas, I had to admit that what they
reported was too true regarding the
godless multitudes at home who made
the Sabbath a day of pleasure, but not
regarding Jehovah’s servants. By this
time, they were willing to remain quiet,
and allowed me to talk of spiritual
things and of the blessings that the
Sabbath and the Bible brought to all
41
More Mission Leaves from Tanna


other lands, and to conduct in their
presence and hearing the Worship of
Jehovah.
One evening, I awoke three times to
hear a Chief and his men trying to
force the door of my house. Though
armed with muskets, they had some
sense of doing wrong, and were whole-
somely afraid of a little retriever dog
which had often stood betwixt me
and death. God restrained them again ;
and next morning the report went
all round the Harbour, that those
who tried to shoot me were “ smitten
weak with fear.” and that shooting
would not do. A plan was therefore
deliberately set on foot to fire the
premises, and club us if we attempted
to escape. But our Aneityumese
Teacher heard of it, and God helped
us to frustrate their designs. When
they knew that their plots were re-
vealed to us, they seemed to lose faith
in themselves, and cast about to circum-
vent us in some more secret way.
Their evil was overruled for good.
Namuri, one of my Aneityumese
Teachers, was placed at our nearest
village. There he had built a house
for himself and his wife, and there he
led amongst the Heathen a pure and
humble Christian life. Almost every
morning, he came and reported on the
state of affairs to me. Without books
or a school, he yet instructed the
Natives in Divine things, conducted
the Worship, and taught them much
by his good example. His influence
was increasing, when one morning a
Sacred Man threw at him the kawas
or killing stone, a deadly weapon like
a scythe-stone in shape and thickness,
usually round but sometimes angular,
and from eighteen to twenty inches
long. They throw it from a great
distance and with fatal precision. The
Teacher, with great agility, warded
his head and received the deep cut
from it in his left hand, reserving his
right hand to guard against the club
that was certain to follow swiftly.
The Priest sprang upon him with his
club and with savage yells. He evaded
yet also received, many blows ; and,
rushing out of their hands, actually
reached the Mission House, bleeding.
fainting, and pursued by howh
murderers. I had been anxiously e
pecting him, and hearing the noise
ran out with all possible speed.
On seeing me, he sank down by
tree, and cried, “ Missi, Missi, quid
and escape for your life ! They a
coming to kill you ; they say, th
must kill us all to-day, and they ha
begun with me ; for they hate Jehov.
and the Worship ! ”
I hastened to the good Teacher whe
he lay; I bound up, washed, and dress
his wounds ; and God, by the myste
of His own working, kept the infuriat
Tannese watching at bay. Gradua
they began to disappear into the bus
and we conveyed the dear Teach
to the Mission House. In three
four weeks, he so far recovered 1
careful nursing that he was able
walk about again. Some petition
for him to return to the village ; b
I insisted, as a preliminary, that t
Harbour Chiefs should unitedly puni
him who had abused the Teache
and this to test them, for he had on
carried out their own wishes, —Now
excepted, and perhaps one or t\
others. They made a pretence of ato
ing by presenting the Teacher with
pig and some yams as a peace-offerin
but I said, “No ! such bad condu
must be punished, or we would lea
their island by the first opportunity.
All appearing friendly for sot
time, and willing to listen and leai
the Teacher earnestly desired to retu
*to his post. I pled with him to rema
at the Mission House till we felt mo
assured, but he replied, “ Missi, wt
I see them thirsting for my blood
just see myself when the Missiom
first came to my island. I desired
murder him, as they now desire to 1
me. Had he stayed away for sr
danger, I would have remained Hi
then; but he came, and contim
coming to teach us, till, by the gn
of God, I was changed to what I a
Now the same God that changed :
to this, can change these poor Tanm
to love and serve Him. I cannot sf
away from them ; but I will sleep
the Mission House, and do all I can
day to bring them to Jesus.”
42
John G. Paton, D.D.


t was not in me to keep such a man,
ler such motives, from what he felt
be his post of duty. He returned
his village work, and for several
;ks things appeared most encourag-
, The inhabitants showed growing
jrest in us and our work, and less
r of the pretensions of their Heathen
est, which, alas ! fed his jealousy
I anger. One morning during Wor-
3, when the good Teacher knelt in
yer, the same savage Priest sprang
>n him with his great club and left
i for dead, wounded and bleeding
unconscious. The people fled
. left him in his blood, afraid of
ig mixed up with the murder.
; Teacher, recovering a little, crawled
the Mission House, and reached it
ut midday in a dying condition,
seeing him, I ran to meet him, but
ell near the Teacher’s house, saying,
issi, I am dying ! They will kill
also. Escape for your life.”
rying to console him, I sat down
de him, dressing his wounds and
sing him. He was quite resigned ;
was looking up to Jesus, and re-
ing that he would soon be with Him
dory. His pain and suffering were
it, but he bore all very quietly,
ie said and kept saying, “For the
! of Jesus ! For Jesu’s sake ! ”
was constantly praying for his
ecutors, “ O Lord Jesus, forgive
n, for they know not what they
doing. Oh, take not away all Thy
ants from Tanna ! Take not away
Worship from this dark island !
■od, bring all the Tannese to love
follow Jesus ! ”
n one occasion, when a Chief had
, the Harbour people were all being
mbled to strangle the widow.
of my Aneityumese Teachers,
ing of it, hastened to tell me. I
to the village, and, with much per-
ion, saved her life. A few weeks
rafter she gave birth to a young
’tain, who prospered well. If our
aour people told the truth, the
>ws of all who fell in war were
dby our pleading. Immediately
- the foregoing incident, a Sacred
was dying, and a crowd of people
assembled awaiting the event in
order to strangle his three wives. I
spoke to them of the horrid wicked-
ness of such conduct. I further rea-
soned with them, that God had made
us male and female, the sexes so
balanced, that for every man that had
three or a dozen wives, as many men
generally had none, and that this
caused great jealousy and quarrelling.
I showed them further, that these
widows being spared would make
happy and useful wives for other kind
and loving husbands. After the Wor-
ship, I appealed to the Chief, and he
replied, “ Missi, it was a practice in-
troduced to Tanna from the island of
Aneityum. It was not the custom of
our fathers here to strangle widows.
And, as the Aneityumese have given
it up since they became worshippers
of Jehovah, it is good that we now
should give it up on Tanna too.”
Thus these three widows were saved ;
and we had great hope in Christ that
the ghastly practice would soon dis-
appear from Tanna.
An incident of this time created
great wonder amongst the Natives ;
namely, the Sinking of a Well. We
had, heretofore, a boiling spring to
drink from, the water of which literally
required in that climate days to cool
down ; we had, also, a stagnant pool
at the lower end of a swamp in which
the Natives habitually bathed, the
only available fresh water bath !
Beyond that no drinking water could
be had for four or five miles. I
managed to sink a well, near the
Mission House, and got about twelve
feet deep a good supply of excellent
fresh water, though, strange to say,
the surface of the well rose and fell
regularly with every tide ! This be-
came the universal supply for us and
for the Natives all round the Harbour
and for miles inland. Hundreds of
Natives from ail parts of Tanna flocked
to examine this greatest wonder they
had ever seen —rain rising up out
of the earth. I built it round with a
kind of stone brought in my boat from
the other side of the bay ; and for
many years it was the only fresh water
supply for the Natives all around.
Some years later a Native Chief sank
43
More Mission Leaves from Tanna


another well about a mile nearer the
entrance to the Harbour at his own
village, and built it round with the
bricks that I had purchased for house-
building ; these he grabbed and thus
appropriated ! Many a vessel, calling
at the Harbour, was glad to get her
casks refilled at my well, and all were
apparently more friendly because of
it; but the Sinking of this Well pro-
duced no such revolution as on
Aniwa, —to be hereafter related.
For fully three months, all our avail-
able time, with all the native help
which I could hire, was spent in erect-
ing a building to serve for Church and
School. It was fifty feet long, by
twenty-one feet six inches broad. The
studs were three feet apart, and all
fixed by tenon and mortise into upper
and lower wall plates. The beautiful
roof of iron-wood and sugar-cane leaf
was supported by three massive pillars
of wood, sunk deeply into the ground.
The roof extended about three feet
over the wall plates, both to form a
verandah and to carry the rain-drop
free beyond the walls. It was made
of sugar-cane leaf and cocoa-nut
leaves all around. The floor was
laid with white coral, broken small,
and covered with cocoa-nut leaf mats,
such as those on which the Natives
sat. Indeed, it was as comfortable a
House of Prayer as any man need wish
for in the tropics, though having only
open spaces for doors and windows !
I bought the heavy wood for it on
Aneityum—price, fifty pairs of trou-
sers for Natives ; and these again were
the gift of my Bible Class in Glasgow,
all cut and sewed by their own hands.
I gave also one hundred and thirty
yards of cloth, along with other things,
for other needful wood.
An ever-memorable event was the
printing of my first book in Tannese.
Thomas Binnie, Jun., Glasgow, gave
me a printing-press and a font of type.
Printing was one of the things I had
never tried, but having now prepared
a booklet in Tannese, I got my press
into order, and began fingering the
type. But book-printing turned out to
be for me a much more difficult affair
than house-building had been. Yet by
dogged perseverance I succeeded
last. My biggest difficulty was t
to arrange the pages properly ! Al
many failures, I folded a piece of pa
into the number of leaves wanf
cut the corners, folding them ba
and numbering as they would be wl
correctly placed in the book ; tl
folding all back without cutting up
sheet, I found now by these numb
how to arrange the pages in the fra
or case for printing, as indicated
each side. And do you think
foolish, when I confess that I show
in an esctasy of joy when the fi
sheet came from the press all correc
It was about one o’clock in the mo
ing. I was the only white man tl
on the island, and all the Natives h
been fast asleep for hours ! Yet
literally pitched my hat into the air, a
danced like a schoolboy round a
round that printing-press; till I beg
to think. Am I losing my reasoi
Would it not be liker a Missionary
be upon my knees, adoring God for t'
first portion of His blessed Word e-\
printed in this new language ? Frier
bear with me, and believe me—tl
was as true worship as ever was Davii
dancing before the Ark of his Go
Nor think that I did not, over that fii
sheet of God’s Word ever printed
the Tannese tongue, go upon my km
too, and then, and every day sim
plead with the mighty Lord to car
the light and joy of His own He
Bible into every dark heart and I
nighted home on Tanna! But t
Tannese had a superstitious dread
books, and especially of God’s Boc
I afterwards heard that Dr. Turn
had printed a small primer in Tannc:
translated by the help of the Samoi
Teachers ; but this I never saw 1
near the close of my work on Tann
Dr. Geddie sent me a copy, but it w
more Samoan than Tannese, especial
in its spelling, and I could make litl
or nothing of it.
Shortly after this, I was greatly i
freshed by the visit of an Americ.
whaler, the Camden Packet, und
Captain Allan. He, his chief office
and many of his double company
seamen, were decided Christians—


.t contrast to most of the Traders
fc had called at Port Resolution.
Captain cordially invited me on
rd to preach and conduct a reli-
is service. That evening I enjoyed
feedingly—wells in the desert ! The
•tain introduced me, saying, “ This
ly ship’s company. My first officer
most of my men are real Christians,
ng to love and serve Jesus Christ,
have been three years out on this
age, and are very happy with each
er. You would never hear or see
se on board of this vessel than you
now. And God has given us grati-
ig success.”
le afterwards told me that he had
ery valuable cargo of sperm oil on
rd, the vessel being nearly filled
with it. He was eager to leave
plies, or do something for me, but
ceded nothing that he could give.
mate, on examining my boat,
nd a hole in her, and several planks
t and bulged in, as I had gone down
a, reef with her when out on Mission
k, and narrowly escaped drowning,
ct morning, the Captain, of his
i accord, set his carpenter to repair
boat, and left it as good as new.
t one farthing of recompense would
r of them take from me ; their own
istian love rewarded them, in the
:umstances. I had been longing
a chance to send it to Sydney for
airs, and felt deeply thankful for
h unexpected and generous aid.
; Captain would not admit that the
ay was any loss to him,—his boats
nding the day in purchasing cocoa-
;s and provisions from the Natives
his own ship. Oh, how the Christ-
; spirit knits together all true fol-
rers of Christ ! What other earthly
luman tie could have so bound that
anger to me ? In the heart of
rist we met as brothers. ,
Dangers again darkened round me;
e day, while toiling away at my
ise, the war Chief and his brother,
I a large party of armed men, sur-
inded the plot where I was working,
ey all had muskets, besides their
n native weapons. They watched
for some time in silence, and then
;ry man levelled a musket straight
at my head. Escape was impossible.
Speech would only have increased my
danger. My eyesight came and went
for a few moments. I prayed to my
Lord Jesus, either Himself to protect
me or to take me home to His Glory.
I tried to keep working on at my task,
as if no one was near me. In that
moment, as never before, the words
came to me, —“ Whatsoever ye shall
ask in My Name, I will do it ” ; and
I knew that I was safe. Retiring a
little from their first position, no word
having been spoken, they took up the
same attitude somewhat farther off,
and seemed to be urging one another
to fire the first shot. But my dear
Lord restrained them once again, and
they withdrew, leaving me with a new
reason for trusting Him with all that
concerned me for Time and Eternity.
Perils seemed, however, to enclose me
on every hand, and my life was fre-
quently attempted. I had to move
about more cautiously than ever,
some days scarcely daring to appear
outside my Mission premises. For I
have ever most firmly believed, and do
believe, that only when we use every
lawful and possible means for the pre-
servation of our life, which is God’s
second greatest gift to man (life eternal
through His Son being the first), can
we expect God to protect us, or have
we the right to plead His precious
promises.
The Chief, Nowar Noukamara, usu-
ally known as Nowar, was my best
and most-to-be-trusted friend. He
was one of the nine or ten who were
most favourable to the Mission work,
attending the Worship pretty regu-
larly, conducting it also in their own
houses and villages, and making gener-
ally a somewhat unstable profession
of Christianity. One or more of them
often accompanied me on Sabbath,
when going to conduct the Worship
at inland villages ; and sometimes
they protected me from personal
injury. This Nowar influenced the
Harbour Chiefs and their people for
eight or ten miles around to get up
a great feast in favour of the Worship
of Jehovah. All were personally and
specially invited, and it was the largest
45
More Mission Leaves from Tanna


Assembly of any kind that I ever
witnessed on the Islands.
When all was ready, No war sent a
party of Chiefs to escort me and my
Aneityumese Teachers to the feast.
Fourteen Chiefs, in turn, made speeches
to the assembled multitude ; the drift
of all being, that war and fighting be
given up on Tanna, —that no more
people be killed by Nahak, for witch-
craft and sorcery were lies, —that
Sacred Men no longer profess to make
wind and rain, famine and plenty,
disease and death, —that the dark
Heathen talk of Tanna should cease, —
that all here present should adopt the
Worship of Jehovah as taught to them
by the Missionary and the Aneityum-
ese, —and that all the banished Tribes
should be invited to their own lands
to live in peace ! These strange
speeches did not draw forth a single
opposing voice. Doubtless these men
were in earnest, and had there been
one master mind to rule and mould
them, their regeneration had then
dawned. Though for the moment a
feeling of friendliness prevailed, the
Tannese were unstable as water and
easily swayed one way or the other.
They are born talkers, and can and
will speechify on all occasions ; but
most of it means nothing, bears no
fruit.
After these speeches, a scene fol-
lowed which gradually assumed shape
as an idolatrous ceremonial and greatly
horrified me. It was in connection
with the immense quantity of food that
had been prepared for the feast,
especially pigs and fowls. A great
heap had been piled up for each Tribe
represented, and a handsome portion
also set apart for the Missionary and
his Teachers. The ceremony was this,
as nearly as I could follow it. One
hundred or so of the leading men
marched into the large cleared space
in the centre of the assembled multi-
tudes, and stood there facing each
other in equal lines, with a man at
either end closing up the passage be-
tween. At the middle they stood
eight or ten feet apart, gradually near-
ing till they almost met at either end.
Amid tremendous silence for a few
moments, all stood hushed; thi
every man kneeled on his right km
extended his right hand, and bent fc
ward till his face nearly touched t
ground. Thereon the man at tl
one end began muttering somethin
his voice rising ever louder as he ro
to his feet, when it ended in a fearf
yell as he stood erect. Next the tv
long lines of men, all in a body, we.
through the same ceremonial, risii
gradually to their feet, with mutte
ings deepening into a howl, and hegh
ening into a yell as they stood erec
Finally, the man at the other end we;
through the same hideous forms. /
this was thrice deliberately repeate
each time with growing frenzy. Ax
then, all standing on their feet, th<
united as if with one voice in wh
sounded like music running mad x
and down the scale —closing with
long, deep-toned, hollow howl as
souls in pain. With smiles of joy, tl
men then all shook hands with ea<
other. Nowar and another Chi
briefly spoke ; and the food was th«
divided and exchanged, a princip
man of each Tribe standing by
receive and watch his portion.
At this stage, No war and Nerwanj
as leaders, addressed the Teachers ax
the missionary to this effect: “Th
feast is held to move all the Chiefs ax
People here to give up fighting,
become friends, and to worship yo
Jehovah God. We wish you to r
main, and to teach us all good conduc
As an evidence of our sincerity, ax
of our love, we have prepared this pi
of food for you.”
In reply, I addressed the who
multitude, saying how pleased I w;
with their speeches and with the res
lutions and promises which they i
had made. I further urged them
stick fast by these, and that grar
fruits would arise to their island, i
themselves, and to their children.
Having finished a brief address,
then walked forward to the vexy midd
of the circle, and laid down before the
a bundle of strips of red calico ar
pieces of white calico, a number i
fish-hooks, knives, etc., etc., requestix
the two Chiefs to divide my offering (
4 6
John G. Paton, d.d.


dwill among the Tribes assembled,
I also the pile of food presented to
as a token of my love and friendship
them all.
'heir insisting upon me taking their
sent of food, laid upon me an un-
isant and dangerous necessity of
ilaining my refusal. I again
nked them very warmly, and ex-
ned that, as they had in my pre-
ze given away all their food to an
1-God and asked his blessing on it
i sacrifice, even to Karapanamun,
great Evil Spirit, my people and
urst not and could not eat of it,
that would be to have fellowship
h their Idols and to dishonour
ovah God. Christians could acknow-
only the one true and living God,
ask His blessing on their food, and
r it and themselves in thanksgiving
o Him, but unto no cruel or evil
dt. Yet I explained to them how
:h I thanked them, and how I loved
m just as much as if we had eaten
their gifts, and how it would please
;o see them all, along with my own
s, divided amongst their Tribes,
leathen dances were now entered
n, their paint and feathers and
aments adding to the wildness
the scene. The men seemed to
! in an inside ring, and the
;n in an outside ring, at a con-
ible distance from each other.
>ic was supplied by singing and
iping of hands. The order was
;ect, and the figures highly intricate.
: I have never been able to associate
cing with things lovely and of good
art! After the dancing, all re-
d to the bush ; and a kind of sham
t then followed on the public
red ground. A host of painted
ages rushed in and took possession
i songs and shoutings. From the
h, on the opposite side, the chant-
of women was heard in the distance,
ier and louder as they approached,
tching from a burning fire flaming
cs, they rushed on the men with these,
ing them and throwing burning
es of wood among them, till with
ening yells amongst themselves
amidst shouts of laughter from the
«1, they drove them from the space,
and danced thereon and safig a song of
victory. The dancing and fighting,
the naked painted figures, and the
constant yells and shoutings, gave one
a weird sensation, and suggested
strange ideas of Hell broken loose.
The final scene approached, when the
men assisted their women to fill all the
allotted food into baskets, to be car-
ried home and eaten there ; for the
different Tribes do not sit down together
and eat together as we would do;
their coming together is for the purpose
of exchanging and dividing the food
presented. And now they broke into
friendly confusion, and freely walked
about, mingling with each other; and
a kind of savage rehearsal of Jonathan
and David took place. They stripped
themselves of their fantastic dresses,
their handsomely woven and twisted
grass skirts, leaf skirts, grass and leaf
aprons ; they gave away or exchanged
all these, and their ornaments and bows
and arrows, besides their less romantic
calico and print dresses more recently
acquired! The effusion and cere-
monial of the gifts and exchanges
seemed to betoken a loving people ;
and so they were for the feast—but
that laid not aside a single deadly feud,
and streams of blood and cries of hate
would soon efface all traces of this day.
I had now six Stations, opened up
and ministered to by Aneityumese
Teachers, at the leading villages along
the coast, and forming links in a chain
towards the other Mission establish-
ment on Tanna. And there were
villages prepared to receive as many
more. These Teachers had all been
Cannibals once ; yet, with one excep-
tion, they proved themselves to the
best of my judgment to be a band of
faithful and devoted followers of
Christ. Their names were Abraham,
Kowari, Namuri, Nerwa, Lazarus,
and Eoufati. I visited them periodi-
cally and frequently, encouraging and
guiding them, as well as trying to
interest the villagers in their teaching
and work. But whenever war broke
out they had all to return to the Mis-
sion House, and sleep there for safety
by night, visiting their Stations, if
practicable, by the light of day. My
47
More Mission Leaves from Tanna


poor dear Teachers, too, had to bear
persecutions for Jesu’s sake, as the
following incident will sorrowfully
prove.
A native woman, with some mur-
derous purpose in her heart, pretended
great friendship to the excellent wife
of one of my fellow-labourers. She
was especially effusive in bringing to
her dishes of food from time to time.
Having thus gained confidence, she
caught a little black fish of those parts,
mown to be deadly poisonous, and
baked it up in a mess for the unsuspect-
ing Teacher’s wife. On returning, she
boasted of what she had done, and
thereon a friendly neighbour rushed
off to warn the other, but arrived just
to learn that the fatal meal had been
taken. Beyond all reach of human
skill, this unknown Martyr for Christ
died soon after in great agony, and
doubtless received her Master’s re-
ward.
In helping to open up new Stations,
those dear Native Teachers often bore
the greatest hardships and indignities
with a noble self-denial and positively
wonderful patience. Nothing known
to men under Heaven could have pro-
duced their new character and dispo-
sition, except only the grace of God
in Christ Jesus. Though still marred
by many of the faults of Heathenism,
they were at the roots of their being
literally new creatures, trying, accord-
ing to their best light, to live for and
to please their new Master, Jesus Christ.
This shone out very conspicuously in
these two apostolic souls, Abraham
and Kowari, as leaders among all the
devoted band.
Not many days thereafter, a very
horrible transaction occurred. Before
daybreak, I heard shot after shot
quickly discharged in the Harbour.
One of my Teachers came running,
and cried, “Missi, six or seven men
have been shot dead this morning for
a great feast. It is to reconcile Tribes
that have been at war, and to allow
i. banished Tribe to return in peace.”
I learned that the leading men had
in council agreed upon this sacrifice,
but the name of each victim was kept
a secret till the last moment. The
torture of suspense and uncertaint
seemed to be borne by all as part c
their appointed lot ; nor did they pre
pare as if suspecting any dread assaul'
Before daylight, the Sacred Men allc
cated a murderer to the door of eac
house where a victim slept. A sigm
shot was fired ; all rushed to thei
doors, and the doomed ones were she
and clubbed to death as they attempte
to escape. Their bodies were the
borne to a sacred tree, and hung u
there by the hands for a time, as a
offering to the gods. Being take
down, they were carried ceremoniousl
and laid out on the shore near my housi
placed under a special guard.
Information had reached me tha
my Teachers and I were also destine
victims for this same feast; and sui
enough we espied a band of armed mei
the killers, despatched towards or
premises. Instantaneously I had th
Teachers and their wives and myse
securely locked into the Mission Housi
and, cut off from all human hope, w
set ourselves to pray to our dear Lor
Jesus, either Himself to protect us c
to take us to Glory. All throug
that morning and forenoon we hear
them tramp-tramping round our housi
whispering to each other, and hoverin
near window and door. They kne
that there were a double-barrelle
fowling-piece and a revolver on th
premises, though they never had see
me use them, and that may, und<
God, have held them back in dreai
But the thought of using them di
not enter our souls even in that awfi
time. I had gone to save, and not 1
destroy. It would be easier for me i
any time to die, than to kill one i
them. Our safety lay in our appei
to that blessed Lord who had place
us there, and to whom all power ha
been given in Heaven and on Eartl
He that was with us was more tha
all that could be against us. This
strength ; this is peace : —to feel, i
entering on every day, that all i
duties and trials have been committe
to the Lord Jesus—that, come wh;
may, He will use us for His own gloi
and our real good !
All through that dreadful mornin
48
John G. Paton, d.d.


i far into the afternoon, we thus
)de together, feeling conscious that
were united to this dear Lord Jesus;
i we had sweet communion with
tn, meditating on the wonders of
5 person and the hopes and glories
His kingdom. Oh that all my
ders may learn something of this
their own experience of the Lord !
;an wish them nothing more pre-
us. Towards sundown, constrained
the Invisible One, they withdrew
m our Mission House, and left us
:e more in peace. They bore away
; slain to be cooked and distributed
ongst the Tribes, and eaten in their
st of reconciliation ; a covenant
led in blood, and soon, alas, to be
ried in blood again ! For many
thereafter, we had to take un-
lal care, and not unduly expose cur-
ves to danger ; for dark characters
re seen prowling about in the bush
ir at hand, and we knew that our
i was the prize. We took what care
could, and God the Lord did the
t ; or rather He did all—for His
;dom guided us, and His power
Fed them.
Shortly thereafter war was again
dared, by the Inland people attack-
our Harbour people. It was an
quarrel; and the war was renewed
i continued, long after the cause
;reof had passed away. Going
ongst them every day, I did my
nost to stop hostilities, setting the
Is of war before them, and pleading
;h the leading men to renounce it.
ereon arose a characteristic incident
Island and Heathen life. One day
leld a service in the village where
rning after morning their Tribes
embled, and declared that if they
uld believe in and follow the Jeho-
i God, He would deliver them from
their enemies and lead them into
happy life. There were present
ee Sacred Men, Chiefs, of whom the
ole population lived in terror —
ithers or cousins, heroes of tra-
ional feats, professors of sorcery,
i claiming the power of life and
ith, health and sickness, rain and
mght, according to their will. On
iring me, these three stood up and
declared they did not believe in Jeho-
vah, nor did they need His help ; for
they had the power to kill my life by
Nahak {i.e., sorcery or witchcraft),
if only they could get possession of any
piece of the fruit or food that I had
eaten. This was an essential condition
of their black art; hence the peel of a
banana or an orange, and every broken
scrap of food, is gathered up by the
Natives, lest it should fall into the
hands of the Sacred Men, and be used
for Nahak. This superstition was the
cause of most of the bloodshed and
terror upon Tanna ; and being thus
challenged, I asked God’s help, and
determined to strike a blow against it.
A woman was standing near with
a bunch of native fruit in her hand,
like our plums, called quonquore. I
asked her to be pleased to give me
some ; and she, holding out a bunch,
said, “ Take freely what you will ! ”
Calling the attention of all the
Assembly to what I was doing, I took
three fruits from the bunch, and taking
a bite out of each, I gave them one
after another to the three Sacred Men,
and deliberately said in the hearing of
all, “ You have seen me eat of this
fruit, you have seen me give the re-
mainder to your Sacred Men ; they
have said they can kill me by Nahak,
but I challenge them to do it if they
can, without arrow or spear, club or
musket; for I deny that they have
any power against me, or against any
one, by their Sorcery.”
The challenge was accepted ; the
Natives looked terror-struck at the
position in which I was placed ! The
ceremony of Nahak was usually per-
formed in secret, —the Tannese fleeing
in dread, as Europeans would from
the touch of the plague ; but I lingered
and eagerly watched their ritual. As
the three Chiefs arose, and drew near
to one of the Sacred Trees, to begin
their ceremonial, the Natives fled in
terror, crying, “ Missi, lawe ! Alas
Missi! ”
But I held on at my post of observa-
tion. Amidst wavings and incanta-
tions, they rolled up the pieces of the
fruit from which I had eaten, in certain
leaves of this Sacred Tree, into a shape
49
More Mission Leaves from Tanna


like a waxen candle ; then they kindled
a sacred fire near the root, and con-
tinued their mutterings, gradually
burning a little more and a little more
of the candle-shaped things, wheeling
them round their heads, blowing upon
them with their breaths, waving them
in the air, and glancing wildly at me
as if expecting my sudden destruction.
Wondering whether after all they did
not believe their own lie, for they
seemed to be in dead earnest, I, more
eager than ever to break the chains of
such vile superstition, urged them
again and again, crying, “ Be quick !
Stir up your gods to help you ! lam
not killed yet; lam perfectly well ! ”
At last they stood up and said, “ We
must delay till we have called all our
Sacred Men. We will kill Missi before
his next Sabbath comes round. Let
all watch, for he will soon die, and that
without fail.”
I replied, “ Very good ! I challenge
all your Priests to unite and kill me
by Sorcery or Nahak, If on Sabbath
next I come again to your village in
health, you will all admit that your
gods have no power over me, and that
I am protected by the true and living
Jehovah God ! ”
Every day throughout the remainder
of that week, the Conchs were sounded;
and over that side of the island all
their Sacred Men were at work trying
to kill me by their arts. Now and again
messengers arrived from every quarter
of the island, inquiring anxiously
after my health, and wondering if I
was not feeling sick, and great ex-
citement prevailed amongst the poor
deluded idolaters.
Sabbath dawned upon me peace-
fully, and I went to that village in
more than my usual health and
strength. Large numbers assembled,
and when I appeared they looked at
each other in terror, as if it could not
really be I myself still spared and well.
Entering into the public grounds, I
saluted them to this effect, “ My love
to you all, my friends ! I have come
again to talk to you about the Jehovah
God and His Worship.”
The three Sacred Men, on being
asked, admitted that they had tried
to kill me by Nahak, but had failed
and on being questioned, why they ha<
failed, they gave the acute and subtli
reply, that I also was myself a Sacrec
Man, and that my God being thi
stronger had protected me from thei
gods. Addressing the multitude,
answered thus, “ Yea, truly; m;
Jehovah God is stronger than you
gods. He protected me, and helpec
me ; for He is the only living and tru<
God, the only God that can hear o:
answer any prayer from the childrer
of men. Your gods cannot hea:
prayers, but my God can and will heai
and answer you, if you will give hear
and life to Him, and love and serv(
Him only. This is my God, and H<
is also your friend if you will hear anc
follow His voice,”
Having said this, I sat down on th<
trunk of a fallen tree, and addressee
them : “ Come and sit down all arounc
me, and I will talk to you about th(
love and mercy of my God, and teacl
you how to worship and please Him.’
Two of the Sacred Men then sai
down, and all the people gathered
round and seated themselves verj
quietly. I tried to present to then
ideas of sin, and of salvation througl
Jesus Christ, as revealed to us in th<
Holy Scriptures.
The third Sacred Man, the highesi
in rank, a man of great stature anc
uncommon strength, had meantime
gone off for his warrior’s spear, anc
returned brandishing it in the air anc
poising it at me. I said to the people
“ Of course he can kill me with his
Spear, but he undertook to kill me bj
Nahak or Sorcery, and promised noi
to use against me any weapons o:
war ; and if you let him kill me now
you will kill your friend, one who lives
among you and only tries to do yoi
good, as you all know so well. I knov
that if you kill me thus my God will b<
angry and will punish you.”
Thereon I seated myself calmly ir
the midst of the crowd, while he leaped
about in rage, scolding his brothers and
all who were present for listening to me
The other Sacred Men, however, tool
my side, and, as many of the people alsc
were friendly to me and stood closelji
50
John G. Paton, D.O.


eked around me, he did not throw
5 spear. To allay the tumult and
viate further bloodshed, I offered to
tve with my Teachers at once, and,
doing so, I ardently pled with them
live at peace. Though we got
fely home, that old Sacred Man
;med still to hunger after my blood.
>r weeks thereafter, go where I would,
would suddenly appear on the path
hind me, poising in his right hand
it same Goliath spear. God only
pt it from being thrown, and I,
ng every lawful precaution, had all
3 same to attend to my work, as if
enemy were there, leaving all other
ults in the hands of Jesus. This
ole incident did, doubtless, shake
; prejudices of many as to Sorcery ;
t few even of converted Natives ever
t entirely clear of the dread of Nahak.
But let us return to the war. Many
iefs and villages were now involved
it; and a large part of the bush
3r the country between had been
isumed by fire, to prevent surprises,
t, our Harbour people being assem-
d one night for consultation, a
mber of the Inland warriors crept
ir unobserved and discharged a
ley of muskets amongst them.
rera.l were shot dead, and in the
•kness and confusion the enemy got
ar away. Revenge and self-preser-
;ion now united our people as one
n, and every man assembled for
ion on the borders of the hostile
bes. I again visited them on the
iting ground. As I was seen
broaching, the two old Priests, my
;nds, came to receive and escort me,
itected by their clubs and muskets,
he one blind of an eye lost in war
rching before me, and the other
and me with poised spear and
jhty club. Seating me in a central
ition, they assembled all the war-
's, except the watchmen, and these
age men listened attentively to my
ssage, and bowed quietly during
yer. God only knows what may
r e been the fruit in some dark
ighted soul ! The whole host of
ra ceased firing, till the two friendly
ests had again conveyed me safely
ond the reach of danger.
Going among them frequently thus,-
they treated me with exceptional kind-
ness, till one Sabbath I determined to
go over and talk with the enemy also,
in the hope of getting this sad war put
an end to. Our people were sternly
opposed to this, not for fear of my
safety, but lest I prayed for the enemy
and my God might help them in the
war. But my two friends, the old
Priests, persuaded them to let me go,
and to cease their shooting till my
return. They had an idea to buy, in
this way, my intercession with Jehovah
exclusively on their behalf; but I
explained to them, as on former occa-
sions, that I was there for the good of
all alike, that I loved them all and
sought to lead them to give up war
and bad conduct, for my God would
hear and bless only those who feared
and loved and obeyed Him. I had
a long interview with the enemies also,
arguing against the evils of war, and
urging them to give it up. They were
so far friendly ; they allowed me to
have worship amongst them ; and I
returned in safety before another
musket was discharged on either side.
The war still went on, though more
languidly ; but after a time the leaders
entered into a kind of truce, and peace
reigned for a season.
The other Mission Station, on the
south-west side of Tanna, had to be
visited by me from time to time.
Mr. and Mrs, Mathieson, there, were
both in a weak state of health, having
a tendency to consumption. On this
account they visited Aneityum several
times. They were earnestly devoted
to their work, and were successful so
far as health and the time allowed to
them permitted. At this juncture, a
message reached me that they were
without European food, and a request
to send them a little flour if possible.
The war made the journey overland
impossible. A strong wind and a high
sea round the coast rendered it im-
practicable for my boat to go. The
danger to life from the enemy was so
great, that I could not hire a crew. I
pled therefore with Nowar and Manu-
man, and a few leading men, to take
one of their best canoes, and themselves
51
More Mission Leaves from Tanna


to accompany me. I had a large flat-
bottomed pot with a close-fitting lid,
and that I pressed full of flour; and,
tying the lid firmly down, I fastened it
right in the centre of the canoe, and as
far above water-mark as possible. All
else that was required we tied around
our own persons. Sea and land being
as they were, it was a perilous under-
taking, which only dire necessity could
have justified. They were all good
swimmers, but as I could not swim
the strongest man was placed behind
me, to seize me and swim ashore, if
a crash came.
Creeping round near the shore all the
way, we had to keep just outside the
great breakers on the coral reef, and
were all drenched through and through
with the foam of an angry surf. We
arrived, however, in safety within two
miles of our destination, where lived the
friends of my canoe’s company, but
where a very dangerous sea was break-
ing on the reef. Here they all gave in,
and protested that no farther could they
go ; and truly their toil all the way
with the paddles had been severe.
I appealed to them, that the canoe
would for certain be smashed if they
tried to get on shore, that the pro-
visions would be lost, and some of us
probably drowned. But they turned
to the shore, and remained for some
time thus, watching the sea. At last
their Captain cried, “ Missi, hold on !
There’s a smaller wave coming ; we’ll
ride in now.”
My heart rose to the Lord in trem-
bling prayer ! The wave came rolling
on ; every paddle with all their united
strength struck into the sea ; and next
moment our canoe was flying like a
sea-gull on the crest of the wave to-
wards the shore. Another instant,
and the wave had broken on the reef
with a mighty roar, and rushed past
us hissing in clouds of foam. My
company were next seen swimming
wildly about in the sea, Manuman
the one-eyed Sacred Man alone hold-
ing on by the canoe, nearly full of
water, with me still clinging to the
seat of it, and the very next wave
likely to devour us. In desperation,
I sprang for the reef, and ran for a
man half-wading, half-swimming i
meet us ; and God so ordered it, th;
just as the next wave broke again
the silvery rock of coral, the ma
caught me and partly swam with n
through its surf, partly carried n
till I was set safely ashore. Praisir
God, I looked up and saw all the othe
nearly as safe as myself, except Mam
man, my friend, who was still holdir
on by the canoe, in the face of wind an
sea, and bringing it with him. Othe:
ran and swam to his help. The pa<
dies were picked up amid the sur
A powerful fellow came towards n
with the pot of flour on his head, ui
injured by water ! The Chief wh
held on by the canoe got severely ci
about the feet, and had been bad!
bruised and knocked about; but a
the rest escaped without further harn
and everything that we had was save(
Amongst friends, at last, they resolve
to await a favourable wind and tid
to return to their own homes. Sinj
ing in my heart unto God, I hired
man to carry the pot of flour, and soo
arrived at the Mission Station.
Supplying the wants of our dei
friends, Mr. and Mrs. Mathieso:
whom we found as well as could 1
expected, we had to prepare, after
few hours of rest, to return to our ow
Station by walking overland throug
the night. I durst not remain long(
away, lest my own house should 1
plundered and broken into. Thoug
weak in health, my fellow-Missionari(
were both full of hope, and zealous i
their work, and this somewhat stranj
visit was a pleasant blink amidst oi
darkness. Before I had gone far on m
return journey, the sun went down, an
no Native could be hired to accompan
me. They all told me that I woul
for certain be killed by the way. Bi
I knew that it would be quite dark b<
fore I reached the hostile districts, an
that the Heathen are great coward
in the dark and never leave the:
villages at night in the darkness, e?
cept in companies for fishing and sue!
like tasks. I skirted along the see
shore as fast as I could, walking an
running alternately ; and, when I gc
within hearing of voices, I slunk bac
52
John G. Paton, d.d.


to the bush till they had safely
,ssed, and then groped my way back
ar the shore, that being my only
ide to find a path.
Having made half the journey, I
me to a dangerous path, almost
rpendicular up a great rock, round
e base of which the sea roared deep,
ith my heart lifted up to Jesus, I
cceeded in climbing it, cautiously
asping roots, and resting by bushes,
11 reached safely to the top. There,
avoid a village, I had to keep crawl-
g slowly along the bush near the
a, on the top of that great ledge of
ck—a feat I could never have accom-
ished even in daylight without the
citement; but I felt that I was
pported and guided in all that life
death journey by my dear Lord
sus. I had to leave the shore, and
How up the bank of a very deep
vine to a place shallow enough for
e to cross, and then through the
ish away for the shore again. By
Iding too much to the right, I missed
e point where I had intended to
ich it. Small fires were now visible
rough the bush ; I heard the voices
the people talking in one of our most
3athen villages.
Quietly drawing back, I now knew
iere I was, and easily found my way
wards the shore ; but on reaching
e Great Rock, I could not in the
rkness find the path down again,
groped about till I was tired. I
ired that I might stumble over and
killed, or if I delayed till daylight
at the Savages would kill me. I
iew that one part of the rock was
jep-sloping, with little growth or
ne thereon, and I searched about
find it, resolved to commend myself
Jesus and slide down thereby, that
might again reach the shore and
;ape for my life. Thinking I had
and this spot, I hurled down several
mes and listened for their splash,
at I might judge whether it would
safe. But the distance was too
r for me to hear or judge. At
tide the sea there was deep ; but
low tide I could wade out of it and
safe. The darkness made it im-
ssible for me to see anything. I
let go my umbrella, shoving it down
with considerable force, but neither
did it send me back any news.
Feeling sure, however, that this was
the place I sought, and knowing that
to await the daylight would be certain
death, I prayed to my Lord Jesus for
help and protection, and resolved to
let myself go. First, I fastened all
my clothes as tightly as I could, so as
not to catch on anything ; then I lay
down at the top on my back, feet fore-
most, holding my head downwards
on my breast to keep it from striking
on the rock ; then, after one cry to the
Saviour, having let myself down as
far as possible by a branch, I at last
let go, throwing my arms forward and
trying to keep my feet well up. A
giddy swirl, as if flying through the
air, took possession of me; a few
moments seemed an age ; I rushed
quickly down, and felt no obstruction
till my feet struck into the sea below.
Adoring and praising my dear Lord
Jesus, who had ordered it so, I regained
my feet; it was low tide, I had re-
ceived no injury, I recovered my
umbrella, and, wading through, I
found the shore path easier and lighter
than the bush had been. The very
darkness was my safety, preventing
the Natives from rambling about.
I saw no person to speak to, till I
reached a village quite near to my
own house, fifteen or twenty miles
from where I had started ; here I left
the sea path and promised some young
men a gift of fish-hooks to guide me the
nearest way through the bush to my
Mission Station, which they gladly
and heartily did. I ran a narrow risk
in approaching them ; they thought
me an enemy, and I arrested their
muskets only by a loud cry, —
“I am Missi ! Don’t shoot; my
love to you, my friends ! ”
Praising God for His preserving care,
I reached home, and had a long re-
freshing sleep. The Natives, on hear-
ing next day how I had come all the
way in the dark, exclaimed, —
“ Surely any of us would have been
killed ! Your Jehovah God alone thus
protects you and brings you safely
home.”
53
More Mission Leaves from Tanna


With all my heart, I said, “ Yes !
and He will be your protector and
helper too, if only you will obey and
trust in Him.”
Certainly that night put my faith
to the test. Had it not been for
Ihe assurance that I was engaged in
His service, and that in every path of
duty He would carry me through or
dispose of me therein for His glory,
I could never have undertaken either
journey. St. Paul’s words are true
to-day and for ever, —“ I can do all
things through Christ which strength-
ened me.”
CHAPTER IX
DEEPENING SHADOWS
■A.D. 1860-1861. .ET. 36-37,
In September, 1860, I had the very
great pleasure of welcoming, as fellow-
labourers on Tanna, the Rev. S. F.
Johnston and his wife, two able and
pious young Missionaries from Nova
Scotia. Having visited the whole
group of the New Hebrides, they pre-
ferred to cast their lot on Tanna.
During the Rainy Season, and till they
had acquired a little of the language
and some preparation had been made
of a Station for themselves, I gladly
received them as my guests. The
company was very sweet to me ! I
gave them about fourteen Tannese
words to be committed to memory
every day, and conversed with them,
using the words already acquired ; so
that they made very rapid progress,
and almost immediately were of some
service in the Mission work. No man
could have desired better companions
in the ministry of the Gospel.
But the Ist January, 1861, was a
New Year’s Day ever to be remem-
bered. Mr. and Mrs. Johnston, Abra-
ham and I, had spent nearly the whole
time in a kind of solemn yet happy
festival. Anew in a holy covenant
before God, we unitedly consecrated
our lives and our all to the Lord Jesus,
giving ourselves away to His blessed
service for the conversion of the
Heathen on the New Hebrides. After
evening Family Worship, Mr. and Mrs.
Johnston left my room to go to thei
own house, only some ten feet distant
but he returned to inform me tha
there were two men at the windov
armed with huge clubs, and havin
black painted faces. Going out t
them and asking them what the
wanted, they replied, “ Medicine fo
a sick boy.”
With difficulty, I persuaded ther
to come in and get it. At once, i
flashed upon me, from their agitatio;
and their disguise of paint, that the;
had come to murder us. Mr. Johnsto;
had also accompanied us into th
house. Keeping my eye constant!;
fixed on them, I prepared the medicin
and offered it. They refused t
receive it, and each man grasped hi
killing stone. I faced them firml;
and said, “You see that Mr. Johnsto]
is now leaving, and you too mus
leave this room for to-night. To
morrow, you can bring the boy o
come for the medicine.”
Seizing their clubs, as if for actioi
they showed unwillingness to witl
draw, but I walked deliberately foi
ward and made as if to push them ou
when both turned and began to leav<
Mr. Johnston had gone in front c
them and was safely out. But h
bent down to lift a little kitten tha
had escaped at the open door ; and a
that moment one of the Savages, jerl
ing in behind, aimed a blow with hi
huge club, in avoiding which Mr. Johr
ston fell with a scream to the grounc
Both men sprang towards him, bn
our two faithful dogs ferociously leap
in their faces and saved his life. Rush
ing out, but not fully aware of wha
had occurred, I saw Mr. Johnsto
trying to raise himself, and heard hir
cry, “ Take care ! these men hav
tried to kill me, and they will ki
you ! ”
Facing them sternly I demandec
“ What is it that you want ? H
does not understand your language
What do you want ? Speak wit
me.”
Both men, thereon, raised the
great clubs and made to strike me
but quick as lightning these two doj
sprang at their faces and baffled the
54
John G. Paton, d.d.


'S. One dog was badly bruised,
the ground received the other
', that would have launched me
to Eternity. The best dog was a
tie cross-bred retriever, with terrier’s
Dod in him, splendid for warning us
approaching dangers, and which
d already been the means of saving
f life several times. Seeing how
itters stood, I now hounded both
gs furiously upon them, and the
o Savages fled. I shouted after
sm, “ Remember, Jehovah God
;s you and will punish you for trying
murder His servants ! ”
In their flight, a large body of men,
10 had come eight or ten miles to
fist in the murder and plunder,
me slipping here and there from the
sh and joined them, fleeing too.
;rily, “ the wicked flee, when no man
rsueth.” David’s experience and
mrance came home to us, that
ening, as very real: —“ God is our
: uge and our strength, . . . there-
ewe will not fear.” But, after the
nger was all past, I had always a
ange feeling of fear, more perhaps
•m the thought that I had been on
3 verge of Eternity and so near the
iat White Throne than from any
vish fear. During the crisis, I felt
lerally calm, and firm of soul,
aiding erect and with my whole
ight on the promise, “Lo! I am
th you alway.” Precious promise !
)w often I adore Jesus for it, and
oice in it! Blessed be His name.
1, now accustomed to such scenes
Tanna, retired to rest and slept
mdly ; but my dear fellow-labourer,
I afterwards learned, could not sleep
one moment. His pallor and ex-
ement continued next day, indeed
several days; and after that,
)ugh he was naturally lively and
jerful, I never saw him smile again,
told me next morning, “ I can only
rp saying to myself, Already on the
:ge of Eternity ! How have I spent
r time ? What good have I done ?
iat zeal for souls have I shown ?
ircely entered on the work of my
■, and so near death ! O my friend,
ever realized what death means, till
t night ! ” So saying, he covered
his face with both hands, and left me
to hide himself in his own room.
Having, as above recorded, conse-
crated our lives anew to God on the
first day of January, I was, up till the
sixteenth of the month, accompanied
by Mr, Johnston and sometimes also
by Mrs. Johnston on my rounds in the
villages amongst the sick, and they
greatly helped me. But by an un-
happy accident, I was laid aside when
most sorely needed. When adzing
a tree for house-building, I observed
that Mahanan the war Chief’s brother
had been keeping too near me, and
that he carried a tomahawk in his
hand ; and, in trying both to do my
work and to keep an eye on him, I
struck my ankle severely with the
adze. He moved off quickly, saying,
“ I did not do that,” but doubtless
rejoicing at what had happened. The
bone was badly hurt, and several of
the blood-vessels cut. Dressing it as
well as I could, and keeping it con-
stantly soaked in cold water, I had to
exercise the greatest care. In this
condition, amidst great sufferings, I
was sometimes carried to the villages
to administer medicine to the sick,
and to plead and pray with the dying.
On such occasions, in this mode of
transit even, the conversations that
I had with dear Mr. Johnston were
most solemn and greatly refreshing.
He had, however, scarcely ever slept
since the first of January, and during
the night of the sixteenth he sent for
my bottle of laudanum. Being severely
attacked with ague and fever, I could
not go to him, but sent the bottle, speci-
fying the proper quantity for a dose,
but that he quite understood already.
He took a dose for himself, and gave
one also to his wife, as she too suffered
from sleeplessness. This he repeated
three nights in succession, and both
of them obtained a long, sound, and
refreshing sleep. He came to my
bedside, where I lay in the ague-fever,
and said with great animation, amongst
other things, “ I have had such a
blessed sleep, and feel so refreshed !
What kindness in God to provide such
remedies for suffering man ! ”
At midday his dear wife came to
55
Deepening Shadows


me crying, “ Mr. Johnston has fallen
asleep, so deep that I cannot awake
him.”
My fever had reached the worst
stage, but I struggled to my feet, got
to his bedside, and found him in a
state of coma, with his teeth fixed in
tetanus. With great difficulty we
succeeded in slightly rousing him ;
with a kaife, spoon, and pieces of
wood, we forced his teeth open, so as
to administer an emetic with good
effects, and also other needful medi-
cines. For twelve hours, we had to
keep him awake by repeated cold dash
in the face, by ammonia, and by
vigorously moving him about. He
then began to speak freely ; and next
day he rose and walked about a little.
For the two following days, he was
sometimes better and sometimes worse;
but we managed to keep him up till
the morning of the 21st, when he again
fell into a state of coma, from which
we failed to rouse him. At two o’clock
in the afternoon, he fell asleep—another
Martyr for the testimony of Jesus in
those dark and tryihg Isles, leaving
his young wife in indescribable sorrow,
which she strove to bear with Christian
resignation. Having made his coffin
and dug his grave, we two alone at
sunset laid him to rest beside my own
dear wife and child, close by the Mis-
sion House.
Hurricane and tempest also fought
against us at that time. On the 3rd,
and again on the 10th March, 1861,
we had severe and destructive storms.
They tore up and smashed bread-fruit,
chestnut, cocoa-nut, and all kinds of
fruit trees. The ground was strewn
thick with half-ripe and wasted fruits.
Yam plantations and bananas were
riven to pieces, and fences and houses
lay piled in a common ruin. My
Mission House was also greatly injured;
and the Church, on which I had spent
many weeks of labour, was nearly
levelled with the ground. Trees of
forty years’ growth were broken like
straws, or lifted by the roots and
blown away. At the other Station,
all Mr. Mathieson’s premises except
one bedroom were swept off in the
breath of the hurricane. The sea rose
alarmingly and its waves rolled f;
inland, causing terrible destructio:
Had not the merciful Lord left oi
bedroom at my Station and one ;
Mr. Mathieson’s partly habitable,
know not what in the circumstance
we could have done. Men of fifi
years declared that never such a terr
pest had shaken their Islands. Canoe
were shivered on the coral rocks, an*
villages were left with nothing bu
ruins to mark where they had beer
Though rain poured in torrents, I ha<
to keep near my fallen house for hour
and hours to prevent the Natives fror
carrying away everything I had i:
this world ; and after the secom
storm, all my earthly belongings hai
to be secured in the one still-standin:
room.
v Following upon this came anothe
spate of thirst for our blood, whicl
was increased in the following manner
Miaki the war Chief had an infant son
who had just died. They told us tha
four men were slain at the same time
that their spirits might serve anc
accompany him in the other world
and that our death also was agaii
resolved upon. For four days the}
surrounded our diminished premises
We locked ourselves all up in that singl<
bedroom, and armed Savages kep'
prowling about to take our lives
What but the restraining pity of th<
Lord kept them from breaking in upor
us ? They killed our fowls. The}
cut down and destroyed all our re
maining bananas. They broke dowr
the fence around the plantation, anc
tried to burn it, but failed. The}
speared and killed some of the fev
goats—my sole supply of milk. W<
were helpless, and kept breathing oui
our souls in prayer; and God die
preserve us, but, oh, what a trying
time !
The horror grew, when short!
thereafter we learned that our peopl
near the Harbour had killed four me:
and presented their bodies to certai:
Chiefs, who feasted on them; an*
that they in return had given larg
fat hogs to our people, one for each c
ten bodies which our people had foi
merly presented to them. W.thin
56
John G. Paton, d.d.


months, thirteen or fourteen per-
, nearly all refugees or prisoners
/ar, were reported to us as killed
feasted upon. We generally heard
ting of these murders till all was
■, but in any case I would have
i helpless against their bloodthirst,
i had I exposed myself to their
,ge enmity. They sent two dead
es to our nearest village, where
till conducted Worship every Sab-
i when we durst appear amongst
u ; but our people refused to re-
e them, saying, “ Now we know
it is wrong to kill and eat
fellow-creatures,” A Chief from
:her village, being present, eagerly
ived them and carried them off to
;at feast for which he was prepar-
t this juncture, our friendly Chief
rar seemed to become afraid. His
also had been threatened ; and
life had been often attempted of
Society around was all in tur-
., and Nowar urged us to leave
take refuge in Aneityum till these
*ers blew past, and he himself
Id accompany us. I refused, how-
to leave. Indeed, there was no
tediate means of escape, except
boat, —which would have been
}st madness in an open sea voyage
tfty miles, with only Nowar and
Teachers, all inexperienced hands,
rar, being angry and afraid, took
revenge by laying aside his shirt
kilt, returning to his Heathen
?dness and paint, attending the
tings of the Savages, and absent-
limself from the Sabbath Worship,
after about three weeks he re-
ed the Christian garments ; and,
ng that the danger had for the
; passed over, he returned to us as
idly as ever. Poor Nowar ! if he
knew what thousands of Chris-
-3 at home do every day just to save
r skins ; and then if he only knew
hardly these Christians can speak
nst Heathen converts !
ne day, about this time, I heard
musual bleating amongst my few
aining goats, as if they were being
d or tortured, I rushed to the
;-house, and found myself instantly
surrounded by a band of armed men.
The snare had caught me, their weapons
were raised, and I expected next
instant to die. But God moved me
to talk to them firmly and kindly ; I
warned them of their sin and its punish-
ment ; I showed them that only my
love and pity led me to remain there
seeking their good, and that if they
killed me they killed their best friend.
I further assured them that I was not
afraid to die, for at death my Saviour
would take me to be with Himself
in Heaven, and to be far happier than
I had ever been on Earth ; and that
my only desire to live was to make
them all as happy, by teaching them
to love and serve my Lord Jesus. I
then lifted up my hands and eyes to
the Heavens, and prayed aloud for
Jesus to bless all my dear Tannese,
and either to protect me or to take me
home to Glory as He saw to be for the
best. One after another they slipped
away from me, and Jesus restrained
them once again. Did ever mother
run more quickly to protect her crying
child in danger’s hour than the Lord
Jesus hastens to answer believing
prayer and send help to His servants
in His own good time and way, so far
as it shall be for His glory and their
good ? A woman may forget her
child, yet will I not forget thee, saith
the Lord. Oh that all my readers
knew and felt this, as in those days
and ever since I have felt that His
promise is a reality, and that He is
with His servants to support and bless
them even unto the end of the world !
May, 186 1, brought with it a sorrow-
ful and tragic event, which fell as the
very shadow of doom across our path ;
I mean the martyrdom of the Gordons
on Erromanga.
Abraham and I were thrown much
into each other’s company, and he
stood by me in every danger. We
conducted Family Prayers alternately ;
and that evening he said during the
prayer in Tannese, in which language
alone we understood each other :
“ O Lord, our Heavenly Father,
they have murdered Thy servants on
Erromanga. They have banished the
Aneityumese from dark Tanna. And
57
Deepening Shadows


now they want to kill Missi Paton and
me ! Our great King, protect us,
and make their hearts soft and sweet
to Thy Worship. Or, if they are per-
mitted to kill us, do not Thou hate us,
but wash us in the blood of Thy dear
Son Jesus Christ. He came down to
Earth and shed His blood for sinners ;
through Him forgive us our sins and
take us to Heaven—that good place
where Missi Gordon the man and Missi
Gordon the woman and all Thy dear
servants now are singing Thy praise
and seeing Thy face. Our Lord, our
hearts are pained just now, and we
weep over the death of Thy dear
servants ; but make our hearts good
and strong for Thy cause, and take
Thou away all our fears. Make us
two and all Thy servants strong for
Thee and for Thy Worship ; and if
they kill us two, let us die together
in Thy good work, like Thy servants
Missi Gordon the man and Missi Gor-
don the woman.”
In this manner his great simple soul
poured itself out to God ; and my
heart melted within me as it had
never done under any prayer poured
from the lips of cultured Christian
men !
Under the strain of these events,
Miaki came to our house, and attacked
me in hearing of his men to this effect:
‘‘You and the Worship are the cause
of all the sickness and death now
taking place on Tanna ! The Erro-
raanga men killed Missi Gordon the
man and also the woman, and they are
all well long ago. The Worship is
killing us all ; and the Inland people
will kill us for keeping you and the
Worship here ; for we love the conduct
of Tanna, but we hate the Worship.
We must kill you and it, and we shall
all be well again.”
I tried to reason firmly and kindly
with them, showing them that their
own conduct was destroying them,
and that our presence and the Worship
could only be a blessing to them in
every way, if only they would accept
of it and give up their evil ways. I
referred to a poor girl, whom Miaki
and his men had stolen and abused—
that they knew such conduct to be
bad, and that God would certs
punish them for it.
He replied, “ Such is the condud
Tanna. Our fathers loved and :
lowed it, we love and follow it, am
the Worship condemns it, we will
you and destroy the Worship.”
I said, “ The Word of the Holy C
condemns all bad conduct, and I m
obey my God in trying to lead you
give it up, and to love and serve .
Son Jesus our Saviour. If I ref
to obey my God, He will punish m
He replied, “ Missi, we like ms
wives to attend us and to do our wc
Three of my wives are dead and th
are yet alive. The Worship kil
them and my children. We hate
It will kill us all.”
I answered, “ Miaki, is it good
you to have so many wives, and m;
of your men to have none ? "V
waits on them ? Who works for the
They cannot get a wife, and so, ha\
to work for themselves, they are
to hate you and all the Chiefs a
have more wives than one. You
not love your wives, else you wo
not slave them and beat them as ;
do.”
To know what was best to be dc
in such trying circumstances, was
abiding perplexity. To have left a
gether, when so surrounded by pc
and enemies, at first seemed the wi:
course, and was the repeated acb
of many friends. But again, I !
acquired the language, and had gai
a considerable influence amongst
Natives, and there were a num
warmly attached both to myself ;
to the Worship. To have left wo
have been to lose all, which to me 1
heart-rending ; therefore, risking
with Jesus, I held on while the h
of being spared longer had not at
lutely and entirely vanished. C
only knows how deep and genr
were my pity and affection for the p
Tannese, labouring and longing
bring them from their dark idola
and heathenism to love and serve :
please Jesus Christ as their God <
Saviour. True, some of the awfi
wise people wrote, as in the case
Mr. Gordon, much nonsense about
58
John G. Paton, D.D.


the Tanna Mission. They knew,
Durse, that I was to blame, and
from safe distances could see that
,s not in the path of duty !
ic following incident illustrates
iepth of native superstition. One
ling two Inland Chiefs came run-
to the Mission House, breathless,
covered with perspiration. One
hem held up a handful of half-
sn tracts, crying, “ Missi, is this
rt of God’s Word, the sacred Book
ehovah ? or is it the work, the
Is, the book of man ? ”
examined them and replied,
ese are the work, the words, and
Dook of man, not of Jehovah.”
3 questioned me again, “ Missi,
mu certain that it is not the Word
hovah ? ”
replied, “ It is only man’s work
man’s book.”
3 continued then, “ Missi, some
s ago, Kaipai, a sacred Chief, and
dn Tannese, went on a visit to
tyum, and Missi Geddie gave him
5 books. On his return, when he
'■ed them to the Tannese, the
le were all so afraid of them, for
thought they were the sacred
cs of Jehovah, that they met for
citation and agreed solemnly to
them. Yesterday, some person
Lgging had disinterred them, and
nee our Inland people said that
dead Chief had buried a part of
vah’s Word, which made Him
v, and that He had therefore
3d the Chief’s death and the plague
easles, etc. Therefore they were
assembled to kill the dead Chief’s
and daughter in revenge ! But,
e that should be done, I persuaded
i to send these books, to inquire
ou if this be part of Jehovah’s
:, and if the burying of it caused
lese diseases and deaths.”
Lssured him that these books never
id either sickness or death to any
an being ; and that none of us
:ause sickness or death by sorcery ;
burying these tracts did not make
vah angry, nor cause evil to any
;ure. ‘‘You yourselves know,”
d, “ the very ships that brought
measles and caused the deaths ;
and you killed some of the young men
who were landed sick with the disease.”
The Inland Chief declared, “ Missi,
I am quite satisfied ; no person shall
be put to death over these books now.”
They went off, but immediately
returned, saying, “ Missi, have you
any books like these to show to us ?
And will you show us the sacred Book
of Jehovah beside them ? ”
I showed them a Bible, and then a
handful of Tracts with pictures like
those they had brought; and I offered
them the Bible and specimens of these
Tracts, that they might show both to
the people assembled. The Tracts
they received, but the Bible they re-
fused to touch. They satisfied the
Inland people and prevented blood-
shed ; but oh, what a depth of super-
stition to be raised out of ! and how
easily life might be sacrificed at every
turn !
Revenge for the murder of the four
men killed to accompany Miaki’s child,
threatened to originate another war ;
but the Chiefs for eight miles around
met, and, after much speechifying,
agreed that as they were all weak for
war, owing to the measles and the want
of food through the hurricanes, they
should delay it till they all grew
stronger. Nowar was, however, greatly
excited, and informed me that Miaki
had urged the people of an inland
district to shoot Nowar and the
Teacher and me, and he pled with
me again to take Abraham and flee
to Aneityum,—impossible except by
canoe, and perhaps impossible even
so. That night and the following
night they tried to break into my
house. On one occasion my valuable
dog was let out, and cleared them away.
Next night I shouted at them from
inside, when they thought me asleep,
and they decamped again. Indeed,
our continuous danger caused me now
oftentimes to sleep with my clothes
on, that I might start at a moment’s
warning. My faithful dog Clutha
would give a sharp bark and awake me.
At other times, she would leap up and
pull at the clothes till I awoke ; and
then she turned her head quietly and
indicated by a wondrous instinct
59
Deepening Shadows


where the danger lay. God made
them fear this precious creature, and
often used her in saving our lives.
Soon after this, six Inland Chiefs came
to see me. We had a long talk on the
evils of war, and the blessings of the
Worship of Jehovah. I gave each a
knife and a fork and a tin plate, and
they promised to oppose the war which
Miaki was forcing on. A man came
also with a severe gash in his hand,
which a fish had given him ; I dressed
it, and he went away very grateful,
and spread everywhere the news of
healing, a kind of Gospel which he
and they could most readily appreciate.
Another incident made them well-
disposed for a season ; namely, the
use of a fishing net. Seeing that the
Natives had so little food—there being,
in fact, a famine after the hurricane
—I engaged an Inland tribe to make
a net forty feet long and very broad.
Strange to say, the Inland people who
live far from the sea make the best
fishing materials, which again they
sell to the Harbour people for the axes,
knives, blankets, and other articles
obtained from vessels calling. They
also make the killing stones, and trade
with them amongst the shore people
all round the island. This kawas or
killing stone is made of blue whinstone,
eighteen to twenty-four inches long, an
inch and a half across, perfectly straight,
and hewn as round and neat as any
English tradesman could have done
it, exactly like a large scythe-stone,
such as they use on the harvest fields
in Scotland. The kawas seems to be
peculiar to Tanna, at least I have not
seen it on any other island. The
Natives, with pieces of very hard heavy
wood of the same size and shape, are
taught from infancy to throw it at
a given mark. In warfare, it is thrown
first; where it strikes it stuns or kills,
and then they spring forward with
their large double-handed heavy club.
Every man or boy carries his killing
stone and other weapons, even when
moving about peaceably in his own
village, war being, in fact, the only
regular occupation for men !
Well, these same Inland people,
the sort of artisans of the island, being
mostly the women and the girls, ma
factured for me this huge fishing-i
The cord was twisted from the fi
made out of the bark of their c
trees, and prepared with immense
and care ; and not without touo
of skill and taste, when woven £
knotted and intertwined. This
I secured, and lent about three d
in turn to every village all round
Harbour and near it. One nigh-
saw them carrying home a large h
which they had got from an Ink
Chief for a portion of the fish wh
they had taken. I thought it rij
to cause them to return the net to
Mission House every Saturday eveni
that they might not be tempted to ’
it on Sabbath. It was a great h
to them, and the Harbour yielded th
much wholesome food in lieu of w]
the hurricane had destroyed.
For a season thereafter, the frien
feeling grew on every side.
Natives prepared, for payment,
excellent foundation for a new Chui
by levelling down the hill near to
Mission House. Any number of ri
offered to work for calico, knives, a:
etc. All the fences were renew
and the Mission premises began to 1<
nice once more—at least, in my e}
My work became encouraging, am
had many opportunities of talking w
them about the Worship and Jehov
This state of matters displeased Mi
and his men ; and one day, hav
been engaged thus, I rushed back o
in time to extinguish a fire which tl
had kindled under the verandah £
close to the door of my house. (
watch had to be unrelaxing. A con
of Miaki’s, for instance, sold me a 1
as good for food which he knew to
poisonous ; but Nowar saw in ti
and warned me of its deadly characi
Miaki then threatened to shoot £
of the Inland people who came to w<
or to receive instruction, yet lar
numbers came than before, but tl
came fully armed !
Nouka, the high Chief of the H
hour, Miaki’s uncle, came and
beside us often, and said, “Mi
breaks my heart! He deceives Mi
He hates the Worship of Jehovah.’
60
John G. Paton, d.d.


r some time, Nouka and his wife
daughter—a handsome girl, his
child—and Miaki’s principal wife
her two sons, and nine Chiefs
ided Worship regularly at the
on House, on Sabbaths and on
afternoon of every Wednesday.
11, about sixty persons somewhat
arly waited on our ministrations
lis time ; and amidst all perils I
encouraged, and my heart was
}f hope. Yet one evening, when
ig more consoled and hopeful than
before, a musket was discharged
y very door, and I was constrained
alize that we were in the midst of
~ Father, our times are in Thy
j
my Mission School, I offered as
ize a red shirt for the first Chief
knew the whole alphabet without
stake. It was won by an Inikahi
E, who was once a terror to the
e community. Afterwards, when
g to teach the A B C to others,
>roceeded in something like this
hie style: “A is a man’s legs
the body cut off; B is like two
; C is a three-quarters moon ;
like one eye ; E is a man with
club under his feet and another
his head ; F is a man with a large
and a smaller one,” etc., etc. ;
as like a man’s foot; Q was the
of the dove, etc. Then he would
“ Remember these things ; you
soon get hold of the letters and
ible to read. I have taught my
; child, who can scarcely walk,
names of them all. They are not
[to hold, but soft and easy. You
soon learn to read the book, if
try it with all your heart ! ”
at Miaki was still our evil genius,
every incident seemed to be used
dm for one settled purpose of hate:
fiserumini Chief, for instance, and
men took away a young girl in
3e to Aniwa, to be sold to friends
for tobacco leaf, which the Ani-
s cultivated extensively. They
prepared to take revenge there
a child’s death, killed in their
;f by the sorcery of Aniwan.
;n within sight of the shore, the
>es were upset and all were said to
have been devoured by sharks, except-
ing only one canoe out of six. This
one returned to Tanna and reported
that there were two white Traders
living on Aniwa, that they had plenty
of ammunition and tobacco, but that
they would not come to Tanna as long
as a Missionary lived there. Under
this fresh incitement, a party of Miaki’s
men came to my house, praising the
Erromangans for the murder of their
Missionaries, and threatening me.
Even the friendly Nowar said,
“ Miaki will make a great wind and
sink any Man-of-war that comes here.
We will take the Man-of-war and kill all
that are on board. If you and Abraham
do not leave us we will kill you both,
for we must have the Traders and the
powder.”
Just as they were assuming a threat-
ening attitude, other Natives came
running with the «ry, “ Missi, the John
Knox is coming into the Harbour, and
two great ships of fire, Men-of-war,
behind her, coming very fast ! ”
I retorted upon Nowar and the
hostile company, “ Now is your time !
Make all possible haste ! Let Miaki
raise his great wind now ; get all your
men ready ; I will tell them that you
mean to fight, and you will find them
always ready ! ”
Miaki’s men fled away in unconcealed
terror ; but Nowar came to me and
said, “ Missi, I know that my talk is
all lies, but if I speak the truth, they
will kill me ! ”
I answered, “ Trust in Jehovah, the
same God who sent those vessels now,
to protect us from being murdered.”
But Nowar always wavered.
And now from all parts of the island
those who were most friendly flocked
to us. They were clamorous to have
Miaki and some others of our enemies
punished by the Man-of-war in pre-
sence of the Natives ; and then they
would be strong to speak in our defence
and to lead the Tannese to worship
Jehovah.
Commodore Seymour,CaptainHume,
and Dr. Geddie came on shore.
After inquiring into everything, the
Commodore urged me to leave at once,
and very kindly offered to remove me
61
Deepening Shadows


to Ancityum, or Auckland, or any place
of safety that I preferred. Again,
however, I hesitated to leave my dear
benighted Tannese, knowing that both
Stations would be instantly broken
up, that all the influence gained would
be thrown away, that the Church
would lose all that had been expended,
and above all, that those friendly to
us would be left to persecution and
destruction. For a long time I had
seldom taken off my clothes at night,
needing to be constantly on the alert
to start at a moment’s notice ; yet,
while hope burned within my soul
I could not withdraw, so I resolved to
risk all with my dear Lord Jesus, and
remained at my post. At my request,
however, they met and talked with all
the leaders who could be assembled
at the Mission House. The Natives
declared frankly that they liked me,
but did not like the Worship. The
Commodore reminded them that they
had invited me to land among them,
and had pledged their word more than
once to protect me ; he argued with
them that as they had no fault to
find with me, but only with the Wor-
ship, which could do them only good,
they must bind themselves to protect
my life. Miaki and others promised
and gave him their hands to do so.
Lathella, an Ancityumese Chief, who
was with Dr. Geddie, interpreted for
him and them, Dr. Geddie explaining
fully to Lathella in Ancityumese what
the Commodore said in English, and
Lathella explaining all to the Tannese
in their own tongue.
At last old Nouka spoke out for all
and said, “ Captain Paddan and all
the Traders tell us that the Worship
causes all our sickness and death.
They will not trade with us, nor sell
us tobacco, pipes, powder, balls, caps,
and muskets, till we kill our Missi like
the Erromangans, but after that they
will send a Trader to live among us
and give us plenty of all these things.
We love Missi. But when the Traders
tell us that the Worship makes us sick,
and when they bribe us with tobacco
and powder to kill him or drive him
away, some believe them and our
hearts do bad conduct to Missi. Let
Missi remain here, and we will tn
do good conduct to Missi ; but
must tell Queen ’Toria of her peoj
bad treatment of us, and that she n
prevent her Traders from killing
with their measles, and from tel
us lies to make us do bad conduc
Missi ! If they come to us and ■
as before, our hearts are very d
and may again lead us to bad cone
to Missi.”
After this little parley, the C
modore invited us all on board, al
with the Chiefs. They saw at
three hundred brave marines ran
up on deck, and heard a great can
discharged. For all such efforts
impress them and open their eye;
felt profoundly grateful ; but
clearly I knew and saw that only
grace of God could lastingly cha
them ! They were soon back to t]
old arguments, and were heard sa}
to one another, “If no punishmen
inflicted on the Erromangans
murdering the Missi there, we fear
bad conduct of the Tannese will c
tinue.”
CHAPTER X
FAREWELL SCENES
A.D. 1861-1862. MT. 37-38.
A time of great excitement amoi
the Natives now prevailed. \
war, nothing but war was spoken
Preparations for war were being ir
in all the villages far and near. I
sat on every face, and armed ba
kept watching each other, as if un
tain where the war was to begin 01
whom. All work was suspended,
that war spirit was let loose wl
rouses the worst passions of hui
nature. Again we found ourse
the centre of conflict, one party set
killing us or driving us away ;
other washing to retain us, while
old bitter grievances were also drag
into their speeches.
Miaki and Nouka said, “ If you
keep Missi and his Worship, take !
with you to your own land, for we
not have him to live at the Harboi
lan, the great Inland Chief,
62
John G. Paton, d.d.


h and said, “ On whose land does
dissi live, yours or ours ? Who
against the Worship and all good,
are the thieves and murderers,
tell the lies, you or we ? We wish
;, but you will have war. We
Missi and the Worship, but you
them and say, ‘ Take him to your
land ! ’ It is our land on which
iw lives ; it is his own land which
aught from you, but which our
rs sold Missi Turner long ago.
and was not yours to sell; it was
r ours. Your fathers stole it
us long ago by war ; but we
i not have asked it back, had you
asked us to take Missi away,
we will defend him on it, and he
teach us and our people in our
land ! ” So meeting after meet-
irokc into fiery speech, and sepa-
. with many threats.
the next great meeting I was
sd, but did not go, contenting
If with a message pleading that
should live at peace and on no
mt go to war with each other.
lan himself came for me. I said,
i, I have told you my whole heart,
ot to that meeting. I will rather
the island or die, than see you
[ to war about me ! ”
; answered, “ Missi, come with
;ome now ! ”
replied, “ lan, you are surely not
ig me away to kill me ? If you
my God will punish it.”
5 only reply was, “ Follow me,
v me quickly.”
elt constrained to go. He strode
Tore me till we reached the great
je of his ancestors. His followers,
d largely with muskets as well as
e weapons, filled one half the
ge Square or dancing ground,
i, Nouka, and their whole party
i manifest terror upon the other
Marching into the centre, he
. with me by his side, and proudly
ng round, exclaimed, “ Missi,
are my men and your friends !
ire met to defend you and the
hip.” Then pointing across to
ther side, he cried aloud, “ These
your enemies and ours ! The
of the Worship, the disturbers
of the peace on Tanna ! Missi, say
the word, and the muskets of my men
will sweep all opposition away, and the
Worship will spread and we will all
be strong for it on Tanna. We will
not shoot without your leave ; but if
you refuse they will kill you and per-
secute us and our children, and banish
Jehovah’s Worship from our land.”
I said, “ I love all of you alike. I
am here to teach you how to turn away
from all wickedness, to worship and
serve Jehovah, and to live in peace.
How can I approve of any person
being killed for me or for the Worship ?
My God would be angry at me and
punish me, if I did ! ”
He replied, “ Then, Missi, you will
be murdered and the Worship de-
stroyed.”
I then stood forth in the middle
before them all and cried, “You may
shoot or murder me, but I am your
best friend. I am not afraid to die.
You will only send me the sooner to my
Jehovah God, whom I love and serve,
and to my dear Saviour J esus Christ, who
died for me and for you, and who sent
me here to tell you all His love. If
you will only love and serve Him and
give up your bad conduct, you will be
happy. But if you kill me, His mes-
senger, rest assured that He will in
His own time and way punish you.
This is my word to you all; my love
to you all ! ”
So saying, I turned to leave ; and
lan strode sullenly away and stood
at the head of his men, crying, “Missi,
they will kill you ! they will kill us,
and you will be to blame ! ”
Miaki and Nouka, full of deceit, now
cried out, “ Missi’s word is good ! Let
us all obey it. Let us all worship.”
An old man, Sirawia, one of lan’s
under-chiefs, then said, “ Miaki and
Nouka say that the land on which
Missi lives was theirs ; though they
sold it to him and he has paid them for
it, they all know that it was ours, and
is yet ours by right ; but if they let
Missi live on it in peace, we will all live
at peace, and worship Jehovah. And
if not, we will surely claim it again.”
Miaki and his party hereon went off
to their plantations, and brought a
6 3
Farewell Scenes


large present of food to lan and his
men as a peace-offering. This they
accepted ; and the next day lan and
his men brought Miaki a return present
and said, “You know that Missi lives
on our land ? Take our present, be
friends, and let him live quietly and
teach us all. Yesterday you said his
word was good ; obey it now, else we
will punish you and defend the Missi.”
Miaki accepted the token, and gave
good promises for the future. lan
then came to the hill-top near our house
by which passed the public path, and
cried aloud in the hearing of all,
“ Abraham, tell Missi that you and he
now live on our land. This path is
the march betwixt Miaki and us. We
have this day bought back the land
of our fathers by a great price to pre-
vent war. Take of our bread-fruits
and also of our cocoa-nuts what you
require, for you are our friends and
living on our land, and we will protect
you and the Worship ! ”
Chafed at the upsetting of all their
plans and full of revenge, Nouka and
Miaki and their allies declared publicly
that they were now going to kill
lan by sorcery, i.e., by Nahak, more
feared by the poor Tannese than the
field of battle. Nothing but the grace
of God and the enlightenment of His
Spirit through the Scriptures, has ever
raised these Natives above that para-
lyzing superstition. But, thank God,
there are now, while I write this (1887),
about twelve thousand in the New
Hebrides who have been thus enlight-
ened and lifted out of their terrors,
for the Gospel is still, as of old, the
power of God unto salvation ! Strange
to say, lan became sick shortly after
the Sacred Men had made the declara-
tion about their Nahak-sorcery. I
attended him, and for a time he re-
covered, and appeared very grateful.
But he soon fell sick again. I sent
him and the Chief next under him a
blanket each ; I also gave shirts and
calico to a number of his leading men.
They wore them and seemed grateful
and pleased. lan, however, gradually
sank and got worse. He had every
symptom of being poisoned, a thing
easily accomplished, as they know and
use many deadly poisons. His su
ings were very great, which preve:
me from ascribing his collapse to i
superstitious terror! I did all
could be done ; but all thought
dying, and of course by sorcery,
people were angry at me for not i
senting before to their shooting
Miaki; and Miaki’s people were
rejoicing that lan was being k:
by Nahak.
One night, his brother and a p;
came for me to go and see lan, b
declined to go till the morning for
of the fever and ague. On read
his village, I saw many people ab
and feared that I had been led ini
snare ; but I at once entered into
house to talk and pray with him, a;
appeared to be dying. After pra
I discovered that I was left alone v
him, and that all the people had
tired from the village ; and I knew tl
according to their custom, this me
mischief. lan said, “ Come near
and sit by my bedside to talk with
Missi.”
I did so, and while speaking to
he lay as if lost in a swoon of «
meditation. Suddenly he drew
the sugar-cane leaf thatch close t
bed a large butcher-like knife,
instantly feeling the edge of it wit
other hand, he pointed it to witl
few inches of my heart and he;
quivering there, all a-tremble
excitement. I durst neither r
nor speak, except that my heart
praying to the Lord to spare m<
if my time was come to take me h
to Glory with Himself. There pa
a few moments of awful susp<
My sight went and came. Not a a
had been spoken, except to Je
and then lan wheeled the knife aro
thrust it into the sugar-cane leaf,
cried to me, “ Go, go quickly I ”
Next moment I was on the r
Not a living soul was to be seen al
the village. I understood then
it had been agreed that lan was to
me, and that they had all withdr
so as not to witness it, so that when
Man-of-war came to inquire about
lan would be dead, and no pur
ment could overtake the murd<
6 4
John G. Paton, d.d.


Iked quietly till quite free of the
lest some hid in their houses
it observe me. Thereafter, fear-
;hat they, finding I had escaped,
.t overtake and murder me, I ran
ny life a weary four miles till I
led the Mission House, faint, yet
ing God for such a deliverance.
lan died soon after, and his
le strangled one of his wives and
ed another, and took out the three
3 together in a canoe and sank
in the sea.
aki was jubilant over having
I his enemy by Nahak ; but the
id people now assembled in thou-
-3 to help Sirawia and his brother
enge that death on Miaki, Nouka,
Karewick. These, on the other
, boasted that they would kill
heir enemies by Nahak-sorcery,
vould call up a hurricane to destroy
houses, fruit trees, and planta-
. Miaki and a number of his
also came to the Mission House ;
observing his sullen countenance,
:ed kindly after his wife, who was
t to be confined, and gave a
cet, a piece of calico, and a bit of
as a present for the baby. He
ed greatly pleased, whispered
thing to his men, and peaceably
irew. Immediately after Miaki’s
,t about bringing a storm, one of
great hurricanes actually smote
side of the island and laid every-
; waste. His enemies were greatly
jed, and many of the injured
le united with them in demanding
ige on Miaki. Hitherto I had
everything in my power to pre-
war, but now it seemed inevit-
and both parties sent word that
raham and I kept to the Mission
e no one would harm us. We
ittle faith in any of their promises,
here was no alternative for us.
the following Saturday, 18th
ary, 1862, the war began. Musket
musket was discharged quite
us, and the bush all round rang
the yell of their war-cry, which
:e heard will never be forgotten,
me nearer and nearer, for Miaki
and his people took shelter behind
around our house. We were
placed in the heart of danger, and the
balls flew thick all around us. In the
afternoon lan’s brother and hir party
retired, and Miaki quickly sent mes-
sengers and presents to the Inika-
himini and Kaserumini districts, to
assemble all their people and help him
“ to fight Missi and the Tannese who
were friends of the Worship.” He
said, “ Let us cook his body and
Abraham’s, and distribute them to
every village on this side of the island! ”
Yet all the while Miaki assured me
that he had sent a friendly message.
The war went on, and poor Nowar the
Chief protected us, till he had a spear
broken into his right knee. The
enemy would have carried him off to
feast on his body ; but his young men,
shouting wildly his name and battle-
cry, rushed in with great impetuosity
and carried their wounded Chief home
in triumph. The Inland people now
discharged muskets at my house and
beat against the walls with their clubs.
They smashed in the door and window
of our store-room, broke open boxes
and casks, tore my books to pieces
and scattered them about, and carried
off everything for which they cared,
including my boat, mast, oars, and
sails. They broke into Abraham’s
house and plundered it; after which
they made a rush at the bedroom, into
which we were locked, firing muskets,
yelling, and trying to break it in. A
Chief, professing to be sorry for us,
called me to the window, but on seeing
me he sent a tomahawk through it,
crying, ‘‘Come on, let us kill him now! ”
I replied, “My Jehovah God will
punish you ; a Man-of-war will come
and punish you, if you kill Abraham,
his wife, or me.”
He retorted, “ It’s all lies about a
Man-of-war ! They did not punish
the Erromangans. They are afraid of
us. Come on, let us kill them ! ”
He raised his tomahawk and aimed
to strike my forehead, many muskets
were uplifted as if to shoot, so I raised
a revolver in my right hand and
pointed it at them. The Rev. Joseph
Copeland had left it with me on a
former visit. I did not wish it, but
he insisted upon leaving it, saying that
65
Farewell Scenes


Ihe very knowledge that I had such
a weapon might save my life. Truly,
on this occasion it did so. Though it
was harmless, they fell back quickly.
My immediate assailant dropped to
the ground, crying, “ Missi has got a
short musket ! He will shoot you
all 1 "
After lying flat on the ground for
a little, they all got up and ran to the
nearest bush, where they continued
yelling about and showing their mus-
kets. Towards nightfall they left,
loaded with the plunder of the store
and of Abraham’s house. So God
once more graciously protected us from
falling into their cruel hands.
In the evening, after they left, I
went to Miaki and Nouka. They
professed great sorrow at what had
taken place, and pretended to have
given them a present of food not to do
us further injury. But Nowar in-
formed us that, on the contrary, they
had hired them to return and kill us
next morning and plunder everything
on the Mission premises. Miaki, with
a sneer, said, “ Missi, where was
Jehovah to-day ? There was no Je-
hovah to-day to protect you. It’s
all lies about Jehovah. They will
come and kill you, and Abraham, and
his wife, and cut your bodies into pieces
to be cooked and eaten in every village
upon Tanna.”
1 said, “ Surely, when you had
planned all this, and brought them to
kill vis and steal all our property,
Jehovah did protect us, or we would
not have been here ! ”
Ho replied, “ There was no Jehovah
to-day ! We have no fear of any Man-
of-war. They dare not punish us.
They durst not punish the Erroman-
gans for murdering the Gordons.
I hey \\ ill talk to us and say wo must
not do so again, and give us a present.
That is all. We fear nothing. The
talk of all Tanna is that wo will kill
you and seize all your property to-
morrow,- ’
I warned him that the punishment
of a Man-of-war can only reach the
IWy and the land, but that Jehovah’s
punishment reached both body and
soul in Time and in Eternity,
He replied, “ Who fears Jehov:
He was not here to protect you
day ! ”
“ Yes,” I said, “ my Jehovah <
is here now. He hears all we i
sees all we do, and will punish
wicked and protect His own peopk
After this, a number of the pe<
sat down around me, and I prayed v
them. But I left with a very he
heart, feeling that Miaki was evidei
bent on our destruction.
I sent Abraham to consult Nov
who had defended us till disabled
a spear in the right knee. He sen
canoe by Abraham, advising me
take some of my goods in it to
house by night, and he would try
protect them and us. The risk 1
so great, we could only take a v
little. Enemies were on every h:
to cut off our flight, and Miaki,
worst of all, whose village had to
passed in going to Nowar’s. In
darkness of the Mission House,
durst not light a candle for fear
some one seeing and shooting
Not one of Nowar’s men durst come
help us. But in the end it made
difference, for Nowar and his n
kept what was taken there, as tl
portion of the plunder. Abraham,
wife, and I waited anxiously for
morning light. Miaki, the false z
cruel, came to assure us that i
Heathen would not return that d
Yet, as daylight came in, Miaki hi
self stood and blew a great conch
far from our house. I ran out to
why this trumpet-shell had been bio
and found it was the signal for a gi
company of howling armed Save
to rush down the hill on the other j
of the hay and make straight for
Mission f louse. We had not a moan
to lose. To have remained wo
have been certain death to us
and also to Matthew, a Teacher j
arrived from Mr. Mathieson’s Stati
1 hough I am by conviction a stn
Calvinist, I am no Fatalist, I h
on while one gleam of hope remain
Escape for life was now the only j
of duty. I called the Teachers, kx
the door, and made quickly for Now
village. There was not a moment
66
John G. Paton, D.D


carry anything with us. In the
e, Abraham and his wife and I lost
our earthly goods, and all our
hing except what we had on. My
le, the few translations which I had
ie into Tannese, and a light pair
dankets I carried with me.
Ve could not take the usual path
ig the beach, for there our enemies
dd have quickly overtaken us.
entered the bush in the hope of
;ing away unobserved. But a
sin of Miaki, evidently secreted to
;ch us, sprang from behind a bread-
t tree, and swinging his tomahawk,
ed it at my brow with a fiendish
c. Avoiding it, I turned upon him
. said in a firm bold voice, “ If you
e to strike me, my Jehovah God
punish you. He is here to defend
now ! ”
he man, trembling, looked all
id as if to see the God who was my
;nder, and the tomahawk gradually
ired at his side. With my eye
d upon him, I gradually moved
kwards in the track of the Teachers,
God mercifully restrained him
n following me.
)n reaching Nowar’s village un-
erved, we found the people terror-
cken, crying, rushing about in
pair at such a host of armed
ages approaching. I urged them
aly their axes, cut down trees, and
akade the path. For a little they
>ught vigorously at this ; but,
;n, so far as eye could reach, they
r the shore covered with armed men
hing on towards their village, they
■e overwhelmed with fear, they
ew away their axes and weapons of
r, they cast themselves headlong
the ground, and they knocked them-
/es against the trees as if to court
,th before it came. They cried,
lissi, it’s of no use ! We will all be
ed and eaten to-day ! See what
ost are coming against us ! ”
Mothers snatched up little children
I ran to hide in the bush. Others
led as far as they could into the
with them, holding their heads
»ve the water. The whole village
lapsed in a condition of indescrib-
e terror. Nowar, lame with his
wounded knee, got a canoe turned
upside down and sat upon it where
he could see the whole approaching
multitude. He said, “ Missi, sit down
beside me, and pray to our Jehovah
God, for if He does not send deliver-
ance now, we are all dead men. They
will kill us all on your account, and
that quickly. Pray, and I will watch!”
They had gone to the Mission House
and broken in the door, and finding
that we had escaped, they rushed on
to Nowar’s village. For, as they began
to plunder the bedroom, Nouka said,
“ Leave everything. Missi will come
back for his valuable things at night,
and then we will get them and him
also ! ”
So he nailed up the door, and they
all marched for Nowar’s. We prayed
as one can only pray when in the jaws
of death and on the brink of Eternity.
We felt that God was near, and omni-
potent to do what seemed best in His
sight. When the Savages were about
three hundred yards off, at the foot of
a hill leading up to the village, Nowar
touched my knee, saying, “ Missi,
Jehovah is hearing ! They are all
standing still.”
Had they come on they would have
met with no opposition, for the people
were scattered in terror. On gazing
shorewards, and round the Harbour,
as far as we could see was a dense host
of warriors, but all were standing still,
and apparently absolute silence pre-
vailed. We saw a messenger or herald
running along the approaching multi-
tude, delivering some tidings as he
passed, and then disappearing in the
bush. To our amazement, the host
began to turn, and slowly marched
back in great silence, and entered the
remote bush at the head of the Har-
bour. Nowar and his people were in
ecstasies, crying out, “ Jehovah has
heard Missi’s prayer! Jehovah has
protected us and turned them away
back.”
We were on that day His trusting
and defenceless children ; would you
not, had you been one of our circle,
have joined with us in praising the
Lord God for deliverance from the
jaws of death ? I know not why they
67
Farewell Scenes


turned back ; but I have no doubt it
was the doing of God to save our lives.
We learned that they all assembled
in a cleared part of the bush and there
held a great wrangling palaver.
Nouka and Miaki advised them first
to fight Manuman and his people.
They said, “ His brother, the Sacred
Man Kanini, killed lan by Nahak.
He is a friend of Missi and of the Wor-
ship. He also sent the hurricane to
destroy us. They have plenty of yams
and pigs. Let us fight and plunder
them, and when they are out of the
way, we will be strong to destroy
Missi and the Worship.”
On this the whole mass went and
attacked Manuman’s first village,
where they murdered two of his men,
two women, and two children. The
inhabitants fled, and all the sick, the
feeble, and the children who fell into
their hands were reported to us to be
murdered, cooked, and eaten. Led
on by Miaki they plundered and burned
seven villages.
About midday, Nouka and Miaki
sent their cousin Jonas, vho had
always been friendly to me, to say
that I might return to my house in
safety, as they were now carrying the war
inland. Jonas had spent some years
on Samoa, and been much with
Traders in Sydney, and spoke English
well; but we felt they were deceiving
us. That night, Abraham ventured
to creep near the Mission House, to
test whether we might return, and
save some valuable things, and get a
change of clothing. The house ap-
peared to stand as when they nailed
up the door. But a large party of
Miaki’s allies at once enclosed Abraham
and, after asking many questions about
me, they let him go since I was not
there. Had I gone there, they would
certainly that night have killed me.
Again, at midnight Abraham and his
wife and Matthew went to the Mission
House, and found Nouka, Miaki, and
Karewick near by, concealed in the
bush among the reeds. Once more
they enclosed them, thinking I was
there too, but Nouka, finding that I
was not, cried out. “ Don’t kill them
just now ! Wait till Missi comes.”
Hearing this, Matthew slipped in
the bush and escaped. Abraharr
wife waded into the sea, and th(
allowed her to get away. Abraha
was allowed to go to the Mission Hous
but he too crept into the bush, ai
after an anxious waiting they all car
back to me in safety. We now ga-
up all hope of recovering anythii
from the house.
Towards morning, when Miaki ar
his men saw that I was not comii
back to deliver myself into their hand
they broke up my house and stole e
they could carry away. They to
my books, and scattered them abou
They took away the type of my prin
ing-press, to be made into bullets fi
their muskets. For similar uses the
melted down the zinc lining of rr
boxes, and everything else that cou
be melted. What they could not tal
away, they destroyed. I lay on tl
ground all night, concealed in an ou
house of Nowar’s, but it was a slee]
less and anxious night, not only to n
and my Aneityumese, but also 1
Nowar and his people.
Next day, the attack was renewe
by the three Chiefs on the district «
my dear friend Manuman. His peop
fled ; the villages were burned ; a
who came in their way were killei
and all food and property carried awa;
At night they returned to keep watc
over Nowar and me. When darkne;
was setting in, Miaki sent for me to g
and speak with him, but Nowar ar
the Aneityumese were all so oppose
to it that I did not go. Messages we]
sent to Nowar, threatening to kill hii
and his people for protecting me, ar
great excitement prevailed.
That very night Nowar declare
that I must leave his village befoi
morning, else he and his people woul
be killed for protecting me. T
advised me, as the sea was good, to ti
for Mr. Mathieson’s Station ; but 1
objected to my taking away any «
my property—he would soon folio
with it himself ! But how to sail
Miaki had stolen my boat, mast, sail
and oars, as also an excellent canc
made for me and paid for by me o
Aneityum ; and he had threatene
68
John G. Paton, d.d.


shoot any person that assisted me
aunch either the one or the other.
; danger, however, was so great
t Nowar said, “ You cannot remain
*er in my house ! My son will
ie you to the large chestnut tree
ny plantation in the bush. Climb
into it, and remain there till the
Dn rises.”
leing entirely at the mercy of such
btful and vacillating friends, I,
ugh perplexed, felt it best to obey,
limbed into the tree, and was left
re alone in the bush. The hours
)ent there live all before me as if
ere but of yesterday. I heard the
uent discharging of muskets, and
yells of the Savages. Yet I sat
*e among the branches, as safe in
arms of Jesus. Never, in all my
ows, did my Lord draw nearer to
and speak more soothingly to my
[, than when the moonlight flickered
mg these chestnut leaves, and the
it air played on my throbbing brow,
told all my heart to Jesus. Alone,
not alone ! If it be to glorify my
I, I will not grudge to spend many
its alo»e in such a tree, to feel
in my Saviour’s spiritual presence,
enjoy His consoling fellowship.
;hus thrown back upon your own
I, alone, all, all alone, in the mid-
it, in the bush, in the very embrace
leath itself, have you a Friend that
not fail you then ?
rladly would I have lingered there
one night of comparative peace !
:, about midnight, Nowar sent his
to call me down from the tree.
. to guide me to the shore where
himself was, as it was now time to
e to sea in the canoe. Pleading
my Lord’s continued presence, I
L to obey. My life and the lives of
Aneityumese now hung upon a
y slender thread ; the risk was
tost equally great from our friends
jailed, or from our enemies. Had
;en a stranger to Jesus and to prayer,
reason would verily have given way,
. my comfort and joy sprang out
these words, “ I will never leave
e, nor forsake thee ; 10, I am with
1 alway ! ” Pleading these pro-
es, I followed my guide. We
reached the beach, just inside the
Harbour, at a beautiful white sandy
bay on Nowar’s ground, from which
our canoe was to start. A good
number of the Natives had assembled
there to see us off. Arkurat, having
got a large roll of calico from me for
the loan of his canoe, hid it away, and
then refused the canoe, saying that if
he had to escape with his family he
would require it. He demanded for
the loan of his canoe, an axe, a sail
for his canoe, and a pair of blankets.
As Koris had the axe and another had
the quilt, I gave the quilt to him for
a sail, and the axe and blankets for
the canoe. In fact, these few relics
of our earthly all at Nowar’s were
coveted by the Savages and endan-
gered our lives, and it was as well to
get rid of them altogether. He cruelly
proposed a small canoe for two ; but
I had hired the canoe for five, and in-
sisted upon getting it, as he had been
well paid for it. As he only laughed
and mocked us, I prepared to start
and travel overland to Mr. Mathieson’s
Station. He then said, “My wrath is
over ! You may take it and go.”
We launched it, but now he refused
to let us go till daylight. He had
always been one of my best friends,
but now appeared bent on a quarrel,
so I had to exercise much patience
with him and them. Having launched
it, he said I had hired the canoe but not
the paddles. I protested, “ Surely you
know we hired the paddles too. What
could we do without paddles ? ”
But Arkurat lay down and pretended
to have fallen asleep, snoring on the
sand, and could not be awaked. I
appealed to Nowar, who only said,
“ That is his conduct, Missi, our con-
duct ! ”
I replied, “ As he has got the blan-
kets which I saved to keep me from
ague and fever, and I have nothing
left now but the clothes I have on,
surely you will give me paddles.”
Nowar gave me one. Returning to
the village, friends gave me one each
till I got other three. Now Arkurat
started up, and refused to let us go.
A Chief and one of his men, who lived
on the other side of the island near to
69
Farewell Scenes


where we were going, and who was
hired by me to go with us and help in
paddling the canoe, drew back also
and refused to go. Again I offered
to leave the canoe, and walk overland
if possible, when Faimungo, the Chief
who had refused to go with us, came
forward and said, “ Missi, they are all
deceiving you ! The sea is so rough,
you cannot go by it; and if you should
get round the weather point, Miaki
has men appointed to shoot you as
you pass the Black Rocks, while by
land all the paths are guarded by armed
men. I tell you the truth, having
heard all their talk. Miaki and Kare-
wick say they hate the Worship, and
will kill you. They killed your goats,
and stole all your property yesterday.
Farewell ! ”
The Teachers, the boy, and I now
resolved to enter the canoe and attempt
it, as the only gleam of hope left to us.
After Faimungo came, the man to
whom the canoe belonged had with-
drawn from us, it having transpired
that Miaki would not attack us that
night, as other game had attracted his
savage eyes. My party of five now
embarked in our frail canoe ; Abraham
first, I next, Matthew after me, the
boy at the steering paddle, and Abra-
ham’s wife sitting in the bottom,
where she might hold on while it con-
tinued to float. For a mile or more
we got away nicely under the lee of
the island, but when we turned to go
south for Mr. Mathieson’s Station, we
met the full force of wind and sea,
every wave breaking over and almost
swamping our canoe. The Native lad
at the helm paddle stood up crying,
“ Missi, this is the conduct of the sea !
It swallows up all who seek its help.”
I answered, “We do not seek help
from it, but from Jehovah Jesus.”
Our danger became very great, as
the sea broke over and lashed around
us. My faithful Aneityumese, over-
come with terror, threw down their
paddles, and Abraham said, “ Missi,
we are all drowned now! We are
food for the sharks. We might as well
be eaten by the Tannese as by fishes;
but God will give us fife with Jesus in
heaven ! ”
I seized the paddle nearest me :
ordered Abraham to seize anot
within his reach ; I enjoined Matth
to bale the canoe for life, and
lad to keep firm in his seat, and I cri
“ Stand to your post, and let us
turn ! Abraham, where is now y<
faith in Jesus ? Remember, He
Ruler on sea as on land. Abraha
pray and ply your paddle ! Keep
stroke for stroke with me, as our li
depend on it. Our God can prot
us. Matthew, bale with all y<
might. Don’t look round on the i
and fear. Let us pray to God and ]
our paddles, and He will save us yet
Dear old Abraham said, “ Tha
you for that, Missi. I will be stroi
I pray to God and ply my padc
God will save us ! ”
With much labour, and amid dec
perils, we got the canoe turned ;
after four hours of a terrible strug
we succeeded, towards daylight as
tide turned, in again reaching smo
water. With God’s blessing we
last reached the shore, exactly wl
we had left it five hours ago !
Now drenched and weary, with
skin of our hands sticking to the p
dies, we left the canoe on the reef ;
waded ashore. Many Natives v
there, and looked sullen and dis
pointed at our return. Katasian,
lad who had been with us, instar
fled for his own land ; and the Nati
reported that he was murdered si
after. Utterly exhausted, I lay dc
on the sand and immediately fell i
a deep sleep. By-and-bye I felt sc
one pulling from under my head
native bag in which I carried my Bi
and the Tannese translations—the
that had been saved by me from
wreck ! Grasping the bag, I spn
to my feet, and the man ran aw
My Teachers had also a hedging kn
a useless revolver, and a fowling-pie
the sight of which, though they 1
been under the salt water for hoi
God used to restrain the Savaj
Calling my Aneityumese near,
now, in united prayer and kneel
on the sands, committed each otl
unto the Lord God, being prepai
for the last and worst.
70
John G. Paton, d.d.


Ils I sat meditating on the issues,
mungo, the friendly Inland Chief,
tin appeared to warn us of our
iger, now very greatly increased
our being driven back from the sea.
Nowar’s men had fled, and were
in the bush and in rocks along the
ire; while Miaki was holding a
eting not half a mile away, and
paring to fall upon us. Faimungo
:1, “ Farewell, Missi, I am going
ne. I don’t wish to see the work
I the murders of this morning.”
le was Nowar’s son-in-law. He had
ays been truthful and kindly with
, His home was about half-way
oss the island, on the road that we
ated to go, and under sudden im-
se I said, “ Faimungo, will you let
follow you ? Will you show us the
:h P When the Mission Ship arrives
dll give you three good axes, blan-
s, knives, fish-hooks, and many
ngs you prize.
Che late hurricanes had so destroyed
i altered the paths, that only Natives
0 knew them well could follow them,
trembled much and said, “ Missi,
1 will be killed. Miaki and Kare-
:k will shoot you. I dare not let
1 follow. I have only about twenty
n, and your following might en-
iger us all.”
! urged him to leave at once, and
would follow of our own accord,
vould not ask him to protect us ;
t if he betrayed us and helped the
;my to kill us, I assured him that
■ God would punish him. If he
.red us, he would be rewarded well ;
i if we were killed against his wishes,
d would not be angry at him. He
i, “ Seven men are with me now,
i thirteen are to follow. I will not
n send for them. They are with
iki and Nouka. I will go ; but if
1 follow, you will be killed on the
y. You may follow me as far as
1 can ! ”
dy three Aneityumese and I started
er Faimungo and his men. We
ild place no confidence in any of
m ; but, feeling that we were in
1 Lord's hands, it appeared to be our
y hope of escaping instant death.
: got away unobserved by the
enemies. We met Several small par-
ties of friends in the Harbour, appar-
ently glad to see us trying to get away.
But about four miles on our way, we
met a large party of Miaki’s men, all
armed, and watching as outposts.
Some were for shooting us, but others
hesitated. Every musket was, how-
ever, raised and levelled at me. Fai-
mungo poised his great spear and said,
“ No, you shall not kill Missi to-day.
He is with me.” Having made this
flourish, he strode off after his own
men, and my Aneityumese followed,
leaving me face to face with a ring of
levelled muskets.
Sirawia, who was in command of
this party, and who once, like Nowar,
had been my friend, said to me, Judas-
like, “My love to you, Missi.” But
he also shouted after Faimungo,
“ Your conduct is bad in taking the
Missi away ; leave him to us to be
killed ! ” I then turned upon him,
saying, “ Sirawia, I love you all. You
must know that I sought only your
good. I gave you medicine and food
when you and your people were sick
and dying with measles ; I gave you
the very clothing you wear. Am I
not your friend ? Have we not often
drunk tea and eaten together in my
house ? Can you stand there and see
your friend shot ? If you do, my God
will punish you severely.”
He then whispered something to his
company which I did not hear ; and,
though their muskets were still raised,
I saw in their eyes that he had re-
strained them. I therefore began
gradually to move backwards, still
keeping my eyes fixed on them, till
the bush hid them from my view,
whereon I turned and ran after my
party, and God kept the enemy from
following. I would like to think that
Sirawia only uttered the cruel words
w'hich I heard as a blind to save his
own life ; for at this time he was
joined to . Miaki’s party, his own
people having risen against him, and
had to dissemble his friendly feelings
towards me. Poor Sirawia ! Well I
knew that Miaki would only use him
as a tool for selfish interests, and sacri-
fice him at last. All this showed how
71
Farewell Scenes


dangers grew around our path. Still
we trusted in Jehovah Jesus, and
pressed on in flight,
A second hostile party encountered
us, and with great difficulty we also
got away from them. Soon there-
after a friendly company crossed our
path. We learned from them that
the enemies had slaughtered other two
of Manuman’s men, and burned several
villages with fire. Another part of
the enemy encountered us, and were
eager for our lives. But this time
Faimungo withstood them firmly, his
men encircled us, and he said, “ I am
not afraid now, Missi ; I am feeling
stronger near my own land ! ”
Hurrying still onwards, we came to
that village on their high ground called
Aneai, i.e., Heaven. The sun was
oppressively hot, the path almost un-
shaded, and our whole party very
exhausted, especially Faimungo, carry-
ing his load of stolen goods. So here
he sat down on the village dancing
ground for a smoke, saying, “ Missi,
lam near my own land now. We can
rest with safety.”
In a few minutes, however, he
Started up, he and his men, in wild
excitement. Over a mountain, behind
the village and above it, there came
the shoutings, and anon the tramp,
tramp of a multitude making rapidly
towards us. Faimungo got up and
planted his back against a tree. I
stood beside him, and the Aneityumese
woman and the two men stood near
mo, while his men seemed prepared to
flee. At full speed a large body of the
tallest and most powerful men that I
hail seen on Tanna came rushing on
and filled the dancing ground. They
were all armed, and flushed with their
success in war. A messenger had in-
formed them of .our escape, probably
from Miaki, and they had crossed the
country to intercept us.
Faimungo was much afraid, and
said, “ Missi, go on in that path, you
and your Aneityumese ; and I will
follow when I have had a smoke and
a talk with these men.”
I replied, “ No, I will stand by your
side till you go; and if lam killed', it will
be by your side. I will not leave you.”
He implored us to go on, but t
I knew would be certain death. T]
began urging one another to kill
but I looked round them as calmly
possible, saying, “My Jehovah C
will punish you here and hereafter
you kill me or any of His servants.’
A killing stone, thrown by one
the Savages, grazed poor old Abrahai
cheek, and the dear soul gave sucl
look at me, and then upwards, as
to say, “ Missi, I was nearly away
Jesus.” A club was also raised
follow the blow of the killing sto
but God baffled the aim. They <
circled us in a deadly ring, and c
kept urging another to strike the fi
blow or fire the first shot. My he;
rose up to the Lord Jesus ; I saw H
watching all the scene. My pea
came back to me like a wave from Gc
I realized that I was immortal till r
Master’s work with me was doi
The assurance came to me, as if
voice out of Heaven had spoken, th
not a musket would be fired to woui
us, not a club prevail to strike us, n
a spear leave the hand in which it w
held vibrating to be thrown, not ;
arrow leave the bow, or a killing sto;
the fingers, without the permission j
Jesus Christ, whose is all power
Heaven and on Earth. He rules
Nature, animate and inanimate, ai
restrains even the Savage of the Soul
Seas. In that awful hour I saw H
own words, as if carved in letters j
fire upon the clouds of Heaver
“ Seek, and ye shall find. Whata
ever ye shall ask in My name, that wi
I do, that the Father may be glorifij
in the Son.” I could understand ho
Stephen and John saw the glorify
Saviour as they gazed up throug
suffering and persecution to ti
Heavenly Throne !
Yet I never could say that on sui
occasions I was entirely without fea
Nay, I have felt my reason reelia
my sight coming and going, and n
knees smiting together when thi
brought close to a violent death, hi
mostly under the solemn thought i
being ushered into Eternity and appear
ing before God. Still, I was never lei
without hearing that promise in all it
72
John G. Paton, D.D.


•ling and supporting power com-
p through the darkness and the
:sh, “Lo, I am with you alway.”
with Saul I could say, even in
dread moment and crisis of
, “I am persuaded that neither
i nor life, . . . nor any other
are, shall be able to separate us
the love of God which is in Christ
our Lord.”
mungo and others now urged us
on in the path. I said, “ Fai-
o, why are we to leave you ?
rod heard your promise not to
y me. He knows now what is in
heart and in mine. I will not
you ; and if I am to die, I will
t your side.”
replied, “ Now, I go on before ;
keep close to me.”
men had gone, and I persuaded
neityumese to follow them. At
vith a bound, Faimungo started
them. I followed, keeping as
him as I could, pleading with
to protect me or to take me home
ory. The host of armed men
an along on each side with their
ms ready ; but leaving every-
to Jesus, I ran on as if they were
scort, or as if I saw them not.
r reader wonders how they were
ined, much more would I, unless
eved that the same Hand that
ined the lions from touching
I held back these Savages from
g me ! We came to a stream
ag our path. With a bound all
irty cleared it, ran up the bank
ite, and disappeared in the bush,
it yet pursuing,” I also tried the
but I struck the bank and slid
an my hands and knees towards
ream. At this moment I heard
h above my head amongst the
res of an overhanging tree, and
v that a killing stone had been
u, and that that branch had
me. Praising my God, I scram-
p on the other side, and followed
ack of my party into the bush,
ivages gazed after me for a little
mce, but no one crossed the
i; and I saw them separate into
one portion returning to the
: and another pressing inland.
With what gratitude did I recognize
the Invisible One who brought their
counsels to confusion !
I found my party resting in the bush,
and amazed to see me escaped alive
from men who were thirsting for my
blood. Faimungo and his men re-
ceived me with demonstrations of joy,
perhaps feeling a little ashamed of
their own cowardice. He now ascended
the mountain and kept away from the
common path to avoid other native
bands. At every village enemies to
the Worship were ready to shoot us.
But I kept close to our guide, knowing
that the fear of shooting him would
prevent their shooting at me, as he
was the most influential Chief in all that
section of the island.
One party said, “ Miaki and Kare-
wick said that Missi made the sickness
and the hurricanes, and we ought to
kill him.”
Faimungo replied, “ They lie about
Missi ! It is our own bad conduct
that makes us sick.”
They answered, “We don’t know
who makes the sickness ; but our
fathers have taught us to kill all
foreign men.”
Faimungo, clutching club and spear,
exclaimed, standing betwixt them and
us, “You won’t kill Missi to-day ! ”
In the flight we passed springs and
streamlets, but though parched with
sickening thirst, not one of us durst
stoop down to drink, as we should have
been almost certainly killed in the act.
Faimungo now sent his own men home
by a near path, and guided us himself
till we were close upon the shore.
There, sitting down, he said, “ Missi,
I have now fulfilled my promise. I
am so tired, I am so afraid, I dare not
go farther. My love to you all. Now
go on quickly ! Three of my men will
go with you to the next rocks. Go
quickly ! Farewell.”
These men went on a little, and then
said, “ Missi, we dare not go ! Fai-
mungo is at war with the people of the
next land. You must keep straight
along this path.” So they turned and
ran back to their own village.
To us this districtwas especially peril-
ous. Many years ago the Aneityumese
73
Farewell Scenes


had joined in a war against the Tannese
of this tribe, and the thirst for revenge
yet existed in their hearts, handed
down to sire from son. Besides Miaki
had incited the people here to murder
the Teachers and me if we attempted
to escape this way. Most providenti-
ally the men were absent on a war ex-
pedition, and we saw only three lads
and a great number of women and
children, who ran off to the bush in
terror. In the evening the enraged
Savages of another district assaulted
the people of the shore villages for allow-
ing us to pass, and, though sparing
th ei r 1 i ves, broke i n pieces their weapons
of war a very grievous penalty. In
the next district, as we hasted along
the shore, two young men came run-
ning after us, poising their quivering
spears. I took the useless revolver out
of my little native basket, and raising
it cried, “ Beware I Lay down your
spears at once on the sand, and carry
my basket to the next landing at the
Black Hocks."
They threw their spears on the sand,
lifted the bag, and ran on before us to
the rocks which formed the march bc-
t wixt t hem and their enemies. Laying
it down, they said appealingly, “ Missi,
let us return to our home ! " And how
they did run, fearing the pursuit of
their foes !
lul he next land we saw none. After
i hat wo saw crowds all along, some
friendly, others unfriendly, but they let
us pass on, and with the blessing of
Almighty God we drew near to Mr.
Mathieson’s Station in safety. Here
a man gave mo a cocoa-nut for each of
our party, which we greatly required,
having tasted nothing all that day, mid
very little for several days before. Wo
were so weak that only the struggle for
life enabled us to keep our feet; yet
my poor Ancityumese never complained
and never halted, not even the woman,
t he danger and excitement kept us up
in the race for life ; and by the blessing
of God we were now approaching the
Mission House, praising God for His
wonderful deliverances.
Hearing of our coming, Mr. Mathie-
sou came running to meet me. They
had heard of our leaving my own Sta-
tion, and they thought 1 was dc
They were themselves both very we
their only child had just been lai
the grave, and they were in great {
and in greater peril. We praised
Lord for permitting us to meet;
prayed for support, guidance, and
tection ; and resolved now, in all eve
to stand by each other till the last.
Before I left the Harbour I wrote
left with No war letters to be givei
the Captains of any vessels which cal
for the first, and the next, and the n
tellingthemof our great danger, that
Mathicson was almost without f(
and that I would reward them ha
somely if they would call at the Sta-
and remove any of us who might
spared thence to Aneityum, Twc
three vessels called, and, as I af
wards learned, got my letters ; 1
while buying my stolen property fi
the Natives for tobacco, powder, ;
balls, they took no further notice of
appeals, and sailed past Mr. Mathies<
straight on to Aneityum. “ The 1
der mercies of the wicked are cruel
Let me now cull the leading ev
from my Journal, that intervened
twixt this date and the final break-r
the Mission onTanna —at least for a
son—though, blessed be God ! I I
lived to see the light rekindled by
dear friends Mr. and Mrs. Watt,
shining more brightly and hopef
than ever. The candle was quencl
but the candlestick was not remov
On Wednesday, 22nd Janu
1862, we heard that other threi
Manuman's people had been killed
a district burned with fire.
On the 23rd January, Mr. Mathii
sent for Taura, Kati, and Kapuku
three principal Chiefs, to induce tl
to promise protection till a vessel ca
to take us away. They appei
friendly, and promised to do their t
Alas ! the promises of the Tam
Chiefs had too often proved to be v
On Frida}’, 24th January, re]
reached our Station that Miaki and
party, hearing that a friendly Chief
concealed two of Manuman’s yo
men, compelled him to produce tl
and club them to death before t
eyes. Also, that they surroun
74
John G. Paton, D.D


Farewell Scenes
uman’s party on a mountain, and
med them in there, dying of starva-
and trying to survive on the car-
;s of the dead and on bark and
5. Also that Miaki had united all
Chiefs, friends and foes alike, in a
1 of blood, to kill every one per-
ng to the whole Mission on Tanna.
s rules !
i Sunday, the 26th January, thirty
3ns came to worship at the Mission
se. Thereafter, at great risk, we
Worship at three of the nearest
most friendly villages. Amidst all
perils and trials, we preached the
>el to about one hundred and six-
persons. It was verily a sowing
of tears ; but, despite all that fol-
d, who shall say that it was vain ?
a the 27th, at daylight, a vessel was
in the offing, as if to tantalize us.
Captain had been at the Harbour,
had received my letter from No war.
sted a flag to induce him to send or
5 on shore, but he sailed off for
ityum, bearing the plunder of my
■ Mission House, purchased for
xunition and tobacco from the
ves. He left the news at Aneityum
I had been driven from my Station
3 time ago, and was believed to
; been murdered.
n the 29th January, the young
f Kapuku came and handed to Mr.
txieson his own and his father’s
gods and household idols. They
isted chiefly of a basket of small
peculiar stones, much worn and
ing with use. He said, “ While
y are trying to kill you and drive
N orship of J eho vah from this island,
re up my gods, and will send away
leathen idols from my land.”
n the 31st, we learned that a party
liaki’s men were going about Mr.
hieson’s district inciting the people
ill us. Faimungo also came to in-
x us that Miaki was exerting all his
ice to get us and the Worship de-
yed. Manuman even sent, from
ad, Raki, his adopted son, to tell
3f the fearful sufferings that he and
people were now passing through,
that some were killed almost every
. Raki’s wife was a Chief’s daugh-
who, when the war began, returned
to her father’s care. The Savages of
Miaki went to her own father’s house
and compelled him to give her up
as an enemy. She was .clubbed and
feasted on.
On Sabbath, 2nd February, thirty-
two people attended the Morning
Service. I addressed them on the
Deluge, its causes and lessons. I
showed them a doll, explaining that
such carved and painted images could
not hear our prayers or help us in our
need, that the living Jehovah God only
could hear and help. They were much
interested, and after Worship care-
fully examined the doll. Mr. Mathie-
son and I, committing ourselves to
Jesus, went inland and conducted
Worsliip at seven villages, listened to by
about one hundred people in all. Nearly
all appeared friendly. The people of
one village had been incited to kill us
on our return ; but God guided us to
return by another way, and so we es-
caped.
During the day, on 3rd February, a
company of Miaki’s men came to the
Mission House, and forced Mrs. Mathie-
son to show them through the premises.
Providentially, I had bolted myself
that morning into a closet room, and
was engrossed with writing. They
went through every room in the house
and did not see me, concluding I had
gone inland. They discharged a mus-
ket into our Teacher’s house, but after-
wards left quietly, greatly disappointed
at not finding me. My heart still rose
in praise to God for another such de-
liverance, neither by man nor of man’s
planning !
Worn out with long watching and
many fatigues, I lay down that
night early, and fell into a deep sleep.
About ten o’clock the Savages again
surrounded the Mission House. My
faithful dog Clutha, clinging still to me
amid the wreck of all else on Earth,
sprang quietly upon me, pulled at my
clothes, and awoke me, showing danger
in her eye glancing at me through the
shadows. I silently awoke Mr. and
Mrs. Mathieson, who had also fallen
asleep. We committed ourselves in
hushed prayer to God and watched
them, knowing that they could not see


us. Immediately a glare of light fell
into the room ! Men passed with
flaming torches ; and first they set fire
to the Church all round, and then to a
reed fence connecting the Church and
the dwelling-house. In a few minutes
the house, too, would be in flames, and
armed Savages waiting to kill us on
attempting an escape !
'Faking my harmless revolver in the
left hand and a little American toma-
hawk in the right, I pled with Mr.
Mathicson to let me out and instantly
again to lock the door on himself and
wife. He very reluctantly did so, hold-
ing me back and saying, “ Stop here
and let us die together! You will
never return ! ”
I said, “Be quick ! Leave that to
God. In a few minutes our house will
be in flames, and then nothing can save
us."
He did let me out, and locked the
door again quickly from the inside ;
and, while his wife and he prayed and
watched for me from within, I ran to
the burning reed fence, cut it from top
to bottom, and tore it up and threw it
back into the flames, so that the fire
could not by it be carried to our dwell-
ing-house. I saw on the ground sha-
dows, as if something were falling
around me, and started back. Seven
or eight Savages had surrounded me,
and raised their great clubs in air. I
heard a shout—“ Kill him ! kill him ! ”
One Savage tried to seize hold of me,
but, leaping from his clutch, I drew the
revolver from my pocket and levelled it
as for use, my heart going up in prayer
to my God. I said, “ Dare to strike
me, and my Jehovah God will punish
you. He protects us, and will punish
you for burning His Church, for hatred
to His Worship and people, and for all
your bad conduct. We love you all;
and for doing you good only you want
to kill us. But our God is here now to
protect us and to punish you.”
1 hey yelled in rage, and urged each
other to strike the first blow, but the
Invisible One restrained them. I stood
invulnerable beneath His invisible
shield, and succeeded in rolling back
the tide of flame from our dwelling-
house.
At this dread moment occurred
incident, which my readers may
plain as they like, but which I t
directly to the interposition of my C
A rushing and roaring sound came f
the South, like the noise of a mig
engine or of muttering thunder. Er
head was instinctively turned in 1
direction, and they knew, from prev:
hard experience, that it was one of t
awful tornadoes of wind and rain. IN
mark, the wind bore the flames a
from our dwelling-house ; had it c<
in the opposite direction, no powei
Earth could have saved us from b(
all consumed ! It made the worl
destroying the Church only that c
few minutes ; but it brought with
heavy and murky cloud, which pou
out a perfect torrent of tropical r
Now, mark again, the flames of
burning Church were thereby cut
from extending to and seizing upon
reeds and the bush ; and, besides
had become almost impossible nov
set fire to our dwelling-house,
stars in their courses were fighf
against Sisera !
The mighty roaring of the wind,
black cloud pouring down unceas
torrents, and the whole surroundii
awed those Savages into silence. Sc
began to withdraw from the see
all lowered their weapons of v
and several, terror-struck, exclaim
“ That is Jehovah’s rain ! Truly tl
Jehovah God is fighting for them ;
helping them. Let us away ! ”
A panic seized upon them ; tl
threw away their remaining torch
in a few moments they had all <
appeared in the bush ; and I was 1
alone, praising God for His marvell|
works. “ O taste and see that Got
good ! Blessed is the man that trust
in Him ! ”
Returning to the door of the '
House, I cried, “ Open and let
I am now all alone."
Mr. Mathieson let me in, and
claimed, “ If ever, in time of need,
sent help and protection toHisserva
in answer to prayer, He has done s(
night ! Blessed be His holy Nam
All through the remainder of
night I lay wide awake keeping wa
76
John G. Paton, d.d.


noble little dog lying near me with
s alert. Early in the morning
nds came weeping around us. Our
mies were loudly rejoicing. It had
n finally resolved to kill us at once,
□hinder our house and then to burn
The noise of the shouting was dis-
:tly heard as they neared the Mission
mises, and our weeping, friendly
:ives looked terror-struck, and
ned anxious to flee for the bush.
t just when the excitement rose to
highest pitch, we heard, or dreamed
t we heard, a cry higher still, “ Sail
yt
Ve were by this time beginning to
trust almost our very senses ; but
in and again that cry came rolling
from the shore, and was repeated
m crowd to crowd all along the
,ch, “ Sail O ! Sail O ! ”
7he shouts of those approaching us
dually ceased, and the whole multi-
[e seemed to have melted away from
• view. I feared some cruel de-
)tion, and at first peered out very
itiously to spy the land. But yon-
in very truth a vessel came sailing
o view. It was the Blue Bell, Cap-
n Hastings. I set fire to the reeds
the side of the hill to attract his
ention. I put a black shawl as a flag
one end of the Mission House and a
ite sheet on the other.
his was one of the vessels that had
;n to Port Resolution, and had sailed
st to Aneityum some time ago. I
;erwards saw the mate and some of
3 men wearing my shirts, which they
id bought from the Tannese on their
mer visit. At the earnest request
Messrs. Geddie and Copeland, Mr.
iderwood, the owner, had sent Cap-
in Hastings to Tanna to rescue us if
t alive. For this purpose he had
ought twenty armed men from Aneit-
.m, who came on shore in two boats
charge of the mate, the notorious
ass Lewin. He returned to the ship
th a boat-load of Mr. Mathieson’s
ings, leaving ten of the Natives to
;lp us to pack more and carry them
>wn to the beach, especially what the
issionary thought most valuable.
The two boats were now loaded and
ly to start. It was about two
o’clock in the afternoon, when a strange
and painful trial befell us. Poor dear Mr.
Mathieson, apparently unhinged, locked
himself all alone into what had been
his study, telling Mrs. Mathieson and
me to go, for he had resolved to remain
and die on Tanna. We tried to show
him the inconsistency of praying to
God to protect us or grant us means of
escape, and then refusing to accept a
rescue sent to us in our last extremity.
We argued that it was surely better to
live and work for Jesus than to die as a
self-made martyr, who, in God’s sight,
was guilty of self-murder. His wife
wept aloud and pled with him, but all
in vain ! He refused to leave or to un-
lock his door. I then said, “It is now
getting dark. Your wife must go with
the vessel, but I will not leave you
alone. I shall send a note explaining
why lam forced to remain ; and as it
is certain that we shall be murdered
whenever the vessel leaves, I tell you
God will charge you with the guilt of
our murder.”
At this he relented, unlocked the
door, and accompanied us to the boats,
in which we all immediately left.
Meantime, having lost several hours,
the vessel had drifted leeward; darkness
suddenly settled upon us, and when we
were out at sea we lost sight of her and
she of us. After drifting about for some
hours in a heavy sea and unable to find
her, those in charge of the boats came
near for consultation, and, if possible,
to save the lives of all. We advised that
they should steer for Port Resolution
by the flame of the Volcano —a never-
failing lighthouse, seen fifty miles
away—and there await the vessel.
The boats were to keep within hearing
of each other by constant calling ; but
this was soon lost to the ear, though on
arriving in the bay we found they had
got to anchor before us. There we sat
in the boats and waited for the coming
day. As the light appeared, we an-
chored as far out as possible, beyond
the reach of musket shots ; and there,
without water or food we sat under a
fropical sun till midday came, and
still there was no sign of the vessel.
The mate at last put all the passengers
and the poorest seamen into one boat
77
Farewell Scenes


and left her to swing at anchor ; while,
with a strong crew in the other, he
started off in search of the vessel.
In the afternoon, Nowar and Miaki
came off in a canoe to visit us. Nowar
had on a shirt, but Miaki was naked
and frowning. He urged me to go and
see the Mission House, but as we had
seen a body of men near it, I refused to
go. Miaki declared that everything
remained as I had left it, but we knew
that he lied. Old Abraham and a
party had slipped on shore in a canoe,
and had found the windows smashed
and everything gone except my books,
which were scattered about and torn in
pieces. The armed men there wanted
to kill the Aneityumese, but others said,
“ Not till we get Missi killed too ! ”
They learned that Miaki had sold
everything that he could sell to the
Traders. The mate and men of the
Blue Dell had on my very clothes.
They boasted that they had bought
them for a few figs of tobacco and for
powder, caps, and balls. But they
would not return a single shirt to me,
though I was without a change ! We
had all been without food in the boat
since the morning before, so Nowar
brought us off a cocoa-nut each, and
two very small roasted yams for the
ladies. Those, however, only seemed
to make our thirst the more severe, and
we spent a trying day in that boat un-
der a burning sun.
Miaki said, “ As our fathers did not
destroy Missi Turner’s house, we will
not destroy yours.” But after a time,
failing to persuade me to accompany
him, and fall into a trap, he muttered,
“We have taken everything your house
contained, and would take you too if
we could ; for we hate the Worship, it
causes all our diseases and deaths ; it
goes against our customs, and it con-
demns the things we delight in.”
About five o’clock in the evening the
vessel hove in sight. Before dark we
were all on board, and were sailing for
Aneityum. Though both Mr. and
Mrs. Mathieson had become very weak,
they stood the voyage wonderfully.
Next day we were safely landed. We
had offered Captain Hastings £2O to
lake us to Aneityum, but he declined
any fare. However, we divided
amongst the mate and crew, for tl
had every one shown great kindness
us on the voyage.
What could be taken in three bo
was saved out of the wreck of I
Mathieson’s property ; but my eart]
all perished, except the Bible and 1
translations into Tannese.
My own intention was to remain
Aneityum, go on with my work of trai
lating the Gospels, and v/atch t
earliest opportunity, a? God opened
my way, to return to Tanna. Ihe
however, got very weak and thin ; r
health was undoubtedly much shak
by the continued trials and dangt
through which we had passed ; a:
therefore, as Dr. and Mrs. Inglis we
at home carrying the New Testame
through the press in the language
Aneityum, and as Tanna was closed i
a season—Dr. Geddie, the Rev. Jose:
Copeland, and Mr. Mathieson all urg
me to go to Australia by a vessel th
in the Harbour and leaving in a f<
days. My commission was to awak
an interest among the Presbyteri
Churches of our Colonies in this N(
Hebrides Mission which lay at thi
doors, up till this time sustained 1
Scotland and Nova Scotia alone. Ai
further, and very specially, to rai
money there, if possible, to purchase
new Mission Ship for the work of G<
in the New Hebrides, —a clamant n
cessity, which would save all futu
Missionaries some of the more territ
of the privations and risk of which
few examples have in these pages c
ready been recorded.
After much prayerful deliberate
with my brethren and with my o\n
heart before God, I somewhat relu
tantly felt constrained to undertal
the task.
With regrets, and yet with 1
quenchable hope for these Islands
embarked for Australia, having
ceived the solemn promise of 1
brethren, that in entering upon t
great effort I was to be left absolut
free of all control, and empowered
carry out the work as God might se
to guide me and open up my way.
had only spoken to one man in Sydm


doors to influence had therefore
ie unlocked ; and I had no helper,
leader, but the Spirit of my God.
Second Part of this Autobiography,
ild God spare me to write it, will re-
l his marvellous goodness in using
humble voice and pen, and the
y of my life, for interesting thou-
1s and tens of thousands in the
r of Missions ; and especially for
ing together the children of the
Dath Schools of Australasia in a
r League of help to the New Heb-
i, which has already borne precious
to His glory, and will continue to
5 for ages to come.
CHAPTER XI
FLOATING OF THE “ DAYSPRING ”
A. D. 1862-1863. .EX. 38-39.
cued from Tanna by the Blue Bell
tie Spring of 1862, I was landed on
ityum, leaving behind me all that
wned on Earth, save the clothes
n my back, my precious Bible,
a few translations that I had
le from it into the Tannese lan-
ge. The Missionaries on Aneityum
[essrs. Gcddie and Copeland—•
;ed, after repeated deliberations,
rging me to go to Australia in the
rests of our Mission. In this appeal
7 were joined now by my corn-
ions in tribulation, Mr. and Mrs.
Meson. A Mission Ship was sorely
led—was absolutely required—to
/ent the needless sacrifice of de-
id lives. More Missionaries were
sd for, and must somehow be
ught into the field, unless the hope
Earning these fair Islands for Jesus
to be for ever abandoned.
Tth unaffected reluctance, I at
felt constrained to undertake this
welcome but apparently inevitable
r. It meant the leaving of my dear
,nders for a season ; but it embraced
hin it the hope of returning to them
in, with perhaps every power of
;sing amongst them tenfold in-
1 Sandal-wooder, then lying at
rityum, was to sail in a few days
direct for Sydney. My passage was
secured for And, as if to make
me realize how bare the Lord had
stripped me in my late trials, the first
thing that occupied me on board was
the making with my own hands, from
a piece of cloth obtained on Aneityum,
another shirt for the voyage, to change
with that which I wore—the only one
that had been left to me.
About midnight we came to anchor
in Sydney harbour. As we came to
anchorage, I anxiously paced the deck,
gazing towards the gas-lighted city,
and pleading with God to open up my
way, and give success in the work
before me, on which the salvation of
thousands of the Heathen might
depend. Still I saw them perishing,
still heard their wailing cry on the
Islands behind me. I saw them
groaning under blinding superstitions,
and imbruing their hands in each
other’s blood, and I felt as if crushed
by the awful responsibility of my work
and by the thought of all that hung
upon its success or failure. But I felt
also that there must be many of God’s
dear people in Sydney who would
sympathize with such work and help
me, if only I could get access to them.
At the same time, I knew not a soul
in that great city ; though I had a note
of introduction to one person, which,
as experience proved, I would have
been better without.
Unfortunately, I had not with me
a copy of the Resolution of the Mis-
sionaries, commissioning me to plead
their cause and to raise funds for the
new Mission Ship. Again and again
I had earnestly requested it, but the
Clerk of the meeting, pressed by corre-
spondence, or for some other reason,
gave me instead that note of introduc-
tion, which proved more of a hindrance
than a help in launching my work ;
except that it threw me more exclu-
sively on the guidance of my Lord,
and taught me to trust in Him, and in
the resources He had given me, rather
than in any human aid, from that day
till the present hour. ‘
That friend, however, did his best.
He kindly called with me on a number
of Ministers and others. They heard
79
The Floating of the “ Dayspring ”


my story, sympathized with me,
shook hands, and wished me success ;
but, strangely enough, something
“ very special ” prevented every one
of them from giving me access to his
pulpit or Sabbath School. At length,
I felt so disappointed, so miserable,
that I wished I had been in my grave
with my dear departed and my brethren
on the Islands who had fallen around
me, in order that the work on which
so much now appeared to depend
might have been entrusted to some
one better fitted to accomplish it.
The heart seemed to keep repeating,
“ All these things are against thee.”
Finding out at last the Rev. A.
Buzacott, then retired, but formerly
the successful and honoured repre-
sentative of the London Missionary
Society on Rarotonga, considerable
light was let in upon the mystery of
my last week’s experiences. He in-
formed me that the highly esteemed
friend, who had kindly been introduc-
ing me all round, was at that moment
immersed in a keen Newspaper war
with Presbyterians and Independents,
He had published statements and
changes of view, which charged them
with being unscriptural in belief and
practice. They, of course, were vigor-
ously defending themselves. This made
it painfully manifest that, in order to
succeed, I must strike out a new course
for myself, and one clear from all local
entanglement.
Paying a fortnight in advance, I
withdrew even from the lodging I had
taken, and turned to the Lord more
absolutely for guidance. He brought
me into contact with good and generous-
souled servants of His, the open-
hearted Mr. and Mrs. Foss. Though en-
tire strangers, they kindly invited me to
be their guest while in Sydney, assur-
ing me that I would meet with many
Ministers and other Christians at their
house who could help me in my work.
God had opened the door ; I entered
with a grateful heart ; they will not
miss their recompense.
A letter and appeal had been already
printed on behalf of our Mission. I
now re-cast and reprinted it, adding a
postscript, and appending my own
name and new address. This \
widely circulated among Ministers a
others engaged in Christian work ; a
by this means, and by letters in 1
Newspapers, I did everything in i
power to make our Mission kno\
But one week had passed, and no
sponse came. One Lord’s Day h
gone by, and no pulpit had be
opened to me. I was perplexed 1
yond measure, how to get access
Congregations and Sabbath School
though a Something deep in my se
assured me, that if once my lips w<
opened, the Word of the Lord woi
not return void.
On my second Sabbath in Sydnt
I wandered out with a great yearni
at heart to get telling my message
any soul that would listen. It w
the afternoon ; and children wc
flocking into a Church that I passe
I followed them—that yearning gro
ing stronger every moment. My G
so ordered it, that I was guided th
to the Chalmers Presbyterian Churc
The Minister, the Rev. Mr. McSkii
ming, addressed the children. At t
close I went up and pleaded with hi
to allow me ten minutes to speak
them. After a little hesitation, ai
having consulted together, they ga
me fifteen minutes. Becoming deep
interested, the good man invited r
to preach to his Congregation in ti
evening. This was duly intimated
the Sabbath School; and thus n
little boat was at last launched-
surely by the hand of the dear Lor
with the help of His little children.
The kindly Minister, now ve;
deeply interested, offered to spend tl
next day in introducing me to 1;
clerical brethren. For his sake, Iwi
most cordially received by them a
but especially by Dr. Dunmore Lap
who greatly helped me; and no
access was granted me to almost evej
Church and Sabbath School, bol
Presbyterian and Independent. ]
Sabbath Schools, I got a collection i
connection with my address, an
distributed, with the sanction of Supe
intendents, Collecting Cards among!
the children, to be returned throug
the teachers within a specified dat
80
John G. Paton, D.D.


Congregations, I received for the
sion the surplus over and above the
inary collection when I preached
Sabbaths, and the full collection at
week-night meetings for which I
Id arrange,
now appealed to a few of the most
ndly Ministers to form themselves
) an Honorary Committee of advice;
[, at my earnest request, they got
Goodlet, Esq., an excellent elder,
become Honorary Treasurer, and
take charge of all funds raised for
Mission Ship. For the Public
;w nothing of me ; but all knew
good Treasurer and these faithful
listers, and had confidence in the
:k. They knew that every penny
it direct to the Mission ; and they
r that my one object was to promote
i’s glory in the conversion of the
athen. Our dear Lord Jesus thus
med up my way ; and now I had
itations from more Schools and
igregations than I knew how to
irtake—the response in money being
) gratifying beyond almost all ex-
tation.
t was now that I began a little plan
interesting the children, that at-
cted them from the first, and has
ze had an amazing development,
aade them shareholders in the new
ision Ship—each child receiving a
nted form, in acknowledgment of
; number of shares, at sixpence each,
which he was the owner. Thou-
ids of these shares were taken out,
re shown about amongst families,
1 were greatly prized. The Ship
sto be their very own ! They were
be a great Shipping Company for
ius. In hundreds of homes, these
eipt-forms have been preserved ;
i their owners, now in middle years,
training their children of to-day to
e their pennies to support the white-
iged Angel of the Seas, that bears
; Gospel and the Missionary to the
athen Isles.
daving done all that could at that
ic be accomplished in New South
lies, and as rapidly as possible—my
mmitteee gave me a Letter of Com-
ndation to Victoria But there I
no difficulty. The ministers had
heard of our work in Sydney, They
received me most cordially, and at
my request formed themselves into a
Committee of Advice. Our dear friend
James Mcßain, Esq., now Sir James,
became Honorary Treasurer.
As in New South Wales, I made,
chiefly by correspondence, all my own
engagements, and arranged for Churches
and Sabbath Schools as best I could.
Few in the other Denominations of
Victoria gave any help, but the Presby-
terians rose to our appeal as with one
heart.
The contributions and collections
were nearly all in very small sums.
I recall only one exception,—a gift
of from the late Hon, G. F.
Angus, South Australia, whose heart
the Lord had touched. Yet gently and
steadily the required money began to
come pouring in ; and my personal
outlays were reduced to a minimum
by the hospitality of Christian friends
and their kindly conveying of me from
place to place. For all this I felt deeply
grateful; it saved money for the Lord’s
work.
Each of my Treasurers, to whom
all contributions were sent direct, kept
me duly posted as to sums received
from time to time. The progress made
soon led on to the resolution to aim at
a Ship three times the size of that
originally proposed. We set apart
the sum of £3OOO as necessary for it;
and I vowed, in my solitude, that if
God sent an additional within a
given time, that would be my Gideon’s
fleece, and would warrant me in going
home to Scotland to secure more
Missionaries for the Islands. By this
time, I had heard of the death of my
dear fellow-labourers, Mrs. Mathieson
on Aneityum, and shortly thereafter
Mr. Mathieson on Mare. I alone north
of Aneityum was now left to tell the
story of the planting of the Standard
oa Tanna—our Mission numbered
then only four agents in the field—
and the thought arose, Why keep a
Mission Vessel for so few ? The reso-
lution was, therefore, taken in God’s
Name to get more Missionaries too.
But this, as yet, was betwixt my own
soul and the Lord.
81
The Floating of the u Dayspring”


82 John G.
Returning to Melbourne, the whole
matter was laid before my Committee.
I reported how God had blessed the
undertaking, and what sums were now
in the hands of the several Treasurers,
indicating also what larger hopes and
plans had been put into my soul.
Dear Dr. Cairns rose and said, “ Sir,
it is of the Lord. This whole enter-
prise is of God, and not of us. Go
home, and He will give you more
Missionaries for the Islands. ’ ’ My ever-
honoured friends, Dr. and Mrs, Inglis,
had just returned to Melbourne from
Britain, where they had been carrying
the complete New Testament in Aneit-
yumese through the press. Dr. Inglis
was present at that meeting, and ap-
proved warmly of my going home for
more Missionaries, especially as from
want of time and opportunity he had
not himself succeeded in getting any
additions to our Missionary staff.
Melbourne held a Farewell meeting.
The Governor, Sir Henry Barkley,
took the chair. The Hall was crowded;
and the Governor’s sympathetic utter-
ances arrested public attention and
deepened the interest in our Mission.
The fact was emphasized that this
work, lying at their very doors in the
Pacific Seas, had peculiar claims on
the heart and conscience of Australia.
Thence I hasted to Sydney, and
reported myself also there. The New
South Wales Committee gave their
cordial approval to our larger plans.
A Farewell was held there too ; and
the Governor, Sir John Young, took
the chair. The meeting was a great
success. His presence, and his ex-
cellent speech, again helped to fix the
eyes of all Australians on the peculiar
claims of the New Hebrides. This
was their work, more than that of any
other people on the face of the Earth.
The awakening of this consciousness,
and intensifying it into a practical
and burning faith, was a great and
far-reaching achievement for Australia
and for the Islanders. It is one of the
purest joys of my life, that in this work
I was honoured to have some share,
along with many other dear servants
of the Lord.
Of ihe money which I had raised,
Paton, D.D.
£3OOO was sent to Nova Scotia, to pa
for the building of our new Missic
Ship, the Dayspring. The Churc
which began the Mission on the Ne
Hebrides was granted the honour <
building our new Mission Ship. T 1
remainder was set apart to pay fc
the outfit and passage of addition;
Missionaries for the field, and I w;
commissioned to return home to Sco
land in quest of them.
Here let me turn aside from tl
current of Missionary toils, and recor
a few wayside incidents that marke
some of my wanderings to and fro i
connection with the Floating of tl
Dayspring. Travelling in the Colonic
in 1862-63 was vastly less develope
than it is to-day ; and a few of m
experiences then will, for many reason:
be not unwelcome to most readers c
this book. Besides, these incident;
one and all, will be felt to have a viti
connection with the main purpose c
writing this Autobiography, namelj
to show that the Finger of God is a
visible still, to those who have eyes t
see, as when the fire-cloud Pillar le
Flis people through the wilderness.
An intelligent gentleman, a shee
farmer, who knew the country wel
once kindly volunteered to lift me i
an out-of-the-way place, and drive m
to a meeting at his Station. Havin
a long spell before us, we started a
midday in a buggy drawn by a pai
of splendid horses, in the hope c
reaching our destination before dust
He turned into the usual bush-trac
through the forests, saying, “ I kno\
this road well; and we must driv
steadily, as we have not a moment t
lose.”
Our conversation became absor;
ingly interesting. After w r e had drive
about three hours, he remarked, “ Y
must soon emerge into the open plain
I doubtfully replied, “ Surely v
cannot have turned back! The:
trees and bushes are wonderfully hi
those we passed at starting.”
He laughed, and made me feel rath<
vexed that I had spoken, when he sai<
“ I am too old a hand in the bush fc
that! I have gone this road many
time before.”


Jut my courage immediately re-
ed, for I got what appeared to me
lint of the roof of the Inn beyond
bush, from which we had started
loon, and I repeated, “ I am certain
have wheeled, and are back at the
inning of our journey ; but here
les a Chinaman ; let us wait and
uire.”
ly dear friend learned, to his utter
azement, that he had erred. The
h-track was entered upon once
re, and followed with painful care,
he murmured, half to himself,
7ell, this beats all reckoning ! I
Id have staked my life that this
> impossible.”
burning to me, he said, with mani-
; grief, “ Our meeting is done for !
will be midnight before we can
ve.”
'he sun was beginning to set, as we
ahed the thinly-timbered ground.
! dusk fell, he took his bearings with
greatest possible care. Beyond
wood, a vast plain stretched before
where neither fence nor house was
ble, far as the eye could reach,
drove steadily towards a far-distant
nt, which was in the direction of
home. At last we struck upon the
e fence that bounded his property.
; horses were now getting badly
ged ; and, in order to save them a
y roundabout drive, he lifted and
I low a portion of the fence, led his
ses cautiously over it, and, leaving
0 be re-erected by a servant next
r , he started direct for the Station,
it seemed a long journey too ; but
vas for him familiar ground ; and
Dugh amongst great patriarchal trees
e and there, and safely past dan-
dus w&.ter-holes, we swung steadily
reached his home in safety, and
1 a joyous welcome. The household
[ by this time got into great excite-
at over our non-appearance. The
iected meeting had, of course, been
,ndoned hours ago ; and the people
e all gone, wondering in their
rts “ whereto this would grow ” !
it that time, in the depth of winter,
roads were often wrought into
;rs of mire, and at many points
lost impassable even for well-
appointed conveyances. In connec-
tion therewith I had one very perilous
experience. I had to go from Clunes
to a farm in the Learmouth district.
The dear old Minister there, Mr.
Downes, went with me to every place
where a horse could be hired ; but the
owners positively refused—they would
sell, but they would not hire, for the
conveyance would be broken, and the
horse would never return alive ! Now,
I was advertised to preach at Lear-
mouth, and must somehow get over
the nine miles that lay between. This
would have been comparatively prac-
ticable, were it not that I carried with
me an indispensable bag of “ curios ”
and a heavy bundle of clubs, arrows,
dresses, etc., from the Islands, where-
with to illustrate my lectures and
enforce my appeals. No one could
be hired to carry my luggage, nor could
I get it sent after me by coach on that
particular way. Therefore, seeing no
alternative opening up my path, I
committed myself once more to the
Lord, as in harder trials before, shoul-
dered my bundle of clubs, lifted my
heavy bag, and started off on foot.
They urged me fervently to desist;
but I heard a voice repeating, “As
thy days, so shall thy strength be.”
There came back to me also the old
adage that had in youthful difficulties
spurred me on, “ Where there’s a will,
there’s a way.” And I thought that,
with these two in his heart, a Scotch-
man and a Christian would not be
easily beaten.
When I found the road wrought into
mire, and dangerous, or impassable, I
climbed the fence, and waded along
in the ploughed fields—though they
were nearly as bad. My bundle was
changed from shoulder to shoulder,
and my bag from hand to hand, till
I became thoroughly tired of both.
Pressing on, however, I arrived at a
wayside Public House, where several
roads met, and there I inquired the way
to Learmouth, and how far it was. The
Innkeeper, pointing, answered, —
“ Thi j is the road. If you are on
horseback, it might be three to four
miles just now, as your horse is able to
take it. If you arc in a conveyance,
83
The Floating of the “ Dayspring ”


with a good horse, it might be six
miles. And if you are walking, it
might be a eight or ten miles, or
even more.”
I said, “I am walking. How many
English miles is it to Mr. Baird’s farm ? ”
He laughingly replied, “ You will
find it a long way indeed this dark
night, considering the state of the road,
fenced in on both sides so that you can-
not get off.”
I passed on, leaving my Job’s com-
forter ; but a surly watch-dog got upon
my track, and I had much difficulty in
keeping it from biting me. Its attacks,
renewed upon me again and again, had
one good effect, —they stirred up my
spirits and made me hasten on.
Having persevered along the Lear-
mouth road, I next met a company of
men hastening on with a bundle of
ropes. They were on their way to re-
lieve a poor bullock, which by this
time had almost disappeared, sinking
in the mire on the public highway !
They kindly pointed me to a light,
visible through the dusk. That was
the farm at which I was to stay, and
they advised me to clear the fence,
and make straight for that light, as the
way was good.
With thankful heart I did so. The
light was soon lost to me, but I walked
steadily on in the direction thereof, to
the best of my j udgment. Immediately
I began to feel the ground all floating
under me. Then at every step I took,
or tried to take, I sank deeper and
deeper, till at last I durst not move
either backward or forward. I was
floundering in a deadly swamp. I
called out again and again, and “ coo-
eed ” with all my strength, but there
came no reply. It grew extremely
dark, while I kept praying to God for
deliverance. About midnight, I heard
two men conversing, apparently at no
very great distance. I began “ coo-
king ” again, but my strength was fail-
ing. Fortunately, the night was per-
fectly calm. The conversation ceased
for a while ; but I kept on crying for
help. At length, I heard one voice re-
mark to the other, “ Some one is in the
swamp.” And then a question came.
“ Who’s there ? ”
I answered, “ A stranger. Oh,
help me ! ”
Again a voice came through
darkness, “ How did you get in then
And I feebly replied, “ I have 1
my way.”
I heard the one say to the other,
will go and get him out, whoever
may be. We must not leave him the:
he’ll be dead before the morning,
you pass by our door, tell my wife tt
I’m helping some poor creature out
the swamp, and will be home i
mediately.”
He kept calling to me, and I answi
ing his call through the darkness, t
not without peril, he managed to rea
and aid me. Once I was safely dragg
out, he got my bag in his hand a:
slung my clubs on his shoulder, and
a very short time landed me at t
farm, dripping and dirty and col
Had God not sent that man to save n
I must have perished there, as mai
others have similarly perished befo]
Ihe farmer’s wife heartily welcom
me and kindly ministered to all n
needs. Though not yet gone to res
they had given up all hope of seeii
me. I heard the kind servant say
his mistress, “ I don’t know where ]
came from, or how far he has carri«
his bundles ; but I got him stuck fa
in the swamp, and my shoulder is t
ready sore from carrying his clubs.”
A cup of warm tea restored me. T]
Lord gave me a sound and blessed slee
I rose next morning wonderfully r
freshed, though arms and shoulde
were rather sore with the burdens 1
yesterday. I conducted three Se
vices, and told the story of my Missioi
not without comfort and blessing ; an
with gratifying results in money. ’ Ti
people gave liberally to the work. )
One day, after this, I was driving)
long distance on the outside of ]
crowded coach.. A grave and sensibl<
looking Scotchman sat next me. B
had inquiringly marked me readin
in silence, while all around were cor
versing on matters of common interesl
At last, he queried, “ Are you a Minis
ter ? ” I answered, “ Yes.”
“ Where is your Church ? ”
!< I have no Church,”
8 4
John G. Paton, d.d.


“ Where are you placed ? ”
“ I am not placed in any charge
“ Where is your home ? ”
“ I have no home.”
“ Where have you come from ? ”
“ The South Sea Islands.”
“ What are you doing in Australia ?”
“ Pleading the cause of the Mission.”
“ Are you a Presbyterian ? ”
“ I am.”
Having gone through this catechism
his satisfaction, a most interesting
id profitable conversation followed.
Tien the time came for the payment
fares, nothing would please but that
must allow him to pay for me—some
/enty-two shillings—which he did
ith all his heart, protesting, ‘‘A joy
me, Sir, a great joy ; I honour you
r your work’s sake ! ”
Thereafter, a Schoolmaster drove me
long distance across the country to
iolet Town, where for the night we
id to stay at an Inn. We had a taste
what Australian life really was, when
te land was being broken in. A com-
my of wild and reckless men were
irousing there at the time, and our
•rival was the signal for an outbreak
: malicious mischief. A powerful
How, who turned out to be a young
edical, rushed upon me as I left the
mvcyancc, seized me by the throat,
id shook me roughly, shouting, “ A
irson, a parson ! I will do for the
arson ! ”
Others with great difficulty relieved
ie from his grips, and dragged him
vay, cursing as if at his mortal enemy.
After tea, we got into the only bed-
>om in the house, available for two.
he Teacher and I locked ourselves in
nd barricaded the door, hearing in the
ext room a large party of drunken men
ambling and roaring over their cards,
ly-and-bye they quarrelled and fought;
aey smashed in and out of their room,
nd seemed to be murdering each other ;
very moment we expected our door to
erne crashing in, as they were thrown
r lurched against it. Their very
inguage made us tremble. One man
1 particular seemed to be badly abused;
e shouted that they were robbing him
f his money ; and he groaned and
cried for protection, all in vain. We
spent a sleepless and most miserable
night. At four in the morning I arose,
and was glad to get away by the early
coach. My friend also left in his own
conveyance, and reached his home in
safety. At that period, it was not only
painful but dangerous for any decent
traveller to stay at many of these way-
side Inns, in the new and rough country.
Every man lived and acted just as he
pleased, doing that which was right in
his own eyes ; and Might was Right.
Wheresoever railway, steamboat,
and coach were available, I always used
them ; but failing these, I hired, or
was obliged to friends of Missions for
driving me from place to place. On
this tour, having reached a certain
place, from which my way lay for many
miles across the country, where there
was no public conveyance, I walked to
the nearest squatter’s Station and
frankly informed the owner how I was
situated ; that I could not hire, and
that I would like to stay at his house all
night, if he would kindly send me on in
the morning by any sort of trap to the
next station on my list. He happened
to be a good Christian and a Presby-
terian, and gave me a right cordial wel-
come. A meeting of his servants was
called, which I had the pleasure of ad-
dressing. Next morning, he gave me
£2O , and sent me forward with his own
conveyance, telling me to retain it all
day, if necessary.
On reaching the next squatter’s
Station, I found the master also at
home, and said, “ I am a Missionary
from the South Sea Islands. I am
crossing Victoria to plead the cause of
the Mission. I would like to rest here
for an hour or two. Could you kindly
send me on to the next Station by your
conveyance ? If not, lam to keep the
last squatter’s buggy, until I reach it.
Looking with a queer smile at me, he
replied, “ You propose a rather novel
condition on which to rest at my
house ! My horses are so employed to-
day, I fear that I may have difficulty in
sending you on. But come in ; both
you and your horses need rest ; and
my wife will be glad to see you.”
I immediately discovered that the
85
The Floating of the “ Dayspring ”


good lady came from Glasgow, from a
street in which I had lodged when a
student at the Free Normal College. I
even knew some of her friends. All
the places of her youthful associations
were equally familiar to me. We
launched out into deeply-interesting
conversation, which finally led up, of
course, to the story of our Mission.
The gentleman, by this time, had so
far been won, that he slipped out and
sent my conveyance and horses back
to their owner, and ordered his own to
be ready to take me to the next Station,
or, if need be, to the next again. At
parting, the lady said to her husband,
“ The Missionary has asked no money,
though he sees we have been deeply in-
terested ; yet clearly that is the object
of his tour. He is the first Missionary
from the Heathen that ever visited us
here ; and you must contribute some-
thing to his Mission fund.”
I thanked her, explaining, “ I never
ask money directly from any person for
the Lord’s work. My part is done
when I have told my story and shown
the needs of the Heathen and the claims
of Christ; but I gratefully receive all
that the Lord moves His people to give
for the Mission.”
Her husband replied, rather sharply,
“ You know I don’t keep money here.”
To which she retorted with ready tact
and with a resistless smile, “ But you
keep a cheque book ; and your cheque
is as good as gold ! This is the first
donation we ever gave to such a cause,
and let it be a good one.” He made it
indeed handsome, and I went on my
way, thanking them very sincerely,
and thanking God.
At the next Station, the owner turned
out to be a gruff Irishman, forbidding
and insolent. Stating my case to him
as to the others, he shouted at me, “ Go
on ! I don’t want to be troubled with
the loikes o’ you here.”
I answered, “ I am sorry if my
coming troubles you ; but I wish you
every blessing in Christ Jesus. Good-
bye ! ”
As we drove off, he kept growling
after us. On leaving his door, I heard
a lady calling to him from the window,
“ Don’t let that Missionaiy go away !
Make haste and call him back. I
the children to see the idols and
South Sea curios.”
At first he drowned her appeal in 1;
own shoutings. But she must ha’
persisted effectually ; for shortly \
heard him “ coo-eeing,” and stoppe
When he came up to us, he explaine
“ That lady in my house heard yc
speaking in Melbourne. The ladi
and children are very anxious to si
your idols, dresses, and weapons. W:
you please come back ? ”
We did so. I spent fifteen minub
or so, giving them information aboi
the Natives and our Mission. As
left, our boisterous friend handed rr
a cheque for £s, and wished me gref
success !
The next Station at which we arrive
was one of the largest of all. It haj
pened to be a sort of pay-day, and me
were assembled from all parts of th
“ run,” and were to remain there ove
night. The squatter and his famil
were from home ; but Mr. Todd, th
overseer, being a good Christian and
Scotchman, was glad to receive us, ai
ranged to hold a meeting that evenin
in the men’s hut, and promised to se
me forward on my journey next da}
The meeting was very enthusiastic
and they subscribed £2O to the Missioi
—every man being determined to hav
so many shares in the new Mission Ship
To the honour of Australia I mus
here record, that anything like uncivi
treatment was a rare exception ii
all my travels. Sometimes, indeed, ]
have suspected that people were acting
as if to say, Let us treat him kindly, d(
as little for his cause as we can, and ge'
rid of him as quickly as possible ! But
as a rule, almost without an exception
I have met with remarkable kindness
hospitality, and help from all the Minis,
ters and people of Australia. Scarce!}
ever, at any place visited, was I withoul
one or more invitations to be guest oi
some of the Lord’s people ; and I was
there treated as a dear friend of the
family, rather than a passing stranger,
Colonials, indeed, are proverbial for the
open door and the generous hand to pil-
grims by the way. May the Divine
Master grant them evermore of His own
86
Paton, d.d
John G.


irit, with His ever-enriching blessings
their Souls and in their homes !
A lively and memorable extempo-
ed meeting on this tour is associated
memory with one of my dearest
ends. The district was very remote.
the squatter, and his beloved wife
:re sterling Christians, and have been
er since warmly devoted to me. On
y arrival, he invited the people from
. the surrounding Stations, as well as
5 own numerous servants, to hear the
Dry of our Mission. Next day he
ilunteered to drive me a long distance
er the plains of St. Arnaud, his dear
fe accompanying us. At that time
ere were few fences in such districts
Australia. The drive was long, but
e day had been lovely, and the fellow-
ip was so sweet that it still shines a
nny spot in the fields of memory.
Havingreached ourdestination about
ven o’clock, he ordered tea at the Inn
r the whole party ; and we sallied out
eantime and took the only Hall in the
ace, for an extemporized meeting to
: held that evening at eight o’clock,
then hired a man to go through the
wnship with a bell, announcing the
me ; while I myself went up me side
the main street, and my friend up the
her, inviting all who would listen to
; to attend the Mission meeting, where
>uth Sea Island idols, weapons,
id dresses would be exhibited, and
ies of the Natives told.
Running back for a hurried cup of
a, I then hasted to the Hall, and
und it crowded to excess with rough
id boisterous diggers. The hour
ruck as I was getting my articles ar-
,nged and spread out upon the table,
id they began shouting, “ Where’s
ie Missionary ? ” —“ Another hoax ! ”
-indicating that they were not un-
illing for a row. I learned that, only
few nights ago, a so-called Professor
id advertised a lecture, lifted entrance
oney till the Hall was crowded, and
ten quietly slipped off the scene. In
ir case, though there was no charge,
ley seemed disposed to gratify them-
Ives by some sort of promiscuous re-
Amidst the noisy chaff and rising up-
ar, I stepped up on the table, and
said, “ Gentlemen, I am the Missionary.
If you will now be silent, the lecture
will proceed. According to my usual
custom, let us open the meeting with
prayer.”
The hush that fell was such a con-
trast to the preceding hubbub, that I
heard my heart throbbing aloud ! Then
they listened to me for an hour, in per-
fect silence and with ever-increasing in-
terest. At the close I intimated that I
asked no collection ; but if, after what
they had heard, they would take a
Collecting Card for the new Mission
Ship, and send any contributions to the
Treasurer at Melbourne, I would praise
God for sending me amongst them.
Many were heartily taken, and doubt-
less some souls felt the “ constraining
love ” who had till then been liv-
ing without God. Next morning, I
mounted the Mail Coach, and started
on a three days’ run, while my dear
friend returned safely to his home.
I travelled thus over the length and
breadth of New South Wales, Victoria,
Tasmania, and South Australia, telling
the story of our Mission, and delivering
the Lord’s message, not only in great
centres of population, but in almost
every smaller township ; and not only
thereby Floating the Dayspring, but
sowing, by God’s help, seeds of far-
reaching blessing, whose fruits will
ripen through the years to come.
Blessed be His holy Name !
The crowning adventure of my tour
came about in the following manner.
I was advertised to conduct Services at
Narracoort on Sabbath, and at a Sta-
tion on the way on Saturday evening.
But how to get from Penola was a
terrible perplexity. On Saturday morn-
ing, however, a young lady offered
me, out of gratitude for blessings re-
ceived, the use of her riding horse for
the journey. “ Garibaldi ” was his
name ; and, though bred for a race-
horse, I was assured that if I kept him
■firmly in hand, he would easily carry
me over the two-and-twenty miles. He
was to be left at the journey’s end, and
the lady herself would fetch him back.
I shrank from the undertaking, know-
ing little of horses, and having
vague recollections of being dreadfully
87
The Floating of the u Day spring 33


punished for more than a week after
my last and almost only ride. But
every one in that country is quite at
ease on the back of a horse. They saw
no risk ; and, as there appeared no
other way of getting there to fulfil my
engagements, I, for my part, began to
think that God had unexpectedly pro-
vided the means, and that He would
carry me safely through.
I accepted the lady’s kind offer, and
started on my pilgrimage. A friend
showed me the road, and gave me
ample directions. In the bush, I was
to keep my eye on the notches in the
trees, and follow them. He agreed
kindly to bring my luggage to the
Station and leave it there for me by-
and-bye. After I had walked very
quietly for some distance, three gentle-
men on horseback overtook me. We
entered into conversation. They in-
quired how far I was going, and ad-
vised me to sit a little “ freer ” in the
saddle, as it would be so much easier
for me. They seemed greatly amused
at my awkward riding ! Dark clouds
were now gathering ahead, and the
atmosphere prophesied a severe storm ;
therefore they urged that I should ride
a little faster, as they, for a consider-
able distance, could guide me on the
right way. I explained to them my
plight through inexperience, said that
I could only creep on slowly with safety,
and bade them Good-bye. As the sky
was getting darker every minute, they
consented, wishing me a safe journey,
and started off at a smart pace.
I struggled to hold in my horse ; but
seizing the bit with his teeth, laying
back his ears, and stretching out his
eager neck, he manifestly felt that his
honour was at stake ; and in less time
than I take to write it, the three friends
cleared a way for us, and he tore past
them all at an appalling speed. They
tried for a time to keep within reach of
us, but that sound only put fire into his
blood ; and in an incredibly short time
I heard them not; nor, from the mo-
ment that he bore me swinging past
them, durst I turn my head by one inch
to look for them again. In vain I tried
to hold him in ; he tore on, with what
appeared to me the speed of the wind.
Then the thunderstorm broke around
us, with flash of lightning and flood o]
rain, and at every fresh peal my “ Gari-
baldi ” dashed more wildly onward.
To me, it was a vast surprise to dis-
cover that I could sit more easily or
this wild flying thing, than when at a
canter or a trot. At every turn I ex-
pected that he would dash himself and
me against the great forest trees ; buf
instinct rather than my hand guided
him miraculously. Sometimes I had a
glimpse of the road, but as for the
“ notches ” I never saw one of them ;
we passed them with lightning speed.
Indeed, I durst not lift my eyes for one
moment from watching the horse’s
head and the trees on our track. My
high-crowned hat was now drenched,
and battered out of shape ; for when-
ever we came to a rather clear space, I
seized the chance and gave it another
knock down over my head. I was
spattered and covered with mud and
mire.
Crash, crash, went the thunder, anc
on, on, went “ Garibaldi ” through th<
gloom of the forest, emerging at lengtl
upon a clearer ground with a mon
visible pathway. Reaching the top o
the slope, a large house stood out far ii
front of us to the left; and the hors<
had apparently determined to mak<
straight for that, as if it were his home
He skirted along the hill, and took th<
track as his own familiar ground, al
my effort to hold him in or guide hin
having no more effect than that of £
child. By this time, I suspect, I reallj
had lost all power. • “ Garibaldi ” hac
been at that house, probably, fre-
quently before ; he knew those stables
and my fate seemed to be instant death
against door or wall.
Some members of the family, on the
outlook for the Missionary, saw us
come tearing along as if mad or drunk ,
and now all rushed to the verandahj
expecting some dread catastrophe. A
tall and stout young groom, amazed at
our wild career, throwing wide open
the gate, seized the bridle at great risk
to himself, and ran full speed, yet hold-
ing back with all his might, and shout-
ing at me to do the same. We suc-
ceeded—“ Garibaldi ” having probably
88
John G. Paton, D.D.


ined his purpose—in bringing him
halt within a few paces of the door,
•ing at me with open mouth, the man
aimed, “ I have saved your life,
at madness to ride like that ! ”
nking him, though I could scarcely
this time articulate a word, I told
that the horse had run away, and
; I had lost all control,
ruly I was in a sorry plight,
iched, covered with mud, and my
battered down over my eyes ;
e wonder they thought me drunk or
1 ! Finally, as if to confirm every
licion, and amuse them all, —for
iter, mistress, governess, and child-
now looked on from the verandah,
hen I was helped off the horse, I
Id not stand on my feet ! My head
went on rushing in the race ; I
jgered, and down I tumbled in the
1, feeling chagrin and mortification ;
there I had to sit for some time,
ire I recovered myself, so as either
ise or to speak a word. When I did
to my feet, I had to stand holding
;he verandah for some time, my head
rushing on in the race. At length
master said,“ Will you not come in ? ”
knew that he was treating me for
[runken man ; and the giddiness
. so dreadful still, that my attempts
speech seemed more drunken than
n my gait.
.s soon as I could stand, I went into
house, and drew near to an excel-
; fire in my dripping clothes. The
atter sat opposite me in silence,
ling the newspapers, and taking
>ok at me now and again over his
tacles. By-and-bye he remarked,
Wouldn’t it be worth while to change
r clothes ? ”
peech was now returning to me. I re-
d,“Yes,but my bag is coming on in
cart, and may not be here to-night.”
le began to relent. He took me
) a room, and laid out for me a suit
lis own. I being then very slender,
I he a big-framed farmer, my new
3s, though greatly adding to my
ifort, enhanced the singularity of
appearance !
Returning to him, washed and
ssed, I inquired if he had arranged
a meeting? My tongue, I fear, was
still unsteady, for the squatter looked
at me rather reproachfully, and said,
“ Do you really consider yourself fit
to appear before a meeting to-night ? ”
I assured him that he was quite
wrong in his suspicions, that I was a
life-long Abstainer, and that my nerves
had been so unhinged by the terrible
ride and runaway horse. He smiled
rather suggestively, and said we would
see how I felt after tea.
We went to the table. All that
had occurred was now consummated
by my appearing in the lusty farmer’s
clothes ; and the lady and other friends
had infinite difficulty in keeping their
amusement within decent bounds.
I again took speech in hand, but I
suspect my words had still the thick-
ness of the tippler’s utterance, for they
seemed not to carry much conviction.
“ Dear friends, I quite understand
your feelings ; appearances are so
strangely against me. But I am not
drunken, as ye suppose. I have
tasted no intoxicating drink, I am a
life-long Total Abstainer.”
This fairly broke down their reserve.
They laughed aloud, looking at each
other and at me, as if to say, “ Man,
you’re drunk at this very moment.”
Before tea was over they appeared,
however, to begin to entertain the idea
that I might address the meeting ; and
so I was informed of the arrangements
that had been made. At the meeting,
my incredulous friends became very
deeply interested. Manifestly their
better thoughts were gaining the ascen-
dancy. And they heaped thereafter
every kindness upon me, as if to make
amends for harder suspicions.
Next morning the master drove me
about ten miles farther on to the
Church. A groom rode the racehorse,
who took no scathe from his thunder-
ing gallop of the day before. It left
deeper traces upon me. I got through
the Services, however, and with good
returns for the Mission. Twice since,
on my Mission tours, I have found
myself at that same memorable house ;
and on each occasion, a large company
of friends were regaled by the good
lady there with very comical descrip-
tions of my first arrival at her door.
89
The Floating of the “ Day spring ”


CHAPTER XII
THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES
A.D. 1863. >ET. 39.
Detained for nearly a week at Bal-
moral by the breakdown of the coach
on these dreadful roads, I telegraphed
to Hamilton for a conveyance ; and
the Superintendent of the Sunday
School, dear Mr. Laidlaw, volunteered,
in order to reduce expenses, to spend
one day of his precious time coming
for me, and another driving me down.
While awaiting him, I came into pain-
ful and memorable contact with the
Aborigines of Australia. The Publi-
cans had organized a day of sports,
horse-racing, and circus exhibitions.
Immense crowds assembled, and,
amongst the rest, tribe after tribe of
the Aborigines from all the surrounding
country. Despite the law prohibiting
the giving of strong drinks to these
poor creatures, foo’.ish and unprinci-
pled dealers supplied them with the
same, and the very blankets which
the Government had given them were
freely exchanged for the fire-water
which kindled them to madness.
Next day was Sabbath. The morn-
ing was hideous with the yells of the
lighting Savages. They tore about
on the Common in front of the Church,
leading gentlemen having tried in vain
to quiet them, and their wild voices
without jarred upon the Morning Ser-
vice. About two o’clock, I tried to
get into conversation with them. I
appealed to them whether they were
not all tired and hungry. They re-
plied that they had had no food all
that day ; they had fought since the
morning ! I said, “ I love you, black
fellows. Igo Missionary black fellows
far away. I love you, want you rest,
get food. Come all of you, rest, sit
round me, and we will talk, till the
jins (=women) get ready tea. They
boil water, I take tea with you, and
then you will be strong ! ”
By broken English and by many
symbols, I won their ear. They pro-
duced tea and damper, t.e., a rather
forbidding-looking bread, without
yeast, baked on the coals. Their
wives hasted to boil water. I kept
incessantly talking, to interest tl
and told them how Jesus, God’s
Son, came and died to make t
happy, and how He grieved to
them beating and fighting and kr
each other.
When the tea was ready, we squat
on the green grass, their tins v
filled, the “ damper ” was broken i
lumps, and I asked the blessing of (
on the meal. To me it was unpleas
eating ! Many of them looked stn
and healthy ; but not a few were w
and dying creatures. The stre
devouring all they could get, urged
to be done, and let them finish tl
fighting, eager for the fray. But h
ing gained their confidence, I pra;
with them, and thereafter said, “ N<
before I leave, I will ask of you to
one thing for my sake, which you <
all easily do.”
With one voice they replied, “ Y
we all do whatever you say.”
I got their leaders to promise to
one by one. I then said, “ Now }
have got your tea ; and I ask ev(
man and boy among you to lie do
in the bush and take a sleep, and y<
wives will sit by and watch over y(
safety ! ”
In glum silence, their war weape
still grasped in their hands, they stc
looking intently at me, doubti
whether I could be in earnest. I urg
them, “ You all promised to do wl
I asked. If you break your promi
these white men will laugh at me, a
say that black fellows only lie a
deceive. Let them see that you c
be trusted. I wait here till I see y
all asleep.”
One said that his head was cut, a
he must have revenge before he coi
lie dowm. Others filed past showi
their wounds, and declaring that
w r as too bad to request them to go
sleep. I praised them as far as I con
but urged them for once to be men a:
to keep their word. Finally they i
agreed to he dowm, I wmiting till t
last man had disappeared ; and, bei
doubly exhausted wdth the debau
and the fighting, they were soon ;
fast asleep. I prayed that the bless
Sleep might lull their savage passioi
90
Paton, O.D.
John G,


and test thejn, whether they know
these objects.”
Carrying them in his hand, we went
to them. The woman instantly on
perceiving them dropped what she
was washing, and turned away in in-
stinctive terror. Mr, Simpson asked,
“ Have you ever before seen stones
like these ? ”
The wily “ doctor ” replied, “ Plenty
on the plains, where I kick them out of
my way.”
Taking others out of my pocket,
I said, “ These make people sick and
well, don’t they ? ”
His rage overcame his duplicity, and
he exclaimed, “ What black fellow
give you these ? If I know him Ido
for him ! ”
The woman, looking the picture of
terror, and pointing to one of the
objects, cried, “ That fellow no good !
he kill men. No good, no good ! Me
too much afraid.”
Then, looking at me, she said, point-
ing with her finger, “ That fellow
savvy (knows) too much ! No white
man see them. He no good.”
There was more in this scene and in
all its surroundings, than in many argu-
ments ; and Mr. Simpson thoroughly
believed that these were objects of
idolatrous worship.
On a later occasion I showed these
four objects to Aborigines, with whom
I got into intercourse far off in New
South Wales. They at once recognized
them, and showed the same super-
stitious dread. They told me the
peculiar characteristics and the special
powers ascribed to each idol or charm.
This I confirmed by the testimony of
five different tribes living at great
distances from each other; and it is
morally certain that amongst all the
blacks of Australia such objects are so
worshipped and feared in the place of
God.
And now let me relate the story of
my visit to Nora, the converted Abo-
riginal referred to above. Accom-
panied by Robert Hood, Esq., J.P.,
Victoria, I found my way to the en-
campment near Hexham. She did not
know of our coming, nor see us till we
stood at the door of her hut, She
was clean and tidily dressed, as v
also her dear little children,
appeared glad to s e us. She had
been reading the Presbyterian A
senger, and the Bible was lying at
elbow. I said, “Do you read
Messenger ? ”
She replied, “ Yes ; I like to kr
what is going on in the Church.”
We found her to be a sensible c
humble Christian woman, convers
intelligently about religion and serv
God devotedly. Next Sabbath i
brought her husband, her children, a
six blacks to church, all decen
dressed, and they all listened m
attentively.
At our first meeting I said, “ No
they tell me you are a Christian,
want to ask you a few questions abc
the blacks ; and I hope that as
Christian you will speak the trutl
Rather hurt at my language, she rais
her right hand, and replied, “ I ;
a Christian. I fear and serve the ti
God. I always speak the truth.”
Taking from my pocket the sto
idols from the Islands, I inquired
her people had or worshipped thir
like these. She replied, “ The‘doct
have them.”
“ Have you a ' doctor ’ in yo
camp ? ” I asked. She said, “Y(
my uncle is the Sacred Man ; but he
now far away from this.”
“ Has he the idols with him now :
I inquired. She answered, “N<
they are left in my care.”
I then said, “ Could you let us s
them ? ”
She consulted certain represent
tives of the tribe who were at han
They rose, and removed to a distant
They had consented. Mr. Hood assun
me that no fault would be found wi
her, as she was the real, or at lea
virtual head of the tribe. Out of
larger bag she then drew two small
bags, and opened them. They we
filled with the very objects which
had brought from the Islands,
asked her to consult the men of h
tribe whether they would agree to st
four or five of them to me, that I mig]
by them convince the white peop
that they had gods of their own, ar
John G. Paton, d.d.


therefore, above the brutes of the
[; the money to be given to their
red Man on his return. This also,
r a time was agreed to. I selected
se of the objects, and paid the
ulated price.
CHAPTER XIII
TO SCOTLAND AND BACK
A.D. 1863-1865. JET. 39-41.
ch of my Australian Committees
ongly urged my return to Scotland,
efly to secure, if possible, more
ssionaries for the New Hebrides.
. Inglis, just arrived from Britain,
ere he had the Aneityumese New
stament carried through the press,
ilously enforced this appeal.
Fet my path was far from clear,
twithstanding my Gideon’s fleece
erred to already. To lose time in
ng home to do work that others
ght to do, while I still heard the
il of the perishing Heathen on the
ands, could scarcely be my duty,
nidst overwhelming perplexity, and
ding no light from any human
imsel, I took a step, to which only
ce before in all my chequered career
have felt constrained. Some will
)ck when they read it, but others
11 perhaps more profoundly say,
to whomsoever this faith is given,
; him obey it.” After many prayers,
d wrestlings, and tears, I went alone
fore the Lord, and, on my knees,
st lots with a solemn appeal to God,
d the answer came, “ Go home ! ”
my heart, I sincerely believe that
. both these occasions the Lord con-
scended to decide for me the path
duty, otherwise unknown; and I
lieve it the more truly now, in view
the aftercome of thirty years of
rvice to Christ that flowed out of the
eps then deliberately and devoutly
ken. In this, and in many other
atters, I am no law to others, though
obeyed my then highest light. Nor
,n I refrain from adding that, for the
;ry reasons indicated above, I regard
i-called “ lotteries ” and ‘‘ raffles ”
a mockery of God, and little if at
1 short of blasphemy. “Ye cannot
drink at the Lord’s Table, and at the
table of devils.”
I sailed for London in the Kosciusko,
an Aberdeen clipper, on 16th May,
1863. Captain Stewart made the
voyage most enjoyable to all. Tjje
Rev. Mr. Stafford, friend of the good
Bishop Selwyn and tutor to his son,
conducted along with myself, alter-
nately, an Anglican and a Presbyterian
Service.
We cast anchor safely in the East
India Docks, at London, on 26th
August, 1863, having been three
months and ten days at sea from port
to port.
It was 5.30 p.m. when we cast
anchor, and the gates closed at
6 o’clock. My little box was ready on
deck. The Custom House officers
kindly passed me, and I was imme-
diately on my way to Euston Square.
Never before had I been within the
Great City, and doubtless I could have
enjoyed its palaces and memorials.
But the King’s business, entrusted to
me, “ required haste,” and I felt con-
strained to press forward, looking
neither to the right hand nor to the
left. The streets through which I was
driven seemed to be dirty and narrow ;
many of the people had a squalid and
vicious look ; and, fresh from Australia,
my disappointment was keen as to the
smoky and miserable appearance of
what I saw. No doubt other visitors
will behold only the grandeur and the
wealth ; they will see exactly what
they come to see, and London will
shine before them accordingly.
At nine o’clock, that evening, I left
for Scotland by train. Next morning,
about the same hour, I reported my-
self at the manse of the Rev. John
Kay, Castle Douglas, the Convener of
the Foreign Mission Committee of the
Reformed Presbyterian Church, to
which I then belonged. We arranged
for a meeting of said Committee, at
earliest practicable date, that my
scheme and plans might at once be
laid be fore them.
By the next train I was on my way
to Dumfries, and thence by convey-
ance to my dear old home at Torthor-
wald. There I had a Heavenly Wel-
92
To Scotland and Back


fore daylight next morning, the
;ter and I were hastening to the
s to prevent further fighting ; but
ie sun was rising we saw the last
of the distant Natives disappear-
ver the brow of the hill. A small
belonging to the district alone
ned. They shouted to us, “ Black
■ all gone ! No more fight. You
iuch like black fellow ! ”
or three days afterwards I had still
inger there ; and if their dogs ran
marked at me, the women chased
n with sticks and stones, and pro-
ed me. One little touch of kind-
i and sympathy had unlocked their
cened hearts.
he 18th of February, 1863, was a
worthy of being chronicled and
embered. I visited the Wonwon-
Station in the Wimmera district
Victoria, and there beheld a great
ip of the Aborigines on the plain
r by. Securing the company of
following witnesses, I proceeded
;he camp, and found that part of
m had already seen me at Balmoral.
3 of them spoke English fairly well,
nanaged to break through their
cence, and in course of time they
I us freely about the customs and
iitions of their people. They took
to their “ doctor,” or Sacred Man,
) was lying sick in his hut. Half
cealed among the skins and clothes
and him, I observed several curious
i;S, which I knew at once would
bably contain the little idols of
ich I was in quest. I urged the
nesses to take special notice of
rything that occurred, and draw
and sign a statement for my future
. The following is their attested
‘ Mr. Baton, having carefully ex-
ined to the blacks that he would
; to see some of the sacred objects
ich they said made the people sick
1 well, assured them that his aim
3 not to mock at them, but to prove
white people that the blacks had
ects of worship and were not like
s and dogs. He offered them a
mber of small pieces of silver to get
;ad and tea for the ‘ doctor,’ if they
open these little bags and let us
see what was in them. After a good
deal of talk amongst themselves, he
took some of the Island stone-gods
from his pocket, saying, ‘ I know that
these bags have such things in them.’
An Aboriginal woman exclaimed, * You
can’t hide them from that fellow. He
knows all about us.’ Mrs. Rutherford
offered to kill a sheep, and give them
sugar and tea to feast on, if they would
open the little bags, but they refused.
After consulting the Sacred Man, how-
ever, he took the silver pieces and
allowed them to be opened before us.
They were full of exactly such stones
and other things as Mr, Baton had
brought from the Islands, to prove to
white people in Melbourne that they
were not like dogs, but had gods ; ho
offered the Sacred Man more money
for four of the objects he had seen.
After much talk among themselves,
he took the money ; and in our pre-
sence Mr. Baton selected a stone idol,
a piece of painted wood of conical
shape, a piece of bone of human leg
with seven rings carved round it,
which they said had the power of
restoring sick people to health, and
another piece of painted wood which
made people sick ; but they made him
solemnly promise that he would tell
no other black fellows where he got
them. They were much interested in
Mr. Baton’s conversation, and said,
‘ No Missionary teach black fellow.’
They then showed us square rugs,
thread and grass bags, etc., all neatly
made by themselves, as proofs that if
they were taught they and their wives
could learn to do things and to work
just like white people; but they said
‘ White man no care for black fellow.’
All this, we, whose names follow, were
eye-witnesses of : —G. Rutherford,
(Mrs.) A, Sutherland, (Mrs.) Martha
Rutherford, Jemima Rutherford, Ben
B. Bentock, tutor of the Rutherford
family.”
On returning to Horsham, I informed
my dear friends, Rev. B. Simpson and
his excellent lady, of my exploits and
possessions. He replied, “There is
a black ‘ doctor ’ gone round our house
just now to see one of his people who
is washing here to-day. Let us go
93
The Australian Aborigines


94 John G
come from my saintly parents, yet not
unmixed with many fast-falling tears.
Five brief years only had elapsed,
since I went forth from their Sanc-
tuary, with my young bride ; and now,
aias ! alas ! that grave on Tanna held
mother and son locked in each other’s
embrace till the Resurrection Day.
Not less glowing, but more terribly
agonizing, was my reception, a few
days thereafter, at Coldstream, when
I first gazed on the bereaved father
and mother of my beloved ; who,
though godly people, were conscious
of a heart-break under that stroke,
from which through their remaining
years they never fully rallied. They
murmured not against the Lord ; but
all the same, heart and flesh began to
faint and fail, even as our Divine
Exemplar Himself fainted under the
Cross, which yet He so uncomplain-
ingly bore.
The Foreign Mission Committee of
the Reformed Presbyterian Church
met in Edinburgh, and welcomed me
kindly, nay, warmly. A full report
of all my doings for the past, and of all
my plans and hopes, was laid before
them. They at once agreed to my
visiting and addressing every Congre-
gation and Sabbath School in the
Church. They opened to me their
Divinity Hall, that I might appeal to
the Students. My Address there was
published and largely circulated, under
the motto —“ Come over and help us.”
It was used of God to deepen vastly
the interest in our Mission.
The Committee generously and
enthusiastically did everything in their
power to help me. By their influence,
the Church in 1864 conferred on me
the undesired and undeserved honour,
the highest which they could confer
—the honour of being the Moderator
of their Supreme Court. No one can
understand how much I shrank from
all this ; but, in hope of the Lord’s
using it and me to promote His work
amongst the Heathen, I accepted the
Chair, though, I fear, only to occupy
it most unworthily, for Tanna gave
me little training for work like that!
The Church, as there represented,
passed a Resolution, declaring—“ It
Paton, d.d.
is with feelings of no ordinary pleas
that we behold present at this meet
one of our most devoted Missionar:
The results of Mr. Paton’s appeals
Australia has been unprecedented
the history of this Mission. It appe
in the shape of £4,500 added to ■
funds of the New Hebrides Missi
besides over £3OO for Native Teach(
to be paid yearly in £5 contributio
and all expenses met. The Spirit
God must have been poured out u|
the inhabitants of the Colonies,
leading them to make such a no
offering as this to the cause of Missio
and in making our Missionary •
honoured instrument God employ
in drawing forth the sympathy £
liberality of the Colonists. Now,
the good hand of God upon him,
holds the most honoured position
Moderator of the Church,” etc., etc
The Synod also placed on record
gratitude for what God had thus doi
and its cordial recognition of the me
and fruitful services rendered
Ministers and Sabbath Schools, 1>
in Scotland and Australia, in stand
by me and helping on the Floating
the “ Day spring.”
In May, 1876, the Reformed Presi
terian Church entered into an hono
able and independent Union with
larger, wealthier, and more progress
sister, the then Free Church of Sc
land, —only one Minister and a few
the brethren, doubtless with perf
loyalty to what they regarded as di
to Christ, holding aloof and stand
firmly in the old paths, as they
peared to them.
In the Deed of incorporating Un
the Church took itself legally £
formally bound to maintain the Is
Hebrides Mission staff, and also
Dayspring, committing herself ne
to withdraw, as it were, till th
Islands were all occupied for Jes
Now that the French have been o
strained to abandon the scene, the fi
is open, and the Islands wail aloud
eight or ten Missionaries more than
at present have (1889); and then
Standard of the Cross might speed
be planted on every separate Isle, a
a true sense might at last come into 1


dish name given to these regions by
fir Spanish discoverer, when he called
5 part at which he touched, thinking
the fabled Southern Continent, the
nd of the Holy Ghost.
Vly tour through Scotland brought
; into contact with every Minister,
ngregation, and Sabbath School in
; Church of my fathers. They were
ver at any time a rich people, but
;y were always liberal. At this
ae they contributed beyond all
3vious experience, both in money
d in boxes of useful articles for the
anders.
Unfortunately, my visit to the far
jrth, to our congregations at Wick
d Stromness, had been arranged for
e month of January ; and thereby a
re trial befell me in my pilgrimages,
le roads were covered with snow and
;. I reached Aberdeen and Wick
r steamer from Edinburgh, and had
find my way thence to Thurso,
re inside seats on the Mail Coach
g all occupied, I had to take my
e outside. The cold was intense,
one of my feet got bitten by the
The storm detained me nearly
;ek at Thurso, but feeling did not
turn to the foot.
We started, in a lull, by steamer for
xomness ; but the storm burst again,
1 were ordered below, and hatches
id doors made fast. The passengers
ere mostly very rough, the place was
ul with whisky and tobacco. I
jpealed to the Captain to let me
ouch somewhere on deck, and hold
las best I could. He shouted, “ I
ire not ! You’ll be washed over-
jar d.”
On seeing my appealing look, he
ented, directed his men to fasten
tarpaulin over me, and lash it and
3 to the mast, and there I lay till
; reached Stromness. The sea broke
avily and dangerously over the
ssel. But the Captain finding shelter
r several hours under the lee of a
idland, saved both the ship and the
jsengers. When at last we landed,
r foot was so benumbed and painful
it I could move a step only with
satest agony. Two meetings, how-
ir, were in some kind of way con-
ducted ; but the projected visit to
Dingwall and other places had to be
renounced, the snow lying too deep
for any conveyance to carry me, and
my foot crying aloud for treatment and
skill.
On that tour, the Sabbath Schools
joyfully adopted my scheme, and
became “ shareholders ” in the Mission
Ship. It was thereafter ably devel-
oped by an Elder of the Church. A
Dayspring collecting box found its
way into almost every family ; and
the returns from Scotland have yielded
ever since about /250 per annum, as
their proportion for the expenses of
the Children’s Mission Ship to the New
Hebrides. The Church in Nova Scotia
heartily accepted the same idea, and
their Sabbath School children have
regularly contributed their per
annum too. The Colonial children
have contributed the rest, throughout
all these years, with unfailing interest.
The Lord also crowned this tour with
another precious fruit of blessing,
though not all by any means due to
my influence. Four new Missionaries
volunteered from Scotland, and three
from Nova Scotia. By their aid we
not only re-claimed for Jesus the posts
that had been abandoned, but we took
possession of other Islands in His most
blessed Name. But I did not wait
and take them out with me. They
had matters to look into and to learn
about, that would be infinitely helpful
to them in the Mission field.
But I did not return alone. The
dear Lord had brought to me one pre-
pared, all unknown to either of us, by
special culture, by godly training, by
many gifts and accomplishments, and
even by family associations, to share
my lot on the New Hebrides. Ere
I left Scotland in 1864, I was married
to Margaret Whitecross, and God
spares us to each other still ; * and
the family which He has been pleased
in His love to grant unto us we have
dedicated to His service, with the
prayer and hope that He may use
every one of them in spreading the
Gospel throughout the Heathen World.
My last scene in Scotland was
♦ Died at Melbourne, 1905.
95
To Scotland and Back


kneeling at the family altar in the old
Sanctuary Cottage at Torthorwald,
while my venerable father, with his
high-priestly locks of snow-white hair
streaming over his shoulders, com-
mended us once again to “ the care
and keeping of the Lord God of the
families of Israel.” It was the last
time that ever on this Earth those
accents of intercession, loaded with a
pathos of deathless love, would fall
upon my ears. I knew to a certainty
that when we rose from our knees and
said farewell, our eyes would never
meet again till they were flooded with
the lights of the Resurrection Day.
But he and my darling mother gave
us away once again with a free heart,
not unpierced with the sword of human
anguish, to the service of our common
Lord and to the Salvation of the
Heathen. And we went forth, praying
that a double portion of their spirit,
along with their precious blessing,
might rest upon us in all the way that
we had to go.
Here, in passing, I may mention
that my mother, ever beloved, “ fell
on sleep,” after a short agony of afflic-
tion, in 1865; and my ‘‘priest-like
father ” passed peacefully and joy-
fully into the presence of his Lord in
1868 ; both cradled and cherished to
the last in the arms of their own
affectionate children, and both in the
assured hope of a blessed immortality,
where all their sons and daughters
firmly expect to meet them again in
the Home prepared by their blessed
Saviour.
We embarked at Liverpool for
Australia in The Crest of the Wave,
Captain Ellis ; and after what was
then considered a fast passage of
ninety-five days, we landed at Sydney
on 17th January, 1865. Within an
hour we had to grapple with a new and
amazing perplexity. The Captain of
our Dayspring came to inform me that
his ship had arrived three days ago
and now lay in the stream, —that she
had been to the Islands, and had
settled the Gordons, McCullaghs, and
Morrisons on their several Stations, —
that she had left Halifax in Nova
Scotia fourteen months ago, and that
now, on arriving at Sydney, he co
not get one penny of money, and t
the crew were clamouring for tl
pay, etc., etc. He continued, “Wh
shall I get money for current expens
No one will lend unless we mortgi
the Day spring. I fear there is noth
before us but to sell her ! ” I gi
him £so of my own to meet clam*
demands, and besought him to sea
me a day or two of delay that son
thing might be done.
Having landed, and been heart
welcomed by dear Dr. and Mrs. Mo
and other friends, I went with a ki
of trembling joy to have my first lo
at the Dayspring, like a sailor getti
a first peep at the child born to h
whilst far away on the sea. Some
the irritated ship’s company stopp
us by the way, and threatened proi
cution and all sorts of annoyani
I could only urge again for a few da;
patience. I found her to be a beauti:
two-masted Brigantine, with a dec
house (added when she first arrived
Melbourne), and every way suital
for our necessities, —a thing of beaul
a white-winged Angel set a-floating 1
the pennies of the children to bear t
Gospel to these sin-darkened but su
lit Southern Isles. To me she becar
a sort of living thing, the impersonate
of a living and throbbing love in t
hearts of thousands of “ shareholders
and I said, with a deep, indestructit
faith, —“ The Lord has provided—t
Lord will provide.”
On Friday morning, I consult
friends of the Mission, but no help w
visible. I tried to borrow, but foui
that the lender demanded twen
per cent, for interest, besides the til
deeds of the ship for security,
applied for a loan from the agent
the London Missionary Society (th(
agent for us too) on the credit of tl
Reformed Presbyterian Church’s Fc
eign Committee, but he could not gi l
it without a written order from See
land. There were some who seem<
rather to enjoy our perplexity !
Driven thus to the wall, I advertise
for a meeting of Ministers and oth
friends, next morning at 11 o’cloc
to receive my report and to consu
9 6
John G. Paton, D.D.


5 Day spring. I related my jour-
gs since leaving them, and the re-
and then asked for advice about
>hip.
>ell her,” said some, “ and have
with it.” “ What,” said others,
r e the Sabbath Schools given you
)ayspring and can you not support
ourselves ? ”
ointed out to them that the salary
ich Missionary was then only
per annum, that they gave their
for the Heathen, and that surely
Colonial Christians would undcr-
-1 the up-keep of the Ship, which
necessary to the very existence of
Mission. I appealed to them that,
ly own Church in Scotland had now
Missionary abroad for every six
isters at home, and the small
byterian Church of Nova Scotia
actually three Missionaries now
>ur Islands, it would be a blessed
ilege for the Australian Churches
Sabbath Schools to keep the Day-
ng afloat, without whose services
Missionaries could not live nor the
iders be evangelized.
eing Saturday, the morning Ser-
s for Sabbath were all arranged for,
advertised ; but Dr. McGibbon
•ed me a meeting for the evening
Dr. Steel an afternoon Service at
e o’clock, combined with his Sab-
-1 School. Rev. Mr. Patterson, of
mont, offered me a Morning Ser-
; but, as his was only a Mission
rch, he could not give me a col-
ion. These openings I accepted,
rom the Lord, however much they
short of what I desired.
t the Morning Service I informed
Congregation how we were situated,
expressed the hope that under God
their devoted pastor they would
.tly prosper, and would yet be able
lelp in supporting our Mission to
r South Sea neighbours. Return-
to the vestry, a lady and gentleman
:ed to be introduced to me. They
e from Launceston, Tasmania.
I am,” said he, “ Captain and
ler of that vessel lying at anchor
osite the Dayspring. My wife
I, being too late to get on shore to
;nd any Church in the city, heard
this little Chapel bell ringing, and fol-
lowed, when we saw you going up the
hill. We have so enjoyed the Service.
We do heartily sympathize with you.
This cheque for £5O will be a beginning
to help you out of your difficulties.”
The reader knows how warmly I
would thank them ; and how in my
own heart I knew Who it was that
made them arrive too late for their
plans, but not for His, and led them
up that hill, and opened their hearts.
Jehovah-Jireh !
At three o’clock, Dr. Steel’s Church
was filled with children and others. I
told them in my appeal what had hap-
pened in the Mission Chapel, and how
God had led Captain Frith and his wife,
entire strangers, to sound the first note
of our deliverance. One man stood up
and said, “ I will give £10.” Another,
“ I will give £s.” A third, *’ I shall
send you £2O to-morrow morning.”
Several others followed their example,
and the general collection was greatly
encouraging.
In the evening, I had a very large as
well as sympathetic Congregation. I
fully explained the difficulty about the
Dayspring, and told them what God
had already done for us, announcing an
address to which contributions might
be sent. Almost every Mail brought
me the free-will offerings of God’s
people ; and on Wednesday, when the
adjourned meeting was held, the sum
had reached in all Believing
that the Lord thus intervened at a vital
crisis in our Mission, I dwell on it to the
praise of His blessed Name. Trust in
Him, obey Him, and He will not suffer
you to be put to shame.
Clearing out from her sister ships,
then in harbour, the John Williams
and the John Wesley, our little Day-
spring sailed for Tasmania. At Hobart
we were visited by thousands of
children and parents, and afterwards
at Launceston, who were proud to
see their own ship, in which they
were “shareholders” for Jesus. Daily,
all over the Colony, I preached in
Churches, and addressed public meet-
ings, and got collections, and gave out
Collecting Cards to be returned within
two weeks. But here a little rift began
97
To Scotland and Back


to show itself. At a public meeting in
Hobart, the Congregational Minister
said, “ We support the John Williams
for the London Missionary Society.
Let the Presbyterians do as much for
the Day spring ! ”
I replied, that I was there by special
invitation from those who had called
the meeting, and that, rather than have
any unseemly wrangling, my friend,
Dr. Nicolson, and I would quietly re-
tire. But the Chairman intervened,
and insisted that the meeting should go
forward in a Christian spirit, and with-
out any word of recrimination. To
find ourselves, even by a misunder-
standing, regarded as inimical to the
London Missionary Society, one of the
most Catholic-spirited and Christlike
Societies in the world, was peculiarly
painful. Still the little rift seemed to
widen at every turn, and we found our-
selves thrown more and more exclu-
sively on Presbyterians alone. But
thus also the hearts of two great
Communions were concentrated on
Heathendom, where one only or chiefly
had been bearing the burden hereto-
fore. And the Lord hath need of all.
We received many tokens of interest
and sympathy. The steam tug was
granted to us free, and the harbour
dues were remitted. Many presents
were also sent on board the Dayspring.
Still, after meeting all necessary out-
lays, the trip to Tasmania gave us only
£227 Bs, clear for the Mission
Fund.
Sailing now for South Australia, we
arrived at Adelaide. Many friends
there showed the deepest interest in our
plans. Thousands of children and
parents came to visit their own Mission
Ship by several special trips. Daily
and nightly I addressed meetings, and
God’s people were moved greatly in
the cause. After meeting all expenses
while in port, there remained a sum of
9 s - for the up-keep of the vessel.
The Honourable George Fife Angus
gave me /241 —a dear friend belonging
to the Baptist Church. But there was
still a deficit of /400 before the Day-
spring could sail free of debt, and my
heart was sore as I cried for it to the
Lord.
Leaving the ship to sail dlrec
Sydney, I took steamer to Melboi
but, on arriving there, sickness
anxiety laid me aside for three
Under great weakness, I crept alo
my dear friends at the Scotch Co
Dr and Mrs. Morrison, and Miss Fi
and threw myself on their advice.
“ Come along,” said the D
cheerily, “ and I'll introduce yc
Mr. Butchart and one or two frien
East Melbourne, and we’ll see wha
be done.”
I gave all information, being le
in conversation by the Doctor,
tried to interest them in our work
no subscriptions were asked or rece
Ere I sailed for Sydney, however
whole deficiency was sent to mi
received in all, on this tour, the su
£i ,726 9s. 1 od. Our Day spring
more sailed free, and our hearts <
flowed with gratitude to the Lord
to His stewards !
On my return to Sydney, and b
sailing to the Islands, I called, b}
yertisement, a public meeting of
isters and other friends to report
cess and to take counsel for the fu
My report was received with he
thanksgiving to Almighty God.
a resolution was unanimously adoj
in view of all that had transp
urging that a scheme must beorgani
whereby the Presbyterian Chur
and Sabbath Schools of Aust:
should be banded together for the
port of the Dayspring , and so pre’
the necessity of such spasmodic efl
for ail future time.
CHAPTER XIV
CONCERNING FRIENDS AND FOEI
A.D. 1865-1866. JET. 41-42
We went down to the Islands with
Day spring in 1865. The full stor}
the years that had passed was laid
fore my Missionary brethren at t]
Annual Synod. They resolved t
permanent arrangements must now
made for the Vessel’s support, and t
I must return to the Colonies and
these matured. This, meantime,
peared to all of them the most clam:
9 8
John G. Patch, D.D.


Missionary duties, —their very
md the existence of the Mission
depending thereon. The Lord
I to leave me no alternative ;
ath great reluctance, my back
ain turned away from the Islands.
ayspring, doing duty among the
y Islands, left me, along with
ar wife, on Mare, there to await
pportunity of getting to New Cale-
a, and thence to Sydney,
etained there for some time, we
the noble work done by Messrs.
3s and Creagh, of the London Mis-
ary Society, all being cruelly un-
-3 by the tyranny and Popery of the
ich. One day, in an inland walk,
. Paton and I came on a large Con-
ticle in the bush. They were teaching
i other, and reading the Scriptures
;h the Missionaries had translated
their own language, and which the
ich had forbidden them to use.
y cried to God for deliverance from
r oppressors ! Missionaries were
ribited from teaching the Gospel to
Natives without the permission of
nee ; their books were suppressed,
they themselves placed under
tary guard on the island of Lifu.
m when, by Britain’s protest, the
sionaries were allowed to resume
r work, the French language was
le to be used by them ; and some,
Rev. J. Jones (as far down as 1888),
e marched on board a Man-of-war,
ialf an hour’s notice, and, without
ie laid to their charge, forbidden
:to return to the Islands. While,
the other hand, the French Popish
sionaries were everywhere fostered
protected, presenting to the Na-
s as many objects of idolatry as
r own, and following, as is the cus
l of the Romish Church in those
s, in the wake of every Protestant
sion, to pollute and to destroy,
teing detained also for two weeks on
imea, we saw the state of affairs
ier military rule. English Protest-
residents, few in number, appealed
ne to conduct worship, but liberty
Id not be obtained from the au-
rities,who hated everything English,
tin a number of Protestant parents,
ic French, others English and Gcr-
man, applied to me to baptize their
children at their own houses. To have
asked permission would have been to
court refusal, and to falsify my position.
I laid the matter before the Lord, and
baptized them all. Within two days
the Private Secretary of the Governor
arrived with an interpreter, and began
to inquire of me, “Is it true that you
have been baptizing here ? ”
I replied quite frankly, “ It is.”
“ We are sent to demand on whose
authority.”
“On the authority of my Great
Master.”
“ When did you get that authority?”
“ When I was licensed and ordained
to preach the Gospel, I got that au-
thority from my Great Master.”
Here a spirited conversation followed
betwixt the two in French, and they
politely bowed, and left me.
Very shortly they returned, saying,
“ The Governor sends his compliments,
and he wishes the honour of a visit from
you at Government House at three
o’clock, if convenient for you.”
I returned my greeting, and said that
I would have pleasure in waiting upon
his Excellency at the appointed hour.
I thought to myself that I was in for it
now, and I earnestly cried for Divine
guidance.
He saluted me graciously as “ de
great Missionary of de New Hebrides.”
He conversed in a very friendly man-
ner about the work there, and seemed
anxious to find any indication as to
the English designs. I had to deal very
cautiously. He spoke chiefly through
the interpreter ; but, sometimes dis-
missing him, he talked to me as good,
if not better English himself. He was
eager to get my opinions as to how
Britain got and retained her power over
the Natives. After a very prolonged
interview, we parted without a single
reference to the baptisms or to religious
services !
That evening the Secretary and in-
terpreter waited upon us at our Inn,
saying, “ The Governor will have
pleasure in placing his yacht and rew
at your disposal to-morrow, Mrs.
Paton and you can sail all around,
and visit the Convict Island, and the
99
Concerning Friends and Foes


Government Gardens, where lunch will numbers. The Curasao, was pic
be prepared for you.” lying at anchor off the shore, h
It was a great tr at to us indeed.
The crew were in prison garments, but
all so kind to us. By Convict labour all
the public works seemed to be carried
on, and the Gardens were most beauti-
ful, The carved work in bone, ivory,
cocoa-nuts, shells, etc., was indeed very
wonderful. We bought a few speci-
mens, but the prices were beyond our
purse. It was a strange spectacle—
these things of beauty and joy, and be-
side them the chained gangs of fierce
and savage Convicts, kept down only
by bullet and sword !
Thanking the Governor for his ex-
ceeding kindness, I referred to their
Man-of-war about to go to Sydney, and
offered to pay full passage money if
they would take me, instead of leaving
me to wait for a “ trader.” He at once
granted my request, and arranged that
we should be charged only at the daily
cost for the sailors. At his suggestion,
however, I took a number of things on
board with me, and presented them to
be used at the Cabin table. We were
most generously treated —the Captain
giving up his own room to my wife and
myself, as they had no special accom-
modation for passengers.
Arriving at Sydney, I was at once
plunged into a whirlpool of horrors.
H.M.S. Curagoa had just returned from
her official trip to the Islands, in which
the Commodore, Sir William Wiseman,
had thought it his duty to inflict punish-
ment on the Natives for murder and
robbery of Traders and others. On
these Islands, as in all similar cases, the
Missionaries had acted as interpreters,
and of course always used their in-
fluence on the side of mercy, and in the
interests of peace. But Sydney, and
indeed, Australia and the Christian
World, were thrown into a ferment just
a few days before our arrival, by certain
articles in a leading publication there,
and by the pictorial illustrations of the
same. They were professedly from an
officer on board Her Majesty’s ship,
and the sensation was increased by
their apparent truthfulness and reality.
Tanna was the scene of the first event,
and a series was to follow in succeeding
the Dayspring astern. The Ta:
warriors were being blown to piec
shot and shell, and lay in heaps o
bloody coast. And the Missior
were represented as safe in the I
the Man-of-war, directingthe onslai
and gloating over the carnage.
Without a question being asked
doubt suggested, without a voice t
raised in fierce denial that such me
these Missionaries were known t<
could be guilty of such conduct, —:
who had jeoparded their lives for y
on end rather than hurt one hail
a Native’s head, —a cry of execrat
loud and deep and even savage, ai
from the Press, and was apparei
joined in by the Church itself. '
common witticism about the “Go;
and Gunpowder ” headed hundred;
bitter and scoffing articles in
journals ; and, as we afterwa
learned, the shocking news had b
telegraphed to Britain and Amer:
losing nothing in force by the way, a
while filling friends of Missions w
dismay, was dished up day after c
with every imaginable enhancemenl
horror for the readers of the secular a
infidel Press. As I stepped ashore
Sydney, I found myself probably i
best-abused man in all Australia, a
the very name of the New Hebri<
Mission stinking in the nostrils of 1
people.
The gage of battle had been thro 1
and fell at my feet. Without one n
ment’s delay, I lifted it in the name
my Lord and of my maligned brethn
I hat evening my reply was in the ha
of the editor, denying that such batt
ever took place, detailing the actr
facts of which I had been myself an ej
witness, and intimating legal prosec
tion unless the most ample and u
equivocal withdrawal and apoloj
were at once published. The new
paper printed my rejoinder, and mai
satisfactory amends for having bee
imposed upon and deceived. I waite
upon the Commodore, and appealed f<
his help in redressing this terrible ii
jury to our Mission. He informed rr
that he had already called his office;
100
John G. Paton, d.d.


count, but that all denied any con-
on with the articles or the pictures,
ad little doubt, all the same, that
one on board was the prompter,
gloried in the evil that was being
to the cause of Christ. He offered
y possible assistance, by testimony
therwise, to place all the facts be-
the Christian public and to vindi-
our Missionaries.
re public excitement made it im-
ible for me to open my lips in the
lotion of our Mission. The Revs.
. Dunmore Lang and Steel, along
h Professor Smith of the University,
ted on the Commodore, and got an
ependent version of the facts. They
n called a meeting on the affair by
die advertisement. Without being
de acquainted with the results of
ir investigations, I was called upon
give my own account of the Cura-
’s visit and of the connection of the
ssionaries therewith. They then
unitted the Commodore’s statement,
en by him in writing. He exoner-
d the Missionaries from every shadow
blame and from all responsibility,
the interests of mercy as well as
tice, and to save life, they had acted
ins interpreters ; and there all that
y had to do with the began
I ended. All this was published in
newspapers next day, along with
speeches of the three deputies. The
itement began to subside. But the
son had been lodged in many hearts,
I the ejectment of it was a slow and
icult process.
t was gratifying, however, to learn
ue course that all the Churches sup-
ting our Mission, after having in-
endently investigated the facts,
ified the course adopted by us—
za Scotia alone excepted. Yet two
ler own Missionaries had also to in-
iret for that Man-of-war, exactly as
id done, nor did I ever hear that any
uke was administered to them,
■ling absolutely conscious that I had
y done my Christian duty, I left all
ilts in the hands of my Lord Jesus,
I pressed forward in His blessed
•k.
ie special object of my visit was
explained, and several Ministers
and others spoke heartily in further-
ance of the proposals for the perma-
nent support of the Dayspring through
the Sabbath Schools.
At the General Assembly of the Pres-
byterian Church of Victoria in 1866, I
was adopted—being officially trans-
ferred from the Church in Scotland—
as the first Missionary from the Presby-
terian Churches of Australia to the
New Hebrides. Dr. Geddie would also
have been adopted at the same time,
but Nova Scotia could not agree to part
with its first and most highly honoured
Missionary. The Victorian Church
therefore engaged the Rev. James
Cosh, M.A., on his way out from Scot-
land, as its other agent, in the hope that
we two might be able to reopen and
carry on the Tanna Mission. In their
Christian Review of 1867, they said :
“ The idea which we in Victoria had,
when the Missionaries left us in July
last, was, that Messrs. Paton and Cosh
would be associated on Tanna, and
labour for its evangelization, under the
special auspices as well as at the cost
of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria ;
but Mr. Cosh, having chosen the station
at Pango on Efat6, where the Natives
were more prepared for the Gospel, and
where life and property were safe, went
to spend a year’s novitiateship with
Mr. and Mrs. Morrison on EfatN Mr.
Paton would have fain gone back to
Tanna, but the Missionaries generally
feared that no one European life would
have been safe at the time on Tanna.
They therefore, and no doubt wisely,
sent Mr. Paton to the small and less
savage, but not less Heathen, Island of
Aniwa.”
It was indeed one of the bitterest
trials of my life, not to be able to return
and settle down at once on dear old
Tanna ; but I could not go alone,
against the decided opposition of all
the other Missionaries Dr. Inglis,
ho-wever, at last sympathizing most
strongly with my views. I went, as
will appear hereafter, to Aniwa, the
nearest island to the scene of my former
woes and perils, in the hope that God
would soon open up my way and enable
me to return to blood-stained Tanna.
My heart bleeds for the Heathen,
101
Concerning Friends and Foes


IQ 2 John G. Paton, d.d.
and I long to see a Teacher for every He left for me his silver watch-
tnbe and a Missionary for every island which I had myself sent to the dea
of the New Hebrides. The hope still from Sydney, and which he gi
burns that I may witness it; and then prized. In his dying hour he
I could gladly rest. “ Give it to Missi, mv own Missi Pi
CHAPTER XV
SETTLEMENT OF ANIWA
A.D. 1866-1867. AST, 42-43.
Everything being now arranged for in
the Colonies, in connection with the
Mission and Dayspring , as far as could
possibly be, we sailed for the Islands
on the 8111 August, 1866. Besides my
wife and child, the following accom-
panied us to the field : Revs. Copeland,
Cosh, and McNair, along with their re-
spective wives. On August 20th we
reached Aneityum ; and, having landed
some of our friends, we sailed North-
wards, as far as Efate, to let the new
Missionaries sec all the Islands open for
occupation, and to bring all our Mission-
aries back to the annual meeting,
where the permanent settlements would
be finally agreed upon.
On our return, we found that the
beautiful new John Williams, reaching
Aneityum on sth of September, had
stuck fast on the coral reef and swung
there for three days. By the unceasing
efforts of the Natives, working in hun-
dreds, she was saved, though badly
damaged. At a united meeting of all
the Missionaries, representing the Lon-
don Missionary Society and our own, it
was resolved that she must be taken to
Sydney for repairs. Twenty stout
Aneityumese were placed on board to
keep her pumps going by day and
night, and the Dayspring was sent to
keep her company in case of any dire
emergency. Missionaries were waiting
to be settled, and the season was steal-
ing away. But the cause of humanity
and the claims of a sister Mission were
paramount. We remained at Aneityum
for five weeks, and awaited the return
of the Dayspring.
M hilc staying here, I learned with as
deep emotion as man ever felt for man
that noble old Abraham, the sharer of
my 1 annese trials, had during the in-
terval peacefully fallen asleep in J esus.
“ Give it to Missi, my own Missi P
and tell him that I go to Jesus, ■
Time is dead.”
I learned also, and truly hu]
hearted readers will need no ape
for introducing this news in so gra
story—that my faithful dog Ch
entrusted to the care of a kindly N<
to be kept for my return, had, de:
all coaxing, grown weary of I
amongst all these dark faces, and f;
asleep too, truly not unworthy
grateful tear !
At our annual Synod, after n
prayerful deliberation and the ca]
weighing of every vital circumsta
I was constrained by the united v
of my brethren not to return to Ta:
but to settle on the adjoining is]
of Aniwa ( = A-nee-wa). It was e
hoped that thereby Tanna m
eventually be the more surely reac
and evangelized.
By the new Missionaries all the o
old Stations were reoccupied, and S(
fresh Islands were entered upon in
name of Jesus. As we moved at
with our Dayspring, and planted
Missionaries here and there, notl
could repress the wonder of Native:
‘‘How is this?” they cried; ‘
slew or drove them all away !
plundered their houses and rob
them. Had we been so treated,
thing would have made us return. I
they come back with a beautiful 1
ship, and with more and more Missi
aries. And is it to trade and
money, like the other white men? I
no ! But to tell us of their Jehoi
God and of His Son Jesus. If tl
God makes them do all that, we n
well worship Him too.”
In this way island after island \
opened up to receive the Missiona
and their Chiefs bound themselves
protect and cherish them, before tl
knew anything whatever of the Gosj
beyond what they saw in the c
position and character of its Preach
or beard rumoured regarding its frv
on other Islands. Imagine Cannib


nd thus prepared to welcome the
isionary, and to make not only his
perty but his life comparatively
The Isles “ wait ” for Christ.
)n our way to Aniwa, the Dayspring
I to call at Tanna. By stress of
ither we lay several days in Port
solution. And there many memories
:e again revived—wounds that after
;-and-twenty years, when I now
te still bleed afresh! Nowar, the
Chief, unstable but friendly, was
ermined to keep us there by force
by fraud. The Captain told him
it the council of the Missionaries
i forbidden him to land our boxes at
‘ Don’t land them,” said the wily
ief, “ just throw them over ; my
n and I will catch everything before
•caches the water, and carry them all
ely ashore ! ”
The Captain said he durst not.
Then,” persisted Nowar, “ just point
;m out to us ; you will have no
idler trouble ; we will manage
srything for Missi.”
They were in distress when he re-
;ed ; and poor old Nowar tried
other tack. Suspecting that my
ar wife was afraid of them, he got us
shore to see his extensive planta-
ins. Turning eagerly to her, he said,
iving me to interpret, “ Plenty of
)d ! While I have a yam or a ba-
na, you shall not want.”
She answered, “ I fear not any lack
food.”
Pointing to his warriors, he cried,
We are many ! We are strong ! We
n always protect you.”
“ I am not afraid,” she calmly re-
He then led us to that chestnut-tree,
the branches of which I had sat during
lonely and memorable night, wdien all
>pe had perished of any earthly de-
and said to her with a mani-
st touch of genuine emotion, “ The
3d who protected Missi there will al-
ly s protect you.”
She told him that she had no fear of
it kind, but explained to him that we
Ist for the present go to Aniwa, but
»uld return to Tanna, if the Lord
ened up our way. Nowar, Arkurat,
and the rest, seemed to be genuinely
grieved, and it touched my soul to the
quick.
A beautiful incident was the out-
come, as we learned only in long after
years. There was at that time an
Aniwan Chief on Tanna, visiting friends.
He was one of their great Sacred Men.
He and his people had been promised a
passage home in the Dayspving, with
their canoes in tow. When old Now-ar
saw that he could not keep us with him-
self, he went to this Aniwan Chief, and
took the white shells, the insignia of
Chieftainship, from his own arm, and
bound them on the Sacred Man, say-
ing, “ By these you promise to protect
my Missi and his wife and child on
Aniwa. Let no evil befall them ; or,
by this pledge, I and my people will re-
venge it.”
In a future crisis this probably saved
our lives, and shall be afterwards re-
lated. After all, a bit of the Christ-
Spirit had found its way into that old
Cannibal’s soul ! And the same Christ-
Spirit in me yearned more strongly still,
and made it a positive pain to pass on
to another Island, and leave him in
that dim-groping twilight of the soul.
Aniwa became my Mission Home in
November 1866; and for the next
fifteen years it was the heart and centre
of my personal labours in the Heathen
World. Since 1881, alas ! my too fre-
quent deputation pilgrimages among
Churches in Great Britain and in the
Colonies have rendered my visits to
Aniwa but few and far between. God
never guided me back to Tanna ; but
others, my dear friends, have seen His
Kingdom planted and beginning to
grow amongst that slowly relenting
race. Aniwa was to be the land where-
in my past years of toil and patience
and faith were to see their fruits ripen-
ing at length. I claimed Aniwa for
Jesus, and by the grace of God Aniwa
now worships at the Saviour’s feet.
I had had a glimpse of Aniwa be-
fore, in the John Knox , when Mr. John-
ston accompanied me ; and again with
my dear friend Gordon, who was mur-
dered on Erromanga ; besides, I had
had seen Aniwans in their canoes at
Tanna in search of food. They had
103
Settlement of Aniwa


pleaded with us to remain amongst
them, arguing against there being two
Missionaries on Tanna and none on
Aniwa. Their “ orator,” a very subtle
man, who spoke Tannese well, informed
us that the white Traders told them
that if they killed or drove away the
Missionaries they would get plenty of
ammunition and tobacco. This was
why our life had been so often at-
tempted. Beyond this, all was strange.
Everything had to be learned afresh on
Aniwa as on Tanna.
When we landed, the Natives re-
ceived us kindly. They and the Aneit-
yumese Teachers led us to a temporary
home, prepared for our abode. It was
a large Native Hut. Walls and roof
consisted of sugar-cane leaf and reeds,
intertwisted on a strong wooden frame.
It had neither doors nor windows, but
open spaces instead of these. The
earthen floor alone looked beautiful,
covered thick with white coral broken
small. It had only one Apartment;
and that, meantime, had to serve also
for Church and School and Public Hall.
We screened off a little portion, and
behind that screen planted our bed,
and stored our valuables. All the
Natives within reach assembled to
watch us taking our food ! A box at
first served for a chair, the lid of another
box was our table, our cooking was all
done in the open air under a large tree,
and we got along with amazing comfort.
But the house was under the shelter of
a coral rock, and we saw at a glance
that at certain seasons it would prove
a very hotbed of fever and ague. We
were, however, only too thankful to
enter it, till a better could be built,
and on a breezier site.
The Aniwans were not so violently
dishonourable as the Tannese. But
they had the knack of asking in a
rather menacing manner whatever
they coveted ; and the tomahawk was
sometimes swung to enforce an appeal.
For losses and annoyance, we had of
course no redress. But we tried to
keep things well out of their way,
knowing that the opportunity there,
as elsewhere, sometimes develops the
thief. We strove to get along quietly
and kindly, in the hope that when we
knew their language, and could te
them the principles of Jesus, t
would be saved, and life and prope
would be secure. But the rumoui
the Curasao’s visit and her punishm
of murder and robbery did more,
God’s blessing, to protect us dm
those Heathen days than all other
fluences combined. The savage Car
bal was heard to whisper to his bio
thirsty mates, “ not to murder or
steal, for the Man-of-war that p
ished Tanna would blow up their It
Island! ”
Sorrowful experience on Tanna 1
taught us to seek the site for our Aniv
house on the highest ground, and av
from the malarial influences near
shore. There was one charming mom
covered with trees whose roots ]
down into the crevices of coral, a
from which Tanna and Erromanga ;
clearly seen. But there the Nath
for some superstitious reason forbe
us to build, and we were constrair
to take another rising ground son
what nearer the shore. In the ei
this turned out to be the very best s
on the island for us, central and su
able every way. But we afterwai
learned that perhaps superstition a
led them to sell us this site, in the n
licious hope that it would prove c
ruin. The mounds on the top, whi
had to be cleared away, contained t
bones and refuse of their Cannil
feasts for ages. None but their Sacr
Men durst touch them ; and the Is
tives watched us hewing and diggir
certain that their gods would strike
dead ! That failing, their thougl
may probably have been turned to i
fleet that after all the J ehovah God w
stronger than they.
In levelling the site, and gently slo
ing the sides of the ground for gO(
drainage purposes, I had gathered t
gether two large baskets of hum;
bones. I said to a Chief in Tannes
“ How do these bones come to 1
here ?”
And he replied, with a shrug wo:
of a cynical Frenchman, “ Ah, we
not Tanna-men ! We don't eat
bones! ”
While I was away building the ho
104
John G. Paton, d.d.


Irs. Paton had one dreadful fright,
>he generally remained about half a
nile off, in charge of the Native Hut in
vhich our property had been stored,
rith one or two of the friendly Natives
•round her, though as yet she could not
peak their language. One day she sat
lone, the baby playing at her feet. A
ustling commenced amongst the boxes
►ehind the curtain. She had been
here all the morning, and no one had
ntered. Horror-smitten, her eyes
feie fastened towards the noise.
Suddenly the blanket - screen was
hrown aside, and a black face, with
lood-red eyes and milk-white teeth,
«ered out, and cried in broken English,
Me no steal ! Me no steal! ”
Then, with a bound like that of a
;er, the man sprang out and ran for
ie village. My dear wife, fearing his
idden return, snatched up her child
id rushed to the place where I was
orking, never feeling the ground be-
;ath her till she sank down almost
linting at my feet. Thanking God
nr her escape, we thought it wiser to
smain where we were and finish our
isk for the day. We learned that,
ince we did not return, his wrath had
ooled down and he had withdrawn,
his man was a sort of wild beast in his
assionate moods. His body became
Dnvulsed and his muscles twitched
dth rage. He had lately murdered a
eighbour, a man of his own tribe, in
is frenzy. We believe that the Lord
affled his rage on that memorable day,
id said to his tumultuous soul—
Peace ! be still.”
The Mission House, as ultimately
nished, had six rooms, three on each
de of the lobby, and measured ninety
;et in length, surrounded by a veran-
ah, one hundred feet by five, which
ept everything shaded and cool.
Underneath two rooms, a cellar was
ug eight feet deep, and shelved all
iund for a store. In more than one
;rrific hurricane that cellar saved our
ves,—all crushing into it when trees
nd houses w*re being tossed like
;athers on the wings of the wind. Al-
)gether,the house at Aniwa has proved
ne of the healthiest and most com-
lodious of any that have been planted
by Christian hands on the New Heb-
rides. In selecting site and in building
“ the good hand of our God was upon
us for good.”
I built also two small orphanages,
almost as inevitably necessary as the
Missionary’s own house. They stood
on a line with the front of my own
dwelling, one for girls, the other for
boys, and we had them constantly un-
der our own eyes. The orphans were
practically boarded at the Mission
premises, and adopted by the Mission-
aries. Their clothing was a heavy
drain upon our resources ; and every
odd and curious article that came in
any of the boxes of parcels was utilized.
We trained these young people for
Jesus. And at this day many of the
best of our Native Teachers, and most
devoted Christian helpers, are amongst
those who would probably have perished
but for these Orphanages.
A grievous accident deprived me of
special help in house-building. I cut
my ankle badly with an adze, as I had
done before on Tanna, through a knot
in the tree. Binding my handkerchief
tightly round it, I appealed to the Na-
tives to carry me back to our hut. They
stipulated for payment. My vest
pocket being filled with fish-hooks, a
current coin on all these Islands, I got
a fellow to understand the bribe. He
carried me a little, got some hooks, and
then called another, who did the same,
.and then called a third, and so on, each
man earning his hooks, and passing on
the burden and the pay to another,
while I suffered terribly and bled pro-
fusely. Being my own doctor, I
dressed the wound for weeks, kept it
constantly in cold water bandages, and
by the kindness of the Lord it re-
covered, though it left me lame for
many a day.
But the greatest sorrow was this;
the good and kind Aneityumese, who
had been hired to come and help me
with all the unskilled parts of the
labour, could do nothing without me ;
and when the Dayspring came round at
the appointed time, I had to pay them
in full and let them return, deprived of
their valuable aid. Even to keep them
in food would have exhausted our
105
Settlement of Aniwa


limited stores, and some months must
elapse before our next supplies could
arrive from Sydney.
The Aniwans themselves could
scarcely be induced to work at all,
even for payment. Their personal
wants were few, and were supplied by
their own plantations. They replied
to my appeals with all the unction of
philosophers, and told me, “ The con-
duct of the men of Aniwa is to stand
by, or sit and look on, while their
women do the work ! ”
On Aniwa we soon found ourselves
face to face with blank Heathenism.
The Natives at first expected that the
Missionary’s Biritania tavai ( = British
Medicine) would cure at once all their
complaints. Disappointment led to
resentment in their ignorant and
childish minds. They also expected
to get for the asking, or for any trifle,
an endless supply of knives, calico, fish-
hooks, blankets, etc. Every refusal
irritated them. Again, our Medicines
relieved or cured them, so they blamed
us also for their diseases, —all their
Sacred Men not only curing but also
causing sickness. Further, they gen-
erally came to us only after exhausting
every resource of their own witchcraft
and superstition, and when it was prob-
ably too late. I had often to taste the
Medicine in their sight (or even take
the first dose myself!) before the
sufferers would touch it ; and if one
dose did not cure them, it was almost
impossible to get them to persevere.
But time taught them its value, and
the yearly expenditure for Medicine
soon became a very heavy tax on our
modest salary.
Our learning the language on Aniwa
was marked by similar incidents to
those of Tanna, already related; though
a few of them could understand my
Tannese, and that greatly helped me.
One incident of that time was very
memorable, and God turned it to good
account for higher ends. I often tell
it as “ the miracle of the speaking bit of
wood ” ; and it has happened to other
Missionaries exactly as to myself.
While working at the house, I required
some nails and tools. Lifting a piece
of planed wood, I pencilled a few words
on it, and requested our old Chief t(
carry it to Mrs. Paton, and she woulc
send what I wanted. In blank wonder
he innocently stared at me, and said
“ But what do you want ? ”
I replied, “ The wood will tell her.’
He looked rather angry, thinking thal
I befooled him, and retorted, “ Whc
ever heard of wood speaking ? ”
By hard pleading I succeeded in per-
suading him to go. He was amazec
to see her looking at the wood anc
then fetching the needed articles. Hf
brought back the bit of wood, and
eagerly made signs for an explanation,
Chiefly in broken Tannese I read to hirr
the words, and informed him that ir
the same way God spoke to us through
His Book. The will of God was written
there, and by-and-bye, when he learned
to read, he would hear God speaking to
him from its page, as Mrs. Paton heard
me from the bit of wood.
A great desire was thus awakened ir
the poor man’s soul to see the verj
Word of God printed in his own lan-
guage. He helped me to learn words
and master ideas with growing en-
thusiasm. And when my work oj
translating portions of Holy Scripture
began, his delight was unbounded and
his help invaluable. The miracle of a
speaking page was not less wonderful
than that of speaking wood !
One day, while building the house,
an old Inland Chief and his three sons
came to see us. Everything was to
them full of wonder. After returning
home one of the sons fell sick, and the
father at once blamed us and the Wor-
ship, declaring that if the lad died we
all should be murdered in revenge. By
God’s blessing, and by our careful
nursing and suitable medicine, he re-
covered and was spared. The old
Chief superstitiously wheeled round
almost to another extreme. He be-
came not only friendly, but devoted
to us. He attended the Sabbath Ser-
vices, and listened to the Aneityumese
Teachers, and to my first attempts,
partly in Tannese, translated by the
orator Taia or the chief Namakei, and
explained in our hearing to the people
in their mother tongue.
But on the heels of this, a sad cala-
106
John G. Paton, D.D.


nity overtook us. So soon as two
'ooms of the Mission House were roofed
n, I hired the stoutest of the young
nen to carry our boxes thither. Two
)f them started off with a heavy box
luspended on a pole from shoulder to
ihoulder, their usual custom. They
vere shortly after attacked with vomit-
ng of blood ; and one of them, an
irromangan, actually died. The father
)f the other swore that, if his son did
lot get better, every soul at the Mission
douse should be slain in revenge. But
jiod mercifully restored him.
As the boat - landing was nearly
;hree-quarters of a mile distant, and
luch a calamity recurring would be not
mly sorrowful in itself but perilous in
;he extreme for us all, I steeped my wits,
ind with such crude materials as were
it hand I manufactured not only a
land-barrow, but a wheel-barrow, for
lie pressing emergencies of the time,
’n due course, I procured a more ortho-
iox hand-cart from the Colonies, and
:oaxed and bribed the Natives to assist
ne in making a road for it. Perhaps
;he ghost of Macadam would shudder at
;he appearance of that road, but it has
iroved immensely useful ever since.
I will close this chapter with an in-
cident which, though it came to our
knowledge only years afterwards,
closely bears upon our Settlement on
\.niwa. At first we had no idea why
;hey so determinedly refused us our
lite, and fixed us to another of their
>wn choice. But after the old Chief,
Namakei, became a Christian, he one
day addressed the Aniwan people in
our hearing to this effect:
“ When Missi came we saw his boxes.
We knew he had blankets and calico,
axes and knives, fish-hooks and all such
things. We said, ‘ Don’t drive him
Dff, else we will lose all these things.
We will let him land. But we will force
urn to live on the Sacred Plot. Our
[ods will kill him, and we will divide all
hat he has amongst the men of Aniwa.’
lut Missi built his house on our most
acred spot. He and his people lived
here, and the gods did not strike. He
>ianted bananas there, and we said,
Now when they eat of these they will
,11 drop down dead, as our fathers as-
sured us, i£ any one ate fruit from that
ground, except only our Sacred Men
themselves.’ These bananas ripened.
They did eat them. We kept watching
for days and days, but no one died !
Therefore what we say, and what our
fathers have said, is not true. Our
gods cannot kill them. Their Jehovah
God is stronger than the gods of
Aniwa.”
I enforced old Namakei’s appeal,
telling them that, though they knew it
not, it was the living and true and only
God who had sent them every blessing
which they possessed, and had at last
sent us to teach them how to serve
and love and please Him. In wonder
and silence they listened, while I tried
to explain to them that Jesus, the Son
of this God, had lived and died and
gone to the Father to save them, and
that He was now willing to take them
by the hand and lead them through
this life to glory and immortality to-
gether with Himself.
The old Chief led them in prayer—a
strange, dark, groping prayer, with
streaks of Heathenism colouring every
thought and sentence; but still a
heart-breaking prayer, as the cry of a
soul once Cannibal, but now being
thrilled through and through with the
first conscious pulsations of the Christ-
Spirit throbbing into the words—■
“ Father, Father ; our Father.”
When these poor creatures began to
wear a bit of calico or a kilt, it was an
outward sign of a change, though yet
far from civilization. And when they
began to look up and pray to One
whom they called “Father,our Father,”
though they might be far, very far,
from the type of Christian that dubs
itself “ respectable,” my heart broke
over them in tears of joy ; and nothing
will ever persuade me that there was
not a Divine Heart in the Heavens re-
joicing too.
CHAPTER XVI
FACE TO FACE WITH HEATHENISM
A.D. 1867-1869. .BT. 43-4 S
On landing in November, 1866, we
found the Natives of Aniwa, some very
shy and distrustful, and others for-
107
Face to Face with Heathenism


ward and imperious. No clothing was
worn ; but the wives and elder women
had grass aprons or girdles like our
first Parents in Eden. The old Chief
interested himself in us and our work ;
but the greater number showed a far
deeper interest in the axes, knives,
fish-hooks, stripes of red calico, and
blankets, received in payment for work
or for bananas. Even for payment
they would scarcely work at first, and
they were most unreasonable, easily
offended, and started off in a moment
at any imaginable slight.
For instance, a Chief once came for
Medicine. I was so engaged that I
could not attend to him for a few
minutes. So off he went in a great
rage, threatening revenge, and mutter-
ing, “ I must be attended to ! I won’t
wait on him.” Such were the exac-
tions of a naked Savage !
I could now speak a little to them in
their own language ; and so, accom-
panied generally by my dear wife and
by an Aneityumese Teacher, and often
by some friendly Native, I began to
visit regularly at their villages and to
talk to them about Jesus and His love.
We tried also to get them to come to
our Church under the shade of the
banyan tree. Nasi and some of the
worst characters would sit scowling
not far off, or follow us with loaded
muskets. Using every precaution, we
still held on doing our work ; some-
times giving fish-hooks or beads to the
boys and girls, showing them that our
objects were kind and not selfish.
Such visits gained their confidence.
The first Aniwan that ever came to
the knowledge and love of Jesus was
the old Chief Namakei. We came to
live on his land, as it was near our
diminutive harbour; and upon the
whole, he and his people were the most
friendly; though his only brother,
the Sacred Man of the tribe, on two
occasions tried to shoot me. Namakei
came a good deal about us at the Mis-
sion House, and helped us to acquire
the language. He discovered that we
took tea evening and morning. When
we gave him a cup and a piece of
bread, he liked it well, and gave a sip
to all around him. At first he came
for the tea, perhaps, and disappear
suspiciously soon thereafter ; but hi
interest manifestly grew, till he showe<
great delight in helping us in ever
possible way. Along with him am
as his associates came also the Chie
Naswai and his wife Katua. Thesi
three grew into the knowledge of thi
Saviour together. From being savagi
Cannibals they rose before our eyes
under the influence of the Gospel, intc
noble and beloved characters; anc
they and we loved each other exceed
ingly,
Namakei brought his little daughter
his only child, the Queen of her race
called Litsi Sore { = Litsi the Great)
and said, “ I want to leave my Fits:
with you. I want you to train hei
for Jesus.”
She was a very intelligent child
learned things like any white girl, and
soon became quite a help to Mrs. Paton.
On seeing his niece dressed and sc
smart-looking, the old Chief’s only
brother, the Sacred Man that had
attempted to shoot me, also brought
his child, Litsi Sisi (=the Little) to be
trained like her cousin. The mothers
of both were dead. The children re-
ported all they saw, and all we taught
them, and so their fathers became
more deeply interested in our work,
and the news of the Gospel spread far
and wide. Soon we had all the Orphans
committed to us, whose guardians were
willing to part with them, and our
Home became literally the School of
Christ, —the boys growing up to help
all my plans, and the girls to help my
wife and to be civilized and trained
by her, and many of them developing
into devoted Teachers and Evange-
lists.
Our earlier Sabbath Services were
sad affairs. Every man came armed
—indeed, every man slept with his
weapons of war at his side—and bov
and arrow, spear and tomahawk, clut
and musket, were always ready foi
action. On fair days we assembled
under the banyan tree, on rainy days
in a Native hut partly built for the
purpose. One or two seemed to listen,
but the most lay about on their backs
or sides, smoking, talking, sleeping!
108
John G. Paton, d.d.


Vhen we stopped the feast at the
lose, for which they were always ready,
he audiences at first went down to
wo or three ; but these actually came
o learn, and a better tone began im-
mediately to pervade the Service.
Ve informed them that it was for their
ood that we taught them, and that
hey would get no “ pay ” for attend-
ag Church or School, and the greater
umber departed in high dudgeon as
cry ill-used persons ! Others of a
more commercial turn came offering
o sell their “ idols,” and when we
fould not purchase them, but urged
hem to give them up and cast them
way for love of Jetus, they carried
hem off, saying they would have
othing to do with this new Worship.
Amidst our frequent trials and dan-
ers in those earlier times on Aniwa,
ur little Orphans often warned us
'rivately and saved our lives from
ruel plots. When, in baffled rage,
ur enemies demanded who had re-
ealed things to us, I always said, “ It
fas a little bird from the bush.” So,
he dear children grew to have perfect
onfidence in us. They knew we
fould not betray them ; and they
onsidered themselves the guardians
f our lives.
The excitement increased on both
ides, when a few men openly gave up
licir idols. Morning after morning,
noticed green cocoa-nut leaves piled
t the end of our house, and wondered
it were through some Heathen super-
tition. But one night the old Chief
nocked me up and said, “ Rise,
lissi, and help ! The Heathen are
rying to burn your house. All night
re have kept them off, but they are
lany and we are few. Rise quickly,
nd light a lamp at every window.
,et us pray to Jehovah, and talk loud
sif we were many. God will make
s strong.”
I found that they had the buckets
nd pails from all my Premises full
f water—that the surrounding bush
r as swarming with Savages, torch in
and—that the Teachers and other
iendly Natives had been protecting
tiemselves from the dews under the
irge cocoa-nut leaves which I saw,
while they kept watch over us. After
that I took my turn with them in
watching, each guard being changed
after so many hours. But they held
a meeting and said amongst each other,
“If our Missi is shot or killed in the
dark, what will we have to watch for
then ? We must compel Missi to re-
main indoors at night ! ”
I yielded so far to their counsel ; but
still went amongst them, watch after
watch, to encourage them.
What a suggestive traditiom of the
Fall came to me in one of those early
days on Aniwa ! Upon our leaving
the hut and removing to our new house,
it was seized upon by Tupa for his
sleeping-place ; though still continuing
to be used by the Natives, as club-
house, court of law, etc. One morning
at daylight this Tupa came running to
us in great excitement, wielding his
club furiously, and crying, “ Missi,
I have killed the Tebil. I have killed
Teapolo. He came to catch me last
night. I raised all the people, and
we fought him round the house with
our clubs. At daybreak he came out
and I killed him dead. We will have
no more bad conduct or trouble now.
Teapolo is dead ! ”
I said, “ What nonsense ! Teapolo
is a spirit, and cannot be seen.”
But in mad excitement he persisted
that he had killed him. And at Mrs.
Paton’s advice, I went with the man,
and he led me to a great Sacred Rock
of coral near our old hut, over which
hung the dead body of a huge and
beautiful sea-serpent, and exclaimed,
“ There he lies ! Truly I killed him.”
I protested, “ That is not the Devil ;
it is only the body of a serpent.”
The man quickly answered, “ Well,
but it is all the same ! He is Teapolo.
He makes us bad, and causes all our
troubles.”
Following up this hint by many
inquiries, then and afterwards, I found
that they clearly associated man’s
troubles and sufferings somehow with
the serpent. They worshipped the
serpent, as a spirit of evil, under the
name of Matshiktshiki ; that is to say,
they lived in abject terror of his in-
fluence, and all their worship was
Face to Face with Heathenism


directed towards propitiating his rage
against men.
The story of the Creation, at least of
the origin of their own Aniwa and the
adjacent Islands, is much more an out-
come of the unaided Native mind.
They say that Matshiktshiki fished
up these lands out of the sea. And
they show the deep print of his foot
on the coral rocks, opposite each
island, whereon he stood as he strained
and lifted them up above the waters.
He then threw his great fishing-line
round Fotuna, thirty-six miles distant,
to draw it close to Aniwa and make
them one land ; but, as he pulled, the
line broke and he fell, where his mark
may still be seen upon the rocks—so
the Islands remain separated unto
this day.
One of the darkest and most hideous
blots on Heathenism is the practice
of Infanticide. Only three cases came
to our knowledge on Aniwa ; but we
publicly denounced them at all hazards,
and awoke not only natural feeling,
but the selfish interests of the com-
munity for the protection of the
children. These three were the last
that died there by parents’ hands.
A young husband, who had been
jealous of his wife, buried their male
child alive as soon as born. An old
Tanna-woman, who had no children
living, having at last a fine healthy
boy bom to her, threw him into the
sea before any one could interfere to
save. And a Savage, in anger with
his wife, snatched her baby from her
arms, hid himself in the bush till night,
and returned without the child, re-
fusing to give any explanation, except
that he was dead and buried. Praise
be to God, these three murderers of
their own children were by-and-bye
touched with the story of Jesus, be-
came members of the Church, and each
adopted little orphan children, towards
whom they continued to show the
most tender affection and care.
Wife murder was also considered
quite legitimate. In one of our inland
villages dwelt a young couple, happy
in every respect except that they had
no children. The man, being a Hea-
then, resolved to take home another
wife, a widow with two children. T
was naturally opposed by his yor
wife. And, without the slightest wa
ing, while she sat plaiting a bast
he discharged a ball into her from
loaded musket. It crashed thror
her arm and lodged in her side. Eve
thing was done that was in my po\
to save her life ; but on the tenth d
tetanus came on, and she soon af
passed away. The man appeared v<
attentive to her all the time ; b
being a Heathen, he insisted that s
had no right to oppose his wishe
He was not in any way punished
disrespected by the people of his villa;
but went out and in amongst them
usual, and took home the other worn
as his wife a few weeks thereaft
His second wife began to atte
Church and School regularly with 1
children ; and at last he also cai
along with them, changing very ma;
festly from his sullen and savage fora
self. They have a large family ; th
are avowedly trying to train them
for the Lord Jesus ; and they ta
their places meekly at the Lor<
Table.
Amongst the Heathen, a murder
was often honoured ; and if he su
ceeded in terrifying those who soug]
to take revenge, he was sometimes eve
promoted to be a Chief. One wl
had thus risen to tyrannize over h
village was so feared and obeyed, th;
one of the lads there said to m
“ Missi, I wish I had lived long age
I could have murdered some great mai
and come to honour. As Christian
we have no prospects ; where are yoi
warriors ? Are we always to remai
common men ? ”
I told him of greatness in the send
of Jesus, of glory and honour with o
Lord. That lad afterwards becan
a Native Teacher, first in his ov
village, and then on a Heathen Islar
—the Lord the Spirit having opene
up for his ambition the nobler path.
The last Heathen Dance on Aniv
was intended, strange to say, in honoi
of our work. We had finished tl
burning of a large lime-kiln for oi
buildings, and the event was regarde
as worthy of a festival. To our sir
110
John G. Paton, d.d.


Ise, loud bursts of song were followed
r the tramp, tramp of many feet,
en and women and children poured
ist us, painted, decorated with fea-
rers and bush twigs, and dressed in
ieir own wildest form, though almost
itirely nude so far as regards the
othing of civilization. They marched
to the village Public Ground, and
ith song and shout and dance made
ie air hideous to me. They danced
inner and outer circles, men with
en and women with women ; but
do not know that the thing looked
ore irrational to an outsider than do
balls at home ! Our Islanders,
becoming followers of Jesus, have
r ays voluntarily withdrawn from all
kese scenes, and regard such dancings
> inconsistent with the presence and
Ilowship of the Saviour.
Some most absurd and preposterous
cpcriences were forced upon us by
ie habits and notions of the people,
mongst these I recall very vividly
ie story of Nelwang’s elopement with
ls bride. I had begun, in spare
Durs, to lay the foundation of two
iditional rooms for our house, and
;lt rather uneasy to see a well-known
avage hanging around every day with
is tomahawk, and eagerly watching
ie at work. He had killed a man,
efore our arrival on Aniwa ; and it
as he that startled my wife by sud-
enly appearing from amongst the
oxes, and causing her to run for life,
a seeing him hovering so alarmingly
ear, tomahawk in hand, I saluted
im. “ Nelwang, do you want to
Deak to me ? ”
“ Yes, Missi,” he replied ; “if you
ill help me now, I will be your friend
>r ever.”
I answered, “ I am your friend,
hat brought me here and keeps me
ere.”
“ Yes,” said he very earnestly,
but I want you to be strong as my
iend, and I will be strong for you ! ”
I replied, “ Well, how can I help
ou ? ”
He quickly answered, “ I want to
et married, and I need your help.”
I protested —“ Nelwang, you know
fiat marriages here are all made in
infancy, by children being bought and
betrothed to their future husbands.
How can I interfere ? You don’t want
to bring evil on me and my wife and
child ? It might cost us our lives.”
“No ! no ! Missi,” earnestly re-
torted Nelwang. “No one hears of
this, or can hear. Only help me now.
You tell me, if you were in my circum-
stances, how would you act ? ”
“ That’s surely very simple,” I
answered. “ Every man knows how
to go about that business, if he wants
to be honest! Look out for your
intended, find out if she loves you, and
the rest will follow naturally,—you
will marry her.”
“ Yes,” argued Nelwang, “ but just
there my trouble comes in ! ”
“Do you know the woman you
would like to get ? ” I asked, wishing
to bring him to some closer issue.
“ Yes,” replied he very frankly;
“ I want to marry Yakin, the Chief’s
widow up at the inland village, and
that will break no infant betrothals.”
“ But,” I persevered, “do you
know if she loves you or would take
you ? ”
“ Yes,” replied Nelwang ; “ one
day I met her on the path and told her
I would like to have her for my wife.
She took out her earrings and gave
them to me, and I know thereby that
she loves me. I was one of her late
husband’s men ; and if she had loved
any of them more than she loved me,
she would have given them to another.
With the earrings she gave me her
heart.”
“ Then why,” I insisted, “ don’t
you go and marry her ? ”
“ There,” said Nelwang gravely,
“ begins my difficulty. In her village
there are thirty young men for whom
there are no wives. Each of them
wants her, but no one has the courage
to take her, for the other nine-and-
twenty will shoot him ! ”
“ And if you take her,” I suggested,
“ the disappointed thirty will shoot
you.”
“ That’s exactly what I see, Missi,”
continued Nelwang ; “ but I want you
just to think you are in my place, and
tell me how you would carry her off.
111
Face to Face with Heathenism


You white men can always succeed.
Missi, hear my plans, and advise
me.”
With as serious a face as I could com-
mand, I had to listen to Nelwang, to
enter into his love affair, and to make
suggestions, with a view to avoiding
bloodshed and other miseries. The
result of the deliberations was that
Nelwang was to secure the confidence
of two friends, his' brother and the
orator Taia, to place one at each end
of the coral rocks above the village
as watchman, to cut down with his
American tomahawk a passage through
the fence at the back, and to carry off
his bride at dead of night into the
seclusion and safety of the bush !
Nelwang’s eyes flashed as he flourished
his tomahawk about and cried, “ I see
it now, Missi ! I shall win her from
them all. Yakin and I will be strong
for you all our days.”
Next morning Yakin’s house was
found deserted. They sent to all the
villages around, but no one had seen
her. The hole in the fence behind was
then discovered, and the thirty whis-
pered to each other that Yakin had
been wooed and won by some daring
lover. Messengers were despatched
to all the villages, and Nelwang was
found to have disappeared on the same
night as the widow, and neither could
anywhere be found.
The usual revenge was taken—the
houses of the offenders burned, their
fences broken down, and all their
property either destroyed or distri-
buted. Work was suspended, and
the disappointed thirty solaced them-
selves by feasting at Yakin’s expense.
On the third day I arrived at the
scene. Seeing our old friend Naswai
looking on at the plunderers, I sig-
nalled him, and said innocently,
“ Naswai, what’s this your men are
about ? What’s all the uproar ? ”
The Chief replied, “ Have you not
heard, Missi ? ”
“ Heard ? ” said I. “ The whole
island has heard your ongoings for
three days ! I can get no peace to
study, or carry on my work.”
‘‘ Missi,” said the Chief, “ Nelwang
has eloped with Yakin, the wealthy
widow, and all the young men ai
taking their revenge.”
“ Oh,” replied I, “is that all ? Ca
your men, and let us speak to them.
The men were all assembled, an
I said : “ After all your kindness t
Yakin, and all your attention to he
since her husband’s death, has sh
really run away and left you all
Don’t you feel thankful that you ar
free from such an ungrateful woman
Had one of you been married to hei
and she had afterwards run away witl
this man that she loved, that woul<
have been far worse ! And are yoi
really making all this noise over sud
a person, and destroying so mud
useful food ? Let these two fools g(
their way, and if she be all that yoi
now say, he will have the worst of th
bargain, and you will be sufficient!]
avenged. I advise you to spare th
fruit trees —go home quietly—leavi
them to punish each other—and le
me get on with my work ! ”
Naswai repeated my appeal: ‘‘Missi’
word is good ! Gather up the food
Wait till we see their conduct, how i
grows. She wasn't worth all thi
bother and noise ! ”
Three weeks passed. The runaway
were nowhere to be found. It wa
generally believed that they had gon
in a canoe to Tanna or Erromanga
But one morning, as I began my worl
at my house alone, the brave Nelwanj
appeared at my side !
“ Hillo ! ” I said, “ where have y<
come from ? and where is Yakin ? ”
“ I must not,” he replied, ” tell yc
yet. We are hid. We have lived c
cocoa-nuts gathered at night. Yaki
is well and happy. I come now 1
fulfil my promise : I will help you, an
Yakin will help Missi Paton the womai
and we shall be your friends. I ha\
ground to be built upon and fencec
whenever we dare ; but we will com
and live with you, till peace is secure*
Will you let us come to-morrow morr
ing ? ”
“ All right ! ” I said. “ Come t<
morrow ! ” And, trembling with d<
light, he disappeared into the bush.
Thus strangely God provided x
with wonderful assistance. Yakin soc
112
John G. Paton, d.d


it to wash and dress and clean
prything, and Nelwang served me
e a faithful disciple. They clung
us like our very shadow, partly
'ough fear of attack, partly from
ection ; but as each of them could
ndle freely both musket and toma-
wk, which, though laid aside, were
yer far away, it was not every enemy
it cared to try issues with Nelwang
d his bride. After a few weeks had
us passed by, and as both of them
;re really showing an interest in
ings pertaining to Jesus and His
>spel, I urged them strongly to appear
iblicly at the Church on Sabbath,
show that they were determined
stand their ground together as true
isband and wife, and that the others
ust accept the position and become
conciled. Delay now could gain no
irpose, and I wished the strife and
icertainty to be put to an end. N
Nelwang knew our customs. Every
orshipper has to be seated, when our
hurch bell ceases ringing. Aniwans
ould be ashamed to enter after the
srvice had actually begun. As the
dl ceased, Nelwang, knowing that
3 would have a clear course, marched
1, dressed in shirt and kilt, but grasp-
ig very determinedly his tomahawk !
[e sat down as near to me as he could
mveniently get, trying hard to con-
jal his manifest agitation. Slightly
niling towards me, he then turned
nd looked eagerly at the other door
irough which the women entered and
ift the Church, as if to say, “ Yakin is
Dining ! ” But his tomahawk was
oised ominously on his shoulder, and
is courage gave him a defiant and
Imost impudent air. He was evi-
ently quite ready to sell his life at a
igh price, if any one was prepared to
isk the consequences.
In a few seconds Yakin entered ;
nd if Nelwang’s bearing and appear-
nce were rather inconsistent with the
seling of worship,—what on earth was
to do when the figure and costume
f Yakin began to reveal itself march-
ng in ? The first visible difference
»etwixt a Heathen and a Christian
3, —that the Christian wears some
lothing, the Heathen wears none.
Yakin had determined to show the
extent of her Christianity by the
amount of clothing she could carry
upon her person. Being a Chief’s
widow before she became Nelwang’s
bride, she had some idea of state occa-
sions, and appeared dressed in every
article of European apparel, mostly
portions of male attire, that she could
beg or borrow from about the pre-
mises ! Her bridal gown was a man’s
drab-coloured great-coat, put on above
her native grass skirts, and sweeping
down to her heels, buttoned tight.
Over this she had hung on a vest, and
above that again, most amazing of all,
she had superinduced a pair of men’s
trousers, planting the body of them on
her neck and shoulders, and leaving
her head and face looking out from
between the legs—a leg from either
side streaming over her bosom and
dangling down absurdly in front !
Fastened to the one shoulder also there
was a red shirt, and to the other a
striped shirt, waving about her like
wings as she sailed along. Around her
head a red shirt had been twisted like
a turban, and her notions of art de-
manded that a sleeve thereof should
hang aloft over each of her ears ! She
seemed to be a moving monster loaded
with a mass of rags. The day was
excessively hot, and the perspiration
poured over her face in streams. She,
too, sat as near to me as she could get
on the women’s side of the Church.
Nelwang looked at me and then at her,
smiling quietly, as if to say, “ You
never saw, in all your white world,
a bride so grandly dressed ! ”
I little thought what 1 was bringing
on myself when I urged them to come
to Church. The sight of that poor
creature sweltering before me con-
strained me for once to make the
service very short —perhaps the short-
est I ever conducted in all my life !
The day ended in peace. The two
souls were extremely happy ; and I
praised God that what might have
been a scene of bloodshed had closed
thus, even though it were in a kind of
wild grotesquerie !
Henceforth I never lacked a body-
guard, nor Mrs. Eaton a helper. Yakin
113
Face to Face with Heathenism


learned to read and write, and became
an excellent teacher in our Sabbath
School; she also learned to sing, and
led the praise in Church, when my wife
was unable to be present. In fact,
she could put her hand to everything
about the house or the Mission, and
became a great favourite amongst the
people. Nelwang fulfilled his promise
faithfully. He was indeed my friend.
Through all my inland tours, either
he or the Sacred Man, Kalangi (who
first attempted twice to shoot me, and
then, after his conversion, acted as if
God had entrusted him with the keep-
ing of my life), faithfully accompanied
me. With tomahawk or musket, or
both, in hand, they were always within
reach, and instantly started to the
front wherever danger seemed to
threaten us. These were amongst
our first and best Church members.
Nelwang and the Sacred Man have
both gone to their rest. But Yakin of
the many garments has also had many
husbands. She rejoices now in her
fourth, and is still a devoted Christian,
and a most interesting character in
many ways.
Heathenism made many desperate and
some strange efforts to stamp out our
Cause on Aniwa, but the Lord held the
helm. One old Chief, formerly friendly,
turned against us. He ostentatiously
set himself to make a canoe, working at
it very openly and defiantly on Sab-
baths. He becoming sick and dying,
his brother started, on a Sabbath
morning and in contempt of the Wor-
ship, with an armed company to
provoke our people to war. They
refused to fight; and one man, whom
he struck with his club, said, “ I will
leave my revenge to Jehovah.”
A few days thereafter, this brother
also fell sick and suddenly died. The
Heathen party made much of these
incidents, and some clamoured for our
death in revenge, but most feared to
murder us ; so they withdrew and
lived apart from our friends as far
away as they could get. By-and-bye,
however, they set fire to a large dis-
trict belonging to our supporters,
burning cocoa-nut and bread-fruit
trees and plantations. Still our people
refused to fight, and kept near to pi
tect us. Then all the leading m
assembled to talk it over. Most w<
for peace, but some insisted upon bui
ing our house and driving us away
killing us, that they might be left
live as they had hitherto done. .
last a Sacred Man, a Chief who h
been on Tanna when the Curas
punished the murderers and robbf
but protected the villages of the friend
Natives there, stood up and spoke
our defence, and warned them wh
might happen ; and other three, wl
had been under my instruction <
Tanna, declared themselves to be tl
friends of Jehovah and of His Missio
ary. Finally the Sacred Man ro
again, and showed them rows of bea
tiful white shells strung round his le
arm, saying;
“ Nowar, the great Chief at Po
Resolution on Tanna, when he sa
that Missi and his wife could not 1
kept there, took me to his heart, ar
pledged me by these, the shells of h
office as Chief, taken from his own ar:
and bound on mine, to protect the:
from all harm. He told me to declai
to the men of Aniwa that if the Mis
be injured or slain, he and his warrio:
will come from Tanna and take tl
full revenge in blood.” This turne
the scale. The meeting closed in oi
favour.
Close on the heels of this, anoth
and a rather perplexing incident befi
us. A party of Heathens assembl(
and made a great display of fishii
on the Lord’s Day, in contempt of tl
practice of the men on Jehovah’s sid
threatening also to waylay the Teache
and myself in our village circuits,
meeting was held by the Christie
party, at the close of the Sabbaf
Services. All who wished to sen
Jehovah were to come to my houi
next morning, unarmed, and accon
pany me on a visit to our enemie
that we might talk and reason togeth(
with them. By daybreak, the Chie:
and nearly eighty men assembled £
the Mission House, declaring that the
were on Jehovah’s side, and wished t
go with me. But, alas ! they refuse
to lay down their arms, or leave thei
114
John G. Paton, D.D.


lind ; nor would they either refrain
m going or suffer me to go alone,
idging them to peace, I was reluc-
itly placed at their head, and we
xched off to the village of the un-
;ndly party.
fhe villagers were greatly alarmed,
e Chief’s two sons came forth
a every available man to meet us.
it whole day was consumed in
:ing and speechifying, sometimes
nting their replies—the Natives are
inveterate talkers ! To me the
ly was utterly wearisome ; but it
id one redeeming feature, —their rage
und vent in hours of palaver, instead
: blows and blood. It ended in
;ace. The Heathen were amazed at
re number of Jehovah’s friends ; and
ley pledged themselves henceforth to
save the Worship alone, and that
very one who pleased might come to it
nmolested. For this, worn out and
r eary, we returned, praising the Lord.
But I must here record the story of
le Sinking of the Well, which broke
tie back of Heathenism on Aniwa.
At certain seasons, the Natives drank
r ery unwholesome water; and in-
leed, the best water they had at any
ime for drinking purposes was from
he precious cocoa-nut, a kind of
of Paradise for all these Southern
'sles ! They also cultivate the sugar-
;ane very extensively, and in great
variety ; and they chew it, when we
vould fly to water for thirst; so it is to
;hem both food and drink. The black
ellow carries with him to the field,
vhen he goes off for a day’s work, four
jr five sticks of sugar-cane, and puts
,n his time comfortably enough on
diese. Besides, the sea being their
universal bathing place, in which they
;wattle like fish, and little water,
almost none, being required for cook-
ing purposes, and none whatever for
washing clothes (!), the lack of fresh
springing water was not the dreadful
trial to them that it would be to us.
Yet they appreciate and rejoice in it
immensely too; though the water
of the green cocoa-nut is refreshing,
and in appearance, taste, and colour
not unlike lemonade, —one nut filling
a tumbler ; and though when mothers
die they feed the babies on it and
on the soft white pith, and they flourish
on the same, yet the Natives them-
selves show their delight in preferring,
when they can get it, the water from
the well.
Aniwa having therefore no per-
manent supply of fresh water, in spring
or stream or lake, I resolved by the
help of God to sink a well near the
Mission premises, hoping that a wisdom
higher than my own would guide me to
the source of some blessed spring. Of
the scientific conditions of such an
experiment I was comparatively igno-
rant ; but I counted on having to dig
through earth and coral above thirty
feet, and my constant fear was that,
owing to our environment, the water,
if water I found, could only be salt
water after all my toils ! Still I re-
solved to sink that shaft in hope, and
in faith that the Son of God would be
glorified thereby.
One morning I said to the old Chief
and his fellow-Chief, both now ear-
nestly inquiring about the religion of
Jehovah and of Jesus, “ I am going to
sink a deep well down into the earth,
to see if our God will send us fresh
water up from below.”
They looked at me with astonish-
ment, and said in a tone of sympathy
approaching to pity, “ O Missi ! Wait
till the rain comes down, and we will
save all we possibly can for you.”
I replied, “We may all die for lack
of water. If no fresh water can be
got, we may be forced to leave
you.”
The old Chief looked imploringly,
and said, “ O Missi ! you must not
leave us for that. Rain comes only
from above. How could you expect
our Island to send up showers of rain
from below ? ”
I told him, “ Fresh water does come
up springing from the earth in my
Land at home, and I hope to see it here
also.”
The old Chief grew more tender in
his tones, and cried, “ O Missi, your
head is going wrong ; you are losing
something, or you would not talk wild
like that! Don’t let our people hear
you talking about going down into the
115
Face to Face with Heathenism


earth for rain, or they will never listen
to your word or believe you again.”
But I started upon my hazardous
job, selecting a spot near the Mission
Station and close to the public path,
that my prospective well might be
useful to all. I began to dig with
pick and spade and bucket at hand,
an American axe for a hammer and
crowbar, and a ladder for service by-
and-bye. The good old Chief now
told off his men in relays to watch me,
lest I should attempt to take my own
life, or do anything outrageous, saying,
“ Poor Missi ! That’s the way with
all who go mad. There’s no driving
of a notion out of their heads. We
must just watch him now. He will
find it harder to work with pick and
spade than with his pen, and when
he’s tired we’ll persuade him to give
it up.”
I did get exhausted sooner than I
expected, toiling under that tropical
sun ; but we never own before the
Natives that we are beaten; so I
went into the house and filled my vest
pocket with large, beautiful English-
made fish-hooks. These are very
tempting to the young men, as com-
pared with their own, —skilfully made
though they be out of shell, and serving
their purposes wonderfully. Holding
up a large hook, I cried, “ One of these
to every man who fills and turns over
three buckets out of this hole ! ”
A rush was made to get the first
turn, and back again for another and
another. I kept those on one side
who had got a turn, till all the rest in
order had a chance, and bucket after
bucket was filled and emptied rapidly.
Still the shaft seemed to lower very
slowly, while my fish-hooks were dis-
appearing very quickly. I was con-
stantly there, and took the heavy
share of everything, and was thankful
one evening to find that we had cleared
more than twelve feet deep,—when lo !
next morning, one side had rushed in,
and our work was all undone.
The old Chief and his best men now
came around me more earnestly than
ever. He remonstrated with me very
gravely. He assured me for the fiftieth
time that rain would never be seen
coming up through the earth
Aniwa !
Now,” said he, “ had you beer
that hole last night, you would h
been buried, and a Man-of-war wo
have come from Queen ’Toria to
for the Missi that lived here,
would have to say, ‘ He is down
that hole.’ The Captain would a
‘ Who killed him and put him do
there ? ’ We would have to say, ‘
went down there himself ! ’ The C
tain would answer, * Nonsense ! v
ever heard of a white man going do
into the earth to bury himself ?
killed him, you put him there ; do
hide your bad conduct with lies
Then he would bring out his big gi
and shoot us, and destroy our Isla
in revenge. You are making y(
own grave, Missi, and you will mj
ours too. Give up this mad freak,
no rain will be found by going dov
wards on Aniwa. Besides, all y(
fish-hooks cannot tempt my men agi
to enter that hole ; they don’t w;
to be buried with you. Will you i
give it up now ? ”
I said all that I could to quiet
fears, explained to them that t
falling in had happened by my ncgli
of precautions, and finally made kno'
that by the help of my God, even wil
out all other help, I meant to perseve
Steeping my poor brains over t
problem, I became an extemporiz
engineer. Two trees were search
for, with branches on opposite sid<
capable of sustaining a cross-tree 1
twixt them. I sank them on ea
side firmly into the ground, pass
the beam across them over the cenl
of the shaft, fastened thereon a ru
home-made pulley and block, pass
a rope over the wheel, and swung n
largest bucket to the end of it. Th
equipped, I began once more sinkii
away at the well, but at so great ;
angle that the sides might not aga
fall in. Not a Native, however, wou
enter that hole, and I had to pick ai
dig away till I was utterly exhauste
But a Native Teacher, in whom I hi
confidence, took charge above, ma:
aging to hire them with axes, knive
etc., to seize the end of the rope ar
116
John G. Paton, d.d.


k along the ground pulling it till
bucket rose to the surface, and then
himself swung it aside, emptied it,
I lowered it down again. I rang
ttle bell which I had with me, when
bucket was loaded, and that was
signal for my brave helpers to pull
ir rope. And thus I toiled on from
• to day, my heart almost sinking
letimes with the sinking of the well,
we reached a depth of about thirty
:. And the phrase, “ living water,”
ving water,” kept chiming through
soul like music from God, as I dug
I hammered away,
tt this depth the earth and coral
;an to be soaked with damp. I felt
twe were nearing water. My soul
1 a faith that God would open a
ing for us ; but side by side with
> faith was a strange terror that the
ter would be salt. So perplexing
1 mixed are even the highest ex-
iences of the soul ; the rose-flower
i perfect faith, set round and round
h prickly thorns. One evening I
1 to the old Chief, “I think that
lovah God will give us water to-
rrow from that hole ! ”
rhe Chief said, “ No, Missi; you
[ never see rain coming up from the
th on this Island. We wonder what
to be the end of this mad work of
rrs. We expect daily, if you reach
ter, to see you drop through into
: sea, and the sharks will eat you !
at will be the end of it—death to
a, and danger to us all.”
[ still answered, “ Come to-morrow,
lope and believe that Jehovah God
1 send you the rain water up through
; earth.”
\t the moment I knew I was risking
ich, and probably incurring sorrow-
consequences, had no water been
r en ; but I had faith that the Lord
s leading me on, and I knew that
ought His glory, not my own.
Next morning, I went down again at
ybreak and sank a narrow hole in
3 centre, about two feet deep, the
rspiration broke over me with un-
utrollable excitement, and I trembled
rough every limb, when the water
shed up and began to fill the hole,
addy though it was, I eagerly tasted
it, lapping it with my trembling hand,
and then I almost fell upon my knees
in that muddy bottom as my heart
burst up in praise to the Lord. It was
water ! It was fresh water ! It was
living water from Jehovah’s well!
True, it was a little brackish, but noth-
ing to speak of ; and no spring in the
desert, cooling the parched lips of a
fevered pilgrim, ever appeared more
worthy of being called a Well of God
than did that water to me !
The Chiefs had assembled with their
men near by. They waited on in
eager expectancy. It was a rehearsal,
in a small way, of the Israelites coming
round, while Moses struck the rock
and called for water. By-and-bye,
when I had praised the Lord, and my
excitement was a little calmed, the
mud being also greatly settled, I filled
a jug, which I had taken down empty
in the sight of them all, and ascending
to the top called for them to come and
see the rain which Jehovah God had
given us through the well. They
closed around me in haste, and gazed
on it in superstitious fear. The old
Chief shook it, to see if it would spill,
and then touched it to see if it felt like
water. At last he tasted it, and roll-
ing it in his mouth with joy for a
moment, he swallowed it, and shouted,
“ Rain ! Rain ! Yes, it is Rain !
But how did you get it ? ”
I repeated, “ Jehovah my God gave
it out of His own Earth in answer to
our labours and prayers. Go and see
it springing up for yourselves ! ”
Now, though every man there could
climb the highest tree as swiftly and
as fearlessly as a squirrel or an oppos-
sum, not one of them had courage to
walk to the side and gaze down into
that well. To them this was miracu-
lous ! But they were not without a
resource that met the emergency.
They agreed to take firm hold of each
other by the hand, to place themselves
in a long line, the foremost man to lean
cautiously forward, gaze into the well,
and then pass to the rear, and so on,
fill all had seen “ Jehovah’s rain ”
far below. It was somewhat comical,
yet far more pathetic, to stand by and
watch their faces, as man after man
117
Face to Face with Heathenism


peered down into the mystery, and
then looked up at me in blank bewilder-
ment. When all had seen it with
their own very eyes, and were “ weak
with wonder,” the old Chief exclaimed:
“ Missi, wonderful, wonderful is the
work of your Jehovah God ! No God
of Aniwa ever helped us in this way.
The world is turned upside down
since Jehovah came to Aniwa ! But,
Missi,” continued he, after a pause that
looked like silent worship, “ will it
always rain up through the earth ?
or, will it come and go like the rain
from the clouds ? ”
I told them that I believed it would
always continue there for our use, as
a good gift from Jehovah.
“ Well, but, Missi,” replied the Chief,
some glimmering of self-interest be-
ginning to strike his brain, “ will you
or your family drink it all, or shall we
also have some ? ”
"You and all your people,” I an-
swered, "and all the people of the
Island, may come and drink and carry
away as much of it as you wish. I
believe there will always be plenty for
us all, and the more of it we can use
the fresher it will be. That is the way
with many of our Jehovah's best gifts
to men, and for it, and for all, we praise
His Name ! ”
“ Then, Missi,” said the Chief, “it
will be our water, and we may all use
it as our very own ? ”
" Yes,” I answered, " whenever you
wish it, and as much as you need, both
here and at your own houses, as far as
it can possibly be made to go.”
The Chief looked at me eagerly,
fully convinced at length that the well
contained a treasure,- and exclaimed,
“Missi, what can we do to help you
now ? ”
I was thankful to accept of the
Chiefs assistance, now sorely needed,
and I said, “ You have seen it fall in
once already. If it falls again, it will
conceal the rain from below which
our God has given us. In order to
preserve it for us and for our children
in all time, we must build it round and
round with great coral blocks from the
bottom to the very top. I will now
clear it out, and prepare the founda-
tion for this wall of coral. Let
man and woman carry from the
the largest blocks they can brinj
is well worth all the toil thus t(
serve our great Jehovah’s gift !
Scarcely were my words utt
when they rushed to the shore,
shoutings and songs of gladness ;
soon every one was seen strug
under the biggest block of coral
which he dared to tackle. Thej
like limestone rocks, broken up b]
hurricanes, and rolled ashore in
arms of mighty billows ; and h
incredibly short time scores of 1
were tumbled down for my use a 1
mouth of the well. Having prep
a foundation, I made ready a soi
bag-basket, into which every t
was firmly tied and then let dow
me by the pulley,—a Native Tea(
a faithful fellow, cautiously gui
it. I received and placed each s
in its position, doing my poor bes
wedge them one against the other, bi
ing circularly, and cutting them tc
needed shape with my American
The wall is about three feet thick,
the masonry may be guaranteec
stand till the coral itself decays
wrought incessantly, for fear of
further collapse, till I had it ra
about twenty feet ; and now, fee
secure, and my hands being dreadf
cut up, I intimated that I would
a week or two, and finish the buik
then. But the Chief advanced
said, —
" Missi, you have been strong
work. Your strength has fled. :
rest here beside us ; and just p<
out where each block is to be 1
We will lay them there, we will bi
them- solidly behind like you. J
no man will sleep till it is done.”
With all their will and heart t
started on the job ; some carry)
some cutting and squaring the bloc
till the wall rose like magic, and a i
of the hugest rocks lay round the
bound all together, and formed
mouth of the well. Women, bo
and all wished to have a hand in bui
ing it, and it remains to this day
solid wall of masonry, the circle bei
thirty-four feet deep, eight feet wi
118
John G. Paton, d.d.


ie top, and six at the bottom.
)red it over with wood above all,
fixed the windlass and bucket,
there it stands as one of the
test material blessings which the
L has given to Aniwa. It rises
falls with the tide, though a third
mile distant from the sea ; and
1, after using it, we tasted the
fresh water on board the Day-
ig, the latter seemed so insipid
I had to slip a little salt into my
dong with the sugar before I could
y it! All visitors are taken to
the well, as one of the wonders of
va ; and an Elder of the Native
rch said to me lately, “ But for
water, during the last two years
Irought, we would all have been
I ! ”
sry strangely, though the Natives
nselves have since tried to sink six
;ven wells in the most likely places
their different villages, they have
;r come to coral rock which they
d not pierce, or found only water
was salt. And they say amongst
iselves, “ Missi not only used pick
spade, but he prayed and cried to
jod. We have learned to dig, but
how to pray, and therefore Je-
ih will not give us the rain from
he well was now finished. The
e was neatly fenced in. And the
Chief said, “ Missi, now that this is
water for all, we must take care
keep it pure.”
was so thankful that all were to use
Had we alone drawn water there-
1, they could so easily have poisoned
,s they do the fish-pools, in caverns
rag the rocks by the shore, with
r nuts and runners, and killed us
But there was no fear, if they
nselves were to use it daily. The
jf cont nued, “ Missi, I think I
Id help you next Sabbath. Will
let me preach a sermon on the
. ? ”
Yes,” I at once replied, “ if you
try to bring all the people to hear
Missi, I will try,” he eagerly
raised. The news spread like wild-
that the Chief Namakei was to be
the Missionary on the next day for the
Worship, and the people, under great
expectancy, urged each other to come
and hear what he had to say.
Sabbath came round. Aniwa as-
sembled in what was for that island
a great crowd. Namakei appeared
dressed in shirt and kilt. He was so
excited, and flourished his tomahawk
about at such a rate, that it was rather
lively work to be near him. I con-
ducted short opening devotions, and
then called upon Namakei. He rose
at once, with eye flashing wildly, and
his limbs twitching with emotion. He
spoke to the following effect, swinging
his tomahawk to enforce every eloquent
gesticulation :
“ Friends of Namakei, men and wo-
men and children of Aniwa, listen to
my words ! Since Missi came here he
has talked many strange things we
could not understand—things all too
wonderful; and we said regarding
many of them that they must be lies.
White people might believe such non-
sense, but we saiddhat the black fellow
knew better than to receive it. But of
all his wonderful stories, we thought
the strangest was about sinking down
through the earth to get rain ! Then
we said to each other, The man’s head
is turned ; he’s gone mad. But the
Missi prayed on and wrought on, telling
us that Jehovah God heard and saw,
and that his God would give him rain.
Was he mad ? Has he not got the rain
deep down in the earth ? We mocked
at him ; but the water was there all
the same. We have laughed at other
things which the Missi told us, because
we could not see them. But from this
day I believe that all he tells us about
his Jehovah God is true. Some day
our eyes will see it. For to-day we
have seen the rain from the earth.”
Then rising to a climax, first the one
foot and then the other making the
broken coral on the floor fly behind like
a war-horse pawing the ground, he
cried with great eloquence :
“ My people, the people of Aniwa,
the world is turned upside down since
the word of Jehovah came to this land.
Who ever expected to see rain coming
up through the earth ? It has always
119
Face to Face with Heathenism


come from the clouds ! Wonderful
is the work of this Jehovah God. No
god of Aniwa ever answered prayers as
the Missi’s God has done. Friends of
Namakei, all the powers of the world
could not have forced us to believe
that rain could be given from the depth
of the earth, if we had not seen it with
our eyes, felt it and tasted it as we here
do. Now, by the help of Jehovah God,
the Missi brought that invisible rain to
view which we never before heard of
or saw, and,” —(beating his hand on
his breast, he exclaimed), —
Something here in my heart tells
me that the Jehovah God does exist, the
Invisible One, whom we never heard of
nor saw till the Missi brought Him to
our knowledge. The coral has been
removed, the land has been cleared
away, and lo ! the water rises. In-
visible till this day, yet all the same it
was there, though our eyes were too
weak. So I, your Chief, do now firmly
believe that when I die, when the bits
of coral and the heaps of dust are re-
moved which now blind my old eyes, I
shall then see the Invisible Jehovah
God with my soul, as Missi tells me, not
less surely than I have seen the rain
from the earth below. From this day,
my people, I must worship the God
who has opened for us the well, and
who fills us with rain from below. The
gods of Aniwa cannot hear, cannot help
us, like the God of Missi. Henceforth
lam a follower of Jehovah God. Let
every man that thinks with me go now
and fetch the idols of Aniwa, the gods
which our fathers feared, and cast them
down at Missi’s feet. Let us burn and
bury and destroy these things of wood
and stone, and let us be taught by the
Missi how to serve the God who can
hear, the Jehovah who gave us the
well, and who will give us every other
blessing, for He sent His Son Jesus to
die for us and bring us to Heaven.
This is what the Missi has been telling
us every day since he landed on Aniwa.
We laughed at him, but now we believe
him. The Jehovah God has sent us
rain from the earth. should He
not also send us His Son from Heaven ?
Namakei stands up for Jehovah ! ”
This address, and the Sinking of the
Well, broke, as I already said, the b:
of Heathenism on Aniwa. That vi
afternoon, the old Chief and several
his people brought their idols and c
them down at my feet beside the d(
of our house. Oh, the intense exci
ment of the weeks that followe
Company after company came to i
spot, loaded with their gods of wc
and stone, and piled them up in hea
amid the tears and sobs of some, a
the shoutings of others, in which v
heard the oft-repeated word, “ _
hovah ! Jehovah!” What could
burned, we cast into the flames ; oth
we buried in pits twelve or fifteen f(
deep ; and some few, more likely th
the rest to feed or awaken superstitic
we sank far out into the deep sea. Let
Heathen eyes ever gaze on them agair
We do not mean to indicate that,
all cases, their motives were either hi
or enlightened. There were not wai
ing some who wished to make this n«
movement pay, and were much c
gusted when we refused to “bu
their gods ! On being told that
hovah would not be pleased unless tl
gave them up of their own free v.
and destroyed them without pay
reward, some took them home agi
and held on by them for a season, a
others threw them away in contem
Meetings were held and speeches wi
delivered, for these New Hebrides
are irrepressible orators, florid, a
amazingly graphic; much talk follow
and the destruction of idols went
apace. By-and-bye two Sacred M
and some other selected persons cc
stituted themselves a sort of detecti
Committee, to search out and expc
those who pretended to give them
up, but were hiding certain idols
secret, and to encourage waverers
come to a thorough decision for j
hovah. In these intensely exciti
days, we “ stood still ” and saw t
salvation of the Lord.
CHAPTER XVII
THE LIGHT THAT SHINETH MORE AND MOl
A.D. 1869-1874, jET. 4S-SO
The printing of my first Aniwan b
was a great event, not so much for
120
John G. Paton, d.d.


hi and worry which it cost me, though
lat was enough to have broken the
eart of many a compositor, as rather
)r the joy it gave to the old Chief
amakei.
The break-up at Tanna had robbed
ic of my own neat little printing-press,
had since obtained at Aneityum the
;mains of one from Erromanga, that
ad belonged to the murdered Gordon.
' u t the supply of letters, in some
ises, was so deficient that I could
)rint only four pages at a time ; and,
besides, bits of the press were wanting,
md I had first to manufacture sub-
titutes from scraps of iron and wood.
managed, however, to make it go,
md by-and-bye it did good service.
3y it I printed our Aniwan Hymn-
3ook, a portion of Genesis in Aniwan,
i small book in Erromangan for the
econd Gordon, and some other little
hings.
The old Chief had eagerly helped me
n translating and preparing this first
>ook. He had a great desire “to hear
t speak,” as he graphically expressed
t. It was made up chiefly of short
)assages from the Scriptures, that
night help me to introduce them to the
reasures of Divine truth and love.
Jamakei came to me, morning after
lorning, saying, “ Missi, is it done ?
)an it speak ? ”
At last I was able to answer, “Yes!”
The old Chief eagerly responded,
: Does it speak my words ? ”
I said, “ It does.”
With rising interest, Namakei ex-
daimed, “ Make it speak to me, Missi !
me hear it speak.”
I read to him a part of the book, and
;he old man fairly shouted in an ecstasy
)f joy, “It does speak ! It speaks my
>wn language, too ! Oh, give it to
Tie ! ”
He grasped it hurriedly, turned it all
xmnd every way, pressed it to his
Tosom, and then, closing it with a look
)f great disappointment, handed it
Tack to me, saying, ‘‘ Missi, I cannot
nake it speak ! It will never speak to
■nek )f
“ No,” said I ; “ you don’t know
tow to read it yet, how to make it
speak to you ; but I will teach you to
read, and then it will speak to you as it
does to me.”
“ Oh Missi, dear Missi, show me how
to make it speak ! ” persisted the be-
wildered Chief. He was straining his
eyes so, that I suspected they were dim
with age, and could not see the letters.
I looked out for him a pair of spectacles,
and managed to fit him well. He was
much afraid of putting them on at first,
manifestly in dread of some sort of
sorcery. At last, when they were
properly placed, he saw the letters and
everything so clearly that he exclaimed
in great excitement and joy :
“ I see it all now ! This is what you
told us about Jesus. He opened the
eyes of a blind man. The word of
Jesus has just come to Aniwa. He has
sent me these glass eyes. I have
gotten back again the sight that I had
when a boy. O Missi, make the book
speak to me now ! ”
I walked out with him to the public
Village Ground. There I drew ABC
in large characters upon the dust,
showed him the same letters in the
book, and left him to compare them,
and find out how many occurred on the
first page. Fixing these in his mind,
he came running to me, and said, “ I
have lifted up AB C. They are here
in my head, and I will hold them fast.
Give me other three.”
This was repeated time after time.
He mastered the whole Alphabet, and
soon began to spell out the smaller
words. Indeed, he came so often,
getting me to read it over and over,
that before he himself could read it
freely he had it word for word com-
mitted to memory. When strangers
passed him, or young people came
around, he would get out the little
book and say, “ Come, and I will let
you hear how the book speaks our own
Aniwan words. You say, it is hard to
learn to read and make it speak. But
be strong to try ! If an old man like
me has done it, it ought to be much
easier for you.”
One day I heard him read to a com-
pany with wonderful fluency. Taking
the book I asked him to show me how
he had learned to read so quickly.
Immediately I perceived that he could
12 1
The Light that Shineth More and More


John G. Paton, D.D
recite the whole from memory ! He
became our right-hand helper in the
Conversion of Aniwa.
Next after God’s own Word, perhaps
the power of Music was most amazingly
blessed in opening up our way.
Amongst many other illustrations, I
may mention how Namakei’s wife was
won. The old lady positively shud-
dered at coming near the Mission
House, and dreaded being taught any-
thing. One day she was induced to
draw near the door, and fixing a hand
on either post, and gazing inwards, she
exclaimed, “Awai, Missi! Kdi, Missi!”
—the Native cry for unspeakable
wonder. Mrs. Paton began to play on
the harmonium, and sang a simple
hymn in the old woman’s language.
Manifestly charmed, she drew nearer
and nearer, and drank in the music, as
it were, at every pore of her being. At
last she ran off, and we thought it was
with fright, but it was to call together
all the women and girls from her village
“to hear the bokis sing ! ” (Having
no x, the word box is pronounced thus.)
She returned with them all at her heels.
They listened with dancing eyes. And
ever after the sound of a hymn, and
the song of the bokis, made them flock
freely to class or meeting.
Being myself as nearly as possible
destitute of the power of singing, all
my work would have been impaired
and sadly hindered, and the joyous
side of the Worship and Service of
J ehovah could not have been presented
to the Natives, but for the gift bestowed
by the Lord on my dear wife. She led
our songs of praise, both in the Family
and in the Church, and that was the
first avenue by which the New Religion
winged its way into the heart of Canni-
bal and Savage.
The old Chief was particularly eager
that this same aged, lady, his wife Yau-
waki, should be taught to read. But
her sight was far gone. So, one day,
he brought her to me, saying, “ Missi,
can you give my wife also a pair of new
glass eyes like mine ? She tries to
learn, but she cannot see the letters.
She tries to sew, but she pricks her
finger, and throws away the needle,
saying, * The ways of the white people
are not good ! ’ If she could get apa
of glass eyes, she would be in the ne
world like Namakei.” In my bund
I found a pair that suited her. SI
was in positive terror about puttii
them on her face, but at last she crie
with delight, “ Oh, my new eyes ! n
new eyes ! I have the sight of a litt
girl. I will learn hard now, I w:
make up for lost time.”
Her progress was never very grea
but her influence for good on oth
women and girls was immense.
In all my work amongst the Nativi
I have striven to train them to be sel
supporting, and have never helpe
them where I could train them to he]
themselves. In this respect 1 was e:
ceedingly careful, when the questic
arose of building their Churches an
Schools. At first we moved aboi
amongst them from village to villag
acquired their language, and taugl
them everywhere,—by the roadsid
under the shade of a tree, or on tl
public Village Ground. Our old N;
five Hut, when we removed to tl
Mission House formerly referred t<
was used for all sorts of public meeting
Feeling by-and-bye that the time ha
come to interest them in building
new Church, and that it would be ever
way helpful, I laid the proposal befoi
them, carefully explaining that for th:
work no one would be paid, that th
Church was for all the Islanders and fc
the Worship alone, and that every on
must build purely for the love of Jesui
I told them that God would b
pleased with such materials as the
had to give, that they must not begi
till they had divided the work an
counted the cost, and that for my par
I would do all that I could to direc
and help, and would supply the sinne
( = cocoa-nut fibre rope) which I hai
brought from Aneityum, and the nail
from Sydney.
They held meeting after meetinj
throughout the Island. Chiefs madi
long speeches ; orators chanted thei
palavers ; and warriors acted their par
by waving of club and tomahawk. Ai
unprecedented friendliness sprang uj
amongst them. They agreed to sinl
every quarrel, and unite in building
122


; first Church on Aniwa, —one Chief
ly holding back. Women and child-
-1 began to gather and prepare the
;ar - cane leaf for thatch. Men
irched for and cut down suitable
Our pride in the New Church soon
net with a dreadful blow. That very
eason a terrific hurricane levelled it
dth the ground. After much wailing,
he principal Chief, in a public Assem-
>ly, said, “ Let us not weep, like boys
>ver their broken bows and arrows !
set us be strong, and build a yet
tronger Church for Jehovah.”
By our counsel, ten days were spent
irst in repairing houses and fences,
,nd saving food from the plantations,
nany of which had been swept into
itter ruin. Then they assembled on
he appointed day. A hymn was sung,
rod’s blessing was invoked, and all the
rork was dedicated afresh to Him.
)ays were spent in taking the iron-
rood roof to pieces, and saving every-
hing that could be saved. The work
ms allocated equally amongst the
illages, and a wholesome emulation
/as created. One Chief still held back.
Tter a while, I visited him and per-
onally invited his help,—telling him
hat it was God’s House, and for all the
ieople of Aniwa ; and that if he and
is people did not do their part, the
thers would cast it in their teeth that
hey had no share in the House of God.
le yielded to my appeal, and entered
dgorously upon the work.
One large tree was still needed to
;omplcte the couples, and could no-
vhcre be found. The work was at a
tandstill ; for, though the size was
iow reduced to fifty feet by twenty-
mo, the roof lowered by four feet, and
:here was still plenty of smaller wood
m Aniwa, the larger trees were ap-
parently exhausted. One morning,
lowevcr, we were awoke at caily day-
preak by the shouting and singing of
1 company of men, carrying a great
slack tree to the Church, with this
iame Chief dancing before them, lead-
ng the singing, and beating time with
:he flourish of his tomahawk. De-
;ermined not to be beaten, though late
n the field, he hud lifted the roof-tree
out of his own house, as black as soot
could make it, and was carrying it to
complete the couplings. The rest of
the builders shouted against this. All
the other wood of the Church was
white and clean, and they would not
have this, black tree, conspicuous in
the very centre of all. But I praised
the old Chief for what he had done,
and hoped he and his people would
come and worship Jehovah under his
own roof-tree. At this all were de-
lighted ; and the work went on apace,
with many songs and shoutings.
Whenever the Church was roofed in,
we met in it for public Worship. Coral
was being got and burned, and pre-
parations made for plastering the walls.
The Natives were sharp enough to
notice that I was not putting up the
bell; and suspicions arose that I kept
it back in order to take it with me when
I returned to Tanna. It was a beauti-
ful Church bell, cast and sent out by
our dear friend, James Taylor, Esq.,
Birkenhead. The Aniwans, therefore,
gave me no rest till I agreed to have it
hung on their new Church. They
found a large iron-wood tree near the
shore, cut a road for half a mile through
the bush, tied poles across it every few
feet, and with shouts lifted it bodily on
their shoulders—six men or so at each
pole—and never set it down again till
they reached the Church ; for as one
party got exhausted, others were ready
to rush in and relieve them at every
stage of the journey. The two old
Chiefs, flourishing their tomahawks,
went capering in front of all the rest,
and led the song to which they marched,
joyfully bearing their load. They dug
a deep hole, into which to sink it;
I squared the top and screwed on the
bell ; then we raised the tree by ropes,
letting it sink into the hole, and built it
round eight feet deep with coral blocks
and lime; and there from its top swings
and rings ever since the Church bell of
Aniwa.
One of the last attempts ever made
on my life resulted, by God’s blessing,
in great good to us all and to the work
of the Lord. It was when Nourai, one
of Nasi’s men, struck at me again and
again with the barrel of his musket;
123
rhe Light that Shineth More and Mors


but I evaded the blows, till rescued by
the women—the men looking on stupe-
fied. After he escaped into the bush,
I assembled our people and said,, “ If
you do not now try to stop this bad
conduct, I shall leave Aniwa, and go to
some island where my life will be pro-
tected.”
Next morning at daybreak, about
one hundred men arrived at my house,
and in answer to my query why they
came armed they replied, “We are
now going to that village, where the
men of wicked conduct are gathered
together. We will find out why they
sought your life, and we will rebuke
their Sacred Man for pretending to
cause hurricanes and diseases. We
cannot go unarmed. We will not
suffer you to go alone. We are your
friends and the friends of the Wor-
ship. And we are resolved to stand
by you, and you must go at our head
to-day ! ”
In great perplexity, yet believing
that my presence might prevent blood-
shed, I allowed myself to be placed at
their head. The old Chief followed
next, then a number of fiery young
men ; then all the rest, single file,
along the narrow path. At a sudden
turn, as we neared their village, Nourai,
who had attacked me the Sabbath day
before, and his brother were seen lurk-
ing with their muskets ; but our young
men made a rush in front, and they
disappeared into the bush.
We took possession of the village
Public G’ jund ; and the Chief, the
Sacred Man, and others soon as-
sembled. A most characteristic Na-
tive Palaver followed. Speeches, end-
less speeches, were fired by them at
each other. My friends declared, in
every conceivable form of language
and of graphic illustration, that they
were resolved at any cost to defend me
and the worship of Jehovah, and that
they would as one man punish every
attempt to injure me or take my life.
The orator, Taia, exclaimed, “You
think that Missi is here alone, and that
you can do with him as you please !
No ! We are now all Missi’s men.
We will fight for him and his rather
than see him injured. Every one that
attacks him attacks us. That
finished to-day ! ”
In the general scolding, the Sacr
Man had special attention, for p
tending to cause hurricanes. 0
pointed out that he had himself a si
knee, and argued, “ If he can ma
a hurricane, why can’t he restore t
joint of his own knee ? It is sun
easier to do the one than the other ! ”
The Natives laughed heartily, ar
taunted him. Meantime he sat lookir
down to the earth in sullen silence
and a ludicrous episode ensued. H
wife, a big, strong woman, scolded hi:
roundly for the trouble he had brougl
them all into ; and then, getting ii
dignant as well as angry, she seize
a huge cocoa-nut leaf out of the bus.
and with the butt-end thereof begs
thrashing his shoulders vigorously, i
she poured out the vials of her wrath:
torrents of words, always winding r
with the cry, “ I’ll knock the Tevil out i
him ! He’ll not try hurricanes again !
The woman was a Malay, as all tl
Aniwans were. Had a Papuan woma
on Tanna or Erromanga dared sue
a thing, she would have been kille
on the spot. But even on Aniw
the unwonted spectacle of a wi
beating her husband created uproai
ous amusement. At length I remoi
strated, saying, “You had better stc
now ! You don’t want to kill hir
do you ? You seem to have knocke
‘ the Tevil ’ pretty well out of him noi
You see how he receives it all in silenc
and repents of all his bad talk and be
conduct.”
They exacted from him a solen
promise as to the making of no mo
diseases or hurricanes, and that 1
would live at peace with his neig
hours. The offending villagers at leng
presented a large quantity of suga
cane and food to us as a peace-ofh
ing ; and we returned, praising G<
that the whole day’s scolding had end'
in talk, not blood. The result w
every way most helpful. Our frien
knew their strength and took coura|
Our enemies were disheartened ai
afraid. We saw the balance growii
heavier every day on the side of Jesu
and our souls blessed the Lord.
124
John G. Paton, D.D.


Ihese events suggest to me another
:ident of those days full at once of
al and of joy. It pertains to the
>ry of our young Chief, Youwili.
om the first, and for long, he was
)st audacious and troublesome. Ob-
■ving that for several days no Natives
d come near the Mission House, I
ted the old Chief if he knew why,
d he answered, “ Youwili has
woed the paths, and threatens death
any one who breaks through it.”
I at once replied, “ Then I conclude
it you all agree with him, and wish
; to leave. We are here only to
ich you and your people. If he
s power to prevent that we shall
,ve with the Dayspring.”
The old Chief called the people
*ether, and they came to me, saying,
)ur anger is strong against Youwili.
' with us and break down the taboo.
will assist and protect you.”
went at their head and removed it.
consisted simply of reeds stuck into
! ground, with twigs and leaves and
re tied to each in a peculiar way,
a circle round the Mission House.
3 Natives had an extraordinary
ad of violating the taboo, and
ieved that it meant death to the
;nder or to some one of his family.
present entered into a bond to
lish on the spot any man who at-
ipted to replace the taboo, or to
enge its removal. Thus a mortal
iw was publicly struck at this most
serable superstition, which had
ised bloodshed and misery untold.
3ne day, thereafter, I was engaged
clearing away the bush around the
ssion House, having purchased and
d for the land for the very purpose
opening it up, when suddenly You-
i appeared and menacingly forbade
to proceed. For the sake of peace
or the time desisted. But he went
light to my fence, and with his
lahawk cut down the portion in
nt of our house, also some bananas
nted there —the usual declaration
var, intimating that he only waited
opportunity similarly to cut down
and mine. We saw the old Chief
his men planting themselves here
there to guard us, and the Natives
prowling about armed and excited.
On calling them, they explained the
meaning of what Youwili had done,
and that they were determined to
protect us. I said, “ This must not
continue. Are you to permit one
young fool to defy us all, and break up
the Lord’s work on Aniwa ? If you
cannot righteously punish him, I will
shut myself up in my house and with-
draw from all attempts to teach or
help you, till the Vessel comes, and
then I can leave the Island.”
Now that they had begun really to
love us, and to be anxious to learn
more, this was always my most power-
ful argument. We retired into the
Mission House. The people surrounded
our doors and windows and pleaded
with us. After long silence, we re-
plied, “ You know our resolution. It
is for you now to decide. Either you
must control that foolish young man,
or we must go ! ”
Much speech-making, as usual, fol-
lowed. The people resolved to seize
and punish Youwili ; but he fled, and
had hid himself in the bush. Coming
to me, the Chief said, ‘‘lt is left to
you to say what shall be Youwili’s
punishment. Shall we kill him ? ”
I replied firmly, “ Certainly not !
Only for murder can life be lawfully
taken away.”
‘‘ What then ? ” they continued.
“ Shall we burn his houses and destroy
his plantations ? ”
I answered, “ No.”
“ Shall we bind him and beat him ? ”
“ Shall we place him in a canoe,
thrust him out to sea, and let him
drown or escape as he may ? ”
“ No ! by no means.”
“ Then, Missi,” said they, “ these
are our ways of punishing. What
other punishment remains that You-
wili cares for ? ”
I replied, “ Make him with his own
hands, and alone, put up a new fence,
and restore all that he has destroyed;
and make him promise publicly that
he will cease all evil conduct towards
us. That will satisfy me.”
This idea of punishment seemed to
tickle them greatly. The Chiefs re-
125
he Light that Shineth More and More


ported our words to the Asembly ; and
the Natives laughed and cheered, as
if it were a capital joke ! They cried
aloud, “It is good ! It is good!
Obey the word of the Missi.”
After considerable hunting, the
young Chief was found. They brought
him to the Assembly and scolded him
severely and told him their sentence.
He was surprised by the nature of the
punishment, and cowed by the deter-
mination of the people.
“ To-morrow,” said he, “ I will fully
repair the fence. Never again will
I oppose the Missi. His word is good.”
By daybreak next morning Youwili
was diligently repairing what he had
broken down, and before evening he
had everything made right, better than
it was before. While he toiled away,
some fellows of his own rank twitted
him, saying, “ Youwili, you found it
easier to cut down Missi’s fence than
to repair it again. You will not re-
peat that in a hurry ! ”
But he heard all in silence. Others
passed with averted heads, and he
knew they were laughing at him. He
made everything tight, and then left
without uttering a single word. My
heart yearned after the poor fellow,
but I thought it better to let his own
mind work away, on its new ideas as
to punishment and revenge, for a little
longer by itself alone. I instinctively
felt that Youwili was beginning to
turn, that the Christ-Spirit had touched
his darkly-groping soul. My doors
were now thrown open, and every good
work went on as before. We resolved
to leave Youwili entirely to Jesus,
setting apart a portion of our prayer
every day for the enlightenment and
conversion of the young Chief, on
whom all other means had been ex-
hausted apparently in vain.
A considerable time elapsed. No
sign came, and our prayers seemed to
fail. But one day, I was toiling be-
tween the shafts of a hand-cart,
assisted by two boys, drawing it along
from the shore loaded with coral
blocks. Youwili came rushing from his
house, three hundred yards or so off
the path, and said, “ Missi, that is too
hard for you. Let me be your helper! ”
Without waiting for a reply,
ordered the two boys to seize one roj
while he grasped the other, threw
over his shoulder and started c
pulling with the strength of a hor;
My heart rose in gratitude, and I we
with joy as I followed him. I kn<
that that yoke was but a symbol
the yoke of Christ, which Youwili wi
his change of heart was beginning
carry ! Truly there is only one w;
of regeneration, being born again 1
the power of the Spirit of God, t
new heart; but there are many wa
of conversion, of outwardly turning
the Lord, of taking the actual first st
that shows on whose side we ai
Regeneration is the sole work of t
Holy Spirit in the human heart ai
soul, and is in every case one and t
same. Conversion, on the other han
bringing into play the action also
the human will, is never absolutely t
same perhaps in even two souls —
like and yet as different as are the fac
of men.
Like those of old praying for t
deliverance of Peter, and who could n
believe their ears and eyes when Pet
knocked and walked in amongst thei
so we could scarcely believe our ey
and ears when Youwili became
disciple of Jesus, though we had be
praying for his conversion every da
His once sullen countenance bccar
literally bright with inner light, t
wife came immediately for a book ai
a dress, saying, “ Youwili sent re
His opposition to the Worship is ov
now. I am to attend Church ai
School. He is coming too. He wan
to learn how to be strong, like yo
for Jehovah and for Jesus.”
Oh, Jesus ! to Thee alone be all t)
glory. Thou hast the key to unloi
every heart that Thou hast created.
Youwili proved to be slow at lear
ing to read, and his wife greatly help*
him. The two attended the Cor
municants’ Class together, and uli
mately both sat down to the Loro
Table. After his first Communio
he waited for me under an orange-tr
near the Mission House, and sai
“ Missi, I’ve given up everything f
Jesus, except one, I want to know
126
John G. Paton, d.d.


is bad, if it will make Jesus angry ;
r if so, I am walling to give it up.
want to live so as to please Jesus
We feared that it was some of their
eathenish immoralities, arid were in
measure greatly relieved when he
oceeded, “ Missi, I have not yet
ven up my pipe and tobacco ! Oh,
issi, I have used it so long, and I do
re it so well ; but if you say that it
akes Jesus angry with me, I will
tiash my pipe now, and never smoke
jain ! ”
The man’s soul was aflame. He was
tremendous earnest, and would have
me anything for me. But I was
ore anxious to instruct his conscience
lan to dominate it. I therefore re-
lied in effect thus, “ I rejoice, Youwili,
lat you are ready to give up anything
) please Jesus. He well deserves it,
>r He gave up His life for you. For
ty part, you know that I do not
noke ; and from my point of view
would think it wrong in me to waste
me and money and perhaps health
1 blowing tobacco smoke into the air.
; would do me no good. It could not
ossibly help me to serve or please
esus better. I think I am happier
nd healthier without it. And I am
3rtain that I can use the time and
loney, spent on this selfish and rather
Ithy habit, far more for God’s glory
1 many other ways. But I must be
rue to you, Youwili, and admit that
lany of God’s dear people differ from
le in these opinions. They spend
me and money, and sometimes injure
ealth, in smoking, besides setting a
wasteful example to lads and young
len, and do not regard it as sinful.
will not therefore condemn these,
ur fellow-Christians, by calling smok-
ig a sin like drunkenness ; but I will
ay to you that I regard it as a foolish
nd wasteful indulgence, a bad habit,
nd that though you may serve and
lease Jesus with it, you might serve
nd please Jesus very much better
dthout it.”
He looked very anxious, as if weigh-
ag his habit against his resolution,
nd then said, “ Missi, I give up every-
hing else. If it won’t make Jesus
angry, I will keep the pipe. I have
used it so long, and oh, I do like it ! ”
Renewing our advice and counsel,
but leaving him free to do in that
matter so as to please Jesus according
to his own best light, Youwili departed
with a conscience so far greatly re-
lieved, and we had many meditations
upon the incident. Most of our Natives,
on their conversion, have voluntarily
renounced the Tobacco Idol; but
what more could I say to Youwili,
with thousands of white Christians at
my back burning incense to that same
idol every day of their lives ?
And this leads me to relate the story
of our first Communion on Aniwa.
It was Sabbath, 24th October, 1869 ;
and surely the Angels of God and the
Church of the Redeemed in Glory were
amongst the “ great cloud of witnesses ”
who eagerly “ peered ” down upon
the scene, —when we sat around the
Lord’s Table and partook the memo-
rials of His body and blood with those
few souls rescued out of the Heathen
World. My Communicants’ Class had
occupied me now a considerable time.
The conditions of attendance at this
early stage were explicit, and had to
be made very severe, and only twenty
were admitted to the roll. At the
final examination only twelve gave
evidence of understanding what they
were doing, and of having given their
hearts to the service of the Lord Jesus,
At their own urgent desire, and after
every care in examining and instruct-
ing, they were solemnly dedicated in
prayer to be baptized and admitted
to the Holy Table. On that Lord’s
Day, after the usual opening Service,
I gave a short and careful exposition
of the Ten Commandments and of the
Way of Salvation according to the
Gospel. The twelve Candidates then
stood up before all the inhabitants
there assembled ; and, after a brief
exhortation to them as converts, I
put to them the two questions that
follow, and each gave an affirmative
reply, “ Do you, in accordance with
your profession of the Christian Faith,
and your promises before God and the
people, wish me now to baptize you ? ”
And—“ Will you live henceforth for
127
The Light that Shmeth More and More


Jesus only, hating all sin and trying to
love and serve your Saviour ? ”
Then, beginning with the old Chief,
the twelve came forward, and I bap-
tized them one by one according to
the Presbyterian usage. Two of them
had also little children, and they were
at the same time baptized, and re-
ceived as the lambs of the flock.
Solemn prayer was then offered, and
in the name of the Holy Trinity the
Church of Christ on Aniwa was for-
mally constituted.
Having now our little Aniwan book,
we set about establishing Schools at
every village on the Island. Mrs.
Paton and I had been diligently in-
structing those around us, and had
now a number prepared to act as help-
ers. Experience has proved that, for
the early stages, their own fellow-
islanders are the most successful in-
structors. Each village built its own
School, which on Sabbath served as
a district Church. For the two most
advanced Schools I had our good
Aneityumese Teachers, and for the
others I took the best readers that
could be found. These I changed
frequently, returning them to our own
School for a season, which was held
for them in the afternoon ; and to
encourage them, a small salary was
granted to each of them yearly, drawn
from what is now known throughout
the Churches as the Native Teachers’
Fund.
These village Schools have all to
be conducted at daybreak, while the
heavy dews still drench the bush ; for
as soon as the dews are lifted by the
rising sun, the Natives are off to their
plantations, on which they depend for
their food almost exclusively. I had
a large School at the Mission Station,
also at daybreak, besides the afternoon
School at three o’clock for the training
of Teachers. At first they made very
little progress ; but they began to form
habits of attention ; and they learned
the fruitful habit of acknowledging
God always, for all our Schools were
opened and closed with prayer. As
their knowledge and faith increased,
we saw their Heathen practices rapidly
passing away, and a new life shaping
itself around us. Mrs. Paton taugl
a class of about fifty women ar
girls. They became experts at ser
ing, plaiting hats, and reading. Near
all the girls could at length cut 01
and make their own dresses, as we
as shirts or kilts for the men and clot’
ing for the children. Yet, three sho
years before, men and women alii
were running about naked and savag
The Christ-Spirit is the true civilizir
power.
The habits of morning and evening
Family Prayer and of Grace at Meat tool
a very wonderful hold upon the people
and became, as I have shown elsewhere
a distinctive badge of Christian versiu
Heathen. This was strikingly mani-
fested during a time of bitter scarcity
that befell us. I heard a father, foi
instance, at his hut door, with his
family around him, reverently blessing
God for the food provided for them
and for all His mercies in Christ Jesus
Drawing near and conversing with then
I found that their meal consisted o;
fig leaves which they had gathered and
cooked a poor enough dish, bul
hunger makes a healthy appetite, and
contentment is a grateful relish.
During the same period of privation
my Orphans suffered badly also. Once
they came to me, saying, “ Missi, we
are very hungry.”
I replied, “ So am I, dear children
and we have no more white food till the
Day spring comes.”
They continued, “ Missi, you havi
two beautiful fig trees. Will you le
us take one feast of the young anc
tender leaves ? We will not injur<
branch or fruit.”
I answered, “ Gladly, my childrer
take your fill ! ”
In a twinkling each child wa
perched upon a branch; and the;
feasted there happy as squirrels
Every night we prayed for the vessel
and in the morning our Orphan boy
rushed to the coral rocks and eagerl;
scanned the sea for an answer. Da;
after day they returned with sad faces
saying, “ Missi, Tavaka jimra !” ( = N(
vessel yet).
But at grey dawn of a certain day
we were awoke by the boys shoutinj
128
John G. Paton, d.d.


1 the shore and running for the
ion House with the cry,— “Tavaka
Tavaka oa ! ” ( = The vessel,
ah !).
r e arose at once, and the boys ex-
ned, “ Missi, she is not our own
el, but we think she carries her
She has three masts, and our
spring only two ! ”
looked through my glass, and saw
they were discharging goods into
vessel’s boats ; and the children,
a I told them that boxes and bags
casks were being sent on shore,
ited and danced with delight. As
first boat-load was discharged, the
lans surrounded me, saying,
ssi, here is a cask that rattles like
aits ! Will you let us take it to
Mission House ? ”
told them to do so if they could ;
in a moment it was turned into
path, and the boys had it flying
re them, some tumbling and hurt-
their knees, but up and at it again,
never pausing till it rolled up at
door of our Storehouse. On re-
ing I found them all around it,
they said, “ Missi, have you for-
en what you promised us ? ”
said, “ What did I promise you ? ”
hey looked very disappointed and
spered to each other, “ Missi has
of ! ”
Forgot what ? ” inquired I.
Missi,” they answered, “ you pro-
id that when the vessel came you
Id give each of us a biscuit.”
Oh,” I replied, “ I did not forget ;
ily wanted to see if you remem-
d it ! ”
ley laughed, saying, “ No fear of
, Missi! Will you soon open the
? We are dying for biscuits.”
t once I got hammer and tools,
;ked off the hoops, took out the
and then gave girls and boys a
ait each. To my surprise, they
tood round, biscuit in hand, but
one beginning to eat.
What,” I exclaimed, “ you are
ig for biscuits ! Why don’t you
? Are you expecting another ? ”
ne of the eldest said, “ We will first
ak God for sending us food, and
Him to bless it to us all.”
And this was done in their own
simple and beautiful child-like way ;
and then they did eat, and enjoyed
their food as a gift from the Heavenly
Father’s hand. (Is there any child
reading this, or hearing it read, who
never thanks God or asks Him to bless
daily bread ? Then is that child not
a white Heathen ?) We ourselves at
the Mission House could very heartily
rejoice with the dear Orphans. For
some weeks past our European food
had been all exhausted, except a little
tea, and the cocoa-nut had been our
chief support. It was beginning to
tell against us. Our souls rose in
gratitude to the Lord, who had sent
us these fresh provisions that we
might love Him better and serve Him
more.
The children’s sharp eyes had read
correctly. It was not the Dayspring.
Our brave little ship had gone to
wreck on 6th January, 1873 ; and this
vessel was the Paragon, chartered to
bring down our supplies. Alas ! the
wreck had gone by auction sale to a
French slaving company, who cut a
passage through the coral reef, and
had the vessel again floating in the
Bay,—elated at the prospect of em-
ploying our Mission Ship in the blood-
stained Kanaka - traffic (= a mere
euphemism for South Sea slavery) !
Our souls sank in horror and concern.
Many Natives would unwittingly trust
themselves to the Dayspring ; and
revenge would be taken on us, as was
done on noble Bishop Patteson, when
the deception was found out. What
could be done ? Nothing but cry to
God, which all the friends of our
Mission did day and night, not without
tears, as we thought of the possible
degradation of our noble little Ship.
Listen ! The French Slavers, anchor-
ing their prize in the Bay, and greatly
rejoicing, went ashore to celebrate the
event. They drank and feasted and
revelled. But that night a mighty
storm arose, the old Dayspring dragged
her anchor, and at daybreak she was
seen again on the reef, but this time
with her back broken in two and
for ever unfit for service, either fair
or foul. Oh, white - winged Virgin,
129
Ihe Light that Shineth More and More


daughter of the waves, better for thee,
as for thy human sisters, to die and
pass away than to suffer pollution and
live on in disgrace !
Dr. Steel had chartered the Paragon,
a new three-masted schooner, built at
Balmain, Sydney, to come down with
our provisions, letters, etc., and the
owners had given a written agreement
that if we could purchase her within
a year we would get her for
She proved in every way a suitable
vessel, and it became abundantly
manifest that in the interest of our
Mission her services ought to be per-
manently secured.
I had often said that I would not
again leave my beloved work on the
Islands, unless compelled to do so
cither by the breakdown of health, or
by the loss of our Mission Ship and
my services being required to assist in
providing another. Very strange, that
in this one season both of these events
befell us ! During the hurricanes,
from January to April, 1873, when the
Day spring was wrecked, we lost a
darling child by death, my dear wife
had a protracted illness, and I was
brought very low with severe rheu-
matic fever. I was reduced so far
that I could not speak, and was re-
ported as dying. The Captain of a
vessel, having seen me, called at Tanna,
and spoke of me as in all probability
dead by that time. Our unfailing
and ever-beloved friends and fellow-
Missionaries, Mr. and Mrs. Watt, at
once started from Kwamera, in their
open boat, and rowed and sailed thirty
miles to visit us. But a few days
before they arrived I had fallen into
a long and sound sleep, out of which,
when I awoke, consciousness had again
returned to me. I had got the turn ;
there was no further relapse; but
when I did regain a little strength, my
weakness was so great that I had to
travel about on crutches for many
a day.
Being ordered to seek health by
change and by higher medical aid,
and if possible in the cooler air of New
Zealand, we took the first opportunity
and arrived at Sydney, anxious to
start the new movement to secure the
Paragon there, and then to go 01
the Sister Colony. scat
able to walk without the crutches
called privately a preliminary mee
of friends for consultation and
The conditions were laid before t
and discussed. The Insurance C
pany had paid £2,000 on the
Day spring. Of that sum £ 1,000
been spent on chartering and maint
ing the Paragon ; so that we requ
an additional £2,000 to purchase
besides a large sum for alterations
equipment for the Mission. The
Mr. Learmouth looked across to
Goodlet, and said, “ If you’ll join
we will at once secure this vessel
the Missionaries, that God’s work i
not suffer from the wreck of the 1
spring
Those two servants of God, exce]
Elders of the Presbyterian Chu
consulted together, and the v«
was purchased next day. How I
praise God, and pray Him to t
them and theirs ! The late Dr.
larton, our dear friend, said to tl
“ But what guarantee do you ask f
the Missionaries for your money ?
Mr. Learmouth’s noble reply 1
and the other heartily re-echoed
“ God’s work is our guarantee ! F
them we will ask none. What gua
tee have they to give us, except t
faith in God ? That guarantee is <
already.”
I answered, “You take God and
work for your guarantee. Rest
sured that He will soon repay you,
you will lose nothing by this n«
service.”
Having secured St. Andrew’s Chr
for a public meeting, I advertise<
in all the papers. Ministers, Sabb
School Teachers, and other frie
came in great numbers. The sch(
was fairly launched, and Colled
Cards largely distributed. Some
our fellow-Missionaries thought t
the Colonial Churches should now
all these things voluntarily, with
our personal efforts. But in ev
great emergency some one must t
action and show the way, else gob
opportunites are apt to slip. Cc
mittees carried everything out i
130
John G. Paton, D.D.


tail, and all worked for the fund with
;at good-will.
I then sailed from Sydney to Vic-
:ia, and addressed the General As-
nbly of the Presbyterian Church in
>sion at Melbourne. The work was
sily set a-going there, and willing
>rkers fully and rapidly organized it
rough Congregations and Sabbath
hools.
Under medical advice, I next sailed
r New Zealand in the S.S. Hero ,
iptain I.ogan. A large number of
st men and gamblers were on board,
turning from the Melbourne Races,
id their language was extremely pro-
ne. Having prayed over it, I said
l the second day at the dinner-table,
Gentlemen, will you bear with me a
oment ? lam sure no man at this
ble wishes to wound the feelings of
lother or to give needless pain.”
Every eye stared at me, and there
as a general cry as to what I meant,
continued, “ Gentlemen, we are to be
llow-passengers for a week or more,
ow I am cut and wounded to my very
*art to hear you cursing the Name of
iy Heavenly Father, and taking in
dn the name of my blessed Saviour,
: is God in whom we live and move,
is Jesus who died to save us, and I
ould rather ten times over you would
ound and abuse me, which no gentle-
lan here would think of doing, than
rofanely use those Holy Names so
ear to me.”
There was a painful silence, and most
ices grew crimson, some with rage,
3me perhaps with shame. At last a
anker who was there, a man dying of
onsumption, replied with a profane
ath and with wrathful words. Keep-
ig perfectly calm, in sorrow and pity,
replied, looking him kindly in the
ace, “Dear Sir, you and I are strangers.
Jut I have pitied you very tenderly,
ver since I came on board, for your
ieavy trouble and hacking cough,
fou ought to be the last to curse that
dessed Name, as you may soon have
o appear in His presence. I return,
lowever, no railing word. If the
Saviour was as dear to your heart as
-Te is to mine, you would better under-
id me.
Little else was said during the re-
mainder of that meal. But an hour
later Captain Logan sent for me to his
room, and said, “ Sir, I too am a Chris-
tian. I would not give my quiet hour
in the Cabin with this Bible for all the
pleasures that the world can afford.
You did your duty to-day amongst
these profane men. But leave them
and their consciences now in the hands
of God, and take no further notice
during the voyage.”
I never heard another oath on board
that ship. The banker met me in New
Zealand and warmly invited me to his
house!
Reaching Auckland, I was in time
to address the General Assembly of
the Church there also. They gave me
cordial welcome, and every Congre-
gation and Sabbath School might
be visited as far as I possibly could.
The Ministers promoted the move-
ment with hearty zeal. The Sabbath
Scholars took Collecting Cards for
“ shares ” in the New Mission Ship.
A meeting was held every day, and
three every Sabbath. Auckland, Nel-
son, Wellington, Dunedin, and all
towns and Churches within reach of
these, were rapidly visited; and I
never had greater joy or heartiness in
any of my tours than in this happy
intercourse with the Ministers and
People of the Presbyterian Church in
New Zealand.
I arrived back in Sydney about the
end of March. My health was wonder-
fully restored, and New Zealand had
given me about £1,700 for the new ship.
With the /i ,000 of insurance money,
and about £7 OO from New South Wales,
and from Victoria, besides the
-£5OO for her support also from Victoria,
we were able to pay back the £3,000
of purchase money, and about £BOO
for alterations and repairs, as well as
equip and provision her to sail for her
next year’s work amongst the Islands
free of debt. I said to our two good
friends at Sydney:
“You took God and His work for
your guarantee. He has soon relieved
you from all responsibility. You have
suffered no loss, and you have had the
honour and privilege of serving your
131
fhe Light that Shineth More and More


Lord. I envy you the joy you must
feel in so using your wealth, and I
pray God’s double blessing on all your
store.”
CHAPTER XVIII
PEN-PORTRAITS OF ANIWANS
A.D. 1874-1883. JET. SO-59
In claiming Aniwa for Christ, and
winning it as a small jewel for His
crown, we had the experience which
has ever marked God’s path through
history,—He raised up around us and
wonderfully endowed men to carry
forward His own blessed work. Among
these must be specially commemorated
Namakei, the old Chief of Aniwa.
Slowly, but very steadily, the light of
the Gospel broke in upon his soul, and
he was ever very eager to communicate
to his people all that he learned. In
Heathen days he was a Cannibal and a
great warrior ; but from the first, as
shown in the preceding Chapters, he
took a warm interest in us and our
work, —a little selfish, no doubt, at the
beginning, but soon becoming purified,
as his eyes and heart were opened to
the Gospel of Jesus.
On the birth of a son to us on the
Island, the old Chief was in ecstasies.
He claimed the child as his heir, his
own son being dead, and brought
nearly the whole inhabitants in relays
to see the white Chief of Aniwa ! He
would have him called Namakei the
Younger, an honour which I fear we
did not too highly appreciate. As the
child grew, he took his hand and walked
about with him freely amongst the
people, learning to speak their language
like a Native, and not only greatly in-
teresting them in himself, but even in
us and in the work of the Lord. This,
too, was one of the bonds, however
purely human, that drew them all
nearer and nearer to Jesus.
The death of Namakei had in it
many streaks of Christian romance.
He had heard about the Missionaries
annually meeting on one or other of
the Islands, and consulting about the
work of Jehovah. What ideas he had
formed of a Mission Synod one cannot
easily imagine ; but in his old age, and
when very frail, he formed an ii
passioned desire to attend our ne:
meeting on Aneityum, and see ai
hear all the Missionaries of Jes
gathered together from the New He
rides. Terrified that he would d
away from home, and that that mig
bring great reverses to the good woi
on Aniwa, where he was truly belove
I opposed his going with all my migh
But he and his relations and his peop
were all set upon it, and I had at lengt
to give way. His few booklets wei
then gathered together, his meagi
wardrobe was made up, and a sma
native basket carried all his belong
ings. He assembled his people an
took an affectionate farewell, pleadin
with them to be “ strong for Jesus,
whether they ever saw him again (
not, and to be loyal and kind to Miss
The people wailed aloud, and man
wept bitterly. Those on board th
Dayspring were amazed to see how h:
people loved him. The old Chief stoo
the voyage well. He went in and or
to our meeting of Synod, and wa
vastly pleased with the respect pai
to him on Aneityum. When he hear
of the prosperity of the Lord’s worl
and how Island after Island was lean
ing to sing the praises of Jesus, h:
heart glowed, and he said, “Missi,
am lifting up my head like a tree,
am growing tall with joy ! ”
On the fourth or fifth day, howeve]
he sent for me out of the Synod, an
when I came to him, he said, eagerlj
“ Missi, I am near to die ! I hav
asked you to come and say farewel
Tell my daughter, my brother, and m
people to go on pleasing Jesus, and
will meet them again in the fair World,
I tried to encourage him, saying tha
God might raise him up again and re
store him to his people • but he faint!
whispered, “ O Missi, death is ahead;
touching me ! I feel my feet goini
away from under me. Help me to It
down under the shade of that banyai
tree.”
So saying, he seized my arm, v
staggered near to the tree, and he la
down under its cool shade. He whi
pered again, “I am going ! O Miss
let me hear your words rising up i
132
John G. Paton, d.d.


r er, and then my Soul will be strong
. ) y
unidst many choking sobs, I tried
pray. At last he took my hand,
ssed it to his heart, and said in a
mger and clearer tone, “ O my
si, my dear Missi, I go before you,
I will meet you again in the Home
lesus. Farewell ! ”
'hat was the last effort of dissolving
mgth ; he immediately became un-
scious, and fell asleep. My heart
like to break over him. He was
first Aniwan Convert—the first
d ever on that Island of love and
rs opened his heart to J esus ; and as
lay there on the leaves and grass,
soul soared upward after his, and
the harps of God seemed to thrill
h song as Jesus presented to the
;her this trophy of redeeming love,
had been our true and devoted
nd and fellow-helper in the Gospel ;
I next morning all the members of
Synod followed his remains to the
ve. There we stood, the white
sionaries of the Cross from far
;ant lands, mingling our tears with
istian Natives of Aneityum, and
;ing them fall over one who only a
■ years before was a blood-stained
rnibal, and whom now we mourned
a brother, a saint, an Apostle
ongst his people. Ye ask an ex-
nation ? The Christ entered into his
,rt, and Namakei became a new Crea-
e. ‘‘ Behold, I make all things new. ’’
Ve were in positive distress about
timing to Aniwa without the Chief,
I we greatly feared the consequences,
show our perfect sympathy with
m, we prepared a special and con-
srable present for Litsi, his daughter,
his brother, and for other near
nds —a sort of object lesson, that
had in every way been kind to old
makei, as we now wished to be to
m. When our boat approached
landing, nearly the whole popu-
in had assembled to meet us ;
Litsi and the old Chief’s brother
; far out on the reef to salute us.
li’s keen eye had missed old Nama-
s form ; and far as words could
y I heard her voice crying, “ Missi,
■re is my father ? ”
I made as if I did not hear; the boat
was drawing slowly near, and again she
cried aloud, “ Missi, where is my
father ? Is Namakei dead ? ”
I replied, “ Yes. He died at Aneit-
yum. He is now with Jesus in Glory.”
Then arose a wild, wailing cry, led
by Litsi and taken up by all around.
It rose and fell like a chant or dirge, as
one after another wailed out praise and
sorrow over the name of Namakei.
We moved slowly into the boat har-
bour ; Litsi, the daughter, and Ka-
langi, his brother, shook hands, weep-
ing sadly, and welcomed us back, as-
suring us that we had nothing to fear.
Amidst many sobs and wailings, Litsi
told us that they all dreaded he would
never return, and explained to this
effect:
“ We knew that he was dying, but
we durst not tell you. When you
agreed to let him go, he went round
and took farewell of all his friends, and
told them he was going to sleep at last
on Aneityum, and that at the Great
Day he would rise to meet Jesus with
the glorious company of the Aniet-
yumese Christians. He urged us all to
obey you and be true to Jesus. Truly,
Missi, we will remember my dear-
father’s parting word, and follow in his
steps and help you in the work of the
Lord ! ”
The other Chief, Naswai, now ac-
companied us to the Mission House,
and all the people followed, wailing
loudly for Namakei. On the following
Sabbath, I told the story of his con-
version, life for Jesus, and death on
Aneityum ; and God overruled this
event, contrary to our fears, for greatly
increasing the interest of many in the
Church and in the claims of Jesus upon
themselves.
Naswai was younger and more in-
telligent than Namakei, and in every-
thing except in translating the Scrip-
tures he was much more of a fellow-
helper in the work of the Lord. For
many years it was Naswai’s special
delight to carry my pulpit Bible from
the Mission House to the Church every
Sabbath morning, and to see that
everything was in perfect order before
the Service began. He was also the
1 33
Pen-Portraits of Aniwans


Teacher in his own village School, as
well as an elder in the Church. His
addresses were wonderfully happy in
graphic illustrations, and his prayers
were fervent and uplifting. Yet his
people were the worst to manage on
all the island, and the very last to em-
brace the Gospel.
He died when we were in the Colonies
on furlough in 1875 ; and his wife
Katua very shortly pre-deceased him.
His last counsels to his people made a
great impression on them. They told
us how he pleaded with them to love
and serve the Lord Jesus, and how he
assured them with his dying breath
that he had been a “ new creature ”
since he gave his heart to Christ, and
that he was perfectly happy in going
to be with his Saviour.
The two Chiefs of next importance
on Aniwa were Nerwa and Ruwawa.
Nerwa was a keen debater; all his
thoughts ran in the channels of logic.
When I could speak a little of their
language, I visited and preached at his
village ; but the moment he dis-
covered that the teaching about Je-
hovah was opposed to their Heathen
customs, he sternly forbade us. One
day, during my address, he blossomed
out into a full-fledged and pronounced
Agnostic (with as much reason at his
back as the European type !), and
angrily interrupted me :
“ It’s all lies you come here to teach
us, and you call it Worship! You say
your Jehovah God dwells in Heaven.
Who ever went up there to hear Him
or see Him ? You talk of Jehpvah as
if you had visited His Heaven. Why,
you cannot climb even to the top of
one of our cocoa-nut trees, though we
can and that with ease ! In going up
to the roof of your own Mission House,
you require the help of a ladder to
carry you. And even if you could
make your ladder higher than our
highest cocoa-nut tree, on what would
you lean its top? And when you get to
its top, you can only climb down the
other side and end where you began!
The thing is impossible. You never saw
that God; you never heard Him speak ;
don’t come here with any of your white
lies, or I’ll send my spear through you.”
He drove us from his village,
furiously threatened murder, if
ever dared to return. But very she
thereafter the Lord sent us a 1
orphan girl from Nerwa’s village,
was very clever, and could soon 1
read and write, and told over all
we taught her. Her visits home
at least amongst the villagers w
her home had been, her changed
pearance and her childish talk,
duced a very deep interest in us an
our work.
An orphan boy next was sent f
that village to be kept and traine<
the Mission House, and he too 1
back his little stories of how kind
good to him were Missi the man
Missi the woman. By this f
Chief and people alike were takir
lively interest in all that was tr;
piring. One day the Chief’s wif<
quiet and gentle woman, came to
Worship and said, “ Nerwa’s oj
sition dies fast. The story of
Orphans did it ! He has allowed
to attend the Church, and to get
Christian’s book.”
We gave her a book and a bi
clothing. She went home and
everything. Woman after woman
lowed her from that same village,
some of the men began to accomp
them. The only thing in which t
showed a real interest was the chile
singing the little hymns which I
translated into their own Ann
tongue, and which my wife had tan
them to sing very sweetly and joyfn
Nerwa at last got so interested thai
came himself, and sat within ears]
and drank in the joyful sound. I
short time he drew so near that
could hear our preaching, and t
began openly and regularly to att
the Church. Llis keen reason
faculty was constantly at work. 3
weighed and compared everything
heard, and soon out-distanced ne£
all of them in his grasp of the id
of the Gospel. He put on clothi
joined our School, and professed h
self a follower of the Lord Jesus,
eagerly set himself, with all his pov
to bring in a neighbouring Chief i
his people, and constituted himseli
134
John G. Paton, d.d.


;e an energetic and very pronounced
per to the Missionary,
ifter years of happy and useful
vice, the time came for Nerwa to
He was then so greatly beloved
it most of the inhabitants visited
1 during his long illness. He read
it of the Gospels in his own Aniwan,
1 prayed with and for every visitor.
sang beautifully, and scarcely
>wed any one to leave his bedside
hout having a verse of one or other
fis favourite hymns, “Happy Land,”
1 “ Nearer, my God, to Thee.”
Dn my last visit to Nerwa, his
sngth had gone very low, but he
:w me near his face, and whispered,
lissi, my Missi, I am glad to see you.
u see that group of young men ?
ey came to sympathize with me ;
t they have never once spoken the
ne of Jesus, though they have
>ken about everything else ! They
ild not have weakened me so, if they
i spoken about Jesus ! Read me
! story of Jesus ; pray for me to
ius. No ! stop, let us call them, and
me speak with them before I go.”
[ called them all around him, and he
ained his dying strength, and said,
Liter I am gone, let there be no
1 talk, no Heathen ways. Sing Je-
rah’s songs, and pray to Jesus, and
ry me as a Christian. Take good
•e of my Missi, and help him all you
1. lam dying happy and going to
with Jesus, and it was Missi that
>wed me this way. And who among
lx will take my place in the village
1001 and in the Church ? Who
Longst you all will stand up for
ms ? ”
Many were shedding tears, but there
,s no reply ; after which the dying
ief proceeded, “ Now let my last
irk on Earth be this —We will read
chapter of the Book, verse about,
d then I will pray for you all, and
2 Missi will pray for me, and God will
me go while the song is still sound-
l in my heart ! ”
At the close of this most touching
ercise, we gathered the Christians
10 were near by close around, and
rg very softly in Aniwan, “ There is
Happy Land.” As they sang, the
old man grasped my hand, and tried
hard to speak, but in vain. His head
fell to one side—the silver cord was
loosed, and the golden bowl was
broken.”
Soon after his burial, the best and
ablest man in the village, the husband
now of the orphan girl already referred
to, came and offered himself to take
the Chief’s place as Teacher in the
village School ; and in that post he
was ably assisted by his wife, our
“ little maid,” the first who carried
the news of the Gospel life to her tribe,
and inclined their ears to listen to the
message of Jesus.
His great friend, Ruwawa the Chief,
had waited by Nerwa like a brother till
within a few days of the latter’s death,
when he also was smitten down ap-
parently by the same disease. He was
thought to be dying, and he resigned
himself calmly into the hands of Christ.
One Sabbath afternoon, sorely dis-
tressed for lack of air, he instructed his
people to carry him from the village to
a rising ground on one of his planta-
tions. It was fallow ; the fresh air
would reach him ; and all his friends
could sit around him. They extem-
porized a rest —two posts stuck into
the ground, slanting, sticks tied across
them, then dried banana leaves spread
on these and also as a cushion on the
ground —and there sat Ruwawa, lean-
ing back and breathing heavily. After
the Church Services, I visited him, and
found half the people of that side of
the Island sitting round him, in silence,
in the open air. Ruwawa beckoned
me, and I sat down before him
Though suffering sorely, his eye and
face had the look of ecstasy.
“ Missi,” he said, “ I could not
breathe in my village ; so I got them
to carry me here, where there is room
for all. They are silent and they weep,
because they think lam dying. If it
were God’s will, I would like to live
and to help you in His work. lam in
the hands of our dear Lord. If He
takes me, it is good ; if He spares me,
it is good ! Pray, and tell our Saviour
all about it.”
I explained to the people, that we
would tell our Heavenly Father how
135
Pen-Portraits of Anlwans


anxious we all were to see Ruwawa
given back to us strong and well to
work for Jesus, and then leave all to
His wise and holy disposal. I prayed,
and the place became a very Bochim.
When I left him, Ruwawa exclaimed,
“ Farewell, Missi ; if I go first, I will
welcome you to Glory ; if I am spared,
I will work with you for Jesus ; so all
is well ! ”
One of the young Christians fol-
lowed me and said, “ Missi, our hearts
are very sore ! If Ruwawa dies, we
have no Chief to take his place in the
Church, and it will be a heavy blow
against Jehovah’s Worship on Aniwa.”
I answered, “ Let us each tell our
God and Father all that we feel and
all that we fear ; and leave Ruwawa
and our work in His holy hands.”
We did so, with earnest and unceas-
ing cry. And when all hope had died
out of every heart, the Lord began to
answer us ; the disease began to relax
its hold, and the beloved Chief was
restored to health. As soon as he was
able, though still needing help, he
found his way back to the Church,
and we all offered special thanksgiving
to God.
In 1888, when I visited the Islands,
Ruwawa was still devoting himself
heart and soul to the work of the Lord
on Aniwa.
I am now reminded of the story of
Waiwai, both because it was interest-
ing for his own personality, and also
as illustrating our difficulties about
the delicate question of many wives.
He was a man of great wisdom, and
had in his early days displayed un-
wonted energy. His assistance in
finding exact and idiomatic equiva-
lents for me, while translating the
Scriptures, was of the highest value.
He had been once at the head of a
numerous people, but was now literally
a Chief without a tribe. His son and
heir was smitten down with sunstroke,
while helping us to get the coral lime-
stone, and shortly thereafter died.
His only daughter was married to a
young Chief. And at last, of all his
seven wives only two remained alive.
He became a regular attender at
Church, and when our first Communi-
cants’ Class was formed, Waiwai £
his two wives were enrolled. At Cc
munion time, he was dreadfully dis
pointed when informed that he co
neither be baptized nor admitted to
Lord’s Table till he had given upon*
his wives, as God allowed no Christ
to have more than one wife at a tii
They were advised to attend regulai
and learn more and more of Ch
tianity, till God opened up their v
in regard to this matter; that
might be done from conscience, urn
a sense of duty to Christ, and if at
possible by peaceable and mut
agreement.
Waiwai professed to be willing, I
found it terribly hard to give up eitl
of his wives. They had houses :
apart from each other, for they qu;
relied badly, as is usual in such cas
But both were excellent workers, be
were very attentive to the wants
Waiwai, and he managed to keep
affectionate terms with both. Af
all the other men on the island hr
under the influence of Christian!
given up all their wives save oi
Waiwai began to feel rather asham
of being the conspicuous exceptu
or thought it prudent to pretend to
ashamed ; and so he publicly scold
them both, ordering one or other to
and leave him, that he might be enabl
to join the Church and be a Christi
like the rest. But I learned private
that he did not wish either to go, a
that he would shoot the one tl
dared to leave him. I remonstrat
with him on his hypocrisy, warni
him that God knew his heart. At k
he said, that since neither of the
would depact, he would leave the
both and go to Tanna for a ye;
ordering one or other of them to g
married during his absence. He c
go, but on his return found both s
awaiting him at their respecti
stations. He pretended to scold the
very vigorously in public; but 1
duplicity was too open, and I aga
very solemnly rebuked him for dout
dealing, showing him that not ev
men were deceived by him, much le
the all-seeing God. He frankly a
mitted his hypocrisy. He loved botl
136
John G. Paton, d.d.


did not want to part with either ;
i both were excellent workers !
in process of time the younger of
1 two women bore him a beautiful
Dy boy, about which he was im-
nsely uplifted ; and a short while
sreafter the elder woman died. At
: grave the inveterate talking
tinct of these Islanders asserted
gif, and Waiwai made a speech to
; assembled people in the following
ain: “O ye people of Aniwa, I
,s not willing to give up either of my
ves for Jesus ; but God has taken
e from me and laid her there in the
ive ; and now I am called to be
ptized, and to follow Jesus.”
The two now regularly attended
urch, and learned diligently at the
mmunicants’ Class. Both seemed
be very sincere, and Waiwai par-
ularly showed a very gentle Christian
irit, and seemed to brood much upon
e loss of family and people and tribe
at had befallen him. His had been
feed a crushing discipline, and it was
t yet complete. For, shortly before
.mmunion at which they were to be
geived into fellowship, his remaining
fe became suddenly ill and died also.
; her grave the old man wept very
tterly, and made another speech,
it this time in tones of more intense
ality than before, as if the iron had
tered his very soul:
“ Listen, all ye men of Aniwa, and
ke warning by Waiwai. I am now
d, and ready to drop into the grave
one. My wives kept me back from
;sus, but now they are all taken, and
am left without one to care for me
this little child. I tried to deceive
le Missi, but I could not deceive God.
/hen I was left with only one wife,
said that I would now be baptized
id live as a Christian. But God has
iken her also. I pretended to serve
le Lord, when I was only serving and
teasing myself. God has now broken
iy heart all to pieces. I must learn
3 longer to please myself, but to
lease my Lord. Oh, take warning
y me, all ye men of Aniwa ! Lies
innot cheat the Great Jehovah God.
Poor broken-hearted Waiwai had
>rrow upon sorrow to the full. We
had agreed to baptize him and admit
him to the Lord’s Table. But a terri-
ble form of cramp, sometimes met with
on the Islands, overtook him, shrink-
ing up both his legs, and curving his
feet up behind him. He suffered great
agony, and could neither walk nor sit
without pain. In spite of all efforts
to relieve him, this condition became
chronic ; and he died at last from
the effects thereof during our absence
on furlough.
Readers may perhaps think that
this case of the two wives and our
treatment of it was too hard upon
Waiwai; and those will be the most
ready to condemn us, who have never
been on the spot, and who cannot see
all the facts as they lie under the eyes
of the Missionary. How could we
ever have led Natives to see the differ-
ence betwixt admitting a man to the
Church who had two wives, and not
permitting a member of the Church to
take two wives after his admission ?
Their moral sense is blunted enough,
without our knocking their heads
against a conundrum in ethics ! In
our Church membership we have to
draw the line as sharply as God’s law
will allow betwixt what is Heathen
and what is Christian, instead of
minimizing the difference.
Again, we found that the Heathen
practices were apparently more destruc-
tive to women than to men ; so that
in one Island, with a total population
of three hundred and fifty, I found
that there were twelve adult men over
and above the number of women. As
a rule, for every man that has two or
more wives, the same number of men
have no wives and can get none ; and
polygamy is therefore the prolific
cause of hatreds and murders innu-
merable.
Besides all this, to look at things in
a purely practical light, as the so-called
“ practical men ” are our scornful
censors in these affairs, it is really no
hardship for one woman, or any number
of women, to be given up when the
man becomes a Christian and elects
to have one wife only ; for every one
so discarded is at once eagerly con-
tended for by the men who had no hope
137
Pen-Portraits of Aniwans


of ever being married, and her chances
Of comfort and happiness are infinitely-
improved. We had one Chief who
gave up eleven wives on his being
baptized. They were without a single
exception happily settled in other
homes. And he became an earnest
and devoted Christian.
The old Chief’s only brother was
called Kalangi. Twice in Heathen
days he tried to shoot me. On the
second occasion, he heard me rebuking
his daughter for letting a child destroy
a beautiful Island plant in front of
our house. He levelled his musket at
me, but his daughter, whom we were
training at the Mission House, ran in
front of me, and cried, “ O father,
don’t shoot Missi ! He loves me. He
gives us food and clothing. He teaches
us about Jehovah and Jesus ! ”
Then she pled with me to retire into
the house, saying, “ He will not shoot
you for fear of shooting me. I will
soothe him down. Leave him to me,
and flee for safety.”
Thus she probably saved my life.
Time after time he heard from this
little daughter all that we taught her,
and all she could remember of our
preaching. By-aud-bye he showed a
strong personal interest in the things
he heard about Jesus, and questioned
deeply, and learned diligently. When
he became a Christian, he constituted
himself, along with Nelwang, my body-
guard, and often marched near me, or
within safe distance of me, armed with
tomahawk and musket, when I jour-
neyed from village to village in the
pre-Christian days. Once, on ap-
proaching one of our most distant
villages, Kalangi sprang to my side,
and warned me of a man in the bush
watching an opportunity to shoot me.
I shouted to the fellow, “ What are
you going to shoot there ? This is
the Lord’s own Day ! ”
He answered, “ Only a bird.”
I replied, “ Never mind it to-day.
You can shoot it to-morrow. We are
going to your village. Come on be-
fore us, and show us the way ! ”
Seeing how I was protected, he
lowered his musket, and marched on
before us. Kalangi addressed the
people, after I had spoken and pray*
In course of time they became wa:
friends of the Worship ; and that v(
man and his wife, who once sought i
life, sat with me at the Lord’s Tal
on Aniwa. And the little girl, abc
referred to, is now the wife of one
the Elders there, and the mother
three Christian children, —both s
and her husband being devoted work
in the Church of God.
In one of my furloughs to Austra
I took the young Chief, Mungaw, wi
me, in the hope of interesting t
Sabbath Schools and Congregatio
by his eloquent addresses and nol
personality. The late Dr. Cameron,
Melbourne, having heard him,
translated by me, publicly declar
that Mungaw's appearance and spec
in his Church did more to show h
the grand results of the Gospel amonj
the Heathen, than all the Missiona
addresses he ever listened to or read
Our lodging was in St. Kilda. M
dear wife was suddenly seized with
dangerous illness on a visit to Taradal
and I was telegraphed for. Findir
that I must remain with her, I gc
Mungaw booked for Melbourne, o
the road for St. Kilda, in charge of
railway guard. Some white wretche;
in the guise of gentlemen, offered t
see him to the St. Kilda Statioi
assuring the guard that they wei
friends of mine, and interested in or
Mission. They took him, instead, t
some den of infamy in Melboumi
On refusing to drink with them, h
said, they threw him down on a sofi
and poured drink or drugs into hit
till he was nearly dead. Having take
all his money (he had only two or th're
pounds, made up of little presenf
from various friends), they thrust hir
out to the street, with only one penn
in his pocket.
On becoming conscious, he applies
to a policeman, who either did no
understand or would not interfere
Hearing an engine whistle, he follow©
the sound, and found his way t
Spencer Street Station, where he proi
fered his penny for a ticket, all in vair
At last a sailor took pity on him, go
him some food, and led him to th
John G. Patofl, D.D.


t. Kilda Station. There he stood
ir a whole day, offering his penny for
ticket by every train, only to meet
ith refusal after refusal, till he broke
own, and cried aloud in such English
5 desperation gave him :
"If me savvy road, me go. Me no
ivvy road, and stop here me die.
[y Missi Paton live at Kilda. Me
r ant go Kilda. Me no more money,
lad fellow took all ! Send me Kilda.”
Some gentle Samaritan gave him a
icket, and he reached our house at
t. Kilda at last. There for above
hree weeks the poor creature lay in a
ort of stupid doze. Food he could
carcely be induced to taste, and he
nly rose now and again for a drink of
rater. When my wife was able to be
emoved thither also, we found dear
hngaw dreadfully changed in appear-
ice and in conduct. Twice there-
.fter I took him with me on Mission
vork ; but, on medical advice, pre-
>arations were made for his immediate
eturn to the Islands. I entrusted
lim to the kind care of Captain Logan,
vho undertook to see him safely on
loard the Dayspring, then lying at
Auckland. Mungaw was delighted,
md we hoped everything from his
•eturn to his own land and people.
\fter some little trouble, he was landed
safely home on Aniwa. But his malady
ieveloped dangerous and violent symp-
;oms, characterized by long periods
}f quiet and sleep, and then sudden
paroxysms, in which he destroyed
property, burned houses, and was a
terror to all.
On our return he was greatly de-
ighted ; but he complained bitterly
hat the white men " had spoiled his
lead,” and that when it " burned hot ”
le did all these bad things, for which
le was extremely sorry. He deliber-
ately attempted my life, and most
smelly abused his dear and gentle wife ,
md then, when the frenzy was over,
le wept and lamented over it. Many
i time he marched round and round
)ur house with loaded musket and
spear and tomahawk, while we had to
seep doors and windows locked and
barricaded ■ then the paroxysm passed
?£f, and he slept, long and deep, like
a child. When he came to himself,
he wept and said, "The white men
spoiled my head ! I know not what
I do. My head burns hot, and lam
driven.”
One day, in the Church, he leapt up
during Worship with a loud yelling
war-cry, rushed off through the Imrai
to his own house, set fire to it, and
danced around till everything he pos-
sessed was burned to ashes. Nasi,
a bad Tannese Chief living on Aniwa,
had a quarrel with Mungaw about a
cask found at the shore, and threatened
to shoot him. Others encouraged him
to do so, as Mungaw was growing every
day more and more destructive and
violent. When any person became
outrageous or insane on Aniwa, as
they had neither asylum nor prison,
they first of all held him fast and dis-
charged a musket close to his ear;
and then, if the shock did not bring
him back to his senses, they tied him
up for two days or so ; and finally,
if that did not restore him, they shot
him dead. Thus the plan of Nasi
was favoured by their own customs.
One night, after Family Worship—for
amidst all his madness, when clear
moments came, he poured out his soul
in faith and love to the Lord—he said,
“ Litsi, I am melting! My head
bums. Let me go out and get cooled
in the open air.”
She warned him not to go, as she
heard voices whispering under the
verandah. He answered a little wildly,
" I am not afraid to die. Life is a
curse and burden. The white men
spoiled my head. If there is hope of
dying, let me go quickly and die ! ”
As he crossed the door, a ball crashed
through him, and he fell dead. We
got the mother and her children away
to the Mission House ; and next morn-
ing they buried the remains of poor
Mungaw under the floor of his own hut,
and enclosed the whole place with a
fence. It was a sorrowful close to so
noble a career. I shed many a tear
that I ever took him to Australia.
What will God have to say to those
white fiends who poisoned and mad-
dened poor dear Mungaw ?
After a while the good Queen Litsi
139
Pen-Portraits of Aniwans


was happily married again. She be-
came possessed with a great desire to
go as a Missionary to the people and
tribe of Nasi, the very man who had
murdered her husband. She used to
say, “ Is there no Missionary to go and
teach Nasi’s people ? I weep and
pray for them, that they too may
come to know and love Jesus.”
I answered, “ Litsi, if I had only
wept and prayed for you, but stayed
at home in Scotland, would that have
brought you to know and love Jesus
as you do ? ”
“ Certainly not,” she replied.
“ Now then,” I proceeded, “ would
it not please Jesus, and be a grand and
holy revenge, if you, the Christians of
Aniwa, could carry the Gospel to the
very people whose Chief murdered
Mungaw ? ”
The idea took possession of her soul.
She was never wearied talking and
praying over it. When at length a
Missionary was got for Nasi’s people,
Litsi and her new husband offered
themselves at the head of a band of
six or eight Aniwan Christians, and
were engaged there to open up the
way and assist as Teachers and Helpers
the Missionary and his wife. There
she and they have laboured ever since.
They are “ strong ” for the Worship.
Her son is being trained up by his
cousin, an Elder of the Church, to be
“ the good Chief of Aniwa ” ; so she
calls him in her prayers, as she cries
on God to bless and watch over him,
while she is serving the Lord in at
once serving the Mission family and
ministering to the Natives in that
foreign field.
Nasi, the Tanna-man, was a bad
and dangerous character, though some
readers may condone his putting an
end to Mungaw in the terrible circum-
stances of our case. During a great
illness that befell him, I ministered to
him regularly, but no kindness seemed
to move him. When about to leave
Aniwa, I went specially to visit him.
On parting I said, “Nasi, are you
happy ? Have you ever been happy ?
He answered gloomily, “No !
Never.”
I said, “Would you like this dear
little boy of yours to grow up like you
self, and lead the life you have lived ?
“No,” he replied warmly, “I ce
tainly would not.”
“Then,” I continued, “you mu:
become a Christian, and give up a
your Heathen conduct, or he will ju:
grow up to quarrel and fight an
murder as you have done ; and,
Nasi, he will curse you through a
Eternity for leading him to such a li:
and to such a doom ! ”
He was very much impressed, bu
made no response. After we had sailed
a band of our young Native Christian:
held a consultation over the case o
Nasi. They said, “We know th
burden and terror that Nasi has beej
to our dear Missi. We know that hi
has murdered several persons with hi
own hands, and has taken part in th
murder of others. Let us unite ii
daily prayer that the Lord would opei
his heart and change his conduct, anc
teach him to love and follow what i
good, and let us set ourselves to wii
Nasi for Christ, just as Missi tried t<
win us.”
So they began to show him everj
possible kindness, and one after anothe]
helped him in his daily tasks, embrac-
ing every opportunity of pleading witf
him to yield to Jesus and take the nev
path of life. At first he repelled him
and sullenly held aloof. But theii
prayers never ceased, and their patient
affections continued to grow. At last,
after long waiting, Nasi broke down,
and cried to one of the Teachers, “ I
can oppose your Jesus no longer. If
He can make you treat me like that,
I yield myself to Him and to you.
I want Him to change me too. I want
a heart like that of Jesus.”
He rubbed off the ugly thickly-
daubed paint from his face ; he cut
off his long heathen hair ; he went to
the sea and bathed, washing himself
clean ; and then he came to the
Christians and dressed himself in a
shirt and a kilt. The next step was to
get a book, —his was the translation
of the Gospel according to St. John,
He eagerly listened to every one that
would read bits of it aloud to him,
and his soul seemed to drink in the
140
John G. Paton, d.d.


w ideas at every pore. He attended
e Church and the School most regu-
rly, and could in a very short time
ad the Gospel for himself. The
ders of the Church took special pains
instructing him, and after due prepa-
tion he was admitted to the Lord’s
able—my brother Missionary from
anna baptizing and receiving him.
nagine my joy on learning all this
garding one who had sullenly re-
sted my appeals for many years,
ad how my soul praised the Lord
ho is “ Mighty to save ” !
On my recent visit to Aniwa, in
586, God’s almighty compassion was
irther revealed to me, when I found
lat Nasi the murderer was now a
;ripturc Reader , and able to comment
1 a wonderful and interesting manner
1 what he read to the people. When
arrived on a visit to the Island, after
ly last tour in Great Britain in the
iterests of our Mission, all the inhabi-
ints of Aniwa seemed to be assembled
t the boat-landing to welcome me, ex-
;pt Nasi. He was away fishing at a
istance, and had been sent for, but
ad not yet arrived. On the way to
le Mission House, he came rushing to
icet me. He grasped my hand, and
issed it, and burst into tears. I said,
Nasi, do I now at last meet you as
Christian ? ”
He warmly answered, “Yes, Missi ;
now worship and serve the only Lord
nd Saviour Jesus Christ. Bless God,
am a Christian at last ! ”
My first Sabbath on Aniwa, aftei
he late tour in Great Britain and the
Colonies, gave me a blessed surprise.
Before daybreak I lay awake thinking
if all my experiences on that Island,
ind wondering whether the Church
lad fallen off in my four years’ absence,
vhen suddenly the voice of song broke
m my ears ! It was scarcely full
lawn, yet I jumped up and called to
1 man that was passing, “ Have I
ilept in ? Is it already Church-time ?
Dr why are the people met so early ? ’’
He was one of their leaders, and
jravely replied, “ Missi, since you left,
Ire have found it very hard to live near
ro God ! So the Chief and the Teachers
?,nd a few others meet when daylight
comes on every Sabbath morning, and
spend the first hour of every Lord’s
Day in prayer and praise. They are
met to pray for you now, that God may
help you in your preaching, and that
all hearts may bear fruit to the Glory
of Jesus this day.”
I returned to my room, and felt
wonderfully “ prepared ” myself. It
would be an easy and a blessed thing
to lead such a Congregation into the
presence of the Lord ! They were
there already.
On that day every person ®n Aniwa
seemed to be at Church, except the
bedridden and the sick. At the close
of the Services, the Elders informed
me that they had kept up all the
Meetings during my absence, and had
also conducted the Communicants’
Class, and they presented to me a
considerable number of Candidates
for membership. After careful ex-
amination, I set apart nine boys and
girls, about twelve or thirteen years of
age, and advised them to wait for at
least another year or so, that their
knowledge and habits might be ma-
tured. They had answered every
question, indeed, and were eager to be
baptized and admitted ; but I feared
for their youth, lest they should fall
away and bring disgrace on the
Church. One of them, with very
earnest eyes, looked at me and said,
“We have been taught that who-
soever believeth is to be baptized.
We do most heartily believe in Jesus,
and try to please Jesus.”
I answered, “ Hold on for another
year, and then our way will be clear.”
But he persisted, “ Some of us may
not be living then ; and you may not
be here. We long to be baptized by
you, our own Missi, and to take our
place among the servants of Jesus.”
After much conversation I agreed
to baptize them, and they agreed to
refrain from going to the Lord’s 1 able
for a year ; that all the Church might
by that time have knowledge and
proof of their consistent Christian life,
though so young in years. This disci-
pline, I thought, would be good for
them ; and the Lord might use it as a
precedent for guidance in future days.
141
Pen-Portraits of Aniwans


Of other ten adults at this time ad-
mitted, one was specially noteworthy.
She was about twenty-five, and the
Elders objected because her marriage
had not been according to the Christian
usage on Aniwa. She left us weeping
deeply. I was writing late at night
in the cool evening air, as was my wont
in that oppressive tropical climate,
and a knock was heard at my door.
I called out, “ Akai era?” ( = Who is
there ?)
A voice softly answered, “ Missi, it
is Lamu. Oh, do speak with me ! ”
This was the rejected candidate,
and I at once opened the door.
“ Oh, Missi,” she began, “ I cannot
sleep, I cannot eat; my soul is in pain.
Am I to be shut out from Jesus ?
Some of those at the Lord's Table
committed murder. They repented,
and have been saved. My heart is
very bad ; yet I never did any of those
crimes of Heathenism ; and I know
that it is my joy to try and please my
Saviour Jesus. How is it that I only
am to be shut out from Jesus ? ”
I tried all I could to guide and con-
sole her, and she listened to all very
eagerly. Then she looked up at me
and said, “ Missi, you and the Elders
may think it right to keep me back
from showing my love to Jesus at the
Lord’s Table ; but I know here in my
heart that Jesus has received me ; and
if I were dying now, I know that
Jesus would take me to Glory and
present me to the Father.”
Her look and manner thrilled me.
I promised to see the Elders and sub-
mit her appeal. But Lamu appeared
and pled her own cause before them
with convincing effect. She was bap-
tized and admitted along with other
nine. And that Communion Day will
be long remembered by many souls on
Aniwa.
CHAPTER XIX
SECOND VISIT TO BRITAIN
a.d. 1884-1885. .ST. 60-6 i.
In December 1883 I brought a pressing
and vital matter before the General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria. It pertained to the New
Hebrides Mission, to the vastly i:
creased requirements of the Missio:
aries and their families there, and '
the fact that the Dayspring was 1
longer capable of meeting the nece
sities of the case,—thereby incurrii
loss of time, loss of property, and rii
and even loss of precious lives. T]
Missionaries on the spot had long fe
this, and had loudly and earnestly pl(
for a new and larger Vessel, or a Vess
with Steam Auxiliary power,-or some a
rangement whereby the work of G<
on these Islands might be overtake
without unnecessary exposure of lii
and without the dreaded perils th
accrue to a small sailing Vessel such ;
the Dayspring, alike from deadly calr
and from treacherous gales.
The Victorian General Assembl
heartily at one with the Missionarie
commissioned me to go home to Brita
in 1884, making me at thg same tin
their Missionary delegate to the Pa
Presbyterian Council at Belfast, at
also their representative to the Gener
Assemblies of the several Presbyteri;
Churches in Great Britain and Irelan
And they empowered and authorized n
to lay our proposals about a new Stea
Auxiliary Mission Ship before all the
Churches, and to ask and receive fro
God’s people whatever contributio;
they felt disposed to give towards tl
sum of £ 6OOO, without which tl
great undertaking could not be facec
At Suez, I forwarded a copy of n
commissions from Victoria, from Sou'
Australia, and from the Islands’ Syno
to the Clerks of the various Chur«
Courts, accompanied by a note spe<
fying my home-address, and express!]
the hope that an opportunity would 1
given me of pleading this special cau
on behalf of our New Hebrides Missio
On reaching my brother’s residen
in Glasgow, I found to my deep amaz
ment that replies awaited me fom £
the Churches, except our own, — i.t
the then Free Church, which I call 01
own, as having taken over our Soul
Seas Mission when it entered in-
Union with the Reformed Presbyteria
Church, to which I originally belonge
though now I wais supported by tl
Church of Victoria. This fact paine
142
John G. Paton, d.d.


ie. It is noted here. An explana-
ion will come in due course.
A few days after my arrival, I was
ailed upon to appear before the Su-
ireme Court of the English Presby-
erian Church, then assembled at
iverpool. While a hymn was being
ung, I took my seat in the pulpit under
reat depression. But light broke
.round, when my dear friend and
ellow-student, Dr. Oswald Dykes,
ame up from the body of the Church,
hook me warmly by the hand, whis-
bered a few encouraging words in my
;ar, and returned to his seat. God
lelped me to tell my story, and the
tudience were manifestly interested.
\.gain, however, another indication of
1 rift somewhere, unknown to me, was
consciously or otherwise given, when
30th the Moderator and Professor
Traham, in addressing the Deputies
md referring to their Churches and
speeches individually, conspicuously
emitted all reference to the New Heb-
rides and the special proposal which
[ had brought before them. Again, I
made a note, and my wonder deepened.
Next, by kind invitation, I visited
and addressed the United Presbyterian
Synod of Scotland, assembled in Edin-
burgh. My reception there was not
only cordial, —it was enthusiastic.
Though as a Church they had no de-
nominational interest in our Mission,
le Moderator, amidst the cheers of
.1 the Ministers and Elders, recom-
icnded that I should have free access
to every congregation and Sabbath
School which I found it possible to
visit, and hoped that their generous-
hearted people would contribute freely
to so needful and noble a cause. My
soul rose in praise ; and I may here
say, in passing, that every Minister
of that Church whom I wrote to or
visited treated me in the same spirit
throughout all my tour.
Having been invited by Mr. Dickson,
an Elder of the Free Church, to address
a midday meeting of children in the
Free Assembly Hall, —and the Satur-
day before the Meeting of Assembly
having now arrived without bringing
any reply to my note to be received and
beard, —I determined to call at the
Free Church Offices, and make in-
quiries at least. They treated me with
all possible kindness and sympathy,
but explained to me the strange per-
plexity that had been introduced into
my case. A letter had been forwarded
to them from the Dayspring Board at
Sydney, intimating that the Victorian
Church had no right to commission me
to raise a new Steam-Auxiliary Ship
without consulting them, and that
they placed their direct veto upon the
Free Church authorities in any way
sanctioning that proposal or authoriz-
ing me to raise the money. Here,
then, was the rift; and many things
that had recently perplexed me were
explained thereby.
My Commission was publicly in-
timated. Communication had also
been made to the Church of New South
Wales as to appointing me their second
representative to the Pan-Presbyterian
Council, in connection with my mission
to Britain, but they replied that one
would serve their purpose. And South
Australia and Tasmania were both
written to regarding the object of my
visit to the home countries. But no
note of dissent, no hint of disapproval
from any quarter, was intimated to the
Victorian Church, or in any sense,
directly or indirectly, reached me till
I heard of that so-called veto in the
Free Church Offices at Edinburgh.
This intimation, just as I was enter-
ing the Assembly Hall to address a
great congregation of children and
their friends, staggered me beyond all
description. The Free Church alone,
in Scotland, now supported our new
Hebrides Mission. From it I ex-
pected the principal contributions for
the sorely-needed new Mission Ship.
And now, by the action of the Day-
spring Board at Sydney, the Free
Church was debarred from acknow-
ledging my threefold Commission or
in any direct way sanctioning my ap-
peals. No sorer wound had ever been
inflicted on me ; and when I sat down
on the platform beside Mr. Dickson, my
head swam for several minutes, and
faintishness almost overpowered me.
But, by the time my name was called,
the Lord my Helper enabled me to pull
143
Second Visit to Britain


myself together ; I committed this
cause also with unfailing assurance to
Him ; and by all appearances I was
able greatly to interest and impress
the children. At the close, my dear
and noble friend, Professor Cairns,
warmly welcomed and cheered me,
and that counted for much amid the
depressions of the day.
But when all were gone and we two
were left, Mr. Dickson under deep
emotion said, “ Mr. Paton, that veto
has spoiled your mission home. The
Free Church cannot take you by the
hand in face of the veto from Sydney.”
Having letters from Andrew Scott,
Esquire, Carrugal, my very dear friend
and helper in Australia, to Dr. J.
Hood Wilson, Barclay Free Church,
Edinburgh, I resolved to deliver them
that evening ; and I prayed the I.ord
to open up all my path, as I was thrown
solely on Him for guidance and bereft
of the aid of man. Dr. Wilson and his
lady, neither of whom I had ever seen
before, received me as kindly as if I
had been an old friend. He read my
letters of introduction, conversed with
me as to plans and wishes (chiefly
through Mrs. Wilson, for he was suffer-
ing from sore throat), and then he said
with great warmth and kindliness :
“ God has surely sent you here to-
night ! I feel myself unable to preach
to-morrow. Occupy my pulpit in the
forenoon and address my Sabbath
School, and you shall have a collection
for your Ship.”
Thereafter, I was with equal kind-
ness received by Mr. Balfour, having
a letter of introduction from his brother,
and he offered me his pulpit for the
evening of the day. I lay down bless-
ing and praising Him, the Angel of
whose Presence was thus going before
me and opening up my way. That
Lord’s Day I had great blessing and
joy ; there was an extraordinary re-
sponse financially to my appeals ; and
my proposal was thus fairly launched
in the Metropolis of our Scottish
Church life. I remembered an old
saying, Difficulties are made only to be
vanquished. And I thought in my
deeper soul, —Thus our God throws us
back upon Himself; and if these
£6OOO ever come to me, to the I.ord Got
alone, and not to man, shall be all th<
glory !
On the Monday following, after £
long conversation and every possible
explanation, Colonel Young, of the
Free Church Foreign Missions Com
mittee, said, “ We must have you t(
address the Assembly on the evening
devoted to Missions.”
But the rest insisted that, to keep
straight with the Board at Sydney, no
formal approval should be given of my
proposals. This I agreed to, on con-
dition that the Committee did not
publish the Sydney veto, but allowed
it simply to lie on their table or in
their minutes. Thus I had the pleasure
and honour of addressing that great
Assembly ; and though nb notice was
taken of my proposals in any “ finding ”
of the Court, yet many were thereby
interested deeply in our work, and re-
quests now poured in upon me from
every quarter to occupy pulpits and
receive collections for the new Ship.
Still I had occasional trouble and
misunderstanding through that veto
through all my tour in Britain and
Ireland. It prevented me particularly
from getting access to the Free Church
Foreign Missions Committee, or ad-
dressing them on one single occasion,
though I pled hard to be allowed to do
so and to explain my position. This
I felt all the more keenly, as I laboured
freely and for weeks, along with their
noble Missionaries then at home on
furlough, in addressing meetings in
Glasgow, Aberdeen, Greenock, etc.,
chiefly for Sabbath Scholars, but from
which I received no help directly in
the matter of the Mission Ship. Doubt-
less they were trying to do their duty,
and refusing to take either side ; and
that they thought they had succeeded
appears from the following fact.
When rumour reached Australia that
my mission home had been under God
a great success, a letter came to them
from their Committee’s agent in
Sydney as to the “ application ” of
the sum that had been raised by me,
to which they replied :
“ The Foreign Missions Committee
of the Free Church of Scotland, in
144
John G. Paton, D.D.


;cordance with the action of the
ayspring Committee at Sydney, have
om the first abstained from assisting
r. Paton in this movement, believing
lat the question is one entirely for the
ustralian Churches.”
At the meeting in the Assembly Hall
E the Church of Scotland, which, along
ith others, I was cordially invited to
ddress, the good and noble Lord
olwarth occupied the chair. That
as the beginning of a friendship in
hrist which will last and deepen as
mg as we live. From that night he
30k the warmest personal interest, not
nly by generously contributing to my
ind, but by organizing meetings at
is own Mansion House, and intro-
ucing me to a wide circle of influential
riends. Every member of his family
00k “ shares ” in the new Steam-
.uxiliary Mission Ship, and by collect-
ig Cards and otherwise most liberally
ided me ; and that not at the start
inly, but to the day of my departure —
me of the last things put into my hand
m leaving Britain being a most hand-
ome donation from Lord and Lady
Aflwarth to our Mission Fund —“ a
hank-offering to the Lord Jesus for
precious health restored in answer to
;he prayer of faith.”
Her Majesty’s Commissioner to the
General Assembly for the year was
:hat distinguished Christian as well as
lobleman, the Earl of Aberdeen. He
graciously invited me to meet the
Countess and himself at ancient Holy-
rood. After dinner he withdrew him-
self for a lengthened time from the
general company, and entered into a
close and interested conversation about
our Mission, and especially about the
threatened annexation of the New
lebrides by the French.
There also I had the memorable
ileasure of meeting, and for a long
vhile conversing with, that truly noble
.nd large-hearted lady, his mother,
he much-beloved Dowager-Countess,
veil known for her life-long devotion to
o many schemes of Christian philan-
hropy. At her own home, Alva
douse, she afterwards arranged meet-
ngs for me, as well as in Halls and
Churches in the immediately surround-
ing district ; and not only contributed
most generously of her own means, but
interested many besides and incited
them to vie with each other in helping
on our cause. I was her guest during
those days, and never either in high
or in humble station felt the ties of
true fellowship in Christ more closely
drawn. Despite frost and snow, she
accompanied me to almost every meet-
ing ; and her letters of interest in the
work, of sympathy, and of helpfulness,
from time to time received, were
amongst the sustaining forces of my
spiritual life.
My steps were next directed to-
wards Ireland, immediately after the
Church Meetings at Edinburgh ; first
to 'Derry, where the Presbyterian
Assembly was met in annual conclave,
and thereafter to Belfast, where the
Pan-Presbyterian Council was shortly
to sit. The eloquent fervour of the
Brethren at 'Derry was like a refreshing
breeze to my spirit; I never met
Ministers anywhere, in all my travels,
who seemed more whole-hearted in
their devotion to the work which the
Lord had given them to do.
I addressed the Assembly at 'Derry
and also the Council at Belfast. The
memory of seeing all those great and
learned and famous men —for many of
the leaders were eminently such —so
deeply interested in the work of God,
and particularly in the Evangelizing of
the Heathen World and bringing there-
to the knowledge of Jesus, was to me,
so long exiled from all such influences,
one of the great inspirations of my fife.
I listened with humble thankfulness,
and blessed the Lord who had brought
me to sit at their feet.
On the rising of the Council, I entered,
upon a tour of six weeks among the
Presbyterian Congregations and Sab-
bath Schools of Ireland. It had often
been said to me, after my addresses in
the Assemblies and elsewhere, “ How
do you ever expect to raise £6OOO ?
It can never be accomplished, unless
you call upon the rich individually,
and get their larger subscriptions.
Our ordinary Church people have more
than enough to do with themselves.
Trade is dull,” etc.
Second Visit to Britain


I explained to them, and also an-
nounced publicly, that in all similar
efforts I had never called on or solicited
any one privately, and that I would not
do so now. I would make my appeal,
but leave everything else to be settled
betwixt the individual conscience and
the Saviour—l gladly receiving what-
soever was given or sent, acknow-
ledging it by letter, and duly forward-
ing it to my own Church in Victoria.
Again and again did generous souls
offer to go with me, introduce me, and
give me opportunity of soliciting sub-
scriptions ; but I steadily refused —
going, indeed, wherever an occasion
was afforded me of telling my story
and setting forth the claims of the
Mission, but asking no one personally
for anything, having fixed my soul in
the conviction that one part of the
work was laid upon me, but that the
other lay betwixt the Master and His
servants exclusively.
“ On what then do you really rely,
looking at it from a business point of
view ? ” they would somewhat ap-
pealingly ask me.
I answered, “ I will tell my story ;
I will set forth the claims of the Lord
Jesus on the people ; I will expect the
surplus collection, or a retiring collec-
tion, on Sabbaths ; I will ask the whole
collection, less expenses, at week-night
meetings; I will issue Collecting
Cards for Sabbath Scholars ; I will
make known my Home Address, to
which everything may be forwarded,
either from Congregations or from
private donors; and I will go on, to my
utmost strength, in the faith that the
Lord will send me the £6OOO required.
If He does not so send it, then I shall
expect He will send me grace to be
reconciled to the disappointment, and
I shall go back to my work without the
Ship.”
This, in substance, I had to repeat
hundreds of times ; and as often had
I to witness the half-pitying or in-
credulous smile with which it was re-
ceived, or to hear the blunt and em-
phatic retort, ‘‘You’ll never succeed !
Money cannot begot in that unbusiness-
like way.”
I generally added nothing further to
such conversations ; but a Voice, dec
sweet, and clear, kept sounding throu
my soul —“ The silver and the gold a
Mine.”
During the year 1884, as is we.
known, Ireland was the scene of man;
commotions and of great distress
Yet at the end of my little tom
amongst the Presbyterian people c
the North principally, though not ex
clusively, a sum of more than £6OO hai
been contributed to our Mission Fund
And there was not, so far as my know
ledge went, one single large subscrip
tion ; there were, of course, many bit
of gold from those well-to-do, but th
ordinary collection was made up of th
shillings and pence of the masses of th
people. Nor had I ever in all m;
travels a warmer response, nor eve
mingled with any ministers mor
earnestly devoted to their Congrega
tions or more generally and deserved!;
beloved. I
Returning to Scotland, I settled
down at my headquarters, the house
of my brother James in Glasgow ; and
thence began to open up the main line
of my operations, as the Lord day by
day guided me. Having the aid of no
Committee, I cast myself on Minister
after Minister and Church after Church,
calling here, writing there, and ar-
ranging for three meetings every
Sabbath, and one, if possible, every
week-day, and drawing-room meetings
wherever practicable in the afternoons.
My correspondence grew to oppressive
proportions, and kept me toiling at it
every spare moment from early morn
till bed-time. Indeed, I never could
have overtaken it, had not my
brother devoted many days and hours
of precious time, answering letters
regarding arrangements, issuing the
“ Share ” receipts for all moneys the
moment they arrived, managing all my
transactions through the bank, and
generally tackling and reducing the
heap of communications and pre-
venting me falling into hopeless arrears.
I printed, and circulated by post and
otherwise, ten thousand copies of a
booklet, “ Statement and Appeal,”—
containing, besides my Victorian Com-
mission and my Glasgow address, a.
146
John G. Paton, t).D.


condensed epitome of the results of
:he New Hebrides Mission and of the
reasons for asking a new Steam
Auxiliary Ship. To this chiefly is due
the fact, as well as to my refusing to
rail for subscriptions, that the far
greater portion of all the money came
to me by letter. On one day, though
ao doubt a little exceptional, as
many as seventy communications
reached me by post; and every one of
these contained something for our fund
—ranging from “ a few stamps ” and
“ the widow’s mite,” through every
variety of figure up to the wealthy
man’s fifty or hundred pounds. I was
particularly struck with the number of
times that I received £l, with such a
note as, “From a servant-girl that loves
the Lord Jesus ” ; or “ From a servant-
girl that prays for the conversion of the
Heathen.” Again and again I re-
ceived sums of five and ten shillings with
notes such as—“ From a working-man
who loves his Bible ”; or “ From a work-
ing-man who prays for God’s blessing on
you and work like yours, every day in
Family Worship.” I sometimes regret
that the graphic, varied, and intensely
interesting notes and letters were not
preserved ; for by the close of my tour
they would have formed a wonderful
volume of leaves from the human heart.
I also addressed every Religious
Convention to which I was invited, or
d which I could secure access. The
>erth Conference was made memorable
to me by my receiving the first large
subscription for our Ship, and by my
making the acquaintance of a beautiful
type of Christian merchant. At the
close of the meeting, at which I had
the privilege of speaking, an American
gentleman introduced himself to me.
We at once entered into each other’s
confidence, as brothers in the Lord’s
service. I afterwards learned that he
had made a competency for himself and
his family, though only in the prime of
life ; and he still carried on a large and
flourishing business —but why ? to de-
vote the whole profits, year after year, to
the direct service of God and His cause
among men ! He gave me a cheque for
the largest single contribution with
which the Lord had yet cheered me.
Thereafter I was invited to the
annual Christian Conference at Dun-
dee. A most peculiar experience be-
fell me there. Being asked to close
the forenoon meeting with prayer and
the benediction, I offered prayer, and
then began, “ May the love of God the
Father ” but not another word
would come in English; everything
was blank except the words in Aniwan,
for I had long begun to think in the
Native tongue; and after a dead
pause, and a painful silence, I had to
wind up with a simple “ Amen ” ! I
sat down wet with perspiration. It
might have been wiser, as the Chair-
man afterwards suggested, to have
given them the blessing in Aniwan,
but I feared to set them a-laughing by so
strange a manifestation of the ‘ ‘tongues.’ ’
Worst of all, it had been announced
that I was to address them in the after-
noon ; but who would come to hear
a Missionary that stuck in the bene-
diction ? The event had its semi-
comical aspect, but it sent me to my
knees during the interval in a very
fever of prayerful anxiety. A vast
audience assembled, and if the Lord
ever manifestly used me in interesting
His people in Missions, it was certainly
then and there. As I sat down, a de-
voted Free Church Elder from Glasgow
handed me his card, with “ 1.0. U.
£100.” This was my first donation
of a hundred pounds, and my heart
was greatly cheered. I praised the
Lord, and warmly thanked His servant.
A Something kept sounding these words
in my ears, “ My thoughts are not as
your thoughts ” ; and also, “ Cast thy
burden upon the Lord, and He will
sustain thee.”
During my address at that meeting
a coloured girl, not unlike our Island
girls, sat near the platform, and eagerly
listened to me. She was apparently
about twelve years of age, and at the
close she rose, salaamed to me in Indian
fashion, took four silver bangles from
her arm, and presented them to me,
saying, “ Padre, I want to take shares
in your Mission Ship by these bangles,
for I have no money, and may the Lord
ever bless you ! ”
I replied, “ Thank you, my dear
147
Second Visit to Britain


child ; I will not take your bangles,
but Jesus will accept your offering,
and bless and reward you all the same.”
As she still held them up up to me,
saying, “ Padre, do receive them from
me, and may God ever bless you ! ” a
lady who had been seated beside her,
came up to me, and said, “ Please do
take them, or the dear girl will break
her heart. She has offered them up
to Jesus for your Mission Ship.”
I afterwards learned that the girl
was an orphan, whose parents died of
cholera ; that the lady and her sister,
daughters of a Missionary, had adopted
her to be trained as a Zenana Mission-
ary, and that she intended to return
with them, and live and die to aid them
in that blessed work amongst the
daughters of India. Oh, what a re-
ward and joy might many a lady who
reads this page easily reap for herself
in Time and Eternity by a similar
simple yet far-reaching service ! Take
action when and where God points the
way ; wait for no one’s guidance.
The most amazing variety charac-
terized the gifts and the givers. In
Glasgow a lady sent me an anony-
mous note to this effect : “I have
been curtailing my expenses. The
first £S saved I enclose, that you may
invest it for me in the Bank of Jesus.
I am sure He gives the best interest,
and the most certain returns.”
From Edinburgh a lawyer wrote,
saying, “I herewith send you £5.
Take out for me two hundred shares in
the Mission Ship. I never made any
investment with more genuine satis-
faction in all my life.”
A gentleman, whose children had
zealously collected a considerable sum
for me by the Cards, at length sent me
his own subscription, saying, “ I en-
close you because you have so in-
terested my children in Missions to the
Heathen.” The same friend, after
hearing me plead the cause in Free St.
George’s, Edinburgh, sent me a most
encouraging letter, and another con-
tribution of
In Glasgow a lady called at my
brother’s house, saying, “Is the
Missionary at home ? Can I see him
alone ? If not, I will call again.”
Being asked into my room, she d
dined to be seated, but said, “ I heai
you tell the story of your Mission in tt
City Hall, and I have been praying f(
you ever since. I have called to gh
you my mite, but not my name. Go
bless you. We shall meet in Heaven !
She handed me an envelope, and w<
off almost before I could thank her. ]
was in bank-notes.
Another dear Christian lady came to
see me, and at the close of a delightful
conversation, said: “I have been
thinking much about you since I heard
you in the Clark Hall, Paisley. I have
come to give you a little bit of dirty
paper for your Ship. God sent it to me,
and I return it to God through you with
great pleasure.” I thanked her warmly,
thinking it a pound, or five at the most;
on opening it, after she was gone, it
turned out to be I felt bowed
down in humble thankfulness, and
pressed forward in the service of the
Lord.
Another lady, who sent for me to
call, said : ‘‘l have heard of the suffer-
ings and losses of the Missionaries on
your Islands through the smallness of
the Sailing Vessel. lam glad to have
the opportunity of giving you to
assist in getting a Steam Auxiliary.”
Many articles of jewellery—silver
and gold ornaments, rings and chains—•
were also sent to me, or dropped into
the Collecting plate. With the assist-
ance of Christian gentlemen, and by
the kindness of a merchant at once
interested in our work and in the gold
and silver trade, these were turned into
cash on the most advantageous possible
terms, and added to the Mission Fund.
Having an introduction to a London
lady, then living in Edinburgh, I called,
and was most kindly received because
of our dear mutual friend,Mrs.Cameron,
of St. Kilda. After delightful Christian
conversation, she retired for a minute,
and returned, saying, “ I have kept
this for twelve months, asking the
Lord to direct me as to its disposal.
God claims it now for the Mission
Ship, and I have great joy in handing
it to you.” It was another I
had been praying all that afternoon
for some token of encouragement,
148
John G. Paton, d.d.


.pecially as I went to that lady’s
Duse, and God’s extraordinary answer,
fen while the prayer was still being
fctered, struck me so forcibly that I
>uld not speak. I received her gift
. tears, and my soul looked up to the
iver of all.
The time now arrived for my at-
;mpting something amongst the Pres-
yterians of England. But my heart
ink within me ; I was a stranger to
11 except Dr. Dykes, and the New
[ebrides Mission had no special claims
a them. Casting myself upon the
ord, I wrote to all the Presbyterian
[inisters in and around London,
iclosing my “ Statement and Appeal,”
nd asking a Service, with a retiring
Dllection, or the surplus above the
sual collection, on behalf of our
lission Ship. All declined, except
tvo. I learned that the London
’resbytery had resolved that no claim
eyond their own Church was to be
dmitted into any of its pulpits for
period of months, under some special
nancial emergency. My dear friend,
)r. J. Hood Wilson, kindly wrote also
0 a number of them on my behalf,
ait with a similar result ; though at
Ist other two Services were arranged
or with a collection, and one without.
sing required at London, in any case,
connection with the threatened
annexation of the New Hebrides by
he French, I resolved to take these
ive Services by the way, and im-
nediately return to Scotland, where
ngagements and opportunities were
tow pressed upon me, far more than
could overtake. But the Lord
dimself opened before me a larger
loor, and more effectual, than any
hat I had tried in vain to open up for
nyself.
The Churches to which I had access
lid nobly indeed, and the Ministers
reated me as a very brother. Dr.
Dykes most affectionately supported
ny Appeal, and made himself re-
ipient of donations that might
ie sent for our Mission Ship. Dr.
Donald Fraser, and Messrs. Taylor
md Mathieson, with their Congrega-
:ions, generously contributed to the
Fund. And so did the Mission Church
in Drury Lane—the excellent and
consecrated Rev. W. B. Alexander,
the pastor thereof, and his wife be-
coming my devoted personal friends,
and continuing to remember in their
work-parties ever since the needs of
the Natives on the New Hebrides.
Others also, whom I cannot wait to
specify, showed a warm interest in us,
and in our department of the Lord’s
work. But my heart had been
foolishly set upon adding a large sum
to the fund for the Mission Ship, and
when only about £l5O came from all
the Churches in London to which I
could get access, no doubt I was
sensible of cherishing a little guilty
disappointment. That was very un-
worthy in me, considering all my
previous experiences ; and God de-
served to be trusted by me far differ-
ently, as the sequel will immediately
show.
That widely-known and deeply-
beloved servant of God, J. E. Mathie-
son, Esq., of the Mildmay Conference
Hall, had invited me to address one
of their annual meetings on behalf of
Foreign Missions, and also to be his
guest while the Conference lasted.
Thereby I met and heard many godly
and noble disciples of the Lord, whom
I could not otherwise have reached
though every Church I had asked in
London had been freely opened to me.
These devout and faithful and generous
people, belonging to every branch of
the Church of Christ, and drawn from
every rank and class in Society, from
the humblest to the highest, were
certainly amongst the most open-
hearted and the most responsive of
all whom I ever had the privilege to
address. One felt there, in a highcr
degree than almost anywhere else,
that every soul was on fire with love
to Jesus and with genuine devotion to
His Cause in every corner of the Earth.
There it was a privilege and a gladness
to speak ; and though no collection
was asked or could be expected, my
heart was uplifted and strengthened
by these happy meetings and by all
that Heavenly intercourse.
But see how the Lord leads us by a
way we know not ! Next morning
149
Second Visit to Britain


after my address, a gentleman who
had heard me, the Hon. lon Keith-
Falconer, handed me a cheque from
his father-in-law for /300, by far the
largest single donation at that time
towards our Mission Ship ; and im-
mediately thereafter I received from
one of the Mildmay lady-Missionaries
£S°> from a venerable friend of the
founder £ 2O, from “ Friends at Mild-
may ” ; and through my dear
friend and brother, J. E. Mathieson,
many other donations were in due
course forwarded to me.
My introduction, however, to the
Conference at Mildmay did far more
for me than even this ; it opened up
a series of drawing-room meetings in
and around London, where I told the
story of our Mission and preached the
Gospel to many in the higher walks
of life, and received most liberal sup-
port for the Mission Ship. It also
brought me invitations from many
quarters of England, to Churches, to
Halls, and to County Houses and
Mansions.
Lord Radstock got up a special
meeting, inviting by private card a
large number of his most influential
friends ; and there I met for the first
time one whom I have since learned
to regard as a very precious personal
friend, Rev. Sholto D. C. Douglas,
clergyman of the Church of England,
who then, and afterwards at his seat
in Scotland, not only most liberally
supported our fund, but took me by the
hand as a brother and promoted my
work by every means in his power.
The Earl and Countess of Tanker-
ville also invited me to Chillingham
Castle, and gave me an opportunity of
addressing a great assembly there,
then gathered together from all parts of
the County. The British and Foreign
Bible Society received me in a special
meeting of the Directors ; and I was
able to tell them how all we the Mis-
sionaries of these Islands, whose lan-
guage had never before been reduced
to writing, looked to them and leant
upon them and prayed for them and
their work—without whom our Native
Bibles never could have been published.
After the meeting, the Chairman gave
me £S, and one of the Directors
cheque for £25 for our Mission Ship
I was also invited to Leicester, a
made the acquaintanceship of a gO(
and gifted servant of the Lord Jes
the Rev. F. B. Meyer, B.A. (now
London), whose books and book!
on the higher aspects of the Christi
Life are read by tens of thousands, a
have been fruitful of blessing. Th(
I addressed great meetings of devoi
workers in the vineyard ; and 1
dear friend who was my host on tl
occasion, a Christian merchant, 1
since contributed £lO per annum ;
the support of a Native Teacher
the New Hebrides.
It was my privilege also to visit an
address the Muller Orphanages i
Bristol, and to see that saintly ma
of faith and prayer moving about *
a wise and loving father amongst tt
hundreds, even thousands, that 100
to him for their daily bread and fc
the bread of Life Eternal. At tt
close of my address, the venerab!
founder thanked me warmly and sai(
“ Here are which God has ser
to me for your Mission.”
I replied, saying, “ Dear frienc
how can I take it ? I would rathe
give you £soo for your Orphans if
could, for I am sure you need it all!
He replied, with sweetness and grea
dignity, “ God provides for His ow
Orphans. This money cannot be use*
for them. I must send it after you b
letter. It is the Lord’s gift.”
Often, as I have looked at th
doings of men and Churches, an*
tried to bring all to the test as if i:
Christ’s very presence, it has appeare*
to me that such work as Muller’s, an<
Barnardo’s, and that of my own fellow
countryman, William Quarrier, mus
be peculiarly dear to the heart of ou
blessed Lord. And were He to visi
this world again, and seek a plac*
where His very Spirit had most full]
wrought itself out into deeds, I fea
that many of our so-called Churche
would deserve to be passed by, an<
that His holy, tender, helpful, divinely
human love would find its most perfec
reflex in these Orphan Homes. Stil
and for ever, amidst all changes o:
150
John G. Paton, d.d.


"eed and of climate, this, this is “ pure
ad undefiled Religion ” before God
ad the Father !
Upper Norwood, London, is ever
■esh in my memory, in connection
ith my first and subsequent visits,
tiiefly because of the faithful guidance
nd help amidst all the perplexities of
aat Great Babylon, so ungrudgingly
estowed upon me by my old Australian
riends, then resident there, William
torrie, Esq., and his most excellent
fife, both devoted workers in the cause
f Missions abroad and at home.
ireat kindness was shown to me also
>y their Minister there ; and by
?. W. Stoughton, Esq., at whose
/fission Hall there was a memorable
nd joyful meeting; and, amongst
lany others whom I cannot here
ame, by Messrs. Morgan & Scott, of
he Christian , —all of whom I rejoiced
o find actively engaged in personal
ervice to the Lord Jesus.
But in this connection I must not
mit to mention that the noble and
r orld-famous servant of God, the
[mister of the Tabernacle, invited
xe to a garden-party at his home, and
sked me to address his students and
ither Christian workers. When I
irrived I found a goodly company
issembled under the shade of lovely
rees, and felt the touch of that genial
mmour, so mighty a gift when sancti-
ied, which has so often given wings
;o C. H. Spurgeon’s words, when he
saluted me as “ the King of the Canni-
bals ” ! On my leaving, Mrs. Spur-
jeon presented me with her husband’s
‘ Treasury of David,” and also “ £$
:rom the Lord’s cows ” —which I after-
wards learned was part of the profits
from certain cows kept by the good
lady, and that everything produced
thereby was dedicated to the work of
the Lord. I praised God that He had
privileged me to meet this extraor-
dinarily endowed man, to whom the
whole Christian World is so specially
indebted, and who has consecrated
all his gifts and opportunities to the
proclamation of the pure and precious
Gospel.
On returning to Scotland, every
day was crowded with engagements
for the weeks that remained, and
almost every mail brought me contri-
butions from all conceivable comers
of the land. My heart was set upon
taking out two or three Missionaries
with me to claim more and still more
of the Islands for Christ; and with
that view I had addressed Divinity
Students at Edinburgh, Glasgow, and
Aberdeen. Again and again, by con-
versation and correspondence, con-
secrated young men were just on the
point of volunteering ; but again and
again the larger and better known fields
of labour turned the scale, and they
finally decided for China or Africa or
India. Deeply disappointed at this,
and thinking that God directed us to
look to our own Australia alone for
Missionaries for the New Hebrides,
I resolved to return, and took steps
towards securing a passage by the
Orient Line to Melbourne. But just
then two able and devoted students,
Messrs. Morton and Leggatt, offered
themselves as Missionaries for our
Islands; and shortly thereafter a
third, Mr. Landells, also an excellent
man ; and all, being on the eve of
their Licence as preachers, were ap-
proved of, accepted, and set to special
preparations for the Mission field,
particularly in acquiring practical
medical knowledge.
On this turn of affairs, I managed
to have my passage delayed for six
weeks, and resolved to cast myself on
the Lord that He might enable me
in that time to raise at least /S°°>
order to furnish the necessary outfit
and equipment for three new Mission
Stations, and to pay the passage money
of the Missionaries and their wives,
that there might be no difficulty on
this score amongst the Foreign Mission
Committees on the other side. And
then the idea came forcibly, and for
a little unmanned me, that it was
wrong in me to speak of these limits
as to time and money in my prayers
to God. But I reflected again how it
was for the Lord’s own glory alone in the
salvation of the Heathen, and for no
personal aims of mine ; and so I fell
back on His promise, “ Whatsoever ye
shall ask in My name,” and believingly


asked it in His Name, and for His praise
and service alone. I think it due to
my Lord, and for the encouragement
of all His servants, that I should briefly
outline what occurred in answer to
these prayers.
Having gone to the centre of one
of the great shipbuilding districts of
Scotland, and held a series of meet-
ings, and raised a sum of about £55
only after nine services and many
Sabbath School collecting cards, my
heart was beginning to sink, as I did
not think my health would stand
another six weeks of incessant strain ;
when at the close of my last meeting
in a Free Church, an Elder and his
wife entered the vestry and said, “ We
are deeply interested in you and in all
your work and plans. You say that
you have asked more. We
gave you the first at the Dundee
Conference ; and it is a joy to us to
give you this £ux) too, towards the
making up of your final sum. We
pray that you may speedily realize
your wish, and that God’s richest
blessing may ever rest upon your
head.”
Glasgow readers will at once recog-
nize the generous giver, J. Campbell
White, Esq. (now Lord Overtoun),
who rejoices, along with his dear wife,
to regard himself as a steward of the
Lord Jesus. My prayer is that they,
and all such, may feel more and more
“ blessed in their deeds.”
Another week passed by, and at the
close of it a lady called upon me, and,
after delightful conversation about the
Mission, said, “ How near are you to
the sum required ? ” I explained to
her what is recorded above, and she
continued, “ I gave you one little
piece of paper, at the beginning of
your efforts. I have prayed for you
every day since. God has prospered
me, and this is one of the happiest
moments of my life, when I am now
able to give you another little bit
of paper.”
So saying, she put into my hand
£ i-00. I protested, “ You are surely
too generous. Can you afford a
second £lOO ? ”
She replied to this effect, and very
joyfully, as one who had genuine glad-
ness in the deed, “ My Lord has been
very kind to me, in my health and in
my business. My wants are simple,
and are safe in His hands. I wait nol
till death forces me, but give bach
whatever I am able to the Lord now
and hope to live to see much blessing
thereby through you in the conversion
of the Heathen.”
The name of that dear friend fror
Paisley rises often in my prayers an
meditations before God. “ Verily
say unto you, the Father that seeth i:
secret shall reward openly,”
My last week had come, and I was
in the midst of preparations for depart-
ure, when amongst the letters deliverer
to me was one to this effect:
“ Restitution money which never
now can be returned to its owner.
Since my conversion I have laboured
hard to save it. I now make my only
possible amends by returning it to
God through you. Pray for me and
mine, and may God bless you in your
work ! ” I rather startled my brother
and his wife at our breakfast table by
shouting out in unwontedly excited
tones, —“ Hallelujah ! The Lord has
done it ! Hallelujah ! ” But my tone
softened down into intense reverence,
and my words broke at last into tears,
when I found that this, the second
largest subscription as yet received by
me, came from a converted tradesman
who had now consecrated his all to the
Lord Jesus, and whose whole leisure was
now centred upon seeking to bless and
save those of his own rank and class,
amongst whom he had spent his early
and unconverted days. Jesus said
unto him, “ Go home to thy friends,
and tell them how great things the
Lord hath done for thee, and hath
had compassion on thee.”
Bidding farewell to dear old Glas-
gow, so closely intertwined with all my
earlier and later experiences, I started
for London, accompanied by my
brother James. We were sitting at
breakfast at Mrs. Mathieson’s table,
Mildmay, when a telegram was put
into my hands announcing the “ thank-
offering ” from Lord and Lady Pol-
warth, received since our departure
152
John G. Paton, d.d.


om Glasgow, and referred to on an
irlier page. The Lord had now
terally exceeded my prayers. With
bher gifts, repeated again by friends
t Mildmay, the special fund for outfit
ad travelling expenses for new Mis-
onaries had risen above the
ad now approached
In a Farewell Meeting at Mildmay
ae Lord’s servants, being assembled
1 great numbers from all quarters of
ondon, dedicated me and my work
ery solemnly to God, amid songs of
raise and many prayers and touching
last ” words. And when at length
lr. Mathieson, intimating that I must
o, as another company of Christian
workers were elsewhere waiting also
3 say Good-bye, suggested that the
Lole audience should stand up, and,
istead of hand-shaking, quietly breathe
fieir benedictory Farewell as I passed
:om the platform down through their
reat Hall, a perfect flood of emotion
verwhelmed me. I never felt a
umbler man, nor more anxious to hide
ly head in the dust, than when all
hese noble, gifted, and beloved fol-
Dwers of Jesus Christ, and consecrated
workers in His service, stood up and
/ith one heart said, “ God speed ”
nd “ God bless you,” as I passed on
hrough the Hall. To one who had
triven and suffered less, or who less
.ppreciated how little we can do for
ithers compared with what Jesus had
lone for us, this scene might have
ninistered to spiritual pride ; but long
;re I reached the door of that Hall, my
oul was already prostrated at the feet
»f my Lord in sorrow and in shame
hat I had done so little for Him, and
' bowed my head and could have gladly
>owed my knees to cry, “ Not unto us,
not unto us ! ”
On the 28th October, 1885, I sailed
or Melbourne, and in due course
iafely arrived there by the goodness
)f God. The Church and people of my
)wn beloved Victoria gave me a right
oyful welcome, and in public assembly
aresented me with a testimonial, which
[ shrank from receiving, but which all
;he same was the highly-prized ex-
pression of their confidence and esteem.
During my absence at the Islands,
to which I immediately proceeded,
they unanimously elected me Moder-
ator of their Supreme Court, and called
me back to fill that highest Chair of
honour in the Presbyterian Church.
God is my witness how very little any
or all of these things in themselves
ever have been coveted by me ; but
how, when they have come in my way,
I have embraced them with a single
desire thereby to promote the Church’s
interest in that Cause to which my
whole life and all my opportunities
are consecrated —the Conversion of
the Heathen World.
My Mission to Britain was to raise
£6OOO, in order to enable the Austra-
lian Churches to provide a Steam-
Auxiliary Mission Ship, for the enlarged
and constantly enlarging requirements
of the New Hebrides. I spent exactly
eighteen months at home ; and when
I returned, I was enabled to hand over
to the Church that had commissioned
and authorized me no less a sum than
£gooo. And all this had been for-
warded to me, as the free-will offerings
of the Lord’s stewards, in the manner
illustrated by the preceding pages,
“ Behold, what God hath wrought ! ”
Of this sum £6OOO are set apart to
build or acquire the new Mission Ship.
The remainder is added to what we
call our Number II Fund, for the
maintenance and equipment of addi-
tional Missionaries. It has been the
dream of my life to see one Missionary
at least, with trained Native Teachers,
planted on every Island of the New
Hebrides, and then I could lie down
and whisper gladly, “ Lord, now lettest
Thou Thy servant depart in peace ! ”
But let me not close this chapter,
till I have struck another, perchance
a Diviner note. I have been to the
Islands again, since my return from
Britain. The whole inhabitants of
Aniwa were there to welcome me, and
my procession to the old Mission House
was more like the triumphal march
of a Conqueror than that of a humble
Missionary. Everything was kept in
beautiful and perfect order. Every
Service of the Church, as previously
described in this book, was fully sus-
tained by the Native Teachers, the
153
Second Visit to Britain


John G. Paton, DD.
Elders, and the Occasional visit, once
or twice a year, of the ordained Mis-
sionary from one of the other Islands.
Aniwa, like Aneityum, is a Christian
land. Jesus has taken possession,
never again to quit those shores.
Glory, glory to His blessed Name !
CHAPTER XX
ROUND THE WORLD FOR JESUS
A.D. 1886-1893. XT. 62-69.
From 1886 till 1892 my days were
occupied, in the various Colonies of
Australasia, and in occasional visits
to the New Hebrides, practically in
the same way as set forth again and
again in the preceding Chapters.
But in 1892, events which had been
maturing through many years came
to a crisis, the issue of which was that
I was sent a Tour Round the World
in the Cause of Jesus, and for the sake
of our beloved Islanders. A broadly-
drawn picture of these things, without
any attempt at details, seems all that
is called for here. This I now set my-
self to give to the patient and indulgent
reader of these pages, which after all
contain only brief and fragmentary
scenes out of a crowded and hurried
life.
The occasion was this. The sale of
Intoxicants, Opium, Fire-Arms and
Ammunition, by the Traders amongst
the New Hebrideans, had become a
terrible and intolerable evil. The lives
of many Natives, and of not a few
Europeans, were every year sacrificed
in connection therewith, while the
general demoralization produced on
all around was painfully notorious.
Alike in the Colonial and in the Home
Newspapers, we exposed and con-
demned the fearful consequences of
allowing such degrading and destruc-
tive agencies to be used as barter in
dealing with these Islanders.
To her honour, be it said that Great
Britain prohibited all her own Traders,
under heavy penalties, from bartering
those dangerous and destructive
articles in trade with the Natives,
She also appealed to the other trading
Nations, in Europe and America, to
combine and make the prohibitiof
“ International,” with regard to all th<
still unannexed Islands in the Pacific
Seas. At first America hesitated
owing to some notion that it was in
consistent with certain regulations foi
trading embraced in the Constitutior
of the United States. Then France
temporizing, professed willingness tc
accept the prohibition when America
agreed. Thus the British Trader
with the Man-of-War and the Higt
Commissioner ready to enforce the
laws against him, found himself placed
at an overwhelming disadvantage, as
against the neighbouring Traders oi
every other Nationality, free to bartei
as they pleased. More especially so,
when the things prohibited were the
very articles which the masses of the
Heathen chiefly coveted in exchange
for their produce ; and where keen
rivals in business were ever-watchfu]
to inform and to report against him.
If illicit Trading prevailed, under such
conditions, no one that knows average
Human Nature can feel any surprise.
By-and-bye, the Australian New
Hebrides Company , with two Steamers
plying betwixt Sydney and the New
Hebrides, took up the problem. Having
planted Traders and Agents on the
Islands, they found themselves handi-
capped in developing business, and
began a brisk agitation in the Austra-
lasian and English Press, either to
have the Prohibition applied all round,
or completely rescinded. We have
never accepted that alternative, but
resolutely plead for an International
Prohibitive law, as the only means
under God to prevent the speedy
sweeping off into Eternity of these
most interesting Races by the tide of
what is strangely styled Civilization.
At length Sir John Thurston, Her
Majesty’s High Commissioner for the
Western Pacific, whose sympathies all
through have been on our side, advised
that the controversy in the News-
papers cease, and that our Missions
and Churches send a deputation to
America to win the assent of the
United States. Consequently, the next
Federal Assembly of the Australasian
Presbyterian Churches instructed two
154


>f its Professors in the Divinity Hall
>f Victoria, who were then visiting
Britain, to return by America, and do
sverything in their power to secure the
idhesion of the United States Govern-
ment to the International proposal.
Lest, however, these Deputies found
themselves unable to carry out their
instructions, the same Assembly ap-
pointed me as Deputy, with identical
instructions, to undertake the task
during the succeeding year.
Meanwhile the General Assembly of
Victoria appointed the Rev. Professor
Rentoul, D.D., Ormond College, the Rev.
Jas. M'Gaw and myself, to represent
them at the Pan-Presbyterian Council
to be held at Toronto in September,
1892, and thus was I altogether unex-
pectedly launched on what proved to
be the biggest of all my Missionary
journeys. I received three several
Commissions. But that from my own
Church of Victoria, signed by the
Moderator of the General Assembly
and the Convener of our Foreign
Mission Committee, bears most closely
on the succeeding narrative. It set
forth that, besides being appointed by
the Federal Assembly to the Council at
Toronto, I was empowered to use all
legitimate influence with the Govern-
ment of the United States “ for the
suppression of the trade in Fire-arms,
Intoxicating Liquors, and Opium, in
the New Hebrides Islands and other
unannexed Groups in the Western
Pacific.” I was also “ authorized to
procure two Missionaries to serve in
the New Hebrides Islands under this
Church,” and to receive, on behalf of
the Committee, “ any contributions
offered for its Foreign Missions.” So
that I acted, and had good right to act,
in the name and by the authority of
my own Church, and of the Federated
Churches of Australasia.
With my Fellow-Deputies, and ac-
companied so far on the journey by my
wife and our beloved daughter, we
sailed from Sydney for San Francisco
per s.s. Monowai, on Bth August,
1892. We had a very agreeable voyage
Captain Carey and all on board striving
to make others happy. At Auckland,
,on the 13th, we had the great delight
of spending a few hours with our very
dear friends, Mr. and Mrs. Mackie,
while the ship was discharging and
receiving cargo and mails ; and, as she
was leaving, several Ministers and other
kind friends bade us God-speed. Again
at Samoa, on the 18th, we had a few
hours to spend, and were immensely
gratified with the appearance of the
Natives.
We reached Honolulu, the Hawaiian
Capital, on the 25th, and spent nearly
a whole day on shore. By a circuitous
drive, and on remarkably good roads,
we ascended a considerable hill and
beheld the City spread before us
with its Palace, Government Build-
ings, Mansions and Villas. Large and
beautiful trees surrounded them all.
Two Men-of-War and many other ships
swung at anchor in the harbour, and
the shimmering Sea completed a
charming panorama.
On 2nd September, we arrived at
San Francisco, after a delightful
voyage. The society on board was
most congenial. We had happy daily
Religious Services, and I managed to
secure about eight hours to myself out
of every twenty-four for copying out
translations, finishing my Dictionary
of the Aniwan language, and other
Mission work on which I was constantly
engaged.
Guided, but not very wisely, by
Cook’s representative, we left San
Francisco on sth September. Though
now travelling night and day, we halted
a few hours at the famous Mormon
Settlement on 7th September. While
looking at the grave of Brigham Young,
a well-dressed old lady approached us
and volunteered much information
about her departed husband. He was
one of the first settlers in the Salt Lake
District, and had taken an active part
in the building of the City and the
Temple. She herself was a Mormon,
and mourned that their glory was
departing under the influence of the
American laws. She was fervent in
her defence of polygamy, but I noted
that, with the Mormons as with the
South Sea Savages, a separate house
had to be provided for each wife ! We
saw their vast Temple, said to ac-
155
Round the World for Jesus


commodate 15,000 persons, with trades-
men toiling busily to finish it, for the
reception of Brigham Young on his
speedy return to this Earth.
Replenishing our provision basket,
as it was too expensive to take all our
meals on board the train, our next run
was to Chicago, which we reached on
10th September, and where we rested
at a Hotel on the Sabbath Day. It was
a day of tremendous storm and rain,
and no one of us ventured out even to
Divine Service, especially as no place
of worship was nigh at hand.
Leaving Chicago, we arrived at
Buffalo on the evening of the 13th
September, and returned next day to
Niagara, whence by train and steam-
boat we were bound for Toronto. We
had already had a glimpse of the Falls,
where the train halted for a few minutes
at a convenient spot, and the view was
grand ! When next I gazed on the
spectacle, nigh at hand, I am afraid
almost to admit that I was rather
disappointed. Too transcendent ex-
pectations beforehand, I suppose !
I left Mrs. Paton and our daughter
at the Falls for a day, whilst I went on
to Toronto to arrange for accommo-
dation. What a blessing that I was
guided to do so ! A great Agricul-
tural Show was being held there ; and,
on arriving in the evening, I found
every Hotel and Lodging so crowded
that I walked till midnight from one
end of the City to the other, seeking in
vain for a bed. At last one manager
of a Hotel proposed to give me a
“ shake-down ” m a Common Room,
where twenty-two were to sleep that
same night. But the Hotel-keeper
taking pity, and protesting that he
could not allow me to “ tumble into
that crowded place,” gave me the
address of a private family who took in
lodgers, to whom he commended me.
With much difficulty, at that late hour,
I found the street and the number.
The owner, on hearing my appeal, said
he had already “ turned away thirteen,
and that he had not a corner to receive
me. I offered to pay him the highest
charges, “ merely to rest in the Hall all
night,” rather than to tramp the streets.
Calling his wife, he said : “ I have not
the heart to turn this old man away !
May he not sleep on the floor of our
new empty Room ? ” Her answer
was : “I have neither bed, nor bed-
clothes, nor even a pillow to give him.”
But I was glad of the shelter over my
head. A chair was brought in and
placed in the middle of the floor.
Kneeling, I thanked the Lord, and my
hosts. Then, utterly worn out, I
placed my travelling handbag for a
pillow, rolled my clothes tightly round
me, lay down, and enjoyed a most
refreshing sleep.
Next morning I found my way to
the Presbyterian Church Offices, where
a cordial welcome awaited me, and
news of ample accommodation for our
comfort, all generously provided.
Several invitations were pressed on
me, but I accepted that of Mrs. Park,
who had in the old days been a member
of my Bible-class in the Green Street
Mission, Glasgow, and it was a great
joy to meet once more her sister and
herself. The attention of many other
friends was also very great, and far too
devoted, making us feel ashamed at
the love lavished on us.
At the Pan-Presbyterian Council I
met and became acquainted with
representative Ministers and Laymen
from all parts of the world, but in
specially large numbers from Canada
and the United States. Along with
Fellow-Deputies, I addressed the As-
sembly on Foreign Missions, and on
the urgent reasons for my present visit
to America. A Minister from the
States at once rose and protested that
there must be some mistake, that it
was “ an insult to their honour ” to
insinuate that they declined to join
with Britain in such an International
Prohibition ! 1 repeated my state-
ments, showed my Commission, and
affirmed that it was certainly as I had
represented. He telegraphed to the
Authorities at Washington, and next
day he courageously stood up in his
place and admitted that he was wrong,
and that I had correctly stated the
facts. The action of that good and
brave man, once for all, made the issue
plain and cleared my future course.
I was proud of our Professor Rentoul,
156
John G. Paton, d.d.


[ Ormond College. He at once took
leading place in the Council. In
isdom, in vast learning, and in
oquent debate, he was the equal of
le best men from all Presbyterian
hristendom. I envied the students
10 sit at the feet of such a noble
iter in the School of Christ.
During the Pan-Presbyterian Coun-
1, I addressed many meetings in the
lurches of Toronto and its suburbs,
iceiving, on one occasion, by the
ndness of Dr. Parsons, a collection
; two hundred dollars for Ouf Mission,
nd, by the urgent request of many
Inisters, I spent a considerable time
iter the Council in visiting the chief
>wns of Ontario, where I was cordially
;ceived everywhere, and had very
:eat pleasure throughout the whole
rcuit.
By cordial invitations from many
ten of the highest rank in the Church
[ God throughout the States, I was
ressed to occupy their pulpits, and
;11 the story of our Mission to the
annibals of the New Hebrides. They
iso formed a Committee of their own
umber to advise and help me in
romoting the prohibition against
ading with the Natives in Intoxicants
ud Fire-arms, And the great-hearted
•r. John Hall, in order to give me a
iod start in New York, offered me his
ulpit for my first Sabbath there.
On the way, I had promised to spend
n afternoon and evening at Rochester,
ith the Rev. Principal Osgood, of the
laptist College. An extraordinary
lirit of consecration seemed to rest
n Professors and Students alike. My
eart was overflowing with joy, to
link of the type of Ministers and
lissionaries certain to go forth from
ich a Home of Piety and of Learning.
Never can I express how much I owe
1 the genuine and brotherly friendship
f Dr. Sommerville, of New York, and
is devoted lady. Not simply did
tiey make their House my very Home,
diensoever I chose to return to it,
ut they heaped on me every token of
onsideration and of helpful sympathy,
.midst his many cares, as a Minister
f the Covenanting Church, and his
terary labours, as Editor *">/ the
Herald of Mission News , he became
Honorary Treasurer for me in the
States, and according to his utmost
ability opened up all my way, and
helped me at every turn. They are
for ever my dearly beloved friends in
the bonds of Jesus Christ.
After my first two Sabbaths in New
York, one in Dr. John Hall’s Church,
and one in Dr. Sommerville’s, I had no
difficulty in arranging for as much
work, Sunday and Saturday alike, as
my strength could overtake. One
lady, who heard me in Dr. Hall’s, sent
me one thousand dollars, as from
“ Elizabeth Jane.” In addressing the
Chamber of Commerce, the Doctor
himself announced clearly the special
object of my visit to America, and
described the features of our Mission -
This, being fully reported in the Public
Press, woke a widespread interest, and
invitations poured in upon me from all
branches of the Chur«h, excepting only
the Romish and the Unitarian.
The way to Washington, and to influ-
ence with the Governing Authorities, was
prepared for me thus. Being a stranger
and only a poor Missionary, I asked
every Public Meeting, held on any day
except Sabbath, to forward a Petition
to the President and the Congress,
signed by the Chairman, in favour of
the Prohibition of Intoxicants and
Fire-Arms, as barter by American
Traders on the New Hebrides, or other
unannexed Islands in the Pacific. The
Daily Press reported all these Petitions.
The Public became thoroughly in-
terested. And even the Authorities
were expecting my appeal in person.
Nay, I cannot but regard it as of the
Lord that my first Sabbath in Washing-
ton happened to be in the pulpit of
Dr. Bartlet, where I, altogether un-
known to myself, was pleading the
cause before the Chief Secretary of the
Government. He sent me fifty dollars
for the Mission, invited me to lunch
with his family, and gave me ample
opportunity, by answers to many
questions, to state all the case, and to
deepen all round the growing interest
in our Mission.
On the forenoon of the following
Sabbath, I occupied the pulpit of Dr.
157
Round the World for Jesus


John G. Paton, d.d.
Hamlin, and the President of the
United States heard my story and
appeal. Many Senators and Members
of Congress, having matters thus re-
hearsed, were able to weigh the question
carefully, before I made my official
statement at all. The President de-
clared himself quite frankly to be
deeply interested, and willing to ex-
pedite in every possible way the
negotiations with Britain. It emerged
that in the British reply there was a
new clause, empowering one of the
contracting parties to license Traders,
under certain circumstances, to sell
Intoxicating Drinks. The President
struck his pen through that clause, and
at once returned it, insisting on its
excision. Had Britain agreed to this,
President Harrison would then have
signed the Treaty. But, alas, week
after week elapsed, and no reply came.
A new Election took effect, and Presi-
dent Cleveland was installed at the
White House.
My Advisory Committee in America
now insisted that I must wait till the
new Government’s arrangements were
all completed, and once more press my
appeal. I resumed my work of ad-
dressing Public Meetings every week
Day, and Congregations every Sabbath
Day, always sending, from the former,
Petitions to the President and Congress
regarding the proposed Prohibition on
the Islands. I had also private inter-
views with many leading Politicians,
To all I pointed out that, as America
was now united with Britain in the
Dual Protectorate of Fiji, we only
sought the extension of prohibition on
that Group to the Group of the New
Hebrides.
Constantly engaged in these Mission
interests, I planned ray second visit to
Washington to take place at the same
time as the General Assembly of the
Presbyterian Church of the United
States. I had the honour to address
it on Foreign Missions, and to preach
before a number of Congregations
during its sittings, for a very deep
interest was manifested in the wondrous
workings of God on the New Hebrides.
I was introduced to the new Presi-
dent, when the General Assembly went
in procession to do him honour. Bo
he and Mrs. Cleveland welcomed n
to America, and, a few days after, th<
invited me to lunch at the Whi
House, privately, that they mig]
question me freely regarding tl
Islanders and our work. They bo
seemed to me to be genuine followe
of the Saviour, and sincerely interest*
in the salvation of the Heathen Worl
The Presbyterian Assembly there
after appointed a large Deputation o
its leading men to accompany me ii
laying officially before the Governmen
our grievance regarding Fire-Arm
and Intoxicants, and pleading that th
United States should unite wit]
Britain in the prohibition of all tradin
with Natives in the same. In order t
save time, and secure lucidity, Pro
lessor Hodge carefully prepared an*
read our statement. The Presiden
expressed himself as deeply interested
and requested the document to be lef
with him for reference. We anxious!
awaited the result; but the final repl
from Britain was still delayed. Ou
hearts grew sore with hope deferred !
In course of time I was informed a
the British Colonial Office in Londor
that as France and Russia had with
drawn from the proposal, the negotia
tions were for the present suspendec
France, for years, postured before th
world as ready to enforce this pro
hibition, if America would ; and now
when America was ready, France with
drew ! Still, on the highest of a
moral grounds, let us plead wit
America, Germany, and Britain, al
ready united in their triple Prc
tectorate of Samoa, to extend the sam
prohibition to the New Hebrides, an
the other unannexed Islands in th
Western Pacific. If they would do sc
the other Powers interested coul
scarcely fail to agree, and France woul
be ashamed to stand before the worl
as the only Civilized Nation, exploitin
the bodies *nd souls of poor Savage
by trading witlrthem in Fire-Arms an
Drink for mere godless greed of gold
In Boston, the Ministers of all th
Reformed Churches, having formed
representative Committee, organize'
a series of meetings, and cordial!
158


nvlted me to address them. Dr.
Joseph Cook and his gifted wife gave
ne a public reception, to which many
ff the leading Citizens, as well as Pro-
iessional men, were invited, and where
[ answered all sorts of questions re-
garding Missions in general, and the
New Hebrides in particular. I was
also twice introduced to the audiences
d his famous Monday Lectures ; and
ny replies to testing problems, there
übmitted, were printed in Our Day,
md woke not a little interest in the
ork of God amongst the Cannibals of
te Southern Seas. To all these
merous friends at Boston, I am for
*ver indebted, but very specially to
John Gilchrist, Esq., an office-bearer
in the Presbyterian Church, who toiled
in the cause incessantly, and whom
may the Lord Jesus richly recompense !
I had now visited the leading Towns
in all the Northern States, and not a
few on the borders of some of the
Southern States, being everywhere
received by Ministers and People with
exceeding kindness and exceptional
liberality. My next anxiety was to be
present at the Assembly of the Canadian
Presbyterian Church, and I therefore
decided to leave the work undone,
which was daily being pressed upon
me throughout the States, and to
hasten thither. This was surely of
God’s guidance ; at least I reverently
think so ; for I reached the Assembly
Hall, all unknown to myself, on the
night of their Foreign Mission Report;
and the first thing I heard was an ‘ ‘ Over-
ture ” from Nova Scotia, urging the
Assembly to hand over their three
Missionaries on the New Hebrides to
the Australian Churches, which were
now “ both able and willing to support
them ” !
The Assembly received me very
cordially. The Moderator invited me
to speak immediately after the Over-
ture had been presented. I conveyed
to them the greetings of our Church,
and of our Synod on the Islands, and
reported in general terms on the Home
and Foreign Missions in Australasia.
Then I turned to the Moderator, and
asked on whose authority it was de-
clared that the Australian Churches
were both able and willing to take over
the Nova Scotian Mission on the New*
Hebrides, with its annual cost of about
£l3OO. The question was put to the
Assembly. There was a significant
silence for several moments, and then
some one feebly replied : “On Dr.
Geddie’s.” I retorted, that surely the
author of the Overture was ashamed
of it, when he sought to palm it on
the honoured father of our Mission,
now many years resting in his grave !
I demonstrated, by irrefragable facts
and figures, that the Australian
Churches were in no position to under-
take this additional expense ; and,
further, I insisted that to give up this
specially-honoured Mission would be
one of the greatest losses to the
spiritual life of their own Congrega-
tions and Sabbath Schools. It was
the Mother of all their Missions ! It
was the Mission which had wakened in
them all the Missionary spirit they
now possessed !
The Moderator emphatically pro-
tested, from the Chair, that he hoped
the General Assembly “ would hear no
more of such a proposal.” Yet the
agitation is carried on, from what
creditable motive it is very hard to see.
The Editor of their Mission Record,
with a few men of similar spirit at his
back, seems to have determined to cut
the connection betwixt Nova Scotia
and the New Hebrides, and to close by
violence one of the noblest chapters in
that Church’s history. They have
written to the Australian Churches on
the matter, and I venture to predict
that their answers will be more em-
phatic than even my instantaneous
protest. The nobler spirits in Nova
Scotia ought to squelch out this
miserable agitation, which is killing
the Missionary enthusiasm and curtail-
ing the liberality of their Church.
Surrounded by a multitude of de-
voted Ministers and Elders, I agreed to
remain two months in Canada, and
address as many meetings every day
of the week as could possibly be
crowded into time and space. To
relieve the pressure on Mission Funds
in Nova Scotia, I offered to give up
twenty days entirely to them, with all
159
Round the World for JesuS


the proceeds from every Meeting.
They received, I understand, above
/500; and I trust that by my Addresses,
one at least every day, and four or five
every Sabbath, all the Funds of all
these Congregations prospered and
continue to prosper ; for I humbly and
gratefully recognize the fact that God
has used me not for one Mission but for
all Missions, and not through one
Church but through all His Churches.
The series of Meetings, up to Quebec,
was mapped out at the Assembly, and
the whole of the arrangements were
entrusted to the Rev. J. W. Mitchell, of
Thorold, a man of deep devotion and
of untiring zeal. Our Treasurer was
A. K. Macdonald, Esq., Toronto, to
whose kindness also we were pro-
foundly indebted.
The incidents of these Journeys
would fill a goodly volume. But I
had neither the leisure nor the in-
clination to record them day by day.
One or two specially impressed them-
selves on my memory, however, and
may here be glanced at.
On one occasion, after a long rail-
way ride, I found myself set down on
the wrong side of a flooded river, the
bridge having been swept away. The
Station-Master pointed us to a boat,
kept by a farmer, which, if we reached,
might ferry us over. But two huge
fields betwixt us and the spot were
flooded with the overflow, and these
had to be crossed. A young lady, a
gentleman, and I, all equally eager to
get to the other side, resolved to try.
We waded to the Boat-Landing, and
reached it in a very bedraggled state.
There the boat had been left, awaiting
some one’s return, but the farmer
was across the river. None of us felt
very brave about the experiment of
rowing across the racing current! Our
fellow-traveller, nevertheless, resolved
to try. Minimizing my warning about
rowing a long way up in the quieter
water, and then slanting across with
the sweep of the current, he went up
only a little, and quickly plunged in.
His boat was whirled away like a cork.
We held our breath, while the young
farmer on the opposite bank kept
shouting and gesticulating, running
down the river, and guiding the rower
as best he could. It was with a sigh of
thankful relief that we saw the traveller
stand up at last on the farther side,
safe but badly shaken.
The farmer now took the oars in
hand, and with his great strength and
greater skill ferried first one and then
the other across in safety, but not
without peril. In a high light cart he
mounted us and bore us securely across
another field, through three feet of
water if not more, and planted us
gladly at his fireside. There the lady
waited, that her dripping clothes
might be dried, and the other traveller
found his way to his desired haven.
But, the hour of my Meeting having
already arrived, I hastened to address
them, with clothes soaked through and
through, and was immediately there-
after driven to another town at a
distance of several miles. Without
any opportunity of proper refreshment,
or of getting clothes dried or changed,
I spoke for an hour and a-half to a
large Public Meeting there, and then
retired for the night. My clothes were
hung up to dry. I had to start by train
very early next morning. When I
dressed, the damp of yesterday’s
drenching still hung about them, and
made me shiver. For two days my
bones and muscles felt very sore, and
the dread of severe rheumatic fever
hung over me. But I sustained my-
self with the assurance that the Great
Physician would take care of me,
since none of this had been brought
on by selfish pleasure, or self-willed
obstinacy, but in devotion to His Will
and in doing His work. I suffered no
further harm, and carried through all
the Meetings, praising Jesus my
Saviour.
On another occasion I was for a time
seriously perplexed. A kind Minister
drove me, after conducting several
Meetings under his charge, to join the
Night Train at a lonely crossing.
Arrangements had been made at Head-
quarters to set me down, pick me up,
and set me down again at such places,
in order to reach certain Meetings, and
thence go on my way to others, with
the least possible loss of time. Being
160
John G. Paton, d.d.


duly despatched by my friend, I was
set down, in the darkness, at such a
crossing, where was neither sight
of any house, nor sound of any human
being. The Guard, in manifest pity,
exclaimed, “ I don’t know, sir, what
you can do here ! I am extremely
sorry to leave you. But, for God’s
sake, keep off the line. The Express
follows. The rails are wet, and you
might never hear her ! Someone will
surely meet you. Good-bye ! ”
His train soon disappeared into the
darkness. I tried to rest, sitting on
my travelling bag, but it was too cold,
and rain began to fall. Marching
about to keep up the circulation, I
kept hallooing as loudly as I could
every few moments, but no sound
came in reply. Worn out and greatly
disheartened, I at last put both
hands to my mouth and began the
Australian Coo-ee! Coo-ee! and sus-
tained it with all the breath and
strength I possessed. By-and-bye, in
the pauses, I heard a faint and far
reply, like the echo of my own voice.
It drew nearer and nearer in response
to my cry, and at last grew into the
salutation of a glad human voice. It
was the Minister, appointed to meet
me, who now emerged out of the
darkness. There were two crossings
in the district, and they had left me at
the wrong one ! He had tied his horse
to the fence, and followed my cries
through the night. We stumbled our
way back, and were ere long welcomed
to his cosy Manse ; and I tucked
myself into a warm bed as soon as
possible. Not without praising our
Heavenly Guide, I soon fell into a deep
and sweet sleep, and felt able next
Sabbath morning for any amount of
Meetings. The Holy Day proved to
be exceptionally busy, and excep-
tionally happy ; for I was with a
good and true Minister of Jesus Christ,
and that transforms all work into
joyful fellowship.
I may here record that this period of
my life was fuller of constant stir and
excitement, rushing from Meeting to
Meeting, and from Town to Town, than
any other through which, heretofore,
I had ever passed, without one single
day of rest, or almost an hour of breath-
ing space. I do not think it is ex-
aggeration to say that, on an average,
during these months, I must have
addressed ten Meetings on the ordinary
days of the week and five every Sunday.
I certainly know that, during many
special weeks, the numbers far ex-
ceeded these.
One thing was at first a great worry
to me, but at length solved itself very
happily. I cannot, with any con-
science, use cars, cabs, trains, or steam-
boats on the Lord’s Day, except under
such an emergency of “ necessity or
mercy,” that my Lord, if He met me
on the way, would declare me “ blame-
less.” On beginning in America, it
was enforced on me from every quarter
that I must use these conveyances on
the Sabbath, owing to enormous dis-
tances, or find my Mission an utter
failure. My one answer was : “No
working man or woman shall ever
accuse me at the Bar of God for need-
lessly depriving them of their Day of
Rest, and imperilling or destroying
their highest welfare.” Shoulders were
shrugged knowingly, heads shaken
rather pityingly, and gentle appeals
made to yield for the sake of the higher
interests of the Mission. But I held
my ground unfalteringly. It became
known that I would not use such con-
veyances, and that I sturdily trudged
from Meeting to Meeting on foot, all
through the Lord’s Day. Immediately
the private carriages of friends of Jesus
and His Mission were placed largely at
our disposal ; and, in all cases, I pled
for such arrangements as gave the
horse its rest, and the man his oppor-
tunity of worship. Whensoever I was
necessitated to hire for the Lord’s Day,
it was invariably so planned that not
only was proper food duly provided for
man and beast, but the driver was
invited and encouraged to join in the
Service of the House of God.
The time had come that I must say
farewell to Canada and the States, it
was the first time I had ever seen these
new and marvellous Lands. My soul
was not unaware of their beauties, nor
unresponsive to their grandeur of
scenery. But my whole time and
161
Round the World for Jesus


strength were otherwise required ; and
I turned not aside from the call of my
Lord. He knows that my heart
rejoices in all the wonders of His
Power, not the less that I spend myself
in proclaiming the greater wonders of
His Grace. All my recollections of
intercourse with the Ministers and the
People of the New World are abidingly
sweet, and move me to bless the Lord
for the God-fearing, Bible-loving, and
Sabbath-keeping Nations that have
sprung from our British Race. From
the highest to the humblest they re-
ceived me with royal welcome, and
heard me with loyal sympathy. Their
help was generous, and was gladly
given. Their interest in the work of
God was genuine, and was frankly
displayed. And their delight in listen-
ing to the story of the salvation of the
South Sea Cannibals, made me firm in
the assurance that they themselves
already knew within their own souls
the unspeakable worth of Jesus !
CHAPTER XXI
THE HOME-LANDS AND THE ISLANDS
A.D. 1894-1897. JET. 70-73.
I embarked from New York for Liver-
pool, per the new and magnificent
s.s. Campania. The vibrations of that
vessel were more fearful than any-
thing I had ever experienced in all my
travels. There was some defect, which
I hear has since been remedied. I was
scarcely conscious of ever sleeping at
all, and the ship seemed to be con-
stantly on the eve of shaking herself
into fragments ! On the voyage I
made the acquaintance of very dear
friends, bearing my own name ; whose
Home at Liverpool by-and-bye re-
ceived me lovingly ; and where also I
met the learned and honoured Principal
Paton of Nottingham.
My arrival in Britain revealed to me,
immediately and amazingly, how times
had changed since my previous visit,
only ten years before. Then I had
many difficulties to face in arranging
for public meetings, especially in
England, as set forth in a previous
Chapter. Many a weary day’s tramp-
ing I had, even in Scotland where
something was known about the
Mission to the New Hebrides, passing
from Minister to Minister, and plead-
ing, frequently all in vain, for the use
of their Pulpits and for access to then
Congregations. But since then, bj
my brother’s insistence, the story o:
my life had gone through the Lane
in my Autobiography. I was no longei
treated as a stranger, but as the
dearly beloved friend of everyone whe
had read my book. Blessed be God
who used it for His glory, and gave
our Mission appeal everywhere ar
open door, such as never in my
most hopeful hours had my faith ever
dreamed !
Now, hundreds of invitations poured
in on my British Committee, all
Honorary Helpers who grudged no
amount of labour and pains. I found
a Series of Meetings already arranged
for me, covering the principal towns
and cities of the United Kingdom,—
Mr. Watson of Belfast taking charge
in Ireland, Mr. Langridge in England,
and my brother James, with his
Honorary Secretary, arranging for
Scotland, and acting as General
Director of the Mission.* When those
had been fairly overtaken, the ad-
ditional applications had risen to
several hundreds more than could
possibly be faced, unless I prolonged
my stay for years. My Committee
at one time found themselves dealing
with a mass of 500 invitations ! A
selection had to be made of the more
important and populous centres for the
Services on the Lord’s Day and one or
two Meetings each day during the week
in the smaller surrounding towns ; but
even then the disappointments were
many and grievous ; and not more so
to them than to me ; for I did passion-
ately desire to tell every human being
the story of the Gospel on the New
Hebrides, that other and still other
souls might be won thereby for Jesus
my Lord.
I was much touched by the re-
quisition that came to me from my
well-beloved Dumfries, with the names
of all the Ministers, and full of tender
references to my early associations
Vide Appendix B.
162
John G. Paton, d.d.


rith the Queen of the South, as in our
>oyhood we loved to call her !
The Congregations, on week - days
lot less than on Sabbaths, filled the
ingest Public Halls and Churches in
ach locality ; with frequent overflow
leetings, at which I had to speak for
iteen minutes or so, and then leave them
in the hands of others, whilst I drove
or ran to the principal Meeting, now
opened and waiting my Address.
By the general desire of my fellow-
Missionaries on the New Hebrides, I
had visited Britain ten years before,
for the express purpose of raising if
possible £5OOO for a new Day spring,
larger than the old, and with Steam
Auxiliary Power. By the blessing of
God on my humble pleading, and very
largely in direct answer to prayer, for
I called on no one privately for do-
nations, there came to us in twelve
months the large sum of £lO,OOO, of
which more than one half reached us
by post. My Church in Victoria, to
whom I rendered an account of all, set
apart £6OOO for the new Mission Vessel,
the interest to be added to capital till
such time as she might be built; while
the remaining £4OOO were devoted to
the obtaining and supporting of
additional Missionaries for the New
Hebrides.
But a new difficulty had emerged,
and created not only delay all these
years, but no small measure of re-
grettable dissension ; and that was
how to maintain the Ship, and keep
her floating in the service of the Mission ;
for the Day spring, not being allowed to
trade, had been wholly maintained by
the Sabbath Schools of the Churches
having Missionaries on the New
Hebrides. The sum which they had
raised annually, each Church in its
allotted proportion, amounted to
£l5OO, or rather more; and it was
manifest that the Steam Auxiliary
would cost at least £lOOO extra per
annum.
The burning question, therefore,
had been how to raise this extra sum
for Dayspring Maintenance. Our
Victorian Church proposed to in-
crease her quota from £5OO to £7 s°>
and issued appeals to the other co-
operating Churches to make a similar
advance. It did not seem too much
to expect, in the interests of the Mission,
all whose operations had trebled since
theoriginal responsibility was allocated;
but they pled inability to comply, and
so the project hung fire for ten years
and more.
Coming back, therefore, to Britain,
with these ten years of delay to be ac-
counted for, I did in all my Addresses
frankly avow, that, in my judgment
the main obstacle, if not the only one,
was the lack of this extra £lOOO per
annum for Maintenance. Friends on
every side started up, and thrust upon
me the proposal, that those who had
subscribed the money to build the ship
were quite willing to subscribe yearly
to assist in maintaining her. I took
the whole matter to my Lord in special
prayer. It was borne in upon me to
let the proposal be fully known, and
I felt myself bound to conclude that if,
in a spontaneous way, the sum of
£lOOO were provided, with any hope of
permanent interest, to renew it from
year to year, that would be to me at
least the demonstration of the Gideon’s
Fleece, that God, who had through His
people presented the Ship to our
Mission, was opening up a way for her
yearly Maintenance.
A Circular Letter on the Dayspring
Maintenance Fund was accordingly
drawn up, and issued to all correspon-
dents and supporters by my British
Committee. Certificates for Three-
Penny Shares in the Dayspring, to be
renewed annually, were widely circu-
lated in Sabbath Schools. And, with-
out further organization or appeal,
the answer to our prayers was almost
instantaneously forthcoming. My
Honorary Treasurer had the needed
£lOOO already paid, and sufficient
promises for the immediate future.
We were empowered to promise this
for Maintenance, if the Dayspring were
duly placed on the scene. If not, the
money was to be returned to the donors,
or by them allocated to other depart-
ments of the Mission enterprise. If,
in all this, we had not the guidance of
God, I know not how to trace His
hand !
163
The Home-Lands and the Islands


I returned to Victoria in the autumn
of 1894. To the Asserhbly of the
Presbyterian Church at Melbourne I
gave my first public account of my
Tour Round the World as their
Missionary and representative. At
the close of my address, I handed to
the Moderator a cheque for £\2, 527 4s.
2d., as the fruit of the Collections and
Donations at my Public Meetings—the
offerings of the people of God from all
these lands, to be used for completing
the evangelization of the New Hebrides.
To this I added a deposit of /1000, —
part of the profits of my book, but for
the time locked up in our Australian
Banks. As this money all came to
me through those Congregations and
Assemblies which I addressed as
Missionary Representative of the
Church in Victoria, I regarded it as
belonging to my Church and as placed
entirely under their control. I had no
right to exercise any further authority
over it, save only thus far, that it
could not honourably be spent in any
any other way than on the New
Hebrides Mission. The donors had
again and again protested that they
wanted to hear me on that Mission
and on nothing else—that they had
many other opportunities of giving to
the other great Missions in India,
China, and Africa, and that what they
gave through me was for the New
Hebrides. I handed over the money ;
I delivered their message ; and there,
so far, my responsibility ceased.
On my return to Victoria all these
schemes, and particularly the new
proposals as to the Dayspring, were
fully laid before the General Assembly
of the Presbyterian Church at Mel-
bourne. Though the Ship was offered
as a free gift to the Mission and the
additional per annum was now
provided, without laying one farthing
of financial burden on them or on any
of the Churches concerned, yet our
Victorian Church resolved to proceed
with great deliberation, and to carry,
if possible, the approval of all parties
concerned. They entered into corre-
spondence wdth each of the seven other
Churches co-operating in the New
Hebrides, and with each of the
Missionaries on the Islands, and agreed
to instruct the building of the Ship
only if all, or a clear majority, cordially
approved. More than ten years ago,
all had sanctioned the raising of
the money for a new and larger
Steam Auxiliary Ship, and that
sanction had never been withdrawn.
But many things had happened since
then ; and it was at least brotherly
and considerate, if not absolutely ob-
ligatory, to confer with them ail ere
proceeding further.
The vast majority of the Missionaries
at once reaffirmed their approval of the
scheme. All the Churches concerned,
except one, either cordially approved
or left the matter to the free decision
of the Australasian Churches and the
Missionaries on the field, in which
decision they intimated that they
w’ould heartily concur.
The Victorian Church, therefore,
through its Foreign Mission Com-
mittee, ordered the Dayspring. She
was built by Messrs. Mackie and Thom-
son on the Clyde, under the instruc-
tions and the personal supervision of
John Stephen, Esquire, of Linthouse.
Better, more skilled, more reliable
advice could not be obtained in
Britain. It was all gratuitously and
ungrudgingly given for the sake of the
Mission, and we felt deeply indebted
for the same. The new Steam Aux-
iliary Dayspring, on her completion,
was exhibited to friends, subscribers,
and Sabbath Scholars, at Glasgow, at
Ayr, at Belfast, at Douglas, and
at Liverpool. Thousands upon thou-
sands of people flocked to see the
little Missionary Ship, and to wish her
God-speed. She was universally ad-
mired. The Public Press commented
on her trim appearance, substantial
workmanship, and perfect adaptation
to the service for which she was
destined. She had been built and
equipped within the £7OOO set apart
for her construction. She had every
necessary accommodation for Officers
and Crew, for Missionaries and their
Families, and for Native Teachers ;
and when she sailed away from Liver-
pool, the representatives of my British
Committee, upon whom had lain the
164
John G. Paton, d.d.


heavy burden of all the details, praised
God that the plans and toils of so many
years had at last been brought to so
auspicious an issue. It marked the
beginning of a new era, it was hoped,
in the Conversion of the New Hebrides,
and the little Ship was borne away on
the wings of prayer and praise !
She performed the Ocean voyage to
the highest satisfaction of all her
Officers. At Melbourne she was wel-
comed with much enthusiasm. On
her first trip to the Islands, the hearts
of our Natives thrilled with great joy
at the sight of their own Gospel Ship.
On her second visit, her powers and
capacities were most severely tested,
and her adaptability to the needs of the
Mission. She had to call at all our
Stations, and carry up to Aneityum all
the members of the Mission for the
Annual Synod in the month of May.
She had on board fifty passengers,
forty adults, and ten children, exclu-
sive of the Native Teachers and their
families, and, after the Synod, she had
to carry all these back again to their
several scattered Stations. It was the
unanimous and decided opinion of all
concerned, that, during no previous
Synod Trip under any service, had we
ever enjoyed the same comfort and the
same happiness. There was thanks-
, giving on every hand. The dis-
sensions of the past were buried. The
Mission Synod had now their own
Ship ; and they unitedly resolved to
turn her to the best possible account
in the Cause of Jesus and for the
speedy Evangelizing of the New
Hebrides. Our hearts were at rest.
We turned aside to other labours,
thanking God that in all this many
prayers had been answered, many tears
had borne precious fruit. The Day-
spring was the crown and complement
of our Missionary Enterprise for the
salvation of these Islands —God bless
her !
Our dear little Mission Ship per-
formed her third trip also with perfect
safety, and with much satisfaction to
all the Missionaries. The Ship had,
as the result of experience, been in
some matters overhauled and re-
adjusted, to meet special require-
ments ; and her fourth Voyage, was
entered upon with hope and joy. She
was loaded with provisions for the
Missionaries and their Families, with
wood for the building of their Houses
and Schools, and with whatsoever was
most urgently required by them for
three months to come. So that at
every Station, on every Island, the
eyes of our beloved Missionaries and
their Converts were eagerly looking
out across the Seas for the flag of the
dear little Dayspring.
Alas, they looked in vain ! She
struck on an uncharted reef, not
far from New Caledonia, —a disaster
against which no skill and no ex-
perience could guard, in those not yet
thoroughly explored and ever-change-
ful Seas. Her Officers and Crew did
everything that men could do to save
her, and struggled on till all hope had
perished. With sore hearts, they at
last provisioned and manned the two
boats, and committed themselves to
the deep—agreeing on certain general
lines of action, that, please God, they
might again come together and be
rescued. In a very short time, after
they had withdrawn, a high wind and
a heavy sea working together com-
pleted her destruction, and they beheld
the dear little Dayspring plunging
head-foremost from the reef into the
Sea, and disappearing, masts and all,
within the hungry Ocean.
Wisely or otherwise, all parties
seemed to embrace at once the con-
clusion that this Shipwreck should
furnish the occasion for reconsidering
the whole question of a Mission Vessel
or no Mission Vessel for the New
Hebrides. For the time, arrange-
ments had again to be resumed for the
services of the Trading Company ; and
the interval was to be utilized in con-
sulting the Mission Synod on the-
Islands, and the Churches concerned,
in the light of the experience gained,
whether another Dayspring should be
built or not. I must openly affirm
that this policy never commended itself
to my judgment, nor even yet can I see
its wisdom. With the Insurance,
though limited to the inadequate sum
of £2OOO much against my will by the
165
The Home-Lands and the Islands


Committee at Melbourne, and with
the other Funds for the Dayspring
still on hand, besides the Free-Will
Offerings that poured in on us from
friends everywhere, we could have
ordered and paid for a New Ship with-
out one hour’s delay. We had the
assent of the Churches and the ap-
proval of the Missionaries, and should
have gone forward, as if the wreck had
never happened. God seemed Him-
self to be clearly pointing the way.
Within a few hours, after the disaster
was cabled to Britain, a lady in London
sent a cheque for £lOOO to my Home
Committee, “to build or buy a new
and larger ship ! ” Other generous
offers were also pressed upon us ; and
the money is at this moment lying
in the Bank awaiting a decision. We
could then, and can now, present to
the Mission another Dayspring , as a
free gift from those throughout the
world to whom God has endeared the
Mission on the New Hebrides.
But I was powerless to. resist the
policy of delay, the consequences of
which I cannot but fear, whatever the
ultimate decision may be, as highly
disastrous to our Mission. Should the
vote be in favour of another Ship, the
delay will have so damped the interest
of supporters, that my British Com-
mittee may find it extremely difficult
to revive subscriptions and secure the
promised £ 1000 per annum towards
the Maintenance Fund. Should the
vote be unfavourable, the dissension
amongst the Missionaries and the
Churches, and the see-saw policy in
the Management of the Mission, will
so shake the confidence of the Christian
Public, that all our funds are bound to
suffer, and the welfare of the Mission
be seriously crippled. I do, there-
fore, most earnestly pray and hope
that there may be unity, at whatever
cost to my personal predilections ;
for the spectacle of a disloyal Minority,
undermining and destroying the work
of the Majority, is enough to bring on
our cause the contempt of men, if not
also the curse of God. And at the same
time, I cannot but fervently desire that
the mind of the Synod on the Islands
and of the Churches in the Colonies, at
Home, and in Nova Scotia, may t
clear and decided in favour of
Mission Ship, for the highest welfai
of the Church of God on the Ne-
Hebrides.
And now, since this in all human
probability is the closing Chapter of
my humble Life, so far as it shall ever
be written by me, therefore ere I lay
down my pen, let me dwell with un-
alloyed delight on the one grand fact
that rises before me—the work of God
at large throughout the New Hebrides.
In all my journeyings, and in all my
talks and writings, though of necessity
personal experiences bulked somewhat
largely, yet every candid hearer or
reader will bear witness that I was
eager and careful to pay unstinted
honour to all my fellow-labourers on
these Islands ; many of whom, men
and women too, I truly regard before
God as amongst the noblest Servants
of the Lord Jesus that I have ever
known, or expect to know, on this
Earth. God be with them, one and
all ; and though, on questions of
policy and management, some of them
may differ from me, I would gladly
spend my last ounce of strength in
promoting the spiritual interests of
their work at every Station, and con-
tributing to their personal happiness
and prosperity, if it be in my power in
any way to do so. All this, on both
sides, we thoroughly know and under-
stand, as becometh the Ambassadors
of Christ to the Heathen World. lam
never happier than when, I try to
picture the work of God on all the Isles
of the New Hebrides, and show our
friends and supporters in every Land
some of the fruits of their money and
their prayers.
Oh that I had my life to begin again !
I would consecrate it anew to Jesus
in seeking the conversion of the
remaining Cannibals on the New
Hebrides. But since that may not be,
may He help me to use every moment
and every power still left to me to
carry forward to the uttermost that
beloved work. Doubtless these poor
degraded Savages are a part of the
Redeemer’s inheritance, given to Him
in the Father’s Eternal Covenant, and
166
John G. Paton, d.d.


thousands of them are destined through
us to sing His praise in the glory and
the joy of the Heavenly World ! And
should the record of my poor and
broken life lead any one to consecrate
himself to Mission work at Home or
Abroad, that he may win souls for
Jesus, or should it even deepen the
Missionary spirit in those who already
know and serve the Redeemer of
us all—for this also, and for all
through which he has led me by His
loving and gracious guidance, I shall,
unto the endless ages of Eternity,
bless and adore my beloved Master
and Saviour and Lord, to whom be
glory for ever and ever.
NOTE BY EDITOR
Since the foregoing Autobiography
was published my venerable brother
has once more (1900-1901) returned
to the Home-Lands, and made a Tour
of the British-speaking world in the
interests of his beloved Islanders. He
is now (1906) toiling on by letter-
writing and by lecturing in his eighty-
third year from his headquarters at
Melbourne, in the same sacred Cause,
and hopefully awaiting the Coming of
the King.
APPENDIX A
(See page 19)
NOTES ON THE NEW HEBRIDES
By the Editor
The South Seas —so named by Vasco
Nugnez de Balboa, who in 1513 first saw
the ocean on the other side of Darien, and
marched into it as far as he durst, waving
his sword and taking possession of it in the
name of his master, the King of Spain.
The Pacific Ocean —so named by
Ferdinand Magellan, who in 1521 sailed
westwards in his Victory seven thousand
miles, and found the sea exceptionally
peaceful —for that trip at least.
The New Hebrides —so named by Cap-
tain Cook, who in 1773 first fully explored
and described the whole of the group. As
far back, however, as 1606, Captain Pedro
Fernandez de Quiros had landed on the
largest and most northerly island of the
group. He at once fancied it to be the
great Southern Continent, deemed to be
essential to balance the great Continents
of the North, and eagerly looked for both
by sailors and men of science. He named
the bay Vera Cruz, —the river that flowed
into it, Jordan, —and the city which he
founded there, New Jerusalem. The land
itself he called by the preposterous designa-
nation of Tierra Australis del Espiritu
Santo. In 1768 a French Explorer,
Bougainville, sailed round Santo, dis-
covering that it was but an island, and
through the Straits that still bear his name;
whereon, finding many islands all around,
he re-baptized them L’A rchipel des Grandes
Cyclades. But Cook, being the first who
sailed in and out amongst all the group,
and put on record the most faithful de-
scriptions and details, which to this hour
remain generally authoritative, considered
himself entitled to name them the New
Hebrides ; and history since has been well
pleased to adopt his views, seeing, doubt-
less, the geographical analogy betwixt
the multitudinous scattered isles and islets
of the old Hebrides and those of the new.
From Santo in the north to Aneityum in
the south, a distance of about 400 miles,
there are scattered over the Ocean thirty
islands, twenty being well inhabited, and
eleven of them being of considerable size,
from Aneityum, which is forty miles in
circumference, to Santo, which measures
seventy miles by forty. The islands lie
1000 miles to the north of New Zealand,
1400 miles North-East from Sydney, 400
miles West of Fiji, and 200 East of New
Caledonia. The population is now esti-
mated at 70,000 ; but, in the early days of
Missions, before Traders and Kanaka-
collectors, and the new Epidemics of
Civilization (!) had decimated them, their
numbers were certainly three times
greater.
The general appearance of the Islands
is that of a range of mountains bursting
up out of the sea, clothed with forests, and
severed from each other by deep valleys,
through which the tides now flow. They
are all volcanic in origin ; in some cases,
the lava has poured itself out over a bed of
coral, and the mountains have reared
themselves up on a coral base ; but in
others, the volcano, bursting through, has
167
Appendices


borne the coral rocks to the tops of the
hills, and even piled them on mountain
summits. The fires are still active on
Tanna, Ambrym, and Lopevi—the volcano
on Tanna being now, as in the days of
Cook, a pillar of cloud by day and of fire by
night, a far-reaching lighthouse for the
sailor, kindled by the finger of God Him-
self. The climate is moist and humid,
with a thermometer seldom below 6o° and
seldom above 90° in the shade ; what they
call the Rainy Season is their worst and
hottest weather ; and the vegetation is
tropical in its luxuriance.
On one Island may be found a hundred
varieties of ferns alone. The damara or
kauri-pine, so prized in New Zealand,
grows there, as also the bread-fruit tree,
the banana, the papua-apple, the chest-
nut, and above all the cocoa-nut, which
•for refreshing drink competes with the
vine of other lands, and for varied uses and
services to man almost rivals the very
palm-tree of Palestine. The sandal-wood,
for its sacred odours and idol incense, has
been almost swept entirely away,—as
much as £ 70,000 worth being carried off
from Erromanga alone !
Among native foods, the yam and the
taro hold the foremost place, not inferior
to our finest potatoes ; besides the banana,
the sugar-cane, the bread-fruit, and the
cocoa-nut, which flourish to perfection.
Their arrowroot is in some respects the
finest in the world, and is kept only for
special uses as yet, but may develop into
a great and valuable industry, as Commerce
opens up her markets and stretches out her
hands. The English cabbage has been
introduced and grows well ; also the
planting of cotton and of coffee.
The scarcity of animals is marvellous.
The pig, the dog, and the rat are their only
four-footed creatures ; and some affirm
that the rat is the alone indigenous quad-
ruped in all the New Hebrides. Lizards
and snakes abound, but are declared
not to be poisonous. There are many
small and beautiful pigeons, also wild
ducks and turkeys, besides multitudes of
ordinary fowls. Goats have now been
largely introduced, as well as sheep, and
various European animals. Fish, of
course, swarm in millions around the
shores, and a whaling station on Aneityum
sent into the market £2OOO worth of oil in
a year.
The Natives are practically quite naked,
till induced by the Missionary to “ wear a
shirt ” —the first sign of renouncing
Heathenism and inclining towards Christi-
anity. They are Cannibals of a very pro-
nounced type, and .Savages without any
traces of civilization, except those con-
nected with war (!), —without a literature,
and almost without a religion, except only
the dread of evil spirits, the worship of
ancestors, and the lowest forms of fetish-
ism, as to trees, stones, etc. They are
partly Malay and partly Papuan,—a
mixture of Ham and of Shem, —some with
hair crisp and woolly, stuck full of feathers
and shells, others with hair long and wavy,
twisted into as many as 700 separate whip-
cords on a single head, and taking five
years to finish the job! Their bows
and arrows, tomahawks, clubs, and spears
are sometimes elaborately carved and
adorned ; and they can twist and weave
grasses and fibres into wondrously beauti-
ful mats, bags, and girdles. They make
bracelets out of shells, sliced and carved
in marvellous ways, as also ear-rings and
nose-rings ; and in many similar methods
they show some savage sense of beauty.
Polygamy, with all its accompanying
cruelties and degradations, universally
prevailed. Infanticide was systematically
practised ; and even the despatch of
parents, when they grew old and helpless.
Widows were put to death on almost every
island, to bear their husbands company
into the spirit world. There is not an
unmentionable vice hinted at in Romans
which is not unblushingly practised on
those Islands, wheresoever the Gospel has
not dawned.
For the best published information on
all these subjects, consult (1) the work by
Dr. John Inglis, “ In the New Hebrides ”
(Nelson and Sons, 1887), Reminiscences of
noble Missionary Services for three-and-
thirty years ; and (2) the work by Dr,
Steel, of Sydney, founded on a Cruise
amongst the Islands in the Mission Ship,
and entitled “The New Hebrides and
Christian Missions ” (Nisbet and Co.,
1880).
APPENDIX B
(See page 162)
“ THE JOHN G. PATON MISSION
FUND ”
By the Hon. Treasurer
Shortly after the publication of the
Autobiography in 1889, free-will offerings
poured in on the Author, and on myself,
168
John G. Paton, d.d.


om all classes of readers in almost
y quarter of the world, —eager to
st in carrying the Gospel to those
>es and Islands on the New Hebrides
it were still Cannibal and Heathen.
Tiese sums were, by request of the
lonors, directly entrusted to the Vener-
able Missionary himself, who gladly
illocated them towards that sacred
mrpose.
But. within a year or little more, the
Fund had so grown and God had raised
up and had Himself called into the field
such a helper and organizer in the person
of our beloved friend, Mr. Albert K.
Langridge now the well-known Hon.
Secy.—that a Mission Trust Fund had to
be properly instituted, and an Official
Committee made responsible. This was
carried through at the desire, and with
the personal sanction of Dr. John G.
Baton himself; and he, so long as God
spares him at our head, is the Director
of this Branch of the New Hebrides
Mission work, without whose approval
the Committee have done nothing.
Mr. Langridge, with a genius for or-
ganizing, set himself to develop the
Scheme. First came his Lantern Lectures,
with a splendid set of illustrative Slides.
Then followed, in view of JohnG. Baton’s
visit to this Country, the launching of
Quarterly Jottings, which Mr. Langridge
continues to edit, and which is now the
visible bond of union betwixt us, our
fellow-helpers everywhere, and the Islands
afar. By and bye, as the Fund still
prospered steadily, there dawned the
audacious proposal to have at least one
Missionary, “ our own,” entirely supported
by the Fund ! But God took the matter
in hand, and this year (1906) we find
ourselves maintaining five Missionaries
on the New Hebrides, and full of confi-
dence that we shall never need to reduce
our staff, till every Tribe on the Islands
has been won for Christ.
Other helpers have rallied round us—
particularly our devoted friend, Mr. Wm.
Watson, of Belfast, Hon. Secy, for Ireland
—with a host of willing assistants in
many corners of the United Kingdom,
and in many other Lands. When we
meet, at long intervals, and consider how
greatly blessed has been the Organiza-
tion that sprang from so small a seed, we
can but look into each other’s faces, and
gratefully exclaim —Behold how great
things God hath wrought.
We are now responsible for the follow-
ing objects; and all friends of the New
Hebrides may help in one or other of the
undernoted Schemes: —
Ways of Helping.
1. “Shares” may be taken through
“ Our Own Missionary Fund ” for the
support of any one or more of our Five
Missionaries. A Share is £6. The ordinary
Salary for a Missionary is £2OO per
annum exclusive of special “Allow-
ances.” So that thirty-five Families, or
Subscribers, combining, may have their
own “Missionary Substitute” on the New
Hebrides. Our General Fund would meet
all the extras, for Outfit, Boat, House,
Transit, and the like.
2. In addition to these fully qualified
Missionaries (all, either Ministers or
Doctors), the Fund pays the Salary
per annum) of the “ Assistant Master ”
at the Training Institute on Tongoa; and
supports at least one “Lay Helper,”
an Industrial Evangelist from home, who
is also a Mission Carpenter. A generous
donor provides the Salary of the latter;
but the former, the Assistant Master, has
so far had to be maintained out of the
General Fund.
3. A Native Teacher or Evangelist be-
gins at £6 per annum, and may by service
rise to (according to a recent regula-
tion). You may have, therefore, a Native
Evangelist working as your “Missionary
Substitute” on the New Hebrides, by the
payment of this sum every year. We
have not changed from the Salary of £6,
with which this Scheme was started; but
we pay the balance, when required, for
experienced Agents, out of our “Native
Teachers’ Fund ” —portion of which is
left free by the donors for our allocation.
One of the Missionaries on the spot acts
as our Hon. Treasurer, and disburses
the money for us, at the sight and
with the approval of the Synod on the
Islands.
4. The “General Fund” is that out of
which all Salaries, not otherwise sub-
scribed for, and all the other Outlays in
sending forth Missionaries, in maintaining
them from year to year, and in conducting
the affairs of the Mission, have to be
regularly met; and to this Branch of our
Fund, happily, most of our Subscribers
send their donations, and leave their
apportionment to the Committee and to
Dr. John G. Baton, as circumstances
seem to demand for the Evangelizing
of the Islands. These sums reach us by
post from every Land in Christendom,
and even from many Missionary brethren
in the heart of the Heathen World, We
have no paid Collectors or Officials of any
kind. It has been, from the first, to all
of us a labour of pure love; and the
169
Appendices


present Trustees mean that it should be
so to the last.
Copies of Quarterly Jottings are sent
regularly by post to every Subscriber,
whose name and address are known to
us. Collecting Cards, Collecting Boxes, and
Lantern Slides, can all be arranged for.
Communications on these and other ma'
ters pertaining to the Mission will t
gladly answered by the Hon. Treasure:
James Paton, d.d.. Overdale Hous<
Pollokshields, Glasgow, or by the Hoi
Organizing Secretary, A. K. Langridgi
“Aniwa,” Southend-on-Sea, Essex.
PLYMOUTH
WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON, LTD., PRINTERS
170
Appendices


DOCTOR ;
I cure BILIOUSNESS
I cure CONSTIPATION
lam a Sixty Years 9 Success
I am regarded by the Ladies as a valuable PHYSICIAN
I AM KNOWN AS
WHELPTON’S PILLS
7id., 1/14. 2/9. Of all Chemists.
WHELPTON, 4 Crane Court, Fleet Street, E.C.


POPULAR EDITION. COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME
Tzventy-fifth Thousand. Crown Bvo, Cloth, 6s.
JOHN G. BATON, D.D
MISSIONARY TO THE NEW HEBRIDES
AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY
Edited by his brother, the Rev. James Paton, d.d.
With Portrait and Map
EXTRACTS FROM PRESS NOTICES
“ Dr. Paton’s book is one of the best autobiographies we have ever read.”
Daily Chronicle.
“A popular edition in one volume of the autobiography of John G. Paton, D.D.,
is sure of an eager welcome from a very large class of readers. The popularity of
the book has been remarkable, and in its new and handy form—it is a handsome,
well-bound volume—its circulation will doubtless be largely extended.”— Scotsman.
“Dr. Paton has proved himself a beau-ideal missionary. Ardently devoted to
the work, strong in faith, possessing presence of mind and unflinching courage on
many occasions when his life has been in peril at the hands of the cannibal islanders,
he is a man the record of whose life and work is eminently worth preserving. His
autobiography is fascinating and inspiring.”— Manchester Examiner.
“We have never had the pleasure of turning over the pages of any work, since
we were privileged in early boyhood to read of Robert Moffat’s early efforts among
the Eechuanas, which has seemed to us more full of inspiration for all who desire to
see the Kingdom of God established upon earth. Every missionary speaker would
do well to acquaint himself with the incidents of this wonderful life.”
Review of the Churches.
“This deeply interesting autobiography.”— N. B. Daily Mail.
“For lyric flow of feeling and graphic narrative, as well as for thrilling incident
and the natural unfolding of a little segment of the great Divine plan, infinitely
transcending the sublimest plot of any literary artist, this autobiography stands
unrivalled.”— United Presbyterian Missionary Record.
“A book which will bring lasting pleasure to many homes,”— Methodist Recorder.
Dr. T. L. Cuyler says: “I have just laid down the most robust and the most
fascinating piece of autobiography that I have met with in many a day. It is the
story of the wonderful work wrought by John G. Paton, the famous missionary to
the New Hebrides; he is made of the same stuff with Livingstone. A book
which is as thrilling as any romance.”
The Rev. Dr. Pierson, author of ‘ The Crisis of Missions,’ says: “I consider it
unsurpassed in missionary biography. In the whole course of my extensive reading
on these topics, a more stimulating, inspiring, and every way first-class book has not
fallen into my hands. Everybody ought to read it.”
LONDON: HODDER & STOUGHTON


YOUNG FOLKS’ ILLUSTRATED EDITION
With Map. Bvo, Cloth , 3-f. 6 d., 2 s. 6 d. } and is. 6 d.
THE
STORY OF JOHN G. PATON
TOLD FOR YOUNG FOLKS
By the Rev. JAMES PATON, D.D.
With Illustrations by J. Finnemore
The Daily Telegraph says : “ In the record of thirty years’ good work
amongst the South Sea cannibals, we have before us one of those missionary
enterprises which read almost more strangely than fiction itself. . . .
There are enough hairbreadth escapes and deeds of cool —if unostentatious
—courage in these pages to stock half-a-dozen ordinary books, and the
forty-five graphic illustrations add much to the attraction of the text.
“ The book of the year for young folks.”— British Weekly.
“ A remarkable and interesting biography.”— Guardian.
“ In all the history of missionary work there is no finer narrative than
the story of John G. Paton, which is told by his brother in the handsome
volume before us. It is a great romance of the South Seas, as well as a
record of a noble life.” — World.
“ Paton’s autobiography is one of the most notable records ive have of
missionary enterprise, and it was, decidedly, a happy thought to biing out
this version of it for the benefit of young readers.”— St. Jameds Gazette.
“Here is a book of adventure—adventure in real life —which it would
not be easy to match in fiction. ‘Thirty Years Among South Sea
Cannibals’ is the descriptive sub-title; but what the story really is, hov
full of thrilling incident, and what sort of man the hero, can only be
realized by actual acquaintance. It would be difficult to find as admit able
a present for a young reader as this volume. A boy must be better for
reading of such courage and devotion.” Spectator.
LONDON: HODDER & STOUGHTON


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR
Third Edition. Crown Bvo, Cloth , is. 6 d.
BEAUTIFUL CHARACTERS
TYPES OF VICTORY
“A pleasant little book. . . . The stories are Scottish idylls, and they
are written from life. They give in an attractive form the experiences of a
man with the true pastoral heart and eye. . . . We like his book.”
British Weekly.
“The literary setting of the sketches is worthy of the author; but the
main interest of the book is in the characters portrayed. We hardly needed
him to tell us that the likenesses are drawn from the life ; they bear that
evidence in themselves. The reader will not readily lay down the book when
he has begun it. In the sketches the facts speak for themselves, and show
most strikingly the power of a Christian faith.”— Glasgow Daily Mail.
“ That Dr. Paton is a literary artist, no reader of this edition of his
missionary brother’s autobiography will ever doubt. He tells us that these
beautiful characters have all been drawn from real life, but the names are, of
course, fictitious. They are very well drawn, and nothing can come of them
but good to the reader. Behind them all are deep meanings and fine
teaching.”— Methodist Times.
Crown Bvo, Cloth, ss. 6d.
THE GLORY AND JOY OF
THE RESURRECTION
“ The scheme of treatment pursued in the elucidation of the subject is
scientific and convincing; and we have no hesitation in saying of Dr. Baton’s
volume that it is one of the most valuable recent additions made to our
Biblical Literature.”—English Churchman.
“ The facts are marshalled in a masterly manner, and a glow comes to
both mind and heart as we see them passed under review.” “ The author
is at all times a very beautiful writer, and we would strongly recommend
this volume.”— Church Family Newspaper.
“A very suggestive exposition of the chief New Testament evidence
regarding the place and value of our Lord’s Resurrection ; worthy of careful
perusal.”— Guardian.
“ Dr. Paton will impress the most casual reader as a reverent, conscien-
tious, and scholarly interpreter of Scripture.” “No one will question his
absolute sincerity, or his qualification for a study that demands sustained
thinking and quick spiritual insight.”— Glasgow Herald.
LONDON: HODDER & STOUGHTON


FIFTH EDITION
LETTERS AND SKETCHES
FROM THE
NEW HEBRIDES
By Mrs. JOHN G. BATON, of Aniwa
Edited by her Brother-in-Law, Rev. James Baton, d.d.
With Portrait , Map, and 23 Illustrations. Crown B vo, Cloth , 6s.
“ These ‘ Letters and Sketches ’ are well described as ‘ supplementary
and illuminative’ of that most interesting of missionary records, the
‘Autobiography of John G. Baton.’ Delightful it is, nothing less, so great
is the naive charm with which Mrs. Baton writes.”— Spectator.
“A very attractive piece-of missionary literature, full of vivid description
of nature and life.”— Times.
“A series of simple and charming letters.” —Saturday Review.
“ If Mrs. Baton’s letters do not find as wide a circulation as her husband’s
narrative, it is not because they do not deserve it. They are quite as graphic,
and reveal even moi'e of the inner life of the savage and Christian community
of Aniwa. The simplicity and unconscious courage exhibited by Mrs. Baton
is nothing short of splendid. These letters deserve to be placed among the
archives and monuments of missionary enterprise. A serviceable map and a
few illustrations increase the value of the book.” —British Weekly.
“ The volume is indeed, as the editor says, ‘ supplementary and illumina-
tive’ of thrilling scenes familiar to the readers of the ‘Autobiography’;
while it dwells upon incidents of a kind which the venerable missionary
would scarcely have thought worth while alluding to, and yet these
sometimes possess a fascination equal almost to anything Dr. Baton has
to tell.” — Scotsman.
“ The perfection of naturalness and unstudied grace and liveliness.
There is not a dull page in the whole book.”— Glasgow Herald.
“A peculiar charm undoubtedly characterizes these letters. They were
written for members of Mrs. Baton’s family and personal friends, without
any thought of publication ; and their literary grace is evidently natural
and of the uncommon kind. They abound in homely touches and in
hearty humour, while the unrestrained personal and domestic allusions
afford valuable illustrations of a side of missionary life the existence of
which is sometimes strangely ignored, and the value of which to the work
is by some utterly denied.” —Church Missionary Intelligencer.
LONDON: HODDER & STOUGHTON


Illustrated. Crown B vo, Cloth , 6s.
LOMAI OF LENAKEL
A HERO OF THE NEW HEBRIDES
By FRANK H. L. BATON, B.D. (Son of Dr. John G. Baton )
“ Lomai, the hero, if we exclude Mr. Baton and those who worked with
him, was a splendid example of manhood; and the fight he made for the new
religion with his own people, the manner in which he sacrificed himself to
spread what he felt to be the truth, cannot be read without warm admiration.
Mr. Baton has contributed a remarkable chapter to the annals of the heroic
work of the missionaries in the dark places of the earth.I’—Morning 1 ’ — Morning Post.
“Of Mr. Baton’s book we must confess that it is altogether frank and
delightful. The elemental island life which he depicts, and the changes
wrought in a dozen years by the coming of missionaries, have the charm and
wonder of a fairy tale ! . . . The book will greatly stimulate the interest of
its readers in mission work.”— Daily News.
“The name of Dr. John G. Baton is held in warm affection in Christian
homes all over the world ; and, if for no other reason, his son’s book, ‘Lomai
of Lenakel,’ would be assured of a kindly welcome. But Rev. Frank H. L.
Baton proves his personal right to a place in the front rank of missionary
writers by adding a fresh and profoundly interesting chapter to the story of
the triumphs of the Gospel.”— Christian.
“ The volume is one of the most remarkable of recent missionary
records ; it is written in a most interesting style and is well illustrated.”
Church Family Newspaper.
“ In the simple diction and entirely artless charm of this narrative we
get a vivid impression of the elemental power of the true missionary spirit.
Mr. Baton’s chronicle of six years in the New Hebrides is one of the most
unsophisticated in a literary sense that ever was put on paper. ... A
refreshing book, a real moral stimulant; and the native whose name it bears
for title is a fine character. But the real, though unconscious, hero is the
author.”— Pall Mall Gazette.
“ This is a romance of real life —a missionary romance. The book will
stand side by side with the ‘ Autobiography ’ as a missionaries’ classic, and
deservedly so. Boys and girls will read it and be entranced by its romance,
strong men and women will read it, and will study over again by its light
problems of missionary policy. ... It is admirably illustrated.”
Methodist Recorder.
LONDON: HODDER & STOUGHTON


SIXPENNY EDITIONS
POPULAR AUTHORS
Young Barbarians. By lan Maclaren
Gwen. By Ralph Connor
The Ascent of Man. By Henry Drummond
The Lady Cakemaker. By L. T. Meade
John G. Baton, d.d. An Autobiography
Men Women and Books. By Augustine Birrell
Barbe of Grand Bayou. By John Oxenham
John of Gerisau. By John Oxenh im
The Sky Pilot. By Ralph Connor
Beatrice of Venice. By Max Pemberton
The Samaritans. By John A. Steuart
Who Giveth This Woman? By William Le Queux
The Corner-Stone. By David Lyall
Near Relations. By Adeline Sergeant
Sweet William. By Madame Albanesi
Obiter Dicta, By Augustine Birrell
Auld Light Idylls. By J. M. Barrie
A Window in Thrums. By J. M. Barrie
My Lady Nicotine. By J. M. Barrie
When a Man's Single. By J. M. Barrie
Beside the Bonnie Brier Bush. By lan Maclaren
The Days of Auld Lang Syne, By lan Maclaren
Kate Carnegie. By lan Maclaren
Afterwards and other Stories. By lan Maclaren
Black Rock. By Ralph Connor.
Concerning Isabel Carnaby. By Ellen Th >rneycroJt Fowler
Fuel of Fire. By Ellen Thorneycroft Fowler
Sirius. By Ellen Thorneycroft Fowler
Feo : A Romance. By Max Pemberton
Doctor Xavier. By Max Pemberton
Her Majesty’s Minister. By William Le Queux
Thr Unnamed. By William Le Queux
ill the Spiritual World. By Prof. Henry Drummond
jj II ■ |{j j | e. By Claudius Clear (W. Robertson Nicoll)
1111111 HODDER & STOUGHTON
1508023384589


Hurrah for
SUNLIGHT SOAP
St does its work easily, quickly, thoroughly.
At home or abroad it is universally successful, and
Lever Brothers have this world-wide reputation of
excellence to maintain.
That is why £l,OOO is offered for any impurity
found in its composition.
LEVER BROTHERS, LIMITED, PORT SUNLIGHT, ENGLAND
The name LEVER on soap is a guarantee of Purity and Excellence,
