

P BlfJjo




j ftr- p
B(EL lo
PSVZu-




A HANDBOOK OF ANARCHY
• { ..
BY J. A. ANDREWS.
ANARCHY is freedom. The literal meaning of the
word “ free ”is to love or like; thus when we say that a
man is free we imply that he is “to like,” that is, he has
only to like in order to decide what he will do, or try to
do. Among the things which people in general like, is
to avoid hurting others, and as sometimes to do a parti-
cular thing which one would like would come in conflict
with this, it becomes a matter for consideration which
course one likes the best. From this, people have roughly
set out certain particular things which they supposed, so
far as they could see, that they would prefer not to do to-
wards others, saying that, as it was their wish to save
each other from harm, they would mutually defend each
other against anyone who did those things. This was law,
which at first existed without any Governments since
the mere solidarity and fellow-feeling of the people
sufficed to carry it out. Hut they erred through short-
sightedness, for they could not see further than the
conditions and circumstances they were most familiar
lyUlJUiiiGUo auu hiiiyluiioiam Lk? me y vv u 1 v uiuot idUJuidi
with, and not only are the general conditions of life
constantly changing, but the individual circumstances
under any general conditions a?e of almost infinite
variability. Consequently when they assumed that
certain things were as a matter of bourse opposed to
their general purpose of sparing each other suffering,
they overlooked the fact that there are “ two sides to
a question,” and that the real aspect of a case might
be the very opposite of what they stood pledged in
advance to regard it, as circumstances alone give every
action its bearing. Had they not established the law,
they would have taken part on the unbiassed guidance
of the same natural sympathies as were at the root of
the law ; but having created the law, they had to con-
sider, not what part they would like to take according
to the realities, but which part the law pledged them
to. As a consequence of which, it would happen that
when some person, let us say Alfred, did something


slightly to the disadvantage of another, say Arthur,
but which, in the nature of the circumstances, every
unbiassed observer would hold him absolutely justified
in doing, they would, in the false light of the law,
look on it as a crime; while the law would, through
being all on Arthur’s side, and, so to speak, patting
his immediate grievance on the back, lead him into
the most narrowly selfish and exclusive view of the
matter. Thus by degrees, as conditions changed partly
from natural evolution and partly from the deliberate
exertions of the most cunning to bend the circumstances
into the shape that would give them most advantage
of the law, the effects showed themselves in the division
of society into two classes those to whom, on the whole,
the restrictions of law operated as circumstantial advan-
tages over and against the others ; and these others,
who were, on the whole, disadvantaged and subordin-
ated by the operation of the same restrictions. Those
who received the advantage were naturally weeded
down to consist of the most assertive of those whom
chance or cunning bad at any time favored, and came
to look on the unequal operation of law as the ex-
pression of mysterious “ fights,' 1 invented, after the law
had unconsciously created them, bv way of apology
for their own existence, and of making it appear that
law, instead of unintentionally originating them, had
itself come into existence for the express purpose of
protecting them; and new laws were piled sky-high
and Grove rumen ts established to compel the observance
of the vested interests thus set up. When the result-
ing evils have at some stage become intolerable, those
below have from time to time revolted, either to bring
things back to a fresh start, or to put the framing and
administration of laws into the hands of supposedly ini'
partial persons, or to take them directly into their own
hands—expecting to thus remedy the evil, which, how-
ever, as pointed out, is in the very nature of law as im-
posing fallacies upon conduct; and out of falsehood as
the source of social relations can come only the piling up
of social lies, which, translated into material conditions,
mean tyranny, slavery, and misery. No two occurrences


are exactly alike in their causes and their effects, and
the essence of law is that it takes all cases which have
a single, and it may be the least important, point in
resemblance, and directs them to be treated, in kind if
not in degree, on the same footing. And as under no
conceivable condition of society is wrong impossible,
the effect of law is necessarily to create a vested interest
in all wrongs possible to occur in conformity with the
modes it crystallises, for all who are in a position to
profit by them at the expense of those who will suffer,
and thus to constitute the latter mere cattle for the
former ; while freedom, by preserving the social elasti-
city, although it cannot prevent wrongs of a purely
personal character from occurring if the elements are
present, admits of no such wholesale wrong being foisted
upon and overshadowing society. The moment when,
instead of considering what they would really like best
to do under the actual circumstances confronting them,
people in their ignorance turned their will to work out
the dictates of a rule, that moment they ceased to be
free ; and the fact that they adopted the rule of their
own accord, could no more alter the nature of their con-
dition, than the fact of a man having voluntarily chained
himself up could prevent the resulting fact of his physical
bondage. The free man cannot owe obedience or
support either to a personal ruler or to the fallacious
exactions of any sort of superstition. The recognition
of this fact is signified in expressing freedom by the
word “ Anarchy,” which means literally “ un-rule,” or
lawlessness.
Now what is lawlessness? It is usually held up
as the equivalent of all wickedness. But let us see.
Right and wroYig are simply good and harm. We
define as right whatever ministers to the pleasure
which we find in others’ welfare without depriving us
of a greater amount of pleasure in our own being, and
which those whom it is safe for us to associate with find
reciprocally in our welfare; wrong that which acts
oppositely. Our whole nervous structure makes it a phy-
siological fact that we share in the joys and sufferings o£


each other. This is true of almost all animals that have
a nervous system, but in man so especially that a healthy
individual feels to some extent the pleasures and woes
of even the animals of other species with which he
associates. But from a protective natural process, this
susceptibility is closed where vital interests are in con-
flict. We share no grief in the death-agony of a tiger
or a human enemy whose life would threaten our own
or make it insupportable. Then, since law in the nature
of things takes away the exercise of fellow-feeling by
which that feeling is developed, substituting, instead,
comparison with codes, and since by building on false
generalisation it creates antagonistic interests, which
cannot be adhered to without consequently closing up
the bodily avenues of love for one’s neighbor as tor
oneself, it is law that is a hideous creator of wickedness.
It would moreover be as rational to allege that an honest
man should not object to being chained up to prevent
him from stealing, as that he should not object to being
a bond-slave in his conduct to prevent him from doing
wrong, and a bond-slave he is when he has to conform
his actions to an imposed code to the exclusion of his
own judgment of what accords with reason and human
sentiment. The whole of law is exactly on a par with
the contention of the rabid teetotallers who affirm that
because one man may do wrong in drinking alcohol,
everyone should be forbidden to drink it. Because a
certain act committed by a person whose moral nature
is deficient, or who is not sufficiently thoughtful in his
conduct, may probably be, under those circumstances,
an unjust act, moral and considerate men are to be
forbidden to do that act under any circumstances ! It
is the same. And a man does, or abstains from doing,
something, for one of two reasons: either because he
concludes that this conduct is the most appropriate, or
because such is the rule or law. The conduct ma y
answer to both reasons, but the motive can be only one of
them ; if a man does a thing because he thinks it
fitting, he does so whether it is in accord with law or not,
and if he does it because such is the law, he does it
whether it is fitting or not. This is regarding law as a moral


standard of conduct. Rules are all very well in their place
as foundations for thoroughly optional special doings, and
confined to the limited sphere of a circumscribed purpose,
such as defining the structure of a game, the fun of which
consists in seeing what can be done under specified limit-
ations, and where the rule exists in the capacity of an
assumed natural quality in an imaginary world which we
can enter or leave at will; but as affecting doings in the
real world, which are founded on facts that cannot be
abrogated in that connection, they are wholly out of
place. Our everyday affairs might just as well be regu-
lated by the rules of cricket or draughts as by property
or other law; it is only a matter of depending on the
complications to which the peculiar limitations of the
game give rise, for our material prosperity or adversity.
As to the dread of penalty, everyone has to beware how
he awakens resentment, but the question here is, will
it wake on natural and reasonable, or on artificial and
arbitrary grounds? If the latter, its moral value for
arousing the morally dull to the fact that other people’s
feet ache when trodden on, is destroyed; especially
when the aggrieved—directly or through sympathy —
are forbidden to exercise their resentment, and instead
of the aggriever being taught a lesson as between man
and man, he is punished by strangers in the name of
an impersonal power for breach of discipline; not for
wronging others, for the law gives to all who can use
the law to that purpose, the privilege of wronging others ;
hut for doing a wrong, or for that matter a right, in a
forbidden way. This brings us to the point: to judge
the rights and wrongs of any case correctly and deal
with it intelligently, it must be treated on its own cir-
cumstances, and not by conventionalities and codes;
then, is this to be done by the parties consciously
affected, or by officials endowed with the monopolistic
privilege of doing so? To be governed signifies that
someone else has the choice of your conduct and atti-
tude towards others’ conduct, and you have not.
“Oh ! but,” we are told, “if you did away with
Government there would be a horrible state of things ;
the world would become one vast field of chaotic rapine
and slaughter I ” What else is it now ? If, however,


there are so many people who are only restrained by law
and authority from waging: war on the wretched, helpless
others, it is rather surprising for them to have gone on
allowing the weak helpless good to govern them and keep
them from doing what they would like. If such exist, it
is because the existence of law is protecting them from
the risks of their disposition ; and JS'ature demands a
slaughter for the purification of the world from the living-
abortions and inhuman monstrosities that have been pre-
served through law from the doom which humanity, in
its own defence, should have meted out to them. Let it
be slaughter, then, if such indeed it would, but let me
be free to try and slaughter whom I like to slaughter,
and every other whom he likes to slaughter, and not be
butcher-slaves massacring as somebody else pleases, and
when that slaughter stops because there is nobody left
alive that anybody else left alive would like to kill, the
survivors will be only such as are capable and desirous
of living together in peace and harmony. Let us have
it, by all means, as soon as the people learn to abandon
law—let those who can and wish to live in helpful
brotherhood, or at least in peace and concord, exterminate
their enemies, and have, even if it is only for a few
generations, a life worth living! They can do it, for if
wickedness were naturally pleasing to the bulk of man-
kind, they would not wish for law “to suppress evil.”
But in the absence of law, all the social feelings would,
of a psychologic necessity, he enormously awakened, and
I believe that when people learn to throwaway the super-
stition of law, with its consequence of their stiffened and
distorted attitude towards each other, many and indeed
the most of those who arc under existing conditions social
enemies, will rise naturally to the glory of peace and good
will. Men’s mutual mistrust has furnished, in the various
forms of law—rules, statutes, property, authority—the
means for its own justification ; so also their mutual con-
fidence will not fail, in Liberty, to justify itself.
In the absence of law the one consideration taken
by people as to their own or each others’ welfare, must
be in the broadest sense the bearing of their respective
needs, feelings and purposes. For those who refuse this


cOi-Mdcraiioa to others, there can only be war, ami it is
war : or, only that the war is against those who refuse to
r ive the false consideration demanded by rules, instead of
ihe true consideration called for by real circumstances.
But this war is not waged by the classes wlio profit hy
the vested interests in the subjection of their fellows which
law in its very nature has created for the crafty and tyran-
nical. It is the people’ * own force which through their
delusion is turned against such of them as dare to infringe
the rules of their bondage. And what the people’s own
force can do blindly and irrationally, at the bidding and
for the purposes of their opppressors, it can do consciously
and intelligently, of free will, and for the people’s own
purposes. Who are all the police, soldiers, judges, gaolers
and so on, but people like anyone else, and picked very
much at tandem ? So far as their position does not cor-
rupt them, they are conscientiously endeavoring to admin-
ister and defend laws which nobody can understand, and
they are privileged interferers, (since the hands of the
people at large arc lied) and ternpte I to curry favor with
their “ superiors” and the classes in whose interest they
mainly exist. Surely then people in general here, there
and everywhere, can far better administer and defend the
principles of humanity, which every ordinary person can
understand, and with a full sense of mutual responsibility
undestroyed hy privilege and unbiassed by servile
denendeuce 1
x
Anarchy is no blind dogma of non-inteifercnce, as it
is sometimes misrepresented to he; I would even take a
man by force ml compel him to work forme, if occasion
required —for instance, if my life or yours depended on
tiie prompt repairing uf an engine and his labor was neces-
sary to .its accomplishment, and he refused to help volun-
tarily; and I think every reasonable man would justify
me in standing over that fellow with a whip in one hand
and a pistol in the other till that engine was in working
order —just as I think that nobody would justify me in
interfering with him even hy procuiing his voluntary
assistance, wlien I should obviously entail less hardship
on myself and others by leaving him alone than on him
by so interfering. Neither is it as others misrepresent it,


a condition in which the first to do as he likes is pri-
vileged. and other people must not do as they like in
opposing him. It is simply and purely the substitution
of the real for the conventional as the guide of conduct.
Substitute the free choice of conduct by all humanity
according to their respective needs for action, in place of
having some ordinary persons endowed with monopolies
of this and that portion of the choice of conduct and re-
sulting destinies of the rest; substitute the enlightened
instincts of self-preservation and fellow-feeling together as
the standard of morality, in place of obedience; and if
not all people are competent for such a life, those of
not less than average intelligence and good will certainly
are, and th e y are the community ; the others are its
enemies. R e ad Bakounine’s GOD & THE STATE.
Property is law in restraint of use and possession,
and conferring on the person in whose favor the restric-
tion is declared, authority over his fellow-beings to arbit-
rarily forbid or impose his own terms for, their use of
particular things. The more a man owns, the more
he owns you. Like other law in tho beginning, it
was instituted with good intentions, the idea being to
secure,to each person undisturbed possession of the things
which habitually he resorted to or had reasonable expecta-
tion of using fox' the satisfaction of his needs. In fiee-
dom, of course, there will be no ownership, but
the reality will he there instead of the formality, and
secure all the good aimed at by the latter, without its
evil. Tho moral sense of people at large will, to the
utmost of what reasonable and humane men can do,
ensure and defend to each the undisturbed opportunity
to gratify his purposes with the things he has provided
or placed himself in access to for that end ; otherwise
give him friendly help; and justify him equally with
anyone else in such latitude with the means provided
for other people’s purposes as emergency mayjg render
desirable, so long as he displays as much regard for
others’ convenience as the relative importance and urgency
of his needs will enable.
In the absence of Property, capitalism, wages and
prices, money, barter, etc., will necessarily be extinguished.


J’.n e they depend on property for their very existence.
Just here let us consider buying and selling, and the
commercial principle generally, together with the division
of labor that we now have in connection with them. What
is the difference between a woman selling to a man the
use of her sexual organs, and one person selling to another
person the use of some other part of the body, such as the
arm or the brain ? Or what is the difference between a
woman exacting from a man a price for the use of certain
“ resources. ” for his gratification, and one person exacting
from another person a price for the use of certain other
resources which the former can provide—such as a pair
of boots or a load of firewood,? I can see no moral differ-
ence between one transaction and the other. Our innate
sentiment for the welfare of the ract teaches us that if a
woman admits a man for the mere satisfaction ol her own
animal passion, it is natural and not in itself immoral;
and if she does so in pursuance of a special affection it is
usually positively moral, inasmuch as such affection ord-
inarily guides to the coupling most advantageous for the
beneficial breeding of her species. But to pair without
desire is repugnant to our feelings, and rightly so, as it
impairs the quality of propagation. Does not also the use
of the other organs without, or in excess of, desire, impair
the quality of their operation ? The artist, the author,
the poet, know that when they have to resort to “ pot-
boiling ” drudgery, it renders it more difficult for them to
produce good work. Where there is a real natural prompt-
ing, whether the craving of a faculty for exercise, or the
suggestiveness of appropriate conditions, the gratification
of that prompting is a pleasure ; and the being who would
demand compensation for being pleased, is repugnant to
all our instincts of self-preservation. The whole system
of the habitual female prostitute is in a state of chronic
derangement. What else can be said of the man who
spends all his time in overworking one faculty to the level
of a mere mechanical automaton, and shutting his energies
off from the rest ? Our body is too delicate a mechanism
to be tampered with in this way. The whole man would
be healthier and more vigorous and competent for a greater
variety of exercise and due proportioning of action to the
measure in which the different faculties exist in his struo-


ture. And again, a person does not in general like to do
something for the sake of mere exorcise; unless he is,
as the saying is, bursting to get it off him, he wants first
some reason; some purpose in view. The amateur who is
brimful of energy seeking an outlet in the direction, say,
of photography or the cultivation of flowers, does not want
to compile an album or fill a garden which no eyes but
his shall ever behold. The scientist, the philosopher,
the poet, the author, these would soon weary, though re-
warded with every outward luxury, were they cut off from*
others whose lives and interests to weave into their work,
and for whose pleasure and advancement to make their
conceptions and investigations. Even the hard-up swag-
man goes his way gloomily while he is alone, and asks for
tucker seldom, but when two such come together, neither
one shirks this most distasteful work, because it is f©r his
mate as well as himself. And the swagman who exercises
his bushmanship in discovering water or a good camping
place, constructing a shelter, improving the bill of fare,,
making a knife or a billy from old waste, etc., feels, because
his doings have a direct purpose, an immediate connection*
with the needs and welfare of him and his mates, a zest
and relish of living such as he never experiences when, in?
employment, he spends his time doing something that so*
far as he is concerned' might just as well be anything else,
and receiving money with which he buys enjoyments that
have no logical connection with his efforts.
Production and distribution would be effected in a
condition of Anarchy on the same free and pleasurable
lines as the various things necessary among a party of
friends on a holiday excursion. Suppose that you and
some of your comrades went on a holiday camping-out
expedition in some remote part. Each would bring as
far as possible what he or she would require, and what
would be handy to others who might not have it, and
everything would be at disposal for the most equal and
harmonious satisfaction of all the wants of everyone.
The same principle would prevail in your doings; thus
one group might go fishing, some because they liked
both angling and eating fish ; others who liked angling
but did not care for eating fish ; others who did not
care particularly for angling, but wanted to make suie


of the fish either for themselves or for friends with a taste
for it. Other groups would go shooting, exploring, etc., in
like manner. Another group would probably stay at the
main camp, some because the work of camp fitting was
most attractive to them, some because they felt for the
time being more interest in that than in anything else, or
knew that others felt so. Then when the other groups
returned, and the party sat down to supper, it would be
simply, who would like fish ? who would like game? etc.
so long as there was enough of the particular article for
each who cared for it to have a share worth eating; if
there was not enough for this, then some would standout
of their own accord, and if the deficiency was considerable
you would leave the fish, if that was what was short, to
those among the fishers who caught it. and next to them,
those among the unsuccessful fishers, who had fished in
the hope of eating fish, or the non-fishers for whom most
personally and particularly any of the anglers had gone
to the task of fishing. Then, too, one of you might do
something to provide for his own convenience ; two moie
might do different things for each other ; a fourth might
attend to something for a fifth, while the fifth did some-
thing for a sixth, and the sixth for someone else; one
who had no occasion for assistance would help another
who had, and there would be no thought of taking formal
recognisances for the return of the compliment, or keeping
accounts of the things done for each other, nor would the
person who wanted something done go to another who
could not do it, and offer to permit him to eat three meals
on condition of having the thing done, and that one go to
another and offer him leave to eat a quarter of a meal to
do it, another a quarter to record the transaction, another
a slice for introducing the party who wanted the thing
done, and other slices to divers individuals to stand ready
with guns to enforce the arrangement! The day after,
all these groups and combinations might be changed ;
some vanished, some composed partly or wholly of new
persons, others sprung up new. Nor would there be any
persons privileged to rule in these combinations ; if indeed
anyone was accepted as guide or director in anything you
would only take his instructions as advice, and if you did
not approve of them, if it was your affair you would go on
in your way, if his affair leave him to his vray.


Now suppose news came to hand of a flood or war,
that would cut you off from the outer world for some
time, vou would keep on in exactly the same way, only
you would build more substantial shelters and take more
elaborate means for supplying your wants from the re-
sources ar >und vou, and there would be wants that you
would experience on a long stay, that could have been
passed over for a short one, and the things on which
your energies would be directed, but not the nature of
your relations towards each other, would be modified.
You would still be the party of friends, and the ways
of propertv and law would have no place among you.
And now supposing that your stay was prolonged in-
definitely, do von think that you w mid want to
change all this, and map things out, saying, “this is
for me exclusively,” and “that is for him exclusively,”
to go each f>r himself against the rest, and lav'out a
commercial system, jealously measuring everything bv
which one benefited another, and demanding liquidated
security for a reward as a condition of doing it ? No I
Whatever difference there might be in the things to be
undertaken for suoplying your respective needs, you
would conduct yourselves in the same free and happy
way as when you first set out. And the fruits of your
toil an I skill, and of your wav of life, would soon be
comfort for all such as the fevy have by the woe of the many
now. Reac i w. M irris’s NEWS from NOWHERE.
If quarrels or difficulties arose, you would adjust
them freely like all other mattars. Why should you
pick out a few anl bind yourselves that what they call
right shall be right, and what they call wrong shall be
wrong ? People whose conduct is chosen for them are
“selfish,” because the only thing left them to think on
is the immediate convenience or inconvenience of the
result. People who choose their conduct for themselves
exercise their social feelings in doing so, and are satisfied
with any sacrifices they make to please their sympathies.
If a dispute arises among associates, it does not
follow that the majority should prevail. Perhaps both
majority and minority can carry out their views inde-
pendently. The majority may be barely more than in-
different, while the minority are very decided, and in


practice it may please the individuals of the majority best
to give way. Or the question may be sunk, or new ideas
conceived, or new persons enlisted. Unless materially
impossible, as in the case of a ship in mid-ocean whose
farther course has been called in question, where there is
nothin? for it but to stay on board, it should generally be
optional with everyone whether to remain associated with
what others decide on —though extraordinary emergencies
might justify the majority in coercing the minority, or the
minority in coercing the majority, if possible. It is all a
matter for common sense to adjust without being tram-
melled by formalities and legalities.
An agent, delegate or representative in any matter
would only be that of those who procured him to act. In
dealing with another person’s representative everyone is
aware that ho may be a misrepresentative, and would in
Anarchy know therefore that h e shared with the party
“represented,” the risk of the representative being false.
The “ represented ” would be perfectly justified in repudi-
ation if the representative had designedly or inadvertently
committed them to something unreasonable or foreign to
their purpose in sending him ; or in so far as one fair man
would justify another in revoking a promise made even
personally, if the circumstances had materially varied in
the meantime. A promise or agreement is simply an
expression of definite intention, for the guidance of others
concerned, and the whole moral question upon it is one of
mutual sparing of inconvenience.
The relations of the sexes will be on the same footing
of freedom. Here there are always two persons whose
choice in the matter would require to be mutual. All
persons are not alike sexually. Some are monogamous,
others polygamous ; some mating, others roving, but all
these can find partners who can take them as they are,
and the mating person forced against nature to go from
one to another, the rover kept to one, the monogamist
forced to conso’ t habitually with several during the same
period and the polygamist prevented from doing so, each
loses respect for the other sex, and treats a sex-partner
as a mere machine for gratifying his or her sensuality.
Hence, freedom tends to purity. Though ordinarily, the
habitual sex partnership is accompanied by a domestic


one, it is not essential or uniformly desirable deducing
& person to quit or ignore an existing sexual partnership
is, other things being equal, an act that would call forth*
the contempt of the lawless, on account of its inconsiderate
character towards the other partner.
Children would not be the chattel slaves of the parents
as they are now. They Would be to all on the same foot-*
ing as any other feeble and inexperienced stranger who
might arrive and become the guest of the community. It
would at once be recognised as monstrous to order such a
stranger about, saying, “do this because you are told.”
A child may be rightfully coerced, to avoid more serious
hlrm to itself or others, but without authority, as you:
would force a friend who was drinking too much and be-
having foolishly—not for the mere whim of the parents
or anyone else, but with full 1 responsibility to everyone’s'
sense of fairness and right.
As older people would’ have 1 leisure to let the society
and wants of childhood enfet more into their lives tllan at
present ~. and encourage the natural tendency of children'
to take the affairs of their elder friends info their lives ...
children Would pick up writing, reading, and all material
knowledge as they acquire speech or the knowledge of
games. Special classes conducted by those whom it would
please to so exercise their faculties, and cooperative classes
of students, such as our scientific societies really are, are
natural and obvious means for closer study.
The nature of Anarchy being now understood, how
is this state, so desirable, to be realised ? It cannot be
imposed; it must come bv enlightenment and individual
reform. Each must purify his own life from all taint of
the evil, and have courage to ignore what is imposed, as
the Catholics did before pagan and Protestant persecutors,
Protestants before Catholic persecutors, and Atheists in
face of both ; as science has conquered religious persecu-
tion while the sects are still contending, so Anarchy, the
applied science of society, will ma'i# its way with a rapid-
ity and power impossible to barren creeds. In the spirit
of the living faith that works its truth to sight, dwells,
and there wlone, the hope with the glory of Victory.


!
The following Works recommended can he had of Mivn
Wo Ho Macnam&ra, 221 Castlereagh-st., Sydney: ,
William Morris 1 * NEWS from NOWHERE, Is.
Fairly pourttaying an Anarchist state of society.
* -TME MAN’S PARADISE, by Lane,
the founder of NSw Australia, Is. 3d.
On© #f the noblest work? ever written, full o T the
living pow.tr ©f humanity Not an Anarchist
work, iiit regards . 'Anarchy favorably.
•’-.'-.lt may fye as w«U to point out hsr e t..;h®.;t
,th a dynamite policy has nothing to do
'■wfth Anarchy, though lb h®s been so misre«
present# c! that p.®opie madden eci,l o genets
despet«• tio:n at the 1 s>-a?.ou.nd th,es
to |o’ bomb th towi a g, are no w' samelim e'er
A •f•*a a d e d that they ©re Anarchists. *V
. ■ \ ■ ■' ■ V V '-..v. >;
J&**‘*** siam 8 —‘
I:3® ued %j AHDBEWS, Sat® of Mudgeei
and-sow of 4fl 3£lkab©th-st, -Sydney.


