

FOE THE
PRESERVATION OF SPECIMENS
MTUEAL HISTOET,
FOE
MUSEUM PURPOSES.
E. PI EES ON RAMSAY, F.L.S.,
CUEATOE OF THE AUSTEALIAN MUSEUM, SYDNEY.
£W/y s H V
II I IST T.S
SIDNEY: THOMAS RICHARDS, GOY.EJINMENT PRINTER.
> f
1876.
«-




Peesstjee of work at present in the Museum, in arranging and
cataloguing the large collections contained therein, does not permit
me to give such detailed instructions for preserving specimens
as I would wish; I must therefore trust that our friends in the
Country will accept these few “ Hints ” on the Preserving of
Specimens, for the present. I hope by-and-bye to find time to
give fuller instructions for collecting and preserving specimens
of all kinds for the cabinet —in the meantime, should a difficulty
occur in any particular case, I shall be happy to answer any
reasonable questions on the subject.
E. P. R.




HINTS FOR THE PRESERVATION OF
SPECIMENS OF NATURAL HISTORY,
THE HUMAN EACE.
In cases where complete skeletons of Aborigines cannot be procured,
the skulls, along with the lower jaw, will prove of great interest and
value to Museums. Any apparent malformation or peculiarities in the
formation of the cranium of the various tribes should be carefully
noted; obtain all the information possible respecting such occurrences,
and whether produced by artificial means or otherwise.
MAMMALIA.
Eemove all blood-stains if possible, and plug any shot holes or other
bleeding wounds with tow, wadding, or rag; put a plug of moss or
tow in the mouth to keep any blood or other matter from exuding.
Note the shape and color of the eyes and fleshy parts, and the sex. Slit
the skin open from about the centre of the belly downwards to the
vent, but in the case of female marsupials, take care not to cut into
the pouch; or this may be avoided, by cutting from the chest, between
the fore arms, downwards, and making an opening, in all cases large
enough to extract the body ; loosen the skin round it with the fingers,
or handle of the knife, being careful not to use the blade more than is
absolutely necessary; generally the skin will be found to be easily
separated; now sever the leg from the pelvis bones at the body, leaving
the tail attached to the body, by which it may be more easily slipped
out of the skin; turn the skin back, outwards, and slip the tail out
entire, the skin will then draw off over the back with ease; sever the
fore limbs from the body with the shoulder-blades attached to them,
and the neck close up to the back of the skull (at the atlas vertebra);
skin the head as far as the tip of the nose, remove all the flesh from
it, take out the eyes, and remove the brains by enlarging, if necessary,
the opening at the back of the skull; anoint it well, inside and
out, with arsenical soap, and fill out the orbits with tow or wadding,


&c.; clean the limbs, stripping the skin back as far as the paws;
anoint all the bones and roll a little tow round them to make
up for the amount of flesh removed; the tail often strips easily
enough, but in some animals (as in the Platypus) requires literally
to be cut out, making an incision along one side of it. Anoint
the skin inside well all over with arsenical soap, and dust it
well with the powdered burned alum, now turn the skin back, and
pull the limbs and tail into their original position; open the palms of
the hand and soles of the feet, remove the fleshy parts and rub in
some soap and alum, remove the testes and fill up the skin to its
natural size—if a female marsupial, fill out the pouch with a little
tow. Allow the skin, after it has been prepared as directed to remain
for a few hours, or a day, if the time can be spared, before filling it
out, afterwards fill out* the skin to about the natural size, and sew up
the opening; tie the mouth shut, and pull up the wadding in the
orbits, and adjust the eye-lids, but do not distend them. Anoint the
eye-lids, face, ears, the fleshy parts of the feet, and the pouch, &c.,
with a solution of mercuric chloride and camphor in spirits of wine ;f
hang the animal up in a dry airy situation, not in the sun, until quite
dry, when, if required, to save space in packing the filling may be
removed from the body, and the feet and tail folded over the belly,
and the skin doubled up.
The smaller mammals, such as mice, rats, bats, and even the smaller
species of native cats and bandicoots, are best preserved, entire, in
strong spirits of wine, to which a little arsenic has been added, taking
care to make an opening in the abdomen to allow the spirits to enter
freely. The body should be well covered with the spirit, and care
taken that the stopper or cork of the vessel be made air-tight. A very
good contrivance for large vessels is that known as a “ man-hole fasten-
ing,” used for steam boilers, &c.
BIRDS.
When first obtained, push a small piece of cotton wool, tow, or
moss, into the throat, to prevent any liquid from escaping, and remove
* Tow, dry grass or moss, cocoanut fibre, unravelled rope, or the refuse tow from the
rope-works.
f Solution No. 1, see p. 16.


any blood from the feathers. Note the color of the eyes, bill, legs,
and feet. If the weather be hot, and the bird cannot be skinned at
once, it is advisable to brush the bill, eyelids (being careful to note the
color of the eyes first), the inside of the mouth, and other fleshy parts,
as well as the abdomen under the feathers, and the vent, with the
solution of mercuric chloride and camphor ;* this will prevent those
parts being blown by flies, and, to a great extent, arrest putrefaction.
Before beginning to skin, for convenience sake dislocate or break
the first hone (the humerus) of the wings about the middle, and then,
after separating the feathers on the abdomen, open the skin from the
lower end of the breast-bone, or from a little above it, down to the
vent, being careful not to cut into the intestines; if there is much
moisture or fat, dust these parts well with powdered lime, or better,
plaster of Paris; detach the skin from the flesh on either side
until you come to the knee-joints, which, push up inside the skin,
and cut through the exposed joints carefully; draw the legs back
again, and detach the skin round on either side to the tail, cut through
the vertebra at the tail, taking care not to injure the skin, which is
very thin about this part; draw the skin over the back, holding the
feathers clear of the body, which may be powdered well with plaster
of Paris to keep it from soiling them. The skin will now easily strip
off as far as the wings, which must be cut through at the broken part
or at the first joint; pull back the skin carefully over the neck until
you come to the skull, and ease it gently over the head with your
nails; detach the head, cutting the neck off with a small portion of
the skull attached; pinch up the skin over the ears and pull it care-
fully over them as far as the eyes, the tough skin round which cut
through, when it has been eased over the orbit, taking care not to cut
the eyelid, detach the skin as far as the base of the bill, remove the eyes
and flesh from the head, and the tongue, &c., and take out the brains
through the opening enlarged at the back of the skull; anoint the head
well with arsenical soap inside and out; fill up the orbits with a plugget
of cotton wadding for eyes; roll up a piece of tow or wadding and plug
the end of it tightly into the back of the skull, leaving a piece out, of
sufficient length to form the neck.f Now turn to the legs—remove the
* Solution No. 1.
t Some taxidermists prefer to put the neck in after the skin is turned back; it is
immaterial at what stage it be done, provided a good neck be formed.


flesh from the bones, anoint them, and roll a little cotton wadding
round them, leaving' some of it over the end of the bone; clean the
wing bones, but put no wadding round them, cut off the humerus, or the
broken part of it, tie them a little apart by passing a string between
the bones and drawing the wings together, but not too close, leaving a
space of about one quarter of an inch in a bird as large as a thrush,
and proportionately greater or less for other birds, as the case may be
(in very small birds the wing bones may be tied close, just leaving room
enough for them to play); clean the tail carefully, and remove the fat
and oil glands, anoint it well with the soap, and turn it back into its
place with a small piece of wadding over it; soap the legs and wings and
adjacent skin, and turn them back as near as possible into their original
position ; soap the remainder of the skin well all over, especially the
nock, ease it carefully back over the skull, pulling the head through,
assisted by the string previously passed and left through the nostrils ;
in some birds, as the larger cockatoos and parrots, and the stilts and
avocets, &c., the neck being very small, the head cannot with safety
be drawn through, it is advisable to open the skin at the back of the
head or along the throat, and turn out the head through the opening,
which can be sewed up afterwards.
Having turned the skin back, and pulled the head, legs, and wings
into their original position, arrange the feathers of the head and
ears as neatly as possible, with the point of a long needle, lifting up
the skin here and there, and, getting all smooth, pull up the wadding
in the orbits to fill out the eyes, taking care not to distend it
or bulge the eyelids out; shorten the neck by pulling the false
neck of wadding down a little inside, place a piece on either side
near the wings, and thrust a small piece up from the breast as far as
the throat, to fill it out, and close the bill on the end of it to hold it in
position, or by pulling the end of it, the neck can be shortened at
will; fill the body out to about its natural dimensions, or a very little
more, to allow for the shrinking of the skin in drying, and arrange the
wings closed on the sides, in the natural position ; pull the legs down
to their proper length, and take care not to elongate the neck,
see that the bird is filled out enough, and sew up the opening—
small birds need not be sewed up. Cross the legs, the tarsus of
one over the tarsus of the other, and tie them; the right leg, as
the bird lies on its back, should be crossed over the left, if the
bird is a male, and vice versa for a female. The legs and feet,


margins of the wings, the bill, orbits and nostrils, should be brushed
over with the solution of mercuric chloride,* which may be repeated
two or three times as the skin dries, if the specimen be a large one.
Having settled the feathers, and affixed a ticket, with date, locality,
sex, color of eyes, bill, and legs, and a number referring to the note
book, in which particulars should be entered as to the contents of the
stomach, &c., the skin should be carefully pushed, head first, into a
cylinder of stiff paper (not funnel shaped) made just wide enough to
contain it, and not too small to cramp the bird—this keeps the wings
together and the feathers smooth whilst drying.
Carefully ascertain the sex of each specimen by dissection. On
removing the intestines the ovaries (if a female), resembling a small
cluster of round seeds or beads, may be plainly seen, situated on the inner
surface against the back bone; if a male, two small (usually yellowish)
oval bodies will be found near the same place. Large birds require to have
the last joint of the wings opened from without along the inner margin,
and any flesh removed, and the bone and skin well anointed with the
soap, after which the incision may be sewed up, and the margins and
joints of the wings and legs well brushed with the solution of mercuric
chloride ; should the legs (tarsi) of the birds be fleshy, as in some of
the larger ducks and geese, and some of the eagles, or puffed out by
decomposition, it will be necessary to slit them open along the under
portion, down to the soles of the feet, and rub in arsenical soap or dry
arsenic, bind the legs round tightly with strips of rag or tow, to bring
the skin into its original position, until quite dry. This is, however,
seldom necessary with the Australian species, except when decomposi-
tion has set in.
FISHES.
These are best preserved in strong spirits of wine (methylated spirit
will do) into which a little alum, and about £ oz. of arsenic ( to the
gallon) has been dissolved. Care must always be taken to have close
air-tight fitting stoppers to the vessels containing the spirits. The
specimens may be plunged in whole, after first having a small opening
made in the abdomen, to allow the preserving fluid to enter the intestines.
If they can be put in alive, all the better. If spirits cannot be obtained,
strong brine may be used, to which a little alum may be added with
* Solution No. 1, p. 16.


advantage, and after the specimens have been in soak for two or three
days, they may be taken out and well salted inside, and packed between
layers of coarse salt, and fastened up tightly in a box or keg. In
all cases where small specimens are placed among larger ones, or when
any are packed for transit in fluid, each one should be rolled up separ-
ately in cloth or paper to prevent friction, without which precaution
the fins and spines are likely to get broken, and the fish damaged.
Specimens too large to be conveniently preserved whole, may be
skinned, and the skin, with the head attached, be placed in the pre-
serving fluid, or salted, or they may be only partially skinned —an open-
ing being made in the abdomen (the intestines pushed aside but not
removed), and as much as possible of the back bone and flesh should
be taken out; this greatly reduces the bulk, and permits of a long fish
being doubled up into a comparatively small compass.
Some of the larger fishes, rays, sharks, &c., may be preserved dry,
after skinning. Make an opening in the skin below the pectoral fins,
large enough to extract the body through, remove the intestines, cut
through the back bone and flesh all round, until the skin is reached ;
remove each portion of the body by cutting through the fin bones
inside, and pulling the skin back, after the manner of skinning eels ;
when doing the head portion, the cleaning of the gills and removing
of the brain, and all fleshy parts, must be carefully attended to, and the
whole of the skin, skull, and any bones that may be left, well anointed
inside with arsenical soap, and powdered with burned alum; the skin
may be then sewed up and the body filled out to its original propor-
tions with dry sand or dry sawdust, which, when the skin is dry and
required for packing, may be shaken out to save room. Any parasites
or intestinal worms, eggs or young found inside, should be preserved
in spirits of wine.
The color of the eyes and fins, and the general coloration of the
specimens should always be noted down, also any information as to
their capture, &c., or respecting their habits will be valuable.*
EEPTILES.
Lizaeds, Snakes, Feogs, Tuetles, Ceocodiles, &c. —These animals,
when not too large, are best preserved in strong spirits; a small
* In the head waters of the Mary and Burnett Rivers, in Queensland, the curious fish
Ceratodus forsteri, known by the aborigines under the name of “ Teebine,” is plentiful.
Young specimens of this fish, or the heads of very large ones, in spirits, and any informa-
tion respecting their habits, will be gladly received.


incision should be made in the abdomen to allow the spirit to enter.
The larger specimens of lizards may be skinned in the manner
described for mammals, but in filling out the tail, feet, and limbs, the
material should be cut up fine, to allow its being pushed into the small
recesses, or dry sand or saw-dust may be used. Care must be taken
in skinning the tail—which cannot be stripped back, as in most cases
with mammals—the skin on the under side must be carefully slit up to
the tip, and the tail removed, which can be replaced by an artificial
one made of tow wound round two or three rushes. In skinning
lizards, particularly the glossy species of Tropidolepisma, Cyclodus,
Sfc., care should be taken not to break the tails, which are particularly
brittle.
In preserving large specimens in spirits, the bodies can be skinned
out through an incision made down the belly, the bones of the legs,
arms, tail, and head being left attached to the skin.
Snakes are always best preserved in spirits, but if it be desirable to
skin some of the large boas and pythons common in the north, it may
be done by making an opening in the skin just below the neck, a few
inches in length along the belly, sever the vertebra through to the
skin, and turn out the body after the manner of skinning eels ; do the
same with the head portion, leaving the skull attached to the skin,
removing as much of the flesh as possible, the eyes and the brains;
anoint the head and the whole of the skin on the inside with arsenical
soap, and powder it with burned alum; turn the skin back and fill it
out with dry sand, &c., as directed for fishes ; curl the body into
shape.
Tortoises and Turtles may be preserved dry, the breast-plate
being more or less severed along the sides, laid back, and the head,
limbs, and tail skinned and cured as before described for animals ;
the carapace (back) should be well cleaned and anointed with soap and
burned alum, and the breast-plate returned to its original position,
may be sewn or wired on, and the specimen set out to dry on a
board; in the smaller specimens the bones within the body need not
be removed but cleaned carefully and left in their places.
In the case of large Alligators or Crocodiles, &c., the entire skeleton
should be preserved, if possible, the flesh may be easily removed from


the bones, and the head carefully cleaned; and after drying a little,
may be packed in dry sawdust, grass, or seaweed ; if the whole cannot
be secured, obtain the head at least.
INSECTS.
Beetles, Buas, Cockroaches, Centipedes, &c., in fact almost all
insects, except Moths and Butterflies, are best killed in spirits of wine.
Procure a wide mouthed bottle with tight fitting cork or stopper, half
filled with methylated spirits of wine, and plunge the insects in as
soon as captured. For killing beetles hot water may be used, if no
spirits can be obtained. Wasps, Hornets and Flies may be killed
in the same way. Some beetles with hairy backs or thread-like
appendages on their wing-covers should not be put in spirits, they
should be killed by chloroform, as advised in the case of Moths and
Gnats, &c.
Insects, when killed, may be taken out of the bottles and dried on
blotting paper or cloth, and then packed away with dry sawdust, in
layers, in boxes, with a little crushed camphor sprinkled through the
sawdust; the boxes should be fastened up tightly, and strips of strong
paper pasted over the cracks. They will keep this way for months,
small packages thus prepared may be transmitted by post.
Lepidoptera, &c.
Butterflies, Moths, and soft-winged insects in general, should be
killed by chloroform after first squeezing them across the thorax and
pinning them to the bottom of a corked-lined collecting box. Most of
the Butterflies, however, are easily killed, and a slight pressure under
the wings, between the finger and thumb is sufficient; fat bodied
motbs, &c., should be stuffed; make a longitudinal cut on the under side
of the abdomen, remove the intestines carefully, and replace them by
a small piece of wadding, and bring the edges together again. Small
Lepidoptera may be first pinned against the substance they are found
resting on, and then put in a box with chloroform, or a wide mouthed
bottle containing cyanide of potassium, inverted suddenly over them ;
the cyanide may be kept at the bottom of the bottle by a piece of
gummed paper or wadding. Insects killed in this way must be pinned
and “set out” as soon as possible, as they dry and become brittle, very
quickly, after death. Moths and Butterflies, Gnats, &c., may be kept


for transmission, folded with their wings and the feelers between them
together and laid in triangular shaped pockets of paper, made by
doubling a suitable sized square of paper into a triangular form, turn-
ing over and gumming together the edges.
SHELLS.
Shells, or the calcareous coverings of molluscous animals, only
require cleaning. The animals should be allowed to come partially
out of the shell, and then suddenly dash boiling water over them, and
leave them in the water for a few minutes, or more according to the
size of the specimen and thickness of the shell, the animal can then
easily be picked out with a pin or bent wire. The horny or calcareous
mouth pieces, or opercula, which close the openings of certain shells,
should always be preserved and gummed inside the shells to which
they belong. Bivalve shells may be left in the sun until dead and
then cleaned, but in no case allow the animal to rot out, as in most
instances during decomposition an acid is formed which corrodes and
disfigures the pearly lining of the shell. They may also be packed up
in dry sand without removing the animal, which will dry up, but may
afterwards, at a more convenient time, be softened in water and
removed.
GENE HAL REMARKS
Wounded birds and animals may be easily killed by pressing them
tightly across the windpipe. In the case of smaller birds, place the
thumb and second finger under the wings on either side, and the fore-
finger in the hollow of the chest, just over the windpipe, press ail
tightly together for a minute or so, until you find that respiration has
ceased.
The collector should always be careful to note down the color of the
eyes and fleshy parts as soon as possible after the specimen is cap-
tured. The locality and situation in which the animal is taken, with a
few remarks as to the style of the country and the nature of the vege-
tation, geological characters, and elevation, &c.; also the vulgar, local or
native name, and the rarety or commonness of the animal, and any in-
formation respecting its habits, &c., being particular about the dates and
season of the year. The color and shape of Seals, Porpoises, Whales,
Dugongs, &c., should be carefully noted, and a sketch made of their


White Arsenic ...
1 ft
Common or Hard White Soap* ...
1 ft
Salts of Tartar
4 oz.
Lime in Powder
...
3 oz.
Camphor
2 oz.
forms, whenever opportunity offers. In cases where the skins of these
animals cannot be cured, the skeletons or at least the skull should
always be preserved, being careful to note the sex —the females should
be carefully opened in search of the foetus, which should be preserved
in spirits.
Should the collector obtain what he believes to be a scarce or rare
animal the skull should not be cut or the opening at the back part
enlarged; with a little trouble the brains may be extracted through
the natural opening.
In preparing skeletons of animals for transmission to Museums, if
you have a choice of the animals, select the largest and oldest indi-
viduals, discarding those with fractured bones, if you can get better.
All the flesh should be carefully cut off, and the bones made as clean as
possible, the head, arms, legs, and tail may be severed from the body,
the back disjointed in convenient sized pieces, and the parts thrown
into a tank or tub of cold water, with a few handfulls of salt, or about
two or three ounces to the gallon, the salt and water renewed every
second or third day for about a week or so; the remainder of the flesh
can then be removed, and the brains extracted through the opening
at the base of the skull, which must not be enlarged or cut in any way,
and the bones when dried packed up.
When none of the chemicals aforementioned can be obtained, the
specimens may be skinned in the way described, the skin and the
bones carefully cleaned, and the bodies filled out with fresh dry
charcoal, or wood ashes, crushed into a coarse powder, to which may
be added with advantage grated or bruised “galls,” the excresences
found on the twigs and leaves of many of the gum trees ( Eucalypti );
hang the specimens up in a dry airy place till quite dry.
Receipt for making Arsenical Soap.
* Soft Soap must not be used.


Solution No. 1.
Mercuric Chloride *
.. f oz.
Camphor ...
1 oz.
Spirits of Wine
1 pint
Cut the soap into thin slices and melt it in a saucepan over a slow fire,
when melted add the Salts of Tartar which will reduce the mass into
a creamy consistency, take it off the fire and put in the arsenic, and
stir it up well, add the lime, and then the camphor either reduced to
a fine powder or dissolved in a small quantity of strong methylated
spirits of wine, stir the whole up well, and pour out into earthenware
jars to cool; if it is required very hard to pack up for travelling with,
it may be poured out into porus vessels, when cold it may be cut out
and pressed together into cakes like common soap, and when wanted
for use, softened with a brush in a little water.
Dissolve the camphor in methylated spirits with the mercuric
chloride, shaking it up occasionally until it is all dissolved.
* Corrosive sublimate.
Sydney: Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lB76.


• 4'
* I
i
