

ONE SHlbblN®.
THE
Great
Problem
AND
HOW IT IS SOLVED.
-hi BY J. E. LAING, M.A. **
Melbourne :
DUNN & CO., 309 & 311 BOURKB STREET.
MDCCCXC'I.




THE GREAT PROBLEM,
HOW ITT IS SOLVED.
DAVISON, DUNCAN AND CO., PRINTER#,
181 a LT. COLLINS ST.


“ God is Love." —l John IV., 8,16.
“ Love never fails." —I COR. XIII., 8.
“ And I, if Ihe lifted up from the earth , will draw all men unto
Myself." — John XII., 32.
“ For God , sending His own Sonin the likeness of sinful flesh and as
anofferingfor sin , condemned (or put down) sin in the flesh —what
the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh —in
order that the requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not after the flesh, hut after the spirit. — Romans VIII., 3, 4.


PREFACE.
JIJHOUGH a good deal has been written on the question discussed in
the following pages, the subject has by no means been yet worn
threadbare, and it seemed to me that there was still room for a con-
cise statement of the case, and this I have endeavoured to give. The
final destiny of the human race is to many an entirely unexplored
region of thought, because the traditions regarding it have been ac-
cepted more unquestioningly than those on perhaps any other subject.
Doubt here has been regarded as an advanced stage on the road to
infidelity, and timid minds have shrunk from an investigation as to
the truth or falseness of the commonly received opinions. The fol-
lowing remarks by John Stuart Mill are well worth weighing by those
who deprecate discussion on what they have come to regard as settled
truths : —“ If all mankind, minus one, were of one opinion, and only
one person were of the contrary opinion, mankind would be no
more justified in silencing that one person, than he, if he had the
power, would be justified in silencing mankind. Were an opinion a
personal possession of no value except to the owner ; if to be ob-
structed in the enjoyment of it were simply a private injury, it would
make some difference whether the injury was inflicted only on a few
persons or on many. But the peculiar evil of silencing the expres-
sion of an opinion is, that it is robbing the human race ; posterity as
well as the existing generation : those who dissent from the opinion,
still more than those who hold it. If the opinion is right, they are
deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth ; if wrong,
they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer perception and
livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision with error."


It has ever been the ruinous mistake of the religious world strenu-
ously to oppose every interpretation not in accord with the “ tradi-
tions of the elders,” in profound forgetfulness of the fact that these
traditions have been handed down from the dark ages. Doubt as to
their truth is treated as a rejection of Revelation, and a sapping of
the foundations of virtue. Every new interpretation rendered neces-
sary by the advance of science “ truly so called ” has been at first ob-
stinately opposed, and if finally accepted, accepted with the greatest
reluctance. It is forgotten that a book of Divine origin can never be
fully understood by finite human minds, and that, consequently, doc-
trines new to the present generation are lying in it, or in expositions
of it, awaiting birth or resurrection to a life of the highest usefulness.
In this light do I regard the doctrine discussed in these pages. It
lived in the distant past ; it was crucified during the relapse of
Christendom into the thick darkness of the gross materialistic con-
ceptions of the middle ages, and now it is rising to enter upon a
glorious life-giving career, for it makes known the only living and true
God, Whom to know is life eternal. The knowledge of God is un-
rivalled in importance. No pains should ba spared either to establish
the truth of the ordinary theology, or in the event of its being
proved false, to ascertain and disseminate true views of the character
of God. This may be done in full confidence that the truth on this
subject above all others will ever raise men to eternal life, and never
sink them or even tend to sink them in sin (as some fear it would do)
by removing, as they think,a restraining influence. If belief in “the
larger hope ” does remove any restraint (which is very doubtful) it
brings into operation others infinitely stronger.
Should the publication of this little volume in any way exert an
influence in hastening the resurrection of the life-giving truth that
“ God IS love,” and be in any degree instrumental in directing at-
tention to the necessary inferences deducible from that glorious
revelation He has given us of Himself, the object of sending it forth
will be attained.
Melbourne, September, 1891,




INTRODUCTION.
The Problem Stated
PART I.—IS IT GOD’S PROBLEM, AND WILL
HE SOLVE IT?
CHAPTER I.
Man’s Rights
CHAPTER IT.
The Nature of Created Beings
CHAPTER 111.
Conditional Salvation
CHAPTER IV.
Probation
CHAPTER V
The Unchangeableness of God ...
CHAPTER VI
The Unity of the Race


PART IL—HOW THE PROBLEM IS SOLVED.
CHAPTER I.
The Solution...
CHAPTER 11.
The Evolution of the Greatest of the Graces
CHAPTER 111.
Attraction Universally Prevails
CHAPTER IV.
The Knowledge of God
CHAPTER V.
Texts Apparently Opposed to the View that the Problem
will be Solved
CHAPTER VI.
Texts which Teach that God will Solve the Great Problem
CHAPTER VII.
The Glory of God
CHAPTER VIII.
Man’s Attempts to Solve the Great Problem
CHAPTER IX.
Effects of the Belief that the Great Problem will be
Solved.




©Jfte proßPerrj, aac| <Koao
“ God is Love." —l John IV. : 8.
“Acquaint thyself now with God, and he at peace" —Job XXII.: 21.
INTRODUCTION.—THE PROBLEM STATED.
W HEN it is explained that the Great Problem to be
considered is one which God has to work out, the
thought may well arise in the reader’s mind that the choice of
such a theme is somewhat bold. And so it is, and so is every
attempt to discuss God’s character and His dealings with men.
Yet this is what must be done ; it is what He Himself has
commanded to be done, —for the preaching of the Gospel in-
volves this, —and provided it be undertaken with the deepest
reverence, and with the single aim of knowing God and
making Him known, the boldness involved in taking up such a
theme is not without ample justification.
“ Come and let us reason together,” saith the Lord, and it
seems to me that in answer to that invitation we may legiti-
mately discuss the Great Problem, which, without further
preliminary remarks, I now proceed to state.


Given a number of intelligent beings endowed with free will,
how shall their Creator succeed in obtaining from, all of them a
voluntary obedience to the requirements oj His righteous law f
By going carefully through the wording of the problem it
will be seen that both angels and men are included, as well as
any other created beings that may be endowed with reason ;
that both sinless and sinful beings are included, that is, both
those who have hitherto obeyed the requirements of God’s law,
and those who have not; that the beings in question are
capable of both good and evil; that they freely choose to obey ;
that, as the natural consequence of this, their obedience is not
merely outward conformity to God’s righteous law, but con-
formity from the heart; and that in the event of the problem
being solved, wrong-doing will cease, and right-doing have
absolute and universal sway.
The truism may be added here that only in this con-
summation —so devoutly to be wished and so earnestly to be
striven for—can the complete happiness of the human race as
a whole be found.
That this, or something very like this, is the Great Problem
which God has set Himself to solve may, I think, be gathered
from the following petitions in the Lord’s Prayer : “ Hallowed
be Thy name, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth,
as it is in heaven from Romans viii. 4. where the ultimate
object of God’s dealings is said to be, “ that the requirements
of the law may be fulfilled in us and from the numerous
ascriptions to the Creator of glory and honour, both now and
for the ages of the ages. Surely the fulfilment of these
prayers and aspirations implies complete and universal obe-
dience to the requirements of God’s law.
As a great many people, however, think that God has never
set before Him this problem for solution, and that, though His


gracious will is that all should Jbe saved, this could not be
accomplished without interference with His creatures’ free will,
a considerable portion of this treatise must of necessity be
devoted to the purpose of showing that God has set for Him-
self the solution of this problem ; and that it can be solved
without interfering with anyone’s free will. An attempt will
then be made to point out the steps in the solution, and to
indicate the effect upon men of the belief that God will solve
this Great Problem.


PART I.
IS IT GOD’S PROBLEM? AND WILL HE SOLVE
Chapter I. —Man’s Rights.
JN considering whether God has undertaken to solve the
problem, the following question arises, and must be faced :
Have created beings any rights as against their Creator ?
Doubtless this will suggest to some readers the words of Paul,
“ Nay but, 0 man, who art thou that repliest against God ?
Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it ‘ Why
didst thou make me thus ? ’ Or hath not a potter a right
over the clay, from the same lump to make one part a vessel unto
honour and another unto dishonour ? ” These words do not
bear on the question at all. They refer to election—not
election to bliss as opposed to reprobation—but election to
some particular work or position. The context shows that
they are intended to point out that Esau had no right to com-
plain that he was not chosen to be the head of the Jewish nation ;
that none of Abraham’s kinsmen had any right to complain
that they were not called instead of him—in all proba-
bility had they been called, they would not have obeyed ; and
similarly in other cases. Paul’s words, then, however
pertinent they may at first sight appear, do not bear on the
question now raised, Have created beings any rights as against
their Creator ? There is no assailing of God’s sovereignty in
asking the question. It is freely admitted that the Creator
can do as He pleases, but the question we wish to consider in


the light of Revelation is, What will He please to do ? Perhaps
there is nothing so far from being conceivable as that the
Creator could do wrong, but at the same time there is nothing
so common as ascribing wrong actions to Him. This is of
course done in ignorance. But supposing the Creator capable
of doing wrong, and supposing further that He has actually
done wrong to some of His creatures, would not these creatures
have a right to redress ? It is true there would be no
possibility of redress, for there would be no court of appeal,
but none the less would the right to different treatment exist.
The Creator, however, is perfect—all-powerful, all-wise, all-
good, infinite in love. It seems absurd to speak about rights
as against such a Being, but much of the common theology is
such that the question cannot be thrust aside, even though it
looks like presumption to take it up.
It will be granted, then, that creatures have a right to pro-
per treatment, to fair play at the hands of the Creator, since
to deny this would be to say that God is at liberty to do wrong.
And coming to the facts of the case, all who reflect on the
subject will acknowledge that they receive very much
more than fair play, that they receive abundant mercy.
But the difficulty is to decide what constitutes proper treat-
ment and fair play, and to the consideration of this point our
attention must now be turned.
The creature has no “ say ”in his creation. He is brought
into existence, he is endowed with intelligence, with the
capability of doing good and evil, of enjoying happiness and
suffering pain. He may say, ‘I did not wish to be created,
and as a matter of fact many do say this, whether sincerely
or not it would be difficult to tell. But the wish is quite in
vain. What has been done cannot be made as if it had never
been done. Choice in the first instance being of necessity


impossible, can any right be based upon this circumstance ? As
mentioned before, it seems quite out of place to use the word
“ rights ” in speaking about the creature’s claims on a Creator
who is love. It will, perhaps, be better to consider what may
be justly inferred on this point from the fact of Cod’s char-
acter being what it is.
What, then, may we justly infer from the great truth that
God is Love, and from the fact that in the very nature of
the case creatures can have no voice in the matter of their
creation ?
First, we may infer that the creation of any creature is for
that creature’s good. Try to imagine a God of love creating a
being with the intention that its existence should be an evil to
it, or even simply with the foreknowledge that this would be
the case. The supposition is absurd on the face of it, in fact
a contradiction in terms. It will doubtless be objected that
God creates every being for its good, but that some turn their
creation to evil, in opposition to His wishes. True, but God
foresees all the effects of any creation before it takes place, and the
question is, whether He would create, foreseeing all the while that
such creation would be a very great evil to the being created.
The doctrine of free will cannot be pleaded in such a case,
because it rests with God either to create or abstain from
creating free moral agents, who will become incorrigible. I
plead for free will as a necessary part of every intelligent
being’s mental endowment, and I plead for non-interference
with that free will. But in maintaining these positions, we
must be careful not to restrict in thought the free will of the
great Creator. In the exercise of His free will He could either
say, “I will create only such intelligent beings as (in the event
of rebellion) I can reach and bring back to myself without any
withdrawal from them of the gift of free will”; or He could say,


“I will create, indiscriminately, intelligent beings who can and
who cannot be so reached and brought back. ” Can there be
any doubt as to how a God of love and order would exercise
His free will on such a point as this ? Would He be likely to
exercise it in creating incorrigible, unmanageable beings, who
would not only introduce, but perpetuate disorder and evil ?
Assuredly not. On the contrary, He created man in His own
image, and though that image has been defaced by sin, it has
not been quite obliterated, and when Christ’s mission of de-
stroying the works of the devil has been quite accomplished,
man will again be in the image and likeness of God, and that
in even a higher sense than at first.
Secondly, we may naturally infer further, that a God of love
would not create beings upon whom chastisement would have
no good effect, and whose punishment would consequently be
devoid of the reformatory element—the main, if not, perhaps,
the sole element in the punishment inflicted by a God of love.
On the subject of man’s rights the question arises, What
rights had he after the fall ? It is commonly said that he
forfeited all his rights by that act; that God might justly
have left him to his own devices, without stretching out a hand
to save. But if such had been the case, is it not likely that
Adam would have been told so ? But there is not a word
about it. On the contrary, the veiled gospel is at once preached.
There seems to be a good deal of mock humility about the
common theology, which represents our fallen first parents as
entitled to no consideration. Sin and wrong entered the
universe before the creation of Adam, and have been rife ever
since. Hid not Eve suffer a wrong from Satan when tempted
by that powerful evil spirit ? I think all will admit that she
did. But all wrongs will be righted, and Christ came for the
special purpose of putting this one right. “As in Adam all


died, so in Christ all shall be made alive.” While, then, our
first parents were blameworthy, it by no means follows that
they were entitled to no consideration. Free-will beings,
brought into existence without a voice in the matter,
and falling under exposure to a great temptation, are surely
entitled to some sympathy, and a chance of retrieving their
position ; and, as a matter of fact, from the moment of their
fall, right down to the present time, the most loving consider-
ation has been lavished upon the fallen human race. There
was line upon fine of gospel, here a little, and there a little,
until the completed good news of a crucified and risen Saviour
was unfolded, when repentance unto the remission of sins
began to be proclaimed at Jerusalem.
In short, all the circumstances connected with the creation
of free moral agents, point to the conclusion that God, from
all eternity, undertook' the solution of the Great Problem.


Chapter ll. —The Nature of Created Beings.
JJfHERE are some considerations concerning the nature of
created intelligent beings, which may fitly occupy the
chapter following that on “ Man’s Rights.” First of all,
created beings of necessity have a limited nature—the great
Creator, and He alone, is without bound or limit. There are
all degrees of limitation in power and capability, from the
comparatively slight limitation in the case of the brightest
Intelligence before God’s throne, to the very marked limit in
the lowest specimens of the human family. As regards these
limitations the question presents itself, In what directions do
they lie, and in what directions do they not lie ? As regards
free will there is no limitation. The voice of the Lord is
always heard calling, “ Choose ye this day whom ye will serve.”
As regards power the limit is very conspicuous. When
compared with the Creator, all created beings put together
arc as nothing. This limitation as to power exhibits itself
in many different ways, of which the following are examples:—
(1.) It limits the usefulness of the willing and obedient.
Even the great worker, Paul, felt this very keenly. He
lamented that performance with him lagged so far behind will.
(2.) It limits the resistance of the disobedient. There is no
contradiction between this statement and the statement that
there is no limitation of free will.
Our free will is not affected by the fact that we cannot move
mountains, or work miracles of any other kind ; it is not
affected by our inability to do all the good works which we
would, or by the inability of the wicked to accomplish all the


evil that they would ; nor is it affected by the fact that resist-
ance will be overcome ; “that in the name of Jesus every knee
shall bow, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and
things under the earth, and that every tongue shall confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father”
(Phil. ii. 10). This passage clearly refers to a voluntary sur-
render to Jesus. Were it said that at the command of Jesus
every knee should bow, there might be some ground for sup-
posing that it was an unwilling obeisance extorted by force,
though it is quite contrary to all we know about God’s
character to suppose that He would insist on a hypocritical
reverence. This reverence, however, is not yielded at the
command, but in the name of Jesus—the very expression
which every Christian uses when approaching God in prayer.
No one, who in the name of Jesus bows and confesses Him
Lord, can be His enemy. About one who was casting out
demons in Christ’s name, though not following Him, our Lord
said to His disciples, “ Forbid him not, for there is no man
who shall do a mighty work in My name, and be able quickly
to speak evil of Me.” In the same way, no one, who performs
the little work (though in one sense the mighty work) of
bowing in His name and confessing Him Lord, will be able
quickly to speak evil of Him, That the creature’s power of
resistance should be limited follows from the very nature of
the case. That God should overcome this resistance follows
naturally from His character. That He can overcome the
creature’s resistance without interfering with his free will may
appear puzzling to some, yet it does not appear why it should
be so, since it is a thing which occurs every day. Every fresh
case of submission to God is a case of God’s overcoming resist-
ance, and no one thinks of hinting that there has been any
interference with the convert’s free will. If this has been the


case with the hundreds of millions of those who have become
the willing servants of God in the past, why should it be
thought incredible about the billions who will in the future
become His willing servants ? The only ground on which I can
conceive of any such distinction being built is the supposition
that the unsaved are worse than the saved ever were, that in
fact they are so bad, and so powerful in their resistance, that
they have gone beyond God’s control. It is no uncommon
thing for sons to go beyond their earthly parents’ control, but
it is inconceivable that any one should ever go beyond God’s
control. It may be safely asserted that no human father
would knowingly bring into existence a son who would not
only go beyond his control, but would remain impenitent, and
be lost forever. Just as far as heaven is removed above the
earth, in that degree may it be more confidently asserted that
God would not create a being, who to His knowledge would
go beyond His control and develop powers of resistance in-
capable of being broken down without infringing on his free
will. The common idea that if people are saved at all they
must be saved here—that death ends probation—involves
either the assumption that all who have died unsaved were in-
corrigibly bad ; or the admission that God did not do all for
them that He might have done, or even as much as He has
done in the case of others. It may be said that God does His
part by giving all a fair chance, and that nobody who neglects
his fair chance, and remains unsaved, has a right to complain,
if others have a much better chance, and thereby secure their
salvation. This being granted for argument’s sake, it
still remains that God’s character is such that He
will not rest content with giving men a fair chance
and seeing them perish, when by giving them a
better chance they would be saved, We are told, on the best


authority, that Sodom and Gomorrah would have repented had
they had as good a chance as Capernaum, and I have no doubt
that Capernaum would have accepted Christ had it received as
good a chance as many have now-a-days. ISTow, since God is
love, and wills the salvation of all, may we not confidently
infer that He will take care that all have the best possible
chance before He with them, and may we not safely
predict that this care and love on His part will not be thrown
away ? We may be perfectly sure that since a better chance
would have saved Sodom and Gomorrah, they have had that
chance extended to them, and that, if a chance better than the
ver y good one they had would have saved Bethsaida and
Chorazin, they will not be finally lost for want of it. The
p jsition that none will be able to resist God’s love when they
fully see it, may be thought to he incompatible with free will
and the truth that salvation is conditional. To the consider-
ation of this objection the next chapter will be devoted.


Chapter lll.— Conditional Salvation.
JJJHERE can be no doubt whatever that salvation is con-
ditional, and it may be added that the conditions are very
stringent, as is shown in the saying of Paul, “ Follow after the
sanctification, without which no man can see the Lord.” Now
there is a difficulty in some minds as to how free will, con-
ditional salvation, and the absolute certainty of the salvation of
all, can be compatible with each other. It has been objected
that to call a thing conditional that must absolutely be, is to
destroy the very nature of conditions. Let us examine this
objection. It seems to arise from the too common inability or
neglect to distinguish between fore-knowledge and fore-
ordination. What was foretold by the prophets must
absolutely be. For example, the betrayal of Christ was
predicted, and consequently it was necessary that it should
take place. It was, therefore, also necessary that there should
be an agent ready to do it, and that, too, among his own
chosen twelve. This constituted a condition of the perform-
ance of the deed, and yet the doing of it w r as an absolute
certainty. Nor was the free will of anyone tampered with in
bringing about the fulfilment of the prophecy. Heie, then, is
an instance in which the performance of a particular action
was absolutely certain, although conditional, and though the
free choice of the agent was in no way interfered with. And
the same reasoning applies to hundreds of events foretold by
the prophets, and in due time fulfilled.
It may be well, however, to add another illustration
apart from prophecy altogether. Passing the Matricu-
lation Examination, or indeed any test of scholarship,


is conditional on attaining a fixed standard of pro-
ficiency in certain branches of knowledge. Now, given
a certain class of pupils under instruction of a certain quality,
all will fulfil the prescribed conditions and pass. They
may not all pass at the first trial, but eventually, by continuing
under proper instruction, they will all attain the prescribed
standard. Now, in dike manner, salvation is conditional ; in
order to obtain it, certain conditions have to be complied with,
which may be generalized as, (1,) a complete surrender to the
Saviour; (2,) holiness or sanctification. Now, given a
certain class of beings under training of a certain character,
the result will be that all will perform the conditions and
be saved. We have next to consider whether the circum-
stances assumed in the case of the examination exist in this
case also.
First, let us consider the class of beings. Are they such
that there is no impossibility about the salvation of them all ? I
think all will readily answer this question in the affirmative.
There can be no inherent impossibility in the character of
beings created in the image and likeness of God, fallen though
they be. The next question refers to the training. Is that
of a suitable character ? In as far as it is committed to human
hands it is sometimes good, very frequently bad, sometimes
indifferent, but never perfect. Only when God takes it into
His own hands does it reach perfection. Speaking of earthly
training Solomon says, “ Train up a child in the way lie should
go, and when he is old he shall not depart from it.” From
this we conclude that men are a race of such a kind that they
only need proper training to save them. Now, it is clearly
taught that God, who spared not His only Son, but gave Him
up to the death for us all, will with Him freely give us all
things,andamong “allthings”must be included proper training.


We cannot, perhaps, fathom the reason why so many are
deprived of good training here, but we may rest assured that
at some time or other all will enjoy the training which will
bring them into loving submission to the Saviour, and guide
their steps into the path of holiness. Their free choice will
not be interfered with, and the conditions of salvation will not
be relaxed, yet the training and the teaching will be so well fitted
to each individual case, that all will be brought to a voluntary
surrender.
Continuing the illustration drawn from the Matriculation
Examination, it may be noticed that the knowledge on the part
of the candidates, that they will all eventually pass, will not
lead to indifference or indolence, because it is at the same time
known that the standard will not be lowered, and that the
work must be done. The feeling of shame at repeated failure
would also act as an incentive ; and there would be a further
powerful stimulus in the knowledge that every failure meant a
great loss of time—a loss that would probably never be made
good. In like manner the loss accruing from procrastination
in eternal matters is in one sense endless, as those guilty of
it will always thereafter be less advanced in their progress
upward than they would otherwise have been.
Apply this to salvation. Let it be known that all will
finally be saved, but that the conditions of salvation will not in
the slightest degree be relaxed, and the tendency to put off
will be reduced to a minimum. A very important point to be
remembered is, that as a rule people come to Christ to supply
a want rather than to flee from the wrath to come. In fact,
it is only as they come to Christ in order that the void in
their hearts may be filled, and because they are drawn by His
love, that they can be truly said to come to Him at all. There
is nothing dangerous, then, in the doctrine that all will be


finally saved. When properly understood, there is nothing in
it to encourage procrastination. On the contrary, even on the
low ground of selfish calculation there is every inducement to
accept salvation, and comply with its conditions without delay ;
while by this doctrine the attractive power of the Saviour’s
character is infinitely increased, and this attractiveness is the
really operative cause* in conversion. The selfish consideration
is of service only in awakening interest in these matters.
Until it gives place to higher motives there is no real salvation,
for this implies deliverance from selfishness. The truth on
this point as on all others may, then, be boldly declared, and
the consequences confidently left with God.
The considerations in this and the preceding chapter point
to the conclusion that there is no moral impossibility in the
way of the solution of the problem, and therefore nothing to
prevent God’s undertaking the work of solving it. Let it not
he understood, however, that undertaking this work is the
result of an after-thought. God has no after-thoughts. He
saw the end from the beginning, and in the beginning He
foresaw both the problem which would arise and the solution
thereof.


Chapter IV.— -Probation.
0 LOSE LY connected with the subject of conditional salvation
is that of probation. It is also closely connected with the
problem, for the possibility or otherwise of its solution depends
upon what limits, if any, are set to the probationary period.
Probation is quite a common thing in every day life. A boy
is taken on trial for a month ; a public servant is appointed
for six or twelve months on trial : these are common instances
of probation or testing. It will be noticed that the rejection
of a candidate at the end of the trial does not imply final
rejection. The boy who failed to give satisfaction during the
trial may improve himself in the points in which he was
lacking, may be admitted to a second trial, and may come out
of the second ordeal fully approved. As regards the probation
which human beings undergo at the hand of God, it is
the generally received opinion that they have but one trial, and
that this trial, which begins with the dawning of re-
sponsibility, ends with the close of their natural life,
whether that has been long or short, favourable for
the purpose or unfavourable. Such a doctrine is so
contrary to all reasonable expectations on the subject, that,
were it not thought to be taught in Scripture, it would gain few,
if any adherents, if put forward as a speculation. Before
accepting it, clear, unmistakeable proof should be forthcoming,
but an examination of the texts usually quoted in its support
shows that no opinion ever had so small a scriptural basis for
its acceptance. Before examining any of these texts, I


purpose offering a few thoughts on the antecedent im-
probability of making death in every case the end of probation.
These thoughts will be an attempt to answer the question, Is
death always the natural time for the ending of probation ?
For the following reasons I think not :
The period of probation is a testing or proving time.
Let us suppose 'that the testing is to try whether certain per-
sons will adopt a particular course. When the course has
been put before them, accompanied with sound arguments well
stated, probation, for that time at least, ends as soon as the
decision for or against the proposed course is arrived at.
The probation of the grown-up Israelites who marched out
of Egypt ended in two years, so far as entering the Land of
Canaan was concerned. It ended when, by their refusal to go
up and possess the land, they proved their unfitness to under-
take the conquest. Saul’s probation as king and as a
candidate for the position of “ founder of a dynasty,” ended
when he disobeyed the Lord in saving alive Agag, the King
of the Amalekites, and the choicest of the oxen. And it is
natural that probation should thus end when some question
has been debated in the mind, and a decision deliberately
adopted. But does the moment of death always corres-
pond with the arriving at a decision on matters of eternal
moment ? Far from it. On the contrary, it cannot be
denied that death overtakes people at every conceivable
stage of their testing. Some would have decided for right
had their lives been spared a little longer, and some would
have decided to continue in sin.
It comes upon some just as they are entering on the consid-
eration of eternal tilings, upon otheis deep in the investigation,
upon others drawing towards a decision favourable or unfavour-
able, upon others when the decision for or against has just


been arrived at, and upon some after the chosen course has
been long pursued. In the last case probation, or at least
one stage of it, ended long before death, but in the former cases
death occurred while the process of probation was in progress,
and the most reasonable supposition is, that it went on after
death. To those who do not believe in a future life, death is of
course a terrible event. To those, also, who have crude notions
about a future state, and think that the doom of each is, on
entering that state, irrevocably fixed, death is an event
most solemn and awful, but to those who regard the dead as
still in the hands of a loving God, who is the same yesterday,
to-day and for ever, death is but a door or passage leading
from one room to another in God’s great mansion. It is really
a more solemn thing to five than to die, as has been expressed
again and again by the deepest thinkers. At death there is
undoubtedly a great change in the manner of living, the fleshly
body is laid aside, and a spiritual body of some kind is either put
on or simply retained by the spirit, and conscious life goes on.
God at the burning bush said, “I am the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob,” and Christ in commenting on this said,
“ God is not the God of the dead, but of the living, for all
live to Him a plain intimation that those whom we call dead
are really alive. From our point of view they are the dead ;
from God’s point of view there are no dead for all live to Him,
But while at the point we call deatli there is a great change in
the mode of living, there is no ground for supposing that a
great change of character takes place. The probabilities are
that the work of character building, which was going on when
the change came, will still go on. But just as any striking
event, such as exposure to great danger, or deliverance from
some great impending calamity, may mark the turning point in
a man’s career, so the great event, death, may be the turning


point in the career of many. The sight of the now unseen
spiritual world may convert many, just as a glimpse of it did
Saul of Tarsus. On the other hand many may go to greater
depths of sin in the other life, before they are brought to their
senses by the sight of the infinite love of God. But in face
of Paul’s assertion that “ love never fails ” we cannot without
opposing inspiration doubt that in the end God’s love will
prevail, and bring back every wanderer to the fold. If not,
love will fail in every such instance—a consummation which
Paul in his wonderful dissertation on love in 1 Cor, xiii.,
emphatically declares to be impossible.
But while we have been treating of probation, as if God
proved men in exactly the same way and for the same purpose
as that for which man proves his fellow man before taking him
permanently into his service, it must be borne in mind that the
object in the two cases cannot be exactly the same. To say that
the object is the same in both cases would be to deny the fore-
knowledge of God. When God commanded Abraham to offer
up his son Isaac, He was testing or proving him, not to see
what Abraham would do, for that He foreknew, but to develop
his faith by giving it work to do in the shape of overt acts for
the purpose of educating and strengthening it, God tested
King Saul when He said to him, “Go and smite Amalek, and
utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not.” But
the testing was not to ascertain Saul’s character, for that He
already knew right well, but to show both to Saul himself and
to the people what he was. To test people when it is known
that they will not stand the test, may appear an unreasonable
or even a heartless proceeding, but it is really a kindness to
them, and the only system of training that will benefit them.
They are not likely to know their sinfulness and their need of
repentance, until they have been tried, and by the performance


of an overt act of disobedience have found themselves wanting.
It must be remembered, then, that when God tests men, it is
not for the purpose of ascertaining how the probationers will
stand the test, but in order to educate and purify them.
The following are the texts mainly adduced in favour of the
view that man’s fate is irrevocably fixed at death “If the
clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth :
and if a tree fall towards the south, or towards the north, in
the place where the tree falleth, there shall it be. He that
observeth the wind shall not sow ; and he that regardeth the
clouds shall not reap. ... In the morning sow thy seed,
and in the evening withhold not thine hand : for thou knowest
not which shall prosper, whether this or that, or whether they
both shall be alike good ” (Eccles. xi,, 3,4, 6). “ There is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither
thou goest ” (Eccles. ix., 10). “ The night cometh when no
man can work ” (John ix., 4). “It is appointed unto men
once to die, and after this cometh judgment ” (Heb. ix., 27).
“We must all be made manifest before the judgment-seat of
Christ; that each one may receive the things done in the body,
according to what he hath done, whether it be good or bad.”
(II Cor. v., 10). Were it not for the preconceived notions on
the subject of probation, these and similar texts would have no
weight whatever in supporting the common view, for they
really do not touch upon the subject. The passage in Ecclesi-
astes points out that as the winds, the clouds, and matter in
general are subject to God’s physical laws, so spiritual man
should be subject to the spiritual law of his being— constant
work for the glory of God, sowing in the morning and in the
evening withholding not his hand, as it is there expressed. If
the passages in Ecclesiastes and John prove anything about
probation, they prove far too much, for they would also prove


that the story of the rich man and Lazarus is quite contrary
to fact, since it shows that work, device, knowledge and
wisdom do all exist in the grave, i.e., Hades, the unseen world.
These passages, however, are not intended to do anything
more than point out in a plain, common-sense way that man s
earthly works and pursuits of every kind are brought to a stop
at death. The other ■passages (Heh. ix., 27 and II Cor. v., 10)
speak of a judgment after death, hut few, if any, will venture
to say that it is the final judgment they speak of, and there is
no Scripture to show that the judgment after death and the
final judgment are always or even generally the same. If they
were, the last great judgment would be quite unnecessary. It
would simply be re-sentencing beings all of whom had been
sentenced previously, at periods more or less remote.


Chapter V.— The Unchangbablbness op God.
JfHE great trutli that God is unchangeable—the same yes-
terday, to-day, and forever —has a very direct bearing on
the subject of the preceding chapter. Though everyone is
ready to confess this truth, many are not prepared to follow
wherever it leads. For example, it is commonly thought that
at a certain point in an impenitent man’s existence, God’s
conduct towards him undergoes a complete change. The
point I refer to is of course physical death. Up to this point
he is spoken of as being in the place of hope, and the re-
cipient of God’s many loving favours, and this is quite true.
But the event called death, which is not the man’s act, and
not a sin, is regarded as changing all that. He is no longer
in the place of hope, and he is now the recipient of wrath in-
stead of favours. Were this change to take place on the com-
mission of what is called the unpardonable sin, there might be
some reason for the change, if God were a changeable Being ;
but even if God were changeable there would be no reason
why the change should take place simultaneously with an
event which is not man’s act, and which is not a sin at all.
Let me put this point in another way. We are commanded
to pray for all men, and we delight to pray for them that they
may be saved and come to a knowledge of the truth. We
rejoice that they are in the hands of a loving God, and in
faith we commend them to His care. We know that not one
of them can be beyond hope, otherwise God would not exhort
us to pray for them all. As long as the breath is in their


bodies, we regard them as being in the best possible hands,
but as soon as the vital spark has fled we regard God as
undergoing a complete change towards those who bad not pre-
viously made their peace with Him. We regard them now as
being in the worst possible hands. He must no longer be
approached in prayer on their behalf. Though our natural
feelings would lead us'still to hope and pray for their salvation,
we must at the call of a stern theology repress these feelings,
just as if it were possible that we could be more merciful than
the Source of all mercy, and more unchanging in our
good wishes than He. Ido not advocate prayer for the dead, not
because I think their doom is fixed, for I do not so think, but
because they are now out of our sphere and care altogether,
and more fully and directly under God’s loving care and
training. While our acquaintances are on earth, we are to
some extent their keepers, and it is our duty both to pray and
work for their salvation ; but when they have crossed the
bourne whence no traveller returns, they are beyond our care,
and our faith in God’s unchanging love should cause us to
leave them in His hands without a doubt that they will have
the best of training, even though it should be in the form of
severe punishment in the Gehenna of fire. It is a good
general rule that prayer and work should go together, and
when our friends have been removed from our sphere by death,
so that we can no longer be co-workers with God for their
good, it is fitting that the offering up of prayers in their
behalf should also cease.
To such thoughts it is generally objected that scripture is
against them, but this is an objection that should be made
with the greatest caution, when we remember how many
erroneous interpretations have been discarded after being held
for centuries. Especially with regard to views in harmony


with the general tenor of scripture should care be exercised in
urging against them the weight of particular texts. The in-
terpretation of a particular text or class of texts may be wrong,
but the general principle which is part of the very texture of
scripture cannot be wrong.
Two great truths about God are clearly revealed, and
universally accepted, viz., that He is love, and that He is the
same yesterday, to-day and forever. It follows that any inter-
pretation of particular texts which clashes with these truths
must be false. The terribly harsh and gloomy interpretations
which do not harmonize with the two fundamental truths
about God are easily accounted for. We know that in
matters in general men’s views depend upon the state of their
mental capabilities and attainments, and religious matters
form no exception to the rule. Now we can well imagine how
in the early centuries of Christianity men with a good deal of
savage blood in their veins would, when converted, interpret
texts to accord with their own natures, and being strong-
minded and energetic would influence against their will the
milder spirits that naturally recoiled from such interpretations.
Their interpretations being put forward with boldness, the
authority of scripture would soon be pleaded for them, and de-
murrers treated as heretics. How many of the choicest spirits
have groaned under the belief in endless torment, but, overawed
by the apparent authority quoted in its favour, have not dared
to rebel against it. To illustrate this point I quote from
Canon Farrar :—“ St, Augustine did more than any man to
settle the popular conviction in the distinct and definite belief
that there is an endless hell. He did this far more by his
authority, which was immense, than by his arguments, which,
in the one main passage in which he discusses the question,
are singularly empty and feeble. And yet St. Augustine him-


self, dubious and tentative as his own language is, also did
more than any man to lead the Church into a belief in a ter-
minable retribution —a ‘ purgatorial fire ’ beyond the grave a
cleansing pain, whether in the intermediate state or at the day
of judgment,”
Of necessity different views concerning God will be held by
different races or generations of men at different stages of
advancement in civilisation and general culture. The less
cultivated will have thoughts about God which are quite revolt-
ing to those more advanced in humane instincts, The un-
reasoning may draw very erroneous inferences from the
proposition that “ God is Love.” Some draw the inference
that those who die wicked will suffer endless torment inflicted
simply as retribution, and wholly without the reformatory element.
Others draw the equally erroneous conclusion that God will
not inflict punishment at all. But those who have sound
heads and hearts, and who have reflected on the subject will
say that love implies chastening as severe as is necessary to
produce reformation. They will appeal to the government of
the family to prove that true love does not imply continual in-
dulgence, but that it oftentimes implies severe punishment.
And the necessary inference from the truth that God is un-
changeable is that as He acts towards the disobedient here,
striving to draw them to repentance by His goodness, so in the
ages to come, as long as such a course is needed, He will draw
men to Himself by the cords of love. In one sense this draw-
ng will always continue, but I refer here to the drawing neces-
sary to induce men to turn.
The seeming contradiction of this view by passages such as
‘ I will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear
cometh,” is found to be apparent only and not real. The
words are put into the mouth of Wisdom personified, and are


not spoken by God. As the part cannot equal the whole,
Wisdom cannot by any means be'regarded as equivalent to
God. But even if the words were spoken by God, they could
not be taken as the serious literal expression of His thoughts.
By the figure of speech by which God is spoken of as encom-
passed with human imperfections and limitations, He is
spoken of as laughing at the wicked in the day of calamity, as
repenting etc., but no one who has at all reflected on the
subject ever imagines that it is possible for God either to laugh
at calamity or to repent. Let no particular text, then, disturb
our minds or shake our confidence in the hopeful inferences to
be drawn from the great truths that God is love and that He
is the same yesterday, to-day and forever. Love, even as im-
perfectly developed in the Christian, cannot literally laugh at
calamity (1 Cor xiii.) ; how much less then can God, in whom
resides perfect, all-reaching, infinite love.


Chapter Yl.—The Unity of the Race.
JJERHAPS there is no lesson which it is so necessary that
man—especially man of the higher and better type—
should learn, as the lesson that the human race is one. The
truth of this position is admitted in a general way, but it is
a difficult lesson for pride to learn perfectly. Assent is
readily given to the statement that God has made of one blood
all nations of men to dwell on the face of the earth, and to the
truth of the proverb, “ One touch of nature makes the whole
world kin.” Writers moralise about the scenes which take
place when a fire breaks out in a crowded hall or theatre, and
about the crushes which take place when the box plan is opened
for some popular entertainment. After depicting the disgrace-
fully selfish struggles for life or precedence witnessed at such
times, their reflection is, “ Even amongst the most cultured and
civilised how thinly after all is the savage veiled I” I think it
was John Newton who preached in one sentence an eloquent
sermon on the unity of the race. He had evidently learnt the
lesson though perhaps he failed to carry it out to its legitimate
issues. Seeing a criminal on the way to execution he ex-
claimed, “ There goes John Newton but for the grace of God.”
If all who think themselves better than the general mass had
but this thought, how much more sympathy would there be
for the depraved and the wretched! If the moral and
respectable but realized that the state of the most degraded
would most probably have been theirs, had their parentage, up-
bringing and general environment been similar, there would


not be so many prayers offered up- thanking God that the
petitioner (?) is not like this or that sinner or even like this
publican ; there would be more “ publican’s prayers ” offered
up, “ God be merciful to me a sinner,” and there would be
more confessions to being the chief of sinners. The Saviour’s
sayings and doings when on earth show that He understood
the matter fully. He was often blamed by the moral and
respectable for associating with the degraded, but He made it
very clear that to His eye —piercing as it did even to the
inmost recesses of the heart —there was not so much difference
between the classes of mankind after all. Indeed it would
appear that the respectable had the worst of it. To the highly
respectable chief priests and elders He spoke the parable of the
two sons, who were commanded by their father to work in the
vineyard. We read that the first answered, “I wdl not,” but
afterwards repented and went, while the second replied, “ I go,
sir,” but went not. The Saviour’s application of the parable
is contained in the words He addressed to the priests and
elders, “Verily, I say unto you, that the publicans and harlots
go into the Kingdom of God before you.”
By the common theology the human race is treated as a unit
so far as sin and suffering are concerned —“ through one man
sin entered into the world, and death through sin ; and so
death passed unto all men, for that all sinned ” (Rom. v., 12)
—but in the matter of salvation the individual is reckoned
the unit, and it is thought that a great many of these units
will be finally lost, notwithstanding the equally explicit con-
tinuation of the passage just quoted, “ as through one trespass
the judgment came unto all men to condemnation ; even so
through one act of righteousness the free gift came unto all
men to justification of life. For as through the one man’s
disobedience the many were made sinners, even so through


the obedience of the one shall the many be made righteous ”
(Rom. v., 18, 19). It is scarcely necessary to remark that the
expression “ the many ”is just equivalent to “all.” But the
idea that the individual, or even a generation of individuals, is
the unit, is contrary not only to reason, but to every principle
of fair play. Take the privileges and liberties (social and re-
ligious) enjoyed under the British Constitution, and reflect on
the present opportunities of knowing and being saved by the
gospel, as compared with those of a thousand years ago, or
even a hundred years ago. Our privileges and opportunities
are the growth of ages. We inherit the fruits of the labours
of all who have gone before. And shall the numerous genera-
tions of those who struggled in darkness for us have no share
in the light and salvation which through their efforts we enjoy ?
When Christianity was introduced among the Japanese they
did not take this doctrine 30 stoically as many of us seem to
do. St. Francis Xavier wrote in 1652, “ One of the things
that most pains and torments these Japanese is that we teach
them that the prison of hell is irrevocably shut. For they
grieve over the fate of their departed children, of their parents
and relatives. They ask if there is any hope, and I am
obliged to answer that there is absolutely none. The grief at
this affects and torments them wonderfully ; they almost pine
away with sorrow. I can hardly restrain my tears sometimes
at seeing many so dear to my heart suffer such intense pain
about a thing which is already done with, and can never be
undone.”
What a callousness of heart these last words reveal, and
what a depth of insight they give us into the baleful effects
on the human heart of the common theology ! The remark is
often made with sighs by religious people, that there is no
marked line dividing the Church from the world, that is, that


the Church does not exhibit a high and exalted character as
compared with the world. Is the cause far to seek ? Is it
not to be found in their low conception of the character of
God ? We sometimes speak of men as being better than their
religion, and certainly the believers in the common views con-
cerning the future would need to be better than theirs. And
in truth even though they may be but very indifferent Christians,
they are better than might have been expected considering their
views of God’s character. They are far superior in somg points to
the God—or rather the creature of their imagination—whom
they worship.
The inspired bards and prophets of old, and the uninspired
bards of modern times, delight in singing of the good time
coming,
“When man to man the world o’er
Shall brothers be fora’ that;”
when selfishness shall have been uprooted, when men shall do
to others as they would that others should do to them, when
swords shall be beaten into ploughshares, and the art of war
learned no more, when there shall be nothing to hurt or
destroy in all God’s holy mountain, when all, from the least to
the greatest, shall know God, and through this knowledge be
possessed of eternal life. Surely in that happy time the for-
tunate participators in the blessings thereof will think kindly
of the many generations that preceded them in the toilsome
upward march, and it may be safely predicted that they will
not have to endure the teaching that the great majority of
their ancestors are irrevocably shut up in the prison of hell. It
will be understood that the then happy state of the earth will
be no complete fulfilment of the prophecy, “ In thee shall all
the families of the earth be blessed,” but that its only
adequate fulfilment consists in treating the whole race as one,


and blessing each individual member of it. They without us,
or we without them could not be perfect—“ As in Adam all
die, so in the Christ shall all be made alive.”
I am not to be understood as saying in this chapter that
descent and environment are everything. There are differences
between men that cannot be accounted for by these circum-
stances. These differences are due to the different ways in
which free will—the source of responsibility —is exercised.
What I contend for is that the differences are not so great as
is usually imagined, and that they are certainly not great enough
to warrant the opposite awards of endless bliss and endless tor-
ment. Especially is this clear when we reflect on the
comparatively slight difference between the least holy of
believers and the best among unbelievers.


PART 11.
HOW THE PROBLEM IS SOLVED.
Chapter I.—Solution op the Problem.
“ For Ood, sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for
a sin offering, condemned (or put down) sin in the flesh, a thing
which the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh."
Rom. VIII.: 3.
JN the foregoing chapters the great problem lias been stated,
reasons have been adduced to show that God has made it
His problem, and that, consequently, it will sooner or later be
solved. It is necessary that the method of the solution should now
be briefly discussed, though really little more can be done in
this direction than making a few expository remarks on the
verse quoted at the beginning of this chapter, for that contains
the summing up of the matter. In the translation of it given
above, the arrangement has been somewhat altered so as to
bring out more clearly the full meaning of the apostle. -The
verse brings before us the following truths :
1, The existence of sin.
2. God’s wish to put down sin.
3. The powerlessness of law to put it down
4. The reason of the powerlessness of law—it is weak
through the flesh.
5. The accomplishment of the desired work by God’s
sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for a sin offering.


The succeeding verse tells us that the great end and object
of all this is, that the requirement of the law may be fulfilled
in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, or in
other words, that the great problem may be solved.
From our experience of law, as made and administered by
the different earthly states, we are apt to conclude that it is
almost all-powerful; and we are somewhat surprised when God
says concerning His law, that it is weak. And when we think
further of the awful sanctions attached to His law, our wonder
is increased. When, however, we pause to reflect that God’s
requirement is that the law should be written in our heart, and
that outward obedience apart from a loyal heart is worthless,
our wonder ceases. Law cannot touch the heart. When
a state attaches a heavy penalty to theft, the number of
infringements of the law, “ Thou shalt not steal,” is dimin-
ished, but there is nothing to show that the enactment has up-
rooted the spirit of covetousness from a single heart. Law is
necessary to teach us what we ought to do, but it is powerless
as regards leading us to do it. Law is weak when it is alone ;
it needs a helpmeet to be its complement, and that helpmeet is
love. Paul says, “ Love is the fulfilling (i.e. the complement)
of the law ” (Rom. xiii,, 10). The solution of the problem,
then, is effected by the union of law and love. Not that
these things are saviours in the true sense of the word. There
is one Saviour, but salvation cannot he obtained until He is
known, and until the knowledge of Him has produced love.
No wonder, then, that the knowledge of God is spoken of
in language like the following :
“ They shall not hurt nor destroy in all My holy mountain ;
for the earth shall he full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the sea ” (Is. xi., 9). “ And this is life eternal,
that they might know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus


Christ, Whom Thou hast sent ” (Joliu xvii., 3). “ For if after
they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the
knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, etc.” (II Peter
ii., 20).
These passages, and many others to the same effect, show
that the knowledge of God is just as powerful to put down
sin, as law by itself is weak ; and the fact that such great
power resides in this knowledge shows how necessary it was
that Christ should come in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
show us the character of God in a series of actions performed
by One who was bone of our bone, and subject to all the
temptations by which we are assailed.
But Christ not only reveals to us by His life the holiness of
God ; in His character of a sin-offering He shows that love is
the summing up of all God’s attributes—the result obtained
by blending them all together, just as pure white is the sum of
all the colours, and is obtained by blending them together—
that the knowledge of God’s love, by begetting love in return
in the hearts of men, “ destroys or puts down sin in the flesh,
and causes the righteousness of the law to be fulfilled in us : a
thing which the law could not do in that it was weak through
the flesh.” This explains how love is the fulfilling (or com-
plement) of the law ; and it corresponds also with John’s
thoughts on the subject—“ Every one that loveth is born of
God, and knoweth God. Whosoever is born of God doth not
commit sin.” Thus we see there is a connecting link required
between “ the sending of God’s own Son ” and “ the putting
down of sin.” That link is love, and until love—the love that
obeys and works—is kindled in man by God’s sending His
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for a sin-offering,
the chain is incomplete, the problem remains unsolved, there
is no forsaking of sin, and the sinner remains unsaved. But


when God’s love begets love in return —and love never fails —
the problem is solved, sin put down, the sinner saved, the
chain made complete. A glorious chain it is, consisting of
these four links : God’s sending His own Son ; our love to God
in return ; our fulfilling the right doing required by the law ;
eternal life.


Chapter ll.— The Evolution of the Greatest of the
Graces.
jpHE chain described at the close of the preceding chapter
may be extended at both ends. It would then consist of the
following fifteen links :—lnnocence : temptation : the fall :
prevalence of sin and selfishness : the law : knowledge of sin and
the abounding of trespasses : God’s sending His own Son, that
is, the manifestation of God’s love towards us : the knowledge
of God ; love towards God ; submission to God : crucifixion of
the flesh with the passions and lusts thereof, that is, the death
of selfishness and the rise of unselfish love : the right doing
required by the law : present eternal life, that is, a Christ-like
life : the eternal life of the next age : the eternal life of all
succeeding ages.
It will be noticed that love, the complement of law,
occupies a very prominent position in this chain, occurring as
it does in three main links. In the first of these the love
mentioned is the love of God towards us, in the second it is
our love towards God, the love of gratitude, and in the third
it is love similar to God’s, pure unselfish love, develope l in ns.
It is concerning tins love that Coleridge says :
He prayeth well who loveth well
Both man, and bird, and beast;
He prayeth best who loveth best
All things both great and small,
For the dear Lord who loveth us,
He made, and loveth all.


These three manifestations form a trinity necessary to man’s
salvation. There could be no salvation apart from God’s in-
finite love towards us. Not less true is it that the man who
has not the love of gratitude towards God is in a hopelessly
unsaved state.
O monster ingratitude, where can we see
A blot on. humanity blacker than thee !
Unbounded iniquity cannot but be
In the heart that’s to gratitude dead.
But the possession of the love of gratitude is only a partial
salvation, if indeed it is anything more than the road leading up
to it. Salvation is nothing less than the possession in some
degree of the Divine nature, the participation in that nature,
or the being made partakers of it. Now it is the existence in
us of pure unselfish love towards
“ Both man, and bird, and beast,”
that is, towards all that God has made, that gives us true
communion, real partnership with Him. The love of gratitude
finds expression in the lower animals. For benefits conferred
upon them, for deliverance from pain or danger, the more in-
telligent of them express in unmistakeable ways their “ love of
gratitude,” but we would not therefore say that they are
made partakers of our nature. In like manner our “ love of
gratitude ” towards God does not by itself make us partakers
of His Divine nature, though it leads towards that goal.
Again, it is only by the existence in us of pure unselfish love
like God’s that we can really know Him. We cannot be truly
said to know any person with whom we have no ideas in
common—we cannot understand him. In like manner only
those can be said to know God, who have attained to the pos-
session of the unselfish love which is the very essence of God’s
character, for God is love. As the attainment of this unselfish


love really constitutes the solution of the problem, the re-
mainder of this chapter will be devoted to an account of its
evolution.
The beautiful clouds which fashion the varied and often
sublime scenery of the sky, and the beautiful snow —fit
emblem of purity—have been drawn up by the heat of the sun
perhaps from the pestilential swamp, perhaps from the typhoid
producing drain, or the green stagnant pool. The most
beautiful flowers, and the plants that furnish food for us, very
frequently have their roots in that which is hateful to sight
and smell, and noxious when uncovered. This is God’s
manner of doing things in the natural world, and in somewhat
the same way in the spiritual world does He bring the most
beautiful graces out of the most hateful qualities, or to speak
more correctly, out of qualities which have been previously so
exercised as to make them hateful.
Taking man as he is, we find that he is naturally selfish.
Some regard for others also generally shows itself very early,
but it seldom, in the natural man, attains any higher stage
than the most rudimentary. Selfishness, then, is the un-
savoury soil in which the high qualities developed in the best
of men have had their root, and I purpose tracing, step by
step, the process of the evolution or development of these high
qualities. The full title of the chapter might therefore appro-
priately be : The progress of man from selfishness and the love
and practice of sin to the stage of unselfish love, of walking
according to the Spirit, and of delighting in and fulfilling the
righteousness of the law.
Selfishness causes men to search after happiness, and to do
those actions, and seek for those things, in which they find
their happiness. In this search they make very grave mistakes
in their choice both of deeds and of things. All the different


methods of following after happiness may be summarised
under two heads :
Man’s way.
God’s way.
I suppose every human being tries his own way first. He
is grievously disappointed, and he finds, besides, that in fol-
lowing his own way he has been doing things forbidden by the
holy law of God, and he is terrified by the curse pronounced
against every infringement thereof. In this state let us sup-
pose that God’s way is laid before him. And just here let me
lay down the distinction between the two ways.
Man’s way of seeking happiness consists in setting the
affections on earthly things, whether right or wrong in them-
selves ; in giving way to the lusts of the flesh ; in seeking
wealth, position, fame, or in giving up the mind to the pursuit
of pleasures and amusements, however innocent in themselves.
I am not to be understood as saying that wealth, position, and
fame are evil things, but only that setting our affections on
them is wrong. Man’s way is summed up by the apostle as
sowing to the flesh, that is, making provision only for the
lower side of his nature.
God’s way consists of setting the affections on heavenly
things, of making provision for tlie spiritual side of our nature,
of sowing to the Spirit.
Now, when God’s way is accepted it is generally because the
other has proved a failure, or because it is seen that, although
it is yielding happiness of a kind at present, the time will come
when it will prove a complete failure. Thus the first step in
the right way has its root in selfishness. The Gospel can
only appeal to what is already in man, it theref re appeals to
his selfishness, and to any feeling of gratitude he may possess.
Though reason is not mentioned it is not overlooked, as every


appeal is made through the reason. God, then, comes to men
seeking after happiness, and says, “ Ho, every one that
thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and lie that hath no money ;
come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without
money, and without price. Wherefore do ye spend money for
that which is not bread, and your labour for that which satis-
fieth not ? Hearken diligently unto Me and eat ye that which
is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. Incline
your ear, and come unto Me ; hear, and your soul shall live :
and I will make an everlasting covenant with you'.” In the
present dispensation the following grand announcement can be
added, “God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten
and well beloved Son that whosoever believeth on Him should
not perish, but have eternal life.” Our natural but selfish
search for happiness having brought us within the sound of
this text, and the knowledge of how much has been done for
us having exercised its due effect on our minds, we are con-
strained to say “we love Him because He first loved us.”
Thus, by the wonderful working of God, out of that hateful
thing, the love of self, is love towards God evolved, and the
knell of selfishness rung. The beautiful and highly signifi-
cant ordinance of Christian baptism finds its place here. It is
an act of submission in token of the full surrender of the will
to Christ, and as a sort of first-fruits or earnest of the life of
submission to follow. In so far as it is the outcome of love it
is an evidence of acceptance with God, for every one that loveth
is begotten of God. Being a burial it shows forth the death
of the old selfish life without Christ ; while the rising from the
waters of baptism symbolises a resurrection, for it shows forth
the believer’s entering upon his eternal life here—a step which
is appropriately described in Scripture as a resurrection.
“Jesus said : the hour cometh, and now is, when the dead shall


hear the voice of the Son of God ; and they that hear shall
live.” (John v., 25).
In love towards God there are different stages, of which the
“ love of gratitude ”is the first. But this phase of love does
not long remain alone. This new creation becomes in turn a
creator ; it produces a higher kind of love towards our fellow
men than ever we had before. But even when this point is
reached, the way still to be travelled is long and toilsome.
The flesh is still strong, the spirit is still weak, and there are
sometimes great longings for the fleshpots of Egypt, and
strong inclinations to return thither. But our love to Him
“ because He first loved us,” leads us to desire a fuller acquaint-
ance with Him, and this fuller acquaintance brings to our know-
ledge the perfections of His glorious character, and lifts us
to the higher stage of loving Him “for Himself alone.” And
loving God for Himself alone leads to loving “ right ” for
itself alone, and loathing wrong because it is wrong, however
temptingly it may be decked out, and however much Satan
may offer us as the reward of yielding to it.
Thus the problem is solved, and the right doing of God’s
holy law is fulfilled, not only voluntarily, but as a matter of
preference, by those who have reached this stage. And God’s
love is great enough, and His training good enough, and when
necessary, severe enough, to bring all to this stage in due
time. What sin and folly to resist such love and training !
What folly to resist and delay, when we know that of necessity
before we can be fully saved, wr must not only be thoroughly
ashamed of every act of resistance, but be filled with sorrow on
account of it ! The atonement does not render repentance un-
necessary, and repentance involves deep shame and grief for
all wrong-doing, including all delays in yielding ourselves up
to God’s will,


Chapter lll. —Attraction Universally Prevails.
“ And I , if Ihe lifted up from the earth , will draw all men unto
Myself.” — John XII.: 32.
jjihe Divine Teacher when on earth was constantly unfold-
ing spiritual truths by reference to laws prevailing in
the natural world. His parables are all examples of this mode
of teaching, which indeed is the only method of communicat-
ing spiritual ideas, since progress in knowledge always proceeds
from the known to the unknown. Ideas about the “ Unseen ”
must always have for their basis the knowledge of that which
has been seen by the eye, or perceived by some of the other
senses. And the better we understand the natural laws on
which Christ based his spiritual teaching, the better we shall
understand that higher teaching, and see the full depth of its
meaning. Natural science, then, instead of being opposed to
the teaching of scripture on spiritual matters, helps us to attain
to a fuller understanding of them. Perhaps there could be
found no better illustration of this than the truth taught by
Christ in the words, “ And I, if I be lifted up from the earth,
will draw all men unto Myself.” His hearers knew what the
act of drawing was, and could therefore understand His words ;
but we know the laws of attraction or drawing, and are there-
fore in a position to see more of the spiritual truth than they
possibly could. Sir Isaac Newton discovered the law of uni-
versal attraction, and Kepler some of the laws in accordance
with which it works, and these discoveries throw a flood of


light on the words of Christ. A most wonderful force is the
force of attraction, acting as it does at immense distances —
distances of billions upon billions of miles. Indeed it is recog-
nised as the law on this subject, that there is no limit to the
distance at which attraction acts, but that every material body
in the universe attracts every other body in proportion to the
amount of matter it contains, and inversely as the square of
the distance. The' latter part of the law just means that if the
distance is doubled the force of attraction is only one fourth ;
if the distance is increased tenfold, the force is only one
hundredth part of what it was before, and so on. Masses of
matter, at whatever distances apart, may be said to be bound
together by an invisible chain of enormous strength, which
stretches and contracts, but never snaps. It will thus be seen
that even in the material world there are things unseen and in-
comprehensible. The drawing of the sun keeps the earth and
all the other planets in their orbits, and prevents them from
wandering off into space beyond the reach of its light and heat.
The earth draws the moon, and retains it in its orbit, thus
keeping it as “ the lesser light to rule the night.” The earth
also attracts all bodies that may be projected upwards from its
surface, and pulls them back again, thus preventing the con-
fusion and destruction that would result from their floating
about in the air independently of law. The sun itself and all
the planets that make up the solar system are attracted by
some still greater centre, and revolve in an immense orbit
around it. Even the comets cannot get beyond the reach of
attraction : they go beyond the reach of our telescopes ; for
anything we know to the contrary some of them go beyond the
control of the attractive influence of our sun, but if so, it is
because they come within the influence of some other great
centre, either the one round which the whole solar system is


moving, or some system revolving, in common with our own,
round that great centre. A comet may be lost to us, but it
cannot be lost absolutely. If it does not again turn up journey-
ing once more towards our sun, it will turn up in some distant
part of the universe revolving round some other sun. And
even then it will not be wholly lost to us, as it will with us be
revolving round some great common centre.
The supposed case of a comet leaving our system, through
being brought within the stronger attractive influence of
another system, illustrates the fact that two attractions some-
times oppose one another, and engage in a struggle for the
mastery. The magnet affords a more familiar illustration of
this conflict between opposing attractive forces. We hold a
magnet over some steel pens, and they are distracted so to
speak, that is, they are pulled in two different directions, and
act as if in doubt what to do. The earth is pulling them
downwards, and the magnet upwards. If the magnet is held
at a considerable distance above the pens, its influence, though
felt, is not sufficient to overcome the drawing of the earth.
Bring it nearer, and the pens begin to shift uneasily in their
places. Bring it still nearer, and they spring upwards and
cling to the magnet. In the world of mind, too, the greatest
force is attraction, and here, too, as in the world of matter,
there are opposing attractions. Some influences pull down-
wards, and some upwards. The great upward-drawing force
resides in Christ. “And I, if Ibe lifted up from the earth,
will draw all men unto Myself.” But opposed to this there is
what may be called the attraction of gravitation, pulling down-
wards towards the earth. This latter attraction acts upon the
lower nature in man, and makes his upward progress difficult
and painful. Paul is speaking of these opposing forces when
he says, “ For I delight in the law of God after the inward


man : but I see a different law in my members, warring against
the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity under the
law of sin which is in my members ” (Rom. vii. 22, 23). The
attraction of Christ acts upon man’s higher nature, and has
always on arduous task to perform, as there is a time in every
one’s history when the higher nature is weak compared with
the lower. In many cases the task is so difficult as to appear
impossible, since many for whom Christ died are so gross in
their ideas and habits, that His drawing does not seem to affect
them at all. As the magnet can only attract iron, so Christ
can only attract the higher nature of man. Substances which
have no trace of iron in them cannot feel the drawing of the
magnet, but all men however depraved have in them some
trace of the higher nature, (for man was created in the image
and likeness of God) and consequently they can all feel in some
degree, however slight, the drawing of Christ. Now the draw-
ing of Christ has the wonderful effect of transforming the
persons drawn, so that, although when it commences to act it
may be utterly powerless to move to any appreciable extent
those who are strongly attracted by the things of earth, that is,
the things pertaining to the lower life, it gradually transforms
them, by strengthening the higher nature and weakening the
lower, until at last the attraction of Christ prevails, and they
move upwards to Him.
In most if not all cases God has to use aids to attraction,
“ which at the time are very grievous, though afterwards
they yield peaceable fruit unto them that have been exercised
thereby, even the fruit of righteousness.” He has to loosen
the ties that bind to earth, so that the drawing of Christ may
have its due effect. By the dispensations of His Providence
He teaches us the uncertainty as well as the unsatisfying
character of earthly possessions, earthly pleasures and even


earthly friendships, and shows us that there is nothing true,
pure, lasting and soul-satisfying, but the higher, spiritual life
of love to God, and love (like God’s) to man.
It has been mentioned that in the world of matter the force
of attraction decreases very rapidly as the distance increases,
and of course the converse must be true, that force increases
very rapidly as the distance diminishes. A very important
point in the comparison we are instituting is that this law
relating to distances and degrees of attractive force holds good
also with regard to spiritual attraction. As Christ is brought
nearer, His drawing power is very greatly increased. Now it
rests with Christians whether Christ shall be brought near to
their fellow-men or not, as will readily be seen by the following
simple illustration. Just as pieces of steel, by contact with the
magnet, are themselves made little magnets capable of exercis-
ing some attractive influence, so Christians by contact with
Christ become little magnets capable of exercising over others
some drawing power.
If Christ is ever to be brought near to the great bulk of the
unsaved, it must be by the drawing power of these secondary
magnets. The great majority of people judge of Christ and
the religion which He founded by the acts of those who pro-
fess to be His followers.- If Christians live lives in some
degree resembling the life of Christ, in that degree are they
magnets pulling their fellow men upwards ; in that degree are
they influential in putting down sin, and thus assisting to
solve the Great Problem, for the practice of any virtue tends
to put to shame those who indulge in the opposite vice. By
the contrast the observers see the beauty of virtue and the ugli-
ness of vice, and are shamed out of the latter into the former.
And though comparatively few study the life of Christ, very
many study—and that very closely—the lives of His professed


followers. 0 that Christians would but understand that they
must themselves be lifted up from the earth, and exhibit Christ
in their lives, before they can become magnets, before they can
bring Christ near enough to their fellow men to effectually
attract them ! If, on the contrary, Christians appear to be on
the same level with others, equally eager in the pursuit of
earthly things, and: showing no special development of the
higher life, they act as repellent rather than attractive forces.
The most cheering point in the comparison is that just as
attraction never fails in the material world, so it never fails in
the world of mind. This is a necessary inference from the
truth that love never fails, for wherein lies the attractive power
of Christ, but in His perfect character, which is pure, unselfish
and boundless love ? Some of the intelligent beings created
by God may, like the comets, wander far away, and appear to
be lost, but they are lost only for a time. It is only impatient
man who speaks of them as being finally lost. They are lost
in the sense of not having yet returned, that is all. As they
go further and further away from God, their progress is im-
peded both by the difficulties of the path (for the way of trans-
gressors is hard) and by the continuous drawing of God’s love,
(for they cannot get beyond its reach) and these two combined
at last bring every wanderer to a stop.' This stage is described,
in the parable of the “ Prodigal Son,” by the simple words,
“He came to himself.” The drawing still continues, and as
there is now no motion in the opposite direction, it turns him
round, and he says, I will arise and go to my father, and will
say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy
sight : I am no more worthy to be called thy son ; make me
as one of thy hired servants.” The drawing still continues,
and motion towards God begins. He arises and comes towards
his father. Just at this point in the parable we come to an


incident which shows how fully the comparison between
material and spiritual attraction holds good. In the world of
matter attraction is mutual. Every mass of matter, great or
small, attracts and is attracted by every other material bodv.
The sun attracts the planets, but the planets also attract the
sun, in proportion to the mass of matter they contain. The
earth attracts the moon, but the moon also attracts the earth.
A stone set free at the top of some cliff or high tower is
attracted by the earth, and falls with an ever increasing
velocity, but the earth is also attracted by the stone and moves
upward to meet it, though of course the distance through which
it moves is so small as to be inappreciable. How glorious a
thought it is that this holds true in the world of spirit as well !
God attracts us, and we attract God. This thought is brought
out in the next portion of the parable, and shows that the bond
between God and his children—even his erring and rebellious
children is very strong indeed. Ihe prodigal son was drawn
to his father, and the father was drawn to his erring son, and
that, too, through a very appreciable distance. “ While he was
yet afar off, his father saw him, and was moved with compass-
ion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.” It will be
noticed that God is drawn to us by compassion for our misery,
even though the misery has been caused by our own sin. A
loving earthly parent cannot hear the wail of his suffering child
in the most distant room of the house without being filled with
a strong desire to mitigate its pain, and without being drawn
thither, not only to express sympathy, but to take action for its
relief. The suffering may have been necessary ; it may have
been caused with the parent’s consent or by his direction in
order to save the child’s life, as happens in many cases of
medical treatment, but none the less does he suffer with the
child, and suffer even more acutely, for his suffering is of the


mind, while the child’s is of the body. In like manner the
loving Universal Father cannot hear the cry of suffering
ascending from any of His creatures without being drawn to
them. The suffering of humanity, even though caused by man’s
own wilful disobedience, drew down from heaven Jesus Christ,
God manifested in Jibe flesh, not to condemn but to save —to
solve the Great Problem by drawing all men to Himself. Can
He see of the travail of His soul and be satisfied with less than
this ? If He could change, and could have His love turned
to hatred in the case of those who rejected Him, He might
be satisfied with the salvation of a small percentage of those
for whom He died ; but as He is unchangeable, and as He
came to seek until he should find (Luke xv.), it is impossible
that He can be satisfied, till He has quite accomplished the
great work which He has set Himself, even the drawing of all
men to Himself.
Since in the material universe attraction universally pre-
vails, and not a single particle of matter escapes its operation,
is it conceivable that in the world of spirit it should fail ?In
matter God has implanted a drawing power which never fails,
which acts universally and effectually, keeping all the hosts of
heaven in harmony, even the apparent discord of the erratic
movements of the comets being a higher kind of harmony not
yet understood by us. Now so far as value is concerned,
matter is nothing as compared with spirit. The value of a
spirit is beyond calculation. God is Spirit. He has created
innumerable spirits ; He is the Father of our spirits. He is
the great centre of the spiritual universe. In Him resides un-
limited attractive power. In many ways He has brought the
spirits of men within the influence of this attraction, but
especially in the unspeakable gift of His love, even Jesus
Christ. And shall this spiritual attraction prove weaker than


material attraction ? Shall it fail in innumerable cases, while
material attraction never fails ? It cannot be. Christ himself
said, It cannot be, for did He not say, “ And 1, if I be lifted
up from the earth will draw all men unto Myself,” and did not
His inspired apostle say, “For as in Adam all died, so in
Christ shall all be made alive ; as through one trespass judg-
ment came unto all men to condemnation ; even so through
one act of righteousness the free gift came iintcr all men to
justification of life”? In another place the same apostle
writes, “ For there has appeared the grace of God which brings
salvation to all men ’’(Tit. ii., 11). There is every reason, then,
to fling ourselves unreservedly on the glorious good news of
the grace of God, that the attraction which He exercises will
universally prevail, both as regards drawing and transforming,
until all shall be Christ’s willing subjects, and right shalhhave
universal sway.


Chapter IY.— The Knowledge of God.
“ Acquaint now thyself with God and be at peace: thereby good
shall come unto thee." Job XXII : 21.
“ This is life eternal, that they should know Thee the only true God,
and Him whom thou didst send , even Jesus Christ .” John XVII :3.
JJf HOUGH the knowledge of God has of necessity been fre-
quently mentioned in the preceding pages, at the risk of
some repetition this short chapter will be set apart for the
special consideration of the subject, so that it may have the
prominence which its paramount importance demands. The
consideration of it cannot fail, I think, to strengthen the belief
that God is now solving the Great Problem, and that He will
eventually complete the task.
We learn from the great apostle to the Gentiles that love
never fails, and from the disciple whom Jesus loved that
God is love. How can we wed these two precious gems of
truth except to conclude that the problem will be solved, that
all will be brought to a complete and voluntary and loving
obedience to the requirements of God’s perfect law ?
We learn from science that attraction universally prevails in
the world of matter, and from Revelation that it universally
prevails in the world of mind, for Christ says He will draw all
men unto Himself, and we accept the joyful news with the
greater confidence, because the attractive force js the love that
never fails. But apart from this, the close analogy between the
natural and spiritual worlds would warrant us in concluding
that as attraction is universal in the one, so must it be in


the other. We are not, however, dependent upon conclusions,
logically drawn though they be, for we have the direct state-
ment of Christ Himself to the truth of the proposition.
There is still another string to the bow, and that is, the
knowledge of God. This knowledge is life eternal, so that
when all know God, the problem will be solved. Suppose
everything hinged upon the possibility or otherwise of proving
that the knowledge of God would become universal. Are there
any proofs direct or indirect that this will be so ? There is
the statement of Isaiah in the eleventh chapter of the book of
his prophecy, the whole of which chapter might be quoted in
this connexion, but the last verse must suffice, “ They shall
not hurt nor destroy in all My holy mountain : for the earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover
the sea.” The opening verses of the chapter show that this,
and the universal right .doing which accompanies it, are to be
brought about by “ a shoot out of the stock of Jesse, and a
branch out of his roots, upon whom the Spirit of the Lord
shall rest, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit
of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord.” To this agree the
words of Christ Himself, “ Have I been so long time with
you, and hast thou not known Me, Philip : he that hath seen
Me hath seen the Father, and how sayest thou then, Shew us
the Father ? ” In addition to the direct statement that the
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, the truth of
the universality of that knowledge at some future time follows
as a necessary inference from God’s character. There are cer-
tain courses which a God of love must take in preference to
certain other courses which appear to be open to Him to follow.
The question that arises here as to which course God will pur-
sue is the following : —Hid God create intelligent beings, that
He might lead them up from a low estate through various


stages to see one part of his character after another, until they
should know Him fully, or did He create them with the full
realisation that great numbers would never attain to a saving
knowledge of Him, and therefore remain for ever and ever in
the greatest depths, of misery ? The first alternative is like
God for it displays a purpose. “Unto Paul was the grace given
to preach unto the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ ;
and to make all men see what is the dispensation of the mystery
which from all ages hath been hid in God who created all
things ; to the intent that now unto the principalities and
powers in the heavenly places might be made known through
the church the manifold wisdom of God, according to the pur-
pose of the ages which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
The other alternative is unlike God, for it implies a careless,
haphazard sort of method of doing things. God will take cer-
tain action : if men respond by taking certain action in return,
well and good ; but, if not, they must just go to the bad, that’s
all ; they must just defy God, and frustrate His good inten-
tions. The question may be put in another way. God is the
Father of our spirits. Owing to our ignorance of our Father
our spirits are sinful and polluted. He takes in hand to teach
us about Himself. To that end He sends His unique Son to
tabernacle among us, to show us by His life the spirit of self-
denial and self-sacrifice that ought to animate us, and to show
us by His death the good-will—the more than good-will, the
infinite love—of God to man. The question is, Will He as a
teacher persevere, work on patiently, until His pupils learn
the lesson He wishes to teach them, or will He after a few
years, in some cases after only a few weeks or months (for
some die very shortly after the commencement of their school-
ing) say to the inapt pupils,—let us call them stubborn, stiff-
necked, wilfully blind, any hard names you please—will He


say to them, “ Your opportunity of learning to know Me is
for ever gone. Henceforth and for ever your portion is torment ?”
The first alternative is like God, who is long-suffering and slow
to anger. Surely the God who had patience to spend ages
upon ages upon this globe of ours, making it a fit habitation
for us, will have patience to spend ages upon ages, if necessary,
upon our training, so as to purge all the dross out of us, free
us from every particle of pollution, and make us fit foi His
presence and for the higher forms of His service. The other al-
ternative is unlike God, for it indicates impatience, changeable-
ness, and a neglecting to take all the circumstances of each case
into account.
When we seriously reflect on the sunken and degraded con-
dition of some of our fellow men, are we not ready to say in
our hearts, even if we dare not say it with our lips, “ 0 how
hopeless is the task of teaching these men the knowledge of
God in one short life ! ” So hopeless was the task in the
early ages of the human race that God never attempted it in
the short period of one generation. It took four thousand
years to raise even a small fraction of them to the position of
being able to understand faintly the final, the glorious re-
velation of God in His Son, and to practise even very im-
perfectly the final and all-comprehensive statement of the duty
of man : “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and
with all thy mind, and thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy-
self.” And are there not millions to-day, even in so-called
Christian lands, as void of the knowledge of God as the bulk
of mankind were four or five thousand years ago ? How can
these in one short life come to a full knowledge of the truth ?
But none the less is it necessary for Christians to engage in
the work of advancing and raising these men as far as possible,


for this is God’s work. It will be impossible for them ever, in
this life, to understand very much about the deep truths which
lay hid through the ages, but which were brought to light in
Christ. They were hid only because man was not advanced
enough to grasp them. They are still hid from the majority
of the human race for the same reason. But this does not
furnish any reason for slackening work ; it furnishes rather
the greatest possible incentive to unceasing diligence as co-
workers with God, in the noble work of raising men. Above
all it gives patience like Christ’s, for it gives us the assurance
that our work shall not be in vain in the Lord. It gives us
the assurance that when those upon whom our labour has been
bestowed pass from this stage of existence, without much
apparent impression having been made upon them, they do not
pass out of God’s loving hands, but are still the recipients of
His love, and under the care of His ministering spirits.
It is impossible to say how much of the knowledge of God
our first parents in their state of innocence had, but it was
probably much less than is generally supposed. It is also im-
possible to say how much of that knowledge they lost by the
Fall, but we know they acquired by it a very undesirable kind
of knowledge—the knowledge of evil. We know further that
the nations without a direct revelation from God have made
little, if any, progress in the knowledge of Him. They have
all worshipped many gods, the work of their own hands.
The choice spirits among them —and by these I mean such
men as Socrates and Plato—had some idea of a great Supreme
Being, but the masses were confirmed polytheists. In India
the number of deities was multiplied so as iat last to include
every living thing, whether animal or vegetable, for all were
supposed to have something of the Deity in them, and the
natural outcome of this was pantheism. When polytheism


gives way to the belief that there is only one God, a very
decided upward step has been taken. For this reason some of
the corrupt forms of Christianity, which are virtually systems
of polytheism, are really less advanced than the uncompromis-
ing monotheism of the Mohammedan. But believers in the
truth that there is only one God cannot be all said to be
worshippers of the same God. On the contrary, each may be
said to worship a different God, because every man worships
his own ideal. As idolaters worship the work of their own
hands, so even the more advanced in the knowledge of the
true God may be said to worship the work of their own minds.
This may seem a rash and unwarranted statement, but a little
reflection will, I think, convince those of a reflective turn of
mind that it cannot possibly be otherwise. Who by searching
can find out God, who can find out the Almighty to per-
fection ? Of necessity men must worship the Supreme Being
as they know Him, as their minds have grasped Him, and not
as He really is, and in this sense it may be said that as many
Gods are worshipped as there are intelligent, responsible
worshippers, even though they are all monotheists, for no two
minds have reached exactly the same stage, and consequently
the conceptions concerning God formed by any two men can-
not be the same in every particular. Hence we are shut up
to the conclusion that every man worships the conception of
God to which he has attained. If we look back on our past ex-
perience, do we not see that our conception of God to-day is
very different from that of ten years ago, of one year ago,
perhaps even of yesterday ? What is conversion but the fixed
resolve to live to God, which is induced by a marked change
in our conception of His character ? And what is the marked
change but seeing Him more nearly as He is, that is, as a God
of love ? And how is this change brought about but by


seeing Him as He is revealed in His only Son ? Are we
not horrified at the low conception of Him we at one time
had, and are we not utterly ashamed of the terrible things
we were accustomed to believe about Him ? If not, we are
not growing in the knowledge of God ; our moral development
has for the present come to a stand-still. What the world
needs to raise it, and the only thing it needs, is the know-
ledge of God. It is a law that every worshipper tends to
become like the Being he worships. Raise the ideal by
presenting God in His true character, and you take the
only effectual way of raising the race. Men do not per-
sistently, and wilfully, and continually act contrary to their
ideal. They do act in opposition to it, but it is never-
theless always drawing them, and making them ashamed of
those actions of theirs which are contrary to it.
The foregoing thoughts are all summed up in one sentence in
Scripture, but we are apt to miss the concentrated wisdom
stored up there, and fail to digest and assimilate it, till it has
been prepared by some expository remarks. The text referred
to is found in the Psalms : “ But unto the wicked God saith,
Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thyself .”
—(Ps. 1., 21.) Herein lies the difficulty of making God
known, and herein lies the necessity of Christians exhibiting
in their lives the character of Christ, since this is the only
method of bringing Him near to those who do not know Him.
Even when this is done, the difficulty is not overcome, for
men will persist in thinking that not only God, but their
fellow men are altogether such as themselves. They will
measure other people’s corn by their own bushels, and hence
they regard disinterested, unselfish actions as simply a more
crafty kind of selfisbmess, —a more skilfully laid scheme for
furthering the selfish ends of the doers of these actions.


Doubtless Christians have given some ground for this. Even
in their proclamation of the gospel they have brought selfish
considerations into too great prominence, and have con-
sequently created the impression that Christianity is nothing
more than the wisest kind of selfishness. It is true that the
adoption of Christianity is the wisest policy from a selfish
point of view, just as it is true that honesty is the best policy.
But as he who is honest only because it is the best policy is a
rogue at heart, so he who embraces Christianity only because
it is the best policy for himself is an infidel at heart. His
acceptance is only from the lips outward ; he has not been
drawn to Christ, and as yet has none of his spirit. As a
striking instance of how people think God such a one as
themselves, I have heard selfish motives imputed to Christ in
becoming the Saviour of the world. Nor is it an uncommon
thing to hear people speak of God as doing all things for His
own glory. This would be right enough, if they did not
erroneously put a selfish meaning into the expression, “ for His
own glory,” yet this is what is in reality usually done. Sal-
vation may be said to consist in uprooting selfishness from our
idea of the character of God, for just as surely as we succeed
in doing this, shall we begin to strive earnestly to uproot it
from our own characters. And this is not simply a negative
work, for uprooting selfishness implies planting self-sacrifice :
every successful struggle against selfishness is a triumph
for unselfish love. How then is the Great Problem to be
solved ? We are brought back to the solution of it given by
Paul, “God sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh
and for a sin-offering condemned (or put down) sin in the
flesh, a thing which the law could not do in that it was weak
through the flesh.” By spoken words, by mighty deeds God
could not make Himself known. By His Word becoming flesh


and dwelling among us, He could be manifested to us, and
that is the method He adopted in the fulness of time, when
man was prepared for it. Christ shows us the Father. The
life and death of Christ, studied and understood, furnish
us with a true conception of the character of God, and this
lofty ideal in our hearts at once commejaces its transforming
and attracting work —drawing us to Him and making us, in
some faint degree, like Him. The way of instruction is very
long by precept, short by example. Man needed a fellow-man
to show him how to live, and to be an object of deep affection
and profound reverence. At the proper time God supplied
this want by manifesting Himself in the person of His
Son.
It may be mentioned that when the idea of selfishness in
God’s character is uprooted, the idea of partiality goes with it.
It is noteworthy that the opening words of the first sermon
preached to the Gentiles declared God’s strict impartiality ;
“ Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons ;
but in every nation he that feareth Him, and worketh right-
eousness is acceptable to Him.” This truth, which just
dawned on the minds of a few of the more advanced thinkers
of the apostolic age, is still struggling to penetrate the gloom.
As yet it has found but scant recognition. Calvinism flatly
contradicts it, and the idea that those dying unsaved are
finally lost is opposed to it, for few, if any, would contend for
the only possible alternative, viz., that none who have died
unsaved would have turned, even if they had had the high privi-
leges and golden opportunities which the most favoured now-a-
days have. At least if they did so contend, they would be in direct
opposition to the teaching of Christ Himself, for He said that
the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah would have repented,


if they had seen the mighty works which were done in
Capernaum.
It is only as ideas of the unselfishness and impartiality of
God’s character become firmly grasped by men’s minds, that
the persecuting, intolerant spirit dies out, and the brotherly
feeling between man and man gains ground, It is to be
hoped that all Christians, whatever may be their belief on the
subject, earnestly desire that the Great Problem will be solved,
and that they are doing what they can to that glorious end.
Let them weigh well the great truth that to know God is life
eternal, and let them endeavour to free their conception of God
from all blots, so that they may show Him to their fellow-
men as He is.
I cannot do better here than quote from a sermon entitled,
“Love’s Wonderful Gift,” recently delivered by Mr. Sydney
Black, in the Theatre Royal, Melbourne :
“ The peculiarity and uniqueness of God’s love are its thorough
disinterestedness. God’s love is not relative ;it is absolute. It is
not produced by any beauty, merit, nobility, or community of nature
and purpose in its object. True, we love because He first loved us,
but we nowhere find that “ He loved because we first loved Him!"
Did you ever think of that ? God cannot help loving you because He
is love. If God did otherwise than love you, he would change His
nature, and cease to be God. He was a loving Father from all
eternity. He was the everlasting Father before He was a Creator,
Judge, or Supreme Ruler. Creation and providence are but prior
manifestations of the Divine unselfishness, which culminated in the
beautiful Babe of Bethlehem—and the tragedy of the Cross of
Calvary.
“We are led to conclude from these considerations that God’s
nature being unselfishness, and His motive unselfishness, God’s nature
and God’s motive are one. God is always true to Himself, and hence
absolutely disinterested love is at the base of all His dealings with


mankind. We Christians, too, always find our natures and our
motives identical; but, alas ! alas ! we have a lower nature as well as
a God-like nature, and we continually have to probe ourselves to find
out which nature it is our actions embody. 0 that we may keep the
spirit nature in the ascendancy ! God help us to starve out the old
nature by persistently feeding and sustaining the new. So shall our
motives ever be identical with the God-imparted gift of unselfish
love 1”
I am not to be understood as implying that our knowledge
of God must be nearly perfect before we can be said to have
“ saving knowledge.”
The meaning of the expression “saving knowledge” is
very elastic. It means any glimmering knowledge of God
which gives a man a start upwards, and it means any
accession of knowledge, at whatever stage, which gives him a
lift upwards. There is salvation all along the line from the
first yielding to the drawing of Christ to the highest state yet
reached by man. As there is life in the egg long before the
shell is cracked and the young bird emerges, as there is life in
the plant for some time before it appears above the clod, so
there is spiritual life in man for a period, sometimes long and
sometimes short, before he appears before the world as one
who has publicly confessed Christ, and taken upon himself the
name of Christian. Much harm is often done by forcing on
the public confession, and this arises from the fear that all
will be irrevocably lost, should death come before it is made.
0 for patience to allow the development of the life to take its
proper course ; patience to be content with using proper means
for fostering its growth ; patience to refrain from continually
stirring up the ground and scraping away the soil which
covers it, or (if we use the other illustration) breaking the
shell which encloses it ! The impatience which causes the
life to appear prematurely invariably causes it to suffer in vitality.


With the following deductions from the foregoing thoughts
on the character of God, I bring this chapter to a close :
(1.) If our minds have grasped the knowledge that God
in His essence is love, we know that He can never hate His
creatures, but only that which injures them—sin Against it
He will wage a war of extermination, and He can, consistently
with universal love, do so, for it is not a creature.
(2.) If we have grasped the idea that God is all-wise, we
know that His love will never act in a mistakenly indulgent
manner, but that like a wise parent He will chastise His
children as severely as is needful to “ thoroughly purge away
all the dross and take away the alloy in them.”
(8.) If we have grasped the truth that He is all-powerful,
we shall rest assured in mind that He will not be bathed by
sin, but that with untiring patience He will manifest His love,
before which, as it enters the heart, sin hoes like the mists
before the morning sun.


Chapter V.—Texts Apparently Opposed to the
View that tHe Problem will be Solved.
tJAVINGr studied the great problem and dealt with its solution
in accordance with the principles running through Holy
Writ rather than by the consideration of particular texts, it
now remains to deal with texts apparently opposed, and
endeavour to show that when rightly understood they do not
contradict any general principle. It is a self-evident truth
that individual texts cannot really be in opposition to any es-
tablished general principle, but since, through a misconception
of their true meaning, some of them cause a certain uneasiness of
mind, and cast a doubt even on the truth of the general
principle, it is expedient to examine at least a few typical texts
of the class referred to. In considering words such as
“ damn ” and “ damnation, ” which have a terrible meaning
in our day, we must bear in mind that they have not always
had that terrible meaning. These words are closely related to
“deem” meaning primarily to think, and secondarily to give a
decision. It is true they are used only in reference to an un-
favourable decision, and the consequent loss or punishment,
Jbut of themselves they cannot even touch the question of the
nature, extent or duration of the loss or punishment. And
is gratifying to observe that in the revised version these words
do not find a place, a circumstance which proves that the com-
mittee of revision did not regard them as correctly interpreting
the mind of the Spirit.


Let us next look at the words which indicate the place of
punishment, if such an expression may be allowed. It is very
doubtful whether the word “ place ”is appropriate. It is true
that human governments have places of punishment, but in
speaking of the punishment inflicted by the Creator it seems
more accurate to speak of it as a state. In the same way it is
generally allowed that Heaven is more correctly described as a
state than as a place. There are three Greek words rendered
“hell” in our Authorized Version—Hades, Tartarus, and
Gehenna. Of these, Hades just means “ the unseen,” and is
applied to the state of both good and bad beyond the grave.
Tartarus occurs only once, and is spoken of as a state or place
of punishment prior to the judgment. These two words, them
though both tianslated “ hell ” cannot refer to the final state
of the unrighteous, and consequently the translation is a very
misleading one, To the ordinary reader it does not at all
make known the mind of the Spirit. The third word,
Gehenna, is the Greek form of the Hebrew expression for
“ Valley of Hinnom.” This was the valley where idolatrous
shrines were erected, and where the fires of Moloch were
kindled. It thus came to be to all the faithful Jews a type of
all that was wicked and abominable. And when the good
Josiah became king, the groves were burned down and the
shrines destroyed, and to make the valley for ever “ unclean,”
the bones of the dead were strewn over it. It thus became
the place into which were cast the carcasses of animals, and
even the bodies of great criminals, who were judged unworthy
of decent burial. Worms fed on the corrupting flesh, and
fires were kept burning, lest the pestilential infection should
rise from the valley and float through the streets of Jerusalem.
The name of this valley, then, is the word which the
Saviour uses to describe the place or state of the punishment


of the wicked, and to the Jew this metaphorical language
would be of sufficiently awful significance, but the idea con-
veyed to his mind would have scarcely any resemblance to the
idea conveyed to the ordinary English reader by our trans-
lation of it—“ hell.” 'ln this case also we do not get the mind
of the Spirit. What we need is to ascertain what the Jews
understood by Gehenna, and on this point the eminent
Hebrew scholar, Dr, Deutsch, says : —“All the Jewish Avrit-
ings which date from three centuries before Christ to three
centuries after Christ have been carefully searched, with a view
to ascertain the meaning then placed on the word Gehenna.
The result is that with one very doubtful exception, these
writings positively discountenance the English translation of
that word, viz., hell. The solitary apparent exception is a
sentence from the Talmud, which says that ‘ Christians and
apostates descend into Gehenna, and are judged in it for
generations of generations,” but even this strong expression
does not mean for ever. The following are some of the ex-
pressions used in the Talmud : —“ The ungodly shall be
judged in Gehenna until the righteous shall say of them, We
ha\ r e seen enough.” “The judgment of the ungodly is for
tAvclve months.” “ Noah, seeing the Angel of Death, hid him-
self in the ark twelve months, because the judgment on
sinners lasts for twelve months.” “Gehenna is nothing but a
day in Avhich the impious will be burned.” Now as these were
the vieAYS of the Jcaa t s as to the meaning of Gehenna, and .as
Christ in using the word did not mean to mislead them,
(though he did not necessarily endorse their aucavs) it is evident
that he meant to convey an idea very different from that con-
veyed at the present time by our translation. I say “at the
present time” because “hell” is one of those words whose
meaning has deteriorated very greatly. It originally signified


ii covered place, and in our early English literature it is used
of any obscure dungeon, or covered spot. To show that the
meaning generally attached to it now is entirely out of the
question, 1 would refer the reader to three offences and their
corresponding punishments as detailed in Matt. v. Ihe
offences are the following, and they seem to be graded so that
each is a little more heinous than the preceding :
1. Being angry with a brother without cause.
2. Saying to a brother, Ilaca (an expression of con-
tempt).
3. Saying to a brother, “Thou fool.
The following are the punishments attached to these offences,
and it will be noticed that while the offences are evenly graded,
the punishments, as generally understood by English readers,
are far from being similarly graded, and yet there can be little
doubt that they were meant to ascend in the scale of severity
just as the offences descended in the scale of wickedness :
1. Being in danger of the judgment, that is, of the
highest punishment which could be inflicted by
the local courts of justice.
2, Being in danger of the council, that is, the San-
hedrim, which had authority to inflict death by
stoning.
3. Being in danger of hell-fire (literally, Gehenna of
fire.)
As generally understood there is an enormous leap from the
second to the third, but as the Jews understood the matter,
the third simply consisted of the death indicated by the second
punishment plus the casting of the body into the A alley of
Hinnom, to become the prey of the worm or the fiic.
Dr. Deutsch also says, “There is not a word in the Talmud
that lends any support to that damnable dogma of endless


torment.” And in another place he says, “According to the
Talmud there is only a temporary punishment even for the
worst of sinners ; the sinner has but to repent sincerely, and
the gates to everlasting bliss will spring open.”
The next point to be considered is the nature of the punish-
ment as regards the object for which it is inflicted. Of the
two Greek words for punishment, kolasis and timoria, Christ
selected the former, which, according to the definition of
Aristotle, the highest authority on the subject, means punish-
ment intended for the improvement of the offender ; punishment
inflicted for the sake of him who suffers it; a reformatory
process. This is the word used in the celebrated sentence :
“These shall go away into everlasting punishment” (Matt, xxv,
46). This is in beautiful harmony with the grand declaration
“ God is love,” and no other view of punishment can
harmonise therewith. It may be objected that it is sometimes
necessary to inflict punishment in order to deter others. This
is true of human governments which are confessedly imperfect,
but as imperfection vanishes, the practice of punishing one
man for the purpose of frightening others, will also vanish.
Punishment will always act as a deterrent, but in a perfect
government it will not be inflicted with that object. It would
be manifestly unfair to punish one man in order that others
might take warning and escape. God’s punishments, like
those inflicted by all in authority, have a deterrent influence ;
from the very circumstance that they operate according to law
and on account of the infringement of some law T , they may
also be said to be retributive, for there is nothing more clearly
taught both by revelation and experience than the doctrine of
retribution ; but underlying both these incidentals of punish-
ment is the great essential element in all God’s punishments,
viz., that they are inflicted for the sake of those who suffer them.


From the foregoing it naturally follows that punishment
cannot be “ endless.” It would be a contradiction in terms to
say of endless punishment that it was inflicted for the good of
him who suffered it. And this necessary inference is supported
by the Greek word aionios which is used to indicate the dura-
tion of the punishment. This word is the adjective
derived from the noun aion an age. There is great unanimity
among scholars as to the meaning of aion. It is admitted by
all that in one sense it is very indefinite, since in different con-
texts it indicates different lengths of duration varying from the
shortest periods to endlessness. In another sense it is very
definite, for it invariably includes the whole of the period to
which it refers. These two facts about the meaning of aion
may be familiarly illustrated by reference to the meanings of a
fraction, say a fourth or a tenth. The expression “a tenth ”
conveys a very definite idea to our minds. It calls up some
whole divided into ten equal parts, and indicates that one of
these parts is spoken of. But until we know what the whole
is, we have no idea of the absolute value of the tenth. The
whole may be a shilling or a million pounds, a square inch or a
million square miles, a grain or a thousand tons, a minute or
thousands upon thousands of years. How while an aion is a
whole and not a fraction, its absolute value is just as indefinite
as the absolute value of the fraction one-tenth, and depends
entirely upon the object whose aion or age is under consider-
ation. So far all scholars are agreed. But when some particu-
lar object is under consideration, diversities of opinion arise as
to the length of its aion. This is notably the case as regards
future punishment. While all are agreed that an aion may be
of very short duration, there is diversity of opinion as to the
duration of the particular aion through which punishment will
last.


As it is of the utmost importance that the correct idea of
aion should be grasped, I shall quote President Milligan’s very
clear remarks on the subject :
“ The Hebrew word nlam and the Greek word aion are each
equivalent to the English word everlasting. They are all
relative terms and may be applied to any age or period. Thus,
for instance in Exodus 21 :6, the word olam is applied to a
period of service, and simply means that the servant should
serve his master as long as he lived. In Exodus 40 :15, it is
applied to the Levitical priesthood, and means that it should
continue throughout the Jewish age, or while the Old Covenant
should endure. In Gen. 4!) : 2(i, it is applied to the hills, and
comprehends all time. This is also evidently its meaning in
Dan. 2 : 44, and many other passages of scripture. From such
premises, some have hastily inferred that these words always
refer to a limited period, and that they never mean duration
without end. Put they are always perfectly exhaustive of the
entire period <>r cycle to which they are applied. If they refer
simply to the period of a man’s life, they exhaust it ; if to an
age, they exhaust it; if to time, they exhaust it; and if to
eternity, they in like manner exhaust it.”
So far as I am aware all scholars agree with the foregoing
definition, but when it comes to fixing the duration of the aion
of future punishment, some take one road and some another.
The road President Milligan takes is indicated in the sentence
following the above quotation :—“ So that when Christ says,
‘ These shall go away into everlasting punishment {eis kolasin
aionion), but the righteous into everlasting life (eis zoen
aionion )’ (Matt, xxv., 46), He means, beyond all doubt, life and
punishment without end.”
This conclusion, however, is simply asserted, and left quite
unsupported. As regards the 'punishment, it is incapable of


s upport, while as regards the Mje the proofs are overwhelm
ingly strong. It seems puzzling to some that aionion should
have two different values in the same sentence, but the matter
becomes simple enough when we refer to our illustration of
the fraction. A tenth may mean in one breath an inch, and
in the next a thousand miles.
The very fact that punishment (pruning), and life (union with
God) are so different in their nature, should of itself suggest
the truth that their aions will be of different durations. Ab-
solute endlessness is ascribed only to God, but those who are
united to God have the promise that they will be partakers in
Ilis aion, “ Because I live ye shall live also,”
On this point Thomas De Quincey says : —'“The Scriptures
ascribe absolute and metaphysical eternity to one sole Being,
viz., to God, and derivatively to all others, according to the
interest they can plead in God’s favour. Having anchorage
in God innumerable entities may possibly be admitted to a
participation in the divine aion. But what interest in the
favour of God can belong to falsehood, to malignity, to im-
purity ? To invest them with aionian privileges is in effect,
and by its results, to distrust and insult the Deity. Evil
would not ba evil, if it had that power of self-subsistence
which is imputed.to it in supposing its aionian life to be co-
eternal with that which crowns and glorifies the good.”
Still further to elucidate the meaning of aion as used in
Scripture, I reproduce here portion of an article of mine, which
appeared in the Australian Christian Standard for November,
1889
“ It is thought that if endless torment is taken out of Matthew 25 :
46, that endless bliss must go with it. For the following two very
good reasons this is quite a groundless fear :
“ Ist. Christ, in this celebrated passage, is speaking about the
things pertaining to the age following the scenes depicted. It is un-


fortunate, that while the Scriptures in the original very frequently
speak about ‘ the ages ’ our translation knows next to nothing of
them. A correct conception of the teaching of Scripture concerning
the ages removes many errors, and I would advise all Bible students
to obtain a translation which makes use of age and cognate express-
ions wherever the original does. An age may be defined as a period
or epoch of time marked by some special feature. But sometimes
‘ age ’ does not seem to convey so much the idea of time as the idea
of the special feature, for two very different ages are spoken of as
existing contemporaneously. For example, Christ says :‘ He that
believeth on the Son hath the life peculiar to the age' (John 8 : 30).
And again, 4 Whoso eateth my flesh and djpnketh my blood hath the
life peculiar to the age , and I will raise him up at the last day ’
(John 6 : 54). He is not speaking of the future life at all, but of
the present life, and not so much, if at all, of duration as of kind or
quality. On the other hand Paul says, I Be not conformed to this
age ’ (Rom, 12 ; 2), and ‘ Demas forsook me, having loved this pre-
sent age' (2 t Tim 4 ; 10). The age Paul speaks of is just the opposite
of that of which Christ speaks, and yet they both existed at the
same time. The fact is, the idea of time is scarcely present in either
case, but the spirit or special feature of the Christian life is what
Christ is speaking of, and the spirit or special feature of life without
Christ’s influence is what Paul is speaking of.
“ But reverting to “ age ” when it means a period or epoch of time,
it may be said that living the life fitted to any particular ‘ age ’ will
always be sufficient preparation for the life of the succeeding age,
Christ came to introduce a new age, though I think it would be
wrong to fix upon some particular day as the date on which the one
terminated and the other commenced. More probably there was a
border time during which both ages existed together. Now any one
who had lived the life befitting the Mosaic age was prepared to enter
upon the life befitting the Messianic age. Christ expressed this truth
when He said, l lf ye believed Moses, ye would believe Me, for he
wrote of Me. But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe
My words V (John 5 : 46, 47). Now, granting for argument’s sake (I
do not really grant it) that the age-long pruning, and the age-long
life of Matt. 25 : 46 are of the same duration, can we conceive of any
one living the life peculiar to that age, and at the end of it not being


admitted to the still higher life peculiar to the succeeding age 1 If
those who had the eternal life of the Mosaic Dispensation were pre-
pared for, and entered into the eternal life of the Messianic Dispensa-
tion, surely those who live the eternal life referred to in Mat. 25 : 46
will be prepared for, and enter into the eternal life of the next suc-
ceeding age. In the foregoing sentence I have used the word ‘ eternal ’
instead of the phrase ‘ belonging to the age ’ to show that the two
expressions have the same meaning, and to try to familiarize the
readers of the Standard with the meaning which ‘ eternal ’ has in Scrip-
ture. lam very desirous of making it clear that eternal life refers
to the past and present as well as to the future ; .that one eternal life
after another comes and passes by ; and that this will go on through
the ages of the ages.
“ 2nd. My other reason for saying that the fear that bliss will end
is groundless, is based upon Heb. 7 : 15, 16.— ‘ After the likeness of
Mclchizedek there ariseth another priest who hath been made, not
after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an
endless life.’ Take this statement about Christ in connection with
his promise in John 14 : 19— ‘ Because I live ye shall live also, and
it will be seen that the doctrine of endless bliss is firmly established.
For the word here translated ‘ endless ’ really means ‘ endless ’ (the
literal translation is indissoluble'), and it is very significant and very
comforting that it is never applied to punishment.”
It may be added in this connexion that there are several
Greek words and expressions denoting endlessness, which arc
quite free from the indefinitoness attaching to aion, and
it is almost, if not quite certain that some of them would have
been used had it been intended to teach the doctrine of endless
punishment. Such are : ateleutos, aperantos, uthanatos t
apaustos, es aei, emeu telous, etc., all of which are conspicuously
absent when punishment is mentioned.


Chapter Vl. —Texts Which Teach that God will
Solve the Great Problem.
IT is impossible that the Word of God can contradict itself.
No revealed truth is opposed, and no error is supported by
a single passage in it. Any text which apparently opposes
any clearly revealed truth, or apparently supports any un-
doubted error, is either misunderstood, or is no part of the
Word of God, but an interpolation. It is almost always the
case, however, that the apparent contradictions arise from
misinterpretations. And little wonder, for spiritual things have
to be illustrated by earthly things, and of necessity earthly
tilings cannot form a perfectly true illustration. The Holy
Spirit is straitened, not in Himself, but by the limitations of
our knowledge and language ; and on this account even the
great Source of inspiration fails to reveal fully. Now, we can
only know in part; now, we can only have spiritual things
partly revealed to us. A great deal must always depend upon
the stage of advancement of the individual. Christian ex-
perience and a close walk with God open the eyes of the un-
derstanding as nothing else does. “The natural man re-
ceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are fool-
ishness to Him ; and he cannot know them because they are
spiritually judged. But he that is spiritual judgeth all things,
and he himself is judged of no man.” I subjoin a number of
passages for the examination of spiritual men and women. I
have arranged them under the following five heads :


I.—Texts bearing on tbe extent of the blessings of
the Gospel.
II. —Texts treating of tbe duration of punishment.
111. —Texts pointing out the purpose of punishment.
IV. —Texts showing the effect of punishment.
V. —Texts expressive of what God’s will or pleasure is.
In the examination the points for consideration are the
following :
1. When interpreted by the usual rules, what do these
passages mean ?
2. Are they in accordance with the revealed character
of God as a God of love, and no respecter of per-
sons ?
3. Are they compatible with the continued existence
throughout all the ages of eternity of a countless
multitude of sinners in open rebellion and endur-
ing untold suffering—inflicted or permitted,—not
for the purpose, of bringing them to their senses,
but simply as a fitting retribution for the deeds
done in the body during the few short years of
their earthly pilgrimage ?
I, TEXTS WHICH TEACH THE UNIVERSALITY OP THE
BLESSINGS OF THE GOSPEL,
Gen. xii., 3. —“ And in Thee shall all the families of the earth
be blessed.”
Ps. xxii., 27.—“ All the ends of the earth shall remember and
turn unto the Lord : And all the kindreds of the
nations shall worship before Thee.”


Ps, Ixxxvi., 9. —“ All nations whom Thou hast made shall
come and worship before Thee, 0 Lord ; And they shall
glorify Thy name.’’
Is. xlv., 22.—“ Look unto Me, and be ye saved, all the ends
of the earth : for lam God and there is none else. By
Myself have I sWorn, the word is gone forth from My
mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that unto
Me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.”
Dan. vii., 13.—“ There came with the clouds of heaven one
like unto a Son of Man, and He came even to the Ancient
of Days, and they brought Him near before Him. And
there was given Him dominion and glory and a kingdom,
that all the peoples, nations and languages should serve
Him.”
John i., 29. —“ Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away
the sin of the world.”
John hi., 17. —“ For God sent not the Son into the world to
judge the world ; but that the world should be saved
through Him.”
Mat. xi., 27. —“ All things have been delivered unto Me of
My Father.”
John vi., 37. —“ All that which the Father giveth Me shall
come unto Me ; and him that cometh to Me I will in no
wise cast out.”
John xii., 32. —“ xlnd I, if Ibe lifted up from the earth, will
draw all men unto Myself. But this He said, signifying
by what manner of death He should die.”
Acts hi., 21. —“ Whom the heaven must receive until the
times of restoration of all things, whereof God spake by
the mouth of His holy prophets.”
Rom. v., 18.—“ So then as through one trespass the judg-
ment came unto all men to condemnation, even so,


through one act of righteousness, the free gift came unto
all men to justification of life. For as through the one
man’s disobedience the many (=all) were made sinners,
even so through the obedience of the one shall the many
(=all) be made righteous.”
Rom viii., 20. —“ For the creation was subjected to vanity, not
of its own will, but by reason of Him who subjected it,
in hope that the creation itself also shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the
glory of the children of God.”
Rom. xi., 26. —“ And so all Israel shall be saved.”
Rom. xi,, 32.—“ For God hath shut up all unto disobedience,
that He might have mercy upon all.”
I John iv., B.—“ God is love.”
I Cor. xiii. 8. —“ Love never fails.”
I Cor. xv., 28.—“ And when all things have been subjected
unto Him, then shall the Son also Himself be subjected
to Him that did subject all things unto Him, that God
may be all in all,”
II Cor. v., 19.—“ God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto Himself, not reckoning unto them their tres-
passes.”
Phil, ii., 10, 11.—“ That in the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of things in Heaven, and things on earth,
and things under the earth, and that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God
the Father.”
I Tim. ii., 4.—“ Who willeth that all men should be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the truth. For there is
one God, one mediator also between God and man, Him-
self man, Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a ransom for
all.”


I Tim. iv., 10. —“We have our hope set on the living God,
who is the Saviour of all men, specially of them that
believe.”
Tit. ii., 11.—“ For there has appeared the grace of God that
saves all men.”
Hhb.u., Id, 15. —“ That through death He might bring to
nought him that had the power of death, that is, the
devil ; and might deliver all them who through fear of
death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.”
I John ii., 2.—“ He is the propitiation for our sins ; and
not for ours only, but also for the whole world.”
Rev. v., 13.—“ And every created thing which is in the
heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and on
the sea, and all things that are in them, heard I saying,
‘ Unto Him that sitteth on the throne, and unto the
Lamb, be the blessing, and the honour, and the glory,
and the dominion unto the ages of the ages.”
Rev, xx., 14. —“And death and Hades were cast into the
lake of fire.”
Rev. xxi., 8-5. —“ Behold the tabernacle of God is with men,
and He shall dwell with them, and they shall be His
peoples, and God Himself shall be with them, and be
their God : and He shall wipe away every tear from their
eyes ; and death shall be no more ; neither shall there be
mourning, nor crying, nor pain, any more : the first
things are passed away. And He that sitteth on the
throne said, ‘Behold, I make all things new.’ ”
Rev. xxii,, 2, 3. —“ And the leaves of the tree (of life) were
fur the healing of the nations. And there shall be no
more anything accursed.”


11. TEXTS .SHOWING THAT THE DURATION OF PUNISHMENT Is
LIMITED.
Ps. ciii., B.—“ The Lord is full of compassion and gracious,
slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy. He will not
always chide; neither will He keep His anger for-
ever.”
Is. liv., 8. —“ ‘ln overflowing wrath I hid My face from thee
for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee,’ saith the Lord, thy Redeemer.”
Is. Ivii., 16.—“ For I will not contend for ever, neither will I
be always wroth.”
Lam. iii., 81-33. —“ For the Lord will not cast off for ever.
For though He cause grief, yet will He have compassion
according to the multitude of His mercies.
For He doth not afflict willingly (from His heart),
nor grieve the children of men.”
Mic. vii., 18.—“ He retaineth not His anger for ever, because
He delighteth in mercy.”
Mat. xxv., 46. —“ These shall go away into age-long prun-
ing.”
Luke xii,, 47.—“ And that servant which knew his Lord’s
will, and made not ready, nor did according to His will
shall he beaten with many stripes ; but he that knew not,
and did things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few
stripes.”
Jer. iii., 12. —“ ‘I am merciful,’ saith the Lord, ‘ I will not
keep anger for ever. Only acknowledge thine iniquity,
that thou hast transgressed against the Lord, thy God.’ ”
I Pet. iii., 18, — “ Because Christ also suffered for sins once, the
righteous for the unrighteous, that He might bring us to
God : being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in


the spirit; in which also He went and preached unto the
spirits in prison, which aforetime were disobedient, when
the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Hoah,
while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight
souls were saved through water ; which also after a true
likeness doth now save you, even baptism, not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh, but the appeal of a good
conscience toward God, through the resurrection of Jesus
Christ.”
I Pet. iv., 6.—“ For unto this end was the Gospel preached
even to the dead, that they might be judged according to
men in the flesh, but live according to God in the
Spirit.”
I Cor. y., 5. —“ To deliver such a one unto Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus.”
111. —texts which indicate god’s purpose in inflicting
PUNISHMENT.
Ps. Ixii., 12.—“ Also unto Thee, 0 Lord, belongeth mercy :
for Thou renderest to every man according to his
work.”
Ps. cxix., 75. —“ I know, 0 Lord, that Thy judgments are
righteous,
And that in faithfulness Thou hast afflicted me.”
Is. iv., 4.—“ When the Lord shall have washed away the filth
of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged
the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by the
spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning.”
Is. xlviii., 10.—“ Behold, I have refined thee, but not as
silver ; I have tricd_thee in the furnace of affliction.”


Mal. iii., 2. —“ But who may abide the day of His coming?
And who shall stand when He appeareth ? For He is
like the refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ soap : and He shall
sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he shall purify
the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver;
and they shall offer unto the Lord offerings in right-
eousness.”
Heb. xii., 10. —“ For they (the fathers of our flesh) verily for
a few days chastened us as seemed good to them ; but
He for our profit, that we may be partakers of His
holiness.”
IV. TEXTS TEACHING THE EFFECT OF PUNISHMENT.
Ps. Ixxviii., 32-35.—“ For all this they sinned still,
And believed not in His wondrous works.
Therefore their days did He consume in vanity,
And their years in terror.
When He slew them, then they inquired after Him :
And they returned and sought God early.”
Ps. cxix., 67. —“ Before I was afflicted I went astray ;
But now I observe Thy word.”
Is. xxvi., 9.—“ When Thy judgments are in the earth, the
inhabitants of the world learn righteousness.”
Is. xxvi., 16.—“ Lord, in trouble have they looked for Thee,
they poured out a prayer when Thy chastening was upon
them.”
Hos. v., 15. —“ I will go and return to My place, till they
acknowledge their offence and seek My face: in their
affliction they will seek Me earnestly.


Come and let us return unto the Lord : for He hath
torn and He will heal us ; He hath smitten and He vviU
bind us up.”
Hep. xii., 11.— “ All chastening yieldeth peaceable fruit unto
them that have been exercised thereby, even the fruit of
righteousness.”
V. TEXTS SHOWING GOD’S WILL OR PLEASURE.
Is. xlvi., 10.—“ My counsel shall stand, and I will do all
my pleasure : 1 have spoken, I will also bring it to
pass ; I have purposed, I will also do it. Hearken unto
Me, ye stout-hearted, that are far from righteousness : I
bring near My righteousness, it shall not be far off, and
My salvation shall not tarry.”
Luke xix., 10.—“ For the Son of Man came to seek and
to save that which was lost.”
John vi., 89.— “Andthis is the will of Him that sent Me,
that of all that which He hath given Me I should lose
nothing, but should raise it up at the last day.” (“ All
things have been delivered unto Me of My Father.”
—Matt, xi., 27.)
1 John iii., 8. — “ To this end was the Son of God manifested,
that He might destroy the works of the devil.”
1 John iv., 14.— “ The Father hath sent the Son to be the
Saviour of the world.” (“ Jesus saith unto them, ‘My
meat is to do the will of Him that sent Me, and to
accomplish His work.’ ” —John iv., 34.)
Eph. i., 9, 10. —“ Having made known unto us the mystery of
His will, according to His good pleasure which He


purposed in Him unto a dispensation of the fulness of
the times, to sum up all things in Christ, the things in
the heavens and the things upon the earth.”
Col. i., 19.— “ For it was the good pleasure of the Father
that in Him should all the fulness dwell; and through
Him to reconcile all things unto Himself, whether things
upon the earth or things in the heavens.”
I Tim. ii., 4.—“ Who willeth that all men should be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the truth,”
Rev. iv., 11.—“ Thou art worthy, 0 Lord, to receive glory,
and honour and power : for Thou hast created all things,
and for Thy pleasure they were and are created.”
Ex. xviii., 32.—“ ‘ For I have no pleasure in the death of him
that dieth,’ saith the Lord God, ‘ therefore turn your-
selves and live.’ ”


Chapter Vll.— The Glory of God.
“ All the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord."
Num. XIY., 21.
“ The earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord."— Hab. 11., 14.
JT seems to me necessary to supplement the preceding two
chapters by taking up the subjects of the glory of God and
His Sovereignty, since the meaning attached to the former
and the view held as to the exercise of the latter have a very
intimate connexion with our Problem. Indeed, the ideas we
imbibe from the passages bearing on these subjects colour our
whole theology.
It is a maxim in moral philosophy that the quality of an
action lies in the intention or motive which calls it forth. As
a corollary to this it may be said that we know a good deal
about a man’s character when we know the motives by which he
is actuated, and further, that we know a good deal about God’s
character when we know the motives which from all eternity
have actuated Him. In the chapter on the “ Knowledge of
God ” it was incidently mentioned that a very common view
represents God as doing all things for His own glory, and
that this is understood as meaning that His own Glory is the
motive which actuates Him. Now, we cannot utter a state-
ment more damaging to a man’s character as a Christian,
than that his great motive is his own glory, and yet about God
the statement is made unblushingly, as if it were not only
possible, but quite natural, that a motive utterly unworthy in


the creature should be perfectly right in the Creator.
Perhaps I may be reminded that God’s ways are so different
from man’s ways that they cannot be compared together.
True, their ways are very different, but in what direction does
the difference lie ? It is not in the possibility of God’s motive
being lower than man’s ; on the contrary, it consists in God’s
ways and thoughts being higher than man’s ways and
thoughts, by as much as the heavens are higher than the
earth.
The statement that God’s great motive is His own glory is
very distinctly made in the Shorter Catechism in the following
passages :
“ The decrees of God are His eternal purpose according to
the counsel of His will whereby for His own Glory He hath
foreordained whatsoever comes to pass.
“ God, having out of His mere yood pleasure from all eternity
elected some to everlasting life, did enter into a covenant of
grace to deliver them out of the state of sin and misery, and to
bring them into a state of salvation by a Redeemer.”
To the same effect is the following extract from a Con-
fession of Faith :
“By Whom (God) wo confess and believe all things in
heaven and earth, as well visible as invisible, to have been
created, to be retained in their being, and to be ruled and
guided by His inscrutable Providence to such end as His
eternal wisdom, goodness and justice have appointed them to
the manifestation of His glory.
Whatever may have been the ideas in the minds of the
framers of these sentences, it is undeniable that they are
generally understood as stating God’s motive, and as represent-
ing that motive to be a selfish one. ihis has arisen fiom
directing attention too exclusively to God’s sovereign power,


forgetting that power is but a manifestation of the love which
is the very essence of God, and that consequently it can only
be exercised in the service of love.
The absolute sovereignty of God is a great fact, seen and
known of all who have studied the material universe, or
accepted God’s written revelation concerning Himself. But
to infer from His sovereignty that out of His mere good
pleasure He has from all eternity elected only some to ever-
lasting life, is to say that this sovereign power is not
wielded in the service of love, but of partiality and caprice.
The doctrine of God’s sovereignty, coupled with the possibility
of its being exercised with partiality, is the most dreadful con-
ceivable, and the most repellent. It has driven millions into
infidelity, and many into blank atheism, if such a state of
mind is really possible. The doctrine of God’s sovereignty
coupled with the assurance that it is always exercised in
the service of pure, unselfish and universal love, is the
most glorious conceivable, and the most attractive. It has drawn
millions upon millions to an absolute surrender to Christ ; it has
transformed their natures, so that they lore only what God
loves, and are therefore no longer under law, but raised
above it; and it will continue attracting, until all are
brought under its sway, in loving, voluntary surrender.
The very expression, “ Sovereignty wielded in the service of
love ” is a guarantee that this will be so.
It is quite clear, then, that love , not glorg, is God’s
great motive. Since He is love, it is impossible that it
could be otherwise. Love was the motive that prompted
God’s acts of creation, or, expressing it in different language,
the good of all His creatures was and is and ever will be the
great motive of the Supreme Being who is Love , and who is the
same yesterday, to-day and for ever.


It may be objected that this does not prove anything since
creatures may obstinately and persistently refuse to be
benefited by the proffered “ good.” This objection is met by
the consideration that since the good of His creatxires is the
sole object of the Great Creator, He could not create beings
with the full knowledge that it would not be for their good.
Let us, then, accept joyfully the grand truth, that God’s great
motive is wholly unselfish. Let us fling ourselves upon it
with the utmost confidence, and revel in the ‘ peace passing all
understanding ’ that it brings. What perfect trust as regards
the future it will give to those Avho embrace it, and how
rapidly it will increase the growth and development in them
of the matchless motive of self-sacrificing love !
While, however, the glory of God in the selfish sense in
which it is generally understood, is not the motive which has
actuated God in all His works, it is, nevertheless, the result of
them all, whether spiritual or material. “ The heavens declare
the glory of God ” (Ps. xix., 1.) “ Man is the image and
glory of God ” (I Cor. xi., 7.)
Let us next examine a little more closely this sublime
expression, “ the glory of God perhaps it has not after all
the selfish idea usually attached to it. To understand it
aright, it is necessary first of all to take the Greek word
translated “glory,” and trace it to its root. By so doing, and
by again following it upwards in its course of glorification
(for it is one of those words whose signification has ever been
getting nobler), we shall obtain a firmer grasp of its
meaning.
The root is dokeo , a verb which means to think, expect,
fancy, imagine. Its secondary meanings are, to seem, to appear,
to appear to he something, to be of repute.


From this verb is derived the noun doxa, which is trans-
lated glory in the passages to be examined.
Doxa means an opinion (especially a philosophical opinion),
expectation, a sentiment, a judg merit, a fancy, a vision. Its
secondary meanings are, reputation, good report, credit,
honour.
As has just been said, the meaning of this word has had an
upward course : it has been ennobled as the centuries have
rolled by ; while originally it meant any kind of opinion, it
finally shook off all connexion with unfavourable opinions,
and retained only the meanings of good report, credit, hot tour.
Its own signification is now wholly good, but it is found in a
compound word which conveys the idea of censure, viz.,
hetero doxy, a word meaning erroneous opinion—erroneous,
that is to say, in the estimation of the person who so styles it.
On the other hand, ortho doxy means a set of correct opinions
—correct, that is to say, in the estimation of the person who
so names them.
We have seen that the root verb means, to seem, to
appear ; that the noun derived from it means the appear-
ance ( seeming) which the thing has, and that this noun
doxa, in process of time, came to mean an appearance in a
good sense only, rising at last, in the phrase under consideration!
to mean the grandest appearance or sight imaginable. Its mean-
ing is not confined to appearances seen by the bodily eye, but
includes all the grandest imaginations and conceptions of
the minds most fully developed, either intellectually, (esthetic-
ally, or morally.
When we speak of the glory of any inanimate thing, we
mean its grand appearance ; when we speak of the glory of a
person, we mean his fine mental or physical development, or
something in his possession which reflects honour upon him.


When we speak of giving glory to anyone, we mean entertain-
ing and expressing a high opinion concerning him. It will
thus be seen that the original meanings of doxa, viz., opinion
and appearance, really form the basis of all the meanings we
attach to “ glory.”
The following are examples of these meanings :—Satan
tempted Christ by showing Him all the kingdoms of the
world and the glory of them, that is, the magnificence per-
taining to them. How the magnificence of the kingdom
attaches to the ruler, and is called his “ glory.” This
furnishes an example of something possessed by a person
being called his “glory.” His great flocks and herds were
the glory of Jacob, and Laban’s sons murmured, saying,
“Of that which was our father’s hath he gotten all his
glory.”
The Ark of the Covenant was the glory of the Israelites,
and on the news of its capture by the Phillistines being
brought from the field of battle, the daughter-in-law of Eli ?
in her dying moments, exclaimed, “ The glory is departed
from Israel, for the Ark of God is taken.”
The Shekinah, that is, the brightness over the mercy-
seat in the holy of holies, was called the glory of the
Lord, because it was the appearance which visibly mani-
fested God’s presence. Similarly, though not in the same
supernatural sense, the heavens may be said to be the
glory of God. In a higher sense man may be said to be the
glory of God. And since God Himself says this about man,
who shall dare to despise the race of Adam, and slander
them, as if they were a disgrace rather than a glory ? We
study the lower animal creation, and we are lost in amaze-
ment at the infinite variety of species, and at the wonderful
adaptation of each to the life it has to lead. In some we


specially admire the structure, in others their beautiful
skins ; we gaze with delight at the brilliant plumage and
graceful forms of some birds, and our ears are ravished
with the harmonious notes of others, but taking the lower
animals as a whole, we do not hesitate to say that they are a
manifestation of the glory of God. In a higher sense, man,
notwithstanding his many sins, is the glory of God. Consider
the works of man. Think how he has ferreted out the secrets of
nature,and brought the natural forces under his control.
Think of his mighty leviathians that float on the great deep,
of the powerful locomotive, with its long train of carriages,
rushing on at the rate of a mile a minute. Think of his
inventions for the communication of news—the telegraph, by
which messages, notwithstanding many breaks and delays
in the journey, travel round the globe in a few hours ; the
telephone, by which conversations are carried on between
persons a hundred miles apart, as comfortably and expediti-
ously as if they were standing face to face ; the phono-
graph, by which the tones of the far distant or long
departed are faithfully produced in our hearing. These, and
many other works, are the glory of man, and they contribute
towards making man the glory of God.
We watch the busy throng in a populous city, tens of
thousands hurrying hither and thither, all taking a part in the
work needed to keep things moving in the world, and sug-
gesting the lines about the bee: —
“ Each seems to know both where to go,
And what he has to do.”
Scanning their faces, we are gladdened by perceiving in some
a noble appearance (glory), telling of something Divine within ;
we are saddened to see on others the stamp of vice, but are
cheered by the thought that as man is the glory of God, that


stamp cannot be permanent, must sooner or later give
place to something better. We turn to the country, and con-
template the peaceful homesteads of our farmers ; we observe
their patient, persevering cultivation of the soil to produce
food for us all ; we see the results of their industrious toil in
the fields of golden grain, the orchard trees laden with fruit,
and the rich pasture lands on which flocks of sheep and herds
of cattle are peacefully browsing. As we reflect on all this,
do we not confess that man, by reason of his works in the
country, as well as in the city, is the glory of God ? The
words which Shakespeare puts into the mouth of Hamlet
express very beautifully and forcibly the truth about man
which lam endeavouring to impress : —“ What a piece of work
is man ! how noble in reason ! how infinite in faculty ! in
form and moving, how express and admirable ! in action, how
like an angel ! in apprehension, how like a god ! the beauty of
the world ! the paragon of animals ! ” And if, with prevail-
ing sin obscuring his faculties, and marring his usefulness in
every way, man is still the glory of God, in how much higher
a degree will this be the case, when by the drawing of
Christ he has been lifted to that higher level which sin cannot
reach. On the other hand, it is inconceivable that a race of
beings, the great majority of whom were sinking down, down,
hopelessly down into greater and ever greater depths of sin
and misery, could consistently with common sense be called
the glory of God. The main things, then, which constitute
man the glory of’ God are his power of choice, and his
capability of becoming a partaker of the Divine nature; but the
former must be exercised aright, and the latter become an ac-
complished fact, before man can be the glory of God in a sense
which can satisfy His infinite, unchanging love. Both man


and the lower animals, then, are possessions which reflect glory
on God their possessor.
In the highest sense of all, the glory of God means the appear-
ance of God as He really is. This appearance is wholly
spiritual, for the visible universe, though manifesting the glory of
God in a sense, rather veils than reveals it in the highest sense.
God possesses attributes. These possessions are His glory.
The summing up of these attributes is Love , so that in the
highest sense of all, Love is the glory of God.
This view of the matter may lead us more correctly to
understand some of the passages containing the expression
under consideration. For example, in Isaiah xliii., 7, we
read the words, “ Whom I have created for My glory,”
which seem to savour of selfishness. The literal translation
of this sentence as it occurs in the Septuagint is, “ For in
My glory I have created Him,” which may mean either that
God created him in His love or that He created Him in His
likeness, from both of which meanings all idea of selfishness
is excluded.
It is unfortunate that while the Greek word doxa has
always a high and good meaning, the English word glory has
both a high and a low, i.e , a good and a bad meaning. Another
Greek word altogether, and the poles asunder from doxa,
meaning boasting, is also translated glory, and we find it very
difficult to separate the low meaning altogether from it. The
position is just this : we have two Greek words of very
different signification, which are both translated glory, and as
a consequence, it naturally happens that we sometimes under-
stand glory as if it were the translation of the one, when in
reality it is the translation of the other, and further, as a con-
sequence of our fallen, selfish nature, when we do make this
mistake it is always by way of taking the translation of the


high-toned word doxa, and understanding it as if it were the
translation of the inferior word. We shall be kept right so
far as the expression “ the glory of God ” is concerned, if we
remember that God is wholly unselfish, that His glory in the
highest sense consists in the perfections of His character,
which are summed up in the one word Love.
A passage in the Authorized Version, which has given rise
to much misconception, has been put right in the Revised
Version. I refer to Rev. iv., 11, which reads in the Author-
ized Version “Thou hast created all things, and for Thy
pleasure they are and were created,” but more correctly in the
New “ Thou didst create all things, and because of Thy will
(or more simply, by Thy will) they are and were created.”
Keeping in mind the lofty sense in which the word gloiy is
always used in the expression the glory of God, what is the
legitimate conclusion to be drawn from it as regards the Great
Problem ? All God’s creatures are His glory. Could a being
in hopeless misery be the glory of any one ? Yes, he could be
the glory (not the doxa , however,) of a cruel tyrant. By no
possibility could he be the glory (doxa) of God. An incor-
rigibly bad son is not the glory of a good father. But the
time is coming when the earth shall be filled with the glory of
the Lord, and not only so but with a knowledge of the glory of
the Lord, or in other words, the time is coming when all shall
see the perfections of God’s character, shall see and be
attracted and transformed by His love. In the light of all the
joyful anticipations of God’s holy prophets and apostles, it is
a mystery how pessimistic views can live. But stop ! there is
no mystery : they do not lire in the light ; they only live in
the dark recesses into which the light is not allowed to
penetrate.


The sum of the matter seems to be that for ages past the
wheels of the gospel chariot have been made to drag heavily by
reason of the gross misconceptions prevalent regarding God’s
character. In a former chapter it was shown that in the times
of Christ and His apostles no such terrible conceptions about
the state of punishment were held, as those which now pre-
vail. In this chapter an attempt has been made to show that
for centuries past the ideas of “ God’s power and absolute
sovereignty ” have usurped the position which “ God’s love and
absolute sovereignty” should hold, and that a kind of glory,
very nearly akin to vain-glory, if not identical with it, has been
proclaimed to be God’s great motive in creation, providence,
and redemption, instead of pure, unselfish love, or in other
words the good of all His creatures.
Let love be accepted as the essence of God, which it is :
let all His mighty works be regarded as manifestations of love,
which they are, and a completely different, a much more
glorious view of God’s character will be obtained. Gazing upon
this with unveiled face, that is, worshipping God in the
clearer light reached, we shall be transformed into the same
image from glory to glory. In other words the Great Problem
will be solved.


Chapter Vlll,— Man’s Attempts to Solve the Great
Problem.
They have forsaken Me, the fountain of living ivaters, and hewed
them out cisterns, h alien cisterns, that can hold no water."
Jer. 11., 18.
3|][HOUGH the problem is God’s, and can of course be
solved only by Him, man, in his eagerness to do without
God, and get rid of the necessity for a Supreme Intelligence,
steps forward and attempts the task. If the reader will turn
to the statement of the Problem, he will perceive that man’s
attempt can refer only to a very small percentage of one
species, the human family, whereas the Problem deals with
every race of intelligent beings throughout the universe, though
the details have had reference mainly to mankind. It is some-
what suggestive that man’s attempts have been made since
God’s great solution has been before the world, that is, since
the Word became flesh and dwelt among us.
The following are well-established facts, viz., that schemes,
having for their object the relief of suffering, and the
general amelioration of humanity, have abounded under
Christianity ; that prior to the Christian era such things were
almost unknown, and that even now they are mainly confined
to Christian communities. It is not disputed that among
those who do not assent to the truth of Christianity, there
are many philanthropists, but even these are very appreciably,
though perhaps insensibly to themselves, affected by it. Both
by heredity and environment, they owe far more to


Christianity than they have any idea of. Well, such men
try to raise the masses, and bring about right-doing. It
has sometimes been said, and probably there is some truth
in the saying, that Chiist’s coming to the earth in the like-
ness of sinful flesh, was delayed until man had had a full
opportunity of trying to solve without His aid the Great
Problem, so that the total failure of these attempts might
convince him that unaided he was wofully weak in the struggle
against evil, and might prepare him to receive with joy the
help of a Divine Saviour. It is very easy to talk glibly
about the necessity of leaving him for thousands of years
to his own resources, and thus proving to man his inability
to do anything to raise or save himself, but under the view
of the common theology, it was a very costly experiment for those
upon whom it was made. Thousands upon thousands of
millions of spirits—each infinite in value as we constantly
hear in sermons —lost for e\er in an attempt to prove to
man that he needed a Saviour ! Grasp unfaltering, however,
the great truth that God is no respecter of persons, and
every difficulty vanishes. Before God has done with any
man, He will give him as good a chance as any other
man ever had. In the fulness of time Christ came, but men
are by no means even yet convinced that they cannot save
themselves. There are many who deny the supernatural, and
struggle on bravely, though ineffectually, in their battle against
wrong. While deploring their mistake, let us give them all
credit for the efforts they put forth. Mistaken effort is more
acceptable in God’s sight than truth wedded to inactivity.
When man attempts to bring about right doing without the
aid of supernatural religion, he takes as the basis of his opera-
tions the principle of utilitarianism. His aim is to teach
men that right doing is in the long run the most useful for


all. A sample maxim from this school of thought is,
“ Honesty is the best policy,” and the exhortation based upon
it is, “ For that reason be ye honest.” Herein lies the differ-
ence between God’s solution of the Problem, and man’s attempt;
God enjoins self-sacrifice regardless of future compensation,
man would build up a system of ethics on the basis of what
is thought to be the most useful. Man enjoins the practice
of what is expedient : God enjoins the practice of what is
right in accordance with a fixed and perfect standard. Any
attempt to teach morality on purely utilitarian grounds, and
apart from a sanction by the framer of the perfect standard,
must result in failure. There is but a short step between being
honest, by faith in the maxim that it is the best policy, and
being honest only in those circumstances in which it is plainly
seen to be the best policy. Mutatis mutandis , the foregoing
sentence applies to all the virtues, and it would appear that
under the regime of expediency there is no possibility of walk-
ing by faith. The attempt may be made, but sight will
speedily assert its supremacy, for the simple reason that
expediency cannot cultivate the moral sentiment, or, to use the
language of Scripture, cannot change the heart.
The main defects in any merely human attempt at solu-
tion arc the following :
Ist. It makes no provision Jor the past. The toilers in
the upward march in by-gone ages are left in the darkness
of the grave ; there is no uprising for them ; their lives
fell in places and times far from pleasant ; and though,
notwithstanding much that was bad in them, they helped
in some measure the onward march ol the woild, they are,
nevertheless, according to any merely human scheme, allowed
to perish. It cannot be too deeply impressed upon our minds
that apart from the supernatural there can be no solution of


the Problem, for the future life, in which of necessity the last
steps of the solution must be wrought out, lies wholly in the
realm of the supernatural.
Very different from man’s feeble attempt is God’s complete
solution, which He is working out through His unique Son
Jesus Christ. He makes full provision for the past ; He
will not allow “ the spirits to faint away before Him, and the
souls which He has made.” Being put to death in the flesh,
but quickened in the spirit, Christ went in spirit and
preached unto the spirits in prison. “ For unto this end
was the gospel preached even to the dead, that they might be
judged according to man in the flesh, but live according to
God in the spirit.” (I Pet. iv., 6).
The common theology is quite as defective here as the
purely human schemes are. In fact in a sense it is much
more defective, for while the human view leaves the un-
approved toilers of the past in the darkness of the grave,
“where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are
a t res t ”in short, annihilates them, the ordinary
theology leaves them under the wrath of God, suffering
unspeakable torments.
2nd. It makes very little provision for the present and the
future. Notwithstanding the efforts put forth, great numbers
of the present generation are still unsaved, and are passing off
the stage of time in that state. As regards the future, it holds
out no greater hope than that at some very distant date the
human race, having as a whole (by which is meant the then
existing generation) emerged out of the darkness of wrong
doing into the glorious light of the universal practice of
right doing, will pass across the stage of time without a blemish
into the darkness of nothingness. This dream is a hopeful
one only in a very limited degree. It pleases the philanthropic


philosophers who refuse to believe,in God’s solution, preferring
something which ignores Him, but it cannot satisfy the ordinary
individuals of the race, who find no solace to themselves per-
sonally in such a doctrine or such a dream. In a previous
chapter the great importance of the unity of the race was
insisted on, but that doctrine is not to be understood as de-
stroying individuality. On the contrary, it lays down as its
main feature the ultimate happiness of each unit that goes to
compose the whole race.
3rd. It makes no adequate provision for the cultivation and
development of the moral sentiment. By the moral sentiment is
meant the feeling of reverence for the Moral Law, or more
briefly, the love of Virtue. Because of this defect it must fail
even in the limited sphere in which it professes to operate.
The possession of the moral sentiment is the crowning glory
of man, far surpassing in importance the possession of
intellect. Hence the cultivation of the moral sentiment is the
highest part of education, and the part upon which the greatest
amount of care should be bestowed. Hot that the cultivation
of the intellect or the emotions should be neglected in favour
of the cultivation of the moral sentiment ! That would be a
very unwise course, for the better the former are trained the
more highly can the latter be cultivated. This sentiment or
faculty has very feeble beginnings, and its development
has to be fostered by presenting to the child’s mind examples
of virtue, with a view to call forth his moral feelings, and
exercise his moral judgment. How, the feeling which
bears the principal share in developing the moral sentiment is
sympathy, which just means feeling with others, entering into
all their feelings, their ideas, aspirations and joys, as well as
their sorrows. Sympathy is produced by putting ourselves,
in imagination, in the place of others, and realising how we


should feel in their place. We must be careful not to limit
sympathy to the act of condoling with anyone in distress, but
must, on the contrary, bear in mind that it means a fellow
feeling of any kind exercised with reference to any subject. I
wish to call attention to a phase of sympathy very different
from condolence, viz,, having a fellow feeling with the thoughts,
aspirations, and doings of the great and good. This feeling
has an ennobling effect, and this effect is of coixrse most
powerfully displayed when Christ, the perfect One, is con-
templated, and a fellow feeling with Him generated. In fact,
it is only by affection for a lofty person that the moral
sentiment can be cultivated. It is inconceivable that created
beings can develop the moral faculty apart from an ideal
loftier than their present attainments being placed before
them. This ideal may be either a living or an historical person.
Some may suppose that it may be an inherent ideal implanted
in the human mind, but experience has, I think, fully proved
that whatever inherent ideal there may be, it cannot be
developed without an external ideal, which may be looked up
to, and which draws out and develops whatever moral faculty
may be inherent. In order that the ideal may have its full
influence, it must be one about which there is no doubt, and it
is the Ayant of an undoubted ideal, that constitutes one of
the great weaknesses of man’s schemes for the elevation of
humanity. And it is the possession of an ideal about which
there is no doubt that constitutes the mighty power of the
gospel.
It has been said that sympathy is awakened and developed
by putting ourselves (in imagination) in the circumstances of
others, and trying so to realize their position, as to perceive
clearly what we should like, and what we might reasonably
expect from others, if that were really our position. It is by


making a practice of this imaginary transposition, and carry-
ing out the conclusions thus reached, that we succeed (so far
as we do succeed) in carrying out the Golden Rule of doing
unto others as we would that they should do to us. Without
a perfect model, however, we sjhould make great mistakes in
carrying out this principle. To prevent these mistakes, it is
necessary to acquire a fellow feeling with Christ, by habitually
imagining Him to be in our place, and by asking ourselves
the question, “ How would Christ have acted under these
circumstances ? ”
In still another and quite a different sense should we cultivate
this feeling of sympathy. When we wish to know how we
ought to act towards our fellow men at any particular juncture,
we imagine ourselves in their place, and try to realize what we
might fairly expect from them under the circumstances. In
like manner there is no better way of ascertaining our duty to
our Saviour God than by trying to imagine ourselves in His
place, and realize what we might reasonably expect from those
we had saved. By the continuous practice of this exercise we
cultivate in the most effectual way that fellow feeling (sym-
paty) with God, which develops in us the moral sentiment
(the love of Virtue), and saves us with a great salvation.
Man’s attempt to save himself lacks the personal element
which we have in Christ; it consequently lacks in a marked
degree the power of awakening the fellow feeling of which we
have been speaking, and thus the moral sentiment (the love of
Virtue) languishes and fades for want of the nourishment
which the Bread of Life, that came down from heaven, can
alone supply.
In these vital points, and others that might be enumerated,
any Christless scheme for the upraising of humanity is found
wanting. It is highly probable that every such scheme is


really due to Christianity as one of its reflex influences.
Though some philanthropists may reject Christ, they cannot
remove themselves from His influence as the great ideal. If
they could, it is probable that their philanthropy would soon
vanish, The light of the world is Jesus, and where this light
is not, there is very little benevolence. “ The dark places of
the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty.”
The reader must have noticed from this and the foregoing
chapters, that at every turn one great truth in some form or
other has confronted us, viz., that the knowledge of God is
eternal life. This affords ample justification for the space
that has been devoted to the subject of God’s character, and
whether the views put forth are right or wrong, their public-
ation will do good, if thought be thereby stimulated. The in-
difference evidenced by want of thought on these subjects is a
more backward state than the possession of mistaken thoughts
on them. To all co-workers with God, I would suggest the
use of the following short but comprehensive prayer, the
sincere offering up of which cannot but be attended with the
most beneficial effects to the petitioner, and widely reaching
effects in hastening the solution of the Great Problem :
“ Help me, 0 Lord, to know Thee, and to make Thee
known, for Jesus’ sake.”


Chapter IX.— Effects of the Belief that the Great
Problem will be Solved.
TT GREAT many, who would like to believe in the final restora-
' tion to holiness and happiness of the whole race, have grave
misgivings as to what would be the effect of teaching the doc-
trine. They are afraid that it would let loose the floodgates
of sin in this world at least ; that none would exercise self-
denial here, if they knew they would have another chance
hereafter. I confess ithe doctrine is liable to abuse, but in
this respect it does not stand alone. When Paul taught
the precious truth, “ Where sin abounded, grace did much
more abound,” he thought it necessary to guard it against
abuse by continuing, “ Shall we continue in sin that grace
may abound ? God forbid. We who died to sin, how shall
we any longer live therein ? ” And he tells us that some
slanderously reported and affirmed that he said, “ Let us do
evil that good may come.” In like manner the doctrine that
God will subdue all to Himself by His love is liable to abuse
if not properly understood, but this does not warrant any one
in slanderously affirming that.it involves as its necessary fruit
careless living.
It may not be out of place to inquire what have been the
fruits of the awful doctrine of endless torment. It is very
evident from the experience of every age, that it is utterly
powerless to put down sin. Men never ran to such
extremes in wickedness as when the doctrine was most
widely and most firmly believed, and that, too, in Its most


materialistic and hideous form. The fact is that when men
believe that God has but one punishment in his code—that of
everlasting damnation—they do not realize it for themselves,
but for others. They hope that they will get off, and accord-
ing to the common theory this implies freedom from chastise-
ment. It is not realized that even after forgiveness every sin
must receive its due punishment. Yet the Bible is full of this
doctrine. When Nathan brought home to David his great
sin, saying, “ Thou art the man,” David, in deepest penitence,
said, “ I have sinned against the Lord.” Nathan then in-
timated that he was forgiven, “ The Lord also hath put away
thy sin,” but the chastisement for it followed all the same.
His child died, and the prophet told him that on account of
his sin the sword would never depart from his house, and that
He would raise up evil against him out of his own family.
The remembrance that God in His mercy renders to every man
according to his works (Ps. Ixii, 12) leads to careful living,
whereas the idea, that there is either perfect happiness with-
out chastisement or fearful torments without hope, is cal-
culated to lead each to hope for himself, and to go on in
careless indifference. I am speaking of the great mass
who do not love the Lord, and whom it seems hopeless to
attempt to win, unless God’s character is placed before
them in a truer, purer light than that in which the
common theology puts it.
It is utterly impossible that truth should ever have an
injurious influence on living, though a misconception of it
may. A misconception of the great truth of justification
through the gospel, without the deeds of the law, may result
in antinomianism, but the truth itself, as Paul informs us,
establishes law instead of making it void. Every believer
in God should equally be a believer in His truth, and have


no misgivings as to the effects of any truth, being confident
that the fruits of truth will be good and only good con-
tinually. In this concluding chapter I wish to defend the
doctrine under consideration from the aspersions thrown
upon it, and to show its efficacy in promoting right
living.
First of all, it places God’s character in a more attractive
light. It is the goodness of God that leads men to re-
pentance, and undoubtedly more goodness is displayed in
God’s continuing the work of redemption as long as there
is a single poor, hungry, ragged prodigal in the far country,
than in giving over to hopeless despair and endless weeping
and wailing and gnashing of teeth every one who dies im-
penitent. This consideration alone should decide the question,
for how could we even imagine greater goodness than the
goodness of God ? This doctrine, then, gives a higher view
of the goodness of God —we can never give a high enough
view of it—and is therefore more powerful in leading men to
repentance. Now repentance is that change of heart and will
which necessarily results in reformed conduct, so that this
doctrine, instead of encouraging sin here, tends powerfully to
lead to repentance and consequent right doing.
Let us next consider what effect this doctrine will have on
the average Christian. The average Christian does not
struggle very determinedly against sin. He believes that at
his death he will be made perfect in holiness, and be received
into heaven. He does not realize that he will receive the
deeds done in the body. He thinks receiving Christ frees
him from all this, or that his acceptance of Christ will be the
one act looked at, and that for it he will receive an infinite
reward. He forgets that “ judgment will begin at the house
of God.” He does not struggle against frailty of temper ; he


is not careful to be kind and considerate to all, and perhaps
does not see the necessity for being scrupulously upright in
all his dealings. But let him fully understand that a severe
process of pruning may be necessary in the world beyond, that
there he will receive the deeds done in the body, that every sin
must be repented of before it can be forgiven, and that re-
pentance is an exceedingly painful, tedious process, and he will
see the wisdom of increased diligence in battling against his
besetting sins. He will carefully cultivate the Christian spirit,
and manifest it in his manner towards all with whom he has
dealings. He will, in short, by the belief of this doctrine, be
lifted out of the ranks of ordinary Christians into the select
company of uncommon Christians, who do strive to carry out
Paul’s many exhortations about crucifying the flesh, with the
affections and lusts thereof.
Again, the important lesson of the brotherhood of man can-
not be well learnt by those who believe that there will be a
final separation of the race into two great classes, the saved
and the lost —the comforted and the tormented. Could a
Calvinist be sure that any particular man is reprobate, he
would regard him not as a brother but as an enemy. Now
Christians in general are not sure that their neighbours and
friends will not be consigned to endless torment, and though
this may lead them to take measures to bring them to the way
of salvation, it loosens the bond of brotherhood. It makes
t he Christian in effect say, If you do certain things you will
be my brother, but if not, I must regard you as an alien be-
longing to another class altogether. But let him believe
that as all men are God’s by creation now, so, one day, will
they all be God’s by redemption, and he cannot fail to learn,
in such a way as will lead to practical results, the doctrine of
the brotherhood of man. You cannot despise those who, you


firmly believe, will one day be in heaven praising God with you,
nor can you harbour feelings of envy or malice against them.
You may loathe their sins, but you will love and pity them,
and feel it incumbent upon you to be a co-worker with God in
their rescue from degradation, and their elevation to holiness.
Nor will there be the feeling of indifference which says, “ Ah,
well, it will be all right sometime ; I need not trouble my head
about the matter,” How we should declaim against the cal-
lousness of a doctor who would not try to relieve intense pain,
coolly remarking that as it would pass off in two or three days,
he need not trouble about it! And what language is strong
enough to denounce the callousness of Christians who say
that if all are to be finally saved, they need not trouble to
preach to their fellow men, or try in any way to save them, for
what matters an age or two more or less in misery ? None
who know God’s love would harbour such a thought. Their
absorbing thought is, “ How best can we be useful co-workers
with Him, how best can we qualify ourselves to excel as
teachers in His great school, the world, and how best can we
train our class (for every one has a class, that is, a circle of
acquaintances more or less influenced by his actions) and
lead them onward and upward ? ”
Times of great calamity, such as outbreaks of plague, have
had wonderful effects in making people realize the unity of
the race, and have given birth to the noblest acts of self-denial
and devotion, transforming ordinary men and women into
heroes and heroines. After recovering from an attack of the
disease they have consecrated themselves to the work of
nursing those still suffering, and have done the new work with
the utmost tenderness and with the surprising skill which their
love for the work bestowed. And will not similar conduct be
repeated in spiritual matters ? Will not those who have been


cured of the malady of sin, or at least, who are so far cured
that they may be said to be convalescent, —will not they have
sympathy with their brethren who are still in the height of
the attack, and will they not act as tender physicians and
nurses, doing their best to alleviate suffering and conquer the
disease ?
It is only this doctrine, too, which can give the preacher or
the labourer in any sphere of work the incentive and the
mighty staying power arising from hope. It is only this
doctrine which makes the promises to the worker “ Yea ” and
“ Amen.” Listen to this exhortation and promise :
“ Wherefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, immovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye
know that your labour is not vain (or void) in the Lord.”
Accoiding to the common idea, if a preacher does not
succeed in converting a hearer, all the labour spent upon him
is vain, and worse than vain, seeing that he will receive the
greater condemnation. It is true it may not be vain as
regards the preacher, for the work may benefit him, but the
question is, whether that is the meaning of the passage.
When compared with other similar passages, it would appear
to be indisputable that the apostle is referring to the fruits of
labour, as shown in the good done to those upon whom the
labour is bestowed. Besides, when the distinct promise is
given that our work shall not be in vain (or void), I think we
are justified in assuming that it will not be void in any sense.
Let the preacher or other labourer have this hope firmly im-
planted in his heart, and what a powerful incentive it will prove!
And as it proves an incentive to the worker, so it does also to
the sinner who grasps it. Let him believe that Christ will be
one day manifested unto him, that he will be like Him ; for
he will see Him, even as He is, and we are assured by the


apostle that the result will be sanctification. “Every one
that hath this hope set on him purifieth himself even as Ho
is pure.”
The fruits of this doctrine may be briefly summed up
thus :
1, Careful living, since we are to receive the deeds
done in the body, as our capital to start with
in the next age.
2. Sympathy with all, even the lowest, since we are
all brethren, since we realize that we have
nothing which we have not received, and that
their position would most probably have been
ours, if our hereditary endowments and our
environment had been similar to theirs. The
knowledge of God will yet make the whole
world kin.
3. Effort on behalf of our brethren will naturally
follow sincere sympathy. If we are convalescent,
we shall delight to act the part of physicians
and nurses to those who are still prostrate with
the disease of sin.
4. We shall act in these capacities animated and
stimulated by the certain hope that our labour
will not be in vain, but that God will make our
efforts as co-workers with Him really useful in
His great universe. Meditation on the in-
comparable sentence, “ God is love,” will lead us
to precious inferences —and logical as well as
precious—-which will make the poet’s dream of
hope a matter of firm conviction with us, a
purifying and stimulating belief—a veritable
gospel of peace and good will to men :


“ Oh yet we trust that somehow good
Will be the final goal of ill,
To pangs of nature, sins of will,
Defects of doubt and taints of blood ;
That nothing .walks with aimless feet ;
That not one life shall be destroyed,
Or cast as rubbish to the void,
When God hath made the pile complete ;
That not a worm is cloven in vain ;
That not a moth with vain desire
Is shrivelled in a fruitless fire,
Or but subserves another’s gain.
Behold we know not anything ;
I can but trust that good shall fall
At last—far off—at last, to all,
And every winter change to spring.
The wish, that of the living whole
No life may fail beyond the grave,
Derives it not from what we have
The Hkest God within the soul ? ”
The following lines from Browning show that he had solved
the problem of the existence of evil, and had grasped unfalter-
ingly the doctrine of the final triumph of good :
“ Therefore to whom turn I but to Thee, the ineffable Name ?
Builder and maker, Thou, of houses not made with hands !
What, have fear of change from Thee who art ever the same ?
Doubt that Thy power can fill the heart that Thy power
expands ?


There shall never be one lost good! What was, shall live as
before ;
The evil is null, is nought, is silence implying sound ;
What was good, shall be good, with, for evil, so much good
more ;
On the earth the broken arcs ; in the heaven, a perfect round.
All we have willed or hoped or dreamed of good, shall exist ;
Not its semblance, but itself; no beauty, nor good, nor
power
Whose voice has gone forth, but each survives for the melodist,
When eternity affirms the conception of an hour.
The high that proved too high, the heroic for earth too hard,
The passion that left the ground to lose itself in the sky,
Are music sent up to God by the lover and the bard ;
Enough that He heard it once : we shall hear it by-and-hy.
And what is our failure here but a triumph’s evidence
For the fulness of the days ? Have we withered or agonized ?
Why else was the pause prolonged but that singing might
issue thence ?
Why rushed the discords in, but that harmony should be
prized ?
Sorrow is hard to bear, and doubt is slow to clear,
Each sufferer says his say, his scheme of the weal and woe :
But God has a few of us whom He whispers in the ear ;
The rest may reason and welcome ;’t is we musicians know.”
“ I end with —Love is all and Death is nought.’
c j FINIS. " >






