

(JDljurc!) (n tfjt (Salomes. No. 36.
MELBOURNE,
EXTRACTS
THE VISITATION JOURNAL
OF THE
BISHOP OE MELBOURNE.
1856.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR
the society for the propagation of the gospel;
and SOLD BY THE
SOCIETY TOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS J
4, ROYAL EXCHANGE; 16, HANOVER STREET, HANOVER square,
B.IYINGTONS, BELL & DALDY, HATCH ARDS;
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.




f /I+Ot+S
(£fturcf) m t&e Colonics.
No. XXXVI.
MELBOURNE,
EXTRACTS
THE VISITATION JOURNAL
OF THE
BISHOP OE MELBOURNE.
1856.
LONDON.
PRINTED FOR
THE SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF THE GOSPEL;
AND SOLD BY THE
SOCIETY EOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN EIELDS j
4, ROYAL EXCHANGE; 16, HANOVER STREET, HANOVER SQUARE J
RIVINGTONS, BELL & BALKY, HATCHARBS,
ANB ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1857.


LONDON :
R. CLAY, PRINTER; BREAD STREET HILL.


MELBOURNE.
The Bishop of Melbourne, on his return from a
visit to this country, landed at Melbourne on the
2d of April, 1856, and shortly afterwards undertook
a visitation of a portion of his Diocese, a report of
which he has embodied in a letter from which the
following pages have been extracted :
Upon the 23rd of April we left Melbourne for
Ballaarat and the westward, setting off in our old
spring-cart, which is as strong and serviceable as at
first, and with our old two horses, of which I could
not say the same, for the symptoms of age were too
perceptible in them. I felt, however, that I could
depend upon them with more confidence than upon
any which I might purchase in a hurry from the
owners. Our first day’s journey was to Bacchus’
Marsh, where we lodged with a very old friend,
Mrs. M £ Leod, who resides there with a daughter;
a married son occupies a station close at hand. We
were pleased to see a very neat little iron building,
which had been imported for a store, but which,
with a slight alteration in the form of the windows,
and a small entrance tower, made a very respectable
church —superior in appearance, as to some particulars,
to our church at Williamstown. The purchase and


erection of this building has been mainly owing to
the exertions of Mrs. M‘Leod. A German, a Clergy-
man of our Church, formerly employed under the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, Mr. Schleicher,
had arrived during my absence, and been placed in
charge of the parish of Ballan, and Bacchus’ Marsh,
by the Dean; the Rev. J. Potter, whom I left there,
having been removed to Ballaarat, to supply the place
of the Rev. J. Thackeray. From Bacchus’ Marsh
we proceeded, the following day, through a very
beautiful country, now brought under cultivation
(the Pentland Hills), but by a very heavy road
(between fences) of soft rich soil, to the house of
Mr. Syons (Balleuu), about two miles from Ballan.
Here we met the Rev. Mr. Syons, and the next day
visited him at the parsonage at Ballan. This is the
centre of the first bush parish which I formed in the
country, and we have always continued to occupy it.
Ballan itself is a small village, and, although it is
upon the road from Melbourne to Ballaarat, has not
greatly increased. Since I was last there, they have
erected a schoolroom, which serves for a place of
Avorship on Sundays. On the same day (Friday) we
went on twelve miles towards Ballaarat, stopping for
the night at the house of Mr. Bacchus, the name of
the settler from whom Bacchus’ Marsh derives its
name. Here I administered Baptism to a child of
Mr. Bacchus and another infant.
On Saturday, the 26th, we drove into Ballaarat,
and here we were much struck with the changed
appearance of the place. We entered by a long street,


intersected by other shorter streets, on either side of
which was a long range of weatherboard buildings,
or framework covered with canvas, exhibiting for
sale articles of every sort in profusion, and some of
them vying in appearance with the best shops in Mel-
bourne. Passing through this, we came to the Govern-
ment “ township,” where the buildings are fewer, but
of a more substantial character, being erected upon
purchased land. The chief business of these gold-
fields is carried on in the flat below. Here we found
Mr. and Mrs. Potter, with whom we took up our
abode. In consequence of the painful occurrences of
last year, the progress of our Church had been sadly
retarded j and wdiile the Wesleyans possessed a sub-
stantial church-like schoolroom, Ave had nothing but
a hired weatherboard building in the “township,”
and a tent upon the flat. Mr. Potter, however, has
done much to restore union, and to call forth
exertion; and I have a good hope that we shall now
make a fresh start.
On Sunday I preached on the hill in the morning,
and on the flat in the evening, the buildings on both
occasions being quite full ; and the following day,
having first arranged with the trustees for the con-
tinuance of Mr. Potter with them, and for the com-
mencement of a stone church, I pursued my journey
with Mrs. Perry towards Belfast, which we reached
on Friday evening just after sunset. On the road we
rested each night at some squatter’s head-station, and
were always most kindly received One of our hosts,
Mr, Russell of Cairngham, was an old friend, but


all the rest were strangers to us ; and it so happened
that the whole of them were Scotchmen and Presby-
terians. This, however, was of no consequence; for
they all welcomed me as a Minister of the Gospel, and
assembled their people for evening service : and on
two occasions I administered the Sacrament of
Baptism according to the order of our Church, which
was a perfectly novel ceremony to several of those
present, and drew forth from more than one of them
afterwards expressions of their approval, and sense of
its solemnity and appropriateness. It is only their
ignorance of what our Church really is, which makes
our Presbyterian brethren regard us as near akin to
Romanism, and our services as savouring of the Mass-
book or Breviary. At Belfast, there was ready to
be opened by me a large church, of stone, in the
simple early English character, without ornament,
but in perfect good taste, from a design by
Mr. Billing, who is a local architect with very con-
siderable and skill in church-building.
It is, in my judgment, the best which has yet been
erected in the province of Victoria. On Sunday, I
administered Confirmation to eight young men and
twenty-two young women in the new church, the
service being followed by the Sacrament of the
Lord’s Supper, of which almost the whole number
of the confirmed partook. In the evening I preached.
At both services there were large congregations.
On Monday I received addresses of welcome from
the clergy of the archdeaconry of Portland, and from
the laity of Belfast; and in my reply was able to


announce to them the determination of the Govern-
ment at home to recommend Her Majesty to give
her assent to our Church Act —of this I was that
morning informed by a private note from Mr.
Labouchere.
On Wednesday, we drove to Warrnambool,
about twenty miles from Belfast, a pleasant drive,
partly along the shore, and partly through en-
closed farms a little inland. We passed Tower
Hill, the centre of the Rev. L. A. Baker’s parish,
where is a small iron church, which I had not before
seen. Since we were there, a weatherboard parsonage
has been erected, of which Mr. Baker has j ust taken
possession. Warrnambool is still under the pastoral
charge of Mr. Beamish, who had come over to Belfast
to see us, and now accompanied us on our drive.
This town has made considerable progress during
the last two years, and promises to become speedily
a place of great commercial importance. It differs
from Belfast, in that the latter is the private pro-
perty of an individual who is unwilling to part with
the freehold in any portion of it. Hence it is for
the most part composed of tenements erected only
for temporary use; and the mass of the people feel
that they have no permanent interest in the place,
and do not trouble themselves about its welfare.
Everything there is done by a few leading men.
In Warrnambool, on the contrary, every house-
holder is at the same time a freeholder, and
regards the prosperity of the town as affecting him-
self personally. All are independent men, who


exercise their own judgment, and do not follow
any leaders. The contrast in every respect, both as
regards civil and ecclesiastical matters, is very striking.
Belfast has had a long start, and is still ahead :
but my impression is, that Warrnambool will soon
take the lead, and keep it. I regretted that I
could not spend a Sunday there, and was therefore
obliged to hold a Confirmation on a week-day
(Wednesday). The candidates consisted of one
young man and seven young women. There was
a considerable number of people at the service,
although the weather was unfavourable.
I have found the very great advantage of ad-
ministering this ordinance in each parish separately
(which is my general practice, except in Melbourne,
where I sometimes combine two or three parishes for
the purpose), and (if possible) on Sundays, when the
usual congregation is assembled. The service always
attracts the greatest attention, and the laying on of
hands, with the accompanying prayer, seems to pro-
duce a deep impression. How much our Church in
England loses by her large Dioceses, and the impos-
sibility of her Bishops visiting each particular parish,
and affording the people an opportunity of witness-
ing and joining -in this most solemn and affecting
ordinance !
We returned on Wednesday to Belfast, and on
Thursday resumed our journey towards Portland,
where we arrived on Friday, having stopped at a
friendly squatter’s by the way, for Thursday night.
Since leaving Melbourne there had been a great


quantity of rain, and the road in parts, particularly
near Belfast, was exceedingly heavy ; but a friend
kindly lent us a horse to relieve one of our own, so
that we accomplished all our visits without difficulty.
I have omitted to mention that at Warrnambool
I found a pretty small church, of stone, from a design
of Mr. Billing, in progress towards completion,
although not yet ready to be opened. The portion
which they are building will form an aisle, in one
side of which arches are inserted, so that at any
future time the rough stone-work, with which they
are filled up, may be removed, and a second aisle formed
of equal size with the first. This is a plan which I
have often wished to see adopted, but have never
succeeded in finding an architect and trustees who
entered into my views. When we visited Warrnam-
bool, Mr. Beamish, who was one of our very few
unmarried clergymen, was contemplating matrimony,
being engaged to a young lady in his parish. The
marriage has since taken place; and the following
description of the commencement of his wedding-
tour by his friend, the Rev. F. T. C. Russell, who
performed the ceremony, will interest you, and show
you something of a bush clergyman’s life, in the
winter season: —“We heard,” writes Mr. Russell,
“ that the road which they (the bride and bride-
groom) proposed taking, was rendered impassable by
the heavy rains of the last week. The only road
which appeared to us practicable was that towards
Caramut. This road, as you may see in the map,
runs over the Hopkins river, Muston’s creek, and


other lesser streams. Although we made (for they
placed things under my conduct) an early start,
yet, as Mrs. Beamish was an entirely unpractised
horsewoman, our progress was very slow. When we
arrived at the Hopkins, not only was the river
swollen hugely, but I heard that Muston’s creek
could not be forded in the usual places. After great
delay, I succeeded in obtaining a man to act as guide.
We crossed the river in a wicker boat covered
with bullock hide, and then we set off through the
bush. When the sun had set, we found ourselves
on the bank of Muston’s creek. The guide evidently
was afraid, for the volume of water was immense,
and a black fellow had the day before refused to risk
his life by attempting to ford the same place. We
were nearly in despair (for it seemed almost as
perilous to bivouack through the cold wet night
without food or fire), when I saw a man on horse-
back. He proved to be a black fellow, very
daring and well acquainted with the country. We
pressed him into our service, aud then for a quarter
of a mile we rode through the torrent, the water
reaching to the horse’s shoulder. Late at night,
worn out with anxiety and fatigue, we reached the
inn. I there heard that the mailman had been
drowned in attempting to cross a creek to the north.
Indeed, on the joui’ney down (to perform the
ceremony), only that I missed my road, I should
probably have been drowned. Surely this was
ordered by Him who numbers the very hairs of
our heads.” He is now, I trust, safe at home again,


and carrying on his work for the Lord with all the
more zeal and efficiency, that he has a companion
at home and a fellow-labourer with him abroad.
To return to Portland, where we arrived, as I
have mentioned, on Friday, the 9th of May, anch
where we were received with their usual affectionate
kindness by Mrs. Stephen Henty and all her young
family. Mr. H. was absent on our arrival, but he
returned home the next day. On this occasion it
was a satisfaction to see a large portion of a sub-
stantial stone church so for completed as to be
ready for Divine service, and to preach in it morning
and evening on the ensuing Sunday.
On Thursday we left Portland for Hamilton, (for-
merly known as “ The Grange,”) making a circuit in
order to avoid the road through “the Nine-mile
Forest,” which was said to be impassable; we spent
that night at Mr. Cooke’s, whose house is prettily
situated upon a large piece of water. Mr. and Mrs.
Cooke received us most kindly, and accompanied us,
despite of some heavy rain, for some miles on our
journey. The roads this day were very heavy, and
our old horses had some difficulty in accomplishing
the journey. It was quite dark before we reached
Hamilton, and we certainly could not have made it
at all, if the Rev. Mr. McKenzie had not come to
meet us, and guided us thither. At Hamilton, Mr.
Nowlan, one of the trustees of the church, insisted
upon giving up his quarters at an inn to our use,
and entertaining us there at his own charge. The
following day the Rev. Mr, and Mrs. Russell joined


us from the Wannon, and also the Baron and Mrs.
Yon Loseche, an adopted daughter of Captain Carr, of
whom yon may have heard in connexion with Victoria,
and, as Mrs. Perry found out in conversation with
her, a sister of one of her most intimate early
friends. There were also residing at Hamilton two
intelligent and agreeable gentlemen, one the police
magistrate, and the other Commissioner of Crown
lands, so that we formed a very pleasant party ; and I
sometimes wished that our friends in England, w T ho
regard our social condition as so very deplorable,
could have seen us at dinner in a bush inn, 250
miles from Melbourne, and fifty from any town.
They would have been not a little astonished at
seeing such a company in the enjoyment of every com-
fort and even luxury in such a place. Indeed, our
English brethren do not know what Victoria is, and
what Victorians are. You see that lam jealous of
the character of the land in which I dwell. At
Hamilton there has been built, since we left Mel-
bourne for England, a small, unpretending, but very
appropriate stone church, just such as one would
wish to see in such a place ; and I had the pleasure
of seeing it filled, morning and evening, with an
attentive congregation. The trustees and members
of the church presented me with a very nice address
of welcome : I have omitted to mention that I re-
ceived similar addresses at Warrnambool and at
Portland.
From Hamilton we directed our course to a gold-
field, which was previously unknown to me, near


Raglan, upon “ The Fiery Creek ] and passing
through the gold-field, after calling upon the Rev.
P. Homan, who came out with us, and whom I had
placed there, to make arrangements for the following
Sunday, went on to Mr. Simpson’s house, where we
have rested in former journeys, and where we are
always sure of a welcome. We left Hamilton on
Tuesday the 13th, and reached Mr. Simpson’s on
Friday, spending two nights at one station, and the
third at another upon our way. We were delayed at
the first by an unpleasant incident, almost the only one
which happened to us throughout our journey. We
had a mounted constable with us, and at night, not
suspecting any danger to them, he left his saddle
and bridle, with his holsters and pistols, in the stable
with the horses. In the morning the horses were
safe, but all these articles had disappeared; having
been, as it would seem, from mere mischief made
away with, probably thrown into some u wateihole
(pool of the stream) in the night. This obliged us
to wait, while he went to a neighbouring village,
some miles distant, to borrow a saddle; and when
he returned it was late, and there was a thick mist,
which obscured our landmarks (we were driving
across the plains, where there was no road), so that
we thought it best to remain where we were pntil
the next day.
On Saturday we drove back to Mr. Homan’s, that
we might be ready for Sunday; he was living with
a brother in a small slab (or weatherboard —I forget
which) hut of the most primitive character, consist-


ing of one long room, divided by a curtain, in one-
half of which they slept, and in the other ate, &c.
Each half had two doors, opposite to each other, no
one of which could be locked ; this building, with
genuine Irish hospitality, they insisted upon our
occupying, affirming that they could make us as
comfortable as we should be in any squatter’s house
in the country. Accordingly, we took up our quarters,
and of course were left to ourselves in it at night; there
was no other habitation within some little distance,
and it was curious to feel that we were there alone,
without any impediment to having strange visitors
walking in during the night; but, in fact, we were
as safe as in our own house here. During the night
it rained in torrents, making such a noise upon the
roof as to render sleep almost impossible. On
Sunday the weather partially cleared up. I preached
to a small congregation in the Court-house, an
unsuitable place (a tent), but the best that could be
obtained ; and in the afternoon we returned to Mr.
Simpson’s, where I conducted an evening service to a
large number of his people. Mr. Simpson, like some
other Scotch settlers, has service regularly in his
house upon Sundays, and the large proportion of those
who are about the place constantly attend. I wish
that this practice were generally adopted; but
where the master is regardless of religion, the ser-
vants in the bush are, for the most part, wholly
neglected. Mr. Homan has had a very difficult task ;
the gold-field in which he is placed has experienced
the vicissitudes which are so common to them. Last


year it was crowded with diggers; when we were
there, it was almost wholly abandoned by the men,
but the women and children were left, together with
the storekeepers, to await their return, when the
season would again be favourable for mining opera-
tions. In the meanwhile, Mr. Homan had everything
to provide,—a place of worship, a school-building,
teachers, &c. He has been working very hard, but
I can hardly say whether with much success ; I am
daily expecting him upon a visit, to report of his past,
and consult about his future proceedings. We left Mr.
Simpson’s on Monday for our old friends, the Messrs.
Learmouth’s station. One brother only, Mr. Somer-
ville Learmouth, was at home; he returned late in the
evening, from some out-station, where he had been
engaged, and found us established in his house, and
“waiting dinner” for him. We had scarcely seen
one another for several years, and were all extremely
pleased to meet, and chat together over the past;
so we determined to make the next day a holiday,
and remain quiet in our comfortable quarters. The
house is very pleasingly situated, and the station
used to be a very valuable one; but when the
brothers had fenced in a large portion, and taken
great pains, and gone to great expense in putting it
into the best possible order, the discovery of gold-
fields in the neighbourhood disconcerted all their
plans; their wire fence was destroyed by the opening
of a road to Raglan, and large portions of the run
were put up for sale. They have, therefore, been
obliged to change their plans, and to buy land for


themselves; which, I trust, will iu the end prove as
profitable, and much more sure and satisfactory an
investment of their money.
Leaving Mr. Learmouth’s on Wednesday the 21st
of May, we visited Amherst (formerly Daisy Hill),
the centre of another gold-field, which has within the
last two years been found to be very rich, and the
produce of which is even now increasing largely.
There is no clergyman resident upon it; but a lay-
man, who has been licensed as a “ Missionary to the
Gold-fields,” visits it from time to time, and spends
some weeks there. Unfortunately, he was at the Avon
when I was at Amherst; so that I had not an oppor-
tunity of conversing with him about his work. I
endeavoured to make an arrangement with some of
the officers of the Government, who are members of
the Church of England, to conduct a service there on
Sunday ; but I have not heard whether they have
done so. Mr. Stephens, the Missionary above al-
luded to, has since succeeded in establishing a
school. Within about twelve miles of Amherst is
Maryborough, another large gold-field, in the neigh-
bourhood of which, at Carisbrook, a village about
five miles distant, the Rev. A. H. Smith was located
by the Dean during my absence in England, The
reason for his not residing at Maryborough itself is
the want of water; which makes the more settled
portion of the people prefer Carisbrook, and has pre-
vented any towns from being formed at Maxy-
borough. I did not visit the latter place, but
stopped at the former for a few minutes on Wed-


nesday afternoon, and returned again from another
Mr. Simpson’s, where we spent the night, the follow-
ing morning, and remained about a couple of hours.
We had a very wet drive, and a very difficult
road, from Carisbrook, and only reached the Lod-
don, which we had to cross, and which was very full
from the recent rains, just before dark. However, we
got safely over, Mrs. Perry in a punt, and I with
the cart by a ford; and in a quarter of an hour
afterwards were comfortably ensconced in the cot-
tage of Mrs. Bryant, a widow lady with several
sons, who have a station upon the above river. We
were now drawing near to Castlemaine, which was
our next point, and which we reached on Friday
afternoon. Castlemaine, like Ballaarat, has under-
gone a great change since our last visit. The mass
of the gold-digging population has gone, although
there are still a great many in the neighbourhood,
and some close at hand. But the town has assumed
quite a settled character, and contains a number of
substantial buildings and several large shops, or stores.
There are residing here many professional men,
and merchants, besides Government officers. Around
the town, or rather upon one side of it, that towards
Sandhurst (Bendigo), are to be seen cottages with
their gardens, indicating permanence of habitation
and comfort. In the vicinity, a considerable quan-
tity of land has been purchased, and is under culti-
vation ; so that during the last year the inhabitants
were as well supplied with garden and farm produce
as any other town in Victoria. This is one of the


changes which especially attracted our attention
during our journey. In consequence of the pro-
vidential distribution of the gold-fields throughout
the country, masses of people have been collected at
a number of different points. Hence the land in all
those several localities has become valuable. Much
has been sold and cultivated ; and a permanent rural
population has grown up by the side of the ever-
changing mining population. The result has been a
striking improvement in the morals as well as the
comfort of the people; and we received the most
satisfactory testimony to the diminution of drunken-
ness, and the quiet and order which generally pre-
vailed. Another change has taken place upon the
older gold-fields, as Mount Alexander and Ballaarat,
and also on some of those more recently discovered,
as Terrangower and Mount Blackwood. The working
of the Quartz reefs upon the hills, some of which are
exceedingly rich in gold, has succeeded to the dig-
ging in the flats ; and as some capital, and machinery,
and patient labour are required for this, the owners
of “ claims,” as they are called, have become a dif-
ferent class of men from the ordinary diggers ; and
many of the latter prefer also to be employed at
certain wages by those than to work at a risk of
getting nothing for themselves.
Since I last visited Castlemaine a parsonage has
been built. A brick schoolroom has also been
erected, in which Divine service is held on Sundays ;
and the foundation of a church has been laid.
Here we were the guests of our former kind host,


Captain Butt, the chief resident Warden, who was
alone with his younger children ; Mrs. Butt having
left him to visit a married daughter at Sydney, and
another married daughter and her husband, who
lived with him, having gone for a few days to Mel-
bourne. We remained there until Thursday; and
while we were there, I received an address from the
members of the Church, preached twice on Sunday,
and attended a public meeting for a branch of the
Bible Society, at which very nearly 1007 were col-
lected.
It had been my intention to return to Melbourne
from thence; but the Rev. J. D. Brennan, who had
succeeded Mr. Gregory at Sandhurst, wrote to beg
of me to go there and open his new church, which I
could not refuse to do; although the season was
already so far advanced as to make travelling very
tedious and difficult. Accordingly, on Thursday we
proceeded to Sandhurst, where we remained until
the following Monday. Here, again, was a great
change in the aspect of the place ; but the greatest
change was in the condition of the church. When
I was last there, the only Church of England build-
ing was a miserable tent; no church, no parsonage,
no school. Now there are all three; a large wea-
therboard schoolroom, under good management, and
well attended; a small but neat stone parsonage,
surrounded by a pretty garden, which gave it a
truly homelike character ; and lastly, an excellent
stone church, well-designed and substantially built,
and fitted up with all the proper appurtenances,


except a font, which was to be made immediately,—
pulpit and reading-desk, communion-rail, chairs, &c.
Nor was this improvement visible only in Sandhurst
itself.
On Saturday we drove through the neighbouring
gullies, and every mile and a half or two miles we
had the pleasure of seeing neat Church of England
school-houses, in which a goodly company of children
is gathered on the week-days, and which can be used
for service on Sundays. Since my return to Mel-
bourne, I have sent a second clergyman, the Rev. J.
Linskea, to divide Mr. Brennan’s charge with him ;
and Mr. Brennan has also obtained a lay-reader, and
has just written to ask me to license a second for
him.
While we were at Sandhurst it rained in torrents;
but, notwithstanding, on Friday evening there was a
well-attended tea-party in the schoolroom, and on Sun-
day, when the weather partly cleared, a full morning
congregation at the church, and a full afternoon con-
gregation in a schoolroom at the “ White Hills,’’where
Mr. Linskea now is, about five miles distant. On
Monday morning we returned to Castlemaine, after
rather a difficult drive ; the road at one place being
full of holes, partly concealed by the quantity of
mud in them, of such a depth as made me very
doubtful whether our cart, broad as it is, would
not have been capsized. However, we got through,
and reached our destination in safety.
An evening meeting had been arranged for the
Chinese Mission, which is now in operation among this


large class of our immigrants. It is maintained by
the combined exertions of all the several Protestant
branches of the Church, and is progressing favour-
ably. We had an interesting meeting, and a goodly
attendance. I must restrain my desire to enter
further into this mission. On Tuesday we reached
Kyneton, now a populous town, having stopped on
the way at Tarradale, a village where the Rev. F. G.
Barton has got a small weatherboard church erected,
and where a lay-reader has since been located, Mr.
Barton met us here; and we went with the trustees
to look at the building, which is well suited to the
place, and may be regarded as likely to be, with
God’s blessing, the precursor of a substantial per-
manent church. We were much pleased, on enter-
ing Kyneton, to see before us upon a beautiful site a
handsome stone church almost ready for use, which
was the eighth, including the small iron building at
Bacchus’ Marsh, and the small weatherboard one at
Tarradale, that we had seen for the first time on
this journey. We were still to see another, one
which was sent out from England, for the gold-
fields, which is erected at Gisborne. The erection of
nine churches within this portion of the diocese
in less than eighteen months, indicates progress, for
which I desire to be thankful to Him who has dis-
posed the hearts of the people to these good works.
We remained Tuesday night and the whole of Wed-
nesday with Mr, and Mrs. Barton, at the parsonage,
Kyneton. On the former evening, there was a
meeting to establish a branch association of the


j ßible Society; but the heavy rain, the state of the
streets, and the darkness of the night, caused the
attendance to be very small. Throughout Sunday
it continued to rain in torrents, and we became
fearful lest the rising stream should burst the bridge
over the Campaspe, and so separate us from our
cart and horses, which were in the keeping of an
innkeeper upon the other side. We therefore had
them fetched across for us. The precaution, how-
ever, was unnecessary, as the bridge remained un-
injured. I was to have preached in the evening;
but we thought that no one could go out on such a
night, and therefore did not go myself. For this
I was afterwards very sorry ; several persons having
gone, and returned disappointed. It is very seldom
that I break an engagement; and when I do, I
almost always repent of it. Our journey on Thurs-
day lay through the “ Black Forest,” which is noted
above every place in the country for its bad roads;
and it was confidently predicted by a gentleman at
Kyneton, that we should not be able to get through.
Fortunately, however, the day was fine, and we had
a good guide in the road contractor, who accom-
panied us, with Mr. Barton, on horseback. We also
obtained a mounted constable, who was well ac-
quainted with the route. By their help we accom-
plished the journey ; but certainly not without the
exercise of a good deal of patience on our part, hard
pulling on that of the horses, and some little risk of
being deposited in one of the raudholes. For some
miles there was a road formed of trunks of trees, laid


parallel to each other, and closely jammed together.
When covered with a layer of gravel or stones, it
will be good enough ; but it was then just like the
Corduroy roads of America, and by no means plea-
sant. We arrived at Gisborne early in the afternoon,
and I walked to see the iron church; which looks
tolerably well, although disfigured by some faults in
respect to windows, &c. It is very prettily situated.
There had been no clergyman hitherto appointed to
it, and the people were a good deal irritated at the
delay. My chief object was to arrange with the
trustees to place one there, which I undertook to do
immediately, upon a certain understanding with
them as to his stipend. We had a meeting at which
this was all satisfactorily settled; and now the Rev.
R. J. Cummins is residing there, in charge of Gis-
borne, a hamlet about ten miles off, at a place called
Aitken’s Gap, and the surrounding district. He is
much liked and very happy in his post. The loca-
tion of all the unsettled clergy occupied a large
portion of my thoughts during this whole journey.
Now, I am thankful to say, they are all, with one
exception, and that not of great importance, fixed to
my satisfaction.
Two more Missionaries, Messrs. Russell and
McJennett, have just arrived, and another at least,
Mr. Crawford, is on his way from England ; so that
my work is no sooner finished, than I have to begin
again. Such is a Bishop’s duty in a rapidly increas-
ing community like this. We left Gisborne only on
Friday morning, and after stopping for some time at


Aitken’s Gap to make arrangements about the erec-
tion of the school, and visiting Mr. and Mrs. Aitken,
from whom the place takes its name, we reached
quite late a house which we had passed and observed
in our way to Bacchus’ Marsh, about eleven miles from
Melbourne; and which had been taken in the in-
terval by a Mr. Wilson, who, with his wife, were
fellow-passengers with us in the Walmer Castle , and
for whom we had conceived a great regard. It was a
most unexpected pleasure to find them there, and
formed a most agreeable termination to our long
journey. We had a pleasant chat with them, and
the next morning drove in quietly to Bishopscourt;
where we found all well, and pleased to see us at
home again.
The season at which we undertook this journey
was much more advanced than we should have
chosen for it, and a great deal of rain fell while we
were from home, but it never caused us any serious
inconvenience; and through the good hand of our God
upon us, and the kind assistance of friends, we
accomplished all that we had to do, with very little
discomfort, and no serious suffering. My narrative
has, I hope, indirectly shown you something of the
condition in which I found the Church upon my
return : but, before I conclude, I will make a few
general remarks upon it. First, —I consider that
the Dean fulfilled the duties of Vicar-general, not
only with much zeal and diligence, but with great
ability and discretion; and that the condition of the
Archdeaconries of Geelong and Portland, and of the


great body of the Clergy, was worthy of all praise.
The good order of the Diocese was, indeed, a matter
of great gratification and thankfulness to me.
Secondly, —My absence from the Diocese for a time,
and the result of its government by another hand,
have, I think, taught me some valuable lessons.
There were naturally, if not necessarily, some irre-
gularities, of which I now feel the evil, and which
I shall be more careful than formerly to avoid.
We are now looking forward to the meeting of our
Church Association, which I have summoned for the
16th of October, There is considerable interest
shown in the election of lay-representatives for our
town-parishes; and in many cases there has been
rather a sharp contest. I look upon this as a good
omen.
Our University is at work, and I think doing
good ; although there are very few students. I like
the Professors. Our Grammar-school is building;
it will be a large edifice, and if wo can only obtain
an efficient master, has every prospect of succeeding.
It is just out of Melbourne, upon an elevated site,
commanding a view of the Bay, with the grounds
set apart for Government House behind it, and a
spacious park before it.
There is another institution now in operation, which
I must not omit to mention, viz. the Public Library.
The present building, which is intended to form
only a small part of the complete edifice, is of stdne,
without much architectural pretension, but in good
taste, and well adapted to its purpose. The Library


already contains a considerable collection of valuable
works for general readers, and useful books of
reference, and does credit to the care and diligence of
Mr. Justice Barry, who has devoted a large portion of
his time and attention to this institution and to the
University, of which he is the Chancellor. I regard
him, on this account, as one of the chief benefactors
of Victoria. The Library is frequented during the
day, and particularly in the evening, by a large
number of readers—sometimes, I believe, by up-
wards of 150 in the course of a day. Any person
may go and read there, but no book may be taken
out. I have now, I think, atoned for my past
silence, and given you at least a sufficiently long
account of the Church in this colony.
THE END.
B. CLAY, PRINTER, BREAD STREET HILL.


I
. • ■ • . . V


I SOCIETY/or PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE, i
I 77, GREAT QUEEN STREET, 4, ROYAL EXCHANGE, AND 16, HANOTER-
STRF.ET, HANOVER-SQUARE; AND BELL AND DALDY, 186, FLEET-ST.
CHURCH IN THE COLONIES. pri ' e -
No. Published. Diocese. Part. *•
I. 1843, Dec TORONTO 0 ®
11. 1844, Feb QUEBEC 1 0 °
HI. 1844, March .... NOVA SCOTIA ... 1 0 ®
IV. 1844, Ang NEW ZEALAND. . . 1 • ®
V. 1845, Feb AUSTRALIA .... I O’
VI. 1845, March .... AUSTRALIA .... II 0 “
VII. 1845, Aug NEW ZEALAND. . . II 0 "
’ ! VIII. 1845, Sept NEW ZEALAND. . . 11l 04
IX 1845. Oct QUEBEC TI ...Ob
Vlll. io4o, aept xN hj W ZLAL.AINL), . . lit *
JX. 1845, Oct QUEBEC II 0 <>
X. 1846, Jan NEWFOUNDLAND. . 1 0 3
XI. 1846, Feb FREDERICTON ... 1 03
XII. 1846, April .... NEW ZEALAND . . . IV 04
XIII. 1846, July .... NOVA SCOTIA ... II 06
XIV. 1846, Oct AUSTRALIA .... 11l 06
XV. 1846, Nov NEWFOUNDLAND. .11 0 2
XVI. 1846, Deo FREDERICTON ... II 03
XVII. 1847, Feb NOVA SCOTIA . . . 11l 0 3
1 XVIII. 1847, March .... QUEBEC 11l 10
XIX. 1848, Dee NEWFOUNDLAND. . 11l 0 4
XX. 1849, March .... NEW ZEALAND . . . V 10
XXL 1849, April .... NEWFOUNDLAND. .IV 10
XXII. 1849, Oct CAPETOWN .... 1 10 I <
XXIII, 1850, March .... TASMANIA 04
XXIV. 1850, June .... MELBOURNE. ... 1 10
XXV. 1850, July .... NEWFOUNDLAND. , V 10
XXVI. 1851, Feb NEWFOUNDLAND. . VI 0 3
; XXVII. 1851, Sept CAPETOWN .... II 16
I XXVIII. 1852, Aug GUIANA 10
. . . . NEWFOUNDLAND. .IV I »
. . . . CAPETOWN .... 1 10
AA VIII. IB3Z, AUg li UIA IS A t U
XXIX. 1854, May .... BARBADOS 03
XXX. 1854 NEWFOUNDLAND. . VII. ... 1 0
XXXI. 1855, March .... MELBOURNE ... II 04
XXXII, 1865 June CAPETOWN . . . 11l 0 2
XXXIII, 1855, Aug MELBOURNE. . . . 11l 0 6
XXXIV. 1856, June .... TRISTAN D'ACUNHA 010
XXXV. 1857, Feb NEWFOUNDLAND . . VIII. ... 0 8
Nos. 1. to XXX. in six volumes, cloth lettered 20 s. OR.
The MISSIONS IN TINNEVELLY; with aTlap, (1815) 0 3
HISTORICAL NOTICES of the MISSIONS of the CHURCH of ENGLAND,
in the North American Colonies 90 i
Indian Missions in Guiana, by Rev. W. H. Brett, ss. ;
ANNALS of the COLONIAL CHURCH: Kjieuericton, Is.; Nbw Zea-
land, 3s. ; Toronto, 3s. id. ; Quebec, 3s. Bc l,
MISSIONS TO THE HEATHEN. Price. I
No. Published. Mission. Diocese. Part. s. d.
I. 1844, Aug.. . SAWYERPOORAM. . . Madras . . I. . . 0 3 (
11. 1844, Dec. . EDEYENKOODY . . . Madras . . I. . . 0 2 I
I 111. 1845, Jan. . . SAWYERPOORAM. . . Madras . . 11. . 0 2 I
IV. 1845, Feb. . . CAWNPORE Calcutta ..... 0 1
V. 1845, March. NAZARETH Madras 0 b
VI. 1845, June . LAKE HURON .... Toronto . . I. . . 0 3 i
VII. 1845, Aug. . SAWYERPOORAM. . . Madras . . 111.. 0 2 !
VIII. 1845, Dec. . SAWYERPOORAM. . . Madras . . IV, . 0 1
IX. 1846, Jan. . . VISITATION TOUR . . Madras 0 4
X. 1846, March . EDEYENKOODY . . . Madras . . 11. .02
XL 1846, May. , GUZERAT Bombay .1. .03
XII. 1846, June. . SAWYERPOORAM. . . Madras . . V. .03
■ XIII. 1846, Aug. . LAKE HURON .... Toronto . . 11. . 0 3
XIV. 1840, Sept. . NAZARETH Madras . . 11. .01
XV. 1817, May. . BARRIPUR Calcutta 0 4
XVI. 1817, June . SAWYERPOORAM. . . Madras . . VI. , 0 I
XVII. 1847, Aug, . COLOMBO Colombo . . L. . 0 6
XVIII. 1847, Sept. . COLOMBO Colombo . . 11. . 0 6
XIX. 1847, Nov. . EDEYENKOODY . . , Madras . . 111., 0 1
XX. 1849, Jan. . . TANJORE, &c Madras 01
XXI. 1849, April . MADRAS Madras . . I. . . 0 1
I XXII. 1840, Dec. , MADRAS Madras , 11. . 0 2
XXIII. 1850, Nov. , TINNEVELLY .... Madras 10
XXIV. 1851, Nov. . COLOMBO Colombo . . 111. . 1 6
XXV. 1853, Ang. . POONINDIE Adelaide 0 2
I XXVI. 1853, Aug. . CHINA Victoria 0 1
j XXVII. Nov. . TANJORE, &c Madras 0 1
, XXVIII. 1855, April . MILAGRAYA, &e. . . . Colombo . . IV. . 0 4
XXIX. 1855, Nov. . WESTERN AFRICA . . Barbados , . I. . . 0 4
XXX. 1856, April , SOUTH AFRICA. , . , (irahamstown ... 0 6
XXXI. June « TARANAKI New Zealand ...00 i
: I XXXII. 1857, Feb. . GEAHAMBTOIVN .... Urahamstnwn ... B 8 I iJ
Nos. I. to XXVII. in three volume: cloth lettered . , . . 8». Ed.
