

A LECTURE
ON
EDUCATION,
BY THE
MEV J. L WHITE, M.A., LLD.
GOWRIE, SINGLETON.
Singleton:
"ARGUS” STEAM PRINTING WORKS, JOHN-STREET.




LECTURE.
THE EDUCATION QUESTION.
jlY i'cmiarks on this most important and
much agitated subject, I beg to preface with
a few general observations.
(1) A false issue is raised by the opponents
of the Denominational system of primary
education. They represent the question as
between Protestants on the one side, and
Catholics on the other. They would make it
appear that the Public system of primary
education is the Protestant, and the Deno-
minational system of primary education the
Catholic side of the question; and that,
therefore, around it all sectarian uncnarit-
ableness, bitterness, and misrepresentation
are to have full and free play, and that it is
to be discussed in a sectarian spirit, ana
settled on sectarian grounds.
Now the question is not one between
Protestants and Catholics. All Protestants
are not in favour of the Public, all Catholics
are not in favour of the Denominational
system. .
Some of each party are m favour of the
Public, and some of each party are in favour
of the Denominational system.
It is a question not even wholly between
the advocates of Public education and
Denominational education —but also between
those who advocate the Public school system
alone, and those who advocate the Public
and Denominational systems together. The
former include not only some Protestants,
properly so called, but also Jews, Rationalists,
Infidels, Materialists, Atheists, &c. The
latter include some Catholics —probably the
majority of them —some Protestants —pos-
sibly a majority of them —and, it may be, a
sprinkling of the other religionists or irreli-
gionists. To be in favour of the Denomi-
national system, or of the two systems
together, is not, as is insinuated, to be in
favour of Romamsm, any more than to be :n
favour of the Public system is to be in favor
of Judaism, Materialism, Infidelity, or
Atheism. While few or none of the advo-
cates of the Denominational system are
Infidels, &c., many of the advocates of the
Public system are so openly and avowedly.
(2) The advocates of the Denominational
system are represented as absolutely disap-
proving of and condemning the Public
system, and as absolutely hostile to it. No
doubt, in some cases, the advocates of the
Denominational system have spoken un-
advisedly with their lips, and said very
untrue, hard, and cruel things of it. Public
schools have often been denounced as “ seed-
plots of immorality and vice.” But this is
by no means the opinion of all, or even of a
majority, of the other side. The majority of
them intelligently believe it to set forth more
or less clearly and fully “ what we are to
believe, what we are to do, what we are to
eschew, and what we are to expect at God’s
hands at length,” and therefore to Ire a
Godly system, and favourable to virtue.
The fact that there are to be found in the
ranks of Denominationalists ignorant, preju-
diced, and unscrupulous men, ought not to
be allowed to operate against Denomina


tionalism, any more than the fact that men
of precisely the same stamp are found in the
ranks of the advocates of the Public system
ought to be allowed to operate against it.
The two systems should be considered and
dealt with on their merits.
(3) The question, both in and out of Par-
liament, has been discussed for the most
part by both sides in a manner wholly
irrelevant to the subject, and beside the
point at issue.
In such a discussion, neither passion’s
power nor interest’s temptation should have
place.
The kind of thinking styled by the Edin-
burqh Review “ hard thinking” is the appro-
priate, and only appropriate style of thought;
and clear, relevant, and logical statement
the appropriate and only appropriate style
of utterance.
We should remember that although we
may choose to look at things through the
medium of prejudice, they have a form
which our mode of regarding them cannot
affect; that although we may choose to
argue erroneously about them, they are
governed and they eventuate according to
the dictates of the highest of perfect reason ;
that although we may choose to deal with
them in a selfish, narrow spirit, there is no
respect of persons with Him who sits upon
the circle of the Heavens, whose Kingdom
ruietb over all, whose sceptre is a sceptre of
rignteousness, and of whose dominion there
is no end.
It is our highest wisdom to bring ouv
minds into harmony with the divine will,
and our action into harmony with the mode
of the divine procedure. So shall we be
ike-mrnded with God —fellow-workers with
Him. So shall we save ourselves fiom the
gffilt of fighting agaiust Him in our opp.sf-
tion to the laws by which Be is represented,
and by whose operation He indicates His
presence and His will, and the fo’-y of rush-
ing against the thick bosses of the Almighty’s
shield which do but represent tne fixi.y,
permanency, and invulnerability of these
laws.
So shall we escape the shame and sorrow
of disappointment and defeat, and secure to
ourselves, by the very constitution of things,
success, honour, and happiness.
But to proceed to the question in band.
Up till the year 1848 all the State-endowed
Primary schools in the colony were Deno-
minational. They were in connection with
some church, and the management of them
was in the bands of ecclesiastics.
In 1848, what was styled the National
system was introduced. Many new schools
under it were established, and many deno-
minational schools, at the request of those
concerned, were absorbed by it.
Under tne National system, ecclesiast’'* ’
interference and influence was limited to
certain official visits at certain prescribed
hours.
In 1866, the National system was super-
seded by what is known as the Public
system, differing from the National system
mainly in being less favourable to existing
Denominational schools, and avowedly hostile
to their increase. By a Bill presently before
Parliament, Denominational schools are
threatened with utter extinction. It is pro-
posed to do away with all ecclesiastic'’ 1
interference and influence in the matter of
primary education, so far as the curriculum
of schools is concerned, and to
invest the State with its whole management
and control. This involves a radical and
most momentous change in reference to one
of our most important and valued interests.
Now, although change is an essential con-
dition of improvement and amelioratffin, yet
change may be not only not benefcial and
desirable, but injurious, and to be depre-
cated. It is a maxim of the law of England
that “ Omnia innovaiio plus novitate per-
turbat quam utilitate prodcst ,” and it i_ a
maxim of the law of God, “meddle not with
them that aie given to change, for tbe :i ’
calamity Shall come suddenly, and who
knoweth the ruin of them botn.” Before
t«king the management of primary educa-
tion entirely out of the hands of ecclesiastics,
and transferring it entirely to those of the
civil rulers, the following questions ought to
be satisfactorily answered :—I. What have
ecclesiastics done to forfeit public confidence
in the matter of primaiy education ? Eccle-
siastics in all ages and in all countries have
been the Liends, patrons, and promoteisof
education. Let the history of the mother
country and of this colony suffice for illus-
tration.
Cardiael Wolsey resuscitated the Uni-
versity of Oxford, and founded that of
Ipswich.
“ Ever witness for him.
These twins of lea oing that he inised in you,
Ipswich and Oxford, one of which fell wUh him,
Unwilling to outlive tee good that did it.
The other, though unfinished, yet so famous,
So excellent in art and still so Using,
That Christendom shall ever speak his tribute,”
Joffdd, abbot of Creyland, founded the
University of Cambridge in the 11th century.


The Prior and Convent of Durham founded
the University of Durham in 1290. Bishop
Wardlaw founded the University of St.
Andrew’s in 1410. Ecclesiastics founded
King’s College and University College,
Aberdeen, 1494. Bishop Turnbull founded
the University of Glasgow in 1451. The
Bishop of Orkney founded the University of
Edinburgh in 1558. At the Reformation, all
that was done for primary, or indeed any
other, education was done by ecclesiastics.
Knox contrived and established the Parish
school system in Scotland. Archbishop
Whately, Bishops Murray and Doyle, and
Mr. Carlile, a Presbyterian minister, pre-
pared the school books and arranged the
time-table for the Irish National system.
The great majority of the standard school
text books on every subject were composed
by ecclesiastics.
In this colony they established primary
education. The Rev. Dr. Lang founded the
Australian College, and the Rev. Dr. Car-
michael the Normal school—-both leading-
educational institutions in their day. Bishop
Broughton founded King’s school. Newing-
ton, Lyndhurst, Sacred Heart, St. Stanislaus
Colleges, and many more of the superior
schools of the colony were founded by
ecclesiastics, and in most cases they have
been, and they still are, taught by eccle-
siastics.
A large proportion of the Public schools
of the colony owe their existence to their
suggestions and efforts.
Ecclesiastics are at the head of St. Paul’s,
St. Andrew’s, and St, John’s Colleges, which
were founded at the instance, and through
the influence, of ecclesiastics. The first
principal of our University was, and its
present principal is, an ecclesiastic.
In the face of facts like these, it may well
be asked what have ecclesiastics done to
forfeit public confidence in the matter of
primary education ? What could have been
done for primary or higher education that
they have not done ?
The reply to this question acquires immense
significance from the fact that what eccle-
siastics have done for education up till a
comparatively recent period, they have done
in spite of the lack of the means and appli-
ances of modern days, for the art of printing
was unknown till about the middle of the
loth century. Steamboats, railways, gas,
telegraphs, telephones, etc., are all the
inventions of the present century, or the
present quarter of it.
(2.) What have the Civil rulers done for
primary education to entitle them not only
to confidence, but to greater confidence than
ecclesiastics—to exclusive confidence-in the
matter ? What have they done that the
business of primary education should be
taken entirely out of the hands of ecclesias-
tics and committed entirely to theirs ?
"What did they do for primary education
up till within the last forty years ? What
have they done during that period, even
with the help of ecclesiastics ?
As to intellectual endowment, mental
culture, or educational attainments and
accomplishments, are they superior to
ecclesiastics 1 As to religious principle and
moral practice, are they superior to
ecclesiastics ?
Are they likely to sympathise more deeply
with the case of those whose interests are
involved, and to feel a deeper concern in
their well-being than ecclesiastics ? Have
the Civil rulers shown greater aptitude in
the business 1 Have they been more success-
ful in the conduct of it 1
In 1833, the Civil rulers essayed the solu-
tion of the problem of primary education in
Ireland. The field for the experiment was
of their own choosing, as the most favourable
on which to try their “’prentice hand.”
Their system was most fully, most carefully
considered, and it was introduced under
circumstances that seemed most favourable
to success. It has been worked at an enor-
mous cost to the country, and under every
advantage of State patronage and State
influence.
It was to scatter the ancient night of
intellectual and moral darkness that had
brooded over Ireland ; it was to cause the
dayspring of knowledge and virtue to arise
with healing in his beams for the religious,
political, and social differences, antipathies,
hatreds, strifes, bloodshed, and misery of
which Ireland had for seven centuries been
the scene. The lion of St. Peter’s, the ox of
St. Paul's, and the lamb of Geneva were to
lie down together; and there was to be
nothing to hurt or to destroy throughout all
the realm of the Isle of Saints. The children
of this Niobe of the West were to be more
than at the first ; she was to have twice as
much as she had before ; and her latter end
was to be blessed more than her beginning.
Have results justified these anticipations ?
The national system of primary education in
Ireland, after a trial of nearly half a century,
has proved in respect of these matters an
utter failure.


Scarcely had it been established before it
was found necessary to modify it. At the
present moment it is itself only in name. It
is the opinion of many that the original
system —like the old garment of the parable
—is not to be mended with new cloth.
Since its establishment famine has deci-
mated the population ; since its establish-
ment two most bloody and destructive
religious riots have occurred, agrarian out=
rages have multiplied, Fenianism and Home
Rule have flourished, rebellion has been
attempted. At the present moment the
people of Ireland are more fiercely antago-
nistic as to creed, more intensely dissatisfied
with and intolerant of their political condi-
tion, more widely and more bitterly alienated
in their social relations, than they have
been for centuries. Do not these facts
prove that the national system of education
has proved a failure—a most lamentable
failure —in the very case in which it was
supposed it would be most acceptable, most
successful, and most beneficial ?
The Irish National system of primary
education was introduced to this colony.
Like its great prototype its has been altered
and amended till one might say of it as
Cicero did of Catiline, “ vixit.” With a
similar origin, a similar management, and a
similar history, it has been an utter failure,
too. To-day the whole country is agitated,
convulsed, and influenced on the question
whether it should be allowed to exist. One
party says, “secularize it”; another says,
“ religionize it” ; another says, “ harmonize
it” ; and another, “ annihilate it.”
It is very difficult to predict its fate, and
quite as difficult to imagine the form and
fashion it will assume when it has left the
hands of our enlightened, patriotic, judicious,
and pious legislators. It is strongly to be
suspected that they will illustrate the story
of “The Old Man and the Ass,” after all
their labours on the bridge, which has
hitherto proved to the Civil rulers the pons
asinorum.
Just consider that part of our colonial
history which runs parallel with that of the
National and Public system of primary
education.
Religious heartburnings, dissensions, and
strifes have increased and become embittered;
larrikinism and bushranffing of a most
formidable character, and on a most exten-
sive scale, have grown with its growth ;
manners have become more licentious, more
especially in respect of the intercourse of
the sexes : and the concealments and
murders incident to such a state of things a
crying national sin.
Contempt and resistance of constituted
authority, covenant-breaking in every form,
have increased : events in our capital, in
Newcastle, and other centres of population
during the past year but too strongly attest
the fact.
While all these evils, whether in the
mother country or in the colony, may not be
attributed to the operation of the National
or Public system of primay education, yet
they have accompanied it pari passu for so
many years ; and under so great a diversity
of social condition, that the possibility of a
connection between them—if not as cause
and effect at the least as relatives—not even
once removed, is irresistibly suggested.
Nor need we wonder at the failure of the
National and Public system of primary
education. There are assignable and ade-
quate reasons of its failure. It is based on a
wrong principle ; it takes for granted that
the emotional nature is alike in all men,
whereas it is not —the Creator has made it
to differ.
Within certain limits any number of men
may not only agree to differ but agree to
unite—hence the origin and the coherence
of sect—at once its reason and its right to
be. But whilst individuals may agree to
unite and form a sect, it is scarcely possible
for the sects to unite with each other, for
this plain reason : that the individuals com-
prising them have already, in order to form
them, responded to all points of similarity
and mutual attraction, and exhausted
their powers of tolerating differences.
In fact, the Creator has laid in this matter
a foundation diverse, and not similar in its
character, and other foundation can no man
lay. Of this fact it behoves a wise states-
man to make due account. In rearing his
superstructure he must have respect to his
foundation. If he attempt to build as
though it were homogeneous, he will be
doomed to disappointment and shame. He
will be in the position of the man who con-
templated building a tower, but who did
not first sit down and count the cost. His
system will lack breadth of base, coherence
of parts, comeliness of proportion, national
sympathy, and stability. He will be fight-
ing against God by ignoring and defying
His laws ; and who may contend with Him
and prosper 1
But it may be said—have we not, at the
least, an intellectual foundation, common to
all, upon which to build 1 Even this foun-


dation is not homogeneous, but if it were so,
it is not the foundation on which to frame a
system of primary education for man. He
is not only an intellectual but an emotional
beihg ; and to educate him adequately and
thoroughly his emotional nature must be
educated—specially educated, for it is the
distinctive and ruling element.
As a matter of fact, the emotional nature
and that in its diversity is that upon which
a majority of the people desire that the
national system of education should be
framed. This fact, taken in connection
with the principle in which it has its origin,
should surely weigh with our statesmen in
framing their policy of primary education.
The very fact that a large number of the
people object to the existing system of
primary education, and to that proposed to
supersede it should warn them that what-
ever in name, whatever it may be in reality,
it will not be national, and, therefore, will
not be satisfactory.
It is urged that those opposed to the
existing and proposed system of primary
education are influenced by ecclesiastics.
Do the people ever act in any social, politi-
cal, or religious movement except under
influence ? Why are they not to be in-
fluenced by ecclesiastics? Are not ecclesiT
astics in this matter at the least guides as
competent, as safe, and as reliable as the
great majority of the popular candidates for
their favour, whose competency is not to be
measured by their powers ol; declamation,
and whose purity of motive is not to be
inferred from the whited wall of their pro-
fession any more than that of the ancient
Roman candidati from the quantity of chalk
upon their togas ?
But have not ecclesiastics interfered, and
indecently interfered, on the other side ?
Have they not set themselves, and taken
Counsel, and banded together against the
Denominational system of primary educa-
tion ? Have they not, to their shame, made
common cause with spiritists, infidels,
materialists, and Atheists against it? Did
they not, in shameful and ominous conjunc-
tion with these on the 17th day of December
last (illustrating that on which Pilate and
Herod were made friends), combine at an
election meeting in denouncing and oppos-
ing it ? Have they not, from the pulpit and
the platform, through the press, by petition,
and in every way sought to influence and
inflame the popular mind against it ? If
the party without sin only may cast the
first stone at opponents in this matter then
will opposition be practiced with impunity.
I shall now very briefly review a few of
the objections urged against Denominational
schools.
(1.) They are inferior in efficiency to
Public schools.
The teachers of Denominational schools
receive the same training, are subject to the
same dicipline, have to come up to the same
standard of teaching qualification as the
teachers of Public schools.
They have the same inspectors. They are
under the same superintendence. The books
used in them are the same, and the course of
secular instruction prescribed and followed
is the same. How then can they be inferior
to Public schools ? If they are so the blame
must rest with the Board.
But they are not inferior. The reports of
inspectors prove that they are quite as effi-
cient. The result of the public examinations
shows that they are not a whit behind, but
rather in advance of the Public schools.
One reverend speaker, at the ever memor-
able election meeting above refered to,
characterised Denominational schools as
miserable shreds.
The number of Denominational schools is
169, or more than one-seventh of all the
State-aided Primary schools of the colony, a
fraction which represents something more
than a shred. A.s to their being miser-
able they cannot be otherwise, unless indeed
like the Christian they find their happiness
in boing persecuted for righteousness sake,
in being reviled, and in having all manner
of evil said against them falsely.
(2.) Denominational schools perpetuate
religious differences and discords.
Before the introduction of the national
system of Primary education there were dif-
ferences of religious opinions in the colony as
there always have been, and as there always
will be everywhen and everywhere, but there
were no religious discords.
Before the introduction of the national
system of Primary education, the two great
sections of the Church went hand in hand in
every great public movement, as the records
of our early colonial history show, and as
many now living can from experience attest.
Since the introduction of this system reli-
gious feeling has been embittered and
exasperated. There have been dissensions
between the representatives of these sections
at the meetings of the Boards of our
public charities, and in every other body in
which the two parties have been associated,


There havebeen disturbances which in one case
terminated in a riot which had to be suppressed
by a police force from the capital. At the
present time are not the two parties arrayed
against each other in bitter conflict ? Is not
the gulf between them widening day by day,
and yawning like the chasm in the Homan
forum, till it threatens to become impassable,
and to leave our people on either side hateful
and hating each other with a perfect hatred,
and biting and devouring each other with
all the accursed malignity of religious
rancour: Does it not threaten to become
impracticable by the art of the most skilful
and most philanthropic of our pontifices
maximi, political or ecclesiastical ? When
the gulf referred to opened in the Roman
Forum, the augurs declared that in order to
close it the most precious thing in Rome
must be cast into it. Whereupon a noble
youth named Quintus Curtius, armed and
mounted leaped in, exclaiming that nothing
is so precious as a brave man. The legend
says that the gulf closed, and the people of
Rome could again meet on common ground.
“Oh ! that the present hour would lend
A Quintus Curtius of the kind,”
worthy of the object, equal to the emer-
gency, and capable as a daysman of laying
his hands upon the opposing parties and
bringing them together and making peace.
What element of conflict and discord does
not the Public system of Primary education
embody ?
With what proportion of Catholics in the
Central Board will Protestants be satisfied ?
With what proportion of Protestants will
Roman Catholics be satisfied ? The same
questions apply to the local boards.
Will Catholics be satisfied with a Protes-
tant teacher, and vice versa 1
The case of the Public school in E. Mait-
land is still fresh in the memory of all. It
may be repeated. It will be repeated..
Will Christian parents be satisfied with an
infidel teacher, and vice versa 1
But perhaps Public school teachers of any
faith, of all faiths, or of no faith at all will
be manufactured to suit occasions, whocame-
leon-like may take the hue, or hues, or no hue
of surrounding circumstances.
(3.) The Denominational system involves
and perpetuates the principle of State aid to
religion. True. What valid objection to
the principle of State aid to religion has
been or can be urged either on scriptural or
Secular grounds 1 The principle of State-aid
to religion is aright and scriptural principle.
The fact that the Denominational system of
education involves the State-aid principle
a fact in its favour.
Which of the sects objects to State-aid to
religion except in theory ?
The Church of England, the Church of
Rome, the Presbyterian Church, the Wes-
leyan Church all receive it to a greater or
less extent, and in some form or other.
Ministers of all the Churches receive it
regularly as stipends. These Churches all
receive in the form of aid for Church, Par-
sonage, Piesbytery, or Manse building, out of
the revenues of the church and school lands.
They all receive it in the form of grants for
sites of churches, parsonages, presbyteries
manses, and burial grounds. Several or
them receive it in the foim of glebe lands,
which yield a handsome revenue to the con-
gregations endowed with them.
But surely, you may say, these ministers of
religion who are so strongly opposed to De-
nominational schools because they involve
the principle of State aid to religion, do not
themselves receive it ?
Consult the Civil List 1 As to perpetuating
State aid to religion. State aid to religion
will never be done away. The abolition of
] mominational schools will not affect it.
If State aid is good for the teacher of
bearded men, it cannot be bad for the teacher
of babes.
It is selfish and invidious in the priest who
regards it as good for food, and pleasant to
the eye of acquisitiveness, and a thing to be
desired to make one wise in the ways of
independence, satisfaction, and comfort to
deny it to the schoolmaster. Is the Public
school system voluntary ? Is it a system
which Jews, infidels, materialists, and
athiests can conscientiously, and which they
will spontaneously support ? The Jews cannot
conscientiously support it because it teaches
Christianity. Infidels cannot conscientiously
support it because they do not believe in
revealed religion. Materialists cannot con-
scientiously support it because it teaches
that mind and matter are separate and inde-
pendent. Atheists cannot conscientiously
support it because it teaches the being and
attributes of a God.
But these constitute about one twenty-
eighth of the population of the colony. Add
to these four-sevenths for the Protestants
and Catholics who cannot support it con-
scientiously, who object to, and repudiate
it, und we have nearly a half of the popula-
tion, the great majority of whom will not
only not support it voluntarily, but who will
support it only under compulsion, which will


partake largely of the character of persecu-
tion for conscience sake.
(4.) Whatever may be said of State aid in
the abstract Protestants cannot share it
with Catholics.
Protestant ministers who accept say prac-
tically by their acceptance that it is a yood
and necessary thing to aid them in the work
of achieving the salvation of men and the
glory of God.
If so they are not at liberty to renounce it
simply because it must be shared with others
who they affirm do not make it subserve the
same ends. To renounce it in their case on
such grounds is to do evil that good may
come.
Objectors being subtle casuists . and
strictly conscientious do accept State-aid for
religious purposes, however, in common with
Catholics, and their practice in this par-
ticular is better than their profession.
(5.1 Waiving all other objections Catholic
Denominational schools teach treason and
send forth traitors.
Whether treason is taught m these schools
or not I cannot say. If treason is taught in
them facts prove that it is taught to very
little purpose. The police force both in the
mother country and this colony is largely
composed of Catholics, and according to the
reports of those competent to judge a more
loyal set of men does not exist.
Many of the sailors by which Her Majesty’s
ships are manned, and many of the legiments
of which Her Majesty’s army is composed
are Catholics, and I know from the records
of their deeds, both by sea and land, that
men braver or more loyal do not wear Queen
Victoria’s buttons. .
They have shed their blood for their Queen
and country more freely than some of their
traducers shed their wine.
Even when led ag&inst their co-religionists
as in the case of the Peninsular war, which
culminated at Waterloo, they acquitted
themselves faithfully, zealously, and glori-
ously in the cause of Protestant England.
No doubt traitors have been nursed in
Catholic schools, but have no traitors been
nursed in Protestant schools ? Why regard
as the rule in the one case what is regarded
as the exception in the other? Why, with a
common sovereign to serve, a common
country to protect, and common interests to
maintain, should we wantonly malign and
alienate those who in times past have ap-
proved themselves worthy of all confidence
and admiration, and who in time to eome, if
necessity should arise, would prove them-
selves most trustworthy and efficient
brethren in arms against any foe of England
be he who he may ?
(6.) The withdrawal of State aid to Catholic
schools will be the destruction of Rome.
Those who think so have surely read his-
tory to little purpose, and have surely
shut their eyes against the facs of
our own day in our own colony. In the
mother country, notwithstanding the with-
drawal of tate aid and the utmost hostility of
the State, she grew in numbers and in strength
until she freed herself from almost all the
disabilities under which she laboured, and
obtained the recognition of her claim for
religious educational purposes, at the least to
participate with the Protestant establish-
ments of the country.
Noc only will the abolition pf State aid to
her schools not involve her destruction, it will
not in all probability have the effect of les-
sening the number of her schools, but of
increasing it.
Rightly or wrongly, she will have in the
eyes of her people a grievance, and that
grievance will be made a more effectual
means of providing funds for the support of
her schools than a vote of Parliament.
No sooner has the first note of danger been
sounded than thousands of pounds have tieen
contributed for building her schools. Are we
to suppose that either the means or the
liberality of her people has been exhausted
by the efforts already made ? Ought we not
rather to regard what she had done as an
earnest and guarantee of greater things yet to
be accomplished under the stimulus of a
grievance no longer in apprehension, but in
experience, and that in respect of successful
effort, it is with her but the day of small
things ?
(3.) Results possibly not contemplated by
the opponents of State aid to Denominational
schools.
(1.) The withdrawal of State aid to these
schools, like the arrows of the far-c, arting
Apollo, will reach further than its advocates
seem to imagine, and will strike and Wound
interests which they seem to regard as beyond
the sphere of its operation.
The affiliated Colleges of St Paul, St.
Andrew, and St. John, are Denominational
schools, and Denominational schools in the
very strictest sense of the term. The State
has the entire management and control of the
Denominational schools under the Board of
Public Education, save in respect of the
short period allotted for ecclesiastical visita-
tions. It prescribes what is to be taught, who


is to teach, and how and when the teaching
is to be imparled.
But in the ease of the affiliated Colleges,
the State has absolutely no power of manage-
ment or control. They are entirely under
the management and control of the sects to
which they respectively belong, and they are
professedly sectarian, presided over by
sectarian ecclesiastics, who are appointed by
sectarian ecclesiastics, and instituted and
maintained avowedly for sectarian purposes:
They have cost the State £30.000 for
building. This sum at 7 per Cent, would
yield £2lOO annually. They cost the State
annually for salaries £l5OO, in all £3600
a year. St. Paul’s College has 6 students,
St. Andrew’s 19, St. John’s 10 ; in all 35 ;
the education of each of whom, therefore,
in the strictest sectarianism, costs the State
every year £l2B four-sevenths, or it costs
the State as much for the most intense
sectarian education of each student of these
colleges as it does to maintain an ordinary
Denominational school with an attendance of
perhaps 200. If the State withdrew its aid
from the Denominational schools under the
Board, and, therefore, under its manage-
ment and control, surely it cannot perpet-
rate such an outrage, inconsistency, injustice,
and indecency as to continue its support to
three Colleges entirely removed from its
supervision and interference.
Again, many thousands of pounds have
been raised by private subscriptions for
erecting the affiliated Colleges, and many
hundreds of pounds are expended year by
year by their private patrons in College
fees.
Now if it is inexpedient and injurious for
the State to support sectarian schools under
the Board, surely it must be much more
inexpedient and injurious to support schools
much more sectarian and under no State
superintendence.
To whatever extent it is inexpedient and
injurious for the State to support the former
it must be inexpedient for private citizens
either individually or collectively to support
the latter.
Those who subscribed for the erection of
the affiliated Colleges, and patronize them,
and who seek the abolition of State-aided
Denominational schools under the Board,
occupy a position of most flagrant inconsis-
tence, “Dim vitant stulti vitia; in con-
traria cur runt." They strain at gnats and
swallow camels. They are bound to see that
in the clause of the new Educational Bill
providing for the extinction of the Board’s
Denominational schools the affiliated Col-
leges be included —that the buildings be used
for the purposes of non-sectarian education
only, and the endowments applied to the
support of non-sectarian teachers only. und~-
the management and control of the Public
school Board or Minister of Public Educa-
tion, as the case may be.
State aid also to Gaol Chaplains, who are
but sectarian teachers of sectarian schools in
the strictest sense without State supervision,
and all endowments to Denominational
charities as such must be withdrawn.
Are these results which Protestants can
complacently contemplate 1
(2.) The withdrawal of State aid to De-
nominational schools involves the question
of the abolition of sectarian churches. The
very same arguments urged against Denom ; -
nationa! schools apply* and with g
force, to Denominational churches. The
State, it is true, has already affirmed the
principle that State aid to the sects is to
cease, but the State has not practically car-
ried out this principle. The State bound the
principle upon the wheel of time, but sus-
pended the death blow indefinitely till the
wheel should stop of itself. No t ",
it is a maxim in Physics, and for
aught I know to the contrary, in Meta-
physics also, that a body in motion will con-
tinue in motion till stopped by some force
external to itself, this wheel, like the river,
may go on for ever, ever, it may go on for
ever.
To some extent there is at the least the
semblance of consistency in the State’s
action. But how stands the case with the
people ?
The opponents of State aid to Denomi-
national schools approve of the abolition (?)
by the State, of its aid to Denominr; 1 '
churches. Gan they consistently and con-
scientiously continue to support them. Tf
they cannot consistently and conscientiously
support them when their money is paid
through the Treasurer of the colony, how
can they consistently and conscientiou-’y
support them when their money is paid
through the Treasurer of a sect or congrega-
tion ? The money is the same in both Caseo,
given from the same motive, and for the
same pu: r „e. The difference in the
personality of the paymaster cannot make a
difference either in the principle of the
payment itself, or in its moral character.
The opponents of Sta i i aid to Denomina-
tional schools to be consistent, must discon-
tinue private aid to Denominational churches


and seek the fusion of all the sects, and the
construction on some universal ground of
religious belief of a great Public Church in
whose system of doctrine, discipline, govern-
ment, and worship all are agreed.
(3.) What will be the probable result to
Protestant churches of the withdrawal of
State-aid to Denominational schools ?
That ministers of religion should desire to
exercise upon the voung generally, more
especially upon the young of their own con-
gregations, an influence as direct, strong,
and continuous aS possible, is to be expected.
That they should desire and strive that the
children of their own sects should be trained
in their own distinctive creeds, and pre-
served to their own distinctive churches, is a
thing still more to be expected. A spirit of
benevolence, not to say a sense of interest,
and a commendable esprit de corps would
seem to ensure this desire and effort on the
part of ministers of religion, and justify this
expectation on the part of the people.
Ministers of religion are sometimes styled
pastors or shepherds, and of late they have
in many cases complacently adopted this
designation in preference to any other, and
its correlative Saxon term flock is growing
in favor with them as the substitute for the
Latin congregation. Now a shepherd worthy
of the name desires to see his flock preserved
and increased. A favorite petition of one of
our sects is “Lord, double our number.”
But it is by the increase of lambs that the
flock can be either increased, perpetuated, or
preserved. No lambs, no increase. No
lambs, no flock.
Just so with the Church. No children, no
increase. No children, no Church. The
Church of Rome seems to be very fully alive
to this fact. Her ablest champion and most
distinguished ornament in this colony says,
“ The side that has the children wins the
day.”
Yet Protestant ministers seem in many
cases to be of a different opinion on this
point. They seem not only to make no
account of the importance of preserving
children to the Church, but to regard their
conservation and adherence as a thing unde-
sirable and injurious. They seem to be
anxious to get rid of them, for they repudiate
the duty of imparting to them during the
teaching hours of the most teachable age,
the religious belief of their respective
Churches or any religion whatever.
Nay, they vociferously demand that the
doors of the State schools shall be shut,
bolted, and barred against them by the
strong arm of the law. One of them actually
sought a seat in Parliament to enable him
the more effectually to aid in this “ Barring
out ”
This is, perhaps, the most extraordinary
and most discreditable ecclesiastical phe-
nomenon of the present or any other age.
History furnishes nothing like it. We might
expect this at the hands of infidels and
atheists, but from ministers of religion—
Shame ! That ministers of religion should
lead on and encourage infidels and atheists
in this most inconsistent, most unholy, most
traitorous, and parricidal attempt upon the
Church, upon their own particular Churches,
is a most flagrant indecency, a most unmiti-
gated disgrace, a snost unnatural and hor-
rible crime. Tell it not in Gath, publish it
not in Askalon !
The ecclesiastics in question seek to justify
their conduct on the ground that the with-
drawal of State-aid to Denominational
schools will weaken and ultimately destroy
Rome. Hot that they love Prosestantism
less, but that they hate Romanism more.
Was ever such folly—such madness ?
“ JVescio an Anticyram ratio illis dcstinet
omnem." They’re as mad as March hares.
Would the end justify the means? Will the
end sought be accomplished ? Let us con-
sider the matter. Protestant parents, and
in due time their children, will reason (many
of them are reasoning now on the matter) :
Since our ministers are so strongly opposed
to the teaching of the tenets of our Church,
these tenets must be injurious. If so, our
adherence to our respective Churches must
be injurious. We will, therefore, break
asunder their bonds, and cast away their
cords from us. Protestant sects will die out
as such. An amalgamation or aggregation
will take place. Those who reject dogma
will unite on rationalistic principles and
constitute a small minority, influential from
position, wealth, and intellect. Those in
whom the emotional predominates, who
prefer to walk by faith and not by sight,
will unite and form a large majority, influ-
ential from numbers and enthusiasm. The
remainder—the Gallios, who care for none of
these things—will constitute an aggregation
without coherence, without symmetry, with-
out permanence, and without influence. The
rationalist section, finding nothing to attract
it, will probably remain much as the circum-
stances of its formation leave it. The emo-
tionalists will never join the rationalists.
The two bodies will be repellant. But what
of the emotionalists in regard to Romanists - ?


They will necessarily have much in common.
There will be much in the one to attract the
other. But as gravitation always acts rela-
tively to the mass of the subjects of its
operation, and as Rome is emotional, and
vastly excessive in numbers, the emotionalist
body will be drawn towards her, and finally
be absorbed by her. They will cast in
their lot with her, and be called by her
name. The nationalists, from tradition and
conviction, will probably retain the name
Protestant, but it will be but a name. It
will be for all practical purposes, but “ vox
et preterea niliil ” The rationalists will
have logic founded on fact, but the world is
not governed by logic. They will lack sen-
timent, which gives sinew and life to the dry
bones of dialectics. Rome has logic founded
on dogma and sentiment, and by sentiment
the world is governed. She will represent
organized Christianity. Her very dogmas
will stamp her in the eyes of the sentimental
as the traditional Christian Church. Her
disciples will be called Christians not only
in Rome, but wherever that desecrated name
is used throughout the world. The final
result it is difficult to predict, and painful
to contemplate. What of the principles of
anti-Denominationalist ministers, then, as
indicated by their anti-Denominational
action ? A man’s denominationalism is a
man’s Christianity—that form of it which to
his mind embodies Christian truth under its
most appropriate and attractive aspect. If
so, whatever he may profess, the man who
abandons his Denominationalism abandons
his Christianity. True, a man may from
increased light abandon one form of denomi-
nationalism for another without abandoning
his Christianity ; but what shall we say of
those who boast of abandoning all Denomi-
nationalism ?
(4) What will be the probable result to
Catholic primary education, if State-aid to
Denominational schools be withdrawn ?
Roman Catholic primary schools will pro-
bably be multiplied in number and increased
in attendance.
As before observed, Rome has done much,
and she is still doing more for the spread of
her teaching agencies.
In every little centre of population she
has her adherents, and wherever she has
even a minimum of children, she will plant
a school. Through the agency of her
religious orders, male and female, these
schools can be maintained at the minimum
of cost. Their efforts will meet with a ready
and liberal response from her people. If
they will “live on cowld potatoes for the
wearing of the green”, they will live without
potatoes at all for the support of the
Church.
How will the establishment of these
schools atfect the Public schools ? Many of
them are presently maintained on the
minimum attendance, or slightly above it.
There are Catholic children in them all. If
these children be removed, the Public schools
in question where such removals take place
must be closed.
Rome will have it all her own way in
these localities. The Protestant children of
the neighbourhood must either attend them
or go without education. We know which
alternative will at last be adopted, however
reluctantly. As a matter of policy, the way
will be smoothed for them, and their good-
will and confidence conciliated ; and in
process of time Rome, instead of being
regarded as the foe of education, will be
looked upon as its friend, patron, and
promoter.
Meantime, the ecclesiastical schoolmaster
will ply his priestly vocation, and that too
under most favourable circumstances.
Rome’s numbers and strength will increase,
and her influence extend.
(5.) What will be the probable result upon
the rising generation of Catholics of the
withdrawal of State aid to Denominational
schools ?
We know what will be the effect of it
upon those of the present generation ; but
they will go the way of all flesh, and within
a short time their feelings on the subject
would cease to be a matter of anxiety to the
world. But their children, by the immor-
tality of succession, will perpetuate their
feelings. They will grow up hereditary
aliens from the State and enemies to it, for
they will regard themselves as members of
a class persecuted for conscience sake, and
compelled to aid in supporting a system of
education of which they disapprove, and
which they repudiate; and it will go hard
with them if they do not find means of
giving expression to their feelings in ways
not conducive to the peace, the prosperity,
and the happiness of society. Those who
might be both Demis et Tutamen will be a
disgrace and ruin.
(6.) The withdrawal of State aid to
Denominational schools will involve all
State inspection and control from Catholic
schools.
Under the present system the Catholics
cannot be said to have the management


and control of their schools under the
Board. As to the locality of a school, its
dimensions, materials, and equipments, as
to the qualification and appointment of
teachers, as to the books and time-table
used, and the discipline exercised in them,
as to all except the sectarian teaching on the
day and at the hour appointed by the State,
every Catholic school, like every Church of
England school, is entirely under the control
of the Board.
But it will be very different if the State
withdraw its aid, for then the State must
withdraw its presence. The State may not
say, “What doest thou?” In the opinion
of those who regard State supervision as a
thing salutary and necessary, this will be a
great evil.
How is the educational difficulty to be
solved ? It is easier to criticise than to con-
struct —to pull down than to build up.
Let the State provide for the support of
Public schools and Denominational schools
as at present.
Let the State fix the minimum of attend-
ance to entitle a locality to the benefit of a
school (either Public or Denominational) as
at present.
Let those who prefer a Public school, and
who can show the minimum, have a Public
school. In any locality in which none of
the recognised Christian sects can show the
minimum, let a Public school only be estab-
lished. In any locality in which one or
more of the Christian sects can show the
minimum, let a Denominational school or
Denominations’ school in connection there-
with be established.
A Public school may be established in a
locality in which none of the ;Christian sects
can at the time of its establishment show
the minimum. Of course, so long as this
state of things remains the Public school will
be the only school.
But if, in process of time, the Church of
England for example, can show the minimum
let a Church of England school be estab-
lished, and so of the other sects.
To illustrate the theory. Take Singleton
for instance. Suppose the minimum fixed at
50. If the sects only unitedly can show
this minimum, let a Public school only be
established, JBut suppose the Church of
England can also show this minimum, then
let a Church of England school also be estab-
lished, and so of the other sects. If the
population increase so that ail the sects can
show the minimum, then let schools for each
of them be established together with the
Public school. If, by withdrawal from time
to time from the Public school its minimum
fall below the standard (which is not likely)
then let the school property be sold or
utilised in some way for educational pur-
poses. and so of the Denominational school
property in like case.
This arrangement, or some arrangement
like it, would meet all the conditions of the
case, provide for the diversity of religious
opinion, respect the principle of rule by
majority, promote the virtue of the people,
and leave no just ground for complaint to any.
Under this, or some similar plan, and
under it only, could compulsion be legalised
justly and beneficially.
As to the cost of such a system. It would
not be very difficult to show that in the
circumstances of the colony, in respect of the
distribution of school property very little, if
any extra cost to the State would be involved.
If Denominational schools are not in
popular favor as their opponents affirm, then
there would be few, if any, applications for
their establishment, and the Public school
system would be the system of the colony,
and the State in supporting it would be
doing only what a popular Government
ought to do.
But if, on the other hand, Denominational
schools were applied for wherever the mini-
mum could be shewn, it would be evident
that it is the system in favor with the people,
and in supporting it a popular Government
would be doing only its duty in carrying out
the popular will. The two systems would
have a fair trial. They would in effect be
tested by the principle of the plebiscite, the
rational ultimatum of Government by the
people, of which some are so deeply ena-
moured;
After all the dissatisfaction, misrepresen-
tation, and strife already engendered on the
subject of primary education, and in pros-
pect of the still greater dissatisfaction and
strife likely to arise from the proposed
system, I think that the State, if it really
believes in government by the people, is
bound, as the only means of ascertaining the
popular will on this momentous question, to
put the issue to the country formally and
authoritatively. Since our legislators have
raised a political tempest, let them brave the
breakers on the lee-shore of anarchy. True,
it would be but a tentative measure. But
what else is the measure presently before
Parliament. It will certainly not. be final.
It will evoke such a spirit, and bring about
such results as will prove it to be final and


conclusiTe only in respect of its own exist-
ence.
That the granting of State-aid to Deno-
minational Christian schools will involve the
necessity of granting it to Heathen or other
un-Christian schools is a supposition scarcely
worth refutation.
Our State is a Christian State. Our con-
stitution is a Christian constitution, found
expressly and formally, mainly on the re-
vealed will of God. As such our State can
be under no obligation to endow Heathen or
other un-Christian schools. As such, it ‘~
prohibited from endowing them. Not only
so, but our State can have no enmity where its
enmity would tend to violate the law of
God.




