

FIRST LECTURE.
LECTURES ON THE JESUITS
Delivered in St. Peter's Schoolroom, Sydney, March 31 st, 1879,
[Price, Threepence .]
By Bev. Canon Moreton.
IGNATIUS LOYOLA and the OEDEE or the JESUITS.
fHE Jesuits are seeking to establish themselves in this city
and colony, and, much as I dislike religious controversy,
I have felt myself called upon to deliver, in this room, a
course of lectures upon some of their principles, and practices.
It will form no part of my task to enter upon the Eoman Catholic
argument, except as it is interwoven with the Jesuits. The latter
have grown out of the former, and while in some periods of their
history they were regarded with jealousy, suspicion, and by one
Pope, Clement XIV., the entire order was suppressed, they
now bid fair to remodel the Church after their own views, and
make their Society co-extensive with it.
In order the better to understand the circumstances out of
which this extraordinary Society arose, it will be necessary to
glance, for a moment at, the state of things which obtained in
Europe at the close of the 15th century. The Church of Eome
had spread herself over the nations of Europe, whom she had
held in darkness and superstition for near one thousand years. Her
bishops had been more familiar with the camp and the court than
with the Bible and the House of God ; and her priests and monks,
with some exceptions, were sunk in ignorance, and lived in
immorality. They formed a suitable subject for the sarcasm of
Erasmus. When such was the state of the clergy it is not
surprising that the laity were “as sheep without a shepherd ” ?
But with the close of the fifteenth century this reign of spiritual
darkness, at least, in some parts of Europe, was drawing to a
close. A combination of circumstances led to this happy result.
The voyages and discoveries of Columbus introducing new worlds
to the old, awakened a spirit of enterprise;—the fall of Constan-
tinople scattered some of the learned Greeks over Europe, without
the means of support, except what they could derive from teaching
the beautiful flexible language of their forefathers, and the
discovery of the art of printing began to place books within the
reach of the people. Erasmus had brought out a new edition of
the Greek Testament to which he had added a paraphrase, and
the next step soon followed, both on the Continent and in England,
namely, the translation of the Bible into the languages of the
people ! A new era had set in, enquiry was awakened, a thirst
was created for knowledge, and the fountain was opened where
the nations could drink. The cause of the Eeformation was that
of learning, liberty, and truth. To withstand this great up-
heaving of the nations, Eome felt powerless. She might appeal
to her cathedral chapters, her colleges, her monasteries, her
parochial clergy, and even to her college of cardinals, in vain for
champions to do battle with the Eeformers, whose armour was
love to God and man, and whose weapon was an open Bible.
Leo X., Charles Y., Francis 11., and Henry YIIL, differing and


warring among themselves, were agreed in the desire to stamp
out “ the new religion.” All their efforts only fanned the flame,
and gave impetus to the Reformation. Some of the weapons of
the Reformers must he turned against themselves, that of learning,
of discipline, and outward morality. If Rome has not among all
her orders the suitable instruments she must create them. A
new order must be formed in the Church, but where is the
material, and whore is the master spirit to fashion and temper it
for the struggle ? We must turn from the church to the camp in
our search.
Charles the Y. and Francis I. were at war with each other in
the year 1521. That year in which Luther made his noble
confession before the same Charles at the diet of AVorms. In
this year the soldiers of the two monarchs met at the town of
Pampeluna, in Spain ; and but for an event which occured, this
siege would, possibly, have never found a place in history. The
French, led on by Cardinal Ximines, had a week before the time
at which our story dates, been defeated by the Spanish, and this
they did almost without the striking of a blow, and Pampeluna, with
the whole of Navarre, fell again into the hands of the Spaniards.
The garrison was weak, the French renewed the' attack, the
townspeople regarded them as their friends, and were urgent for
granting them immediate entrance; the magistrates, believing
the Spaniards would never be able to hold the town, pressed the
garrison to surrender.
Don Inigo, if not in command of the Spanish garrison, held a
high commission in it. He had been born at the ancient castle
of Loyola, of a noble family, on the AYesteru slopes of the Pyrenees.
He had chosen the Military profession as the business of his life.
He was brave, prepossessing, and, at the time of the siege, in
high favour with his sovereign. It would not have been difficult
to predict that he would rise to a high command in the army of his
nation. But the moment had come when one event changed the
whole course of his life, and almost the whole aspect of the Church
of Rome. On the second day of the siege, he was standing on
an embrasure of the outer wall, opposite to which the French had
planted a breaching battery, and had just commenced the
cannonade. At this moment a ball from the enemy split off
several large fragments of stone, one of which inflicted a severe
wound on his right leg and foot, and bounded on to the other leg
and injured it also. He fell, and with him also fell the town of
Pampeluna. From the victors he received attention and every
mark of respect to which his position and bravery entitled him.
So soon as he was equal to the journey he was conveyed to the
castle of his ancestors, and here his career, as a military man,
ends. Upon examination it was found that the right leg had been
badly set, it must be broken and reset. The operation will be
attended with great pain, and if successful, he will walk with
difficulty ever after. All this he will endure. AYeeks of tedium
were in store for him in his chamber ; his moments were beguiled
with the records of ancient knights. He has been through all
these books, and yet a prisoner. Other books were provided
for him. The life of our Saviour by Ludolphus, a monk of


Savony, and the “Lives of the Saints.” The first is laid
aside, the latter he read, and re-read—the imagination of
the fallen warrior was fired, and almost before he was aware
of it, he had made his resolve —“If .Francis did this great
thing, and if Dominic did that, why should not I equal
them ” ? He will cease to be a knight of the sword, and, if needs
be, he will become a knight of the burning torch. Visions, of course,
now appeared to him! The castle was shaken, so much so, that
a rend was made in the walls, the virgin appeared to him, and
claimed him as her knight, and, so soon as he was able he hung,
his arms at her shrine, she should, henceforth, be the lady of his
choice, of his heart, of his life. Don Inigo had become Ignatius
de Loyola.
Now let us mark him as he retires for ever from the castle of
his forefathers. His dress is that of a cavalier and courtier. A
short tunic of crimson velvet, trimmed with fur, such as those only
were allowed to wear who attended on the person of the king;
hose of the same, full above, and fitting close at the knee, below
which they are hidden by a boot of soft leather, decorated with a
golden pendant, and furnished with a brilliant spur. At his side
hangs a richly hilted sword, from his cap, covered with embroidery
waved the long plume, which was the sign of noble blood. With
the change of his views there shall be a change of his attire to
correspond. He has not proceeded far on his journey when he
purchases a long robe of sackcloth, a rope to fasten it round his
waist, and a pair of straw shoes, and a pilgrim’s staff. All these
are for the present placed upon his mule. On the road he meets
a beggar in rags, and those rags almost alive with vermin; to
the astonishment of the beggar he exchanges his costly dress for
these revolting rags in which he clothes himself, and places his
sackcloth robe over them. At Monserato he enters the Benedictine
Abbey where he makes long confession, and performs severe
penances. From Monserato he goes to Manresa, and here, in a
cave, stung with sin, he inflicts torture upon his emaciated body
until he has almost destroyed both body and mind. He goes
days without food, he lies on the damp earth, with a chain round
his waist, and this he substitutes for a girdle of prickly leaves
and wears it next his person ; and now Satan tempts him to
commit suicide, but this horrid suggestion he spurns from him. His
confessor advises him to write down his sins, confess them, and
then think no more of them.
In all this mental agony of poor Ignatius Loyola, how much
we are reminded of Luther’s state, and regret that there was no
Staupitz at hand to direct him to the Saviour. Ignatius, at
length, obtains peace. But Ido not read of the Spirit’s work in
creating in him a living faith in the Atonement of Christ. His
conduct on this occasion, the solemn turning point in his life,
struck the keynote which his followers have only too faithfully
observed —a religion without the Bible. Visions now followed
each other, it is said, in quick succession. At one time he lay in
a trance for seven days, and it was during this time that there
were revealed to him the rules of the order which he was to
establish.


A volume is needed to describe his visit to Jerusalem, his
hardships by land and sea, his return to Spain; his labours,
mortifications, trials, his visions, his entrance into a school, where,
at thirty years of age, and seated with small boys, he commenced
learning Latin under great difficulties. But all these must be
passed over, and we find him in Paris in the year 1528, entered in
the University of Cardinal Ximenes for poor students. Here he
made the acquaintance of Peter Pabre and Francis Xavier, who
became his first two disciples, and to these he shortly after was able
to add seven others. On the 15th August, 1528, Loyola and his
nine followers entered the subterranean chapel of the Church of
Montmartre, at Paris, and Mass having been said by Fabre, they
took the vow of poverty and chastity, and entered into a solemn
oath to dedicate their lives to the conversion of the Saracens —or,
should circumstances make that attempt impossible, to lay them-
selves and their services unreservedly at the feet of the Pope.
They sealed their oath by receiving the Host. The day was
chosen because it was the anniversary of the Assumption of the
Virgin, and the place because it was dedicated to her. In order
to foster the growth of the Order —of which Ignatius was already
virtually, as he became afterwards in reality, the head—he
prepared the Spiritual Exercises, a body of rules to teach men how
to conduct the work of their own conversion. A Jesuit says :
“ The Booh of Exercises was truly written by the finger of Cod, and
delivered to Ignatius by the Holy Mother of God.” Wylie says :
The book displayed, on the part of its author, great knowledge
of the human heart. The method described was an adroit
imitation of that process of conviction, of alarm, of enlightenment,
and of peace through which the Holy Spirit leads that soul which
undergoes that change in very deed ” The penitent, according
to the Spiritual Exercises , must pass four weeks in meditation
alone. During the first, he thinks of hell, its torments, and the
souls enduring them; the second week he thinks of the Incarnation
of our Lord, and Mary, His mother, acquiescing in it; in the third
week he meditates on two great camps, Jerusalem and Babylon—
the Church and the World—with Poverty, Shame, and Humility
written over the former, and Pride, Honour, Eiches over the
latter, and he is called upon to make his choice. Having enlisted
in the army of the Church (that is the Jesuits), during the fourth
week his thoughts turn upon spiritual rest and peace. He sees
the gates of hell closed and the gates of heaven open to him.
His conversion is complete, but where is the Bible, the Holy
Spirit, and that faith without which it is impossible to please
God (Heb. xi.) in this mechanical work ?
The next aim of "Ignatius was to obtain the incorporation of his
Order by a Bull from the Pope ; and after various wanderings
about some parts of the Continent, he and his followers presented
themselves at the feet of the Sovereign Pontiff (Paul III.), from
whom the desired Bull was obtained, September 27th, 1540.
Here is Nicolini’s account of this Pope : —“ The chair of St. Peter
was at this time occupied by Paul Farnese —that same Pope who
opened, and in part conducted, the Council of Trent; who


instigated tlie Emperor to the war against the Protestants ; who
sent, under his grandson’s command, 12,000 of his own troops
into Germany to assist in that war ; and who lifted up his
sacrilegious hands to bless whoever would shed Protestant blood.
He had been scandalously incontinent; and if he did not, like
Alexander YL, entirely sacrifice the interest of the Church and of
humanity to the aggrandisement of his own family, nevertheless
his son received the Dukedom of Placentia, and his grandsons
were created Cardinals at the age of fourteen ! and one of them was
intended to be Duke of Milan. However, Paul had some
grandeur in his nature. He was generous, and therefore popular,
and his activity was indefatigable,” p. 26.
Ignatius did not readily obtain the coveted Bull, but his was a
nature which knew of no difficulty as being insurmountable He
induced his followers to take an oath of obedience to the See of
Rome, of going to whatever part of the world the Pope should send
them, upon any business, and without remuneration. The new
Order seemed what the Pope then greatly needed to withstand
the Progress of the Protestants, and, on the day before named,
the Bull founding it was granted. This Bull empowered Ignatius
to frame constitutions for the government of the Order. Nicolini,
p. 29, speaking of Ignatius and the constitution, says: “He
alone could have devised a scheme by which one free rational
being is converted into a mere automaton —acting, speaking, even
thinking according to the express will of another.” The Jesuit
must have no will, no conscience, of his own ; he must not possess
any property, though his society is, perhaps, the richest in the
world; he must put away all strong affections for his parents his
General, at Rome, must stand to him in the place of God! A
more complete slave in body and soul a human being could not
become. And for what end, but to enslave others ?
At this stage of my lecture I will give you a brief account of
the organisation and training of the Jesuits. The Order is a
combination, intended to cover and conquer the globe;
at its head is the General, who rules all, but is himself ruled by
none. Ignatius became the first General. Speaking of the
organisation, Wylie says :
“At the head, as we have said, is a Sovereign who rules over
all, but is himself ruled over by no one. First come six grand
divisions, termed assistanzen —satrapies or princedoms. These
comprehend the space stretching from the Indus to the Mediter-
ranean—more particularly India, Spain and Portugal, Germany
and France, Italy and Sicily, Poland and Lithuania. Outside
this area the Jesuits have established missions. The heads of
these six divisions act as coadjutors to their General; they are
his staff or cabinet. These six divisions are divided into thirty-
seven provinces. Over each province is placed a chief, termed a
Provincial. The provinces are again subdivided into a variety of
houses or establishments. First come the houses of the professed,
presided over by their Provost. Next come the colleges, or
houses of the novices and scholars, presided over by their Rector
or Superior. Where these cannot be established, ‘residences’
are erected for the accommodation of tho-nrifists. wbn ■nevnmbnin+o


the district, preaching and hearing confessions. And lastly may
be mentioned ‘mission houses,’ in which Jesuits live unnoticed
as secular clergy, but seeking by all possible means to promote
the interests of the Society. From his chamber in Rome, the
eye of the General surveys the world of Jesuitism to its furthest
bounds; there is nothing done which he does not see; there is
nothing spoken in it which he does not hear. It becomes us to
note the means by which this almost superhuman intelligence is
acquired. Every year a list of the houses and members of the
Society, with the name, talents, virtues, and failings of each, is
laid before the General. In additon to the annual report, every
one of the thirty-seven provincials must send him a report
monthly of the state of his province. He must inform him
minutely of its political and ecclesiastical condition. Every
Superior of a college must report every three months. The heads
of houses of residence and houses of novitiates must do the same.
In short, from every quarter of his vast dominions come a monthly
and tri-monthly report. If the matter reported on has reference
to persons outside the Society, the constitution direct that the
Provincials and Superiors shall write to the General in cypher.
‘ Such precautions are taken against enemies,’ says M. de Cha-
lotais.’ ‘ls the system of the Jesuits inimical to all Govern-
ments ?’ Thus to the General of the Jesuits the world lies ‘ naked
and open.’ He sees by a thousand eyes, he hears by a thousand
ears; and when he has a behest to execute, he can select the
fittest agent from an innumerable host, all of whom are ready to
do his bidding. The past history, the good and evil qualities of
every member of the Society—his talents, his dispositions, his
inclinations, his seci et thoughts —have all been strictly examined,
minutely chronicled, and laid before the eye of the General. It
is the same as if he were present in person, and had seen and
conversed with each.”
The training through which a youth must pass before he can
be admitted into the higher stages of the Order strikes one as
being well suited to reduce him to a mere human machine, to be
operated on by another. I am indebted chiefly to Nicolini for
this part of my lecture. The young candidate applies for admis-
sion into the Order. If the Superior, who is to admit him into
probation, cannot make in person the enquiry, he must employ
from those who are about him some one whose assistance he may
use to become acquainted with the probationer—to live with him,
watch all his movements, act as a spy upon him, to move him to
make confession of his thoughts and wishes, while one is near,
but not seen, who makes a record of his confessions for future
reference and guidance. “ The candidate must regard the Superior
as Christ the Lord, and must strive to acquire perfect resignation
and denial of his own will and judgment to that which the
Superior wills and judges.”*' If the probationer is successful in
this part of his ordeal, he enters the house of novitiate. His stay
here may be extended to two years, or be shortened at the will of
the General.
* Const-, pars, iii., cap. 1, sec. 23.


The novices are to devote a month to the Spiritual Exercises,
self-examination, confession of sin, and meditation, and contam-
ination of the life, death, and resurrection of our Saviour. They
will then have to serve a month in the hospitals, ministering to
the sick, to increase their humility. They must then wander
about a month, begging their bread and sleeping anywhere they
are able. Next to this, they must submit to be employed in the
most servile offices in the house in which they have entered.
There they will be called upon to give instruction in Christian
learning to boys or untaught adults. This may be done privately
or publicly. At the end of two years, if the candidates have gone
through all their testings satisfactorily, they may take the vows.
“ Before the two years have elapsed, either the man is dismissed
or he has lost all ideas, all hopes, all desires of a personal nature.
He is a man without will, subject to obey blindly any order, and
devoting soul and body to the aggrandisement of the Society.”
The novice next becomes a scholar in one of the Jesuit Colleges.
The scholars are of two sorts —received and approved. The former
are candidates for membership, who are being tried for their skill
in learning previous to entering upon the noviciate; the latter are
those who have completed their novitiate and taken the vows.
v * The third class of Jesuits consists of temporal and spiritual
coadjutors. The temporal coadjutors, however learned they may
may be, are never admitted to Holy Orders. They are the porters,
cooks, stewards, and agents of the society. The spiritual
coadjutors are priests, and must be men of considerable learning,
in order that they may be qualified to hear confessions, to teach,
preach, &c. The Rectors of the colleges, and the Superiors of
the religious houses are appointed from this class. * * * *
It is here worthy of remark that, in the case of a porter or a cook,
there is required a year of trial more than is necessary to
qualify the scholar who is to preach and teach the catechism. The
porters and cooks must know something of worldly business, and
consequently there is the greater need that they should be faithful
and trustworthy. Before the entrance on each of the above
stages, the vow of obedience, &c., is taken. Here is the form of
vow : “I, , promise Almighty God, before his Virgin
Mother, and before all the heavenly host, and you, reverend
father, General of the Society of Jesus (the Society of the Jesuits),
holding the place of God and of your successor; or you, reverend
father, Vice-General of the Society of Jesus, and of your successor,
holding the place of God, perpetual poverty, chastity, and obedience*
and, therein, peculiar care in the education of hogs, acording to the
manner expressed in the Apostolic Letters and in the constitutions
of the said Society. At Rome, or elsewhere, in such a place, day
month, and year.”
“ There is also a secret fifth class known only to the General
and a few faithful J esuits, which perhaps more than any other
contributes to the dreaded and mysterious power of the order. It
is composed of laymen of all ranks, from the minister to the
humble shoe-boy. Among the individuals composing this class
are to be found many ladies, who, unknown and unsuspected, are


r re er Se\“S 'Jw V
them the forgiveness of a ... V protectsthem,patronises
and, as a more palpable mark o£ ,rt^ procures
them, and, in countries where J”Xgovernment, or
for them comfortable and ucr P , paid for their services
elsewhere. H this which
in hard cash, according o persons who will make
of Ignatius Loyola, and the or e . followers were
He lived until November 1558 *f Europe . And
known, dreaded, and dis 1 7 P tEe order more than
now, after the lapse of more 300 years, tn it has its
exists, it flourisliea m - P*,;. Beeking to gain afooting
missions in thetieatl: > career , w hat tongue can tell,
on these shores. In the cou { dark dealings, its
what pen »n word deedfwrittef in letters of blood ? Who
perversions of trutn, its , .» •, i as sow n broadcast
shall describe, who can.describe theso. it and
in the family, in the nation? Man my attempt
record it, but the work must bei left,
that day “ when God sa jg , yy e must be doubly on
In the mean time our duty ‘ » -\Yatch against the
"ulTone lodging from’the SSiS
lectures to lay be ore rights and liberties as
from you, will tear tro make his conscience, that
Britons, under which w e iiv ®> an d will turn his body
inwardmonitorof apardyzedth wiU o£ the
into a mere machnYnnrUof‘ttoread Um following
“Martial barest de la ®"Xd bfhi—
that it was of It. Marins,
S3*: t r vt°A £ =a° M haTS
that the docile zealou yth 1 ,
still more; were 9““ ’ deat h father, mother, brother,
[the italics are mine] to p tearless, and a heart as
and sisters I would [7^bTnqTet of the paschal lamb.” f ;
the Jesuits.
* Nicolini, Chapter ii., iii.
f Dalton p* 26.


