



f 51 4 deu
’To uv~-e£c*~^-^
[{ d A.o~'
%
CKsV^A,
jryt-o*'
kodJL^.
JS'/


to - S,
THE FEDERAL QUESTION
Article No. I.
Introductory.
Since the establishment of the Fede-
ral Council, this question has more or
less received consideration and has
caused discussion. In 1891, the Nati-
onal Convention drew up a draft
Commonwealth Bill, the object of
wliich was to federate on such lines as
would give almost absolute power to
the Federal Government, and would
reduce the local Governments to mere
nonentities. It has been found im-
possible to carry this Bill through the
seven Parliaments which the proposed
commonwealth would include, only
thrpe having attempted to do so, and
out of those three, only one (Victoria),
succeeded in the attempt. The Fede-
ral Council having proved a failure, a
few 7 months ago the Premiers of the
various colonies, at the instance of the
Premier of New South Wales (Mr.
Peid) met in conference at Hobart.
Asa result we have the Federal En-
abling Bill. This Bill is in its objects
merely provisory, but it is a practical
step towards testing the feeling of the
various colonies on the subject of
Federation There is noihing to cavil
about in the provisions of this Bill, but
pending its consideration in the local
Legislature, the public should give
serious thought to the ideal, for the
accc mplishment of which it is framed.
Federation is indeed a live question,
but it is a momentous one, and has a
number of side issues which require
weighty consideration before a de-
cided step is taken towards its accom-
plishment. Of the good results which
must ultimately attend a wise and just
Federation, all are agreed, but it is
the satisfactory realization of this
ideal which is the difficulty. We have
a number of colonies with divided
interests, with varying conditions, and
of all sizes and degrees of population
and wealth. The difficulty which
must attend the federation of these
varying states, spread over such a
large area of count! y, must be easily
foreseen. When difficulties like this
confront a nation, it is the most natu-
ral course tc turn to the history of
other nations, and discover what they
did under like circumstances. W r e
have several model Federal constitu-
tions to choose from, but if w T e wdsh to
prove a wise and cautious nation, we
will be very careful indeed in intro-
ducing into a country with totally
different conditions to any other, any
system of confederation that has been
adopted elsewhere- The Federal Go-
vernment of United States is often
held up (by the Americans themselves)
as a model of democratic Government,
but if we merely cast a surface glance
at its provisions we can easily see that
it is a two-fold system contradictory
in many respects. The complete sys-
tem of representation is counteracted
to a very great extent by 7 the auto-
cratic power of the President, who
can, if be likes, veto the measures
passed by Congress. Then, if we
glance at Canada we find that the
system in force in that country is too
conservative ever to accord with Aus


THE FEDERAL QUESTION.
tralian popular ideas. A high property
qualification for membership of the
House of Representatives would never
be suffered in Australia. The pre-
cedence which is given to one state
over another, too, is a fault which it
would be well to avoid in forming an
Australian Commonwealth. the al-
most perfect system of Federal Go-
vernment in Switzerland by which the
powers of Federal are balanced with
those of local Government to a nicety,
it would be almost impossible to re-
produce at once in Australasia. The
difference of conditions, and many
other reasons make it impossible to
hold up any foreign constitution as a
perfect model. There are, doubtless,
good points in them all, which we can
copy at discretion In future articles
we shall deal more completely with
the lessons which history has given in
the framing of Federal Constitutions.
Article 11.
The Commonwealth Bill
In introducing this Bill into the
South Australian House of Assembly
in 1891, Mr. Playford summarised the
main points at issue as follows—“ Is
Federation desirable ? If so. has the
time arrived when the colonies should
federate, or is it likely to arrive in the
near future? If this question is
answered in the affirmative, what
should be the constitution of the Fede-
ral legislature ; or in other words
what power should be given and what
limits should be placed on the powers?”
The latter portion of this summary
specially applies to the Bill then under
discussion. The powers given to the
Federal Legislature under that Bill
are ample. The regulation of trade
and commerce, with other countries
and among the several states, customs
and excise, uniform taxation (not local),
borrowing money on the public credit
of the commonwealth, postal and tele-
graph service, military and naval de-
fence. navigation and shipping, ocean
beacons, buoys, lighthouses, etc., quar-
antine, fisheries in Australian waters
beyond territorial limits, census and
statistics, currency, coinage, banking,
weights and measures, bills of ex-
change, etc., copyrights, patents, etc.,
nationalization and aliens, legislation
regarding Corporations, marriage and
divorce, judicial control, immigration
and emigration, foreign affairs and
treaties, internal river navigation, con-
trol of railways, any matters referred
to the Federal Parliament by local
states, and other minor functions are
all committed to the Federal Govern-
ment. It must easily be seen that
in conferring such power upon the
Federal Government the local legisla-
tive bodies would sink into mere nonen-
tities, and that practically, the real
governing power would lie with the
Federal Legislature. To accomplish
such a gigantic scheme would require
a tact, management, and patience which
we scarcely see forthcoming. The
individuality of the states composing
the commonwealth would under such
a system be almost destroyed, for in
the functions we have named are in-
cluded all, or nearly ajl, the important
administrative functions of a state.
Are the various colonies, then, willing
to sacrifice their individuality to the
common welfare ? Would not the
tendency under such a system be
rather to result in the aggrandisement
and strengthening of the larger states,
and the consequent weakening and
impoverishment of the smaller states ?
The chief sources of revenue would be
in the hands of the commonwealth, for
under clause 62, section 3, the Federal
Parliament has power “ to raise money
by any other mode (besides customs
and all other sources of revenue) or


THE FEDERAL QUESTION.
system of taxation ; but so that all
such taxation shall be uniform through-
out the commonwealth. ’ Practically,
then, the Federal Parliament has
power to tax bind, property, or any-
thing else fur the raising of revenue.
Given this great latitude what can
prevent the centralisation of admini-
strative power in the Federal Govern-
ment ? And what does centralisation
mean but the ultimate reign of the
strongest state, and the surrender of
independence and expansive capacity
by the smaller ones ? The chief power
is lodged in a House of Represent-
atives the members of which are
chosen directly by the people, the dis-
tribution of electorates being made
strictly on a population basis. Glance
54 provides that “ laws appropriating
any part of the public revenue, or im-
posing any tax or impost, shall originate
in the House of Representatives,” and
Clause 55, Section i, sets out that “ the
Senate shall have equal power with
the House of Representatives in respect
of all proposed laws, except laws impos-
ing taxation and laws appropriating
the necessary supplies for the ordinary
annual services of the Government,
which the Senate may affirm or reject,
but may not amend.” It is clearly
evident that the power of the popular
House is greater than that of the
Senate (which represents the states)
and the check ( n undue centralisation
is very small.
There is also considerable room for
corruption in the commonwealth which
this Rill is framed to constitute. Un-
der clause 48 a premium is practically
offered for the establishment of ••rings,”
for alter prohibiting any person from
being chosen or sitting as u senator or
memuer of the House of Represen-
tatives who " directly or indirectly,
himself or by any person in trust for
him. or for his use or benefit, or on
his account, undertakes, executes, or
enjoys, in the whole or in part, any
agreement for, or on account of the
public service of the commonwealth
while he executes, holds, or enjoys the
agreement, or any part or or share in
it, or any benefit or emolument arising
from it ” —after prohibiting this it is
stated that “ this section does not
extend to any agreement made, entered
into, or accepted by an incorporated
company consisting of more than 20
persons if the agreement is made,
entered into, or accepted for the gene-
ral benefit, of the company.” This
reservation speaks for itself.
There are many debateable clauses
in the Rill, but a general objection can
be based on the enormity of the scheme
and the opportunities for corruption
which its provisions would afford. The
corruption which exists in the United
States is too well-known and marked
to be doubted, while upon the Canadian
Confederation, Gold win Smith has
written as follows :—“ It seems that
through some traitorous channel a
doubt has found its way to the Aus-
tralians whether the success of the
Canadian Confederation is so assured
that they have only t<> tread in our
footsteps. Let the Australians come
here and judge for themselves. Let
them measure, still with an example in
view, the accounts, not only of expen-
diture, but of corruption, dernagogisra
and faction which the creation of a
Federal Government, as the price of
a perpetual contention of parties, will
entail,. They had better count the
cost fully before they take the leap
once more. Let them come here and
judge for themselves.”
Under the proposed system the
opportunities for such corruption must
necessarily be greater than in small
states. The Rill proposes a very com-
plete and well thought-out system, but
there are obvious defects. Space will
not permit us to gu iutu details as to


THE FEDERAL QUESTION.
the various provisions of the Bill, but
the principal objection which we find
is the extent and enormity of the
scheme. The tendency of the whole
Bill is towards centralisation, which
would be botli unwise and impracti-
cable in a confederation of a number
of states with varying interests and
pervaded to some extent by a spirit of
jealousy.
Article TIL
The Constitution op Switzer-
land.
“On the main-land, only two little
spots at the two extremities of the
old Teutonic world,” says Professor
Fiske, “ came out of the mediaeval
crucible with their self-government
substantially intact.’’
The two little spots referred to are
the Dutch Republic and the Republic
of Switzerland. Since the year 1291,
when the Helvetic union was first
legally formed, the Swiss people have
possessed some system of confederation.
Through many changes, through bloody
wars, fierce struggles against foreign
invaders, enlargements and extensions,
this principle of confederate government
has been earned to its present height.
Beginning with three cantons, it gradu-
ally drew into its ranks one canton
after another, until the whole of the
twenty-two cantons have been federa-
ted under one flag and one govern-
ment. For one hundred and twenty-
eight years the “ Bight Old Cantons ”
continued without admitting new states
to uphold their independence against
foreign powers. By this league was
Duke Leopold of Austria defeated at
Sempach in 1386, and again in 1499,
after two new cantons had been ad-
mitted, did the Swiss Union after a
short war in which the Swiss gained
six victories, force the Emperor Max-
milian to recog"’ ; '■heir independence,
securing the treaty known in history
as the Peace of Basie. In 1515 peace
was made with Prance, which was
undisturbed until the outbreak of the
French Revolution. In 1798 a French
army subdued the Swiss cantons after
a fierce struggle and forced on them
a system of government which they
named “The Helvetic Republic, one
and indivisible.” Switzerland, during
the career of Napoleon, was in an
unsettled state. The latter conferred
upon the Swiss what is known as the
Act of Mediation, under which six new
cantons were added, and Napoleon
became the “ Mediator” of Switzerland.
This Act was annulled on the down-
fall of Napoleon, and in 1814 a new
constitution known as the Federal
Pact was created The Congress of
Vienna, at which the eight great
powers of Europe met in 1815, ac-
knowledged and confirmed this con-
stitution. Following on the religious
hostilities engendered by the revolu-
tion in France in 1830, a short civil
war broke out in Switzerland in 1847,
when seven Catholic cantons which
had formed a separate league, were
subdued b> the forces under the
direction of the Confederacy.
In 1848 the constitution was re-
modelled on lines similar to the con-
stitution in force at present. This
constitution was amended to some ex-
tent in 1874.
As it stands at present the constitu-
tion of Switzerland is the most demo-
cratic in the world. In Switzerland
the people really rule, and all oower is
in reality lodged with the people, and,
what is most remarkable of all, that
power is not abused, but is wielded
soberly, wisely, and for the best inte-
rests of the community. The chief
authority lies with the Federal Legis-
lature, which is composed of two


THE FEDERAL QUESTION.
houses, the National Council, repre-
senting population, and the Council of
States, representing the cantons.
These two houses have equal power,
each having the right of initiative, and
the business for the session, so far as
known, is divided at its beginning by
the two Presidents. The Executive
authority is lodged in a Federal Coun-
cil, consisting of seven members, out
of whom a President is elected, who is
President of the Confederacy. He
has no more power, however, than any
other member of the Council. His
authority extends no farther than pre-
siding over the deliberations of the
Council. The members of the Council
are paid an annual salary of about four
hundred pounds, and are allowed to
practice no profession, and to engage
in no private business, nor are they
allowed to occupy any other office
under the Confederation. Then there
is a Federal Tribunal which arbitrates
in cantonal disputes, and tries the more
important private civil and criminal
cases. This tribunal is subordinate to
the legislature, and cannot comment
on any act passed by that body. Its
sole duty is to enforce laws enacted by
the Legislature. In the constitutional
law of Switzerland the Legislature is
supreme.
The National Council is elected
from the people, one member repre-
senting every twenty thousand elec-
tors. A manhood suffrage obtains.
The Council is elected by the cantons,
each conforming to its own methods of
election. At the beginning of every
term the Executive is elected from the
citizens of the country by the Houses
of Legislature, The members of the
Executive cannot sit in either house ;
they are generally men of tried political
experience and service. The Judiciary
is also elected from the people. The
powers of the Confederation are exer-
cised over all military matters, alliances,
treaties with foreign powers, the con-
trol of tariff, the construction of public
works, the supervision over the water
and forest police in the mountainous
regions, legislation pertaining to the
construction and operation of railways,
customs legislation and control; it has
also the right to establish a Federal
University; under its control are the
post and telegraph service, business of
emigration agents, provisions with
regard to factories, private insurance
companies, coinage and currency,
weights and measures, manufacture
and sale of gunpowder, spirituous
liquors, etc., right of marriage, and
other minor matters.
The cantons have governments of
their own, constituted according to the
custom of each, which transact other
business than that committed to the
Confederation, and are entrusted with
the enforcement of the laws of the
Confederation. They have their own
courts which deal with local matters in
connection with the law, but everything
must accord with the Federal consti-
tution, and most things are submitted
to the approval of the Federal autho-
rities.
Then, the Swiss people possess the
grand right of the direct veto under
what is known as the Referendum. On
the demand of 30,000 voters any
enactment of the Federal Legislature
may be submitted to the approval of
the people, and all amendments of the
constitution have to be submitted to
the popular vote In a modified form
this institution exists in the cantons as
well. It is said that the Swiss people
oppose “ measures ” and not “ men.”
There is little, if any “ party spirit ”
displayed, although different political
parties exist in the state. The two
chief parties into which all others
merge, are the supporters of the


THE FEDERAL QUESTION.
increase of cantonal or state power on
the one hand, and the supporters of the
increase and supremacy of popular
power on the other. But the delibera-
tions are carried on almost entirely
without debate, and in placing' a man
in power, the Swiss people choose him
for his ability and faithfulness, without
paying much attention to his views'
This freedom is the result of the power
to exercise the direct veto. The people
of Switzerland, though composed of
three distinct nationalities, speaking-
three languages, and of two antago-
nistic religions, are distinguished for
their unanimity and the brotherly and
considerate spirit which pervades all
their political and public actions. The
link which binds the Swiss people to-
gether is the common sentiment of
patriotism, which is breathed in with
the cold invigorating mountain air, and
grandly awful surroundings of their
rugged fatherland. A history of deter-
mined struggling has built up a
glorious manhood and brotherhood,
which is the secret of their success in
politics. There is no comparison
between this people and the Austra-
lians. In Australia we have a wide
stretch of country thinly populated,
with varied interests, having as yet no
foreign foe to contend against, having
no past experience of smugglings
against a common foe, which develops
the true spirit of patriotic brotherhood,
but with a people inclined to be selfish,
ease-loving, with faction and part}'
spirit rife, we can expect no such
perfect system of federal government
here as exists in Switzerland. The
cantons of Switzerland are banded to-
gether in a Confederacy under the force
of necessity, sternly impressed through
centuries of fighting and struggling.
Our necessity, if it exists, has not im-
pressed itself upon us in such a way as
to make the demand for federation
imperative.
Akticle IV.
The Canadian System.
So far as is known, the honour of
discovering the vast stretch of territory
now known as British North America
or Canada belongs to England, for it
was under the auspices of King Henry
VII of England, that John and Se-
bastian Cabot sailed westward in 1497
and discovered the coast of Labrador.
The honor of first settling in that part
of the world, however, belongs to the
French, for it is recorded that Jacques
Cartier made the first settlement in
that portion of the globe in 1535,
claiming all the territory in the vicinity
in the name of King Francis of France
Although there had been British set-
tlements in Canada prior to the. Amer-
ican War of Independence, it was not
till the results of that war, so disas-
trous to the Royalists, forced the loyal
subjects of King G-eorge to leave a
country where royalty was not feared,
that the great snow-plains of the
northern portion of the continent be-
came settled to any great extent by
British colonists. It is estimated that
no less than ten thousand refugees
took advantage of the Ireedom which
this wild country offered to indulge
the sentiments of misguided loyalty
which induced them to break with
patriotism. The British settlements
soon formed what was known as Upper
Canada. As was only to be expected,
national and religious jealousy began
to manifest themselves among the
French and British settlers, culmina-
ting in the war of 1812, which finally
established British supremacy. But
peace between nationalities did not
bring with it internal peace. The
provinces were at this time separate,
as the Australian colonies are now.
Trouble arose in some of the provinces
through disagreements between the


THE FEDERAL QUESTION.
executive authorities and the various
representative assemblies, and jealousy
was fostered in the upper provinces
by the control over the exports and
imports which their sea-board position
gave to Quebec and Montreal Finan-
cial misunderstandings thereby arose.
In consequence of these difficulties a
proposal for union between Lower and
upper Canada, originating first in
1822, was put into effect in 1811,
This union created the province of
Canada, amalgamating the two sec-
tion? known as Upper and Lower Can-
ada, but until 1867 this province was
not in any respect different to the pro-
vinces of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick
or Newfoundland A few years prior
to the confederation of 1867, the
British colonies were thriving under
what was known as the Reciprocity
treaty with the United States. After
the civil war in the latter country in
1865, this treaty was repealed. Im-
mediately the foreign trade of the
British provinces declined, and it was
seen that the federation of the various
provinces was necessary. In conse-
quence of the alarming decrease in
the export and import trade, the move-
ment for confederation was hurried on
and resulted in the British North
American Act of 1867. establishing a
confederation in which all but four
provinces at once joined. These four
were British Columbia, Manitoba,
Prince Edward Island, and Newfound-
land. Manitoba joined in 1870, British
Columbia in 1871, and Prince Edward
Island was admitted in 1872. New-
foundland is an independent province
to this day.
The constitution of this Confedera-
tion as it stands at present is a very
Conservative one. A Governor-Gene-
ral, with considerable power, repre-
sents the Crown There is a senate,
in which the various provinces are
represented. Ontario and Quebec have
a vast superiority over any other pro-
vince, having 1 twenty-four representa-
tives each, to twelve from Nova Scotia
or New Brunswick, four from Prince
Edward Island, and three from British
Columbia or Manitoba. The members of
the Senate are nominated for life by the
Dominion Government. The mumber
of senators can be increased by the
Governor-General, but the increase
must be strictly in proportion to the
ratio given above. The qualifications
for senatorship are very high. He
must be of the full age of thirty years,
must have within the province for
which he is appointed property worth
4,009 dollars over and above his lia-
bilities, and must reside within the
province for which he is appointed.
The House of Commons is elected
every five years. Quebec has the fixed
number of sixty-five representatives,
and the other provinces are represented
in the proportion their populations bear
to that of Quebec. An elector must
be a male of full age, and there is a
small property qualification
The Dominion has a federal judiciary
with a final Court of Appeal, or Su-
preme Court, and Court of Exchequer,
at Ottawa. The judiciary is similar,
except in the possession of a final
Court of Appeal, to our own. It must
be explained, however, that litigants
can choose either the Privy Council or
the Supreme Court of Ottawa as a
final Court of Appeal, but in either
case the decision is final. The powers
conferred on the Dominion Legislature
by the British North American Act of
1867 are chiefly;—Criminal law, with
the establishment, maintenance, and
management, of penitentiaries; all laws
pertaining to bankruptcy and solvency;
marriage and divorce, naturalisation
and aliens, Indians and Indian reserves,
and the control generally of ail mat-
ters not expressly delegated to the
provincial legislatures. This system


THE FEDERAL QUESTION.
of confederation was inaugurated for
commercial purposes, and statistics
show that commercially, if not in
other respects, it has succeeded. Ac-
cording to the Encyclopaedia Britannica
the first five or six years after the Con-
federation showed a wonderful increase
in the value of the exports and imports,
whereas previous to this change, the
foreign trade was rapidly falling,
owing to the repeal of the Reciprocity
Treaty. In 1868 the exports amoun-
ted in value to 57,567,888 dollars, and
the imports to 73,459,644 dollars. A
steady increase year by year brought
this up to 89,351,928 dollars (exports),
and 128,011,281 (imports), in 1873,
five years later. Lord Dufferin.
speaking from his experience as Gover-
nor-General of the Dominion, said,
“ Everywhere J have learned that the
people are satisfied—satisfied with
their own individual prospects, satisfied
with their Government, and with the
institutions under which they prosper ;
satisfied to be the subjects of the
Crown, satisfied to be members of the
British Empire.”
When we view the conservative
system which has apparently answered
so well, we cannot but be surprised.
With Canada, however, as with Swit-
zerland, special circumstances made
confederation imperative. Unable to
cope singly with the great commercial
power of United States they united to
do it. Before the Confederation, the
transcontinental railways, of United
States constituted a weighty ad-
vantage over the provinces. Con-
federation brought an intercolonial
railway and permitted the free inflow
and outflow of commerce between the
states. Then there was the question
of defence. The British North Ameri-
can provinces, while separate, were
always in a state of peril and fear, lest
at any time a war should break out
between the States and Great Britain.
Australia has no bordering- enemy to
frighten her into confederation, and if
her provinces ever do confederate, it is
very certain that it will not be on the
conservative lines adopted by the
Dominion of Canada
Abtiole Y.
The American Commonwealth.
The Constitution of the United States
of America was the outcome of a con-
vention which met in 1787, eleven
years after the famous Declaration of
Independence. It embodies a two-
fold and very complicated S3?stem, and
the study of this constitution leads
into a maze of intricate windings,
which, without the key, it is impossible
to unravel. The key to the unravel-
ling- of the endless contradictions of
the American constitution and its
working, lies in the comprehension of
the complete separation of the legisla-
tive from the executive, the subordina-
tion of each State to the common-
wealth, and the finality of the decisions
of the judiciary.
The executive power of the Ameri-
can Commonwealth is lodged in a
President, who is directly elected by
the people for a period of four years.
This '‘resident, unlike the English Cab-
inet, has nothing whatever to do with
the Legislature, except that he accepts
or rejects, as his judgment dictates,
the measures submitted to him by that
body. He has the power, and gene-
rally uses it to the full, of vetoing
legislative measures, and a two-thirds
majority of both houses of the Legis-
lature is required to pass a measure
which he has rejected. His ministers
are merely public officials, and do not
sit in Parliament. As commander-in-
chief of the Army, he has the right of
declaring war, although he depends
upon the Legislature for the voting
of supplies. When this great discre


THE FEDERAL QUESTION.
tionary power is entrusted to a man
of individuality and talent, the Presi-
dential magnate often assumes the
autocratic attitude of a Czar, and, as
in the case of Abraham Lincoln, the
Legislature merely nods when he pulls
the strings. The President is neces-
sarily a party man, and as he has the
right of making nominations for ap-
pointments to public positions in the
state, he often uses this to the great
disadvantage of the section which is
opposed to him in political views, and
his rejection or acceptance of the
measures submitted to him, is invari-
ably influenced, and generally entirely
controlled, by the interests of the party
which places him in power.
The Federal Legislature is com-
posed of two co-equal houses, of which
the Senate is the less numerous and
the more respected house, and equally
represents the several States of the
Union. Its functions are legislative,
executive, and judicial. As a legisla-
tive body it considers measures passed
on by - the House of Representatives,
and can initiate any but financial
measures. As an executive body it
confirms the treaties and appoint-
ments made by the President, and as a
judicial body, it sits as a court to try
impeachments. The house of Repre-
sentatives is the more numerous of the
two, and represents the various States
according to population, The grave
fault in both Houses arises from
the absence from them of Cabinet
ministers, and the consequent ir-
responsibility of the members. The
greater part of the work is relegated
to committees, of which there are an
endless number, and which prevent
organized and methodical debate, and
give the greatest scope to the exercise
of undue pressure by the dominant
party. The House of Representatives
has the sole right of initiating measures
for raising revenue.
The Federal Judiciary is one of the
most important powers in the xtepuolic,
for the Constitution has been so framed
that its interpretation is left entirely to
the judges, and enactments of
the Legislature are rejected by the
J udiciary, it in tne opmiun m a
majority of the judges of the Supreme
Court, they do not agree with the Con-
stitution. Their decision can only be
repealed by themselves, and Congress
cannot, like the English House of
Commons, pass a measure embodying
a principle already rejected by the
Supreme Court. The Federal Judici-
ary is supreme throughout the republic
and its decisions cannot be overlooked
by the tribunals of the various States.
The courts established and maintained
V, T v * *1 I
UIJLCi i.' oucidi WUulolUij UIVICIOU.
into three classes as follows :—-The
Supreme Court, the Circuit Courts, and
the District Courts. The first sits at
Washington, the second sit at stated
periods throughout the States, while
the third sit regularly at fixed places.
The Federal Constitution is supreme
over all State laws, and a State court
cannot override any pi the
Constitution. The Supreme Court at
Washington is the final Court of
Appeal. The various States have
elective governors, and local legisla-
tures, mostly modelled on the lines of
the Federal Government, but in every-
thing the laws of the Federal Govern-
ment are supreme.
The Federal Government has con-
trol over the tariff, which is uniform
throughout the Mates, and has the
power to levy and and collect taxes
etc., to borrow money on the credit of
the United States, to regulate com-
merce with foreign nations, coin
money, to conduct negotiations with
foreign powers, and has control gene-
rally of the great administrative func-
tions of the republic. Section 10,
Article 1, of tne Constitution, limits


THE FEDERAL QUESTION.
the powers of the States as follows :
‘‘No State shall enter into any treaty,
alliance, or confederation; grant letters
of marque or reprisal; coin money ;
emit bills of credit; make anything
but gold and silver coin a tender in
payment of debts; pass any bill of
attainder, ex paste facto law, or Jaw
impairing the obligation of contracts,
or grant any title of nobility. No
State shall, without the consent of
Congress, lay any imposts or duties on
imports or exports, except what may
be absolutely necessary for executing
its inspection laws; and the net pro-
duce of all duties and imposts, laid by
any State on imports or exports, shall
be for the use of the Treasury of the
United States ; and all such laws shall
be subject to the revision and control
of the Congress. No Sfate shall,
without the consent of Congress, lay
any duty of tonnage, keep troops Or
ships of war in time of peace, enter
into any agreement or compact with
another State, or with a foreign power,
or engage in war unless actually
invaded, or in such imminent danger
as will not admit of delay.”
One of the peculiarities of this unique
constitution is the difficulty of amend
ing it. Article Y. provides as follows:
“ The Congress, whenever two-
thirds of both Houses ‘shall deem it
necessary, shall propose amendments
to this Constitution, or on the applica-
tion of the legislatures of two-thirds
of the several States, shall call a con-
vention for proposing amendments,
which, in either case, shall be valid, to
all intents and purposes, as part of
this Constitution, when ratified by the
legislatures of three-fourths of the
several states, or by conventions in
three-fourths thereof, as the one or
the other mode of ratification may be
proposed by the Congress ; provided
that no amendments which may be'
made prior to the year one thousand
eight hundred and eight shall in any
manner affect the first and fourth
clauses in the ninth section of the first
article; and that no State, without
its consent, shall be deprived of its
equal suffrage in the Senate.”
From this brief sketch it will easily
be seen that the American Constitution
is a very complex and intricate one in
working. There is one grave fault in
American politics, from which endless
corruption has resulted, namely, the
predominance of party, and party
interests. The President is the tool of
a party to a large extent, the Con-
gress is made entirely subservient to
the dominant section, and the irrespon-
sibility of its members, together with the
irregularity and secretness of its real
debating (which takes place in com-
mittee), greatly augments this evil.
The great power given the President,
though, doubtless, a desirable check
upon the Congress, is often abused,
and the Judiciary, although up till
now fairly just and unflinching in its
integrity, is liable to corruption at any
moment from two causes. —1. The fact
that the judges are the creation of a
party, and naturally tinged with the
sentiment of that party ; 2. The fact
that no limit is placed upon the number
of judges, in consequence of which
new judges may be appointed at any
time for purely party purposes.
The appointment of public officials is
practically in the hands of the Presi-
dent, and, in order to satisfy the
clamour of the party that places him
in power he is obliged to give all
vacancies to its adherents. The
irresponsibility of Congress, and the
dominance of party are the two great
sources of corruption under the Ameri-
can constitution, but, in spite of that
fact, it has worked admirably so far,
considering the complications to which
its two-fold system leads. Like the-
constitutions of Switzerland and


THE FEDERAL QUESTION.
€anada it was the outcome of a stern
necessity that created a self-sacrificing
patriotism, which, we fear, is lacking- all
too sadly in our Australian commu-
nities.
Article VI,
Tee Commercial Aspect of
Federation,
On July 23, 1890, a Select Commis-
sion was appointed to “inquire into the
probable result of intercolonial free
trade on South Australia.” This Com-
mission sat for a period extending- over
four months, holding forty-one sittings,
and examining 128 witnesses repre-
senting the various departments of
colonial industry. The Commission
consisted of the folio wing gentlemen:—
Messrs. F. W. Holder (chairman),
David Murray, John Darling, William
Hilbert, J. Hancock, B. Gould, J. G,
Jenkins, John Moule, H Allerdale
Grainger, Theodore Hack, and A.
McDonald. The report of the Com-
mission stated that there was a con-
sensus of opinion favourable to the
interchange of natural products, with-
out delay; and the remarkable fact
was adduced that not one witness
examined expressed himself as hostile
to the principle for all time. “ Leading
representatives of our agricultural and
pastoral interests, and of the salt and
wine industries,” says the report, “are
at one in advocating the early removal
of all restrictions upon their products,
which, they allege, have outgrown a
limited market. The evidence of manu-
facturers is in the same direction, but
subject to some important features of
dissent, chiefly coming from the cloth-
ing, boot and shoe, tanning, furni-
ture, coachbuilding, tobacco, and tin-
ware industries, and some few whose
manufactures are the result of the
tariff of 1887. Agricultural implement
makers, machinists, and others declare
themselves as equal to any compe-
tition, and look forward to intercolonial
free trade as opening up wider fields
for enterprise and providing extended
markets ” In regard to the stock tax
the Commission came to the conclusion
that “the production of livestock can-
not be placed in the category of those
industries which depend upon the
tariff for existence or encouragement.”
The Commission also concluded that it
was desirable to limit the work carried
out in the Government workshops to
maintenance. Finally, although ad-
mitting that “certain long established
industries might suffer, at first, from
intercolonial free trade, and some
smaller industries called into being by
the tariff would be seriously imperilled,”
the following conclusions were formed
by the Commission:—“ We recommend
the adoption of intercolonial free trade,
on the basis of a uniform tariff, and
regard it as the corollary of federation
of the Australian colonies. We re-
cognise the many difficulties which
have to be overcome before federa-
tion can be accomplished, and are
of opinion that, in the meantime, prac-
tically the whole of the existing
reasons for postponement will have
passed away. The benefits arising
from intercolonial free trade will far
outweigh auy disadvantages which
may result.”
Such a decision, arrived at by so
competent a body, after such complete
investigation, appears to us to place
beyond all doubt the ultimate benefits
which intercolonial free trade would
confer upon South Australia. When,
with this remarkable conclusion, we
take into consideration the fact that
the Victorians are now tired of their
artificial protective system, and are
anxious for the abolition of all restric
tions upon intercolonial trade, it be


THE FEDERAL QUESTION.
comes evident that the time is already
ripe for the realisation of the most
desirable object indicated in the recom-
mendation of the Select Commission.
The maintenance of these protective
tariffs is an instance of the national
blindness which has in many things
characterised both Victoria and South
Australia during their short career as
provinces of the British Crown. The
short-sightedness which induced the
labour people of Victoria to support this
infamous and unchristian system cannot
be too strongly condemned. The most
elementary principles of economy are
in direct opposition to such a practice.
“To give the monopoly of the home
market to the produce of domestic
industry,” says Adam Smith, “in any
particular art or manufacture is in some
to direct private people in
what manner they ought to employ
their capitals, and must in almost all
cases be either a useless or hurtful
regulation.” “ If the produce of do-
mestic,” he continues, '‘can be brought
there as cheap as foreign industry, the
regulation is evidently useless. If it
cannot, it must generally be hurtful.
A tailor does not attempt to
make his own shoes, but buys them of
a shoemaker. A shoemaker does not
attempt to make his own cloches, but
employs a tailor.” And so, we add
this protective system prevents the
proper and natural division of labour
in precisely the same way as the selfish
tailor who makes his own shoes de-
prives the shoemaker of a living; and
the idoa that protection is beneficial in
the long run arises from the miscon-
ception that money is wealth, and that
the conservation of money tends to
make a country prosperous. Artificial
restrictions upon commerce, in nearly
all cases, prevent the exchange of
commodities, and as production is
useless without means of exchange,
that, too, is prevented by this selfish
and short-sighted policy. The free
exchange of commodities between the
various colonies, although it would
injure or destroy industries artificially
maintained, would strengthen those
whose basis is sound, and would
eventually increase the division of
labour by opening up new fields of
industry, and would thus benefit all
classes of society.
Article VII.
CONCLUSION.
In the short articles which we have
already published we have merely en-
deavoured to lead the public up to a
vantage-point from which they can by
patient effort, piercing with keen dis-
cernment through the mists and clouds
which envelop it, survey with dear-
vision the vast field which this ques-
tion covers. We have but touched
upon it, but our desire is to awaken the
interest of our readers in this ques-
tion, so that the great force of public
opinion, having once been brought to
bear upon the matter, may sift for
itself the intricate entanglements and
strange developments into which the
study of the subject leads. The fede-
ral principle in the abstract most of
us favour, but it is the application upon
which we must necessarily differ, and
it is in this, too, that the difficulties
which confront us arise.
To build a nation, as is presumably
the object of federalists, out of dis-
jointed and independent small states,
is a work worthy of master minds, and
achievable only by an universal cur-
rent of enthusiasm concentrating the
divided forces of individual and pro-
vincial thought upon one common
object. To produce such an enthu-
siasm requires the operation of some
mighty influence, and it has been our
endeavour to show in previous articles
the causes which underlay the evolu


THE FEDERAL QUESTION.
tion of the sentiment which achieved
in other countries results similar to
that desired in Australia.
Patriotism has been the binding link
which has enabled Swiss cantons,
Canadian provinces, and American
states to sink personal interest to the
common weal, and that patriotism in
each instance has been the outcome of
a common danger which necessitated
a combination for defence. That there
is a common danger incident to the
Australian colonies is not to be denied,
but we cannot avoid observing- that
the danger is not, as in the instances
given, an immediate one. Human
nature, unhappily, is so grossly blind
to the reality of future events and
future dangers, that it is only when
the latter arrive with an awakening
shock, that it is conscious of their
presence, and begins to make prepara-
tion for their reception.
Of one difficulty and hindrance to
national prosperity the colonies are
already cognisant, namely, that of
conflicting tariffs. It is quite apparent
that the general tendency of public
opinion throughout the colonies, ex-
cept, perhaps, in Western Australia,
is in favour of the abolition of all
restrictions upon intercolonial trade,
and that this is eminently so in South
Australia has been shown in a previous
article. We conclude then, that the
time is ripe for intercolonial
free trade, and we think that its ac-
complishment should no longer be de-
ferred, but whether that step can be
regarded u as the corollary of fede-
ration of the Australian colonies, ”
appears to us to be doubtful. We
consider, however, that if not the
corollary, it will at least be the fore-
runner, of the creation of u national
Government.
In the articles which we published
upon the three great federal constitu-
tions in existence at present, we en-
deavoured to give the public some
idea of the reasons for not considering
them as perfect models, and those
reasons may be briefly recounted as
follows :—l. In Switzerland the great
difference of conditions, and the cir-
cumstances under which the constitu-
tion was moulded, prevent us from
taking it as a perfect copy. 2. In
Canada the conservatism of the system
in force would never accord with Aus-
tralian popular ideas. 3. In the
United States, the Federal constitution
has left loopholes by which corruption
of a very serious character has crept in.
Notwithstanding these facts, there
are in each of these constitutions,
numerous good points which could
with advantage be copied in forming
an Australian commonwealth, and many
of these have been embodied in the
Commonwealth Bill of 1891, which,
however, as we have alreadj’- pointed
out, has obvious defects.
There are many difficulties in the
way of Federation, as we have shown,
but they can all be overcome when
the colonies, and tne people of the col-
onies, become permeated and saturated
with a deep patriotic desire for the
accomplishment of this end, when the
people as one man arises and demands
with universal voice that party interest
be sunk, that provincial jealousies be
buried, that political selfishness be up-
rooted, then, and only then, will the
mighty spiritual forces which exist in
this people, blend together in one
great wave which shall sweep this
continent from shore to shore, ruth-
lessly tearing to pieces all obstructions,
reducing the mountains to plain, until
in the smoothness of national unity,
bv r the irresistable force of the con-
centrated desire of the people, a nation
shall be made, a National Government
shall be established, and the roar of
the British lion shall be feared in the
Southern Seas.


