

SOUVENIR
OF
Cavalcade
OF
Graham Street. Port Melbourne
METHODIST CHURCH AND SUNDAY SCHOOL
1854 - 1941
PRESENTED IN THE SCHOOL HALL
ON THURSDAY, 19TH. JUNE, 1941, AT 8 P.M.
Superintendent Minister - - Rev. J. T. Freeman
Organiser . - Mr. Jas. Staunton
Assistant Organiser Miss C. Damms
ORDER OF CAVALCADE
1. NATIONAL ANTHEM.
2. LORD'S PRAYER.
3. READER (MR. BRIAN C. FLEMING):
In the following pages we have endeavoured to set out as
faithfully as possible a condensed history of the Church and
Sunday Schools, which we hope will be appreciated and treasured.,
by all who love the dear old Graham street, Port Melbourne,
Methodist Church.


ighty-seven years does not seem a very long period when one mentions
it in a casual way ; but when the events which have happened in that time
are under review, the people who have lived and died, and all the interesting
incidents connected with the history of a church or people are detailed and
brought to light, it becomes apparent that a good deal can happen in that
space of time.
Can you imagine what this city was like eight-seven years ago when the
Methodists first began to organise ? All was excitement, hurry and bustle.
As many as fifty ships arrived on some days with passengers and cargo for the
diggings. Pitching their tents for a night, or securing some kind of lodging,
or even sleeping in the open, these new-comers were off early next morning
for the diggings. No doubt there was something of the Methodist spirit in
many of these travellers, and those who passed through to the North and the
comparative few who stayed to trade at the Beach, would find good fellow-
ship in a word spoken for the Master as they detected a kindred spirit.
In the year 1854, a small band of people, who had come from the old coun-
try, met one Sunday under a tree, near the present site of the Graham Street
Church, and there held the first service which led to the foundation of the
Wesleyan Church in Port Melbourne, now known as the Methodist Church.
The leader of this little band was the late Mr. J. G. Newman, and he was
assisted by Mrs. Newman and the members of his family. The services
were continued, and eventually a building was procured, and the Church
and Sunday School grew and became more and more consolidated.
The West Melbourne Wesleyan Methodist Circuit at that time included
a large area extending beyond Williamstown and Footscray. Sandridge was
linked up with that large Circuit and first appeared as a preaching place on
the West Melbourne Wesleyan Circuit Plan in 1853, the services being held
in a cottage at 3 p.m. It is interesting to note the evolution of our present
Circuit. A new Circuit known as Emerald Hill was formed about 1871, and
included the Sandridge Churches. In 1884 the name of Emerald Hill was
changed to South Melbourne, and Sandridge also became known as Port
Melbourne. In 1905 South Melbourne became a Mission and Port Melbourne
became a part of a newly formed Albert Park Circuit. Still seeking more
effective service the three Port Melbourne Churches, Graham Street, Farrell
Street and Boundary Street, in 1910 were made a part of the South Melbourne
Mission. After seven years another change was felt to be necessary, and the
three Port Melbourne Churches became a separate Circuit. Three years
later (in 1920), Conference transferred Boundary Street to the Albert Park
Circuit, and thus was completed the Port Melbourne Circuit as we now have
it, with its two Churches, the Superintendent Minister, Rev. J. T. Freeman,
at Graham Street, and Sister Louie assisting at Farrell Street. We have
traced the history of the organisation of the Circuit through five distinct
changes; in each case the Methodist tradition and spirit of adaptation of
methods to changing conditions is very evident, and undoubtedly has enabled
better work to be done.
Let us now trace the building adventures of the Circuit ; they began
when the cause outgrew the cottage meeting-place. Late in 1853 a public
meeting was held in the Sandridge Custom House. A company of friends
from Melbourne, including Mr. Walter Powell and Mr. Richard Hodgson,
came and cheered the local people by their help. It was decided to build
at once and £3OO was subscribed on the spot. A weatherboard building
without lining was erected at a cost, with fencing, of £lOOO at the corner of
Graham and Nott Streets; so as far as we can find out, this seems to be the
first Church or School building erected in the district, though a tent had
previously been used by the Church of England on their Bay Street site.
The Church was opened on the fifth day of March, 1854, with three ser-
vices, the preachers being Rev. Isaac Harding, Rev. Dr. Waugh and Rev.
A. Akrill. On the next day a Wesleyan Day School was opened in the build-
ing by Mr. Jesse Carey, who later became a Minister and was stationed for a
term at Graham Street.


It may be noted that the splendid tradition of the Methodists—that
education should go hand in hand with religion—is still being carried out by
the Kindergarten, where even in these days of advanced State education.
Miss Hopkins carries on a wonderfully energetic and effective labour of love.
A Sunday School was commenced on the Sunday after the opening of the
building.
How interesting is the thought of this early Church! The Pulpit was
simply a teacher’s desk, looking like a plain deal box. The school desks
were attached to the walls with hinges to that they might be let down on
Sundays to make more room for the congregation. The unlined walls could
not keep out the ever drifting sand. Light was first provided by candles
fixed on cross pieces of wood suspended from the roof. Later the Pulpit was
graced with silver-plated candle-sticks. Sunday services began at 11 o’clock
in the morning. In the evening services began at 6 o’clock, and in the summer
at 6.30. Those early Methodists were not only “Twicers” on Sunday, but
they loved their week-night service as well, which at first was held on Thurs-
days, and later on Tuesdays. They loved the social life, too. Their first tea-
meeting was held on the third day of May, 1855, Mrs. Newman and Mrs.
Withers were said to have arranged same; it was called a “Shrimp Tea,” and
one expenditure item read : “Shrimps, £l/4/-.”
But soon this meeting-place was also outgrown. Captain Matthews
became Class Leader, Mr. Newman having temporarily gone to Moorabbin.
At a meeting with Rev. Daniel J. Draper, the Circuit Superintendent pre-
siding, Captain Matthews and Mr. Poolman strongly urged a new building
scheme. Some were doubtful, there were many difficulties, but Captain
Matthews so emphasised faith in God as essential to success, that they decided
right away to “arise and build.” Mr. Elsden, chief engineer of the Hobson’s
Bay Railway Company, provided the plans and specifications free of charge.
Mr. Frederick Poolman, manager of the Sugar Works, was a valuable member
of the building committee. Thus was built, in 1860, this massive Milestone
Church which, down the years, has been the spiritual birth-place and training
ground of many who know it indeed as the very “House of God.”
The pulpit has old associations which are sacred and precious. Mr.
Francis told a story of the trustees hearing that the Pulpit of Collins Street
Chapel, which was the Melbourne City Church before Wesley was built, waa
stored in West Melbourne. He asked for it as a donation, his request was
granted and he brought it over, and it was erected just as it was. This pulpit
links us up with the Rev. Joseph Orton, the pioneer Methodist Minister of
Victoria, who preached first in Melbourne one hundred and two years ago
next April, and in whose ministry the Church from which this pulpit was
taken was built in Collins Street on a site now occupied by the Bank of Aus-
tralasia.
Those pioneers were men of heroic faith and service. Graham Street
Church testifies to their character. They did more than their share, but had
to leave some debt to their children. During the ministry of the Rev. J. W.
Crean in 1910, Mrs. Wyatt and other splendid workers united to wipe out the
remaining portion of the debt and also improve the interior by relining the
ceiling. It would be impossible to outline the many contributions which
have been made, but two are very conspicuous. In 1924 Rev. Padre Gault
led a band of willing workers in beautifying the grounds, particularly in the
planting of the much admired palms. Later still the splendid concrete
paving has become a very pleasing contrast to the drifting sand so long trod-
den by the Sandridge pioneer’s.
Methodists ai’e noted for their singing, and Graham Street in the early
days showed their love for music. Before their request for a resident minister
was granted they had two harmoniums and a pipe organ. The organ was
erected by Mr. David Lee, the Melbourne City organist, and it was his first
job in the colony. He also led a tonic-sol-fa singing class in the old Chapel.
The late Mr. T. Hopkins, one of our past and capable Choir conductors, told
of the pleasure he had as a boy in taking a turn at the handle which supplied


the first pipe organ with power. The present organ was erected in 1920, and
it is a tribute to the generosity and faith and love of the late John Cross, who
defrayed almost the whole of the cost of the instrument, which at the present
moment is being played by Mr. E. Northeast in an efficient manner.
In 1888 the first building, which had been adapted for Sunday School
work, was burned down. In its place was erected what at the time was con-
sidered the most up-to-date type of School, with eight class rooms, library
and Secretary’s Office opening off the main hall. It was built of bricks, and
thousands of children have been through its classes and been influenced for
good. It still does splendid service for the teeming young life around.
In 1915, the splendid generosity of Mr. J. Cross, 8.A., was again in evi-
dence when he defrayed more than two-thirds of the cost of the erection of the
building adjoining this Church, containing the Kindergarten and Primary
Departments.
The Christian Endeavour Society did very useful work. The first Society
was formed in 1893 with Rev. Jesse Carey and Mr. C. S. Kilpatrick as Presi-
dents, Mr. T. Hopkins, Secretary, and Miss Effie Carey, Corresponding Secre-
tary. Its membership soon grew, beginning at forty; the number increased
within a year to ninety.
A feature of the work of the Society was the visitation of the sick and
infirm. Bands of three or four did this work on Sunday afternoons after
School, each band being on duty about once in three or four Sundays. The
Society also maintained a native teacher in one of the South Sea Islands.
The Endeavour Society is still active to-day under the very able Secretary,
Miss Cicely Damms.
Rev. W. J. Palamountain, in his book on the life of Rev. A. R. Edgar, has
a chapter on his work in Port Melbourne. It tells how that Prince of Evan-
gelists led his earnest workers in Gospel preaching in the open air, and on the
boats and the pier. He was also the leading spirit in a campaign by all the
Churches which was the means of greatly helping the temperance cause, and
closing some of the many liquor bars which were such a curse to our city.
Truly we of Port Melbourne Methodist Circuit have “a goodly heritage.”
So very many earnest and able Christian workers have here served their Cord
and His Church, and we have entered into their labours. In thus building for
us they enriched their own souls and built for eternity. Their names cannot
all be mentioned, but their record is in their care for the House of God, and
in lives made new by the Gospel they lived.
Before concluding this very interesting subject, we must mention with
deep reverence some of our later brethren who are better known to us to-day.
Mr Job Smith, whose Memorial tablet graces the wall of the Church.
During his day, Mr. Smith was a very faithful Member and Trustee; also Mr.
William, Mr. Fred and Mr. Arthur Baker, Mr. S. B. Cumpston and Mr. Lewis
Owen, Trustee for 30 years and sometime Trust Steward, all in their day
served truly and faithfully. Mr. Feast served as Trust Steward for a number
of years; his kindly and understanding spirit made him beloved by all.
The following Ministers have officiated at Graham Street :
1866 John Gardiner.
1867 Henry Moor.
1868 Jabez B. Stephenson.
1869 Martin Dyson.
1870 George T. Hayward.
1871
1872
1873 Henry Catford.
1874
1875 Samuel Ironside.
1876
1877
1878 James W. Crisp.
1879
IHBO James W. Crisp.
1881 John Catterall.
1882
1883
1884 Alexander R. Edgar.
1885
1886 „ „
1887 John Cowperthwaite.
1888
1889
1890 John H. Tuckfleld.
1891
1892 Peter R. C. Ussher.
1893 Jesse Carey.


1894 Henry J. Cock.
1895
1896
1897 Thomas Grove.
1898 Richard Fitcher.
1899 William Burridge.
1900
1901
1902 Robert Kelly.
1903
1904
1905 William Vawdon.
190(5 Samuel Cuthbert.
1907
1908
1909 J. W. Crean,
1910
1911
1912 Robert S. Joyce.
1913
1914
1915 James Trathan.
1916
1917
1918 James Trathan.
1919
1920 Daniel Daley.
1921
1922
1923 J. A. Gault.
1924
1925
1926 F. J. Jennings.
1927
1928
1929 T. B. Reed.
1930
1931 William Seamer.
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936 Ernest J. Little.
1937
1938
1939 John T. Freeman.
1940
1941
The organisations working for the extension of God’s Kingdom and the
dates of their commencing, with the names of ministers serving at the time,
are as follow :
Trustees 1854
Sunday School 1854
Choir 1854
Endeavour Society (Rev. Jesse Carey) 1893
Mother’s Sunshine (Rev. S. Cuthbert) 1907
Young People’s Circle (Rev. D. Daly) 1920
Order of Knights (Rev. W. Seamer) *. . . . . . 1930
Ladies’ Cheer Up Guild (Rev. W. Seamer) 1932
Rays (Rev. J. T. Freeman) 1939
Each organisation will review its history or give an item which will
complete the Cavalcade.
IV.
DIALOGUE BY THE TRUSTEES.
Trustees on Official Register, 1941 :
Jabez Langley, F. T. Baker, W. C. Trewavis, Cr. .1. P. Crichton, J.P.,
F. IT. Anderson, G. H. Wyatt, T. H, D. Matters, P. F. Scoble, J. Staunton,
W. Dowsett, B. J. Cross, P. V. Thomas, H. H. Cawthorne, C. F. Stacey,
J. McK. Fooks, J. R. Eager, E. .1. Benbow, H. G. Veal, J.P.
The Officers being Rev. J. T. Freeman, Chairman ; J. Staunton, Trust
Steward ; W. C. Trewavis, Secretary ; J. McK. Fooks, Treasurer.
V.
SOLO BY MISS LOLA EDWARDS
VI.
DIALOGUE BY THE TRUSTEES.
VII.
BUILDING OF PRIMARY AND KINDERGARTEN ROOM
By Primary and Kindergarten Schools.


VIII.
CHOIR REPORT AND ANTHEM.
The Choir has through the years been a very helpful and spiritual blessing
to both the Minister and Congregation. Many of the good folk mentioned
in the Church History were workers for, and members of the Choir. Special
features of the Choir’s work during the past two years have been the Women’s
Glees and Male Glees. The present Officers are, Mr. J. Fooks, Secretary ; Mr.
N. Kelley, Treasurer ; Mr. E. Kelley, Librarian ; Mr. E. Northeast, Organist
IX.
BIBLE PLAY—“PAGEANT OF GOD’S HOUSE.”
By Miss C. Damms and Senior Scholars. Pianist —Mrs. J. Staunton.
X.
The SUNDAY SCHOOL REPORT is as follows:
The first Superintendent of the Sunday School was the late J. G. Newman,
who arrived from England only a short time previously.
Among the first teachers were Mrs. Chambers, Mrs. Hill and Mrs.
Bishop, all daughters of Mrs. Newman. The late Jesse Carey was also one
of the first teachers, and later joined the Ministry, and was appointed to
Graham Street Church.
Following are some of the names of those who occupied the position of
Superintendent. Messrs. J. G. Newman (above-mentioned), Trinham, Clarke,
Lowe, H. Francis (who occupied the position for forty years), A. Baker, S.
Cumpston, J. Sleeth, A. Barker, R. Monkhouse, P. Thomas, Rev. E. J. Little.
The Rev. J. T. Freeman is the present General Superintendent, with Mr.
A. Cawthorne as Superintendent of the Senior, Intermediate and Junior
Departments. Mrs. Wilson is Superintendent of the Primary Department,
and Miss E. Hopkins is Superintendent of the Kindergarten and Cradle Roll
Departments.
The Cradle Roll Department was commenced in 1910 by Mr. W. A.
Hamer, the then Secretary of the School, and the Roll now carries 905 names.
The School has influenced hundreds of young men and women to devote
their lives to Christ’s Service. In all walks of life are to be found former
scholars who are nobly upholding the great Christian principles. Special
mention in this connection might be made of Miss Muriel Withers, who for
many years has been working in Korea under the auspices of the Presby-
terian Church. Of the Rev. C. Wilson who went to South Africa, of the
Rev. Will Harris, late President of the South Australian Conference, and of
the Rev. Oliver Harris, Minister in the Victorian and Tasmanian Conference.
Three gentlemen over a long period of years did a wonderful work as
leaders of the Young Men’s Bible Class. They were the late C. Kilpatrick,
the late O. Youngman, and the late Joseph Harris. The present staff is
nobly striving to uphold the best traditions of the School. The drift of
population to the outer suburbs and the apathy of parents have greatly re-
duced the number of Scholars, but notwithstanding these adverse conditions
there are 180 names on the roll at the present time.
XL
RAY’S ITEM—“BUILDING OF SUNDAY SCHOOL AND CHURCH.”
Leader, Miss Rendall; Assistant, Miss Mitchell; Pianist, Miss McDonald.
XII.
ENDEAVOURER’S PLEDGE.
President, Rev. J. T. Freeman ; Vice-President, Mr. Alan Storen ;
Secretary, Miss C. Damms.


XIII.
THE REPORT BY THE MOTHER’S SUNSHINE IS AS FOLLOWS:
The Sunshine, which meets every Thursday afternoon, was commenced
about the * year 1907. Sister Mary was in charge, with Mrs. Monk-
house at the piano and Miss Stubbs at the organ. Miss Hopkins, Mrs. Harris,
Mrs. Briggs and Mrs. Wyatt (Senior), were regular attendants and served the
afternoon tea, while Miss Edwards, Miss Symons and Miss Youngman fre-
quently visited us.
Sister Mary remained for 10 years until the Rev. D. Daley took charge.
From that time the meeting was conducted by the Ministers. During the
Rev. F. J. Jennings’ term, our Sunshine raised the money to provide the stage
in the Sunday School. The Sunshine Members have always been pleased to
take their part in raising funds for the Church. At the present time we have
a roll of forty-two members.
Our present Minister, Rev. J. T. Freeman, has made a change for us, in
that he provides a different speaker for nearly every meeting. In this way
we get several varieties of religious subjects which are greatly appreciated by
the Sunshine, but the days on which he addresses us himself are greatly
looked forward to.
Our present Secretary, Mrs. G. M. Burke, has given excellent service as
Pianist and Secretary for the last thirty years.
XIV.
REPORT BY THE YOUNG PEOPLE’S CIRCLE.
It is twenty-one years since the Movement originated and planned by
Miss Monkhouse and Miss Hopkins to interest young women and keep them
in touch with Church and Sunday School, came into existence as the Graham
Street Young Women’s Social Circle.
Mrs. Daley, wife of the Rev. D. Daley, became President, and quite a
number of young women attended the first meeting. Mrs. Daley entered
heartily into the work and the Circle increased in numbers and interest.
Shortly after the opening, Miss Mason, daughter of the Rev. Francis
Mason, was asked to come and help in the work. Miss Mason, a born or-
ganiser, with exceptional gifts, came and brought Miss Richards, a friend with
fine musical ability. These two continued with the‘Circle for seventeen
years. Miss Mason stimulating and directing all its activities.
One early effort that achieved great success and gave much pleasure was
the performance of the operetta, “The Japanese Girl.”
The early days of the Circle were not all plain sailing. Difficulties arose,
but in these the Circle was greatly encouraged and helped by the late Mr.
Lewis Owen, a faithful and long-standing member of our Church.
The Circle has helped in the Finances of the Church; a total sum of £250
was raised. The money was given to the Church, Sunday School Missions,
and other causes.
The following are the names of our Presidents :
Wives of our Ministers : Mrs. Daley, Mrs. Gault, Mrs. Seamer, Mrs. Little
and Mrs. Freeman. Miss Mason was President during the ministry of the
Rev. T. B. Reed. Mrs. White, daughter of the Rev. F. J. Jennings, w as
President for some time.
Here are some of the outstanding features of their work. Once a year the
Circle conducted the evening service in the Church, under the direction of
Miss Mason, with Miss Richards presiding at the organ. The singing proved
inspiring ; there were large congregations and the services were very up-
lifting. During one of these services the Circle presented the Church with
a Pulpit Hymn Book; it was dedicated by the Rev. E. J. Little in 1936.
The Circle did not confine its activities to the Church, but gave service
in other worthy directions. Workless girls from Wesley Church were enter-
tained at functions held in the Primary Room of our Sunday School.
Programmes were given to Sailors in the Seamen’s Institutes at Melbourne
and Port Melbourne,


Sick folk were visited and many were cheered and helped.
Tn 1940, Mrs. J. T. Freeman asked the Circle to help the Padres’ Comforts
Fund by knitting socks, etc. They most willingly did this, and being assisted
by some ladies of the Church, sent quite a number of articles to the Padres
for their work among the Soldiers.
On the 7th of October, 1940, the Rev. J. T. Freeman felt it to be an op-
portune time to form a Young People’s Circle. The Young Women’s Social
Circle felt that unity was strength, .pined force's, and now we have the Young
People’s Circle, which is doing good work in every way. The Officers are :
President, Rev. J. T. Freeman; Vice-Presidents, Miss E. Hopkins and Mi-.
J. Staunton; Secretary, Mr, N. KeTey ; Treasurer, Mr. J. Fooks.
XV.
REPORT OF THE “CHEER UP’’ CLUB IS AS FOLLOWS:
Early in 1932 Mrs. Wyatt and Miss S. Trewavis were visiting Mrs. Ander-
son, and a talk arose on the subject of “Guilds.” Mrs. Wyatt in her
indefatigable way called on the Ladies of our Church and persuaded some of
them to be willing to form a Guild.
The ladies met at Mrs. Anderson’s home and it was decided to form a
Guild to raise funds for our Church. The name given was “Cheer Up” be-
cause it was felt that it would cheer Mrs. Anderson to have the ladies there.
Mrs. Seamer was made President, Mrs. V\ ilson, Secretary, and Mrs.
Anderson, Treasurer.
The work has been carried on by various routes —Pedlar’s Pack. Visits
to Factories, House Parties and Trading.
In 1933 the Guild paid for the painting of the outside of the Parsonage;
in 1934, paid for painting inside of Church, and organised a very successful
Pair. In 1930, Mrs. E. J. Little became our President, and in that year we
were very successful with our “Mile of Pennies” drive. In 1937, Keith Scoble.
as our “Popular Man,” won the competition (£3O/11/2), and our total for that
year was £5B/40/11. In 1939 Mrs. J. T. Freeman took office as President.
In 1939-1940 we raised £7O/-/-. In 1940-1941 we raised £OB/0/3, winning
the “Popular Person” competition.
We give grateful thanks to Mrs. Wyatt, who helped us considerably
when we had the “Pack” by giving us donations of materials.
We have lost by removal two of our Foundation Members, Mrs, Rose-
warne and Mrs. Reveil. Most of the meetings are business meetings, but at
times we have speakers who give us very helpful spiritual talks.
The present office-bearers are
President, Mrs. Freeman ; Vice-Presidents, Mesdames G. Wyatt, Scoble,
and Storen ; Secretary, Mrs. Wilson ; Assistant Secretary, Mrs. Edwards ;
Treasurer, Miss Trewavis ; Assistant Treasurer, Mrs. Anderson.
XVI.
1 ORDER OF THE KNIGHTS PLEDGE.
. (Mr. G. Williams, Knight Commander).
XVII.
SOLO BY MISS LOLA EDWARDS,
XVIII.
1 ■ 1 w— GRAND FINAL (“God of Our Fathers”)
XIX.
Like others, this Church has been well served by a succession of spiendid
Local Preachers and Helpers. Serving at present are Mr. J. Heysmand,
Mr. G. Cartwright, and Mr. J. McDonald.
BENEDICTION. CIRCLE AND MIZPAH.
