

Te'TU- pptiv.
SfUICI OOS PAMS.
ams
Bo X V
report
OF THE FORMATION OF THE
NEWCASTLE CHURCH SOCIETY,
ESTABLISHED APRIL 26,
1851.
TO WHICH IS PREFIXED
THE SERMON
PREACHED ON THAT DAT,
IN ST. JAMES’ CHURCH, MORPETH,
THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD
WILLIAM, LORD BISHOP OF NEWCASTLE.
«... V 7 a ' Cir ,
I .- ////•>,/.■£. y/KS,
SYDNEY:
PRINTED FOR THE SOCIETY,
BY KEMP AND FAIRFAX,
LOWER GEORGE STREET.
1851.


%


COLLECTS
TO BE USED BY THE DIOCESAN AND DISTRICT COMMITTEES,
BEFORE THEY COMMENCE BUSINESS.
-fY BE VENT us, O Lord, in all our doings, with Thy most gracious favour :
1 and further us with Thy continual help : that in all our works, begun,
continued, and ended in Thee, we may glorify Thy Holy Nanm, and final y
by Thy mercy obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen,
OGOD, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all works of
piety and charity do proceed, we beseech Thee to visit with Thy favour our
Sovereign Lady, Queen Victoria, and so rule her heart, that she may m all
things seek Thy honour and glory. Prosper with Thy blessing the designs
of this Society. Comfort with Thy grace those benefactors who contribute
to its support. Bless the ministry of Thy servants, the Clergy ; the endea-
vours of all who are engaged in spreading the knowledge of true religion in
this colony, and the labours of those Missionaries, who are promotmg the
same throughout the world. And may Thy Holy Spirit direct all our consul-
tations to the advancement of Thy glory, and the good of Thy Church, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
ALMIGHTY God, Father of all Mercies, we Thine unworthy servants do
give Thee most humble and hearty thanks for all Thy goodness and loving
kindness to us and to all men; more particularly for that providential support
by which our Church hath been enabled to spread abroad the knowledge ol
Thy sacred truth. We bless Thee for our creation, preservation, and all the
blessings of this life. But above all, for Thine inestimable love m the
redemption of the world by Thy blessed Son: for the means of grace, and or
the hope of glory, which Thou hast given us in the same our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ; to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost be all honour
and glory, world without end. Amen.
OGOD the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, our only Saviour, the Prince
of Peace; Give us grace seriously to lay to heart the great sin of causing
divisions in Thy Church, Take away all hatred and prejudice, and whatso-
ever else may hinder us from godly Union and Concord : that, as there is but
one Body, and one Spirit, and one Hope of our Calling, one Lord, one laith,
one Baptism, one God and Father of us all, so we may henceforth be all ol
one heart, and of one soul, united in one holy bond of 1 ruth and Peace, ol
Faith and Charity, and may with one mind and one mouth glorily thee;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
OUR Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be Thy Name. Thy kingdom
come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our
daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: tor
Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and e\er.
Amen,
WHEN BUSINESS IS ENDED.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship
of the Holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.


OFFICERS OF THE SOCIETY
FOR 1851.
THE RIGHT REV. THE LORD BISHOP OF NEWCASTLE.
UmiSurcrg.
E. C, CLOSE, Esa., THE REV. G. K. RUSDEN.
J&ecretatieg.
THE REV. W. M. COWPER, THE REY, J. RODWELL.
©omnuttte.
The Clergy licensed to Cures in the Diocese.
Beresford Hudson, Esq.
William Wilton, Esq.
W. Knox Child, Esq.
Charles Bolton, Esq.
J. H. Cox, Esq.
Mr. E. P. Capper
Charles Boydell, Esq.
P. G. King, Esq.
Cyrus M. Doyle, Esq.
Captain Hungerford
J. Corlette, Esq.
With power to add to their number.
&uliltorsi.
THE REV. R. T. BOLTON, Mr. E. P. CAPPER.
The Treasurers have opened an account at the Bank of Australasia, East
Maitland, under the name of the Account of the “ Newcastle Church
Society.”


SERMON.
Eph. iv. 3.
“ Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
The passage from which my text is taken, is one of singular
beauty and power. St. Paul addresses his Ephesian disciples
in terms which show his deep sense of the progress which
they had made in Christian truth and feeling and practice.
He does not give them the food of babes, the milk of the
word, but strong meat, fit for those who by the Spiiit had
been made to understand the deep mysteries of the Gospel.
He, therefore, prays for them, and beseeches them, and
exhorts them, in words which must indeed have found their
way to every heart.
He says —“ For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father
“ of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in
“ heaven and earth is named, that he would grant you accord-
“ ing to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might
“by his Spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in your
“ hearts by faith; that ye being rooted and grounded in love,
“ may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the length
« and breadth, and depth, and height, and to know the love of
« Christ which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with
“ all the fulness of God.”
Such is the prayer of St. Paul for his Ephesian disciples.
It is offered up in that name, in which no prayer is ever
offered up in vain, the name of Christ Jesus; and it is
followed by the passage from which the text is taken, full of


the most touching expressions of mixed intreaty and
exhortation.
“ I, therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that
“ ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, with
“ all lowliness and meekness, with long suffering, forbearing
“ one another in love, endeavouring to keep the unity of the
“ Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one
“ Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling, one
“Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all,
“ who is above all, and through all, and in you all.”
Having thus mentioned the glorious privileges which
belong to the whole body of believers, and which should ever
unite them together in one holy bond of faith and love, the
Apostle then declares the Divine appointment of the ministry
of the Church, by Christ himself, and the design of such
appointment, the edification of the whole body of believers,
and their growth to the perfect man, which he describes as an
unity of faith and knowledge.
“ And he (i. e. Christ) gave some Apostles, and some
“ Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
“ Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
“ Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all
“ come (not in, but) unto the unity of the faith, and of the
“ knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
“ measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.”
May the Lord be with us by his Spirit, while I endeavour
to draw from these words some of the important truths which
they contain; truths, which would seem to urge us most
strongly to support that Diocesan Church Society, which I
trust will be established to-day.
What then would seem to be the chief point which St.
Paul had in view, when addressing these words to his
Ephesian disciples ? Was it that they might each indivi-
dually live under the influence of the one Spirit ? This would
have been a most important truth to impress upon them, and
we find it again and again urged upon our notice in Scrip-


ture. “ Without holiness no man shall see the Lord.” “If
“ we live after the flesh, we shall die ; but if we, through the
“ Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, we shall live.” “ If
“ any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
Unless, therefore, the Holy Spirit dwell in our hearts, and
cleanse those hearts from sin, unless we become holy in our
lives, and heavenly in our desires, we shall never be admitted
to God’s presence above. This necessity of personal holiness,
of living under the influence of the Holy Spirit, is indeed a
most important truth, but it would not seem to be the
especial truth which the Apostle here wishes to impress
upon the Ephesians.
His aim would rather seem to be to urge them to union,
to live together in peace and love; to consider themselves as
a society joined together by the strongest ties, to feel and act
as members of the same body, having a deep interest in each
other’s spiritual well-being. He lays before them the many
motives which exist for the practice of this peaceful union.
“ There is one body and one spirit, even as ye are all called
in one hope of your calling, one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, one God and Father of all.” He tells them that
they are appointed to different offices in the Church for
the general good. They were therefore to endeavour to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace ; practising
towards each other lowliness and meekness, and long-
suffering and forbearance.
I. With respect to this union among Christians, we may first
assert that it is clearly the appointment of Christ. His last
prayer for his disciples was “ that they all may be one, as
«thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be
“ one in us”—that “ they may be one, even as we are one.”
He tells his disciples, “by this shall all men know that ye are
“my disciples, if ye have love one to another. He describes
the intimate union of his disciples with himself, and with
each other, by their being branches of the same vine.
“ I am the vine, and ye are the branches j as the bianch


“ cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine, no
“ more can ye, except ye abide in me.” Our Lord again
describes himself as the Shepherd, and his disciples as
the sheep ; and Jews and Gentiles are to form one flock
together. “I am the good Shepherd, and I lay down my
« life for the sheep ; and other sheep I have which are not of
“ this fold, them also I must bring, and they shall hear my
“ voice, and there shall be one fold and one shepherd.
The Apostles also are continually bringing before us this
necessary union among Christians, describing what it is, by
ever possible kind of figure, and exhorting their disciples
to live in the spirit of it. The whole Church is one body,
of which Christ is the head, and individual Christians are
members. St. Paul thus addresses the Homans . I say,
“ through the grace given untome, to every man that is among
“ you not to think of himself more highly than he ought
“to think, but to think soberly according as God hath
“ dealt to every man the measure of faith. For as we
“ have many members in one body, and all members have not
“ the same office, so we being many are one body in Christ,
“ and every one members one of another.” To the Corinthians
he sa y S) — « As the body is one, and hath many members,
“ and all the members of that one body, being many, are one
“ body, so also is Christ. For by one Spirit are we all baptized
“ into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we
“ be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one
« Spirit. And God hath tempered the body together, that
« there should be no schism in the body, but that the members
“ should have the same care one for another. And whether
“ one member suffer, all the members suffer with it, or one
“ member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it.” The
Apostle then concludes, —“ Now ye are the body of Christ,
“ and members in particular.”
The united worship, and united affection which should
result from this membership in one body, is also frequently
alluded to. 1 will refer to one passage on each ol these


points, Rom. xv. 5. “ Now the God of patience and conso-
“ lation grant you to be likeminded one toward another in
“ Christ Jesus, that ye may with one mind, and one mouthj
“glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.”
Here is an exhortation to united worship. The other beau-
tiful passage, which has reference to the strong united
affection of Christian brethren, is from Phil. ii. I—4.1 —4. “ If
“ there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort
“ of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and
“ mercies, fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the
“ same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing
“ be done through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of
“ mind, let each esteem other better than themselves. Look
“ not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
“ things of others.” How similar is the spirit of these words
to that in the passage whence my text is taken: “ That they
“ should walk worthy of their vocation, with all lowliness and
“ meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in love,
“ endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
“ peace.”
We find then that our blessed Lord formed his disciples
into a visible Church —that Christians are fellow-subjects of
the same kingdom, fellow-citizens of the same city, which is
set conspicuously on a hill—they are inmates of the same
family, even the household of faith, and members of the same
body of which Christ is the head—that they are closely united
together by having the same God and Father, by serving the
same Lord, by being influenced by the same spirit, by having
the same hopes, by professing the same faith, by forming one
visible body, and by being admitted into that one body by
the same holy rite of Baptism ; and we find our Lord and his
Apostles continually exhorting their disciples to live and act
in the spirit of this close union, having important duties to
perform, not only as individual Christians, but also as
members of the Christian Church.
11. Having thus shewn that Church union or Church member-


ship is an appointment of Christ, entailing upon all Christians
the duties of living and acting together, I would next consider
whether the due performance of these duties must be con-
sidered an easy or a difficult task. Is the living and acting
in the real spirit of a member of Christ’s Church —the living
with Christian brethren, and acting with them for mutual
edification, and the spreading of the Gospel, an easy duty ?
Is it the mark of the babe in Christ, or of the full grown
Christian ? A little consideration will, I think, persuade us
that it is a most difficult duty, performed truly and fully by
those only who have advanced far towards Christian perfection.
Observe the Apostle’s exhortation : “ Endeavouring to keep
“ the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.” It was no easy
duty ; they would not perform it without earnest endeavours,
without diligent striving. And to whom was this exhortation
addressed ? What was the spiritual state of those who would
find it so difficult to live and act as united members of the
same holy body? The Apostle was not writing to the
Romans, whose minds were so imperfectly enlightened as to
doubt whether the Gentiles ought to be admitted to
Gospel privileges. Nor to the Corinthians, who were
such babes in Christ, so given over in their carnal mind
to strifes and divisions, that the Apostle could not feed them
with the strong meat of the Gospel. Nor to the Galatians,
who were still so entirely under the influence of a legal
spirit, that they thought baptism ought to be perfected by
circumcision, and the Gospel made a mere steppingstone to
the law. It was not to any of these that the Apostle was
writing, but to the Ephesians, to the Church most perfectly
instructed in the great truths of the Gospel, and with whom
he enters more deeply than he does with any other Church,
into the great mysteries of our faith, and into the fulness of
Gospel privilege and practice.
The frequent mention also by our Lord and his Apostles
of this mutual love and cordial agreement, which should
exist among Christian Brethren, shows the same fact.—How


difficult a duty it is to practise. And, if we consider man’s
nature, we shall be led to the same result, for how great a
change must take place in the natural man, what giving up of
favourite opinions and prejudices, what self-control, what
annihilation of self must take place, before we are willing to
labour solely for the glory of God, and in the way which he
has appointed—as perhaps an obscure, unobserved member
of the great body which Christ has set up on earth.
Among the works of the flesh, the failings of the natural
man, are —“ variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions,
envyings,”—and in one of the passages, to which 1 have
already referred, St. Paul thus exhorts the Philippians as
members of Christ’s Church : “ Let nothing be done through
“ strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem
“ other better than themselves.” How difficult is it for the
natural man so to act? Again, among the graces of the
Spirit, so opposite to man’s fallen nature, we find mentioned*
“ longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, and meekness,” and
in the passage whence my text is taken, St. Paul exhorts the
Ephesians, that they “ walk with all lowliness and meekness,
“ with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love”: by these
means they must “ endeavour to keep the unity of the spirit in
“the bond of peace.” How difficult then, because how opposite
to our fallen nature, is it to live and act as united members of
Christ’s Church.
Again, how pleasing is it to form plans of good ourselves,
and carry out our own plans —to be known to labour thus,
and to receive the praise. But how often do such self-formed
plans of good give the fairest promise, and raise the highest
hopes, and yet end in nothing but failure and disappointment.
Our gourd springs up in a night, and we rejoice in its pleasant
shade, and perhaps pride ourselves in its speedy growth.
But when our self-congratulations have just reached their
height, our fond hopes prove to have been fixed on a
cankered plant, the first rude wind betrays its secret weak-


ness; it snaps asunder, and falls, and withers before our
eyes.
How easy, again, is it to detect defects in any vast compli-
cated system, and to think that we can avoid such defects by
some wise plan of our own. How natural, if we have received
good ourselves, or seen some friend derive manifest good,
from other than the appointed means of grace, to value what
has thus been made useful, in a particular case, to the dis-
paragement of what has been duly appointed, and, in number-
less other cases, blessed for good in the Church.
Again, how difficult to overcome our prejudices, and to act
lovingly and cordially together; and we all have our preju-
dices arising from birth, or station, or calling, or peculiar powers
or qualities of mind, which will keep us asunder, and raise
envy and strife among us, unless the spirit of love be with us,
and unite us together, as members of Christ’s body, in the
bond of peace. Truly then, it is a difficult duty, and there-
fore, a high grace; it is the mark of the spiritual, and not of
the natural man, to overcome prejudice and control self, and
live and act as a meek, forbearing, humble member of Christ’s
body, the Church.
111. There is one more general truth connected with the sub-
ject before us, to which I would call your attention, namely, the
important advantages of this Church union. Notwithstanding
all the difficulty of living and acting thus, yet, every endea-
vour, every effort, which is made for this purpose, will be
amply repaid. Every difficulty in the way of Church union,
which we overcome, will be, in our own persons, an advance
towards spiritual perfection, for it will be the subduing
of some infirmity or prejudice of the natural man, or the
attaining (by the Lord’s aid) some grace of the spiritual
man. And as regards the increase of God’s glory, and the
edification of his church, and the diffusion of his Gospel,
this principle of Church union, of united efforts in preference
to individual exertions, is of the greatest importance.


That such a body as the Church has been appointed from
the first by our Lord will be sufficient proof to every humble
and devout mind that it affords the best and most effectual
means for the conversion of the heathen, and the perfecting
of the saints. If the All wise has appointed means for
effecting good, these means must be the best; and if we
cannot perceive the peculiar excellence of such divinely
appointed means, it will be our bounden duty still to employ
them; to use them in faith, feeling assured that the Almighty
will bless them to the effecting their intended good.
Who is there among us that has not at times felt the
indescribable support of such a principle of conduct? We
are enquiring perhaps for the path of duty, we are seeking
anxiously for guidance, we are searching God’s word, saying
in our hearts, “ Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth.”
And the Lord does speak to us through his word ; we find
the guidance we sought, and we stay ourselves upon his
appointment, trusting to his blessing and support. If he
should say to us, “ Come”—we come willingly to any post
of irksome self-denying duty. If he say “ Go”—we go
cheerfully to our appointed sphere of duty, even in the most
distant lands. If he say “Do this”—we brace ourselves to
the work, however difficult or dangerous it may seem.
Believe me there is no greater support, no surer source of
strength, than this reliance on the appointment of God. If
then we believe our Church to be God’s appointed instrument
for effecting spiritual good in this land and Diocese, we
should cling to it, and earnestly desire to labour in cordial
union with it, even though we could perceive little of its
superior excellence for effecting such good. How much
then should this be our desire, when we can clearly see
that the united efforts of Christian brethren are beyond all
comparison more efficacious for good than the separate
exertions of individuals. And is not this now an ac-
knowledged principle, that “ union is strength,” and


have we not seen results produced by the union of agents,
which are indeed marvellous, and which seemed impossible,
while we rested on the desultory efforts of individuals ? Is
not this the great source of the superiority of civilised nations
over the uncivilised ? If our armies have obtained such
surprising victories, is it because our soldiers have been
individually stronger and braver than their enemies ? not so,
their foes have been sometimes their superiors in strength,
and their equals in courage. But the trained veteran has
ceased to consider himself as an individual —he is one of a
system, one of a band, and it is this sinking of self, and this
practical union with others which gives him the confidence
and the powes which nothing can withstand.
Our great philosophical divine, also in his Analogy of
Eeligion, when proving the superior power of good over
evil, has to contend with the startling fact, that evil seems in
the world to prevail frequently and extensively over good.
He acknowledges the fact, and shows that it does not
invalidate his assertion of the superior power of good. For
the greater prevalence of evil arises, he asserts, from the
wicked combining much more together for evil purposes, than
the good ever unite for good purposes ; and he concludes
that if ever the good unite together for good and holy pur-
poses, their influence and power will so increase, that by
God’s blessing, sin might almost be expected to disappear
from the earth.
Oh, may this be in some degree the blessed result of our
“ endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace.
It is to call into action this united feeling of Christian
brotherhood, that I ask your assistance to-day in forming a
General Church Society for this Diocese.
As it is the office of the Christian Church to preserve the
word of God, as it is the great privilege of her members to
possess that word, as it is the duty of her Ministers to preach


it, diligent care should be taken, that, in every branch of
Christ’s universal Church, the word of God is taught , and
read, and preached, and spread. There should be
1. Schools, in which the word may be taught.
2. Bibles, in which the word may be read.
3. Churches in which the word may be heard.
4. Ministers who may preach the word.
5. Missionaries who may spread it over the world.
These are the great objects which it is intended to promote,
with God’s blessing, by our Church Society. It is to provide
these blessings for you and your families, for our brethren
throughout this diocese, and for the poor heathen both within
and beyond the limits of the diocese, that our Church Society
will this day be established. I will not now enlarge upon
these objects, because they will, doubtless, be this day
explained to you elsewhere. I would only now ask you not
to be discouraged by the number of objects which are urged
upon your attention. It is not intended that every one should
contribute to all of these objects. Some few, whom the Lord
has blessed with ample means, may perhaps contribute to
each fund, but the generality will probably choose one or
more objects in which they feel a peculiar interest, and give
their mite to them. It is far from my wish to make the
Church and your duties as members of the Church, a burden
to you ; I desire rather to set before you the vast amount of
good which you may assist in effecting, and would invite you
to seek that high praise which our Lord bestowed upon the
woman in the Gospel —“ She hath done what she could.”
May each of us, my brethren, do what we can, by our own
personal exertions, and by the due use of those means with
which the Lord has blessed us.
Upon whose exertions then do I confidently rely for pro-
moting these great and good objects ? My brethren, on the
exertions of you all ; not only of the ministers of the Church,
but of every member of the Church ; not only on the exer-


tions of the Clergy, but in an equal, if not in a greater, degree
on the exertions of the Laity.
1. Upon you, my reverend brethren, much will indeed depend.
Upon your zeal, your gentleness, your wisdom in winning
souls to Christ, your wise training of your flocks in that faith
which worketh by love. You, lam sure, will each do what
you can —and what is there which our united zeal may not, by
God’s blessing, effect ?
That we are thus united, is indeed my great comfort and
joy.—Yes, amid the anxious cares connected with my
duties, there has been granted to me, by the goodness of the
Lord, one unfailing source of comfort and encouragement,
I mean, the cordial, united spirit in which we have all
laboured together as members of the same Gospel of Peace.
All of you, it is my joy to say, whether you formed part of
that little band which came with me from England, to labour
here, or whether you had been labouring in this colony for
years before my coming, have shown the most cheerful acqui-
esence in every suggestion that I have made —in every wish
that I have expressed. This our working together with one
heart and one spirit, has lightened all my cares, and has given
me the happy assurance that our ministry will not be without
a blessing —that our labour will not be in vain in the Lord.
And now, my reverend brethren, I ask your aid in spread-
ing this blessed unity of heart and purpose, among all the
members of our Church, The laity as well as the Cleigy,
should learn to consider themselves as members of the same
family, as one united brotherhood —looking, each one, not
only on his own things, but also on the things of others
cheerfully bearing one another’s burdens, and anxious to
impart to others the blessings and privileges which they them-
selves enjoy.
To effect this good purpose, and to call forth into active
exercise among the members of our Church feelings of
Christian sympathy, and the spirit of united brotherhood, I


would suggest to you the formation in each of your parishes
or districts, of a parochial or district association, upon the plan
laid down in the Report which you will hear read to-day.
I feel assured that you, my reverend brethren, will all give
your cordial assistance in carrying out this plan, and in pro-
moting its success; and the only caution which I would desire
to give you, is this.—Not to be discouraged at the little
apparent good which you may, at first, seem able to effect.
We must not despise the day of small things. And you will
agree with me, that our success in this work will not
be shown so much by the amount of money-support which
may be obtained, as by the real feeling of Christian charity
and brotherhood, which we may hope, by God s blessing, to
arouse.
When we ask the members of our Church to give of their
abundance, or of their penury, let us ask in such a spirit as will
show that we do not “ desire a gift,” so much, as “ fruit which
“ ma y abound to their account.” And if we thus build up the
people committed to our care in faith and love, and lead them
on unto perfection, we shall not lose our reward, when our
Lord comes again to make up his jewels for eternity.
1. And what exertions do I ask of you my brethren of the
Laity. I ask of you assistance and support, more difficult and
more precious than any which I have asked of your ministers.
I ask of you to prove the truth, the excellence, the divine ap-
pointment of our Church, and then to hold fast that which is
so truly good : I ask of you to be sincere and faithful and
constant in your use of her means of grace, that you may
profit by them and esteem them precious; and, therefore,
desire in the spirit of Christian charity to impart the same
blessings to your brethren. I ask of you first, to let youi
light so shine before men that they may see yom
good works, your holy lives, and glorify your Father
which is in heaven—and thus confess and report that
God is in you of a truth; —I would ask of you, next,
attachment to that Church in which you have been thus


blessed, and a deep sense of the duty and the privilege of
working with it, and by it, for the spiritual good of others.
And how much is there to encourage you in this work. It
is God’s work, and will prosper in his hands. Either with
our aid or without it, Christ’s kingdom will advance, till the
“ kingdoms of this world become the kingdoms of the Lord
“ and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.”
Nor is the present state or future prospects of the Church
among us without encouragement. During the period that I
have been among you as your Bishop, the work
of the Church has gone on so quietly and peaceably, with so
little, I am glaA to say, of public notice or excitement, that
many may suppose but little has been done to advance its
character and influence. Some, however, will have seen with
ioy, the gradual though silent progress of good—new districts
formed, and clergymen appointed to them, and a growing
reality in the pastoral superintendence of each district.
It has been my aim up to this time to ascertain the state of
religion among you, the means at once available for promoting
your spiritual good, and how your still existing wants might
be supplied with the greatest advantage and least burden to
yourselves. For this purpose I have visited each district in
my diocese, that I might turn every existing means of
good to the best account, might assist in relieving some
districts from the burden of long standing debts, might
encourage the building of Churches in other districts under
the depression of repeated failures, and by personal inter-
course with many of you in your own homes, might create a
bond of mutual attachment, of gratitude on my part for your
many kindnesses, and of confidence on yours that I desired
at least to promote your wishes, and supply your spiritual
wants. Thus more than three years have passed, leaving
behind them feelings of gratitude and thankfulness ; of grati-
tude for the invariable kindness which I have received, and
of thankfulness for the silent steady progress with which the
Lord has blessed our Church.


The time has now arrived, when I feel that I may, with
advantage, invite more general attention to the affairs of the
Church in this Diocese, and call upon all its members to
unite for the general good. I would therefore entreat you to
consider the great duty as well as great privilege of acting
together as one Christian brotherhood, anxious to supply the
wants and promote the good of the whole body of which you
are members. I therefore now ask your cordial co-operation
to-day in forming a General Church Society, and in pro-
moting through it the good objects which I have already
mentioned. And I feel the greatest confidence that many of
you, my brethren of the Laity, will, to the extent of your
power, yea, and beyond your power, be cheerful generous
supporters of this good work.
3. And may we not all, both clergy and laity, derive great
encouragement in our labour of love, and expect a peculiar
blessing upon it from this bond of peace, which will unite us
together in one heart and spirit, and from our woiking
together in close union with our pure and apostolic
Church ? If the Lord has appointed his Church to be the
light of the world, and the salt of the earth, then let us en-
deavour, by means of that Church, to enlighten the darkness
of ignorance, and to stay the corruption of sin. Foi God
will put honour upon his own appointed means of good,
his blessing will rest upon our work, and through the merits
of our Saviour we shall both save ourselves and those who
may learn, or read, or hear the word through our means.
First, then, my brethren, let us give ourselves to the Lord,
and present ourselves, our souls and bodies, a living sacrifice
to him. This is our bounden duty and service. Then let
us give ourselves to the work in the spirit of faith, and
charity, and prayer. Let us have faith and firm confidence
that the Lord will prosper his own work, and bless our self-
denying efforts in his service. Then let us be charitable
according to our means, and merciful after our power. “If
“ thou hast much, give plenteously ; if thou hast little, do this


<e diligence, gladly to give of that little, for so gatherest thou
“ thyself a good reward in the day of necessity.” And when
we give let our prayers go up with our alms e< as a memorial
“ before God for when we pray earnestly and sincerely for
any object our heart and our affections must be fixed upon
it, and thus we shall not be “ weary in well doing,” but
abound more and more in earnestness and zeal.
Let us then all, as members of the same body, as brethren
of the same family, bear one another’s burdens, and so fulfil
the law of God. Let us seek the edifying of the body of
Christ, let us live and act together as Christian brethren
bound together by the dearest ties. And as there is
but one body and one spirit, and one hope of our calling
one Lord—one faith—one baptism —one God and father of
us all, let us (united for the promotion of these good objects)
thus “ walk worthy of our vocation, wherewith we are called,
u endeavouring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
“ peace.”


REPOUT
OF THE
PROVISIONAL COMMITTEE
Appointed at a Public Meeting of Members of the Church of England, at
East Maitland, on the Uth day of November, 1850, to organize a system
for the management of a General Church Fund, for Diocesan and Mis-
sionary purposes.
In submitting to the Members of the Church an account of
their proceedings, it may be expected that your Committee
should, in the first place, offer some reason for the delay
which has occurred in convening a Public Meeting,
according to the terms of the resolution by which they were
appointed. It will perhaps be sufficient to state that not
having been able to give that attention to the subject which
its importance required, and therefore being unprepared with
the details of the system which they wished to propose, they
thought it more advisable to defer the Meeting till a later
period; and the present appeared to be as convenient as any
other upon which they could fix for this purpose.
In the meantime, however, they have not been idle.
They have been engaged in maturely considering the best
method of carrying out the great and important design be-
fore them : and the results are now embodied in the sugges-
tions contained in the following Report.
Conceiving at the same time, that it was one part of their
duty to endeavour to obtain assistance towards the establish-
ment of the projected Mission of the Church to the Islands of
the Western Pacific, they made a request to the Lord
Bishop, at one of their meetings, to do them the favour of
communicating with the clergy on the matter, and iccom
mending them to take steps to interest their people therein


and obtain their support. His Lordship readily complied
with their request, and the result has been that
have been received by the Treasurers in aid of that special
object.
This, however, was only a preliminary step, though not
unimportant. The great end and purpose for which your
Committee was appointed they consider to have been this,
viz : —to organize and bring into operation a general Church
Society for the Diocese of Newcastle, which should unite
the members of the Church of England in an endeavour to
provide for the maintenance and extension of the Gospel and
its ordinances in this portion of the Lord’s vineyard. And,
keeping this in view, they have bestowed their thoughts upon
the ways and means by which this object would seem most
likely to be effected.
Before proceeding, however, to lay before you the system
they propose for adoption, it is right that they should state the
views which they have been led to entertain upon the subject
generally, and the grounds on which they rest the conclu-
sions at which they have arrived.
It is the business of the Church of Christ to uphold and
to propagate the true faith in the world; to cherish and
maintain in its members habits of piety and holiness, training
them up for heaven; and to extend the kingdom of the
Redeemer among all nations. But it is obvious that these
ends require a careful and wise application of suitable
means and agencies.
The first and most important of these, undoubtedly, is the
employment of a body of faithful, earnest, and self-denying
Ministers of the Word. Their existence maybe considered
as indispensable, ordinarily, to the maintenance of religion,
instituted as they were by our blessed Lord himself, for the
preaching and teaching of His Gospel, the administration of
the ordinances of His Church, and the guidance and encou-
ragement of His people; and ordained by Him to continue,
in the terms of His own promise, until the end of the


world. The providing of them, or rather their ordination and
sending forth, belongs to the Bishop. But supposing them
to be thus ordained and licensed to the cure of souls, the
question arises and forces itself upon our minds How, in
this colony, and in this scattered Diocese, are they to be
supported ?
It is known to many, and should be known by all, that the
stipend fund, provided by the Government, has long since
ceased to be sufficient for this purpose ; and by the new Bill
for the Government of the Australian Colonies, the amount
which has been hitherto available, is considerably reduced.
Already several of the clergy licensed in this Diocese are
dependent upon other sources for their incomes, and looking
forward to the future, every Clergyman appointed to serve in
any new district must look for his support to the Church,
totally independent of the State.
Your Committee regard this as of such vital impoitance,
that they have no hesitation in stating that it demands the
most earnest consideration of the laity: and that one of the
first objects of the proposed Society should be to make
suitable provision for the Ministers of the Church; and that
provision they conceive should be such as to secure them
from unnecessary care and anxiety about their temporal
condition, and to place them free from those temptations
which arise from a state of dependence on the flocks to which
they minister. The labourer is worthy of his hire, and it is
the Divine appointment that they who preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel.
Another very necessary branch of duty which has sug-
gested itself to your Committee, is the erection of Churches
and other Church buildings for the honour of Almighty God
and the benefit of his people. Your Committee forbear,
however, to enter into any argument upon this, believing that
the duty will be generally acknowledged. They think also
that when such buildings are needed in a district, local funds
will, in many if not in most cases, be raised, either by the


inhabitants or others who may feel a special interest therein.
They consider, however, that the erection of such buildings
should be embraced in the objects of a General Church
Society, and will only add that such buildings include
Churches, School-houses, and residences for the clergy.
The next branch of operations to which they have directed
their attention is one upon which they feel disposed to lay
very great stress —it is the imparting of a sound Christian
education to the young. In the opinion of your Committee,
this ranks next in importance to the maintenance of the
ministry itself ; for not only is it an important auxiliary to the
work of the ministry: it is in some measure a necessary means
to the accomplishment of the ends for which the Sacred
Office was instituted.
If education be, as it has been defined by no mean authority
on such subjects, the formation of the moral principles and
habits of man, the character of future generations in this
community must depend mainly upon the influences under
which they are educated. On this account your Committee
are most anxious that the children of the Church, at least,
should be trained and taught in schools conducted upon
avowedly Christian principles, and under Christian influences.
They are fully persuaded that it is only in such schools that
children can be properly educated. The spirit of the Gospel
pervading the lessons and discipline of the school, is the very
life and soul of education : and any system which does not
possess this (as the same writer has observed) no more
deserves the name of education , than a body without the
animating spirit deserves to be called a man.
At the present time a considerable number of schools, con-
ducted upon Church principles, are supported mainly by
Government aid in different parts of the Diocese, under the
constant supervision of the clergy; these are imparting a
sound and useful education to a large number of children, and
are thus conferring important benefits upon the community.
Tut the want of means alone prevents the establishment of


many more which are earnestly desired in some places, and
are loudly demanded by the increasing population both within
and without the settled districts. It is hoped that those
means will not be withheld.
But it is not merely the class of schools, called “ primary,”
which your Committee deem important. They consider that
in some of the larger towns there should be Commercial or
Grammar schools, in which those who may have the means
and the inclination, may be able to procure for their children
that superior kind of tuition which such schools usually afford.
And in addition to these they look forward to the estab-
lishment of a College. This will be required, in the first
instance, for the due preparation of candidates for Holy
Orders: but it would appear desirable that such an institution
should eventually be one, in which the higher branches of
study may be pursued by others, and the young may receive
that mental and moral training, which is essential to qualify
them for the high offices to which they may be called in social
and public life, or to form them as Christian gentlemen.
These several educational institutions appear to your Com-
mittee to be necessary in order to the permanent spiritual
welfare of Christ’s flock.
A fourth part of the design which your Committee deem it
desirable to embrace in the objects of the Society, is the
supply of the Holy Scriptures, the Book of Common Prayer,
and other books and tracts, partly religious and partly secular,
but characterized by a healthy religious tone, and a tendency
to usefulness. These would include sets of books for the
schools; and all that may be necessary in the business of
general education. It would appear desirable that there
should be a general Depot at some convenient place in the
Diocese, where these may be obtained, and other branch
depots in the various districts. But the details may very
properly be left to the managing Committee for future
arrangement. It would be desirable, perhaps, to encourage
the formation of Lending Libraries, in every parish or district,


so that those who have been trained in our schools, and others,
may have the means of self-improvement in their leisure
hours.
One very important work still remains to be mentioned,
and your Committee bring it forward last, in what would
appear to be its natural order. They speak of Missionary
operations among the heathen races in Australia, and the
adjacent Islands. It is no doubt the duty of every indi-
vidual first to seek the safety and salvation of his own soul ;
but when he has done that, his next duty is to think what he
can do for his neighbour. So the Church collectively, that is
the body of Christians, is certainly to provide for the spiritual
welfare of its own body first ; but the next care should
be to extend the like blessings unto others. The unsearchable
riches of Christ having been committed to the Church,
love to mankind requires that she should cry aloud to all.
“ Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye, buy and eat; yea,
buy wine and milk, without money and without price.” Our
Lord himself laid this command upon us when he said to the
eleven, “ Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to
every creature.” And success, more or less varied, was
promised by Him, when He said to them, and through
them to His Church in all ages, “ Lo, I am with you alway,
even unto the end of the world.”
By the providence of God our lot has been cast amongst
an aboriginal race, who are creatures of the same God as our-
selves ; and whose souls are not less valuable than ours, in
the sight of Him who redeemed them with His blood. And
who shall say that some of these shall not yet become jewels
in the Saviour’s crown, when we know that it has often
pleased God to magnify the riches of his grace, by bestowing
His choicest favours upon some of the lowest and most
despised of his creatures ?
But whether success attend our efforts or not, we are clearly
responsible for the employment of our talent. Duty is ours,
whether God grant his blessing on our labours or not.


And if such appears to be our duty with regard to the
Aborigines of this land, similar reasons may be adduced with
respect to the Islanders of the Western Pacific. They are
our brethren and our neighbours ", our ships trade with them,
and they behold our superiority in power, and wealth, and
temporal advantages. When we possess far higher and
nobler blessings, do we not sin if we withhold them ? And
when the Gospel is committed to us that we may publish it
unto all who come within our reach, how great would be our
guilt if we were not to make every effort to communicate it
to them ? “ Christianity,” says Bishop Butler, “is to be
considered as a trust deposited with us on behalf of others,
on behalf of mankind; as well as for our own instruction.
No one has a right to be called a Christian who doth not do
somewhat in his station towards the discharge of this trust.”
Such, then, are the objects which your Committee are of
opinion should be embraced by the Church Society which it
has been proposed to established. And they conceive that
they may be best achieved by being thus combined. Ihey
would therefore invite the earnest co-operation of the
members of the Church throughout the Diocese, in this
great and noble work; a work indeed of faith, but a labour
of love, to be undertaken in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
carried on for His glory, and the salvation of those for whom
He died.
Arduous though it may seem to provide for the accom-
plishment of so many different objects; if the members of
the Church throughout the Diocese will only unite their
energies and their means, the work will be rendered com-
paratively easy; and the burden, which if left to a few to
bear would be heavy, when shared by many will become
light- . ...
The great advantage and utility of such an institution
consists in its furnishing the means of such a union; in
drawing forth and giving scope for the exercise of Christian
zeal, and love, and self-denial, and thus enabling Chiistians


to fulfil one of their most sacred obligations, to seek and
provide for the peace, the welfare, and the prosperity of the
Church of God.
The plan and methods of co-operation proposed by your
Committee, will be found in the following rules for the Consti-
tution and Management of the Newcastle Church Society,
which are now submitted for your approval and adoption.


RULES
FOB, THE
CONSTITUTION AND MANAGEMENT
OP THE
NEWCASTLE CHURCH SOCIETY.
I. Name and Objects.
That the Society be called the “Newcastle Church Society,” and
embrace the following objects :
Ist. The establishment and support of Primary Church Schools: of
Commercial and Grammar Schools : and of a Diocesan College.
2nd, The circulation of the Holy Scriptures, the Book of Common
Prayer, and other religious and useful publications, by the establishment of
a Book Depository, and the formation of Lending Libraries.
3rd. The building, repairing, and enlargement of Churches, Schools,
and Parsonages.
4th. The maintenance of additional Clergy in remote and newly formed
districts, destitute of Government aid.
sth. The establishment and support of Missions among the Australian
Blacks, and the Heathen races of the Western Pacific. Which objects may
be more briefly expressed thus :
Ist. Promotion of Education.
2nd. Circulation of Books.
3rd, Erection of Church Buildings.
4th, Maintenance of additional Clergy.
sth. Support of Missions.
11. Constitution.
1. President.
That the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of the Diocese be President,
ex officio.
2. Vice-Presidents.
That annual subscribers of £lO be Vice-Presidents.


3. Members.
That the Clergy licensed to Cures within the Diocese be Members, ex
officio; and that all Members of the United Church of England and Ireland,
subscribing not less than 10s, annually, be Members of the Society, and
entitled to vote, on payment of their subscription for the current year.
4. Officers.
That two Treasurers, two Secretaries, and two Auditors, be elected
annually from the Members who contribute not less than £ 1 annually.
5. Committee.
That the business of the Society be conducted by a Committee, called the
Diocesan Committee, consisting of the President, Vice-Presidents, and
Officers, the Clergymen licensed to cures within the Diocese, and an equal
number of Lay Members, chosen from those who shall subscribe not less
than £1 annually
6. Recommendation of persons proposed as Members of Committee,
That every person proposed as a Member of the Committee, after the first
election, be recommended by one Member according to the following form :
“ I, the undersigned, do recommend to be a Member of
the Committee of the Newcastle Church Society, verily believing him to be
a well-affected Member of the United Church of England and Ireland, and
disposed to aid the pious and charitable designs of the Society.”
111. Management.
1, Prayers.
That the Prayers annexed to these rules be read at every meeting of the
Society.
2, Sermon.
That an annual Sermon be preached before the Society ; that the preacher,
time, and place be appointed by the President, and that fourteen days’
notice of the same be given by public advertisement.
3. Chairman.
That at all Meetings, the President, if present, do take the chair; and
that, in his absence, a Chairman be elected by the Meeting.
4. Annual Meeting,
That the Annual Meeting of the Society be held on the first Thursday in
May ; when a Report of the proceedings of the Society for the past year
shall be read by one of the Secretaries, the Treasurers’ accounts presented,


the Officers and Committee for the ensuing year elected, and other business
transacted. Fourteen days’ previous notice of the hour and place of
meeting, shall be given by the Secretaries.
5, Special General Meeting.
A Special Meeting of the Society may be convened by the President, or
the Committee, when necessary, fourteen days’ notice being given by the
Secretaries.
6. Meetings of the Diocesan Committee.
That the Committee meet at least four times in the year—on the first
Thursday in the months of March, June, September, December; fourteen
days’ notice being sent to the Members by the Secretaries.
7. Special Meetings of the Committee.
That the President or Secretaries may call a Special Meeting of the
Committee, upon sending fourteen days’ notice to each Member, stating the
object of the Meeting.
8. Minutes of Proceedings.
That at every Meeting, minutes of the proceedings be taken by one of
the Secretaries, and that such minutes be read at the next Meeting and duly
signed.
9, Rules of the Society, when altered.
That no motion be made to repeal, suspend, or alter any of the Pules
of the Society, except at a General Meeting ; previous notice of such motion
having been given at the next preceding Meeting of the Committee.
10. Collection of Funds.
All Contributions to the Funds of the Society may be paid into the Bank
of Australasia, East Maitland; or to the Treasurers, Secretaries, or Collectors
authorized by the Diocesan Committee, and shall be received under one
or more of the following funds, at the option of the Contributor.
Ist. Education Fund.
2nd. Book Fund.
3rd. Building Fund.
4th. Additional Clergy Fund,
sth. Mission Fund.
6th. General Fund.
Donations for any special object may be included under any of these heads,
and will be sacredly reserved for the specified purpose.
11. Application of Funds,
The District Committees may apply to local purposes two-thirds of all
sums received by them under funds 1,2, and 3, respectively, and shall remit
one-third of each to the General Society.


The Diocesan Committee shall have the entire management of all sums
received under heads 1,2, 3,5, and 6 ; and shall dispose of all sums received
under head 4, with the approval of the President.
12, Withdrawal of Funds.
No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Bank, except by a printed form of
cheque provided by the Society, signed by one Treasurer, and countersigned
by two other Members of the Committee.
13. Application for Aid,
All applications for aid from the Funds of the Society shall be made in
writing, and the facts stated in such applications certified to be correct by at
least two Members of the Society resident in the applicant’s district.
14. Number of Members necessary to constitute a Meeting.
At all General Meetings of the Society, the number of Members present
necessary to form a quorum shall be at least ten.
At Meetings of the Diocesan Committee, at least six.
15. Circulation of the Report.
The Annual Report of the Society shall be printed, and each Member
subscribing £1 annually to the Funds, shall be entitled to a copy.


DISTRICT ASSOCIATIONS.
OBJECT.
The object of District Associations (in connextion with the Newcastle
Church Society), is to promote the cordial union and co-operation of all the
members of the Church within the district, for the supply of, their local
wants, and for advancing the interests and usefulness of the General Society,
by increasing its funds, enlarging the sphere of its operations, and affording
a means of communication between the Society, and its members residing at
a distance.
RULES.
I. District Associations may be formed in any parish or District, and shall
consist of members of the General Society, residing within the district,
and of other contributors, of not less than five shillings annually, being
members of the United Church of England and Ireland.
11. District Associations shall meet twice, at least, in each year ; seven
days’ notice being sent to the members by the district secretary.
111. The business of District Associations shall be conducted by a Com-
mitttee, consisting of—the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, as President; the
Clergyman, ex officio, as Secretary; a Treasurer, and, at least, two other
members, annually elected at a meeting of the District Association.
IY. At District Committees, the number of persons present, necessary to
form a quorum, shall be at least three.
V. The District Committee may apply to local purposes two thirds
of the sums received by them, as contributions, to (1), the School Fund;
(2), the Book Fund ; (3), the Building Fund: and shall remit one
third, of such sums, to the General Society.
VI. Subscriptions and donations may be paid to the District Treasurer,
for any special object in the District; and all such sums shall be sacredly
reserved for the object specified, and expended on it alone.
VII. Collectors of Subscriptions and Donations, may be appointed by the
District Committee; and shall be furnished with collecting cards, having the
signature of the Secretary attached to them.
VIII. The Secretary of the District Association shall transmit an Annual
Report ’of the proceedings of the Association, with a statement of accounts,
to the Secretary of the General Society, resident at Morpeth, within the
first two months of the following year.


THE LORD BISHOP’S LETTER,
THE SECRETARIES OF THE PROVISIONAL COMMITTEE;
STATEMENT OF DIOCESAN ACCOUNTS.
Reverend and Dear Sir,
You suggested to me before the last meeting of the
Provisional Committee, how acceptable it would be to your-
selves, to the Committee, and to the great body of the members
of our Church, if I could draw up and lay before you, a brief
account of my visitations, and other labours in this Diocese
since the beginning of my episcopate. I was sorry that I
could not at once comply with your request; but the want of
sufficient time to review the events of a period of three years,
compelled me to decline the task, especially as the duties
and engagements then pressing upon me, took away all hope
of even the most limited leisure.
Be assured, however, that I will not forget your sugges-
tion, but endeavour, without any long delay, to carry it into
effect. Indeed, my chief purpose in taking my long Mis-
sionary voyage, is not merely to enjoy the pleasure of seeing
all that the Bishop of New Zealand has done in his College,
for the European and native population of that colony, or the
satisfaction of consulting with him, as to the most effective
system of Missionary co-operation for the conversion of the
Heathen in the Islands of the Western Pacific; it is not the
pleasure of such a sight, or the benefit of such consultation,
which would induce me to be absent so long from my own
peculiar sphere of duty; but my chief aim and purpose will


be, to look at every thing, and to listen to everything, with a
constant reference to my own Diocese ; to mark and meditate
upon all that I may hear and see, that I may afterwards select
everything that is valuable —adapt it to our own circumstances
—and use it for my own guidance and for your good; so that,
on my return, I may lay before the members of our Church,
matured plans for the sound superior education of our own
youth, and for the improvement of our own Australian
blacks.
My thoughts being thus constantly employed on my own
Diocese, I shall be often reviewing what has taken place in
it since I came among you as your Bishop ; and I sincerely
hope that during my absence, I may find time to draw up a
short j ournal, or some brief notes of my different visitations,
and of any other matters or events, which may seem either
interesting or instructive. This statement I shall hope to
present to you on my return, (if I be allowed to return), and
thus prove that, though absent from you in body, you have
ever been present with me in thought and affection.
Before, however, I leave you on this Missionary voyage,
and especially now that I am calling upon all the members of
our Church to unite together in order to supply, by their
joint contributions, the means of grace through the length and
breadth of this Diocese, I am most anxious to lay before you,
and, through you, before all the members of our Church, a
clear statement of every sum of money which has been col-
lected by my friends in England, or granted by English
Church Societies, and placed at my disposal: neither the
Church Societies in England, who have made these grants,
nor the Christian friends who have made these collections,
require this of me ; but I wish all the members of our Church
here, and especially the lay members, to know what sums
have been, and are likely to be, received by their Bishop.
They will not, then, suppose that I have more at my disposal
than I really have; but clearly seeing what power I have of
assisting them, and where that power ends, will, I trust, come


forward as the members of one united body, to supply each
other’s wants. They will all, I trust, consider that the
Government grant, for religious purposes, (which has been
long since appropriated and exhausted), is most unequally
distributed among them, (the long settled districts receiving
everything from it, and the newly formed districts nothing),
and will all cheerfully and generously unite to bear one
another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.
The Statement of Accounts which will accompany this
Letter, will, I trust, clearly shew every sum I have received
from England, and how it has been expended. And here I
may state what I conceive are the different principles which
should regulate the appropriation of funds sent to me from
England, and the appropriation of other funds, contributed
by the members of our Church here, through the Newcastle
Church Society, or in any other way.
The only English sources from which I have received
contributions for the use of my Diocese, are—
Ist. The Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. (See
Account A.)
2nd. The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign
Parts —from the Newcastle Special Fund. (See Account
3rd. The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign
Parts —from their General Fund. (See Account C.)
It is the principle of the Church Societies in England, that
the sums granted by them for the Colonial Dioceses, should be
placed at the disposal of the Bishop of each Diocese. I there-
fore receive and appropriate these grants and collections, and
shall hope, each year, to append to the Report of the
Newcastle Church Society, an account of every sum received
by me from England, and how it has been expended.
The principle, however, which should regulate the appro-
priation of all sums contributed by the members of our
Church here, is, I conceive, very different. I wish it to be


clearly understood, that in my opinion, those who contribute
the funds should have the power of appropriation. And while
I would impress on the Laity of the Church, the duty ot theii
contributing, I would encourage them to give, by placing the
complete control of their contributions in their own hands.
This principle of the Laity having the real control over the
funds contributed by them, is fully carried out in the New-
castle Church Society, by Rule XI. In the District Asso-
ciations, two-thirds of the contributions wdl be appropriated
by the District Committee, which will consist of one Clergy-
man, and as many Laymen as may be considered desirable :
and all sums paid to the General Church Society, including
the one-third remitted by the District Committees, will be
appropriated at the pleasure of the Diocesan Committee,
which will contain lay members, never less in number than
the whole body of Clergy in the Diocese. The only fund
which will not be entirely at the disposal of the Committee,
is the Stipend Fund, for the maintenance of additional Clergy-
men ; which will be appropriated by the Committee, with the
approval of the Bishop, for the following reason when the
Bishop appoints a Clergyman to any new district, he has to
guarantee to that Clergyman a fixed and regularly paid
stipend ; and he has to promise to the Laity of the district,
that their subscriptions for the support of their Clergyman,
shall be met by additional aid from general funds. It is,
therefore, only just to the Laity of these districts, and to the
Bishop himself, that the Stipend Fund should first be applied
to meet these engagements.
I will only add, that if any person, in looking over these
accounts, should see among the grants made by me from
public funds, any grant which I had led him to suppose
would be made from my private purse, the reason is this :
—before I became perfectly acquainted with the state and
the wants of ray whole Diocese, and the proportionate
assistance which each district might in justice expect from
me, some promises and grants were made which might


excite a little jealousy, if they were now published.
I have, therefore, made some changes between my grants
from public funds, and the gifts which I have been enabled
to make from my private purse, for supplying the spiritual
wants of the Diocese.
I remain.
Reverend and Dear Sirs,
Your faithful Friend and Bishop,
W. NEWCASTLE.
To the Rev. W. M. Cowper,
and the Rev. R. G. Boodle,
Secretaries of the Provisional
Committee.
Morpeth, April 25, 1851.
P.S. —I have requested that the Report of the Port Stephens District
Committee may be printed, on account of its own intrinsic interest, and as
affording an encouraging example to the many District Associations now
forming throughout the Diocese. Annexed to that Report, is a statement of
the sums which that Committee has placed at my disposal; and I take this
opportunity of thanking most sincerely the members of our Church in that
district, for the valuable aid they have given me. Their Christian liberality
provided, in 1848, a large supply of Bibles and books for the Diocese ; and
in 1849 and 1850, promoted the erection of important Church Buildings,
which, without such aid, could not have been undertaken. May this
Committee continue its generous exertions, and may its example be followed
in every district of the Diocese.


ACCOUNT A.
Diocese of Newcastle with Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge,
FOE GENEEAL DIOCESAN PUEPOSES
RECEIPTS.
1847. £ s. d.
Grant 500 0 0
Expended 250 0 0
£250 0 0
Balance from 1847 250 0 0
Expended ... ... 250 0 0
PAYMENTS.
1847. £ s. d.
Books from Society for Pro-
moting Christian Know-
ledge... ... ... ... 216 17 0
Other Books in England. ... 33 3 0
£250 0 0
Schoolmasters 96 0 0
Morpeth Church 82 12 3
Brisbane Church 25 0 0
Morpeth School 46 7 9
£250 0 0
This Account is, therefore, closed.
FOE
RECEIPTS.
1848. £ 8. <3.
Grant made by the Society
for Promoting Christian
Knowledge in 1847, and
drawn by me in 1848 ... 2,000 0 0
Balance from 1848 2,000 0 0
Expended 850 0 0
.£1,150 0 0
Balance from 1849 1,150 0 0
April 17.—Interest 20 14 4
Sept. 30.—Interest 24 10 2
Rent 12 0 0
1,207 4 6
Expended ... 1,157 10 5
£49 14 1
PAYMENTS.
£ 8. d.
Oct. B.—Purchase of Roslyn
Castle Estate 850 0 0
Invested in Government De-
bentures 1,040 12 11
July 28.—Draining 16 5 0
„ 30. —Conveyance ... 5 5 0
Aug. 19.—New roof (part)... 20 0
„ 29.—Clearing 72 0
Sept. 30.—Quitrentredeemed 3 7 6
£1,157 10 5
COLLEGIATE PUEPOSES.


ACCOUNT B.
Newcastle Special Fund in Account icith Society for Propagation of the
Gospel in Foreign Parts.
RECEIPTS.
1847. £ s. d.
Donations and Subscriptions. 3,927 14 8
Share of General Fund ... 600 0
4,437 14 8
Expended 1,202 9 0
3,235 5 8
Balance from 1847 3,235 5 8
Donations 292 18 0
Share of General Fund ... 1,000 0 0
4,528 3 8
Expended 3,375 0 0
1,153 3 8
Balance from 1848 1,153 3 8
Donations 341 3 6
Share of General Fund ... 150 0 0
1,644 7 2
Expended 903 3 6
741 3 8
Balance from 1849 741 3 8
The account from the Society
for 1850, has not yet been
received
Expended 700 0 0
41 3 8
PAYMENTS.
1847. £ s. d.
Passage of Clergy and Candi-
dates from England (see
Account D.) 1,202 9 0
Drawn for General and Mis.
sionary purposes (see Ac-
count E.) ... 700 0 0
Invested at mortgage at 7J
per cent 2,666 13 4
Law Deeds 8 6 8
3,375 0 0
Drawn for General and Mis-
sionary purposes (sec Ac-
count F.) 900 0 0
Printing in England 3 3 6
903 3 6
Drawn for General and Mis-
sionary purposes 500 0 0
Ditto ditto 200 0 0
700 0 0
This Special Fund arises from an appeal made by the Bishop of Newcastle, when in
England, asking for Donations and Subscriptions for five years. Therefore, after this
year 1851, this fund will cease, and no longer supply any assistance to the Diocese.


ACCOUNT C.
Diocese of Newcastle with the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, Grant
for Mission beyond the Boundaries,
[The Grant from the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts consists of
£3OO in each year, drawn by me in April and October.]
RECEIPTS.
1848. £ s. d.
April I.—Hdf-year’s Grant... 150 0 0
Oct. I.—Half-year’s Grant... 150 0 0
Expended 250 0
50 0 0
Balance from 1848... 50 0 0
April I.—Half-year’s Grant... 150 0 0
Oct. I.—Half-year’s Grant... 150 0 0
350 0 0
Expended 300 0
50 0 0
Balance from 1849... 50 0 0
April I,—Half-year’s Grant... 150 0 0
Oct. i.—Half-year’s Grant... 150 0 0
850 0 0
Expended 306 10 0
43 10 0
This Grant still continues,
increase it.
PAYMENTS.
1848. £ s d.
January—Rev. Mr. M‘Connell 50 0 0
April I.—Rev. B. Glennie ... 50 0 0
July I,—Ditto ... ... 60 0 0
October—Ditto 50 0 0
Dec. 31.—Ditto 50 0 0
250 0 0
July I.—Rev. J. Wallace ... 50 0 0
Oct, I.—Ditto 50 0 0
Dec. 31.—Ditto 30 0 0
Sept. 30. —Rev. Coles Child ... 25 0 0
„ —Ditto 40 0 0
Dec. 31.—Ditto 30 0 0
„ —Theßev.T.O’Rielly 75 0 0
April I.—Rev. Coles Child ... 30 0 0
„ —Rev J. Wallace ... 40 0 0
June 30 —Rev, J. Wallace
(Ipswich Grant).. 25 0 0
Oct. I.—Rev. H. O. Irwin ... 50 0 0
„ —Rev. Coles Child ... 30 0 0
„ —Rev. J. Wallace ... 47 10 0
„ —Rev. T. O’Reilly ... 84 0 0
306 10 0
and it is earnestly hoped that the Society may be induced to


ACCOUNT D.
Expenses of Passage from England —lB47.
CLERGY AND CANDIDATES.
1849. £ g. d.
Sept, 18.—Rev. R. G. Boodle, passage and outfit ... ... ... 200 0 0
Rev. H. O. Irwin, ditto 200 0 0
B. Glennie ditto 175 0 0
J. Rodwell, passage and cabin furniture 90 0 0
J. F. R. Whinfield, ditto 90 0 0
William Bromfield, ditto 90 0 0
E. Williamg ditto 90 0 0
H. H. Ison ditto 90 0
D. C. Peek ditto 90 0 0
SCHOOLMASTER AND MISTRESS.
Mr. Ilaskew 25 0 0
Hannah Wilcox 25 0 0
Expensea of Candidates for Trial in England 62 10 0
Freight and Insurance for Diocese 8 3 0
Books for Candidates and Diocese 36 17 0
Expenses of Clergy and Candidates on passage and at landing ... 52 9 0
£1,314 19 0
Deduct — £ g. d.
Received from Mr. Bromfield 62 10 0
~ Mr. Ison 50 0 0
112 10 0
(See account B, payments 1847).
£1,202 9 0


ACCOUNT E.
Bishop of Newcastle’s Diocesan Account for 1848.
1848. EECEIVED. £ 8. d.
Prom Newcastle Special Fund (see Recount B, payments 1848) ... ... 700 0 0
Interest on Funds invested I®® ® ®
Interest on Grant of the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knoledge
(account A.) 50 0 0
Snhaerinfion of Rishon of Diocese ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 60 0 0
Subscription of Bishop of Diocese
.£950 0 0
EXPENDED.
CLERGY AND CANDIDATES.
Rev. R. G. Boodle (grant) 75 0 0
Rev. H. O. Irwin (grant) 75 0 0
Mr. Whinfield (year’s tuition) 50 0 0
Mr. Williams (ditto) 50 0 0
Mr. Bromfield (half-year's tuition) 25 0 0
Mr. Ison | (half-year at Lyndhurst).., 40 0 0
Mr. Peek. >
Mr' Peek* 3^ ) ( ex P enses f° r returning to England) 121 0 0
Mr. Ison (illness and death) ®1 10 0
Rev. G. A. Middleton (ill) ••• ••• 20 0 0
Rev J. Rodwell (stipend) 55 0 0
Rev. J. F. R. Whinfield (ditto) 12 10
Rev. E. Williams (ditto) 12 10 0
Rev. T. O’Reilly (ditto) ... 12 10 0
CHURCHES AND SCHOOLS.
Wollombi Church ... ... 25 0 0
East Maitland (grant) 45 0 0
Hexham Church (for cedar) 10 0 0
Raymond Terrace School 20 0 0
Morpeth Parsonage 50 0 0
£750 0
£ s. d.
Received 950 0
Expended ... ... ... 750 0 0
Balance £2OO 0 o—Carried to 1849.


ACCOUNT F.
Bishop of Newcastle’s Diocesan Account for 1849.
RECEIVED
1849. £ *• d -
Balance from 1848 200 0 0
From Newcastle Special Fund (see Account B. payment 1849) 900 0 0
Interest from money at Mortgage 200 0 0
Subscription of Bishop of Newcastle ... j 50 0 0
1,350 0 0
EXPENDED.
CLERGY AND CANDIDATES FOR ORDERS,
First Quarter—Mr Wallace ( tuition) 12 10 0
„ Mr. Whinfield, ditto 12 10 0
Mr. Williams, ditto 12 10 0
Rev. J. Rodwell (stipend) 25 0 0
Ditto (grant) 50 0 0
„ Rev. J. F. R. Whinfield 25 0 0
n Rev. E. Williams (stipend) 25 0 0
Second Quarter— Rev. J. F. R. Whinfield (stipend and tuition) 37 10 0
n Rev. E. Williams (ditto) 31 10 0
Mr. A. Glennie (tuition) 12 10 0
Mr. Kemp (ditto) 6 5 0
Mr. Coles Child (ditto) 15 0 0
Third Quarter—Rev. H. O. Irwin, grant 25 0
Mr. A. Glennie and Mr. Kemp (tuition) 25 0 0
Rev. E. Williams (two-fifths stipend) 60 0 0
Rev. J. F. R. Whinfield (ditto) GO 0 0
Fourth Quarter—Mr. A. Glennie and Mr. Kemp (tuition) 25 0 0
Rev. J. Rodwell (part stipend) 10 0 0
Rev. E. Williams (one-fifth stipend) 30 0 0
Rev. J. F. R. Whinfield, (ditto) 30 0 0
536 5 0
Deduct— s>
Australian Company for Tamworth, half-year’s grant.. 25 0 0
A. Denison, Esq , for Cassilis 16 0 0
E. Hamilton, Esq., ditto ... 15 0 0
55 0 0
481 5 0


ACCOUNT F.— (Continued.)
CHURCHES AND GENERAL PURPOSES. g
East Maitland Church (grant) 45 0
Morpeth School and Fence 88 4 9
Black Creek Church 15 0 0
Morpeth Parsonage 25 0 0
Deeds for Stockton ... ... ... ••• ••• 6 6 0
Palace House, Morpeth (half repairs) ... 75 0 0
r OR A A
Mr. Cooper Turner (law expenses)
Newcastle Parsonage 25 0 0
Falbrook Church "* 20 0 0
Muswellbrook Church 25 0 0
Merton Church ® 9
25 0
Singleton Church
Mr. Blacket for plans o 17 0
’ _ . , 25 0 0
Dungog School
XT- L V V, * 51) 0 0
Hinton Church * _ v A
Wollombi Church (second grant) 9 9
Dungog Church and Site 20 0 0
n ” A A A rt
. 40 0 0
Armidale ... •••
Warkworth Church 10 0 0
„ . 10 0 0
Mem wa Church
lO 0 0
Vacy Church
SCHOOLS AND MASTERS.
4 8
Morpeth, Master’s Rent *
> 15 4 6
Books, Sydney Depository
1. CDRO. °J UIIC J r " 2() Q Q
School House, Hinton
Mr. Miller ? 1 ?
„‘5 0 0
Mr. Bowie
5 0 0
Mr. Coullin " ” *
XT nr v, ..... ... ... 6 0 0
Mr. Waugh Q n „
“*• "““8“ 3 0
Mr. Tuumer
639 13 8
T £ s. d.
Deduct—
Hannah Wilcox, repaid
Mr. Odell, repaid ..; 10 ° ° 2 0 0 0
619 13 3
Brought forward (Clergy and Candidates)
1,100 18
£ s. d.
Received 1,350 0 0
Expended I>loo 1 > 100 0 9
Balance 250 0 0-carried to 1850.


ACCOUNT G.
Bishop of Newcastle’s Diocesan Account for 1850.
1850. RECEIVED. £ s - d.
Surplus from 1849 .. .. .. 250 0 0
From Newcastle Special Fuud (see account B, payments 1850) .. .. 700 0 0
Interest from Mortgage 20 ® 0 0
Subscription from Bishop of Newcastle 50 0 0
.£1,200 0 0
EXPENDED.
First Quarter —Rev. E Williams (one-fifth stipend) 30 0 0
„ Rev. J. F. R. Whinfield (one-fifth stipend) 30 0 0
„ Rev. J. Rodwell (half-year’s additional stipend) .. .. 25 0 0
Rev. A. Glennie (grant) 15 0 0
Second Quarter —Rev. E. Williams (one-fifth stipend) 30 0 0
„ Rev. J. F. R. Whinfield (one-fifth stipend) 30 0 0
„ Mr. Blackwood (tuition) I 2 10 0
Third Quarter. —Mr. A. Glennie and Mr. Kemp (tuition) 12 10 0
12 10 0
„ Mr. Blackwood (tuition) I 2 1® ®
„ Rev. J. P. R. Whinfield (quarter stipend) 37 10 0
12 10 0
„ Rev. E. Williams (quarter stipend) 87 10 0
Fourth Quarter. —Mr. Blackwood (tuition) 6 0 0
„ Rev. J. Rodwell (half additional stipend) 25 0 0
„ Rev. F. H. Kemp (stipend) 20 0
~ Rev. J. F. R. Whinfield (quarter stipend) ~ ~ .. 37 10 0
„ Rev. E. Williams (quarter stipend) 37 10 0
398 10 0
Deduct— •£ B - d.
Australasian Agricultural Company (for Clergyman
at Tamworth) 50 0
Wollombi Contribution 66 0 0
Offertory, Newcastle •• •• •• 615 1
Ditto, Morpeth 6 0 3
A. Denison, Esq. (for Cassilis and station) 12 0 0
l4O 15 4
j£257 15


ACCOUNT G. —( Continued.)
CHURCHES AND GENERAL PURPOSES.
£ s. d.
Singleton Church (loan) 200 0 0
Brisbane Parsonage (loan) .. .. 200 0 0
Dungog Church (loan) 200 0 0
Dungog Parsonage (grant) 130 5 0
Hinton Church (grant) 50 0 0
Morpeth Schoolmaster’s House (grant) 30 0 0
Muswellbrook Church (grant) „ 10 0 0
Tamworth School-house 70 0 0
Falbrooh Church (loan) .« 50 0 0
Miss Hunt, schoolmistress (grant) 2 0 0
Deduct — 942 5
Grant from Australian Agricultural Company, for School-house
at Tamworth 50 0 0
892 5 0
Brought forward for Clergy and Candidates 257 15 0
.£1,150 0 0
£ s. d.
Received 1,200 0 0
Expended 1,150 0 0
Balance £5O 0 o—caried to 1851.


REPORT
OF THE
PORT STEPHENS DISTRICT COMMITTEE
CONTRIBUTORS TO THE NEWCASTLE CHURCH FUND,
FOR THE YEAR 1850.
Another year having elapsed, your Committee, according to
custom, have called the subscribers together, to lay before
them a statement of their proceedings ; and, in doing this,
they might, perhaps, content themselves with mentioning the
amount of subscriptions and donations received from the con-
tributors, and of Bibles and other books sold. They do not,
however, consider that by thus acting they should be
fulfilling the duty they have undertaken. That duty they
conceive to be, not merely the collection of money, and the
circulation of the word of God, the Prayer Book, and other
works of a devotional and useful character, hut the uniting of
the members of the Church of England in this District, in a
combined effort to maintain and extend their Church, and to
diffuse the benefits and blessings connected with it to the
various destitute districts in the Diocese of Newcastle.
Nor, indeed, is their object thus limited. Within the last
few months a new and most important project has been set on
foot, in addition to the former. Your Committee allude to
the design of spreading the Gospel among the heathen races
both in New Holland, and the adjacent Islands in the Pacific
Ocean, and thus bringing these outcasts into the Saviour’s fold.
And they wish to impress upon the minds of the subscribers
to this Committee, the duty of joining in this branch of


£
s.
d.
For general purposes is
38
9
0
For the special object of the Mission to the Heathen ..
2
0
0
For Books
3
12
11
And a donation has been sent from J. E. Ebsworth, Esq.,
for the general objects
5
0
0
Making the total Receipts
49
0
11
Christian effort as well as the former. Contributors will have
the choice of either object, or of both, to which to devote their
offerings. They may subscribe either to the general
purposes of the Church, or, apportion their subscriptions,
partly to the Domestic, and partly to the Foreign operations.
With reference to their own proceedings, your Committee
begin with the sale of books. At the commencement of the
year, they had on hand only a few copies of the New Testa-
ment and other small books, valued at £1 14s. 6d. (one pound
fourteen shillings and sixpence), subsequently they received
through the kindness of the Lord Bishop from the Depot at
Morpeth, a supply of Bibles, &c., to the amount of £4 7s. 4d.
And, again, at a later period, another supply, amounting to
£2 19s. 3d. Of these, there have been sold to the extent of
£3 12s. lid., leaving on hand at the end of the year
£5 Bs. 2d. worth.
The amount of contributions, your Committee are sorry to
say, has fallen short of the sum received last year. And the
number of subscribers is less. The amount received
The deficiency compared with last year, may be attributed
in part to the removal of some of their friends to other
districts ; and it is some consolation to remember that their
interest is not lost to the cause, but transferred to the places
in which they reside. But it is much to be wished that the
number of those who are united with us may be increased.
And, your Committee would again urge upon the present
subscribers to take means to produce this effect: let them
remember that it is in their power to do something towards
kindling the zeal of others, and bringing them to leel that it


is a duty they owe to their Lord and Saviour, to strive
together for the furtherance of His kingdom.
Why is it, your Committee would ask, that such a spirit is
not more widely diffused amongst us? Why is it that so
small a portion of the members of the Church of England
have as yet come forward to help in spreading and establish-
ing the Redeemer’s kingdom ? Have they reflected on their
own privileges ? And how sad their condition would be, if
they were without a Church, without a School, without a
Clergyman, without Bibles, without Prayer Books, without
school books for their children ? It is to supply these blessings
to those who are now without them, or to prevent their being
deprived of them hereafter, that this Committee invites their
aid and co-operation. They ask you to give the Church the
power to send these blessings, and the means of making the
Gospel known to the ignorant, the benighted, and the lost.
And shall they ask in vain ? Will you not be willing to lend
your aid and to deny yourselves rather than they should
continue in a condition so lamentable ? Will you not strive
to increase, rather than to reduce your subscriptions, and
each one to induce another to cast in his offering to the
Treasury of the Lord ?
Your Committee indulge the hope that this will be the
case, and imploring the Divine blessing, without which, they
are well assured, no argument of theirs can ever avail, they
leave the work in the hands of the subscribers, adding, only,
that we are all stewards for one Lord, and that our duty is
expressed by him in those emphatic w ords.
“ Occupy till I come.”


LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
TO THE
DISTRICT COMMITTEE AT PORT STEPHENS.
£ s. d.
The Australian Agricul-
tural Company 5 5 0
Jas, E. Ebsworth, Esq. .220
Mrs. Ebsworth ........ 1 1 0
Miss Ebsworth 0 10 6
Miss M. Ebsworth 0 10 6
Mr. Stanley Ebsworth.. 010 6
Mr. Rodwell 0 5 6
Philip Gedley King, Esq 2 0 0
James Corlette, Esq. .. 1 11 6
Rev. W. M. Cowper.... 2 0 0
Mrs. Cowper 2 0 0
Master W. Cowper .... 0 10 0
Miss Louisa Cowper.... 0 7 6
Miss H. A. Cowper .... 0 7 6
Miss Eliza Jane Cowper 0 7 6
Miss Matilda Cowper ..076
Mr. Martin 1 0 0
Mr. J. Hinton 0 10 0
Mr. George Phillis .... 0 12 0
Mr. Wm. Street 0 5 0
Mr. Thomas Mayton .. 0 5 0
Mr. Wm. Brown 0 5 0
Mr. John Roberts 0 5 0
Thos, L. Ebsworth, Esq. 2 0 0
Mrs. T. L. Ebsworth .. 2 0 0
The Masters Ebsworth .10 0
James Barnes T.... 0 6 0
Mr. J. T. Banks 1 0 0
Carried over 29 4 6
£ s. d.
Brought over 29 4 6
Mrs. Banks 0 10 0
James Hinton 0 4 0
John Masters 0 12 0
Moses Masters 0 5 0
William Ashley 0 5 0
Miss Cribb ... 0 2 0
Henry Masters 0 12 0
Richard Bradley ...... 1 0 0
Mr, Scott 0 5 0
Mr. Laman 1 0 0
Mr. Thos. Laman, jun. .050
William Masters, sen. .. 0 6 0
Mr. Thomas Nicholls .. 010 0
Mrs. Nicholls 0 10 0
Thomas Nicholls, jun. . . 0 5 0
Sophia Nicholls 0 3 0
Joshua Nicholls 0 3 0
Henry, Edward, Eliza,
Nicholls 0 3 0
Robert Phillips 0 5 0
Thomas Yidler 0 5 0
Alfred Bourne 0 12 0
John Yidler 0 5 0
George Yidler 0 2 6
Charles Stokes 0 5 0
William Arrowsmith .. 0 10 0
£3B 9 0


DONATIONS
FOR THE SPECIAL OBJECT OF MISSIONS.
£ s. d.
.10 0
Rev. W. M. Cowper n n
±tev. VV .m. t. q jq q
Mrs. Brown „ r n
mrs. mown q g q
Master S, Mitchell „ s n
master o. iviututu * * 050
John Reid
£2 0 0
FOR GENERAL PURPOSES
J. E. Ebsworth, Esq
45 9 0
3 12 11
Received for Bibles, Prayer Books, &c„ sold
. 49 0 11
Total receipts
Collection after Sermon for Missions 20 15 °
£69 15 11
account.
Bishop of Newcastle, with Port Stephens Diocesan Committee.
RECEIPTS,
1848. £ 8 d -
For General Purposes 36 3 6
For General Purposes 51 13 2
For General Purposes 47 Oil
For Mission Fund 22 15 0
69 15 11
PAYMENTS.
£ 8. d
Paid to Depositary at Sydney
for Books
36 3 6
1849.
School, Tamworth 25 0 0
School, Dungog 26 13 2
51 13 2
1850.
Books supplied to Secretary ... 7 6 7
School, Newcastle ... 20 0 0
Parsonage, Dungog 19 14
Mission Fund 22 15 0
69 15 11


FIRST GENERAL MEETING, APRIL 24th, 1851.
RESOLUTIONS.
Moved by the Rev. G. K. Rusden,
Seconded by E. C. Close, Esq.,
1. That the Report now laid before the Meeting be adopted, and printed
for circulation.
Moved by the Rev. R. Chapman,
Seconded by Mr. J. Kingsmill,
2. That the Rev. G. K. Rusden and E. C. Close, Esqs., be appointed
Treasurers. That the Rev. W. M. Cowper and the Incumbent of St. James’,
Morpeth, be elected the Secretaries. That the Rev. R. T. Bolton and Mr.
E. P. Capper be elected Auditors for the present year. And that the
following persons be elected lay-members of the Committee :—Beresford
Hudson, Esq., Charles Boydell, Esq., William Wilton, Esq., P. G. King,
Esq., W. Knox Child, Esq., Captain Hungerford, J. H. Cox, Esq.,
Mr. E. P. Capper, J. Corlette, Esq., with power to add to their number.
Moved by Mr. W. T. Cape,
Seconded by the Rev. C. P. N. Wilton,
3. That this Meeting considers it to be the duty of the Members of the
Church to provide for their children a complete course of sound religious
education, by means of primary schools, and commercial or grammar
schools; and by the establishment of a Diocesan College; and invites the
co-operation of their brethren throughout the Diocese for effecting the most
desirable object.
Moved by the Rev. W. M. Cowper,
Seconded by Mr. E. P. Capper.
4. That this Meeting, being deeply impressed with the necessity of
providing for the maintenance of Clergymen in districts for which no
Government stipend can be obtained, would urge upon all the Members of
the Church the duty of contributing for this object, and especially upon
those residing in districts which enjoy the benefit of such Government
assistance.


Moved by Mr. H. Stack,
Seconded by the Rev. R. G. Boodle.
5. That the Meeting has heard with thankfulness of the success of the
appeal which has been made for the Establishment of a Mission among the
Heathen in the isles of the Western Pacific ; and hopes that the plans in
contemplation for the conversion of the Australian Blacks will meet with
similar support.
Moved by J. Allman, Esq.,
Seconded by C. Boydell, Esq.,
And put to the Meeting by the Senior Chaplain.
6. That the thanks of this Meeting be offered to the Right Reverend the
Lord Bishop for his sermon, preached at St. James’ Church this morning,
on behalf of the Society, with a request that he will allow the same to be
printed ; and would at the same time record its sense of the viligant earnest-
ness with which he has watched over the affairs of this Diocese, and of the
progress which the Church herein has made since the commencement of his
episcopate.
Signed W. NEWCASTLE,
President and Chairman.


COLLECTIONS
MADE IN
THE DIOCESE OF NEWCASTLE
FOR THE
SUPPORT OF MISSIONS TO THE HEATHEN
1851.
£ s. d.
Collection at Meeting,
Nov, 14, 1850 22 14 1
Morpeth 52 17 6
Stroud 22 15 0
Newcastle 6 13 0
East Maitland 12 6 10
West Maitland 8 2 6
Wollonibi 7 19 6
Port Macquarie 10 0 0
Muswellbrook 15 0 0
Scone 11 19 9
Singleton 7 2 9
Paterson 6 7 0
Gresford .... 5 5 0
Brisbane Water 7 0 8
Armidale 113 9
Hexham 116 0
Raymond Terrace .... 5 0 0
Jerry’s Plains 4 6 6
Carried forward 208 19 10
£ s. d.
Brought forward 208 19 10
Darling Downs 3 12 0
* Clarence River
*North Brisbane
*lpswich
* Liverpool Plains ....
*Dungog
£212 11 10
Placed in the Bishop’s
hands for the Mission
to the Islands of the
Western Pacific .... 200 0 0
Balance paid over to
the Treasurers of the
Newcastle Church
Society, for the
Mission to the Aus-
tralian Blacks 12 11 10
* Collections not yet returned


LIST OF THE CLERGY
IN THE DIOCESE OF NEWCASTLE,
APRIL 24th, 1851.
Lord Bishop of Newcastle.
THE RIGHT REVEREND WILLIAM TYRRELL, D.D.
Clergy appointed previous to the arrival of the Bishop, January 16, 1848.
PRIESTS.
The Rev. C. P. N. Wilton Newcastle.
The Rev. John Cross Fort Macquarie.
The Rev. G. K. Rusden East Maitland,
The Rev. W. M. Cowper Stroud.
6 The Rev. R. T. Bolter Hexham.
The Rev. C. Spencer Raymond Terrace.
The Rev. J. Morse Scone.
The Rev. J. Cooper Jerry’s Plains.
The Rev. W. F. Addams Paterson.
10 The Rev. H. Tingcombe New England,
The Rev. R. Chapman West Maitland.
Clergy appointed since the arrival of the Bishop of Newcastle.
PRIESTS. A
The Rev. R. G. Boodle Muswellbrook.
The Rev. H. O. Irwin .. North Brisbane.
The Rev. B. Glennie Darling Downs,
The Rev. J. Rodwell Morpeth
5 The Rev. J. F. R. Whinfield Wollombi.
The Rev, E. Williams Liverpool Plains.
The Rev. T. O’Reilly Port Macquarie.
The Rev. Coles Child Clarence and Rich-
mond Rivers.
The Rev. John Wallace Ipswich.
10 The Rev. W. Toms William River.
The Rev. J. Raynor Not yet appointed.
DEACONS.
The Rev, A. Glennie Brisbane Water.
The Rev. J. Blackwood Singleton.
The Rev. F. H. Kemp Cassilis.
15 The Rev. J. R. Bloomfield Lockinvax and Clifden
CANDIDATES FOR ORDERS.
John Greenwood Hexham.
Arthur E. Selwyn Wee Waa.
John Stack West Maitland.
William White Edenglassie.
