

REPLY
“A BRIEF STATEMENT OF FACTS,
• v
IS CONNECTICS WITH AN
OVERLAND EXPEDITION
KROM
LAKE GEORGE TO PORT PHILLIP, IN 1H24,”
PUBLISHED IN MAY LAST. BY
“HAMILTON HI ML.”
WILLIAM 111 ETON IIOVELE.
BANGALORE
RE PRINTED AT TUB CENTRAL JAIL PRESS
I*6o
Pies c.




PREFACE.
N
nN
V
1
i
A
*
N
that I ought to reply to it.
In the early part of the present year a pamphlet wan published
and circulated in the colony, entitled “ A Brief statement of
Facts, in connection with an Overland Expedition from Lake
George to Port Phillip in 1824. And this “ Brief Statement'*
also purports to be written, by “ Hamilton Hume” —and to be
edited by “ the Revd. Mr. Ross” of Goulburn.
The pamphlet, which of itself would soon hare slumbered in
oblivion worthy of its tone and style, has elicited some attention,
in consequence of certain notices of it in the public journals, and
as those notices, to some extent, seem to accredit the statement
of Mr. Hume, it has been suggested to mo by some friends.
Had I consulted my own feelings, I certainly should not have
taken this course ; for the miscalled statement of facts, appeared
to me to Ih) so palpably a gross perversion of facts, and an in-
vention of untruths, that I regarded its publication with con-
tempt ; m igated only by sorrow, that a vulgar and groundless
feeling of envy should sufficed to have awakened in the mind of
one, who was formerly my companion in adventure, and who for
thirty years post has called himself my friend, feelings of per-
sonal malignity, and injustice.
I shall not follow Mr. Hume’s example, by attempting to depre-
ciate his character, or to detract from his share of merit in the
enterprise conducted by him and myself jointly, and which is
the subject of his brochure. With Mr. Hume I have nothing to
do; my business is with the public, and in placing myself before
that public in a proper position, I can afford to pity the paltry


jealousy which has led to an unprovoked attack on me, and
which 1 can well believe has been inflamed by the base sugges-
tions of some miserable and secret adviser.
Neither shall I adopt the course pursued by the Rovd. Editor
of Mr. Hume's work, of prefacing any observations I have to
make, by reference to my personal antecedents, or any eulogistic
comment on such slight services as it has been my good fortune
to render to the land of my adoption during my long residence
of forty-two years in it. 1 can indeed, hardly doubt, that Mr.
Hume himself must-have felt somewhat ashamed of the inflated
bombast with which his reverend counsellor deemed it necessary
to set forth his merits on a subject so simple, as the overland
expedition to Port Phillip. I shall therefore proceed at once to
consider Mr. Hume's work ; but licfore proceeding to examine
his statements in detail, it will lie wgll-briefly to recapitulate
the circumstances in which it had its origin.
In the latter part of the year 1853, I was induced to visit the
town of Geelong, which stands on the spot which was held in view,
from the terminus of the overland expedition, accomplished in
the year 1824 by Mr. Hume and myself. During my stay there,
I was treated with marked attention and hospitality by the ci-
tizens and the authorities of the place. Previous to my visit, I had
expressed a wish to Mr. Watson, a mutual friend, that Mr. Hume
should acoompai.y mo, and I requested that gentleman to com-
municate the same to Mr. Hume. Ido not know whether this
communication was ever made, but it shows at all events that 1
had no intention of monopolising any undue share of public
gratitude.
During my stay in Victoria several testimonials were presented
to me in commemoration <if past services, and among other things,
I was invited to a public dinner, where my name, in conjunction
with that of Mr. Hume, was received with much favor. The
public press was also highly complimentary, but on every publio
occasion, and in almost every written article, in reference to the
expedition, Mr. II nine’s sendees met unequal recognition with my
own. It is true that my name was mentioned in precedence, but
this naturally arose from the fact that the only published authen-
tic narrative of the expedition assigned my name a similar pre-


cedcnce, without any arrangement or connivance of mine what-
ever ; and still more naturally,because I was on the spot where
the recognition was made, and Mr Hume was not.
The following letter containing propositions to the Government
before the expedition, will show that Mr. Hume acquiesced to
the precedence, since assigned to my name.
No. 97, George-rtreet, Sydney,
2S»h July, 1824
Sin -W« have the honor to inform your Excellency, that, having made enquiry
r'-«i-'cting the hire of horse*, the charge will be Be. per diem each, which
f ,r 15 week* will amount to £26 s*. each horee, making a total of £2116 Be. for
8 home*. On further enquiry, we learn that hone* for tbia undertaking may
purchased for £35 each on an average, which would amount to £315 for nine
h r*e*, being only £7B 15*. more than the hire; and it i* probable that on
t heir recovery from the journey they might fetch very near, or the whole of
tli.dr original coat.
Should your Excellency approve of either of the above proposition*, your Ex-
cellency’* anawer will enable u* to insert an advertisement in this week*
“Garotte.” for the completion of this object.
We have the honor to be he..
W. H. Hotell,
H. Hums.
His Excellenct, Sir THOS. BRISBANE.
“This, then, was the head and front of my offending,” which
Mr. Hume characterises as “ almost monopolizing, with the
public, the fame and credit of the expedition to Port Phillip, in
which I was associated with him in 1824.” But Mr. Hume fails to
point out one single instance in which I took any step in such a
direction. He does not, and 1 defy him to do so, put his finger
on any one expression of mine, which arrogates to myself any
superior claims over him. On the contrary if he will refer, to the
Melbourne and Geelong journals, he will find in every reported
speech of mine, an express recognition of the part he took in
the enterprise; and I further challenge him to name a single
instance throughout the thirty years which have elapsed since
that enterprise was successfully completed, in which I have en-
deavoured unfairly to parade my own merits, or to cast his into
the shade. The Melbourne Argue has indeed expressed a full
avowal that 1 always gave Mr. Hume full credit with myself.
Immediately on my return from Victoria, I wrote to Mr. Hume
expressing my regret that he had not been with me to partake


of the kindness I had experienced, and informing him of the dis-
appointment felt at his absence by the people there, and that it
was their intention to erect an obelisk on the shores of the Bay,
on which both our names were to be inscribed. To this letter
I received a most ungracious answer, in which Mr. Hume express*
Mr. Hume, however
ise given to him, and which
brief lines, the germ of the
credit due to others to himself.
I am informed that a testimonial is in progress for his services
in discovering the land to the south of Goulburn. This land,
however, was discovered by Mr. Charles Throsby Smith, and
Joseph Wild, servant to, the late Dr. Throsby.
These then are the circumstances under which Mr. Hume wrote;
not that I or any one else had done injustice to his merits, but be-
cause an accident had brought my name somewhat more conspi-
cuously before the public than his own. This is the ground he
assigns why, if he did not, to use a villgar phrase, “ blow his own
trumpet” “ it might possibly with the next generation, be doubt-
ed whether any one called Hamilton Hume accompanied the ex-
pedition at all.” What is is this, but a paltry excuse for the
ebullition of his jealous spleen I—Will the noble river, the head
the most magnifient stream which this island continent pos-
sesses, and which still bears his name, with which I christened
it in a generous and sincere appreciation of his services, furnish
no monument of his worth and of his fame t—Will not the gra-
ven stone, which the inhabitants of Geelong are prepared to rear
on the spot which wt first reclaimed from the desert, form a
memorial at least as enduring as the ephemeral and vituperative
page, which he has chosen for the record of his achievement t
When I find motives so paltry, excuses so transparent, resorted
to to justify the betrayal of a friendship of thirty years standing,
1 cease to wonder, that evidence which under other any circum-
stances Mr. Hume would have been the first to repudiate, should
be worked up in its most garbled form to suit an end so unwor-
thy: I cease to wonder that his “ statement of facts " should turn
out to be a series of perversions of the real truth, and of inconsis-
tencies in which the author continually refutes himself. I cease to
be surprised, that in his preface be says “hehas no wish to detract


from the credit of Mr. Hovell; I am free to confer, that, jointly,
we shared hardships enough: and it is my desire to avoid anything
like asperity in my present statement; ” whilst in that statement
he labours to prove, that not only was none of the success of
the enterprise attributable to my exertions, —that I was in fact
an incubus upon it, but adds direct, gross, personal insult to his
most mendacious inuendoes.
It is only on this point that I would add one word Indore pro-
ceeding to deal with the statement in detail. In the 22nd page
of Mr. Hume’s pamphlet, a statement is published us having
been made by a man named “ Angel, ” that he thought Mr.
Hume called Mr. Hovell and Claude (one of the men who accom-
panied the expedition,) “ Cowards." When I read the passage
feeling that, although he published it, Mr. Hume must have
known this statement to be utterly false, I wrote to Mr. Hume
to the following effect:—“ In order that there may l>e no ambi-
guity on the subject, I now want, Sir, an imnudiate answer from
you, whether you did, or not, apply the word “ Coward ” to me.
To this question I received an equivocating reply, refer-
ring to Angel’s evidence, and not to his own recollection.
A reply, the evasion evinced in which, shows how little
trust Mr. Hume can put in his owm w itnesses, when he cannot
certify to the truth of what they aver, in matters in which he was
himself most nearly concerned. For thirty years the accusations-
and insinuations contained in Mr. Hume’s {aunphlet have l>een
withheld. Will any man of common sense believe, that if they
were true —if they could have been sustained by the w illing te s
timony of the parties who accompanied the expedition, that they
would not have been preferred immediately on his return f
Would the opportunity of securing to himself the w hole honor
and glory of the successful enterprise have been foregone by a
man so avaricious of passing fame, and so morbidly jealous of the
award of it to others as Mr. Hume has shown himself to I** 1
I repeat, that I cannot believe that Mr. Hume has acted under
his own advice in this matter; or that, if he has, he has not greatly
fallen from his former self. His foes, if ho had any, would have
given him credit for more of manly feeling, and generous spirit,
than his pamphlet evinces.


In the explanation I feel now reluctantly compelled to offer,
I can conscientiously say I reciprocate none of Mr. Hume’s ill
feeling, none of his jealousy, and cordially do I assent to the
right he has to express his opinion, that his exertions contri-
buted largely to the projection and success of the enterprise of
1824
Mr. Hume may have a belief in the statement he has made, or
he may have been urged on by others to make it; but in the end
I think he will regret that he has taken bad advice, and exclaim
with many other misled men—“ protect me from my friends. ’’ I
can as conscientiously avow, that had the circumstances been re-
versed, that had Mr. Hume, when on a pleasure trip, been wel-
comed by a body of his fellow Colonists, had he received in his
{terson the grateful tribute of their recollection of his former
services—while my name was always most faithfully associated
with that tribute, though I might have regretted that I did not
share in the personal recognition, none would have more glad-
ly have sympathised with his justifiable exultation, than his
former friend and companion.
WILLIAM HILTON HOVELL.
INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
The delay in publishing the following reply to Mr. Hume’s
“ statement of facts,” is partly accounted for in the preface.
It was in fact, against my wish to notice the statement at all,
but to let it go for wliat it was worth.
Under the urgent advice of valued friends, I have considered it
right to publish the following answer, but the closing up all my
official business, and my removal from Goulburn, previous to my
departure from the colony, have been circumstances which have
tendered to prevent my taking the step, I ultimately decided on,
so promptly as I could have wished.


REPLY
TO “ A BRIEF STATEMENT OF FACTS.”
It is not my intention, in attempting to refute the pretended
“statement of facts,” published by Mr. Hume, to weary the reader
with a grave notice of every palpable error, every glaring inconsis-
tency with which the statement is replete. My main object will
be, to show that the principal points on which he relies are not
founded on truth, and that consequently, in order to support
these points, he has been obliged to resort to a most garbled
narrative of the events as they really occurred.
The only authentic narrative of the expedition of Mr. Hume
and myself, was first published in January, 1831, and a second
edition, with alterations and amendments, was published in 1837.
This narrative was compiled by Dr. Bland, almost exclusively from
my field book, which was kept by me regularly day by day, and in
which is noted down every occurrence worthy of mention which
befel us in our expedition. That field book I have now beside
me; and as the narrative of Dr. Bland, and, if necessary, the tes-
timony of Dr. Bland, can attest the identity of the journal, with
that from which his work was compiled; and as the statements of
the narrative have never been impugned even by Mr. Hume him-
self, I consider I am fairly justified in placing more weight on
the statements contained in that record, than on the vague re-
collections of convict servants who accompanied our party, but who
for thirty years past have never been called on to give any account
of the Expedition and its events.


The main heads of Mr. Hume’s pamphlet to which I shall direct
my attention, are, Ist, the endeavour to appropriate to himself
the merit of initiating the enterprise; 2nd, his attempt to exalt
his own services in its conduct, to the depreciation of mine.
The first of these heads 1 can very briefly dispose of; although
it has pleased Mr. Hume to expatiate on it at some length —the
statement, however, stripped of its verbiage, amounts to this ;
early in the year 1824, the then governor of the colony, Sir Thomas
Brisbane, stated to Alexander Berry, Esq., his purpose of landing
a party of prisoners near Cape Howe or Wilson's Promontory,
with instructions to work their way hack to Sydney, overland.
Mr. Berry suggested Mr. Hume as the leader of the party ;hut
he declined to accompany such expedition, but proposed, if fur-
nished with a sufficient force by the government, to start from
(loorge and push his journey on to Western Port. The
governor assented to the proposal, but after much delay it fell to
the ground, because the government could not furnish the re-
quisite cattle. Some time after the negociation was renewed, and
Mr. Hovell, at the instance of Mr. Berry, was associated with the
party. Through the jealousy of certain officials, the scheme was
again thwarted. “After which, Mr. Hovell agreed with me to find,
jointly, the men and the necessary cattle for carrying out the
expedition/'
Now it is difficult to point out theactualerrorof this statement
but it is an ingenious perversion of the real circumstances, got up to
suit Mr. Hume’s purposes. What we have to do now with what
took place l*etween Mr. Hume and the government, before I was
associated with bin. in the enterprise, I knownot. This, however,
1 know to be the fact: that having waited on the government two
or three times, I saw the absurdity of imagining that, with the
feelings displayed by the subordinate officers of the government,
the Expedition oouldeverreceive any etficieutassistance from that
quarter. So Car, then, as the idea of the journey is concerned, it
belonged to Sir Thomas Brisbane more than to Mr. Hume, or any
one else. When 1 found we were thrown overboard by the go-
vernment, /proposed to Mr. Hume that we should undertake the
Expedition on our own private account, and asked him what h«
could furnish; he told me, and I agreed to supply the necessary
remainder, the government being asked only for a few things, not


to be purchased in the colony, viz., pack saddles, a tent, fire arms
and ammunition. The Expedition thus became a matter entirely
of private enterprise, in which I took a joint risk with Mr Hume.
I equally shared the expense, I was equally aware of the dangers
wc should have to encounter; and I exercised an equal discretion
and control with him in the management of the party. Mr. Hume,
then, was not the originator of the government scheme, he was not
the suggestor of the private enterprize. If there were credit in its
conception, and the sacrifices personally made to carry it out, that
credit is shared alike by l*oth ; and I see not why I should have
repudiated my share of the credit on my visit to Victoria, so long
as 1 never by word or deed infringed on Mr. Hume’s equal claim ;
but frequently put forward that claim and heard it publicly re-
cognised. The attempt, therefore, to establish on the part of Mr.
Hume anv priority in the initiation of the enterprise, is one of the
false assumptions with which his book abounds; and the very
mixing up in the matter the previous overturesof the government,
and its subsequent bad faith, has as much do with the question at
issue, as Mr. Hume’s complaint of the smallness of the remunera-
tion he received and the losses in which he was involved. My
loss was as great as his; my remuneration was not greater; but
my risk and my services were at least equal to his.
I now come to consider the second main object of the work, viz.,
to exalt Mr. Hume’s services in theconduct of this enterprise, and
to deprcciate^minc.
It is necessary, however, to say a few words as to the character
of the testimony, on which Mr. Hume rest* his “statement of
facts." Of course, any evidence respecting the conduct of the party
could only be given by those accompanying it. These, exclusively
of Mr. Hume and myself, were six in number, and consisted en-
tirely of assigned servants. Four of these were the servants of
Mr. Hume, viz,, Thomas Boyd, Claude Bossawa, Henry Angel,
and James Fitzpatrick. The names of my servants were, Samuel
Bollard and Benjamin Smith.
Now it is a strange fact, that Mr. Hume relics exclusively on
the testimony of his own servants, and that he even excludes one
of these, because, as must be seen from his pamphlet, Claude
Bossawa’s evidence would assuredly have been adverse to him.


The other three men, I infer from the pamphlet, were examined
Home time shortly before it was written, being thirty years after
the events narrated took place. They are, lam informed, all
still in some way under the influence of Mr. Hume or his friends.
They were examined by his friends, with no one to attend on my
liehalf to cross examine or to interfere. The two assigned servants
taken by me have not been examined at all. Whether they are
alive or dead I know not, but I think the following bare faced
mis-statement will shew pretty clearly, that if living they would
not have been sought out by Mr. Hume.
The witness on whom that gentleman principally depends to
make out his case, is Thomas Boyd, and the reckless manner in
which the fellow gives his evidence, and the evident superiority
assigned to him by Mr. Hume in the enterprise, evinces a very
excellent understanding between them. Now, for what purpose I
am content to leave the public to judge —whether to give some-
thing like colour to his daring testimony or not, is not my busi-
ness; but Mr. Hume, in the 13th page of his pamphlet, at the very
starting point of the expedition, enumerates this man Boyd among
my men, leaving the impression on the public mind, that Boyd
was one of my assigned servants, when he knew him to l>c one
of his own, or of Mr. Broughton, a friend of his own.
It is also singular that the only man whose conduct iscomplained
of in Mr. Hume’s narrative, liesides myself, is Claude Bossawa
also one of Mr. Hume’s assigned servants, and the only one who is
not cited to prove the assertions in his statement.
It may also be, forthe sake of reference hereafter, well to state
what was furnished for the prosecution of the enterprise by Mr.
Hume and myself. Mr. Hume had two horses, cart, and one bul-
lock, while I had four bullocks, cart, and one horse. Each of ns
supplied an equal stock of provisions, and the men had slop suits
allotted to them by the government.
The first positive mis statement which I proceed to point out, as
to the management of the expedition, occurs in a note appended to
page 14, in which Mr. Hume says:—“ I discovered Yass Plains, in
company with some of my relatives, as early as the year 1 M2l
Now, Messrs. Bradley, Shelley, John Byrnes, and C. T. Smith,
were the first white men who visited Yass Plains in the month of


April, IS2T Mr. Hume had never seen them till we crossed them
on this expedition, and he told me so before we commenced our
journey across them. ,
The next inaccuracy I come to in the statement, is one of a very
trilling nature of itself but it shows how the morbid desire for
superiority can swerve the mind into a complete forgetfulness of
the truth. Mr, Hume states, that finding the Murmmbidgee
Kiver at Marj urigong flooded, and being: unable to form a canoe,
he set to work and took the wheels off his cart, covered the body
o:'it with hi* tarpaulin, and thus made of it a very excellent punt,
in a note to Dr. Bland’s work, a description of the way in which
this punt was made available is given, and it is there stated that
tiie attention of the party was accidentally turned to the cart as a
substitute for a canoe. Mr. Hume, however, claims the merit of
the experiment, as suggested by experience to him, seven years
liefore at the Bong Bong Kiver. Dr. Bland’s account, however, is
the correct one, the idea being first suggested by me; and a fur-
ther error in Mr. Hume’s statement is, that the cart was not hi*
but min*, it being chosen for the purpose on account of its being
the lightest. These are small matters, but when Mr. Hume can
descend to mis-state trifles, to exaggerate his own importance, he
may well be suspected of similar inaccuracies in more serious
matters.
It is remarkable, too, in reference to this matter, that Mr. Hume
does not venture to say himself that it was his cart that was em-
ployed in this service, but he allows his man Boyd to say it for
him, he knowing: well that Boyd must be stating what was false.
I now come to the first portions of what Mr. Hume, I presume,
relies on as evidence of his statement. I allude to the testimony
of his three assigned servants, Boyd, Angel, and Fitzpatrick.
When the whole of the evidence of these men was taken, and in
whose hands that valuable document at present rests, does not ap-
fhar, hut the fragments which are given, are evidently parts of a
whole, or short sentences cooked up, to serve the purposes of the
writer. It is ijuite evident, too, that however different their ver-
sions may lie in matters of detail, that on even' point they thrust
in an opinion, in which a most singular unanimity exists, that Mr.
Hume was the man whodid everything for thesucecss of the ex-
pedition, whilst I did nothing. S> much is this the cose that,


in a note to the 16th page, Mr. Hume himself feels compelled to
correct Boyd’s statement as to how the punt was got across tho
river. Boyd’s evidence, however, in many instances, goes too far for
Mr. Hume. For instance, when on the banks of the Mumimhidgee,
Boyd is made to say, 44 Mr. Hovel! then asked how do you mean to
get across this river 1” Mr. Hume answered, 44 that’s l»est known
to myself, I’ll soon get over.” Now, 1 ask, was this an answer
which Mr. Hume ought to be glad to parade l>efure the public, or
does not it show that the tone and temper of his mind were per-
fectly mounted to such an expedition t On what ground docs
he allow evidence to he given 44 that I did nothing to assist him in
this operatic, according to Boyd!” that 44 I never did anything
in that way, according to Angel I" that “Mr. Hovell hud no
hand in it either doing or suggesting it, according to Fitzpa-
trick r when according to the very aame testimony he al«o-
--lutely and in the coarsest manner refused to give me anv ex-
planation of his plans at all.
I do not however accuse Mr. Hume of forgetting himself so
far as to make this reply ;it never was made. As I have said
before, the experiment was suggested hy myself, and in carrying
it out I rendered all the assistance I thought necessary. The
whole matter would he unworthy of notice where it not to
show the character of the evidence on which Mr. Hume relies.
That every one of these men should recollect, after thirty years
time, that i was doing nothing, either by suggestion or act,
when the punt was constructed, is simply alwurd. The fact, that
they swear it was Mr. Hume's cart that was used, when it really
was mine, and the singular circumstance that each one of the
three, chooses this particular point, on which to express his opi-
nion of my general capacity for the expedition, must convince
every fair and honorable mi.id that no reliance is to be placed
on such testimony, and that it was lieneath the character of an
honest man and a gentleman to assail me on such very ques-
tionable evidence. Mr. Hume, from the statements of those
men, proceeds to say 44 that it was evident, if dependent mi my
own resources, and left to my own shifts, I would not under the
circumstances have crossed the Mumimhidgee, though I might
have proceeded to trace it downwards ; and hy so doing I should
have acted, so far, according to the instructions furnished fur


our guidance.” Now what I might have done if left to my
own resources, is a question which I take it Mr. Hume’s i/w-
--dirit will not exactly settle; hut w ith regard to the instructions
furnished for our guidance, 1 can only say I know of none ; and
if Mr. Hume has them in his possession, he certainly concealed
them very carefully from me.
The next [nissage in Mr. Hume’s statement is singularly in-
cousisteut with the |K»rtion respecting the part I took in end-
ing the river. There he makes me a helpless nonentity, taking
no part in the conduct of the expedition at all. He proceeds to
say however “ after crossing the river and advancing a da\'s
journey, we found ourselves hemmed in by mountains, and caiu|i-
ed for two nights on the Nurreiigulleti Meadows. In order to
hud an outlet, Mr. Huvell took one direction and I took
another”—on this occasion 1 am allowed to reassnme my share in
the control of the [tarty; hut Mr. Hume is again obliged to resort
to mis-statement, tor the purposes of self-laudation, even in this
matter; after stating that he was fortunate enough to hit upon
an outlet, he goes on to say, “on this occasion Mr. Hovell hist
himself for part of two days, and when I found him, he was ac-
tually hut unsuspectingly travelling hack in the direction of
Yassor Downing." From this it would a|>|**ar that I actually
did loose myself for two days. Now Boyd, in respect to thid
matter, says as follows. “ While camped at Narrengullen, Mr.
Hume went in one direction and Mr. Hovell in another, to seek
for an outlet. I accompanied Mr. Hovell, tee tiro got lost and
were out all night aw ay from the camp and the rest of the | nrtr.
—About seven or eight o’clock next morning I heard Mr. Hume
tiring guns for us—on which I remarked to Mr. Hovel) that w e
were out of our latitude altogether ; he asked me how 1 knew it 1
1 replied that 1 judged from the direction from which the guns
sounded. We made in that direction, and shortly met Mr. Hume
looking for us”
By this statement it will lie seen that the part of two days,
means that we were out from tl»e party one night; that I did not
loose myself alone as M r - Hume would imply, hut in company
with tlie man whom Mr. Hume himself s]ieaks of, as the lies!
bushman of the party, but who on this occasion proved himself
as bad a traveller as myself. The description of the matter in


my road book is verbatim as follows. “At 2p. m., myself and
one man, and Mr. Hume with two men, went out in different
directions to look for a road.—ln the direction I took the whole
country was impassable, for on following each small water course
it would receive perhaps twenty others, until at last it took its
course through some deep ravine, and emptied itself into the
river. Whilst out, the dogs killed an Emu, which we hung on
a tree, with intent to take it on our return, but it being dusk
before we got back to the spot, and having lost some time in
looking for it, we had the satisfaction of sleeping in the bush for
our pains.” This then is the true account of this adventure ;
aai h>w Mr. Hume, who according to Boyd’s account met us
as we wore returning to the camp, can say that he found me
travelling unsuspectingly back to Yass, or Downing, I am at a
loss to say. Here again, however, Mr. Hume is obliged to
have recourse to his assigned servants for evidence, and here
again they dish up their recollection of the facts with a most
satisfactory garnish of abuse at 'my expense. Boyd says, “ I
remarked to Captain Hovcll, on the night when we were out,
that I would not be out another night with him, no more I
was —in fact he never put himself forward iu any single thing
afterwards. That was his first and last expedition by himself.
He never slept all night.” Now, it must be quite apparent to
all, that with the discipline in which it was necessary to hold
these convict servants, 1 should never have permitted Boyd to
use language like this to me; the admission of Mr. Hume iu the
rest of his statement, sufficiently shows that, after this occur-
rence, I continued to take as active a part in the management
of the Expedition us ever, while if Boyd can speak positively to
my never having slept all the night, he must necesarily have
been in the same comfortless predicament. The man Angel says,
“ I recollect Mr. Hovell and tome of hit men losing themselves,
and Mr, Hume being out hiking for them and firing guns until
he met them. I knew well from our talk among ourselves, that
none of the men had any confidence in Captain Hovell. We
had no dependence on his taking us through. In fact, he was
the worst man of the party except Claude.” Who can believe
that these wholesale reproaches against me, brought forward
wherever a simple fact is to be proved, can be the evidence of
witnesses of truth.


The next statement which I shall mention is one of a somewhat
singular character ; a mere trifle in itself, hut one on which he
seems to lay particular stress, and which he reiterates in other
parts of his book, with an emphasis that pretty clearly indicates
that he knows it will be impugned. On the 26th of October,
after crossing the Coodradigly River, the country became so
difficult of transit that we were obliged to leave the carts and
other cumbrous portions of our supplies behind us, and had to
resort to our packsaddles. Mr. Hume says, “ I took my tar-
paulin with me, Mr. Hovell left his.” He goes on, “It may be
asked, why such a seemingly trivial matter as the leaving of
Mr, Hovell’s tarpaulin, and the taking of mine forward, should
l>e so particularly mentioned. The reason is rrry oht'inu* when
its use at the crossing of the Murrumbidgee is rememltered. I
calculated (accidently or not) that we would encounter other
rivers as formidable as the Murrumbidgee, and that the tarpau-
lin being at hand, would serve us a good turn again. My renders
will judge, whether my fellow-traveller displayed the smallest
foresight, when he left hit tarpaulin after tee had both witnessed
and experienced the usefulness of such an article a short time
before. Had I not taken mine, as will be seen,the Expedition
must have returned. One cause of our success, simple as it may
appear, was my sticking to my tarpaulin, and lugging it akng
through all our weary journey.”
This passage contains its own refutation. The use of the tar-
paulin was, as Mr. Hume says, “trry oittoti” and it was quite ns
obviotu to me as to him; besides, if it were not, whatever his “cal-
culations” might be as to the wantofl»oth tarpaulins, if I did not
partake in these calculations, it was his duty to the Ex|>cdition to
have suggested to me the desirability of taking both tarpaulins
with us; but the fact was, the tarpaulins, like everything else, were
the common stock of the Expedition, and it was decided to leave
one behind, because of the difficulty of “ lugging it along through
all our weary' journey.”
This, it must be apparent to every one, was the real cause why
one of the tarpaulins was left behind, and not from any want of
foresight on my part. But I assert most unequivocally, that this
very carefully got up passage in Mr. Hume’s statement is an en-
tire fabrication ; whether designedly so or not, Mr. llurne knows


best. The tarpaulin taken forward on the journey was my tarpau-
lin, ami not Mr. Hume's. It was taken, not from any want of fore-
sight on the part of Mr. Hume, which I should scorn to impute to
him, but fur the simple and natural reason, that my force of beasts
of burden lieiug the strongest, I was best able to “ lug it along."
T.ie tarpaulin was c mimon property throughout. The whole of
the men slept under it in comm mi, and although in another ]>art
of tiie hmi it is in ile to appear otherwise, it was 1 alone who
w is, fr un my nautical habits and education, enabled to make the
repairs which constant use of it rendered indispensable.
Au »ther statement, which is a matter of pure invention, is, that
after we had crossed the Tuuuit River we had a dispute as to the
c mrse we should take,aud we separated,and that Mr. Hume went
westward and 1 to the south, and that at night [ returned to his
c i ip by miming down h|is tracks. 'The truth is we never separa-
te 1, though we did differ in opinion as to which course wc should
ta i j ; but the direction 1 supported, viz.—-the course to the west-
ward, was ultimately taken.
Boy.l, of course, in this instance, as in every other supports the
s at'nneiit of Mr. Hume. Angel however, gives a different version.
In e states that a quarrel arose between Mr. Hume and myself on a
v *ry paltry matter, and hence that we separated, though he ad-
mits i again joined their party “ a few hours after, or half a day.”
If I bail made any attempt at exploration in a different direction
this would have been absolutely impossible.
With regard to the next inaccuracy in “ the statement of facta,"
1 must mention Mr. Hume’s assertion that he named the Hume
Ri..*r in compliment to his father. The account 1 have given of
tiiis occurrence in mr Field Book is as follows :
“Tuesday Nov. 16—At half an hour after sunrise we were on our
way, and at 7 o’clock we suddenly arrived at the bank of a fifth
and very fine river, at least 200 feet wide—apparently deep—the
leink atxmt K or 9 feet alxtve the level, and which appeared to ho
overflown in time of Hoods; the tide running about three knots an
hour. This I named Hume’s River, he being the first that saw it.”
Tliat this was the natural course of things will easily be seen
and it is the more apparent from the reason, that on our arrival at
the Goulburn River, Mr. Hume proposed to call that river by my


name, which however I refused, assigning as my reason, that as
Major Goulburn had been one of our firm supporters, I would ra-
ther it were called after him, and it was so. Mr Hume told me
after his return with Captain Sturt from the Macquarie River,
that as there was another Goulburn River in the Hunter District
they had arranged that the river I had named the Goulburn
should be called the Hovell. The first time I saw the river so
named was in a letter from Captain Sturt to Mr. Hume.
This is sufficient to show that both these rivers were named
after their discoverers, and it is pitiable that Mr. Hume should
seek to repudiate the 1 letter spirit in which, in days gone by, he
endeavoured to return the compliment I had paid to him in
naming the Hume River after him.
On our arrival on the banks of the Mitta Mitta, Mr. Hume
Hf\ys —“ On my getting ready to cross the Mitta Mitta, to mr
surprise Mr. Hovell objected, and volunteered an address to the
men, in which he pointed out, as well as he could, the hazards
existing in the rear, suggesting the probability of others ahead,
and appealed to their sense of personal safety; in conclusion,
asking whether it would not be the most prudent step to turn
back, recross the Hume, and proceed thence down its nearest
bank according to paid of our instructions. Mr. Hovell appeal-
ed to a man of mine, Claude Bassaw'a, and asked his opinion ;of
course he agreed with him. On this I got angry, and told Mr.
Hovell that I would prefer lieing rid of him altogether rather
than having one in his position setting such a had example.”
Now I assert that the whole of this is untrue ; Mr. Hume would
never have dared to use such language to me. He knew that
instead of using power to get rid of me, I had an equal com-
mand over the expedition, and even if I had counselled a re-
turn, that I had a right to do so. What however really did take
place was as follows : —Judging from the appearance of the fall
of the mountains that we were likely to have to cross other
rivers. I pointed out to the men the state of the tarpaulin, (a
thing 1 should not have been very likely to do if it had been
by my laches that we were short of a spare one,) and advised
all necessary care to be taken of it, and that if there were any
of them who had any doubt as to its lasting to the end of our


journey, they had tetter say so. Bnt I did not express the
slightest intimation of returning myself, nor had I the slightest
intention to return. On this j»oint Fitxpatrick told Mr. Walsh,
of Goulburn, on the 23rd of March of last year, “ that he never
knew or heard that Mr. Hovell wished to return before they
came to the Salt Water Creek, at Geelong.”
Mr. Hume, in reference to this matter, says, —“He threat-
ened to put Claude in the river if he did not cross it, at the
same time seiring him by the throat as if to make good his
threat; in fact, he frightened the fellow into crossing along
with him." Mr. Hume would as much have dared to do this to
Claude, who was a practised and scientific bruiser, as he would
have done to make use of the language he implies to me. In
fact, Mr. Hume and Claude were constantly quarrelling, and
more than once 1 had to separate them when actually standing
up to fight; and 1 firmly believe that, hut for my interference on
such occasions, not only wonldfMr. Hume, despite of all his boasted
skill and determination, have failed to accomplish his expedition,
but that he would never have returned to narrate the cause of his
failure. What Mr. Hume did say on this occasion, was, that he
did not think it necessary to point out the defects of the tar-
paulin to the men, that if they did not like to risk them-
selves in it let them stop and te d d. On this matter
Mr. Hume again calls upon the evidence of his men, and again
Boyd finds it convenient to say while giving a most pervert-
ed account of it, —“ Mr. Hume never had any assistance, nor
to my knowledge any suggestions from Mr. Hovell in these
matters. He took no share nor part in them. During the time
we were engaged in making the punt Mr. Hovell sat under
the shade of a tree.” This latter assertion is probably true;
probably I did sit under the shade of a tree, but it was
to repair the tarpaulin, which no other of the party was able
to do; and it was probably this occupation which led me
to state to the men its very dilapidated state. Boyd states,
that after I had determined to turn teck, Mr. Hume asked
for volunteers, saying “he would never stick for want of
a boat, and if the tarpaulin did go, he would kill a bullock
or a horse and make a boat of its hide rather than te teat."
Although Mr. Hume clings very closely to his private and pccu-


liar property in the taq»aulin, he seem* here quite ready to
recognise the four bullocks which I took w ith me an part of the
common st«)ck. Had 1 turned back 1 should have left him but
one bullock to kill. Angel in his statement of this matter, makes
the impudent assertion that Mr. Hume called myself and ( laude
cowards, and that he shook Claude. In my prefatory note I
have already stated, that I called upon Mr. Hume for a denial
of this statement and was met by contemptible equivocation ;
and I have already shown that, for the sake ot whole lames, he
w<>uld have been verv chary how he laid his hands on Claude.
The “ statement " goes on to enlarge upon a numlier of tri-
fling occurrences which have nothing to do with the question 1k?-
tween us. Bovd is made to say that at Mount Disappointment
Mr. Hume got staked, but if such an accident occurred it was
not made known to me. Again, that there was an argument
between Mr. Hume and me as to whether a mirage we saw
on the day we made the sea, was a mist or water. It was not
water, hut looked like it ; hut it was not unnatural even if it
had been, that after so much disappointment I should have been
inclined to doubt. On the 16th December we male the place,
wliere Mr. Hume says the Town of Geelong, now stands. This
is not the case, it was w hat is called the Bird Kock Point, s«»me
10 or 12 miles from Geelong. On the li'th Deceml>er, w - e start-
ed on our return :—On Sunday morning, the 19th December,
all of our party, w ith the single exception of Mr. Hume, hoard
a loud noise which seemed like the report of a cannon. Mr.
Hume say* that he and all the party were convinced it was so
ami that they at first agreed t<» go back, but that afterwards.
be was outvoted, and that we proceeded on our return journey.
Now the fact was. Mr. Hume di 1 not hear the noise at all, let
it be what it migh* ; and alter v»me consideration the whole
part , came t > the belief, that it arose probaly from the fulling
of some very large tree. There is but one point now that I
bare to ne ntioti in this miserable of facts.”-
Af the time we were enc imped on the coast the blacks l>ccame
soiu< what troublesome. <'ii one occasion, the man Fitzpatrick
was pursued by them. Mr. Hume devotes a considerable
space to insinuate tint, sometime after, when we again fell in
with the natives, I withdrew mv men from the Macks liecause 1


«u afraid of them. Thia trusty witness, Boyd, says on the
point—“ When we were in the camp in the coast at (Joelong
Mr. Horell and Mr. Hume wore one day lying on the ground,
Mr Hume had thrown off his lioots ; hearing nhouts he started
up and asked if any of the men were absent. Fitzpatrick was
away ; Mr. Hume started up, took his gun, and called upon us
to take ours and follow him, as the blacks must he after Fitzpa-
trick. I went with him for one, Captain Hovell did not stir.”
Now to give some notion of the amount of credit to Ik: reposed
in thia man, Boyd ;—The matter in this particular instance was
aery trifling, and did not last tive minutes altogether. 1 will,
however, state what Boyd told me of his recollections of an en-
counter with tlie blacks at the Bills King, so far Imck as the
year 1847. —On the 11th of January of that year, whilst 1 was,
on a visit to Mr. Bingham, at the Tumut, and in the presence of
that gentleman, and it is my impression of Mrs. Bingham also,
Boyd stated, that by drawing off my party to a distance, while
at the Billa Bong, where the natives came to us and made free
with us ; 1, no doubt, secured the safety of the whole party, as
it is evident they had a design upon us from the fact of a large
partv, armed, having secreted themselves in the creek. \\ hen
Mr. Hume recovered from the tit of the sulks which he took on
this, as on man}’ other occasions, and in which 1 list'd to leave
him, till a latter mood came over him, he told me of this cir-
cumstance, adding that the blacks pulled his la'ard and his
ni we, and opened the front of his shirt. Mr. Bingham told me,
in Buyd's presence, that Boyd had told him that it was my
quiet manner, and U'iug accustomed to command, which fitted
me better for the ex ((edition than Mr. Hume, who “ was all
bluster ami Ismiice,” and constantly fighting and quarrelling
with his men.
I shall m»t follow Mr. Hume in his detail of the return home,
..r notice the fisdisli boasts which lie makes of every insignificant
service he was enable I to reader to the party. As I said at start-
ing, that 1 wished intake u>* fair share "f the credit from him,
so do 1 care as little t »di niuish any satisfaction he may feel in
his own glorification.
I must, however, refer to a reiteration of a false statement
which I have before allu led to. At page 29 Mr. H nine says—“ The


chief reason why Mr. Hovell war associated with me. waf, that
being a nautical man by profession he would be of great service
in ascertaining, by observation, our latitude and longitude ns we
proceeded on our journey through a eountry lililarw unknown
and untraveiled." Now I deny that I wus associated
with Mr. Hume for any such purjK*ae : that our ana elation tr««m
the onset was purely voluntarily. That, to use the word* of
l>r. Lang’s work on Philips Land, quoted by Mr. Hume Himself.
“ In the year 1824 two settlers in New South Wales. Mr. Hovell
and Mr. Hume, the former a retired ship master, having funned
an equipment at their own private ex|»ense, t**ok their departure
from Lake lieorge to find them way to lire southern oeeau."
This was our MMociation, and if Mr. Hume, who had Do |e-
culiar qualiticatious at all, thinks that while i had n y nautical
education to rely on, the public will ladieve that it was “A«x
compass, “Aw base line,” the sun iu the heavens, and Au dead
reckoning alour ,” that took the ]»arty safe to Hobson's Bay, I
think he will find himself mistaken.
IVith regard to the statement in respect to the skeleton map.
this also is a fabrication. We hud hut one skeleton map with us,
not two as alleged by Mr. Hume, and this one was naturally tilled
up under the joint care and consideration of Loth of us.
M hen we made the sea coast we l»oth lalieved we had arrived
at the district of Western Port. We had lie on travelling for that
purpose, and whether we were right or wrong in our conception
of the true geography of our location, is a matter of no importance;
in fact we neither of us could know w hether it was Western Port
or Port Phillip, and that Mr. Hume ever intimated iu any way
that we were in Port Phillip is a fiction of hi» own fancy.
I have now done with this vaulted up compilation of absur-
dities and mis-statements, excepting the few sentences with
which it concludes. Mr. Hume says—“in this statement my
object is to show that the exjiedition of 1824 was led and con-
ducted by me—that the plan originated with me, and that to
my exertions its success was chiefly owing.” I trust I have show n
that this is the very reverse of the fact. That the enterprise
was a joint one in every respect, in which the lead and conduct
devolved on me equally with Mr. Hume.—l have also shown,
that if there were any priority in the suggestion of the nrivao


enterprise, is vm on my side; and even from Mr. Hume’s
statement, partial and garbled as it is, it is quite evident that
I continued my exertions equally with himself until the enter-
prise was accomplished. He proceeds —“ 1 would not detract
from anv credit due to my companion, for he shared in common
our hardships and privations.” After the malicious insinua-
tions, the wholesale slanders, with which his pages alsmnd, does
Mr. Hume expect either myself or the public to believe this I
His concluding sentence is— “ Although I have lately l*een
made to appear but as subordinate to Captain Hovel I mi the
expedition referred to, I notwithstanding respectfully submit
that it was I who took him to Hobson's Bay and brought him
hack again.”
Without any respect fora statement so mendacious, or for
its trttkJoviuy author, I can only regard it as a specimen of
that morbid egotism which Mr. Hume somewhat ludicrously as-
crilies to me, on the occasion of my visit to Port Phillip, and
which in a fit of wounded jealousy has induced him to make
the pitiful exhibition of his jialtry vanity, which the pages of
his contemptiMe “ statement ” afford, and which lam now
happy to dismiss to a congenial oblivion.
Jill fSt-w. ktnuiukt IMM


jAf=p
BIISUO
piOoie c
(f-fkc* iVw j


1508
00010992
