

EMIGRATION
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
A LETTER BY MB. HENRY TAYLOR,
(Late General Secretary to the National
Agricultural Labourers’ Union.)
DESCRIBING HIS PERSONAL EXPERIENCES DURING A VISIT
TO THE ABOVE-NAMED COLONY.
Reprinted from “ The Times f of nlh April, 1877.




EMIGRATION TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Recognizing the importance of having the question of emigra-
tion well considered by those especially desirous to change their
homes, you were good enough to afford me great help in publishing
several letters upon this subject during my tour in Canada in the
latter part of 1874; and as I was appointed at the annual Council
of the National Agricultural Labourers’ Union in May last to the
office of Emigration Commissioner, and made arrangements with
the South Australian Government to visit this colony with a view
to report upon it as a field for emigration, I hope you will permit
me to place the result of my observations before your world-wide
readers. Arriving here in the middle of August last, and with
every facility afforded me by the Government, I think I may claim
to have had a fair opportunity of judging of the Colony in its
various aspects. I have travelled through the greater portion of
its territory—not including the Northern territory—l have in-
timately associated with all classes of the people, from whom I
have met, almost without exception, with the greatest courtesy
and respect. I have visited South Australia in a bad year, the
driest on record, and consequently the crops have largely failed;
wool has suffered from the drought as well as low markets at
home, where commercial depression has also affected the price of
copper so as to render low percentage seams unprofitable in
working, so that I am assured by all that the season is a most
unfortunate one for a visitor who desires to obtain a truthful idea
of the Colony. While all these unfortunate circumstances may
somewhat damp my admiration, and I may not realise so glowing
a picture as that portrayed by the colonists who have seen the
Colony, as in the year previous, in her best state, it may not
be the most unfortunate thing for those to whom I may be an
adviser, as oftentimes disappointment arises in the newly-arrived


emigrant from his expecting too much; and much as I believe in
emigration, and look to it for a great help in ameliorating the con-
dition of the labourers in England, it is all important that it should
be promoted under no false pretences. To do the authorized
agents of the Australian Colonies justice, I believe that in this
respect they have been faithful to their trust.
In the practical work of emigration there are considerable
difficulties, and, from no evil intention on the part of anyone
connected therewith, evils arise both to the emigrants personally
as well as to the colony importing them, which, with a better
system and organization, might be avoided. In the first place,
there is some difficulty arising from the working classes in the
Colonies, who sometimes take a hostile stand against immigration.
In justice to them I am bound to confess that they have good
cause for complaint in the past in having the immigration business
“ rushed ” too much, so as materially to affect the price of labour.
The reaction has shown itself in an entire prohibition of free
immigration, which in a colony which is yearly increasing its
wealth and extending operations and development very much out
of proportion to its natural increase in population soon causes a
dearth of labour, or raises the price of labour to an unprofitable
pitch, which of course militates against the progress of the
Colonies. Thus, in South Australia the immigration policy has been
too spasmodic to be of the greatest service either to the Colony or to
those who adopt it as their home. The workmen whom I have
had the pleasure of meeting through their organizations, and with
whom 1 have talked freely, are not, as in V ictoria, madly opposed
to immigration, they take a practical and reasonable view of the
position, recognizing its importance if conducted fairly; but they,
as I think rightly, object to the undue flooding of the labour
market by those whom they are taxed to import. One can very
well understand the farmers and employers generally crying out
in a very good season against the dearth of labour, and it is at these
limes that the Assembly is moved to resume free immigration,
and the members being mostly capitalists and employers of labour
themselves, are apt to over-estimate their requirements; farmers
are too apt to forget that in their colonial system of farming their


wants are more special than general, and it will be well for them
if they learn to recognize that intermittent labour is as unprofitable
to the labourer as a scarcity of labour is to the employer. It seems
to me that it would be a most unfortunate thing for the Colony to
put an end to free immigration, it would materially injure her
progress, and it is almost impossible for the Colony to secure the
immigrants she requires excepting under a free system, for the
class principally required are those at home in the rural districts,
who have no possible means of raising the cost of transit, were
they ever so much disposed. Another evil arising from the
present spasmodic system is that so soon as the Government
has the sanction of the Assembly to spend money on free
emigration, instructions are sent somewhat hurriedly to the Agent-
General in London, who, should he not secure the numbers asked
for, is liable to be blamed for apathy and neglect. Accordingly,
under pressure, the London Agency gives the free passes to men
from the cities and towns, who are more easily collected, but are
certainly, as a rule, not the kind, of persons most suited to Colonial
life. Under a proper and careful system it is not so difficult to
ascertain the character of country people, although considerable
expense might be entailed in personal selection, hut it is not
difficult to perceive the liability there is to imposture in dense
populations, and it is from these that the complaints generally
arise. The Government, which is responsible for the evil, might
avoid it by adopting some regular system of immigration and
perfecting their arrangements for securing suitable immigrants.
The country can undoubtedly absorb a considerable annual influx
of immigrants with mutual profit; and when I say that during the
past six months nearly 7,000 souls have been landed, and that,
notwithstanding the bad season there remain only 122—men, women
and children—who are supported temporarily by the Government,
and that these are absorbed in a population of only about 220,000,
it will be clearly seen that labour is in demand. Moreover, the
free immigration policy which has led to a larger number than
usual being brought in is in consequence of the Government
having decided to go into large public works of various kinds,
some of which are already in hand, and when fairly under way


will altogether dispose of any anxiety with regard to the employ-
ment of labour.
Before I go on to speak of the prospect of the Colony for im-
migrants, I cannot refrain from an expression of opinion with
regard to the reception and manner of distribution of immigrants
when they arrive in the Colony, As respects the arrangements for
the female portion (single women), I have nought but praise.
Single females on arrival are the first to leave the vessel, and are
aken to a decent home in Adelaide, where they are carefully pro-
vided for until they procure situations. Persons requiring servants
apply at this home, where engagements are made under the advice
of the matron or of lady visitors, who take care, as far as possible,
that those engaging them are known to be respectable people. Of
course, there are many who go by the name of “respectable
people ” with whom servants find very little comfort; and on the
other hand, the Servants’, Home is no guarantee for good
domestics; strange complaints arise on both sides; but still it is
the most that can be done for them at the start, and they very
soon shake down into their own course as they become acquainted
with friends, as they have no difficulty in doing among the various
religious bodies to which they belong, or in society generally.
The house is also open to servants who are out of a situation, a
reasonable charge being made for their maintenance. I need
hardly say domestics find little difficulty in securing situations;
clothes factories and other pursuits in which females are employed
compete very heavily with domestic service and materially augment
the value of female labour. The arrangement for the reception
of married men with families, together with single men, is not
satisfactory, as there is no depot, and the practice of boarding out
is deficient and bad in every sense. In a general way, lam told,
there is no difficulty, and the people are engaged immediately on
the arrival of the vessel in port. This may be so, but as there is
no guarantee, there ought to be proper provision for a kindly and
decent reception. The Government have agencies in all the town-
ships in the Colony, and by a proper and easy method there would
be no difficulty in having a labour registry, which would keep the
central depot informed of the labour requirements of each district;


it would thus make the distribution easy and entirely prevent undue
advantage being taken of the new comers by unprincipled persons.
I would say that this evil is felt by the people of the Colony
generally—a more generous and kind-hearted people never existed
—and I have no doubt whatever but that the Government will be
quite ready to carry out the desired reforms when the matter is
brought officially before their notice, after I have had the opportu-
nity of presenting my report.
The kind of immigrants required in this Colony are those who
want to do something for themselves and require to have less
done for them. I do not mean by this that the people in the
Colonies are wanting in kindness and good disposition. On the
contrary, I have been delighted with the testimony of immigrants
as to the generosity of those with whom their lot has been cast.
Indeed, this feeling seems to be the characteristic of all thinly-
peopled countries ; it is in the crowded cities where everything is
looked upon with commercial eyes. But those who rely much on
the help of their neighbours rarely do much for themselves. South
Australia requires men who have been brought up to farm work,
who can drive a team, handle a plough, tend cattle, and make
themselves generally useful; men who have been brought up on a
farm, and have pushed away from the farm to railway work for
better wages; labouring men with ambition and energy who will
not be content to remain labourers, but will go in for themselves;
country farm hands or rough carpenters who can also put up a
fence and erect farm buildings ; for such men as these South
Australia has room and offers undoubtedly good prospects. Half-
hearted, steady, quiet, no-go kind of labourers will no doubt get
more food here than at home, and they will have the advantage of
surrounding influences which are calculated to sharpen and quicken
them, but such will, in all probability remain labourers as at home,
and any advantage accruing from immigration to such would be
the benefits derived by their children. But I do not hesitate to
say that nowhere is there so good a prospect as in South Australia
for such as I have before mentioned. Industry, tact, and sobriety
possessed by the British labourer together with the liberal Land
Laws shaped specially to meet the requirements of such, are,


humanly speaking, a certain guarantee of a future success which
will abundantly compensate them for their difficulties connected
with the change of country. With respect to other kinds of labour,
mechanical trades, kc., of course the demand grows proportionately
with population and the growth of manufactures. There is a
difficulty in adjusting the exact proportions so as to cause no in-
convenience in the trade labour market, and yet with care I think
the proportions might be fairly estimated. It would be well, and
it should be one of the objects of the trades’ organizations in the
Colonies and at home to keep the true conditions of the labour
market before each other, and •with this view I have suggested to
the trades here that they should communicate monthly to the
“ Bee Hive ” and other papers read largely by the mechanical
classes to that end. It is probable that there will be an attempt to act
on this suggestion. Immediately on my arrival here, the prospect
of the season looking very dull, the employers in the agricultural
implement departments attempted a reduction in wages, and there
were general rumours of an attempt being made to break through
the eight hours’ system, which is apparently very firmly rooted
here. However, a stand was made of “no surrender ” in the
matter of hours of labour, and I am not aware of any change in
the price of labour, although lam not quite certain whether in one
or two instances there was not a little compromise. Anyhow,
things are going on pretty smoothly now; the building trade is
very busy, the iron trades, although not brisk, are in a better
condition than was expected.
There are comparatively few physical difficulties in the way of
settling in South Australia. There are no immense forests in the
sense in which Canadians understand them; there is a great
deal more wood than timber. The many thousands of miles of
mallee scrub which is now open, and will continue to be opened
up for sale by the Government at £1 per acre, are wooded with
small evergreens of the Eucalyptus and acacia genera, which are
easily rooted up, the average cost of grubbing up the mallee scrub
being about from £2 to £3 per acre ; but besides this there are
vast plains, similar to the American prairies, where for miles there
is scarcely an impediment to the plough ; a furrow can be taken


straight through the virgin soil. The woodland has some ad-
vantage over either the forest’ or the prairie, for it supplies suffi-
cient fuel and timber for primary purposes without the enormous
labour in connection with a dense forest. Occasionally heavier
timber is met with in quite sufficient quantities for the use to
which it can be put. The gum, the oaks, and the stringy bark are
hard woods, very valuable for heavy work of every description; but
the lighter timbers have to be imported, the market prices ranging
very similar to those in England. The acacia wood is mostly
used for furniture and turning, some of it being of good figure in
the grain. The wattle forms a very important article of export,
the bark of which contains excellent tanning qualities; the wattle
also freely exudes gum, which is also largely exported. South
Australia has few mountain ranges and deep gulleys, rivers, lakes,
and swamps to hinder the march of the settler; indeed, the want
of rivers is much felt. The peculiar configuration of the southern
coast line gives a seaboard of over 2,000 miles and contains a
considerable number of good natural ports. South Australia is
fortunate, however, in holding the approach to the River Murray,
which is navigable for some' 2,000 miles inland and extends by
Victoria into New South Wales. Already there is a great traffic
on the river, and a railway is in course of construction to connect
the river traffic with the northern railway in South Australia.
This will, no doubt, do something to secure the river trade, but the
greater project, and the one which will defy any competition from
the carriage of the sister Colonies if carried out, is that of
making the approach to the river from the sea navigable. At
present the running of the Murray mouth is too risky and can only
be attempted by small vessels. Various schemes are afloat, and it
is only a question of money and time, and South Australia will
have the easiest means of tapping a vast territory, not only of her
own, but of her sister Colonies. It is considered by eminent
engineers that from a million and a half to two millions of pounds
will be sufficient to do all that is required. Speaking of the want
of rivers and water supply, it resolves itself into a question of the
construction of tanks and the drainage of the land. Much suffering
end inconvenience have been experienced for want of proper


provision in this respect; the way to overcome it is well known
and is being adopted as necessity forces its claims.
True to the principles which guided the founders of the Colony
of South Australia, they still hold to the very wise system of
keeping capital and labour connected with agriculture within
practical limits. In a very ably-written article in the Melbourne
Review, the Hon. J. J. Casey, a late Minister of Lands in Victoria,
compares the land systems of South Australia and Victoria, and
the comparison must be extremely gratifying to the former.
One great difference in the Land Laws of South Australia and
the Colonies of Victoria and New South Wales, which has
led to such beneficial results to South Australia, is doubtless
the system of allowing no selection for farming before the district
is surveyed and declared open for settlement. There are numerous
advantages attending this plan. The Government have no diffi-
culty in making new main roads ; district councils are soon formed
by the new settlers, who make other roads by rates, which are
subsidized to an equal amount by the Government; and thus their
properties are easy of access, and the difficulties of removing the
produce to market are reduced to a minimum. Population goes
forward, new areas are opened, railways and jetties are constructed,
society is formed, townships are proclaimed, institutes for libraries
and newspapers are established, postal and telegraph communi-
cation is afforded, schools and churches are erected, and thus, in
a short space of time, the mallee scrub is converted into agri-
cultural districts, with the necessary machinery for -social inter-
course and enjoyments much more complete than are to be found
in localities of large populations and of hundreds of years’ growth
in the old country. Of course, these communities, although
small, are comparatively wealthy, being composed of industrious
men, who have saved sufficient money to start, and who, through
the liberal terms of the Government, are making good headway on
their own account. In Victoria—as Mr. Casey shows —the land
in any part of the Colony not yet alienated from the Crown is sold
at £1 per acre; if there are two persons desirous of the same plot,
the Minister of Lands has to determine who shall have it, which not
unfrequently leads to much unpleasantness and political bias


against the Minister by the selector and his friends who happen to
be non-suited. This evil is also avoided in South Australia.
If two or more desire the same selection, the question is settled
under the hammer, and not only do they then avoid any suspicions
of partiality in the matter, but the land on an average fetches 50
per cent, more than the upset price of £1 an acre, according to its
market value. When the new districts have been surveyed and
the areas proclaimed, a regular auction sale is called at the
Government Land Offices in Adelaide, the lots are put up at £1
per acre—the upset price. Should they fail to realize that sum
at the sale, selectors may afterwards purchase the same at the
upset price. There is also one other advantage in the system of
survey before selection. In Victoria, where it is otherwise, the
selectors will go in and “pick out the eyes” of the country held
and rented of the Government by the squatters. This, as will be
easily imagined, is not pleasant for the squatter, and it often
intensifies the class prejudices which are always to be found
existing between the two classes. The squatters naturally regard
the onward march of the “ cockatoos ” —as they call the farmers—
with jealousy and suspicion. They know well that as they
advance the settlements, the value of the land which they now
hold in large tracts at a mere nominal rental will be ascertained,
and they will then have to relinquish a valuable holding. Many
stories are told of the duplicity of the squatters, who have for
years effectually prevented settlers going back to farm, declaring
that it would be impossible for a crop of grain to be raised, where
now hundreds of farmers have paid off the purchase-money of
their holdings and have acquired wealth. During the past four
years the “ Northern Areas ” have been thrown open to selectors,
and a country which was always described as arid, inhospitable,
and incapable of growing anything, now holds a front rank as a
wheat-producing district, and agricultural townships such as I have
before described are springing up in all directions, and in one of
them, not four years proclaimed, I saw on my visit good substantial
stone residences, banks, post offices and telegraphs, croquet on the-
lawn and a young lady on her horse in a riding habit. One is
fairly stunned at the rate of progress made in these new countries,.


and a visitor from the old country is ten times more a Briton for
the pride which is engendered within him as he contemplates and
witnesses the result of the go-ahead character of his countrymen.
One thing has struck me particularly all through my observations
in South Australia, and that is not so much the rapid growth of
the population as the substantial character of the property; in
many of these newly-opened districts wooden buildings are the
exception, and stone and brick the rule, and all these things are
indications of solid wealth, which I believe is to be found in no
country more so than in South Australia. In speaking of the
squatters, although they will not be credited with much patriotism
in keeping back the settlement of the colony for their own selfish
purposes, we shall find it difficult to find the community who can
with any good grace “ cast the first stone ” at them ; it is the business
of the Government, as it is doing, and well doing, to push on settle-
ment. In the meantime we must give a fair and reasonable amount
of credit to the squatters —who, if they have amassed large fortunes,
have had to fight immense difficulties as pioneers; if they have
impeded agriculture, they have also made agricultural settlements a
possibility; moreover, there have been blanks as well as prizes, and
for my own part I do not envy them the gains of their courageous specu-
lations, while I would heartily join the Hon. E. Ward and others in
opposing their monopolies and in settling the Colony as far as prac-
ticable with farmers. However, there are two classes of squatters or
sheep farmers. Some few years ago when the Government found
greater difficulties in raising a revenue than it does at present,
much of the land which is now held in fee simple by squatters was
at that time merely rented of the Government. The Government
in order to raise the revenue, pushed on the sale of the lands so
held nearest the settled district, and thus, often at considerable
disadvantage to themselves, the squatters were compelled to hire
money to purchase their runs, or lose them; and so there are
immense runs at present held in fee simple by sheep farmers. As
a rule, I find that such landowners do not oppose settlement for
agriculture ; on the contrary, they encourage it, as it, of course
raises the commercial value of their estates, and there is one good
feature in connection with the acquirement of large holdings in


the Colony—there are no laws to prohibit their being divided up
and sold at the pleasure of the holder. As a very large squatter
said to me one day, he has no family name or mansion to uphold;
he holds his land commercially, and when the time comes that he
can make more by the sale of his land than he can realise by
feeding sheep, it will at once be placed in the market. The ease
with which an industrious man can acquire possession of his own
land and become his own master is, to my mind, the special in-
ducement to those hundreds and thousands in the old country, who-
seem to have such a craving for “ a bit of land; ” and while I am
always one with those who are striving to free land at home, I am
constrained to look with some regret and pity at those who, doubt-
less with the best intentions, are continually striving for some
special and extraordinary concessions to be made, on patriotic and
philanthropic grounds, to a certain class of our population. While
no end of money and brain are uselessly expended in jobbing and
tinkering about to secure the patronage and favour of the landlord
and squire for a very doubtful advantage, lands here are lying
waste by the millions of acres, crying out to be replenished by
labour, and offering the reward of plenty and independence.
Let the land of England be speedily freed from all unnatural
restrictions; let it be made as easy of exchange now as Sir R. R.
Torrens made it in this Colony, as easy as the transfer of any other
property, blit beyond this I have no disposition to go; since nature
is so bountiful here, there is no reason to impose unnatural re-
strictions at home. A person may take any quantity of land in
proclaimed areas up to 640 acres—a mile square. He is required
to pay down 10 per cent. Thus if the price of the land is £lOO,
the selector will have to pay a deposit of £lO, which will exempt
him from any further payment for three years—about 3$ per cent,
per annum. At the end of three years he will have to pay another
10 per cent., which will also be received as interest for the next
three years. If at the end of six years he is not prepared to pay
the whole of the purchase money, he can obtain other four years'
credit on payment of half the purchase money and interest in
advance of the other half at the rate of 4 per cent. A man is re-
quired to conform to certain conditions of settlement to insure that


lie is a bond fide settler, such as erecting a house and fencing his
land and the cultivation of a certain proportion. The whole thing
is arranged so very simply and easily that there are practically few
obstacles in the way. One is disposed to wonder why young
farmers, farmers’ sons in the old country, should allow themselves
to he driven to such straits by severe competition, while these
facilities exist here; I suppose they do not know of it, or cannot
realize the position.
It may be interesting to your readers to know what has been
done in the sale of lands in this Colony, and I will summarize it as
briefly as possible. From the very latest returns with which the
Surveyor-General has kindly furnished me, I find that the total
area taken upon credit since the commencement of the credit system
in 1869 is 2,475,296 acres, realizing a total of £3,485,652. 13s. 9d.
The total land held under credit on the 31st December, 1876, after
deducting cancelled and completed selections, is 2,053,337 acres,
and the amount of balance falling due within the next six years is
£2,957,929. 2s. 9d., and the sum of £480,096. 2s. Id. has been re-
ceived as interest since the credit system has been extended. The
cash sales of land since the proclamation of the Colony to the end of
1876 are 4,777,625 acres, realizing £6,075,133. 14s. There are now
some 200,000 square miles of country leased for pastoral purposes
by squatters; the largest run in any one block comprises 5,700
square miles, and is situated about 450 miles north of Adelaide;
but there are those who own in fee simple in various blocks as
much as 100,000 acres, though of this there are only a very few
instances. The block of 5,700 square miles before alluded to, as
well as the bulk of the land held under pastoral leases, is let at
the rate of 2d. per head of all sheep depastured; and if a man
has no stock on his run, he has to pay 2s. 6d. per square mile per
annum. Most of the first-class runs in the North, some of which
used to bring in £2O per square mile, have been taken up by the
farmers; and the highest-priced run now in existence is one held
in tl\e South-East District, 96 square miles; rent, £7OO per annum.
The total rent derived from pastoral leases during last year was
£50,000. South Australia carries upwards of 6,000,000 sheep,
93,000 horses, 185,000 horned cattle. The fact of the two most


important races in Melbourne having been won by South Australian
horses confirms them more than ever in the belief that there is no
better place in the world for breeding them. Sheep stations, or
rather the whole institution of sheep farming, is very interesting to
those from home, who, being sea girdled within such narrow limits,
can form no conception of the space allotted for these enterprises.
Sheep farming, as it is now, differs much from the ideas currently
formed by the strange tales of bush life which have from time to
time been written, with so much elaborate detail of adventure and
romance. That some of the life is rough, especially in inferior
runs, is no doubt true, but the surprise to the stranger and visitor
is not so much the rudeness as the finish which surrounds them.
The squatter’s home and centre of operations is a little palace
fitted with everything which can afford comfort and pleasure; it is
a merchant’s store on a small scale; everything in connexion
with the estate is managed in as thorough a commercial style as
would be a merchant’s office. Returns and balance-sheets are made
monthly, so that the operations extending over 1,000 square miles
can be seen at a glance. A Norfolk man—Picroft—who came out a
few years ago with only £1 in his pocket, has now a farm of 400 acres,
for which he gave 30s. per acre, and for which he has lately refused
£1,250. This case is, of course, one of hundreds similar; indeed,
this is just the way men of industry and perseverance get on. They
will take up a selection and do what they can for themselves, and
in the proper seasons work for their wealthier neighbours who
surround them for a little hard cash, and so by degrees they are
able to extend their own operations and become employers them-
selves. Great numbers of those engaged in sheep-shearing and
harvest work are men of this stamp, and it well serves the con-
venience of both parties. The notion that men in this country
work harder than those at home is not true ; and I do not hesitate
to say that if the hundreds and thousands of our farm labourers,
those of them who are in the habit of pushing about “ to get the
biggest shilling,” whom I have seen toiling early and late in their
allotments —those who have been sufficiently fortunate to get
them—if these were here and would expend the same amount
of shrewdness, and force, and sobriety as they do at home, they


would soon become the proprietors of their own estate, with a
balance at the bank. That some of the cottages—if they will
bear the name here—are rough and of a primitive kind I grant,,
and the roughest are those which are built as a makeshift for
themselves. Indeed, this is just where the great difference lies
between a man having a motive for thrift and endurance, and
having no hope before him; here he is working for material
advancement as well as an idea; at home, at best for a scanty
subsistence and future decay. Ido not so much object to see the
rude shanties tenanted by men whose eyes are turned to a selection
which is to shortly bear their name, but it crushed one to see the
wretched hovel occupied by a dejected creature, who feels that he
only occupies that on sufferance.
Nothing could repay those who have time and opportunity
more than to visit the British Colonies, to study their histories,,
watch their fortunes or misfortunes, their difficulties and triumphs..
So far as South Australia is concerned—and there is not to be
found a country more loyal to the British Crown and to her insti-
tutions of law and order—there is little fear but that she will be
equal to the proper conduct of her affairs. One is not struck
particularly with the lustre of her politicians, either with respect
to brilliancy of speech or what is called statesmanship, but one
glad to find in mixing among the public little suspicion of pecu-
lation and dishonesty in the Government and Parliament. That
blunders are made and bungling committed at times may be true,,
nevertheless they are a practical people, as one may judge wha
will care to see what has been performed by them since the
granting of the Charter of the Constitution Act, in October, 1856,
when the population numbered some 86,000 souls. I have had
the privilege of conversing with those who killed kangaroos on
the spot where the Government House now stands, as well as with
many others of the earliest settlers, and after weighing their
experiences, after listening to the accounts of the thousands of
difficulties they had to encounter from a variety of causes, I have
come to the conclusion that never in its history did South Australia
hold out more inviting terms than at present. Of course the cry
of those who care little for the development of the country, or of


those who are generally called “ croakers ” is that all the best of
the land is taken up; this has been the song for many years.
I have already referred te the importance attached to the northern
areas lately opened for selection on credit, and doubtless they have
proved themselves most prolific wheat-growing districts when the
rainfall has been sufficient; and here is where the difficulty comes
in. Unquestionably the settlers can sweep off large sums of
money in good seasons by the use of the invaluable machinery
which appears to be peculiarly South Australian. It is commonly
said that three out of five seasons being good, the farmers can do
well; indeed, there are many who say that it is a good providence
to have bad seasons occasionally, lest the farmers be exalted above
measure with prosperity. This is a view in which the wheat-
growers are not likely to share. Nevertheless, dry seasons
virtually enforce a fallow, a rest of the land which is frequently
required, but which would otherwise be denied, and which would
speedily result in the impoverishment of the land. Important as
are these northern areas, in so far as they enable men of little
means to make their way, I am disposed to believe that the
country in the south-east of the Colony will be of considerably
more importance. The climate is different; there is a greater
certainty of rainfall, and farmers will not be confined to wheat
alone, for they can grow everything. This being an exceptionally
dry year, I have seen little of the beautiful fresh verdure which
meets the eye for the greater part of the year at home, but in the
district of Mount Gambier I was in the midst of green pastures as
beautiful as anything I had ever looked upon. English grasses of
all kinds do well, and ten sheep to the acre is by no means the full
extent of the capabilities of its pastures. Although Mount Gambier
cannot be taken as an example in speaking of the South-East
generally, there is no doubt whatever but that great wealth awaits
development. Mr. James Cook, who resides in the south-east,
and has gone to considerable trouble to make himself acquainted
with the surrounding country, speaking of one block alone, which
he describes as being “ in the very centre of the wheat climate of
of the world (37 deg. of south lat.),” shows that there are
24,400,000 acres available for the settlement of 50,000 families as


soon as the “ iron horse” enters. In the country from Rivoli Bay,
extending through Millicent to Mount Gambler, the Government
have for some time been draining swamps, which leave splendid
agricultural land, realizing a good price in the auction room. 1
have said that the present is, perhaps, a better time than any time in
the past history of the Colony for settlers. It seems to me that
the value of the means of transit for produce now existing by fai
exceeds the extra cost of the purchase of farms. From a return
with which the Engineer of Public Works has kindly supplied me,
I gather that there are now 327$ miles of railway in working, 109$
miles in construction, 310£ miles set out for contract, the con-
struction of which will be commenced during the year; 15
additional surveys for projected lines have also been completed,
and the Government have been voted £2,188,500 for railway con-
struction. Besides these works estimates are voted for jetties,
wharves, bridges, &c., to a considerable extent, and these, together
with municipal works much needed and absolutely indispensable,
will make the little Colony of 210,000 souls extremely busy, as
well as those who choose to avail themselves of the free emigration
to settle among them.
One is amazed, in visiting the port of South Australia, with
which she is so fortunately provided by nature, to see the immense
shipping trade for so small a community; but the difficulty is
solved when we look at her exports and imports. In the year
ending 1875 the imports amounted to £4,203,802, and exports to
£4,805,051. The staple produce exports were breadstuffs,
£1,680,996; wool, £1,833,519; and minerals, £762,386. These
figures argue well for the energy of the people as well as the
immense natural resources which they have at command to secure
such results, and we may only hope that they will keep off the
shoals of so-called Protection, upon which the sister Colony of
Victoria is battering herself, and continue to apply themselves to
the development of what the Colony contains, rather than what
she does not contain. Speaking on this matter, however, I am
glad to know that although there is a considerable number of
South Australians who have some confused notions of the possi-
bility of the advantages of Protection, they are not of the rabid


Victorian Protectionist type, nor is Protection likely to make much
headway, for with the exception of a small weekly Comet which has
a very restricted circulation, and perhaps even less influence on
public affairs, I am not aware of another newspaper in South
Australia which supports the fallacy; certainly the two leading
journals, the Register and Advertiser , are thorough Freetraders.
The tariff of South Australia is a sort of compromise, all is secured
which the Freetraders can command, and the Protectionists take
the rest and divide it amongst them according to the Parliamentary
power of the respective protected trades. Hence an occasional
scramble ; and to such absurd lengths do those who are interested
allow themselves to be carried away that a Minister of the Govern-
ment told me that only a few days ago a tanner complained that the
English merchants were running up the price of wattle bark so
high that he considered there should be a tax on its export to
prevent competition with the home-colonial trade. Of course no
Minister will make such an absurd demand in the Assembly. The
most remarkable thing to my mind is that the working classes of
these Colonies persist in taxing themselves in all they consume, in
taxing the whole of their incomes, and yet permit the land, pro-
perty and incomes of the rest to go free. They tax themselves to
borrow money for the construction of railways, roads, jetties, har-
bours, and all kinds of things which often double and treble the
value of the property contiguous to these works, as well as to
improve the country generally; city property is continually rising
in value in consequence, and yet the whole of this unearned incre-
ment is quietly pocketed by the fortunate property owner, without
the return of one farthing of taxation ; and thus while the whole
of the workman’s income is taxed in the purchase of necessities
for his maintenance, the merchant or squatter, who is realizing his
£20,000 or £50,000 a-year, pays taxes only on the £SOO or less
which it costs him to provide for his household. I again repeat
that it is the incidence of taxation which is not understood, or such
a condition cf things would not long be tolerated. It will be well
for the working classes when they learn to “protect” themselves by
allowing property to do the same, each bearing its legitimate
burden. They w r ould do well to secure some good works on poll.
19


tical economy for their Institutes ; and it would well repay them
to secure lecturers and to form classes to discuss such subjects, for
in so democratic a country so much depends on the wisdom of the
people for its advancement and welfare.
Manufactures are extending rapidly in this Colony. There arc
engineering plants besides those of the Government of no mean
order, boiler makers with steam rivetting machines and other
machinery of the first order. There are no fewer than 86 agri-
cultural implement works, where large numbers of “ strippers ”
are turned out annually. To these machines South Australia owes
very much, as without them wheat growing would not be of much
profit; they save labour immensely. Clothing of all descriptions
is now r being manufactured to a great extent in the Colonies, and
these factories, as at home, absorb a great number of female
employees, who seem to prefer such occupation to domestic service,
the reason, doubtless, being that beyond their eight hours of factory
labour they are free. Great complaints are made of the shortness
of the supply and the bad quality of domestic servants, and not
without some reason. On the other hand in many cases employers
are very exacting on their servants, whose hours of service know
no limits. Ido not by any means intend to infer that this sort of
thing is general, but the faults and complaints are not wholly con-
fined to either. The wages of domestic servants are, for general
servants, from Bs. to 125.; cook, 10s. to 205.; laundresses, 10s. to
165.; and so on—of course all found. Tanning is a growing in-
dustry ; the wallaby skin, tanned and dressed, is said to make the
very finest and most durable leather, much superior to kid. There
are more than 30 breweries at work, and numerous soda water,
lemonade, and cordial factories. Milling is an extensive trade ; some
90 steam mills are now in operation. In short, South Australia
is a complete hive of industry and, as I believe, solid prosperity.
The population consists of native born, 65 per cent.. English birth
25 per cent., Irish 8 per cent., German and Scotch 4£ per cent,
each, and about 1,400 from Foreign States. There are very few
Chinese, nor do the colonists in South Australia seem to desire the
presence of more. Besides its farinaceous fertility, South Australia
may well be proud of other capabilities of no unimportant order;


she abounds in fruits. Orange groves, lemons, citrons, almonds,
olives, peaches, apples, pears,—indeed all we can grow at home,
either outside or under glass, and very much besides —grow
naturally and in plenty. The oranges are very fine and delicious,
figs are abundant, and all these things grow with but little culture.
Some of the gardens and orchards are paradises. There are some
5,000,000 vines in bearing, which in 1875 produced 648,186
gallons of wine. This is becoming a very important industry in
South Australia, and it is being pursued with enterprise, Ido not
presume to be a judge of wines, but my own opinions are quite
confirmed by connoisseurs, who claim that the South Australian
wines are not inferior to the Continental. They are mastering the
art of “ blending,” and under the direction and management of
Mr. E. Bourband, who has a thorough practical knowledge of
viticulture and viniculture, and has written extensively upon the
subject, the South Australian United Vineyards Associations are
bidding fair to make the enterprise a success. Mr. Hardy, a very
enterprising wine grower, is turning out some excellent wines; he
also grows and dries raisins and currants for market. The South
Australians complain very sorely of the obstructive and fiscal laws
of England, which almost prohibit the Australian wines from the
home market, and it certainly works very prejudicially against
Australia that a higher duty should be imposed upon her wines
than upon those of the Continent; and it would be an immense
gain if these Australian wines, which, without doubt, are genuine
in their manufacture, could be sold at a moderate price to the
British consumer, and take the place of those logwood compounds
known as British wines. At from 18s. to 255. per dozen clarets,
ports, sherries, hocks, &c., of the finest qualities can be purchased
here, or for ordinary home consumption a good drinkable wine can
be bought for ss. per gallon, some as low as 2s.
In speaking of the products of the Colony, however, I need
hardly say to those who know anything «f the difference between
the north and south of Great Britain that in a country of 380,000
square miles the climate varies considerably. Moreover, in the gullies
among the hills within a few miles of Adelaide the climate and
temperature differ materially, and consequently the various pro-


duchons of which I have previously spoken must be suited to the
varied conditions. In speaking of South Australia hitherto I have
not referred at all to that part known as the “ Northern Territory,”
which, added to South Australia proper, makes the area 900,000
square miles. By the by, “ South Australia,” as a name for this
Colony is an entire misnomer; the Colony is not in the south of
Australia, and the more incorrect is it since the addition to it of
the Northern Territory. The name would seem to imply that it
was the southern part of another Government, instead of a self-
governed State. Why not call it Adelaide ? I have not visited
the Northern Territory. From what I learn of it, it is an India
without Indians, a tropical country very rich, without labour to
develope it. What the Government will do with it is not known.
The telegraph wire is taken through the heart of the country from
south to north, and there has been some talk of a railway being
pushed through. The whole thing is a question of the future.
In these go-a-head days, it is not safe to predict how far a
capitalist can make a high rate of interest for money here, but the
purchasing power of money is less than at home. Bread is about
the same here as at home, perhaps a little cheaper. Mutton varies
with the seasons. I have seen it sold at per lb., a whole side
of mutton for Is. 6d. and 25., small mutton, of course —say 50-lb.
the sheep. But good mutton will, perhaps, average 3£d. to 4d.
per lb. Beef from sd. to Bd. per lb.; pork Bd. Butter, fresh,
Is. 2d. Honey, sd, per lb. I should say that for other neces-
saries of the household and without enumerating them, we may
safely put on 20 per cent, upon the home prices.
I am not quite sure whether the South Australians have not
done themselves an injustice in their representations of the climate.
I am here certainly in the driest year of the Colony's history, and
only upon three former occasions has the thermometer reached so
high as it did in the month of December last, when it showed
114-2 in the shade, and 162 in the sun. Ido not mean to say one
word in mitigation of this condition of the atmosphere, and
especially when accompanied with dust as is sometimes the case,
at which time it is detestable; but it is the infrequency of such
that makes it endurable. By the courtesy of the Government
t;:


i nave given me ngures lor two p
Gambler, to show the variation of
ADELAIDE.
November.
Mean. Absolute.
9 a.m. Max. Min. Max. Min.
57-6 .. 77-0 .. 64-0 .. 102-0 .. 44-5
December.
76-3 .. 87-6 .. 60-8 .. 114-2 .. 49-5
January.
74-1 .. 86-4 .. 60-2 .. 107-2 .. 62-5
For a week or eight days the thei
from
80 dee., until it reaches th
the temperature: —
MOUNT GAMBIER.
November.
Mean. Absolute.
—■■in
-
9 a.m. Max. Min. Max.
60-8 .. 70-8 .. 47-7 .. 92-0
Min.
.. 36-8
67-8
December.
.. 79-1 .. 49-8 .. 106-6
.. 39-0
66-8
January.
.. 78-9 .. 54-0 .. 102-0
.. 37-8
Astronomer, I am able to give the temperature for November,
December, and January, 1876 —the hottest months in the year.
I have given the figures for two places—viz., Adelaide and Mount
For a week or eight days the thermometer will gradually rise, say
from 80 deg., until it reaches the climax, when clouds begin to
show themselves, the wind rises, and a change ensues, sometimes
rain, at others cold winds follow, to great relief. But the rarity
and dryness of the atmosphere must also be taken into account.
Men continue to work in the sun and in the workshops with as
little fatigue or harm as at home; indeed, exercise is essential to
health and comfort during these hot times, for in a state of activity
the heat is more endurable. Setting aside these periodical ex-
cesses of heat, the summer is very agreeable, and then for the
remaining eight or nine months of the year it is doubtless very
enjoyable. The mean rainfall in Adelaide during the past 19 years is
20-478 in.; the fall this year has been only 13-434. During the
past night and day (February 15) upwards of 2 inches of rain has
fallen, to the great relief of the colony. At Mount Gambier the
fall has been 25-470, the mean for 15 years being 33'642; and so
at every station the average this last year has been lower than in
any year preceding. On the whole, there is little to prevent
industrial pursuits, indoor or out, throughout the year; and this
is a consideration for the workman.
Altogether I conclude that South Australia offers advantages
in country and climate which should claim the attention of those
wishing to push their way in life. The kind of men most required
here are of just the same kind that we want at home. Difficulties
will have to be met here as at home; the only difference here
being better pay and a wider field of opportunities. As to the
23


numbers which the Colony can
be committed to the care of the Colonial
always be wholesomely kept from excess
people, who all have votes, and to whom, m
old country, the M.P.’s are responsible.
emigrate who do so simply for
emigra.it; wnu uu su simpiy xur a. unaiige,
desire to get on, and the advantage to thems
will be mutual. The South Australians ar^
> law-respecting, homely and generous peopL
industrious and provident; the lazy and ir
little favour. Such are wanted neither in pris
Full particulars in pom
Emigration, and the issue of I
v.Tt'/ijos to otjjfa j; til tol .v'iUHl v ninth tv. i
ORDER WARRANTS to persons who •
pay their own full passage
Australia can be obtaiiiei
■
cation -to i?io *Uu . cei ■ .a
•jfl ( TfViil a&iO tm/pTA JtA. oif? 10
THE EMIGRATION AG
, FOE SOUTH A^STE^U,
8. Victoria Chambers;
- -
b Westminster, B
■ k* silt nibdj hi trails fiy .fy/ fttaui
imtiupst itonf /mm to i><;Zitf 9 T . dil fri (ti/r ihdi; -• >.>j .sb
X U ~6U JJCt OOJUC WUU • :
tutf to South’
.
K JfrtnV tmlj airi9t odj
* ' I
yfjjw n, tu hm nod hm.
.
■
j ■ $ i . .cV. A • ■ : ■; * * -•
■
v. ’•Tf: , »
