

pern
BOTANY:- Leaflets by
Mueller,Baron Sir Ferdinand von.
Australian plants.
Notes on Australian indigoferas.
Descriptions of New Australian plants.
New Australian plants.
Descriptions of new Australian plants.
References to Baron Constantin von Fttingshausem*s
recent observations on the tertiary
flora of Australia.
Note on an hitherto imperfectly known callistemon
Description of a new cycadeous plant from South-
Western Australia.
Definition of a new cryptandra.
Description of an hitherto unrecorded species of
eucalyptus from New Britain..
Succinct notes on some plants from New Guinea.
Notes on plants from New Guinea.
Description of two unrecorded leguminous trees
from New Guinea.
Description of a new Papuan bassio.yielding an
edible fruit.
Description of a new Papuan Fagraea.
Additional note on sterculiaceae.
Record of a new Papuan Helicia.
Record of a new Papuan ternstoemiaceous plant.
Notes on a new Papuan uncaria.
Notes on a hitherto undefined species of encephalartos
Notes on a new proteaceous.


Description of a species of pycnarrhena from north-
eastern Australia.
Additions to the Queensland flora by Dr. Lucas.
Notes on a new solanura.
Notes on an undescrihed Victorian species of
Swains one..
A glance on the plants of Tasmania.
Record of two undescrihed species of utricularia
from north-western Australia.


NEW AUSTRALIAN PLANTS;
Described by Baron Yon. Mueller, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.R.S.
Atriplex conduplicata.
Branchlets very thin, almost glabrous; leaves rather small, obovate-or
lanceolar-cuneate, entire or slightly denticulated, grey from a very thin iudument;
staminate and pistillate flowers on the same plant; the former in minute clusters,
the latter often scattered, all axillary or becoming lateral; fruiting caljx semiovate-
deltoid in outline, sessile, membranous throughout, truncate at the base,
expanding into two entire almost erect membranes, the latter nearly as broad as
the seed-bearing cavity and surpassing the compressed-conical minutely bilobed
summit; seed smooth ; radicle bent downward.
In the vicinity of the Darling-River and some of its tributaries; C. King, L,
Singleton.
An erect shrub, not tall. Leaves attaining a length of nearly one inch, of
rather thin texture. Staminate glomerules situated at the upper part of the
branchlets. Fruiting calyces attaining a length and width of half an inch, pale,
glabrous, net-veined, almost dimidiated by the surrounding membrane being folded
upwards into two halves. Cavity basal, in comparison to the expanding membrane
small.
Similar in habit and leaves to A. halimoides, but very different as regards
fruit, the membranous expansion being almost vertically doubled up, and the
seminiferous portion very small and sunk within, while the fruit-calyx of
A. halimoides is very similar to that of the recently described Kochia spongiocarpa.
The broad basal truncation of the fruit-calyx is quite peculiar to A. conduplicata.
A chemical analysis of the various kinds of salt-bushes would be highly
desirable for an accurate estimate of their respective nutritive properties, though
such is not invariably combined with palatability.
The Chenopodium triandrum of New Zealand is transferable to the genus
Rhagodia.
Hakea Brookeana.
Branchlets robust, scantily silky; leaves rather short, filiform, rigid, pungent,
soon glabrous ; fruits solitary, almost sessile, ovate-globular, slightly pointed;
valves very thick, outside exceedingly rough from protuding angular blunt
appressed-downy tubercles; cavity deeply foveolate; seeds roundish-ovate, on
the outer side very prominently tuberculated, their membranous appendage
narrowly decurrent on both sides.
At or towards Mount Ragged ; Miss S. Brooke.
Probably of shrubby growth. Leaves spreading, firm, hardly exceeding an
imJh in length, if not shorter, always smooth. Flowers unknown. Fruits fully
an inch long and nearly as broad, reminding when unopened of those of Pandanus
though in miniature; cavity about half as broad as the valves. Seeds black,
about inch long, the terminal portion of the appendicular membrane as long as
the nucleus.
The singular manner in which the surface of the fruit-valves is broke up,
giving it a corky appearance, has its counterpart only in H. pandanocarpa, which
species however produces flat leaves, larger fruits and a seed-membrane passing
broadly all around the nucleus, irrespective of likely floral differences, yet to be
ascertained.
Hakea Macraeana.
Branchlets glabrous or scantily silky; leaves rather long, thinly filiform,
glabrescent, underneath traversed by a slight longitudinal furrow, the apex
gradually pointed; umbels usually only 3 —6-flowered, almost glabrous ; stalklets
about as long as the small flowers ; style glabrous ; stigma lateral; fruit rather
large, nearly ovate, very turgid, outside densely verrucular-rough except at the
much compressed slightly or not horned sumait; seeds almost smooth, their
membranous appendage imperfectly decurrent on one side.
Near the sources of the Shoalhaven-River and near the eastern tributaries of
the Snowy-River, at elevations of nearly 4000 feet; W. Baeuerlen.
A subalpine species. Leaves 3 —5 inches long. Petals i| inch long,
pale-coloured. Ovary almost sessile, glabrous. Hvpogynous gland nearly square.
Fruit attaining a length of inches, the margin of the valves slightly edged
along the upper portion. Seeds oblique-ovate, measuring about | inch in length,
shorter than the terminating membrane.


Specifically named in recognition of kind support given by Mr. George
Macßae, of Braidwood, to the collector’s local botanic travels. This species
differs from H. nodosa in much longer and never compressed leaves, in some-
what larger flowers fewer in each umbel, in evidently not yellow petals, in
bigger and still rougher fruits and in not tuberculated seeds ; moreover H. nodosa
is always a low-lands species. The leaves of H. Macraeana are much like those
of H. Persiehana. The fruit is similar to that of H. propinqua, which species
however has thicker, much shorter and more rigid leaves not unisulcate beneath
and also rougher seeds.
Hakea Persiehana.
Arborescent ; branchlets slender, appressed-downy ; leaves long, thinly
filiform, glabrescent, their apex gradually pointed; corymbs dense, conspicuously
stalked; rachs almost velvet-downy; flowers very small; petals somewhat shorter
than the stalklets, oustside silky-downy ; style almost glabrous; stigma hemi-
spheric-conical, peltate, quite terminal; hypogynous gland unilateral, adnate;
ovary glabrous, nearly sessile ; fruit lanceolar-ellipsoid, almost dimidiate-oblique,
smooth, short-attenuated at the base, gradually narrowed into the acute apex;
terminating membrane of the seed not decurrent along the nucleus.
In the vicinity of the Endeavour-River; W. Persieh.
Leaves attaining a length of seven inches, neither shining nor furrowed,
the pointed apex easily wearing off. Peduncles generally about half an inch
long. Bracts minute, almost lanceolar, early deciduous. Petals measuring only
i —i inch in full length. Stigma much broader than the summit of the
style. Fruit fully an inch long, about inch broad, gently convex, not seen quite
ripe. As regards the stalked flower-clusters this species approaches H.
pedunculata from the same locality, differing however already much in the
form of the leaves and the position of the stigma. The last mentioned species
is nearly allied to H. arborescens, which extends to Port Darwin (Holtze).
The following new localities of species of this genus are particularly note-
worthy :
H. eriantha; Upper Ovens-River, Mrs. M‘Cann
H. saligna; Illawarra, Camera,
H. nitida ; near Eucla, J. D. Bate.
H. multilineata ; sources of the Arthur-River, Th. Muir; between Youldeh and
Ouldabinna, Tietkens ; between the Alberga and Mt. Olga, Giles; near
Mt. Finke, Mrs. Richards; Gawler-Range, R. T. Sullivan ; near Lake
Barlee, Hon. J. Forrest ; Mt. Sender, Rev. W. F. Schwarz. Varies with
smaller flowers, slender pistil, prominently nerved leaves, beaklike-pointed
also unisulcate and bulging fruit, as well as almost diagonal position of
seeds.
H. Epiglottis; near Circular Head, F. v. M.
H. nodosa ; Flinders-Island and North-Eastern Tasmania, Aug. Simson.
H. lorea ; near MacDonnell-Range, Lieut. Dittrich.
Extra print from the “Australasian Journal of Pharmacy,” November, 1886.


NOTES ON AUSTRALIAN INDIGOFERAS
By Baron Feed, yon Mueller, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D.,
F.R.B.
The beautiful pigment, known to every one as Indigo, has
been in technic use for more than two thousand years, so far
as Southern Asia and Southern Europe are concerned ; and
there can be no doubt that, as the name implies, the plant
yielding this pigment is a native of India, although now
Indigo-fields have encroached to such an extent on the native
ground of the Indigofera tinctoria, that precise localities of
its spontaneous and original growth can no longer be easily
indicated. Under these circumstances it was of particular
interest to learn recently, that the true Indigo-plant occurred
in the primeval forests of North-Queensland, it having been
noticed on the Endeavour River, away from any plantations,
and in localities where many Malayan plants are intermixed
with endemic Australian forms of plants. Nevertheless even
there this species may have been brought by migratory birds,
which indeed are so active in the dispersion of many kinds of
vegetation in various parts of the world.
In bringing the Indigoferas on this occasion under notice,
the main object is, to draw the attention of the pharmaceutic
profession to the various kinds, which occur in Australia,
twenty species standing on record from this part of the globe,
ten of them being endemic. The most common in extra-
tropic Australia is I. Australis, and this in the wide range of
its occurrence assumes some remarkably aberrant forms. This
particular congener is interesting also as regards the geography
of plants, being the farthest southward removed species, abound-
ing in Tasmania, no Indigofera extending northward to Europe,
although two species represent this largely tropical genus
in the Southern United States. Possibly Indigo could be
prepared from this common plant, and if so it might turn out
valuable in this respect, particularly for local requirements.
But as Indigo is obtainable at a comparatively cheap price
from many places of Southern Asia, and has even been pro-
duced artificially by modern chemistry, our native Indigoferas
would not concern us so much as dye-plants, but much
more on account of some medicinal principles pervading
them. These seem so powerful in I. Australis, as to have
caused repeatedly and in various places the death of
pasture-animals browsing on them. What however these
active principles exactly are, remains hitherto unknown; to
isolate them for physiologic tests, would be a worthy object of
any pharmacist. Even the Indigo-pigment has sometimes
been administered medicinally, thus in epilepsy, chorea and
hystery ; and it is curious to note, that almost in any part of
the world, where Indigoferas are growing spontaneously, one
or the other species has been drawn into popular medicine,
both as an external and internal remedy. In Australia more-
over we have still to search for additional species, with a view
of completing its “flora.” A new form, perhaps not abso-
lutely specific, but morphologically of high interest, was
recently discovered by Mr. E. Betche during a botanic tour in
the interior of New South Wales, on which scientific errand
he was sent by Oh. Moore, Esq., the Director of the Sydney
botanic garden. This plant, so far as the obtained material
shows, is altogether leafless, and in this respect it can to some
extent be comparted among congeners to the South African I.
filifolia and I. podophylla, in which species however some
leaflets do occur, though only scantily and in the young state
particularly.
The following diagnostic phrase would define this plant :
Indigofera efoliata. —Somewhat shrubby, slightly silky,
much branched, completely leafless; stipules minute, almost
deltoid ; racemes short, lateral and terminal; bracts roundish-
deltoid, much shorter than' the stalklets ; teeth of the calyx
shorter than the tube or almost obliterated ; petals pink,
several times longer than the calyx, the upper one ovate-
orbicular, slightly silky outside, hardly exceeding the others
in length ; the lower petals minutely pointed, imperfectly silky
in front; style glabrous ; ovary slender, somewhat silky, with
several ovules.
On the Macquarie-River, near Dubbo ; E. Betche.
This plant stands evidently in close relationship to Indigofera
australis.
Rarely a channelled narrow leaf-racbis is developed, with
two or three impressions towards the summit, indicative of
the places, which in a developed leaf would be occupied by
leaflets. The fruit is as yet unknown.
i [Extra-print from the “Australasian Chemist and Druggist
November , 1883.]


DESCRIPTIONS OF NEW AUSTRALIAN PLANTS;
By Baron von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.R.S.
( Continued.)
Kayea Larnachiana.
Leaves on very short stalks, elliptic-lanceolar; flowers small,
in terminal short panicules or fascicles without any common
peduncle; bracts obliterated or very fugitive; sepals finally
much enlarged, the two outer roundish, the two inner more
oval ; petals roundish ; fruit rather large, globular, somewhat
pointed, one-seeded.
On the Mossman-River; W. Sayer.
A tree, noticed to be about 20 feet high. Epidermis of
branchlets somewhat fissurated. Petioles i inch long. Leaves
in rather distant pairs, firmly chartaceous, so far as seen 5 —7
inches long, 1^ —2 inches broad, almost smooth and scarcely
shining above, slightly pointed at summit, rounded at the base,
very thinly penninerved, the subtle reticulated veins immersed.
Inflorescence I—inches1 —inches long; pedicels racemosely arranged,
about as long as the calyx, bearing very minute deltoid
bracteoles below the middle. Unexpanded calyx globular,
glabrous, measuring hardly J inch, thinly coriaceous, pellucid
and imbricating at the edge. Petals membranous, glabrous.
Stamens numerous, slightly connate at the base. Filaments
very thin, at the summit pointed. Anthers almost orbicular,
fixed above the base ; the cells surrounding the short and
broad connective, dehiscent along the margin. Style glabrous,
subulate-filiform, short; stigmata minute, pointed. Sepals
finally about an inch long, hardly shorter than the fruit, of
thick texture, outside rather rough and developing a brownish-
film. Fruit indehiscent; pericarp coriaceous. Seed filling the
cavity, basifixed, sessile. Arillus none. Testa chartaceous,
smooth. Embryo almost globular, carnulent.
The descriptive notes are elaborated from specimens with
young flower-buds and with over-ripe fruit.
This Australian species is evidently nearest allied to K.
racemosa; but it has only faint nerves of the leaves, shorter
petioles, pluriseriate stamens, and perhaps the fruit of K.
racemosa, when discovered, may show differences also.
This new and remarkable plant is named in honour of James
McD. Larnach, Esqr., in phytologic appreciation of his sharing
as member of the council of our local Geographic Society in
the work of promoting the cause of geography in Australia as in
New Guinea also, from which exertions botanic science has also
benefited.
Of the Order of Guttiferae, —so little represented in Australia —
another plant occurs in Mr. Sayer’s collection, from the Russell-
River. The leaves are very similar to those of Kayea Larna-
chiana, but traversed by rather prominent nerves conspicuously
confluent into an intramarginal vein; the inflorescence is axil-
lary, the four sepals are equal, semilanceolar and not enlarging,
thus not growing to beyond £ inch length; the fruit is ovate-
globular, indehiscent, apiculated, about f inch long and one-
seeded; the seed turgid-ovate, nearly £ inch long, exarillate,
erect; the testa membranous and brown ; the cotyledones are
carnulent and partially connate, while the radicle is incon-
spicuous. It is intended to establish on this plant, when fuller
‘material is obtained, a distinct genus under the discovers
name. Beccari has recently indicated a species of Kayea from
Borneo.
Hydrocotyle Comocarpa.
Perennial, dwarf, creeping; leaves small, renate —or cordate —
roundish in outline, to the middle or less divided into 3 —5
crenated lobes, as well as the petioles almost glabrous; umbels
capitate, few-flowered,, on very short peduncles; styles
conspicuous, soon erect or not much spreading; fruits turgid,
roundish, but somewhat dilated upwards, the summit surrounded
by a series of flattened bristly hair, elsewhere wrinkled-rough ;
the fruitlets seceding, dorsally blunt, one-nerved on each side;
carpophore permanently adnate.
In Kangaroo-Island ; Otto Tepper.
Well developed leaves only J —£ inch broad, so far as shown
by the only specimen of the plant obtained, which is a fruiting
one. Leafstalks slender, one inch or less long, occasionally
somewhat hairy. Fruitlets obliquely cuneate-ovate, not
conspicuously compressed except at the commissural line, about
yV inch long, dark-brown, sometimes beset laterally with a few
short hairs, thinly one-nerved dorsally, the terminating bristles
forming a paL pappus-like fringe, almost as long as the fruit-
lets, not hooked.
Among Australian species only H. glochidiata and H.
blepharocarpa have also fringed fruits ; but the first-mentioned
belongs to a different section of the genus, while H. blepharo-
carpa differs in annual root, compressed fruitlets fringed longi-
tudinally and with the lateral nerve almost straight.
Mr. Tepper found also H. diantha in Kangaroo-Island, it
previously being known only from West Australia. The
variety acutiloba of H. hirta is, as pointed out by Mr. C. B.
Clarke, the H. Javanica (Thunberg dissert. 11., 415, t. 3), which
name would rank as the oldest, if H. hirta should be specifically
inseparable. H. geranifolia has been traced to the Hawkes-
bury-River by the Rev. Dr. Woolls ; H. scutellifera was found
by me on mossy granite-rocks of the Porongerup-Ranges ; H.
trachycarpa occurs also on the Lachlan-River (H. Andrae) and
on the Finke-River (Rev. H. Kempe); H. diantha at the base
of Stirling’s-Range, so also H. homolocarpa (F. v. M.).
Extra print from the “ Victorian Naturalist,” January, 1887.


O O «/ ' O i/ i. £ O J 7
almost semiglobular, slightly wrinkled, glabrous, the flat summit
expanding into a narrow undivided membrane, the transverse veins
of it very subtle.
Near Caiwarro ; Mrs. J. Cotter. Also near the Darling-River.
Leaves scattered, inch long, comparatively narrow. Stigmas
short, sometimes bifid. Fruiting calyces attaining a breadth of
nearly half an inch, pale-brownish, soft and tumid, blunt at the
base, without decurrent angles, but somewhat distorted by exsicca-
tion or even folded ; cavity rather ample, not reaching to the base
of the calyx ; fruit more or less depressed ; embryo normal.
This species differs from K. triptera in the spongy texture of the
fruit-calyces and in the absence of prominent lateral angles of the
calyx ; the only other congener with spongy fruit-calyces, namely
K. decaptera, has its horizontal expanding membrane lobed, and
its calyx-tube lined by 5 longitudinal thin plates.
Kochia lobostoma.
Erect ; leaves very short, crowded or tufty-disposed, rather
flat, mostly ovate-lanceolar, as well as the branchlets velvet-
downy ; stigmas generally two, shorter than the style - ; fruit-
bearing calyx black-brown, slightly hairy, expanding around
the depressed base into a broad undivided membrane, the five
lobes of the orifice large, semiorbicular or semiovate, nearly as long
as the surrounding membrane.
Between the Lachlan-and Darling-River ; J. Bruckner.
Leaves mostly inch long, hardly acute. Fruiting calyces
nearly half an inch broad, when well developed ; the lobes of the
orifice not quite membranous. Fruit much depressed.
The flattened not hardening fruit-calyx with ample orificial
lobes distinguishes this plant from all forms of K. villosa.
The two Australian species, published in 1810 by R. Brown,
became inclusive of the present two augmented gradually parti-
cularly in later years to 23, and the saltbush-country of the
far interior may furnish still other additions also to this genus,
which evidently attains in Australia its greatest numerical
development. They are among the most important of our pasture-
plants, and should even be methodically redisseminated at the
places of their native growth.
Helicia Sayeriana.
Almost glabrous ; leaves large, on very short stalks, roundish-
ovate, firmly chartaceous, much paler and not shining beneath,
remotely denticulated, costate-nerved, subtle-veined ; racemes
elongated ; bracts minute, narrow, acute ; pedicels very short,
semiconnate in pairs ; petals very narrow, except at the dilated
summit ; anthers oblong-linear, conspicuously apiculated ; style
capillary; stigma short, clavate-ellipsoid; hypogynous scales roundish,
somewhat connate ; ovary glabrous.
On the Russell-River; W. Sayer.
Leaves scattered, so far as known attaining a length of
9 and a breadth of 6 inches, dark-green above, somewhat acute
at the base ; the lateral nerves rather distant, anastomosing
towards the margin of the leaf; meshes of primary veins
ample. Racemes spike-like, sometimes fully a foot long,
lateral, short-stalked. Rachis glabrous. Pedicels slightly
silky, xV£ inch long during flowering time. Petals measuring
about | inch in length. Anthers almost sessile ; connective broad.
Style hardly longer than the petals. Ovary rather slender. Fruit
unknown.
This species differs from the North-Western H. Australasica in
larger and proportionately much broader leaves with more dissimi-
larity of colour of the two pages, in longer racemes with considerably
larger flowers, in longer pedicels an,d in the not silky ovary ; the
fruits of the two may prove also different.
To be continued.)
Victorian Naturalist ,” November , 1886.


NEW AUSTRALIAN PLANTS
Described by Baron von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.E.S.
( Continued.)
Mxtrephora Froggattii.
Branchlets soon glabrous; leaves on very short stalks, rather large, charta-
ceous, elliptic-lanceolar, conspicuously acuminated, almost or quite blunt at the
base, glabrous on both sides, subtle-dotted, distantly costate-nerved, shining on
either side; peduncles obliterated; pedicels axillary or lateral, solitary or two
together, about twice as long as the petals, thinly downy; sepals minute, nearly
deltoid; petals black-purplish, the outer almost orbicular and nearly sessile, the
inner considerably longer, roundish-or obcordate-rhomboid, attenuated into a
stalklike base, bicallous above the middle inside, all as well as the sepals outside
short-downy; stamens crowded; anthers broadly cuneate, truncate; torus velvet-
hairy.
On Mossman’s-Eiver; Sayer and Froggatt.
A tree, noted to be about 20 feet high. Leaves to 8 inches long and to 3
inches broad, of a rather dark green and particularly shining beneath, the lateral
nerves diverging at a very acute angle, prominent at the lower side of the leaves;
veins thin, reticulated. Flower stalklets thin, minutely scaly-bracteate at the base.
All flowers seen only staminate. Sepals membranous, during flowering time only
about inch long. Petals somewhat curved inward, the outer £ —J inch
long, the inner almost twice as long, their upper portion valvular-coherent before
expansion, the callous swelling comparatively large. Head of stamens rather
depressed. Anthers numerous, almost sessile; connective dark, their flat sum-
mits forming an even surface for the head of stamens; cells pale. Torus very
convex. Fruit not obtained.
In the absence of pistils it remains uncertain, whether this interesting plant should
be placed in the genus Mitrephora or Goniothalamus; but it is not dissimilar to
M. reticulata, differing in glabrous more distinctly petiolated leaves, in fewer and
larger flowers, and in dark-coloured petals, the inner quite blunt. In some respects it
reminds of the Oropheas, particularly 0. Zeilanica, though the stamens are so
different.
Mr. Armit’s collection from tributaries of the Gilbert-River contains an anonaceous
plant, possibly conspecific with the one just described; but the lateral nerves of
the leaves are thinner, more approximated and less curved, while the fruits are
not unlike those of Polyalthia Holtzeana, but seem not provided with a conspicuous
stipes; the flowers are unknown of Armit’s plant; it has meanwhile been specifi-
cally designated under the discoverer’s name. Polyalthia nitidissima extends south-
ward to the Richmond-Eiver (C. Fawcett).
Cananga odorata has been found by Miss E. Bauer on the Bloomfield-River,
and by Mr. E. Fitzalan on the Daintree-River.
Eupomatia laurina occurs on the Russell-River (W. Sayer), on the Daintree-
River (Fitzalan), Bloomfield-River (Miss Bauer), at some of the sources of the
Condamine-River (C. Hartmann), on the Manning-River (C. Moore), on Broger’s
Creek (W. Baeuerlen), on Mount Dromedary (Reader). Attains a height of 60 feet.
Branches occasionally climbing. Flowers waxy-white. Staminodia sometimes
narrowly elliptic-lanceolar. Fruit yellowish, sometimes over one inch broad.
Eupomatia Bennettii was noticed on the Clarence-River by Dr. Beckler, on the
Urara-River by Miss Thornton, who also observed, that the roots produce fusiform-
ovate tubers from Ito 2£ inches long. Of this and the preceding plant illustra-
tions have been given by Professor Baillon in the Adansonia, vol. IX, pi. 11, who
fully demonstrates, that this genus forms the passage from Anonaceae to Moni-
miaceae, Magnoliaceae and Calycantheae (Adansonia YIIL, 379, Comptes rendus
de I’Academie des sciences LXYII, 250, et Bulletin de Societe Linndenne de Paris,
Mai, 1868). The structure of the fruit brings this genus in contact with Nelumbo.
An ample description of E. laurina was given 1862 in “ The plants indigenous to the
colony Victoria I, 219.” The aromatic odour and taste of the Eupomatias may
indicate medicinal virtues.


Eupomatia Belgraveana is a third species of this genus, discovered by
Mr. H. 0. Forbes near the Owen Stanley’s Ranges (distributed under N,
759), of which plant a description has been prepared for the 9th part
of the “ Papuan Plants.” It is very distinct from the two congeners, having
leaves of generally lesser length, not gradually attenuated towards the
base, and provided with longer petioles, the underside being densely covered
with minute glandular brownish shining scales ; the ' calyx-tube during
anthesis is very short and like the axillary or lateral pedicels scaly; the anthers
are nearly sessile, and terminated by a linear gradually pointed appendage of
several times greater length; the staminodia are of almost the same form as the
stamens, but still narrower, bearing some marginal glands towards the base and
sometimes towards the summit, while the short stigmata are developed as erect
somewhat cylindrical and slightly pointed. The anther-appendage is analagous to
that of Doryphora; consequently this Eupomatia might subgenerically or perhaps
even generically be separated (as Himantandra); the operculum and fruit are not
yet known. This singular plant received for specific distinction the name of Dr.
T. B. Belgrave, who amidst the arduous duties of his profession still gave as a
member of the exploration-committee of the E.G.S. of Australia much attention,
to promote scientific researches in New Guinea.
Lhotzkya Smeatoniana.
Leaves small, much crowded, trigonous-linear, rather blunt, short-hairy;
flowers small, generally only few and at or near the summit of the branchlets ;
bracteoles about as long as the calyx, navicular-ovate, often ciliated, not pointed,
high-connate ; limb of the calyx very short, turgid, glabrous, only slightly lobed;
tube of the calyx ellipsoid-cylindrical, attenuated towards the summit, ten-streaked;
petals pale; stamens about twenty; style glabrous; fruit very small, concealed
within the persistent bracteoles.
In Kangaroo-Island; Otto Tepper, Esq.
Shrub, attaining so far as known a height of 3 feet, very much branched-
Leaves generally only about § inch long, appressed or not much spreading, short-
stalked. Bracteoles nearly as long as the leaves, broadly membranous towards the
margin. Calyx glabrous, its tube ellipsoid-cylindrical, its limb almost truncated.
Petals oval-lanceolar, about £ inch long. Stamens partly as long as the petals,
partly shorter. Anthers roundish. Style capillary; stigma very minute. Fruit
less than \ inch long.
Allied to L. genetylloides, but generally smaller in all its parts, the leaves not
so spreading, the flowers less numerous, the calyces not exceeding the bracteoles and
seemingly always glabrous, their tube constricted at the summit and the lobes
very much smaller, by which latter characteristic this new species is also separated
from all others of the genus, except L, brevifolia, which shares further in the small-
ness of the leaves and flowers, but has the flowers not terminal, the bracteoles
less connected, shorter and somewhat pointed.
This evidently rare plant is dedicated to Thomas Smeaton, Esq., of Adelaide,
who has, as one of the leading members of the Royal Society of South Australia
and as an independent investigator much promoted the natural sciences in the
neighbouring colony.
Lhotzkya violacea has been found on Mount Stirling by the Hon. Mr. Parker.
Melbourne,Botanic Museum, Dec., 1886.
{Extra 'print from the “ Australasian Journal of Pharmacy," Jan., 1887.)


DESCRIPTIONS OF NEW AUSTRALIAN PLANTS,
Php Baron vpN Mueller, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.R.S.
Continued.)
Shrubby or nearly so, erect, densely covered with a yellowish-
brown vestiture; leaves on rather short stalks, roundish-or
lanceolar-oval, crenulated, wavy from distant beneath prominent
spreading nerves; stipules almost setaceous; flowers at and
towards the summit of the branchlets from the axils of diminu-
tive leaves; their stalks solitary, somewhat longer than the
calyx or twice as long, very thin, jointed close to the upper
end; calyces cleft hardly beyond the middle into ovate-
semilanceolar lobes, rather membranous, much veined, glabrous
inside, somewhat enlarging in age ; corolla very small, scarcely
exceeding the calyx, hairy towards the base; stamens not
numerous, their columnar portion very short; fruitlets about
10, coherent into a roundish very depressed mass, much shorter
than the calyx,’densely beset with minute star-hairy brisiles at
the back, deeply wrinkled-foveolate at the sides, not higher
than broad nor pointed ; seeds silky-downy.
Near Lake Austin ; H. S. King, Esq.
From the only other Australian congener with spinulous
fruits, namely Sida echinocarpa, this one is readily distinguished
by its less close and not pale indument, by rather smaller leaves
on shorter petioles and with stronger nervature, by pedicels
not jointed towards the middle, by the dense vestiture of the
fruit, giving it some resemblance to that of various species of
Triumfetta and Commerconia; the fruitlets moreover being
deeper reticulated at the sides and not conspicuously hollowed
at the summit.
Sida platycalyx has been collected near the Bulloo by Mrs.
Spencer; the fruit-calyx is flat at the bottom, on which about
6 blunt and wrinkled fruitlets are ripening. Sida inclusa was
found on the Finke-River by the Rev. H. Kempe
Goodenia Stephf.nsoni.
Erect or ascending, minutely and densely glandular-hairy;
leaves of chartaceous texture, from narrow-lanceolar to nearly
linear, almost sessile, remotely and irregularly denticulated, flat,
equally green on both sides ; peduncles generally one-flowered,
solitary, axillary, from somewhat longer than the calyx to twice
as long, with small bracteoles below the middle; pedicel very
short; tube of the calyx longer than the narrow lobes ; corolla
yellow, narrowly protruding on the lower side of the calyx,
subtly gland-hairy outside, its lower lobes rather short, all
expanding into broad at the summit truncate membranes;
anthers elliptic-linear, blunt; style purplish-hairy towards the
summit; indusium scantily bearded towards the base, short-
ciliate at the orifice; fruit ovate-ellipsoid, septate to near the
summit; seeds livid, flat, oval, subtle-punctulated, not expanding
into a membranous margin.
In the upper regions of the Hunter’s River-area; L.
Stephenson.
Upper branches transmitted ; branchlets not angular ; their
leaves attaining a length of 2 inches and a breadth of inch,
the margin sometimes slightly recurved; peduncles and
pedicels constituting jointed flowerstalks. Corolla about half
an inch long, the subtle downs on its inner side purplish.
Style somewhat shorter than the corolla. Fruit hardly above
$ inch long, terminated by the calyx-lobes. Seeds many,
measuring about inch in length.
This plant fairly claims specific recognition ; it is easily dis-
tinguished from G. ovata by the glandular indument, by the
narrowness of the leaves and the paucity of their denticulations,
by the generally one-flowered, though occasionally also two-
flowered peduncles, by shorter calyx-lobes and also the less
elongation of the lower corolla-lobes, by the very distinct hairi-
ness of the undivided portion of the corolla inside, by the
also constantly more hairy style and proportionately broader
fruit. From G. varia it differs likewise in some of the above
indicated characteristics, besides in leaves of thinner con-
sistence, ampler-membranous corolla-lobes, longer septum and
broader seeds. G. racemosa stands in its affinity rather more
remote. The following localities of species of Goodenia
remained hitherto unrecorded : —G. phylicoides, between Espe-
rance-Bayand Bremer-River; S. Carey.—G, bellidifolia, Clyde;
Baeuerlen. —G. varia, Eucla; J. Oliver.—G. barbata, New
England, at 3500 ft.; Fr. Campbell.—G. heterophylla, Shoal-
haven; Baeuerlen. —G. scaevolina, Cambridge-Gulf; Johnston.
King’s Sound ; Boulton. —G. albiflora, Flinders-Ranges; F.
v. M. —G. calcarata, Mueller-River; W. Birch.—G. paniculata,
Mitchell-River ; Howitt. —G. heteromora, Wimmera ; Dr.
Curdie. Lachlan-River; F. v. M.—G. humilis, Tattiara-Country ;
Prof. Tate. —G. lamprosperma; Fortescue-River; S. Carey.—
G. grandiflora, Mount Elliott; Fitzalan. Lake Austin; H. S.
King and Th. Beasley.
The collection of the last-mentioned gentlemen from the
vicinity of Lake Austin contain also the following noteworthy
plants:—Sida cryphiopetala, S. calychymenia, Keraudrenia
integrifolia, Dodonaea petiolaris, Codocarpus cotinifolius with
narrow-lanceolar leaves, Kochia triptera, Melaleuca glomerata,
Haloragis trigonocarpa with small linear leaves, Pimelea For-
restiana with very long spikes, Santalum cygnorum, Pomax
umbellata, Helipterum Humboldtianum, Isotoma petraea,
Solanum lasiophyllum, Eremophila platycalyx, Myoporum
Dampierii, Andropogon exaltatus, Grammitis rutifolia.
Extra print from the “ Victorian Naturalist Februar y, 1887.


■REFERENCES TO BARON CONSTANTIN VON
ETTINGSHAUSEN’S RECENT OBSERVATIONS
ON THE TERTIARY FLORA OF AUSTRALIA,
By Baron Febd. Von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M.D., F.R.S.,
F.G.S., Etc.
[Read April 8, 1884.]
The 47th volume of the Imperial Academy of Science,
Vienna, issued this year, contains an important essay on
tertiary vegetable fossils of Australia, the results of original
researches by Baron Von Ettingshausen, who has been
engaged for fully 30 years in endeavours of systematising on
the often enigmatic relics of vegetations of former geologic
periods. Tasmania is also largely interested in these new
enquiries of a palaeontologist, who, in the fields of fossil-plants,
has gained experience rivalled only by those of Goeppert,
• Heer, Saporta, and Lesquereux, after the founders of vege-
table palaeontology, Sternberg, and Brogniart, and some of
its earliest promoters, leadingly Unger, have passed away.
Baron Von Ettingshausen, on this present occasion, alludes
extensively to leaf impressions obtained by Dr. R. McCormick
(one of the surgeons of Sir James Ross’ antarctic expeditions
during the stay of the Erebus and Terror at Hobart) in the
travertin of the country adjacent to the entrance of the Der-
went ; and this distinguished palaeontologist had likewise
an opportunity, through the authorities of the British Museum,
to examine the specimens of fossils collected in the same
region by Mr. R. M. Johnston, —the very material, of which
the last-mentioned zealous and circumspect observer gave
already some general accounts, accompanied by lithographic
drawings in the proceedings of the Royal Society of Tasmania,
1873,1874, 1879, and 1881, determining at the same time the
precise geologic age of these tertiary layers. From these
united Tasmanian collections Baron Von Ettingshausen has
defined 33 species, which he assorts into 21 genera, pertaining
to 16 natural orders. As the “ Denkschriften der Wiener
Akademie ” may not reach many of those who, locally, are
interested in these enquiries, it may not be out of the way to
giye a list of the fossils thus named and diagnosed ; excellent
lithograms enrich this treatise, so that no difficulty should
arise to trace out the now described species under their present
designation at the places of discovery; this is still further
facilitated by citations of Mr. Johnston’s illustrations for 20
of the species.
Myrica Eyrei (Johnston f. 5).
Betula Derwentensis (Johnston f. 10.)
Alnus Muelleri (obtained at Risdon.)
Quercus Tasmanii (obtained at Risdon.)
Tagus Risdoniana (obtained at Risdon.)
Salix Cormickii.
Cinnamomum Woodwardii (obtained at Shoebridge.)
Cinnamomum Hobartianum.
Lomatia prae-longifolia (Johnston f. 16.)
Dryandroides Johnstonii (Johnston f. 29.)
Ceprosma prae-cuspidifolia,
Apocynophyllum travertinum (Johnston f. 14.)
Apocynophyllum microphyllum (Johnston f. 8.)
Echitonium obscurum.
Cordia Tasmanica (obtained at Risdon.)
Premna Drummondi (Johnston f. 2, 26, 26.)
Sapotacites oligoneuris (Johnston f. 1, 30.)
Sapotacites achrasoides.
Ceratopetalum Woodii.
Ceratopetalum prae-arbutoides (Johnston f. 35.)
Sapindus Tasmanicus.
Elaeocarpus Bassii (Johnston f. 57, 60; obtained at
Beaconsfield.)
Cassia Flindersi (Johnston f. 13.)
Phyllites populiformis (Johnston f. 20.)
Phyllites ficiformis (Johnston f. 11.)
Phyllites juglandiformis (Johnston f. 28.)
Phyllites ligustroides (Johnston f. 22.)
Phyllites pyriformis (Johnston f. 23.)
Phyllites phaseolites (Johnston f. 4.)
Phyllites sophorseformis (Johnston f. 9.)
Phyllites mimosseformis (Johnston f. 31.)
Carpolithes gaertnerioides (Johnston f. 34: obtained from
Pipeclay Bluff.)


Carpolithes Eisdonianus (from Eisdon.)
From this list it will be observed that Baron Yon Etting-
shausen refers unhesitatingly fully half the plants, the leaf
impressions of which he had from near Hobart before him, to
genera of the existing vegetable world; some, however, ho
places into genera solely established for the systematic recep-
tion of vegetable relics of former ages, while Phyllites also,
here as elsewhere, becomes the generic receptacle for fossil
leaf—remnants not readily referable to any defined generic
group of plants, whether living or extinct—whereas Carpolithes
serves for keeping together by prevalent palaeontographic
usage some fruits of obscure affinity, generally regarded as
gymnospermous, but not always congeneric, and sometimes,
perhaps, not even co-ordinal.
Were I to be allowed to offer a suggestion on a subject,
which from its very nature must be perplexing, it would be to
recommend a preference of new generic names for all such
organic remnants as cannot be put with any degree of certainty
along with generic forms now living, nor can safely be placed
into clearly defined fossil genera, as this'would not commit
us to fix the exact systematic position of any organism, known
only from fragments quite insufficient for that strict generic
recognition which, for instance, would be expected from deal-
ing with Laurineae, in the sense of living genera of that order,
the corresponding exact circumscription of which for fossils,
even if flowers and fruits were always or finally obtained, would
ever remain an impossibility. Thus only in such cases would
the generic name of living organisms become adopted for
fossils, when direct certainty or far-reaching circumstantial
evidence existed, as, for instance, in the case of Araucaria
Johnstoni, alluded to by Baron Yon Ettingshausen, which
Conifer, though its cone is as yet known only in a young
state, was placed in that genus, not because the carpologic
characteristics were conclusive, but because the genus
Araucaria has been traced elsewhere from living forms succes-
sively through several geologic epochs. There may, however,
exist in many localities a consociation of vegetable fossils to
such an extent, and of such a similarity, as to justify from the
mere presence of some peculiar foliage, not absolutely
characteristic by itself for any particular genus, our systema-
tising on mere leaf forms, especially if such an intimate and
extensive anatomic knowledge, as Baron Yon Ettingshausen
displays, is brought to bear on such fossils; nevertheless, the
almost infinite forms, some of whicli not rarely reiterative in
various genera and even different orders of plants, assumed by
leaves throughout the whole wide creation, would render
identification, unaided by floral and fructifying organs, often
hazardous in the extreme, even to the most experienced
scrutator.
Incidentally it should perhaps here be mentioned, that w©
owe the earliest records of tertiary Tasmanian plants to Sir
Paul de Strzelecki, who in his valuable volume “ Physical
description of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land,"
254 (1845), offered a note by Professor J. Morris on two leaf
impressions and a branchlet fossil in the travertine near
Hobart, all three delineated on plate vii. of his work, and ha
adds that the celebrated Charles Darwin, whose death we had
lately to deplore did notice already the occurrence of leaves of
a supposed Palm in the same deposit.
The essay presented to us by the celebrated Austrian
palaeontologist, is, independent of its special local interest,
also of general importance, inasmuch as he enunciates his
opinion that the whole existing vegetation of the world can in
it> development be traced to an universal original flora of
bygone geologic ages, a conclusion from palaeontologic data
first drawn distinctly by Baron Von Ettingshausen, although
foreshadowed by other observers and indicated already by
D’Archiac in the wording quoted by Schimper, "Le pre'sent
de la terre n’est que la consequence de son This
enunciation, it need hardly be said, supports the theory of
organic beings having gradually ascended in. the scale of
development.


One of the most interesting forms of pliocene plants,
rendered known by this new essay, is the Alder, with which
Baron Von Ettingshausen has generously connected the name
of the writer of these lines, on species of Alnus occurring in the
existing vegetation of Australia, nor any having been found
in a fossil state previously in this part of the globe, although
South-Eastern Australia and New Zealand possess—as well-
known—the co-ordinal genus Fagus. This announcement of
the occurrence of an Alder in the Tasmanian Travertine is all
the more to be appreciated, as Mr. Johnston was fortunate
enough to detect a fruit, amentum of this plant; a fact like
this should encourage Tasmanian geologists to persevere in
farther searches after carpologic specimens in the rich and
very accessible beds of fossils in their island. Schimper in
1872 enumerated 30 fossil species of Alnus, but only seven of
these were any amenta procured by the several finders, the
rest were described from leaves alone, and must therefore
remain doubtful as regards generii and specific limits.
The prospect of Dr. Barnard settling professionally in his
native city, holds out much additional hope for in
the fossil flora of the vicinity, after that talented gentleman
has aided already so much in elucidating the pliocene
vegetation of Gulgong,
It remains to confirm the systematic position now given to
the above-mentioned Tasmanian pliocene plants by searching
for fruit traces, irrespective of the likelihood of future in-
vestigations, proving that in Tasmania,- as in many other
parts of the world, the pliocene vegetation to which Alders
were immixed, was also one of great richness in specific forms,
few of them as yet known to us.


NOTE ON AN HITHERTO IMPERFECTLY KNOWN
CALLISTEMON,
By Babon Feed. Von Muelleb, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D.,
F.R.S., &c.
Though the Australian vegetation has become gradually
unfolded in most of its features, yet much remains to be closer
observed, and even in the vicinity of larger settlements new
or rare plants remain to be traced, as will be exemplified on
this occasion. It was early in the year 1853 when the writer
noticed on one of the rivulets of the Buffalo-Range a
myrtaceous peculiar tall then fruiting shrub, which in the
absence of flowers was referred to the genus Melaleuca, and
for which, in allusion to its pine-like habit, the name M.
pityoides was chosen (First General Report, 12). Six years
later Dr. Miquel in an essay on various Australian plants
received from me, suggested that this Melaleuca might be
transferable to the closely allied genus Callistemon (Neder-
landisk Kruidhundig Aroliief, IV., 142). In 1863, when
occasion arose, to revise the species of Callistemon, I ven-
tured to refer this doubtful plant ( Fragm. Fhytogr. Austr.,
IV, 54) as a form to C. salignus, a species singularly variable
in its ascent from the lowlands to the highest Alps. To this
Mr. Bentham ( Flor . Austr., 111., 121) somewhat demurred,
pointing to Melaleuca nodosa and M. pungens as very similar in
foliage. Matters concerning this plant remained in doubt till
last spring, when I received flowering specimens, gathered far
upon the Ovens-River by Mr. C. Falk, and when other
samples, also in flower, were collected by the Rev. B.
Scortechini, who obtained his material at the sources of the
Dumaresque-River, on the boundary line between New South
Wales and Queensland. By these means it is now clearly
proved, that the plant should be referred to Callistemon ;
indeed, its flowers show such close resemblance to those of
the small blossomed variety of C. salignus, as perhaps to
render it desirable to regard it merely as an extreme form of
that species. If specific value is to be attributed to it, the
diagnosis would be as follows :
Callistemon pityoides,
F. v. M., Systematic Census of Australian Plants, 140
(1882).
Leaves short, thinly cylindrical, somewhat awlshaped,
slightly compressed or sometimes semi-cylindrical, soon
glabrous; bracts lanceolate-linear or narrow, or some
ovate-lanceolar; rachis and often also the calyces short
downy; lobes of the calyx semi ovate-roundish or some almost
semi-orbicular, membranous, about half as long as the tube,
considerably shorter than the petals, finally deciduous ;
stamens comparatively short ; filaments pale yellowish, glab-
rous, about twice as long as the petals, or some three times as
long; anthers yellow ; style glabrous ; fruits truncate-ovate,
rarely depressed-globular, more or less contracted at the summit;
valves silky at the surface.
In its external aspect this plant resembles more the larger
forms of Melaleuca ericifolia than even the smaller of Calli-
stemon salignus. To the pharmaceutic profession it is of par-
ticular interest as the quality of the oil. of the foliage and its
percentage remain to be ascertained yet. After Mr. Bosisto’s
enterprising and successful efforts, to give to the distillation
of oils from our myrtaceous trees large commercial dimensions,
local pharmaceutists should feel encouraged in effecting addi-
tional tests of the Myrtaceac in this respect, the number of
species on record from Australia having reached to 650,
whereby this order of plants stands with us second only to
Leguminosre, but surpassing far the latter in technical im-
portance.
'traprint from the Melbourne “ Chemist and Druggist,"
March, 1883,1
fe 0.


DESCRIPTION OF A NEW CYCADEOUS PLANT FROM
SOUTH-WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
Bv Bakon Yon Mueller, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.R.S.,
F.C.S., F.G.S. &c.
Encephalartos Dyeri (Macrozamia Dyeri, F.V.M. MSG.) —
Leaves large, not distinctly twisted before expansion; petioles
broad, elongated, triangular, convex above; segments on each
side about fifty, comparatively broad, quite fiat, toothless,
pungent-pointed, streaked by 13—15 nerves, without very
conspicuous articular callosity at the base, but there evidently
decurrent; the lower segments gradually abbreviated, but none
reduced to spines; male strobile very long, ellipsoid-cylindrical;
antheriferous scales thick, extremely numerous, the low«r
blunt and abbreviated, those towards the middle of the strobile
short-pointed, those towards and at the summit attenuated
into a pungent ascendent apex of much less length than
that of the obovate-cuneate antheriferous area; strobilar
fruit large, glabrous, ovate in outline; its stalk some-
what covered with a deciduous woolly indument; its lower
scales simply or hardly acute at the summit, the scales
towards the middle of the strobile short-acuminated; those
towards and at the summit of the fruit gradually terminating
in a flat pungent ascendent acumen of less length than that of
the almost cordate turgid laminar portion of the scale.
On the coast at Esperance-Bay.
The material for elucidating this Zamia was obtained
through the kind mediation of Mr. W. Knight and Mr.
W. Webb of King George’s Sound ; it consists of two
leaves, a well - developed antheriferous spike and a
semi-mature strobile. Additional specimens and further
observations on the only known place of growth may affect
hereafter to some extent the descriptive notes now given ; but
unless the peculiar conditions of clime and soil on the isolated
spot of discovery should account for the discrepancies, this
new Zamia or Encephalartos can most readily be distinguished
from the only other western congener by the larger size of the
leaves, with stalks over an inch broad, by the greater width
of the leaf-segments, which generally attains fully half an
inch, by the very obvious decurrence of the segments without
ready indication of callous articulation, by the much greater
length but actually lesser width of the male strobile, which
indeed becomes nearly two feet long when perfected, by the
smaller and proportionately narrower antheriferous scales, of
which even the upper ones are produced into a very much
shorter acumen, the latter characteristic applying as well to
the fruit-scales, which moreover approach not an anchor-
shaped form, at least in the young state. Mature fruit may
exhibit still more marked differences.
Visitors to the lonely place, where this palm-pine grows,
a.e describing its stem'procumbent. Whether this is owing
to frequent oceanic blasts, to which this Zamia is exposed, or
whether this is a character not dependent on extraneous
influences, we must learn through further enquiries and
observations. Also this species exudes a mucilaginous fluid,
which indurates into a kind of Tragacanth; the occurrence
of this kind of gum on cycadeae is mentioned in former pages
of this journal, when some eastern congeners were described.
It is probably an identical Zamia, which has been noticed
between Cape Arid and Cape Pasley on the western extremity
of the great'Bight, but from whence no specimens have been
obtained. Theso widely distributed other S-W. Australian con-
wise no species grows nearer to our new one than the Central
Australian Encephalartos Macdonnellii, which is particularly
gregarious on Krichauff-Range and James-Range; but E.
Macdonnellii has narrower leaf-segments, at their bases not
so contiguous to the rachis, while neither the staminate nor
the nut-bearing scales are pungent, unless the uppermost;
the former are also much smaller, the whole antheriferous
strobile being only about half or three-quarters of an inch long.
On this rare and grand plant the name of W. Thiselton
Dyer, C.M.G., M.A., F.R.S., is bestowed in particular recog-
nition of his comprehensive researches on cycadeae, carried
out by him in the great Kew-Garden, of which he is the
able Assistant-Director.
Extra print from the Victorian “ Chemist anil Drugi/ist,
June, 1885.


DEFINITION OF A NEW CRYPTANDRA
By Baron von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.R.S.,
F.G.S. &c.
The order of Rhamnaceae is one of considerable extent in
the vegetation of Australia, and remarkably characteristic
in its forms, inasmuch as of the ninety hitherto recorded
indigenous species not less than eighty-three are endemic ;
and to these is likely to be added by future searches,
especially in scrubby regions of the interior of our island
continent. But although Sir James Smith already, in the
year 1811, gave the name Cryptandra amara to a species
widely distributed in S.E. Australia, on account of the
bitterness of its foliage, nothing is as yet known of the
perhaps peculiar chemical principles of any of the exclusively
Australian Rhamnaceae. The order presents therefore abso-
lutely new material, so far as we here are concerned, for
chemical and therapeutic investigations. The discovery of an
additional and very handsome species of Cryptandra now
affords an opportunity, not only for describing this new
member of the genus in these pages, but also for renewing an
appeal that pharmacists and more particularly those located
in new settlements should interest themselves, with their
enviable facilities for discoveries, to collect as far as possible,
even at some little monetary sacrifice, the plants of their
district and of adjoining regions. From simply dried speci-
mens forwarded, the kinds known already to possess medicinal
properties could be pointed out, and be brought thus under
the notice of local practitioners. Irrespective of this sub-
stantial advantage, there would also permanent scientific
credit be gained by contributing to the records of the flora
of this part of the world.
Cryptandra Scortechinii, —Erect; branchlets covered with a
very thin stellular vestiture ; leaves lanceolar, acute, conspi-
cuously stalked, above glabrous shining and not wrinkled,
beneath thinly grey-velvety, at the margin recurved, the
lateral nerves but slightly prominent, the veins concealed;
stipules semilanceolate linear, narrowly attenuated towards
the pointed summit, longer than the leaf-stalks ; flower-heads
dense, somewhat compound, terminal, sessile; surrounding
bracts scarious, dark brown, almost oval, keeled, imperfectly
bearded, short-pointed; calyces small, enveloped in white
intricated deciduous hair ; calyx-tube extending for more than
half beyond the ovary and disk; lobes much shorter than
the tube, permanently woolly bearded; petals and stamens
inserted near the summit of the calyx-tube ; style short, subtle-
downy ; stigmata confluent; capsule egg-shaped, glabrescent;
seeds pale brown.
On the Severn ; Rev. B. Scortechini.
A shrub probably of several feet in height. Well-developed
leaves, from Jin. to fin. long, Jin. to fin. broad, above dark
green and smooth ; flower-heads from about Jin. to nearly lin.
in diameter; their indument lax and somewhat woolly, pro-
truding considerably beyond the involucrating dorsally glabrous
bracts; calyces about Jin. long; fruit measuring nearly Jin.
in length, slightly surpassing the discal lining ; seeds smooth;
endocarpal covering of each seed thin, opening by a simple
slit; strophiole membranous, whitish, very short, almost
cupular.
This plant is placed into the genus Cryptandra, as the
characteristics by which Trymalium, Spyridium and Stenan-
themum were severed by Fenzel and Reisseck became more
and more recognised as weak. But, as generic aggregations are
always artificial, it remains optional, whether this new plant is
left in Cryptandra or held apart as a Stenanthemum, to which
genus or subgenus it belongs. But it seems best, to return to
the views enunciated as early as 1858 by Sir Joseph Hooker,
according to which Spyridium and Stenanthemum should
merge into Cryptandra. Our new species differs already in the
form of its leaves from the five or six known Stenanthema,
and is the first of that group from Queensland.
Extraprint from the “Australasian Chemist and Druanist,”
for 1884.


DESCRIPTION OF AN HITHERTO UNRECORDED SPECIES
OF EUCALYPTUS FROM NEW BRITAIN ;
By Baron Yon Mueller, R.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.R.S., F.C.S. &c.
In a small collection of plants, formed some time ago in New Britain by Mr.
J. Turner, occurs what to all appearance is a veritable species of Eucalyptus, a
genus not previously known as represented there, although the Rev. G. Brown
spoke already of Eucalypts, noticed by him in New Ireland during his mis-
sionary travels. The closer investigation of the Flora of New Guinea more
recently has rendered the comparison of the Papuan vegetation with that of
Australia gradually possible at least to a fractional extent ; thus any Australian y/
features in the Flora of any of the adjacent islands have become of augmented
interest also now. But the Eucalyptus, referred to on this occasion, interests
us not merely phytogeographically, but more particularly as likely affording
timber of useful quality and in copious readily available quantity, eucalypts
often being gregarious ; and we may furthermore perhaps gain in this tall
species a new tree for tropical forest-culture and possibly even for medicinal
products.
Eucalyptus Naudiniana. —Branchlets valid, angular; leaves scattered, on
short broadish stalks, ovate-lanceolar, acuminate, much paler beneath; their
primary veins distant, thin, very spreading and somewhat ascending, the
peripheral vein not quite close to the edge of the leaf; veinlets subtle ; oibdots
much concealed; panicles ample, terminal or from the upper axils; flowers
small, nine or often fewer in each umbel; stalklets angular, as long as the
total calyx or somewhat longer; tube of the latter hemispheric, slightly angular ;
lid hardly longer, almost semiglobular, suddenly produced into a thin beak-
like apex; stamens all fertile and all inflected while in bud; anthers minute
roundish-ovate, bursting longitudinally; style short; stigma not dilated; ovary
surpassed by the calyx-tube, somewhat convex and angular at the summit.
Near Spacious Bay; J. Turner. The specimens communicated by Ch. Moore,
Esq., F.L.S., Director of the Botanic Garden of Sydney. A tree, attaining a height
of about 100 feet. Leaves usually 3—4 inches long, II —inches broad, slightly
inequilateral, not very thick in texture, dark-green and shining above, quite dull
beneath. Panicles measuring from a few to several inches, the majority of their
branches not opposite. Total length of the calyces hardly more than J inch.
Stamens very numerous. Style only about I inch long. Fruit unknown. This
species bears in some respect near affinity to E. Cloeziana; but the branchlets
are much thicker, the leaf-stalks dilated upwards, the leaves broader, less
oblique ard of firmer structure with a soft lustre on the surface, the branches
of the panicle and also the stalklets are more angular, while the lid is conspicu-
ously pointed, the ovary less depressed and the style shorter. The fruit,
irrespective of perhaps bark and wood, may also be different.
In the last number of this periodical I alluded to some Eugenias with
eucalyptoid calyces, by which an approach is offered thus far to the genus
Eucalyptus; but in the species from New Britain the petals being entirely
absent, as in all other congeners, it is not likely, that the carpologic charac-
teristics will prove others than those of Eucalyptus and not eugenioid.
I seize on this opportunity, as perhaps the last that ever would be
afforded me, to connect with a distinct specific form of the genus Eucalyptus
now permanently the name of Prof. Ch. Naudin, Ph.D., Memb. de ITnst.,
Director of the famous experimental garden of Antibes, who by cultural
researches and watchful studies in that grand Institution has much aided in
augmenting the forest-resources of the countries around the Mediterranean Sea,
and who has simultaneously by literary elucidations even at a venerable ago
brought the Eucalypts in his own great country under fuller cognisance as
among the leading timber trees of the globe.
Extra print from the “ Australasian Journal of Pharmacy ,” July, 1886.
Extra print from the “ Australasian Journal of Pharmacy,” July, 1883.
ft / '
V
*r • *


SUCCINCT NOTES ON SOME PLANTS FROM NEW
GUINEA,
By Baron Feed, von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M.D., Ph.D., F.R.S.,
F.G.S. Etc.
Before resuming the issue of the publication on “ Papuan Plants,’’
the writer wishes to offer a few preliminary remarks on various
botanic sendings, obtained within the last months from that great
Island. Among the plants, thus received, are leafy branchlets and
acorns of an Oak, gathered in Gemenoma-valley of Astrolabe-Range
(at about 2000 feet elevation) by Mr. E. G. Edelfelt, an emissary
of Thomas Gulliver, Esq., F.L.S., of Towpsville, who made large
monetary sacrifices, to obtain thus some new scientific material from
New Guinea. The tree, from which the specimens were taken, was
abont 80 feet high, with a trunk branchless up to 40 feet and with
greyish bark ; the leaves resemble much those of Quercus ])allida,
but the scales of the involucre are less prominent and less pointed,
and the nuts are not so broad and exceed the involucre considerably
in length ; the leaves are also very similar to those of Quercus
Korthalsii; and from A. de Candolle’s description (prodr. xvi. part
n, 89) the acorns of that Oak seem also very much like those of the
Papuan tree, the seed (to judge from decayed remnants) being like-
wise much lobed. I regard this Oak referable to Quercus Dalbertisii,
indicated in the “ Victorian Naturalist,” Dec. 1884, and alluded to
in the “ Papuan Plants” p. 83 (1877.) The proportionate length
of the involucre and nut is evidently subject to considerable varia-
tion. Flowers were not available or not secured. Acorns of Q.
Dalbertisii were brought by Mr. Armit also from the vicinity of the
Aroa-River of the Kabadi-District.
From the Astrolabe-Mountains were likewise brought by Mr.
Edelfelt the acorns of another Oak, differing from those of Q.
Dalbertisii in larger size, proportionately greater depression and
much thicker almost bony pericarp, approaching thus in form the
fruit of Q. pallida , which however has a more prickly involucre, a
larger nut and thin pericarp. The acorns of this second Oak of
Astrolabe-Range exhibit much resemblance to those of Q. cornea;
but the involucral scales are less distinct and towards the base of
the cup by confluence much obliterated. The species seems well
marked, and I have named it Quercus Gulliveri in acknowledgment
of the efforts of the Townsville gentleman for New Guinean scientific
research. Leaves, flowers and perfect seeds I have not yet seen ; the
nut varies from slightly to half exserted.
In the collection formed by Mr. Edelfelt in his late journey from
Port Moresbye to the Astrolabe-Ranges occur also as not yet recorded
from New Guinea : Sin-apis Timoriana, Desmodium pulchellum,
Dolichondrone Rheedei , Ophioglossum pendulum , Marattia praxinea,
Angiopteris evecta, Ptens geranifolia, Acrostichum repandum ; also
solitary or additional representatives of the genera Sterculia, Breynia ,
Atylosia, Grevillea (named after the collector, but generically as yet
doubtful, as only leaves were obtained), Alyxia, Spatoglottis, Com-
melyna.
During the very recent voyage of H.M. Ship “Dart,” when the
British protectorate became proclaimed over some additional portions
of Eastern New Guinea, Capt. Cyprian Bridge aided by the Rev.
James Chalmers gathered at Dixon’s Bay of Bessel-Island various
plants, from which the occurrence of the genera Cucumis, Bikkia,
and Imperata (7. arundinacea ) in New Guinea is demonstrated. The
Bikkia, obtained there, belongs to the series of B. Pancheri ; but it
is distinct from that species in broader almost orbicular leaves,
shorter calyx-teeth, somewhat smaller corolla with more slender tube
and anthers reaching to the summit of the corolla-lobes or beyond
them. This highly ornamental species seems altogether new, and is
to be recorded as B. Bridgeava. A Bikkia, collected by Dr. Guppy
during the survey-voyage of H.M. Ship “ Lark” in 1884 on Short-
land-Island and also Treasury-Harbour of the Solomon-Group,
approaches as regards leaves and flowers closely to B. Pancheri, but
I have seen no fruit. Among Capt. Bridge’s plants from the Cloudy
Mountains are as unrecorded for New Guinea a Hypolythrum and
a Spiridens. The Rev. W, G. Lawes brought recently among other
plants from the vicinity of Port Moresbye; Vittadinia hrachyco
moides, Setaria glauca, a Graptophyllum, a Buechnera and a
Dianella, thus adding as many genera to the records of the Papuan
Flora.
The distinguished naturalist Mikluko-Maclay secured on the north
coast of New Guinea among plants with edible fruit: Pangium
edule, Bassia Maclayana and a Canarium , the latter perhaps
distinct from those recorded before as Papuan.
Mr, Will. E. Armit, as emissary of the “Argus” for itinerations
in New Guinea, gathered on the S.E. coast, particularly at the
Aroa-River, Gyrocarpus Americanus, Physalis minima, Buddleia
Asiattca, Fuirena umbellata. Paspaliim minutiflorum, Pennisetum
macrostachyum, Polypodium Dipteris, also single species of Spondias,
Alyswarpus, Uraria , Smilax , Scirpodendron and a second Triumfetta.
Extra-print from the “Victorian Naturalist,” February 1885,


SUCCINCT NOTES ON SOME PLANTS FROM NEW
GUINEA.
By Baron Ferd. von Mueller, K C.M.G., M. 1)., Ph.D., F.R.S.
( Continued .)
Cycas Scratchleyana. —Leaves glabrous ; their segments charta-
ceous, flat, rather broad, shining on both sides, hardly or not paler
beneath, slightly decurrent at the gradually narrowed base; antheri-
ferous scales rather large, almost chartaceous, broadly cuneate,
glabrous above, tomentose beneath, truncate or but slightly convex
in front, without any acumen, not even distinctly apiculated, the
antheriferous area extending nearly to the summit, the narrow space
above it more tomentose and sometimes thickened there towards the
middle.
On Mount Bedford, Jala-River, Dedouri-Country ; W. Armit. .
This species of fern-pine, though well marked, can in its charac-
teristics here only as yet be defined very partially, mere fragments of
leaves and some detached staminate scales only being available for
examination. In leaflets it comes much nearer to C. circinalis and
C. Rumphii, than to C. media and C. Papuana ; the leaflets attain
about half an inch in width, and are less rigid than those of most
other congeners. The male scales are inches long, and near
the summit about one inch broad ; all the specimens gathered of
these scales are destitute of any pungent prolongation, the usual
acumen being perhaps replaced by the short repressed but not free
turgescence underneath. This characteristic of the androphylls is
quite unique in the genus.
It is with particular pleasure, that I dedicate this new form of a
very stately class of plants to the distinguished first ruler of British
New Guinea, his Excellency General Scratchlcy.
Mr. Armit’s sendings contain also the following plants as hitherto
unrecorded from New Guinea :
Pittosporum ferrugineum ; Astrolabe-Range,
Erythrina Indica ; base of Astrolabe-Range.
Pholidota imbricata ; on Gycas-stems, Mount Astrolabe.
Habenaria sp. ; Astrolabe-Range.
Iphigenia Indica ; Astrolabe-Hange.
Panicum plicatum ; Laloki-River.
Panicum semialatum ; Astrolabe-Range.
Panicum brevifolium ; Mt. Bedford.
Lygodium scandens ; Jala-River.
Trichomanes Javanicum ; Mount Bedford, up to 3000 feet.
Trichomanes pallidum ; Lochivaga, Jala-River.
Cyathea sp. and Alsophila 2 sp.; Jala-River ; these or allied species
of fern-trees have with some others been also found by Mr
Edelfelt on Astrolabe-Range.
Taenitis hlechnoides ; Mount Bedford up to 3600 feet; with the
normal state also a diminutive form in fruit.
Lindsaya concinna ; Mount Bedford.
Polypodium adnascens ; Laldke.
Hypolepis sp. ; Jala- Hiver.
Acrostichum spicatum ; Mount Bedford, 3000 ft.
Also a tall moss, resembling Dawsonia superba , but without fruit.
The highly experienced Pteridographer, J. G. Baker, records in
Britten’s “Journal of Botany for 1885,” p. 19 , Selaginella Wallichii
from New Guinea, and at p. 40 Selaginella latifolia.
Strange, as it may appear, Mr. Armit brought already Manihot
utilissima from remote places of New Guinea, where hardly any
previous intercourse with Europeans took place.
Extra-print from the “Victorian Naturalist,” April 1885.


ft I
GUINEA,
~ M. & Ph.D.
Mount Owen Stanley Ranges —when this worthy missionary
and courageous New Guinea explorer reached higher eleva-
tions than ever before attained in the great Papuan Island— )
several plants were gathered and kindly submitted to my
examination. Among them is a magnificent gesneraceous
herb, pertaining to Dichrotrichum, of which genus four species
were hitherto recorded —two from the Sunda Islands, one from
the Philippines and one from the north-western part of New
Guinea. The fifth species now brought to notice is well
marked; and - it is with particular pleasure, that the writer
dedicates this splendid floral production to the generous and
enlightened finder, trusting that this new plant will find ere
long its way into conservatory culture. Its characteristics may
be briefly thus defined :
Dichrotrichum Chalmersii —Stem rooting, appressed-hairy ;
leaves alternate, ovate-lanceolar; flowers large, numerously
crowded on the summit of a much-elongated peduncle;
bracts small; lobes of the calyces narrow-oblong, about
as long as the tube; corolla subtle-scabrous, outside
beset with very short hair; stamens nearly as long as the
corolla and not much shorter than the style.
The fruit was not obtained. Should (against expectation) it
hereafter prove differently organised to that of the genuine
species of Dichrotrichum, then this plant might be raised
to a new genus as Chalmersia. Absence of fruit of another
co-ordinal plant from New Guinea, described as Didymocarpus
Lawesii, prevented its being placed into Baea, to which genus
it has since been shown to belong, although seemingly distinct
from B. Treubii.
New Guinea is likely to furnish yet many other plants of the
cyrtandrous section of Gesneraceae to our botanic records and
garden-treasures, although the adjoining north-eastern part
of Australia, even in its jungle-regions, seems very poor in
plants of this order. Mr. C. B. Clarke, in his new and careful
elaboration of all known Cyrtandreae (De Cand. monogr.
phanerog. vol. v.) records already 460 species, 13 of which
Papuan, and these mostly detected by Dr. Beccari in the north-
west of the island, and belonging to the genera Aeschynanthu's,
Dichrotrichum, Baea, Epithema and Cyrtandra. Represen-
tatives of the New Caledonian genus Coronanthera may yet
be looked for in the north-eastern part of Queensland.
Mr. Chalmers’ last sending contains also as new an
exceedingly pretty Dendrobium, in affinity not far removed
from the Javan Dendrobium Kuhlii (D. thyrsodes. G.
Reichenbach), differing, however, so far as the illustration of
the latter in the Botanic Register of 1847, pi. 47, allows
us to judge, in considerably narrower, more pointed
leaves, and in the not flat but fringed summit of
the labellum, the latter being broadly inflexed at the upper
end. This species has been distinguished as D. Lawesii, in
honour of the Rev. Mr. Lawes, whose successful missionary
efforts in South-Eastern New Guinea have been carried on,
with Mr. Chalmers’ able co-operation, through many years,
under great privations and dangers. Dendrobium Lawesii
belongs to the section Pedilonum of Blume (Coelandrium of
Fitzgerald), of which we know as yet only one Australian
species, D. Smillieae, which latter, like D. secundum, D.
Kuhlii, D. Lawesii and probably some other allied congeners,
has purple pollinia. The first part of the second volume of
Mr. R. D. Fitzgerald’s splendid work on “ Australian
Orchids ” (to the material of which many of the pharmacists
of Australia might yet contribute) contains a grand species of
Dendrobium from Sir Will. Macarthur’s conservatory
collections, figured as D. superbiens, and supposed to occur
wild in Northern Queensland. It may, however, have come
from New Guinea through Mr. Reedy; but, as pointed out
already in the Melbourne Leader (February, 1884), where this
Dendrobium was named D. Fitzgeraldi, it does not represent
the genuine D. superbiens of Prof. G. Reichenbach, described
in the “ Gardener s Chronicle ” of 1876, and figured in the
same periodical of 1878, p. 49, inasmuch as the flowers are much
more crisp and in this i aspect more like those of D.
undulatum, to which species this plant also bears considerable
resemblance as well in habit as in foliage. All this shows
that much of the vegetation of N.E. Australia and of the
adjoining islands remains yet to be elucidated, for which
object the facilities are from year to year increasing.
(Extra-print from the Melbourne Chemist and Druggist, June,
1884.)


by the Papuan
tree, now’ for the first time brought under notice. The specimens
from Kerepuna
are only flower-bearing, those from Maiva only fruit-bearing; but
I regard them
as belonging to one species.
Extra prin
't from the “ Australasian Journal of Pharmacy,” April , 1886.
DESCRIPTION OF TWO UNRECORDED LEGUMINOUS TREES
FROM NEW GUINEA ;
By Baeost Feed. Yon Muellee, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.E S., F.C.S. &c.
Cynometra minutifiora.— Branchlets thin, subtle-hairy; leaves consisting generally
of two pair of leaflets, short-stalked or almost sessile, the petiole and rachis
minutely hairy; leaflets comparatively small, chartaceous, sessile, oblique ovate-
lanceolar, gradually protracted into a short-bilobed summit, hardly paler beneath,
glabrous on both sides ; fascicles of flowers almost capitate, emanating often
from near the base of the petiole; peduncle obliterated; bracts minute,
roundish; pedicels very short, subtle-downy; calyces minute, their segments
almost ovate, glabrous; stamens ten, about twice as long as the calyx-segments ;
anthers roundish; ovary short-stipitate, as well as the style glabrous; stigma
not dilated; fruit comparatively small, almost semiorbicular-ovate, oblique, short-
stipitate, slightly rough, rather turgid, indehiscent, one-seeded.
In the south-eastern part of New Guinea ; Rev. J. Chalmers. Leaflets
of the lower pair usually only about half as long as those of the upper, the
latter I—inches1 —inches long, and much more narrowed towards the summit. Fascicles
of flowers reminding of little flowerheads of Acacias; segments of the calyx not
fully inch long. Petals obliterated, unless fugacious, none seen in any of the
advanced flowers available. Style thicker than the filaments. Fruit resembling
that of some Grevilleas, though not bivalvular, attaining a length only of | of an inch;
pericarp rather thick. Seed turgid. The smallness of the leaves, the minute-
ness of the flowers and the smoothness of the ovary separate this species from
all others, except C. Travancorica, the flowers of which are also exceedingly
small; but that species has the leaflets in single pairs and of large size, while
the ovary is downy and the fruit flat. Should further observations confirm the
absence of petals in this Cynometra, then a still closer approach to the genera
Hardwickia, Prioria, Copaifera, Crudia and Delarium would be indicated. Some
South-American species of Cynometra yield a kind of Capal.
Pterocarpus Papuanus. —Branchlets almost glabrous ; leaflets often 5-7, thinly
chartaceous, scattered, soon glabrous, ovate or roundish-ovate, protracted into a
narrow aeumen ; racemes axillary, simple or but little branched ; pedicels about as
long as the calyx during anthesis ; calyces beset with subtle appressed hair outside,
only short-protracted at the base ; teeth somewhat deltoid, the lower smaller and
more acute ; petals glabrous, the upper and the lateral crispated, the two lower
the shortest; tube of stamens cleft into halves ; ovary silky-hairy; style almost
glabrous; pod on a stipes of hardly the length of the calyx, thinly silky, all
around expanded into a broad membrane, with a small sinus in front not far above
the base of the fruit, the anterior portion of the membranous expansion also above
its middle forming a short protruding angle.
At Maiva and Kerepuna in New Guinea; Edelfelt. A tall tree, with redish
wood, according to the collector’s notes. Specimens obtained through Th. Gulliver,
Esq. I should have referred the Papuan species to P. Indicus, had it not been for
the marked difference in the fruit, the stipes of which is still shorter than in
P. marsupium. Ripe seeds of the Papuan plant were not available for comparison.
Miquel and Baker describe the fruit of P. Indicus silky ; Kurz found it glabrous
already in a young state. P. macrocarpus is evidently also closely akin to
P. Papuanus ; but the leaflets are less broad and stiffer, nor can the calyces be
called rusty-velvety. But like P. Indicus and P. macrocarpus also the Papuan tree
is sure to yield Kino, perhaps as good as that of P. marsupium and P. erinaceus ;
nor can there be doubt, that P. Papuanus will furnish dye-wood somewhat similar
to that of P. santalinus ; thus two new articles of export are likely to be supplied


DESCRIPTION OF A NEW PAPUAN BASSIA, YIELDING
AN EDIBLE FRUIT;
By Baron Von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.R.S.,
F.C.S., F.G.S. &c.
Since years it was known, that in the south-eastern parts of
New Guinea a tree exists, which affords a fruit so wholesome
and palatable, that it is largely consumed not only by the
natives, but also by the European and other settlers. Hitherto
however no means were available, to trace this fruit to the
particular species of tree affording it. My wish to obtain full
material for placing this highly useful plant on phytographic
record having been rendered known to the worthy missionaries
of New Guinea, I was recently supplied with flowering and
leafy branchlets and also seeds of the tree in question by the
Rev. William Wyatt Gill, and thus I am now enabled to offer
a diagnosis of this interesting species, which promises to
become important for tropical culture.
Bassia Erskineana. —Branchlets robust, glabrous ; leaves
large, crowded at the summit of the branchlets, ovate-
lanceolar, glabrous, bluntly acuminated, narrowed into a
short stalk, very spreadingly veined, faintly reticular -
venulated; flowers in terminal almost umbelliform fascicles
very numerous ; stalklets not much longer than the flowers ;
calyces rather small, several times shorter than the corolla,
four-cleft to the middle, as well as the stalklets brownish
silky-hairy, its lobes almost semiorbicular, slightly pointed,
the two inner broadly membranous towards the margin;
corolla white, eight-cleft; its tube not very turgid, somewhat
silky outside; its lobes almost ovate, narrowed towards the
base and there ciliolated and somewhat bearded; stamens 16 ;
filaments densely short-downy, about as long as the anthers;
the latter somewhat silky-downy at the back, the blunt
protruding portion of the connective short-bearded; style and
ovary glabrous ; seeds large; oblique-ovate, somewhat com-
pressed ; testa crustaceous, rather brittle, dark-coloured, not
shining; umbilical area cymbiform, occupying about one-
third of the surface of the seed.
The specimens just utilized came from South Cape, where
the vernacular name of the fruit is Posi-Posi. By dedicating
this important tree to the distinguished Commodore Erskine,
I am eager, that the proclamation of the British protectorate
over South Eastern New Guinea should also phytographically
be commemorated as an event, by which the great Papuan
Island will become fully disclosed to peaceful and prosperous
civilization.
The generic name Bassia might well be changed to that of
Illippe, as given by Koenig, as long ago as 1771 (Linne mantissa
altera 563), inasmuch as Allioni five years earlier estab-
lished already a genus Bassia among Salsolaceae. Two other
congeneric trees with esculent fruits are likewise known
from New Guinea—namely, Bassia Cocco (Scheffer in
Annales du jardin botanique de Buitenzong I, 134), the
“ Nate ” of the aborigines, a species bearing only small
fruits; then, Bassia Maclayana (F. v. M. in Victorian
Naturalist I, 168), the “ Dim ” of the natives, which
has globular fruits of fully five inches diameter, with copious
pulp, adhering outward firmly to the endocarpal plates;
the seeds measure about one and a half inches in length and
fully ?in inch in width, are more of a dimidiate-orbicular than
ovate form and considerably compressed; the testa is very
thick, of bony firmness and outside shiningly dark-brown;
the hilum occupies nearly one-third of the seeds, and is not
quite smooth. Rumphius (Herbarium Amboinense HI.,
184-186) mentions six kinds of trees with edible fruits as Vin-
doricum silvestre; of one of these six the seed is described
and figured by Gaertner (de fructibus et seminibus 11., 105, tab.
CIV.) as of Bassia dubia, exhibiting so far as the mere seed
is concerned close alliance to B. Maclayana, but the seed of
the latter is conspicuously broader still.
New Guinea is almost sure to yield from some of its Bassias
and other sapotaceous trees new sources for Gutta-Percha.
Extra print from the Victorian “ Chemist and Druggist ,”
xlpril, 1885 .


' *■ > : >
DESCRIPTION OP A NEW PAPUAN FAGRAEA.
Br Baeon Feed. Yon Muellee, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.R.S., F.C.S. &c.
Fageaea Woodiana.
Branchlets quite robust; leaves very large, chartaceous, gradually narrowed
downward and decurrent along the whole petiole, prominently costate-nerved,
paler beneath, shining on neither page; petiole at the base broadly dilated,
clasping with two posteriorely rounded stipular plates and auteriorely much pro-
tracted into a bilobed broad lamina ; cymes considerably shorter than the leaves ;
general peduncle much abbreviated; pedicels hardly as long as the calyx or
somewhat shorter; tube of the latter scarcely longer than the lobes ; corolla
rather large, its tube slender and not much exceeding in length the cuneate-oval
lobes, but several times longer than the calyx; stamens not reaching to the sum-
mits of the corolla-lobes; ovary gradually attenuated into the style, comparatively
slender.
At the base of the Owen Stanley’s Ranges ; H. O. ForbeS (741). The
whole plant glabrous. Leaves inclusive of the petiolar base attaining a length
of fully one foot and a breath of six inches. Stipular portion about inch
broad and long; lateral nerves distant; veins and veinlets concealed. Cyme
trichotomous. Calyx during anthesis not fully half an inch long, its lobes
rounded-blunt. Corolla 2—inches long, the colour not recognisable in the
dried state of the flowers, the tube not much widened upwards. Anthers about
i inch long. Style nearly as long as the corolla. Fruit yet unknown.
This species agrees almost in size, form and basal dilatation of leaves with P.
auriculata ; but the stipular base is still more produced upwards, the texture of the
leaves is considerably thinner, they are also still more decurrent into the leafstalk and
are much stronger nerved ; besides the flowers are far more numerous and of much
less size, while the corolla is upwards proportionately less widened. From
the imperfectly known F. fastigiata our new plant differs already in the much more
dilated stipular portion of the leaves and in less angular peduncles; the
fruit will afford probably other means of distinguishing the two.
Not dissimilar to F. Zeilanica of Blume, if the basal dilatation of the leaf-stalk
is left out of consideration; —but quite unlike Tbunberg s F. Zeilanica, as
figured by Lamarck (illustr. des genres pi, 167), to which possibly Thwaites’
'F. obovate may be referable, while the real plant of that name, as
originally defined by Wallich, seems to accord with Blume s F. crassifolia,
and approaches also Wight’s F. Malabanca, these three having the leaf-nerves
concealed or only very faintly visible. The genuine F. Corotnandelina, doubtfully
included by Clarke in F. obovata, has the leaves (according to Wight’s
delineation) very distinctly nerved, a characteristic of leading specific value in
this genus. All these congeners can perhaps be much better set out specifically,
when opportunities arise for seeing the form and colour and for investigating
the structure of the matured fruit in each instance, that of Blume s F.
Zeilanica being shown as thickly rostrate. To this plant, as regards size and
form of fruits and also of leaves, respond specimens, sent from near the
Astrolabe-Range by the Rev. James Chalmers ; but the petioles of his plant are
longer and the cyme is more ample. A Fagraea, collected by Dr. Guppy in the
Solomon-Islands, has the fruit only minutely apieulate.
I have bestowed on this very conspicuous plant the name of Harry Wood
Esq., Under-Secretary of the Department of Mines and Forests in Sydney, who
amidst the arduous duties of his responsible position still managed, to advance
also the cause of geography as Chairman of the Exploration-Committee of the
Australian Geographic Society, and thus promoted simultaneously the interests of
the discoverer of this Fagraea. The flowers of all species of this genus as
highly fragrant serve for cosmetic purposes, while the bark of some is
drawn into medicinal use.
Extra 'print from the “ Australasian Journal of Pharmacy , September, 1886.


ADDITIONAL NOTE ON STERCULIACEiE.
by Baron von Mueller.
Since my remarks on some stercullaceous plants appeared in the
July-issue of the Victorian Naturalist, I obtained all at once fifteen
“Hefte der Berichte der Deutschen botanischen Gesellschaft,” among
(hem that, edited on the 21st May of this year in Berlin. At 82-85,
Tafel 111. of this publication a new Brazilian sterculiaceous genus is
ably described and delineated under the name Basiloxylon by Dr.
K. Schumann, and thus a most interesting access is gained, as it
adduces a generic type from the western hemisphere closely cognate
to Pterygota, the extension of which genus to New Guinea had just
been shown by me here. The distinguished author alluded already
in the description to affinity with those species of Sterculia, which
have seeds, each terminated by a large membrane; indeed Basiloxylon
differs from Pterygota only in uniseriate anthers, the number of
pistils being reduced in P. Thwaitesii also to three, while these
organs of the Papuan congener remained yet unknown. Moreover
the arrangement of the anthers, from what is seen in Sterculia
oliganthera, appears to be of doubtful generic value, so that perhaps
the new coordinal Brazilian plant could be transferred to Pterygota
subgenerically, especially so, as in its outer appearance it is quite
similar to the three known genuine species of Pterygota. At all events
the fact, that Dr. Schumann founded on his plant a new genus, confirms
the view, enunciated in these pages, that the genus Sterculia, as
defined by recent writers, needs disintegration again.
Extra-print from the Victoriam Naturalist, September, 1886.
RECORD OF A NEW PAPUAN HELICIA
hv Baron Ferd, von Mueller. K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D.,
F.R.S. &c.
Helicia Foubesiana.
Almost glabrous; leaves lanceolar-ovate or nearly lanceolar, pro-
tracted at the summit, decurrent into the usually very short petiole,
generally quite entire at the margin, their nerves ascendant and
beneath prominent; racemes elongated; pedicels rather long, free to
near the base; bracts minute, narrowed upwards; flowers comparatively
large; petals very narrow towards the mid lie; anthers linear; stigma
elongated, very thin; hypogynous scales annular-connate; fruit almost
oblique-ovate.
Near Soyere; H. 0. Forbes (343, 387, 678, 723, 799.)
A slight appressed brown or greyish indument only on the
youngest branches and scantily on the intlorescene. Leaves scattered,
attaining a length of nine and a breadth of three inches, seldom
remotely denticulated. Petioles sometimes almost obliterated, but
occasionally over half an inch long, neither page shining in a dried
state, the lower less green; the apex oftener blunt than acute; veins
reticulated, rather conspicuous; veinlets subtle. Racemes on
short peduncles, measuring in length from four to six inches.
■Pedicels inch long. Petals |-1 inch long; the terminal
portion much broader than the lower one; the color not recognisable
in the dried state of the flowers. Apex of the connective blunt, con-
siderably extending beyond the anther-cells. Stigma veiy slender, of
about \ the length of the style, somewhat streaked Hypogynous
disk almost patellar, more or less crenulated. Fruit only seen in an
immature state, then hardly half an inch long, and covered by a
light-brown pellicle.
This species comes nearest to H oblongifolia , the differences of
the latter plant consisting in the rather blunt leaf-base, somewhat
shorter pedicels, more denticulated hypogynous disk and perhaps
also color of flowers as well as shape and size of ripe fruit, because
from the latter characteristic important specific distinctions can be
derived in this genus also, as elicited from Australian experiences
particularly. All other known species show lesser affinity.
The indefatigable phytologic explorer, JRev. B. Scortechini, has
sent me two species of Helicia from Perak; both are undescribed;
but as they likely will come under review for the fifth volume of Sir
Joseph Hooker’s Flora of British India, they are left here unattended
to; —one has long petioles, and lanceolar rigid entire leaves
shining above, soon glaucous underneath, the flowers being small,
brown-velvety outside and forming short spicate racemes; —the
other species has large thin lanceolar-ovate almost sessile leaves
without denticulations, the racemes being remarkably short in pro-
portion to the leaves and glabrous, the pedicels almost free, the
style very many times longer than the stigma and the hypogynous
scales connate. Of neither species the ripe fruit could be obtained;
both probably form trees of some size in that damp and hot region.
The characteristics of the bark of these plants are worthy of study.
The presence or absence of denticulations of the leaves should no
longer be used as a primary mark of distinction for the species in
this genus.
Extra-print from the Victorian Naturalist , September, 1886.


During a recent ascent of ranges fully 6000 feet high in south-
eastern New Guinea it fell to the fortunate share of Mr. Carl
Hunstein, to discover a grand epiphyte, of which he brought a
solitary flower, but made a colored sketch of the latter also. Though
it is unusual, to define any plant botanically from a single flower, I
feel no scruples in this exceptional case, to place at once this super!)
production of the Papuan Flora on descriptive record, especially as
the material, altho’ scanty, does allow of referring the plant clearly to
the genus Rhododendron. Thus also lam enabled, to fulfill a long-
cherished wish, to connect with some splendid floral treasure the
name of the Marquis Goyzueta de Toverena, Consul General in
Australia for the Italian Kingdom, a nobleman who has given much
encouragement to my researches, while representing here for a
series of years worthdy his great country. Preliminarely this new
plant may be thus described.
RHODODENDRON TOVE b'ENffi
Corymbs containing about 12 flowers, each at an average 6 inches
long and wide ; calyx reduced to a terminal narrow oblique expan-
sion of the stalklet, the latter nearly glabrous ; corolla pure-white ;
its tube slender-cylindrical, about 3 inches long, but not half an inch
wide at the middle, slightly widened upwards ; lobes seven, horizon-
tal, oblong-ovate, somewhat waved, scantily reflexed at the margin
for short spaces, rounded-blunt or (according to the sketch) occasion-
ally sinnuous at the summit or there produced into 2 or 3 lobules ;
stamens 14, somewhat exserted, about 4 inches long ; filaments in
their lower portion densely beset with short spreading hair, in the
upper portion nearly glabrous ; anthers linear-cylindrical, nearly or
fully half an inch long ; pistil hardly longer than the corolla-tube,
cover of the stigma patellar ; stigma 7-lobed ; style about 1A inch
long, as well as the ovary fulvous-velvety except towards the
summit ; ovary 7-celled.
Four species of Rhododendron are described from New Guinea in
Dr. Beccari’s “ Malesia,” I, 200-202 ; they all came from Mount
Arfak ; so that the addition of a south-eastern species renders it
now probable, that these superb kinds of plants occur in numerous
specific forms throughout the higher regions of the Papuan Island.
This fifth congener differs already in its white and very large
flowers from the other four ; but Rh. Konori has also a 7-lobed
corolla (a characteristic otherwise only prevalent in Rh. Fortune!),
and the number of stamens is also about the same as in Rh.
Toverenae, while the anthers are likewise remarkably elongated.
Among the Sikkim-species of Rhododendron our new one approaches
to Rh. Edgeworthi : but the flowers are numerous (forming indeed
according to the collector’s note magnificent umbel-like bunches of
over one foot’s width), the limb of the carolla is still broader, the
tube much longer, the stamens become increased in proportion to
the corolla-lobes, and t]ie anthers are longer and pale-colored, while
(as noted by the finder of the plant,) the stigma and upper part of
the style are deep-red ; the foliage may also prove very different.
Our plant comes nearer to Rh. Falconer!, so far as the copious
masses of its flowers, the much-lobed corolla and the numerous
stamens are concerned ; but the length and width of the flowers is
much greater, and the shape of the corolla is not campanulas
Indeed only Rh Griffith! in its variety Auckland! comes up to the
size of the flowers of Rh. Toverenae, the latter however again is
distinguished by the comparatively slender corolla-tube, much
longer anthers and a denser vestiture of the pistil. Mr. Hunstein
speaks of pink leaves next the flowers, which would accord with
young leafshoots of red tinge, such as are observed in several
Rhododendrons, particularly Rh. Fortuni and Rh. Hookeri. A
consideration of the fact, that the calyx in many species of Rhodo-
dendron becomes obliterated, strengthens the view, that the floral
envelope of Proteaceee and a few orders allied to them is petaline
not calycine.
Extraprint from the “ Victorian Naturalist,” November, 1884.


DESCRIPTION OF A NEW PAPUAN
TERNSTRCEMIACEOUS PLANT,
bv Baron von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.R.S. &c.
Trematanthera,
Calyx deeply five-lobed, peisistent. Corolla five-cleft almost to
the base, the segments twisted-imbricate before expansion. Stamens
numerous, connate into an only slightly filamentous membrane;
anthers narrow-oblong, base-fixed, blunt, glabrous, opening by two
terminal pores; pollen-grains almost ovate, smooth, bursting by
longitudinal fissures. Style filiform, formed by concrescence of
five into one, entire; stigma minute, undivided. Ovary nearly free,
five-celled, with very numerous ovules in each cell on axillary
placentas. Capsule indehiscent, depressed-globular, adnate to the
calyx slightly beyond the base. Seeds minute, multitudinous,
mostly truncate-ovate; albumen comparatively large; embryo straight,
cylindric-ellipsoid; cotyledons half as long as the radicle.
A shrub with scattered almost lanceolar crenulate-serrulated leaves,
with axillary solitary paired or ternate rather long-stalked flowers
without hypocalycine bracteoles and with comparatively small fruits.
The genus, thus now defined, differs from all others of the order,
except Sarauia and Pentaphylax , in the dehiscene of the anthers;
but is widely separated from these two in various other respects,
coming nearest to Cleyera, Adinanara and Eurya, receding from
these three in not extensively free filaments, in not longitudinally
opening anthers and not curved embryo.
Trematanthera Dueaurii.
At Dedouri on the Jala-River, W, Armit (Argus-Expedition);
near the Owen Stanley’s Ranges, H, 0. Forbes (356,785.)
Plant in general appearance not unlike Cleyera Japomca ,
resembling also some Euvyas , quite glabrous except minute scaly
glands occurring on the young branchlets and on the underside of
the leaves. Petioles |-§ inch long, slender. Leaves firm-chartaceous,
oblong-or ovate-lanceolar, flat, attaining a length of 4 and a breadth
of inches, but often of less size, dark-green above, pale-green
beneath, slightly or hardly acuminated, callous-glandularly dentic-
ulated, ascendingly costate, subtle-veined. Peduncles usually absent,
seldom elongated. Pedicels inch long, very thin, bearing one
or two minute almost lanceolar bracts near or below the middle.
Hypocalycine bracteoles none. Lobes of the calyx from a broad
base obl'ong-semiovate, usually about three times longer than the
undivided basal portion, rarely reduced to four in number, the two
outer somewhat smaller. Corolla deciduous, about inch long,
rather membranous; its color not recognisable in a dried state; the
segments broadly sessile, nearly cuneate-ovate. Stamens inserted
along the base of the corolla, but free from it; the membranous
connate portion of the stamens about as long as the anthers
and only partially divided into very short filaments; anthers forming
a few irregular rows, about inch long, yellowish. Style about
A. inch long. Ovary adnate in its lower portion, rarely 4-celled.
Fruit from hardly £to rather more than inch broad, almost
completely superior; septa thin; placentas very prominent. Seeds
from 24 "to 3q inch long, sometimes verging into an almost
globular form, outside brown, reticulated by copious close impressions;
moistened testa mucilaginous; embryo white, somewhat shorter
than the albumen.
This notable and pretty plant is dedicated to E. Du Faur Esq.,
F.R.G.3., one of the first originators of the Australian Geographical
Society, who not only devoted as a member of its administrative
Council much attention to the Society’s Expeditions into New
Guinea, but who also upheld perseveringly in later years the cause
of the long-lost Dr. Leichardt and the unfortunate companions
of that renowned and lamented explorer.


NOTES ON A NEW PAPUAN UN C API A;
By Baeon Peed. Yon Muelleb, K.C.M.G-., M. & Pu.D., F.E.S., F.C.S. &c,
Among the plants, recently brought by Captain Everill’s Expedition from New
Guinea, is one, which in all probability will become of medicinal and industrial
importance, as yielding Gambir, and it is thus selected for early special notice
*■ in this journal.
Uncaria JBcrnaysii. —Branchlets robust, distinctly quadrangular; leaves on
very short stalks, rather membranous, nearly ovate, short-acuminate, rounded
at the base, as well as the branchlets glabrous ; stipules almost deltoid, bifid ;
peduncles several times shorter than the leaves, their lower joint gradually
compressed downward, glabrous, the upper slightly downy, also shorter and
thinner, bearing at the summit very numerous flowers; involucels extremely
short, deciduous ; stalklets about as long as the calyces, and as well as these
greyish-silky ; limb of the calyx deeply cleft; lobes linear-oblong, nearly of
the length of the tube while flowering, the inside convex towards the summit;
fruit slender, ellipsoid-cylindrical, gradually attenuated at the base and summit,
several times longer than the lobes and not separated from them by any
elongated neck-like attenuation; appendages of the seeds many times longer than
the nucleus, one of them simple, the other often deeply divided.
On the Strickland-Eiver; Dr. Bernays and Mr. W. Baeuerlen. Leaves, so
far as seen, to seven inches loup and to five inches broad, dark-green above, pale-
green beneath; nerves about ten from each side of the midrib; veins rather
distant; veinlets faint. Stipules nearly half an inch broad. Peduncles attaining
finally a length of two inches; the lower joint of them flattened, some becoming
converted into hook-like tendrils. Calyx soon after anthesis about half an inch
Hong; lobes hardly exceeding |-inch in length. Corolla not available, —all specimens
obtained being past flowering. Umhellifurm or fascicular head of fruits solitary,
measuring about four inches. Pedicels slender, rather longer than the ripe fruits,
and as well as these sparsely appressed-hairy ; the latter inclusive of the
terminating lobes nearly one inch long, streaked by longtitudinal nerves, separating
hjy tardy septicidal dehiscence into two halves, but not bursting further, unless
at very advanced maturation. Seeds minute, brown, somewhat rough, very
much shorter than the whitish narrow appendages.
Aspect of the plant that of U. pilosa; but the branchlets and leaves of
that species are short-hairy, the involucels conspicuously large, while the fruits
are considerably smaller.—From U. Gambir and U. acida, which are mainly
those, reared in plantations for obtaining the mercantile Gambir, our plant
differs in many respects; and as it is much more robust and in all its parts
larger, the yield of the drug and dye or tan-material from our plant would be
much larger, provided that the contents of Catechin and Catechu-Acid should
also prove rich.
W. Hunter’s illustration of U. Gambir in Vol. IX., pi. 22, of the
Linnean Society is a fair one, precisely reiterated in Hayne s Arzney-Gewachse
X., 3. Better still is the picture of that plant in Bentley’s and Trimen’s
Medicinal Plants, part 7, numb. 139. From that work and from Fliickiger and
Hanbury’s Pharmacography, p. 298-301, ready information might be gained,
concerning the simple mode of preparing the Gambir or pale Catechu, as
well as the places and extent of export. One other Uncaria is extant as Papuan,
the U. appendiculata from Dutch New Guinea; but it is not closely similar to
our plant. In bestowing on the latter now the name of Dr. Bernays, the surgeon
of Captain Everill’s Expedition, I would bear public testimony to the skill and
zeal displayed by him in seeing the whole party back from such a fever-region
in safety, the medicinal value of this Uncaria likely enhancing to him this parti-
cular identification of his name with the Papuan flora.
{Extra 'print from the Australasian Journal of Pharmacy, February, 1886.)
d;


NOTES ON A HITHERTO UNDEFINED SPECIES OF
ENCEPHALARTOS.
(By Baeon Feed, von Muellee, K.C.M.G., M.D., Ph.D.,
F.R.S.)
Oue International Exhibition, which is just drawing to a close,
has shed on many products of nature, and on numerous works
of art from various parts of the world, a “ flood of light,”
which will lead us on to multifarious new commercial
and industrial efforts, while, simultaneously, we have gained
much additional information on the capabilities and resources
of the Australian colonies.
Even among the living plants, which for decorative purposes
were displayed, some features of interest occurred in the
Exhibition, and thus attention will be drawn in these pages to
a cycadeous plant of imposing aspect, which had a place in
the Queensland court.
The plant under consideration belongs to the sub-generic
group of Macrozamia, which only on geographic considerations
can be kept apart from the older South African genus
Encephalartos, inasmuch as merely the more or less pro-
truding and pungent summits of the flower and fruit scales
offer a distinction of Macrozamia in contrast to Encephalartos;
but this characteristic is so variable even in Australian species,
that already more than twenty years ago (in the quarterly
journal of the Pharmaceutical Society of Victoria 11, 90), I
combined the two genera. Indeed, it would be no strain on
natural arrangement within the order of Cycadese to take
back both Macrozamia and Encephalartos to the original
Linnsean genus Zamia, because the restriction of the
latter in modern sense rests solely on a distinct articulation
between the leaf-rachis and the leaflets ; for even if the
entire absence of woody fibres in the medulla of the stem of
all American Zamias could be proved, that character alone
would not be of generic value, while in the very species of
Encephalartos now to be brought under notice the aged
leaflets secede on their own accord from the rachis, tardily,
it is true, yet at least some of them perfectly as in Zamia
proper, leaving a distinct cicatrix at the point of insertion.
Nor could a mere geographic limitation of Zamia be main-
tained when in the order of nearest alliance, that of Coniferae,
we have Arancaria represented as well in South America as in
East Australia and the adjoining islands, Libocedrus in West
America, South Asia, and New Zealand, and Fitzroya in Chili
and Tasmania, not to speak of the occurrence of Cypresses,
Tuxus, and Juniperus in all the lands around the northern hemi-
sphere, and of Pinus from the Sunda Islands westward to
California, nor to mention the dispersion of Podocarpus to all
the great divisions of the globe except Europe, and the
occurrence of Callitris in North and South Africa as well as
Australia,
Alphonse de Candolle’s suggestion ( Prodromus XVI., 11.,
534) of reducing Bowenia to Encephalartos, as originating,
but on other grounds from my own writings ( Fragmenta V.
171), because the leaf division is as variable in Clematis,
Ranunculus, Aralia, Begonia, Manihot, &c., as it would be in
Encephalartos if Bowenia were added, is not applicable, inas-
much as comparisons of this kind could only be instituted in
orders of close affinity, otherwise the characteristic of
invariably opposite leaves in the vast order of Rubiaceae or
the constantly quartering division of the flowers in the large
order of Proteaceae would at once become invalidated.
Whether the new cycadeous plant is placed into Zamia or
Encephalartos or Macrozamia will depend on the individual
view of any observer, as all genera are mere artificial groups
to facilitate classification, and aid memory, while species in
their true sense are originally created beings, which when
perished, as has already been the case with many of them in
St. Helena and some other places on the earth’s surface, can
by all our human efforts not be restored, but would require
the godly might as much for their restoration as they did for
their origination.
The species to be defined now is not altogether new, but
was much misunderstood, it being mixed from imperfect
material in the Flora Australiensis (VI. 253) with Macro-
zamia Miquelii; but the last mentioned plant as originally
described from specimens obtained at the Richmond River is
very closely akin to M. spiralis, which differs from the stately
species exhibited in the Queensland Exhibition court in its
very short stem, smaller and twisted leaves, longer leaf-
stalks, narrower and above convex rachis, lax and very
spreading and less pungent leaflets, which do not regularly
approach nor partly overlap each other, in the lower leaflets
being nearly as long as the middle ones, in smaller fruit cones
on comparatively longer stalks, and in the middle and upper
anther-scales being more suddenly contracted into a shorter
point. Indeed, the true M. Miquelii is identical with the
M. Corallipes, more recently published by Sir Joseph Hooker
in his Botanical Magazine, t. 5943.
The undescribed species which I wish to name in honour of
Mr. “Charles Moore, who cultivates it in the Sydney Botanic
Garden, and who first drew attention to some of its charac-
teristics, may be recognised by the following diagnosis :
Macbozamia Mooebi. —Tall, glabrous, leaf-stalks very
short, younger leaves hut very slightly twisted, older leaves
straight, elongated, rachis very rigid above, almost flat towards
the base, dilated, leaflets hut little spreading, very numerous,
all closely approximated, regularly distichous, very stiff, opaque,
flat, very finely nerved, sharply pungent at the apex, lower
leaflets regularly and gradually diminishing in length , the
lowest successively, very short, and ultimately almost toothlike;
male cone rather long ellipsoid (cylindric), antheriferous scales
rhomboid (wedgeshaped), the lower pointless, those towards
the middle of the cone short pointed, the upper antheriferous
scales longer and gradually acuminated, fruit-cone very large,
elongated, lower fruit-scales pointless, those towards the
middle of the cone terminating in an acumen of about half
the length of the diameter of the lamina, those towards the
summit of the fruit ending in an acumen almost as long as the
lamina.
With certainty known from the mountainous regions of
Queensland at the verge of the tropics.
It remains to be added that the interest attached to this
species rests not merely on its stateliness for scenic purposes
in horticulture, its stem (like the trunk of its congeners) con-
taining a peculiar starch, though garden traffic ought to hold
this Zamia too valuable to be sacrificed for technical pur-
poses ; but the acrid principle which pervades these plants,
and especially the alluring fruits, is so intense that fatal
poison cases have actually occurred in these colonies from
consuming Zamia fruits without maceration and baking, yet
the peculiar principle of acridity has never been chemically
ascertained, and thus awaits, perhaps for important thera-
peutic purposes, careful elucidation.
/J r, tf


NOTES ON A NEW PROTEACEOUS TREE,
By Baron von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.R.S.
Quite recently I received, through the zealous circumspect-
ness of Charles Fawcett, Esq., F.L.S., while that gentleman
was acting as resident magistrate on the Tweed, from forest
country on the boundary line of New South Wales and Queens-
land, branchlets of a tree, which proved the existence there of
an hitherto unrecorded genus or subgenus of Proteacese.
Although this .order is a very large one in Australia, coming
next as regards the number of its species to Leguminosse and
Myrtaceae, and surpassing even Compositae, it contains only a
very limited number of arboreous members, so that any addi-
tions to the trees of this ordinal group is of unusual interest.
Moreover, Mr. Fawcett sends this species as a second “ nut-
tree,” the only other nut-bearing Australian plant of the
order known to us being Macadamia ternifolia mdnotypic in
a genus singular for its thick, very hard, and perfectly free
endocarp, thus far reminding of some species of Santalum.
The material at first received was fairly complete for elucida-
tion, with the exception of the fruit, which at the time of the
discovery of the tree was found only in remnants of the
exocarp, belonging to last year’s growth. From specimens
thus obtained the genus Hicksbeachia was established in the
February number of Wing’s Southern Science Record, of the
present year, in which publication the species also was defined
already as H. pinnatifolia. Since then Mr. Fawcett’s further
searches were rewarded in getting perfect fruits ; of these the
needful account for completing the generic diagnosis is offered
now.
Hicksbeachia. —Fruit-rachis undivided, attaining a length of
13 inches, sometimes two or three arising from the same point.
Fruit spherical; remarkably variable in size, thus measuring
from two-thirds to inches in length and width, not or but
very slightly compressed, a little oblique, at the base and sum-
mit impressed, and there remaining somewhat downy, outside
bright orange-coloured, along the anterior side furrowed by a
narrow impression ; stalklets and style retained for a long
time ; only one in each pair of stalklets ripening a fruit.
Pericarp slightly succulent, insipid, forming all around an
almost equal layer of from one-quarter to one-third of an
inch thickness ; endocarp bony, livid, much thinner than the
spreadingly fibrous pale mesocarp and firmly adnate to it.
Seed in all the fruits hitherto examined solitary, well de-
veloped only in good-sized fruits, measuring about half an
inch, ovate-globular, filling completely the cavity, affixed near
the summit, faintly raised on the anterior side by a narrow
prominence. Testa membranous, veined, brownish, suddenly
in the lower portion of the seed evanescent. Embryo whitish,
somewhat hard, even when fresh ; cotyledons equal except at
the faintly flexuous summit; radicle semiovate, basal, ex-
tremely short, not protruding beyond the cotyledons.
To the brief descriptive account of Hicksbeachia, issued
already, might be added, that the leaflets are of almost
equal green on both sides, though rather more shining above,
and oftener alternating than opposite, and that the leaf-stalks
are about two inches long. Maximum height, bark and wood
of the tree as yet unknown. In the first notice of this new
acquisition to Proteaceas it was already stated, that perhaps
the plant might be considered a species of the South American
genus Euplassa, under the name of B. Hicksbeachii ; access to
the ripe fruit now confirms to some extent this view, as very
possibly also in our plant occasionally both ovules may develop
into perfect seeds. In Euplassa however the flowers are not
quite symmetrical, the stigma is not perfectly erect, and the
seeds seem always much compressed. On geographic con-
siderations no objection could be taken to extending Euplassa
as a genus to Australia, because the occurrence of Lomatia,
Embothrium and Orites, as well in South America as in Bast
Australia, was shown by R. Brown, Bentham and myself re-
spectively. The kernels of Hicksbeachia are edible, but like
those of the South African Brabejum might need roasting for
any extensive table use. Its grand evergreen foliage and bright
fruits will anyhow render this new tree very acceptable to our
ornamental shrubberies and to conservatories in countries
with a colder clime, while now to the few links of singular
connection between the Australian and South American flora
a new one is added by the discovery of this remarkable pro-
teaceous plant.
[Extraprint from the Melbourne “ Chemist and Druggist ,”
April, 1883.]


DESCRIPTION OF A SPECIES OF PYCNARRHENA
FROM NORTH-EASTERN AUSTRALIA,
By Baron von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M, & Ph.D., F.R.S.
Pycnarrhena Australiana.
High-climbing; leaves large, on short stalkes, ovate or elliptical,
protracted into a short and blunt apex, quite glabrous; peduncles
few or several or many together, rather elongated, very thin, almost
eymosely branched at and near the summit, minutely appressed-
hairy ; sepals almost orbicular, in three rows, the outer three con-
siderably shorter, the other six nearly equal in length and these
much surpassing the almost rhomboid petals ; stamens very short ;
filaments nearly cuneate, at the base united ; fruitlets obliquely ovate-
globular, on an extremely short stipes.
Near the Endeavour-River ; W. Persieh Near Trinity-Bay;
Karsten.
Leaves (as far as seen) attaining a length of 11 and a width of
5 inches, thick-chartaceous, shining on both sides, hardly paler
beneath, distantly and adscendingly penninerved, finely and closely
net-veined. Inflorescuroe axillary or lateral. Flowers (according
to the collector’s note) fragrant. Primary peduncles often from 1
to l£ inch long, sometimes numerous, forming then a dense tuft ;
cymous ramification spreading to about one inch. Pedicels inch
or less long, some obliterated. Inner sepals measuring nearly
inch. Anthers generically quite normal. Pistillate flowers unknown
Fruitlets about ian inch long, glabrous, very turgid; exocarp somewhat
carnulent ; endocarp thinly cartilagineous, not intruding. Seed
obliquely ovate, rather more than inch long. Cotyledons very
convex outward.
The Australian species differs from Pycnarrhena plenifiora in
shorter petioles, larger leaves, long peduncles, more distinctly
pedicellate flowers, different proportionate size of sepals and rather
larger fruitlets ; from P. tumefacta in leaves also dark-green under-
neath, not distinctly dilated petioles, six inner sepals and perhaps
also in fruit, but the disposition of the flowers is similar ; from P.
lucida and P. Manillensis the Australian congener is far more
removed; —P. Novo-Guineensis is as yet only imperfectly known and
in some respects allied to our plant.
Tinospora smilacina has been observed near Springsure by Miss
E. Lament, who sent branchlets with simple filiform aerial roots of
several feet length, and remarked also, that this plant will emit
numerous fine roots from various parts of its branches, down
towards the ground from any height, and that a detached piece of
the plant, when placed against a wall, will push forth roots in search
of nourishment.
Adeliopsis decumhens occurs also on the Endeavour-River
(W. Persieh). It becomes a climber. The leaves attain a length
of three and a breadth of two inches. The flowers are fragrant,
and petals as well as filaments are, even when fresh, remarkably
dark-colored. The fruitlets are almost globular, measuring hardly
1 inch, not stipitate, the stigma’being near the base; fhe exocarp
is rather thin and not succulent, outside yellow ; the endocarp
smooth, very hard and comparatively thick, its intruding portion
occupying the centre of the fruitlet and being two-celled. The seed
is much compressed and considerably dilated; the albumen is
equable, much broader than the embryo ; the latter semi-annular,
the radicle not quite so long as the cotyledons.
Thus the genus Adeltopsts now obtains a fixed systematic position,
in the tribe Cocculece near Hypserpa, to which genus indeed it might
be reduced, notwithstanding the biovulate fruitlets, the latter
characteristic not being any longer as a solitary one on record, two
ovules in the fruitlets having been noted by Dr, Beccari also in the
genus Arcangelisia in the tribe Tinosporece. This characteristic
may therefore not be quite so exceptional in Menispermece , as
hitherto supposed.
Extra-print from the Victorian Naturalist , September, 1886.


is v fs \
ADDITIONS TO THE QUEENSLAND FLORA BY
DR. LUCAS.
Recorded by Baron von Mubllee, K.C.M.G., M.D., F.R.S.
During a recent visit to Northern Queensland Dr. T. P. Lucas,
one of the most accomplished and zealous members of the Victorian
Field Naturalists’ Club, while seeking restoration of his health from
the humid mild tropical air, formed not only entomological collections
of great interest, but enriched also our knowledge of the vegetation
there by bringing from thence many rare plants, one of which as new
I beg to define diagnostically,
Lepistemon Lucae.
Branchlets and leafstalks beset with appressed hair; leaves
hastate, gradually narrowed into an acute apex, the sinus narrow,
the lobes ending into a rather acute sometimes excised angle : both
pages of the leaves beset with appressed hair, the lower more so than
the upper ; cymes almost forming umbels ; stalklets during anthesis
about as long as the stalks, shorter than the flowers, appressed-hairy;
sepals ovate-orbicular, minute, many times shorter than the corolla ;
the lobes of the latter extremely short; anthers hastate-ovate ;
stigma didymous ; ovary and crenulated annular disk glabrous.
Between Endeavour-river and Port Douglas.
In its very small and blunt sepals this species approaches L.
urceolatus , but the form of the leaves is quite different ; the fruit
also is likely to exhibit further distinctive characteristics, but remains
as yet unknown. That of L. urceolatus, according to specimens from
near Cooktown, collected by Mr. W. Persieh, forms a depressed-
globular and somewhat quadrangular capsule, measuring ± to nearly
i an inch in width ; it is glabrous and shining, bursts rather
irregularly and slowly, and contains four seeds, which are about |-of
an inch long and broad, imperfectly silky. Mr. Barnard found the
same species on Mossman’s River.
Meniscium triphyllum.
Swartz, syn.jil. 19 et 206.
Daintree River.
This fern, brought by Dr. Lucas, adds a new one to the Flora of
Australia, in which indeed the genus was neither found to be repre-
sented before. In 1864 (fragm. phytogr. Austr. iv, 166) I alluded
already to some affinity of this fern to Polypodium nrophyllum
through Meniscium cuspidatum ; the two latter seem however to be
also quite distinct from each other. Dr. Lucas found M. triphyllum
growing along with P. urophyllum. The secondary vein, which con-
stitutes the boundary between the two rows of areoles, interjacent to
the primary veins, may on the same pinna be perfect, or may be more
or less broken up by not reaching the transverse veinlet of the next
areole, in that case mostly ending in a club-shaped apex ; this
interruption of the secondary veins occurs exceptionally in P.
urophyllum also, while according to Blume’s illustration it seems of
common occurrence in M. cuspidatum.
The following are the rarer plants, obtained by Dr. Lucas in the
same region :
Mollineda longipes, (2) F. v. M.; Capparis nobilis, (2) F. v. M. ;
Pittosporum rubiginosum, (4) Cunn. ; Polygala leptalea, (1) Cand.;
Hugonia Jenkinsii, (1) F. v M. ; Urena lobata, (3) L. ; Tragia
Novce Hollandice, (1) J. M.; Ilarpullia alata, (4) F. v. M. ;
Celosia aristata, (1) L. (the wild form with conically attenuated
slightly copper-coloured spikes, assumed to be indigenous, thus
adding even a new genus to the Flora of Australia) ;
Salicornia cinerea, (1) F. v. M. (with spikes inches
long) ; Crotalaria calycina, (1) Schrank ; Indigofera pratensis,
(1) F. v. M. ; Tephrosia reticulata, (1) Benth. ; Aeschynomene
Americana , (1) L. ; Kennedya retusa, (4) F. v. M. ; Cajanus reticu-
latus, (5) F. v M.; Callistemon lanceolatus, (3) Cand. ; Osbeckia
Chinensis, (3) L.; Loranthus signatus, F. v. M. ; Helicia ferruginea
(3) F. v. M. (a variety with almost sessile Jess denticulated leaves
and with less hairy flowers) ; Oldenlandia galiodes, (1) F. v. M. ;
Emelia purpurea , (I) Cassini ; Ipomcea eriocarpa (2) R. Br. ;
Nelsonia campestris, (1) R. Br. ; Tournefortia sarmentosa, (3) Lam.;
Plectranthus longicornis , (1) F. v. M. ; Hydrilla verticillata, (1)
Casp. ; Schelhammera multiflora, R. Br. ; Tricoryne anceps, (1)
R. Br. ; Floriscopa scandens (3) Lour.; Ectrosia Gulliveri , (1)
F. v. M. : Selaginella Jlabellata , (3) Spring ; Selaginella concinna
(3) Spring ; Lindsay a lanuginosa, (4) W all. ; Adiantum lunulatum ,
(1) Burm. ; Adiantum diaphanum , (3) 81. ; Pteris geranifolia, (1)
Raddi ; Pteris marginata, Bory ; Pteris quadriaurita, Retz ;
Aspidium uliginotum, (3) Kunze ; Polypodium phymatodes, L.
1 Cooktown. 2 Port Douglas. 3 Daintree River. 4 Mossman River,
5 Cape York Peninsular.
Extra-print from the Victorian Naturalist, October, 1885.


NOTES ON A NEW SOLANUM.
By Baron Feed. Yon Mueller. K.C.M.G., M. & Ph. D.,
F.E.S., F.G.8., &c.
The genus Solanum, as long known, is one of the largest
in the whole vegetable creation, about seven hundred standing
now as well marked on descriptive record, in limitations
adopted by Bentham and Hooker, the number of its species
increasing towards the equator; however, one only occurs
in all the eastern states of America, also one only in New
Zealand, while no more than two are to be found in Britain,
and none in the Arctic and pre-Antarctic regions. With us
in Australia, as might be expected, the species are com-
paratively numerous, already about half a hundred having
become defined, seven of them being natives of Victoria. Very
little is known of the properties of any beyond the general as-
sumption, that their foliage,and also in many cases their berries,
are hurtful, though this notion is subject to much exception,
as instanced by the tomato and by our own S. vescum. The
species ascertained, to afford edible berries anywhere, are enu-
merated in my Select Plants, Sydney edition, pp. 319—321.
That the leaves even of the ordinary potato-plant are dele-
terious is well known ; indeed, they are so detrimental to
much of insect life, that they can be placed advantageously
around any plants in field or garden culture, to ward off blight
through ground insects. In probability all kinds of Solanum are
pervaded by solanin and solanidin, though to various degrees ;
through these alkaloids they may serve as sedatives, hypnotics,
and also in particular cases as diaphoretics, though these
chemical principles have not yet found their way into general
medicine, except with other contents through S. Dulcamara .
Hence a wide area for altogether new research is open yet in
this large genus, not only here, but also elsewhere, particu-
larly for turning local species to therapeutic account. With
a view of drawing also attention to diagnostic differences, and
of encouraging further searches after new forms, I adduce
the definition of a new species.
Solanum sporadotrichum.
Shrubby ; branchlets almost glabrous, but copiously armed
with short and slender prickles; leaves nearly ovate in
outline, of herbaceous consistence, green on both sides, not
much narrowed or even truncated at the base, and there
sometimes very inequilateral, wavy or sinuous, indented at
the margin, generally pointed at the summit, their starry
hair scattered on both sides, or sometimes crowded on the
lower page ; the prickles on either side few or sometimes
entirely wanting, especially on the lower side ; racemes short,
with few or several flowers, beset throughout with scattered
star-hair, but unarmed ; lobes of the calyx terminated in
long narrow ends ; corolla white, deeply divided, about twice
as long as the calyx ; filaments very short; anthers nearly
half as long as the corolla, free, gradually attenuated upwards;
style glabrous ; fruit unknown.
On Mount Dryander.—Kilner and Fitzalan.
Among Australian species nearest to S. pungetium,
differing mainly in scantiness of hair on the branchlets,
generally longer peduncles, shorter and more numerous
pedicels, absence of prickles on any portion of the racemes,
more elongated lobes of the corolla, longer and upward
distinctly tapering anthers ; the berries will likely prove also
different.
[From the Melbourne “ Chemist and Druggist," Oct., 18§2,]


NOTES ON AN UNDESCRIBED VICTORIAN SPECIES
OF SWAINSONA,
By Baron Von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M. & Pn. D., F.R.S.,
F.C.S. &c.
On various occasions I have endeavoured, through these
pages to arouse the interest of pharmaceutic gentlemen in
the native vegetation, as they are placed often in favourable
positions, to test chemically the properties of plants within
their ready reach, and might also frequently afford to medical
practitioners important aid in new therapeutic experiments.
It was also much my wish, to obtain dried plants as pressed
specimens, particularly from far inland-districts, so thp,t the
geographic distribution of any species might be further traced,
and thus, by the aid of numerous botanic amateurs, finally be
determined. This time I beg to give the description of a
Swainsona, hitherto not recognised as a distinct specific form,
and this affords me the opportunity to remark, that we
possess as yet no accurate account, either physiological or
chemical, of the virulent principle, which pervades several and
perhaps many of the so innocuously looking species of this
genus.
Swainsona oncinotropis. —Procumbent, ascendent, pubes-
cent ; leaflets rather small, 11—25, cuneate-obovate or
oftener ovate-lanceolar, occasionally some ovate-obcor-
date, mostly short-pointed ; stipules rather large,
herbaceous, almost dimidiate-cordate, but pointed; racemes
short; flowers rather small; stalklets downy, hardly
as long as the calyx; bracts nearly as long, membranous,
broadish; calyx outside scantily grey-hairy, its lobes
as long as the tube, much narrowed towards the
pointed apex; petals all dark violet-coloured, the
upper without any prominent callosities; lower petals
almost cyclically curved, nearly flat, upwards not broad,
but blunt; lateral petals shorter than the others; style
comparatively long, almost capillary, much curved, bearded
only on the inner side towards the summit; fruit sessile,
somewhat downy; cymbous-ellipsoid, ascendingly pointed,
by the intrusion of the septum bilocular; seeds pale-brown,
not shining.
Near the Wimmera and Richardson-Creek; on the latter
found by Dr. Zichy-Woinarski; collected also at Wagga
Wagga by Mr. Crouch.
This Swainsona is readily recognised among allied species
by the peculiar shape of its lower petals, which form
finally an almost complete circular coil, though at first
the curvature does not reach fully around, and may
then be little more than semicircular. Swainsona pro-
cumbens, with which it grows conjointly on the spots of dis-
covery, has the torsion of its lower petals more complicated,
and differs furthermore in the larger size of all its organs, also
in mostly glabrous stems, in less hairy leaves, in longer
racemes, in the yellow tip of the carinal petals, longer,
straighter ana almost glabrous pods, and in some
other i *pects; but the great Bentham, whose death
we had recently to lament, recorded already our
plant as a var. minor of S. procumbens. Of the
only two other congeners with much incurved lower
petals, namely Swainsona Drummondi and S. plagiotropis,
the first mentioned differs already in the spirally twisted end
of the lower petals, the other in larger flowers with red petals,
and outside-bearded style.
Extra print from the Melbourne “ Chemist and Druggist ,”
October , 1884.


A GLANCE ON THE PLANTS OF TASMANIA,
Communicated by
Baron Ferd. von Menlier, K.C.M.G., M.D., F. 8.5.. F.G.S., Ac.
In offering some brief notes on the vegetation of Tasmania
for the benefit of tourists, we cannot be expected to touch
even on all the salient points, which present themselves in
a vegetation so beautiful and so varied. Suffice it to ex-
plain, in a few words, some of the prominent peculiarities
or remarkable forms of Tasmanian Plants, as far as they
may have interest to passing travellers. The lowlands’
vegetation, as a rule, participates to such an extent in the
physiognomy of that of Victoria and the southern parts of
New South Wales, that in the mountain-tracts and particu-
larly in the alpine elevations must be mainly sought for
attractive peculiarities of the Tasmanian Flora. However
magnificent the fern-tree gullies, and however grand the
forests of the evergreen beech ( Fagus Cunninghamii ), these
pictures of nature are analogous to those of Gippsland and
other parts of the opposite coast, though the ravines with
tree-ferns and the dense shady forests are in Tasmania
far more generally accessible than in the 8. E. part of the
Australian continent. Hence invalids, unable to perform
difficult or distant excursions, will even in the lowlands
of the island derive very great enjoyments on clear fern-
line brooks, which meander through depressed vallies in
all directions, or find invigoration and delight even in the
park-like Eucalyptus ridges, or amidst the meadow-flowers,
or heaths, or shore vegetation, which, although all but
identical with that of the adjacent colonies, maintains in the
humid and equable climate of Tasmania a freshness through-
out the year not readily found elsewhere. Those in quest of
more startling objects can easily gratify their wishes by
penetrating no distance into the vallies, to measure the
ancient denizens of the forests, which in their undisturbed
growth through past centuries attained dimensions
so colossal as to rank amongst the most gigantic of
trees of the globe. To have run the measuring-tape
along and around a sunken stem of a blue-gum tree, or to
have measured the angle of an Eucalyptus amygdalina from
its shadow to its crown, will gain records for a tourist’s
diary likely to be received by most people with scepticism.
The walks need not be extended far into the forest-
glens to fall in with the Waratah peculiar to the island
( Telopea truncata ) or with the equally endemic Aristoteha
peduncularis and Anopterus glandu/osus, both among the
grandest plants of Tasmania, and generally companions of
the singular celery-pine ( Phyllocladus rhomboidalis ), In
these forest-vallies of musk-trees ( Aster argophyllus ), or sas-
safras ( Atherosperma nwschatum), or Plugiunthus sidoide*
may be searched for our most southern of all orchideous
Epiphytes ( Sarcochilus Gunnii ), while the rocks may be
found overgrown by a species of the epiphytal genus Den-
drobium (_D. striatum ) which attains in a New Zealand
species its most southern limit. Mosses, lichens and fungs
abound in the moist recesses of the mountains, and many
a hidden form of these plants awaits still the elucidation
of a phytographer. But the researches of local residents,
among whom R. Gunn, Esq., F.R.S., Dr. Milligan, F.L.S.,
and tlie Hon. W. Archer, F.L.S.. were most prominent, have
left scarcely an opportunity of adding actually novel forms
to the known phanerogamic vegetation, the scientific investi-
gations of these gentlemen have extended over about 30
years, while those of Mr. Gunn simultaneously embrace
the forms of the animal kingdom of the island also. Never-
theless an observer, who may penetrate into new mountain-
recesses or may follow the recent tracks of miners, would
largely yet augment our knowledge of the localities, over
which the rarer species are distributed ; and thus even now
any one of enlightened genius might yet stamp his nameas
a discoverer permanently on the vegetation of Tasmania.
Thus very recently Hymenophyllum marginatum and
Trichomanes Malingii were discovered in N. W. Tasmania,
the one previously only known from New South Wales,
the latter formerly only on record from New Zealand. The
terrestrial Orchids are numerous, and some of them
particularly lovely.
Considering the comparatively inextensive area of this
island, the vegetation, which with an ever-verdaant mantle
envelops it, must be regarded as rich and extremely varied.
About 90 orders of cotyledonar plants are represented, em-
bracing, when reduced to exact limits, 950 species Of
these 80 are trees, the smallest of which attaining at least
30 feet in height ; among the trees those of the eucalyptus,
numbering ten, are prevalent and often gregarious, three
or four of them alpine. Of the whole of the cotyledonar
plants, 130 are exclusively restricted to the island, and of
these again approximately 80 are confined to the High-
land-regions. Moreover, the endemic genera are mostly
alpine, namely : Milligania, Campynema , Hewardia, Micro-
cachrys, Diselma, Athrotaxis , Bellendena, Cenarrhenes,
Prionotes , Pterygopappus, Tetracarpaea ; but Agastachys,


Acradenia, (Lady Franklin’s tree) and Anodopetalum are
jungle genera, the latter known as the Horizontal Bush,
extending to the forests of the lowlands ; whereas Richea
Diplarrhena, Drymophila, Juncella, Aablonium, Orites and
Anopterus occur beyond Tasmania only in South-East
Australia, and Ourisia only near us in New Zealand ; but
Huanaca and Eucryphia are also found in South America.
The majority of the alpine plants belong to genera, which
have representatives also in the lowlands ; Caltha, however
and Anemone, as well as Festera, and Donatia, are exclu-
sively alpine. A dwarf raspberry-plant with a pleasant
fruit ( Rubus Gunnii ) belongs to regions covered in the
winter with snow. Among the most remarkable features on
the snowy heights are two composite plants, Pterygopappus
Lawrenci and Abrotanalla forstercides, on account of the
large cushions formed by them ; no plants of similar
growth are to be found in the Australian Alps, but several
in or near the glacier-regions of New Zealand. The
beautiful glacier-lakes of Tasmania are denied to the
Australian Alps.
Hobart is one of the very few maritime cities in the
world, from which alpine elevations can be reached within
a few hours’ walk ; and in our strictly Australian colonies
it is the only city, which is built at the base of a snowy
mountain, while streets of it are stretching to the very
brink of the sea. Hence from heights, snow-crested almost
throughout the year, views—most glorious and expansive
—can be enjoyed, in which dashing waves of the ocean,
charming features of the city and alpine surroundings in
the foreground are concentrated all in the same pictures
of the landscape. A few of the larger settlements of the
also grandly picturesque island-country of New Zealand,
near to us, share in the rare advantage of such physio-
graphic combinations.
The rough paving of a narrow path over the “ Plough-
Field” boulders of the upper slopes of Mount Wellington,
and simple provision for an artless stone-hut iron-roofed at
the most commanding elevation of that mountain, would
greatly increase the ascents to the extensive plateau of
the summit; thus tourists and picnick-parties would alike
be benefited, while by the plain shelter thus afforded to
the searching naturalist as well as to the sketching artist
ready opportunities would be gained to camp out, as such
comparative inexpensive measures would give shelter to
whosoever may beovertaken by sudden boisterous changes of
the weather in regions apt to be involved in passing clouds.
The pretty blue-striped Gentian has a mbst pleasing
effect on the alpine meadows, and so has the white Wood-
sorrel ( Oxalis Magellanica) along the rivulets. Grandest
among all these highland-plants are however the two palm-
like Epacrideae, which pass under the strange name of
cabbage-trees (Richea pandanifolia and Dracophyllum Mil-
ligani), both attaining a height of 30 feet, or the former
sometimes double that height ; thus they introduce a
tropical aspect into a landscape, which for half the year is
buried in snow. The regular collector of plants will be
richly rewarded anywhere in Tasmania for his exertions
alike on hill and dale, in heaths and forests. Epacrideae
are numerous and often handsome, and so Everlastings
( Helichrysum ), the tall shrubby kinds of the latter ( Ozotham-
nus) being particularly conspicuous ; so also deserve notice
the many different woody Asters, the various gay pea-
flowering bushes of the podalyrious tribe, the balsamic
Rutaceae, the fly-catching Sundews, the various Proteaceae,
as very many of these plants are not to be found out of the
island. The varied and often delicate ferns which line the
brooks or depend in graceful forms from the trunks of
trees, though hardly offering endemic species, will form
ample material for ladies’ albums. Of fern-trees two
species occur as widely distributed, namely Alosphila
Australis, the more slender of the two, which occupies
mostly the slopes of the ranges —when such are springy
and umbrageous ; and Dicksonia Billardieru, which is
more fond of the bottoms of the vallies, and has
proved the most easily transshipped of all the fern-trees of
the globe and the most hardy also, so that any visitor of
the island may transplant to a shady watered part of his
garden most readily one of these noble and aged plants
in remembrance of his voyage ; indeed horticultural energy
may still further develop this new branch of commercial
enterprise. The Cyathea-Ferntree is far more rare.
Ponderous huge Todea-Ferns with irregular square stems
occur in deep mountain-recesses, from whence they may
be moved to wide distances, though weighing perhaps a ton
and being a century old. As arborescent Sencio Bed -


fordi and Senecio centropappus are remarkable in an
enormous cosmopolitan genus, while Prostanthere lasiantha
attains, as far as known, alone among several thousand
Labitae to the height of a fair forest-tree. The Pepper-
tree ( Drimys arematica ) ascends from the forest to the
Alps, fagus Gunnii, a beech of the lake country, is the
only indigenoug tree with deciduous foliage of the Island.
The dwarf alpine Coniferae, peculiar to Tasmania, are
among the most interesting of the globe, Dacrydium
( Microcachrys ) tetragonum being the smallest pigmy among
all known coniferous plants. The famed Huon-Pine
(Dacrydium Franklinii) is restricted to the Island ; so the
2 or 3 .Athrotaxis-pines, though generally almost akin to
Sequoia, which gives us in S. Wellinglonia the Mammoth-
tree of California.
The shores are singularly rich in seaweeds ; rather
more than 300 kinds are enumerated through the glorious
researches of the late Professor Harvey, in the large and
beautifully illustrated work, which Sir Joseph Hooker’s
great talents and original researches have produced on the
general Flora of Tasmania ; and not only are these Algae
there far more numerous than in most shore-parts of the
globe, but they contain also many species such as the rare
Claudea, which for their vivid colors and delicate beauty
are famed far and wide. Among the fungs some are highly
remarkable, for instance the edible Raspberry-fungus
(Cyttaria ) occurring only on the branches of the Beech.
Mrs. Meredith’s charming book on her “ Bush-Friends”
of the flora of Tasmania will afford to amateurs instruc-
tions of the most pleasing kind ; the elegant delineations
being blended with very ingenious and poetical explan-
ations ; whereas the lamented Rev. W. Spicer, though an
invalid during his rather short stay in the island compiled
a few years ago his “ Handbook” for the ready use of
Excursionists, the dichotomous method being adopted for
this meritorious little work. Mr. Rob. Johnston, a most
able Naturalist in the island, published a field-book on the
genera of Tasmanian plants.
For the completion of an universal work on Australian
indigenous plants it is desirable, to obtain additional col-
lections of plants in a pressed and dried state, particularly
from districts far inland or recently settled. It is an im-
portant aim by these means to trace out the exact geo-
graphic limits of the many thousand sptcies, which consti-
tute the original vegetation of Australia, in order also that
all observations on their respective utilitarian value,
whether for pastoral culture, medical or industrial purposes,
may become recognised and applicable to the widest
extent. Moreover, it is necessary to study still further the
degrees of variability, to which all plants are more or less
subject, with a final view of circumscribing the exact
characteristics of each species. It is to be impressed on
those, who may feel interested in the promotion of such
researches, not to exclude from local collections any plants
merely because they appear frequent or insignificant. The
process of drying plants for permanent collections is simple
and easy in the extreame ; it needs hardly any explanation
beyond perhaps the remark, that the parcels of paper, con-
taining any recently gathered plants, after a few hours’
pressure should be divided into thin sets and be spread out
on a dry or warm place, to facilitate and to speed the exsic-
cation and to lessen also the requirements of shifting plants
from paper,which became moist,into dry paper. Small plants
should be gathered with their roots, and all not merely in
flower but in fruit also, as indeed from the latter generally
the main characteristics are derived. Water-weeds, rushes,
sedges,mosses, lichens, fungs (and on the seacoast also algae),
even if ever so small, should not be passed in collecting.
Transits are best effected early after the preparation of the
specimens, in small parcels of closely packed samples by
successive mails. Whoever wishes to become scientifically
acquainted with the native plants of his vicinity, or of
localities otherwise accessible to him, can obtain the specific
names from the writer of these remarks, if a duplicate-set
is retained, in which the specimens are numbered corres-
pondingly to those of the transmitted set. An intimate
knowledge of the indigenous vegetation, while it largely
indicates climatic and geologic circumstances, tends also
to afford an insight not only into the natural vegetative
resources of any tract of country, but also into much of
the agricultural capabilities of the respective localities.
Researches of these kinds become futhermore the sources
of educational works, and unfold to well-trained and intell-
igent minds pure recreative and healthful pleasures, inex-
pensively everywhere within reach.


HE COED OF TWO UNDESCRIBED SPECIES OF UTRI-
CULARIA FROM NORTH-WESTERN AUSTRALIA;
By Baron Yon Mueller, K.C.M.G., M. & Ph.D., F.E.S.,
F.C.S. &c.
Although the Utricularias are of neither medicinal nor
technologic value, yet they claim our interest as remarkably
pretty plants, and are by all collectors gathered with pre-
dilection for the herbarium particularly on account of their
varied and often remarkable structure. They possess
however particular physiologic interest, as for instance it
is now well ascertained that the minute pitchers, with
which some species are so copiously provided, “ entrap
animalcules,” and elaborate vegetable pepsine for digesting
them readily. No doubt they perform much other work in
the economy of nature. The genus is represented in most
parts of the globe; sometimes however only by delicate
ephemerous annuals. Bentham and Hooker, in their great
opus “Genera Plantarum,” rated in 1876 the number of
species as high as 150, though as a maximum only six can
be distinguished in all Europe. In the “ Flora Australiensis ”
however twenty species became recorded already in 1869,
to which since three have been added, two of them now
for the first time characterised.
Utricularia lasiocaulis. —Root consisting of minute fibres ;
leaves at flowering time none ; stem short, weak, very slender,
simple, rather densely beset with very short soft spreading
hair ; flowers one to four, on terminal stalklets, from twice to
several times as long as the comparatively large corolla, more
or less downy or becoming glabrescent ; bracts at the base of
the stalklets short, ciliated, basifixed; sepals blunt, many times
shorter than the purplish or violet-coloured corolla, the lower
sometimes cleft at the end into two short lobes ; upper lip of
the corolla rhomboid, or cuneate, or bicular ; lower lip
slightly longer, often broader than its own laminal length,
wavy, but not distinctly lobed ; spur somewhat longer than the
lips, or about as long, descending, cylindric-conical, gradually
attenuated, but not very acute.
Near Port Darwin; Maurice Holtze.
The specimens seen by me a few inches high; stalklets
reaching two inches in length; width of the lower corolla-lip
nearly half an inch; spur almost as long; fruit riot obtained.
No other species from Australia is extensively downy; in
this respect it approaches U. hirta, but differs from that
species already in the very elongated stalklets, in broader
bracts, in the much larger corolla with down-bent spur; the
fruit in all likelihood will also prove very different, par-
ticularly as the seeds of many of the species exhibit such
marked characteristics.
Utricularia leptoplectra.— Root short, fibrous; leaves at
flowering time none; stems rather long but very slender,
glabrous; flowers few, . terminating singly distant long
almost capillary branches or stalks; bracts centri-fixed,
acutely pointed, particularly at the upper extremity;
stalklets hairlike-thin, shorter than the rather large flower;
sepals roundish, several times shorter than the blue corolla ;
lower lip very much longer than the upper, bifid, with oblique
cuneate-semiovate lobes ; spur somewhat longer than the lips,
subulate-cylindrical, descending.
Near Port Darwin ; Maurice Holtze.
Stem attaining a height of one foot if not more; branch-
lets peduncle-like, extremely* tender; stalklets spreading,
lengthening to half an inch in age; lower lip of the corolla
about one-third inch long; spur acute, not above half a line
wide; fruit not obtained.
No Utricularia, hitherto recorded from either the eastern or
western hemisphere, has a spur so thin in proportion to its
length ; some of the other characteristics bring this plant
nearest to U. biloba, which does however not show the
laxe ramifications, has smaller flowers on shorter stalklets,
and a blunt proportionately thick and not very elongated
spur.
Incidentally it may be here remarked, that the Indian U.
racemosa of Wallich seems reducible to our Australian U.
Baueri of R. Brown, and so U. verticillata of Benjamin to our
U. biloba and U. brachypoda of Wight to U. cyanea.
Regarding the geographic distribution of the Australian
species we have much learned additionally since the last 16
years, and it may here not be out of place to note some of the
new localities found out for various species also of this
genus, as the readers of this journal may thus get a good
idea of the desirability of extending our knowledge also
in this direction, wherever the chances are favourable:
Utricularia stellaris; Carron’s Creek, Gulliver (the species
becomes extratropic in Egypt).—U. flexnosa ; Birragurra and
Colac, F. Y. M.; Mt. Dromedary, Reader; Clarence-River,
Camera; Mt. Boppel, Ramsay; Broad Sound, Bowman;
Dawson-Rivef, Thozet; Mt. Elliott, Fitzalan. —U. exoleta;
Einnasleigh-River, Armit; Port Darwin, Schultz. —U.pygmaea ;
Einnasleigh-River, Armit. —U.fulva; Port Darwin, Foelsche. —
U. chrysantha; Mt. Surprise, Armit; Norman-River, Gulliver;
Port Darwin, Schultz. —U. bifida ; Lynd-River, Armit. —U.
cyanea; Richmond-Eiver, Fawcett; Port Darwin, Holtze. —U.
lateriflora ; Port Phillip, F. V. M.; Mt. William, Sullivan ;
Curdie’s-River, Circular Head and Arthur-Eiver F. V. M. ;
Ulladulla, Baeuerlen; New England, Stuart; Richmond-
River, Fawcett. —U. monanthes ; Mt. Field East, F.V. M. —U.
dichotoma ; near Encounter-Bay, Tepper ; Lakeßonney, Mrs.
Dr. Wehl; Hume and Edwards-River and Murrumbidgee, F.
V. M.; Australian Alps to 5000 ft., Stirling; Logan-River,
Rev. B. Scortechini; Towoomba, Hartmann; Comet-River,
O’Shanesy.—U. volubilis ; Gordon-River, Maxwell; Warren-
River and Shannon, F. V. M.—U. Hookeri; Blackwood-Eiver,
Mrs. M‘Hard.—U. Menziesii; Geographe-Bay, Miss Bunbury;
Blackwood-River, Mrs. M‘Hard.—U. biloba; Logan-River,
Scortechini. —U. Baueri; Gilbert-River, Armit. —Polypom-
pholyx multifida; Gordon-River, F. V. M.—P. tenella ; Corio-
Bay, J. Br. Wilson; Smythesdale, Collyer; Portland-Bay,
Allitt; Glenelg-River and Stirling’s Range, F. V. M.
Extra print from the “Australasian Chemist and Druggist ,”
October, 1885.
