

' /f?
2 . 'o
SERMON
OCCASIONED BY THE
DEATH OF BURKE AND WILLS,
THE VICTORIAN EXPLORERS.
PREACHED IN THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, VICTORIA PARADE, EAST
COLLINGWOOD, ON THE EVENING OF NOVEMBER 10th, 1861.
toboteb fo fire (Bxytnsz of (Enlarging f|rt dfljurt^.
MELBOURNE;
PUBLISHED BY GORDON & GOTCH, COLLINS STREET.
PRICE SIXPENCE.


When I wrote this Sermon I had not the remotest idea that
it would ever be printed, and it was not until after I had been
repeatedly entreated by some of my hearers, that I consented to
let them have the manuscript to do as they pleased with it; the
responsibility of its publication rests, therefore, with them.
J, BEER.


SERMON
OCCASIONED BT THE DEATH OP
BURKE AND WILLS, THE VICTORIAN EXPLORERS.
“ And they are dead ; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.”—Job i. 19,
To be observant of the times is wise, and to extract lessons
for our guidance from the circumstances that are transpiring
around us is our duty; and from the lamentable event which
we seek this night to improve, and which has stirred the
deepest sympathies of every soul that has heard the tidings,
we think some instructive and practical inferences may be
drawn.
The words which I have read as text embody a fact of a
very affecting character. Job, as we are informed, was a
wealthy man, and to him were born seven sons and three
daughters. He was, moreover, a devout man, “one who
feared God and eschewed evilyet he was the subject of
severe trials. Billow after billow seemed to roll over him.
The Sabeans plundered his herds; the lightning destroyed
his flocks; the Chaldeans took away his camels; and to give
a fearful climax to this series of disasters, while his ten chil-
dren were being hospitably entertained at their eldest brother’s
house, a terrific tempest blew down the edifice, and destroyed
them all, one of the inmates only escaping to bear the melan-
choly tidings to the afflicted patriarch that he was childless ;
“ for,” says the informant, “ they are dead, and I only am
escaped alone to tell thee.”
These words seem so strikingly applicable to the circum-
stances of those who, a few months ago, left this city so full of
hope and heroic ardour, in answer to their country’s call, to
cross a continent and explore a region which had never been
crossed or explored by civilised man ; but of whom the dread
intelligence has reached us that “ they are dead, and only one
has escaped to tell us,” that I trust we may be able to make
them the basis of profitable remark.


Perhaps some may ask, “Is it right thus to expose valuable
lives to such dangers and hardships as these and other ex-
plorers have undergone ?”
It is evidently the purpose of God that men should multiply
and spread themselves over the earth, to till and to use it;
and to that end, I have no doubt, that the impulse to
adventure, which dwelt in the bosoms of such men as Colum-
bus, Drake, Cook, Franklin, Barth, Livingstone, and those
whose loss we so deeply deplore, was inspired by Him whose
purposes they were and are the instruments of accomplishing:
and it does not follow that, because there may be difficulties
and dangers in the accomplishment of an enterprise, it is not
our duty to attempt it. There must be some to act as
pioneers for the multitude; to be the harbingers of an
attendant civilisation ; and pioneering work is always hazard-
ous, and those who enter upon it must count the cost. The
history of exploration tells us of others who have gone forth
on their perilous enterprise with the same high hope and
chivalric ardour, and of whom the same dread sentence may
be uttered, “ they are dead,” without the alleviating sequel,
“ and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.” I refer to the
party under the late Sir John Franklin.
I. In discoursing on these words, let us, in the first place,
inquire what is implied in the statement —“ they are dead?"
1. It is not that they have ceased to live, but that they
have ceased to live here on this earth. From the aspirations
of the soul, from the direct teaching of God’s Word, and from
the nature and duration of those rewards and punishments
with which our present actions are hereafter to be visited, we
infer that the soul of man is immortal —that it is something
which death cannot touch or destroy—that the principle of
life we possess will last for ever, for all (the departed) live
unto God. When, therefore, we say of a man that he is
dead, we mean that his soul no longer inhabits the body it
once did, no longer uses it as its instrument, that it has gone
into another world, the proper sphere of unembodied spirit.
The hands no longer handle the feet no longer walk the
heart no longer pulsates the brain no longer busies itself
with cares and schemes—the wonderful mechanism ceases to
inove — anc | the body, dispossessed of that principle of life by
which it grew, acted, suffered, and enjoyed, decomposes and
returns unto the dust as it was, while the spirit returns to
God who gave it.
2. They “ who are dead ” are cut off from all earthly
relationships. There was a time when the silver cord of
affection bound brother to brother, and parent to child ; but
now these relationships are severed, and that for ever. The


spirit eludes the embrace of earthly survivors, and the body
hidden out of their sight, the beaming eye, the pleasing
smile, the warm grasp of the hand, the music of the voice,
and the affectionate embrace, can no more be enjoyed.
“ Lover and friend are put far away and removed into
darkness.”
3. They “who are dead ” are beyond the reach of pardoning
mercy, and renewing grace. That man is a sinner, human
consciousness, and the Inspired Word unfalteringly declare.
But God, who is rich in mercy, has laid help on One who is
mighty and able to save. ef God so loved the world, that He
gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him
should not perish, but have everlasting life.” He has also
sent forth His Spirit to enlighten, to convince, and to purify
the soul, that it may be meet for a holy heaven. And so
rich, so free, so universal are the offers of forgiveness, that
‘ ‘ While the lamp holds out to burn,
The vilest sinner may return
but when the'lamp ceases to burn, that is, when it ceases
to burn in its bodily socket, when the light, that kindled
up the countenance with brightness,—is quenched; when
the spirit is gone, it has passed into a region that lies beyond
the sphere of mercy, where no offers of pardon are proclaimed,
and where no renewing grace is given. “ Then he that is
holy will be holy still, and he that is guilty will be guilty
still.”
4. “ And they are dead.” That men should die would not
strike the patriarch as being anything uncommon; neither would
it make any great impression on his mind, nor stir up the deep
emotions of his heart. But it was very different, when the
escaped one said of his sons and daughters , that they were dead.
There was a terrible significance in such a statement.
It was like “ deep calling unto deep,” that those who
were bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; whom he
had fondled in infancy, whose prattle had been as music to
his ears; Avhose gradual development he had watched over
with so much interest, on whom he looked with parental
pride, and whom he regarded as the most valuable of all
his earthly possessions, that these should be torn from him
with all the suddenness of a stroke, and under circumstances
so appalling, without a moment’s warning, and without an
opportunity of saying farewell! Oh !it was as a barbed arrow
entering his soul when the escaped one said of his children,
“ they are dead." And is it not so with those who went forth
to brave the dangers of the desert ? If a messenger from the
interior had told us that a thousand men had died in a week.


it would not have produced so deep an impression, or have
called forth so universal an expression of sympathy, as the
decease of these three brave and adventurous explorers. But
that they should die—and die under circumstances of such
painful interest—that when they had reached their destined
shore, and achieved the object of their and our heart’s desire,
and had returned to their desert starting-point, wasted and
worn—indulging, no doubt, in pleasing visions of succour and
food, and of ultimately reaching home, and, like the ancient
victors, of entering the Capital in triumph—to reap the reward
to which their bravery so j ustly entitled them, —that they should
then be disappointed, and then die, are circumstances that invest
their decease with a melancholy and saddening interest. So
true it is that “ man knoweth not his time,” he knows not
either the time or circumstances that may attend his death—
he knows not whether he shall die at midnight or in the
morning ; whether amid the balmy zephyr of summer or
winter’s chilling blast; whether in infancy or youth, in the
heyday of. life and in the midst of life’s schemes or at hoary
age and when desire fails; he knows not whether he shall
die amidst the squalor of poverty or the plenitude of wealth,
in a garret or in a mansion; surrounded by the highest
medical skill, and friends to minister to his wants, or in
solitude and without a soul to slake his feverish thirst; in the
crowded city and where his remains will be interred with the
rites of decent sepulture, or in the desert unseen save by the
vulture’s preying eye; amid friends or foes, in a bed or in a
hole; on the battle’s field amid the confused noise of warriors
and of garments rolled in blood, or on the tempestuous ocean
amid the disasters of shipwreck and with hundreds struggling
in the waves —of all this it is emphatically true “ that man
knoweth not his time and is in jeopardy every hour.”
5. And how vast is the number of which it may be said,
“ and they are dead !” What millions of our species have
breathed and acted since the days of Adam, but where are they
now ? Not one remains as a monument of the past. Genera-
tion after generation has passed away. The empire of death
is universal; and the time is not far distant when it will be
said to those who may inquire after us, “they are dead.”
Let us all lay this solemn thought to heart, and so “ number
our days that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.”
11. Observe the providential escape. Had no one escaped
to tell the patriarch of his losses, he might have conjectured
all sorts of things as to their fate. Had no one escaped to
tell us of the deplored ones, the place where, and the manner
in which, they met their fate might never have been known;
and expedition after expedition, at great cost and further


sacrifice of life, might have been sent forth. _ But since one
has escaped to tell us, it is a mournful consolation to be certi-
fied of what they did, and where they died. And oh I how
great were the dangers from which he has escaped I Think of
the hunger and thirst; of the exposure to heat and wet,
and without much shelter ; how easily disease might have
made a prey of his weakened frame ! What misgivings he
might have with regard to the Natives, as to whether they
would feed him or spear him; and then, to see one after
another succumbing to the pressure of hunger, exhaustion,
and disease, without the ability to minister to their necessities;
and in whose death, with all its melancholy circumstances, he
might see the foreshadowing of his own ! Oh ! there is sweet-
ness in this bitter cup; and it is a mercy to us as well as to him
that he has escaped, though alone, to tell us; and to Him
from whom all blessings flow, and in whom alone we live, are
we under additional obligation to render the thanks which
are due unto His name.
111. The purpose for which he was permitted to escape
1. To tell us how they acted —And from that portion of
their journals which we have been permitted to read, we see
that, notwithstanding some few mishaps and misunderstand-
ings which occurred at the outset, their actions subsequently
were characterised by great unanimity of feeling. One great
purpose seemed to inspire them with a resolute determination
to accomplish their mission or die. Hence they bravely and
hopefully plodded on through the desert, until the waters of
Carpentaria gratified their vision: on the shore of which,
methinks, their full hearts prompted them to break the reigning
silence, as they planted Britannia’s flag, by shouting in the
language of the ancient philosopher, “ Eureka ! Eureka .
2. To tell us what they beheld. It had long been thought
by some, who are eminent in the scientific world, that the
interior of Australia consists, for the most part, of an aiid,
sandy desert. It is now proved that this conjectured desert
has no existence, but that the land is, to a considerable extent,
well watered, richly grassed, finely timbered, and inhabited
by a people who, though they differ from us in the colour
of their skin, in the language they speak, and in the habits
of their life, have sympathies in common with us all. Oh !
that was an exquisitely touching circumstance—worthy of
beino* embalmed in the verse of a Laureate* or limned by t e
pencil of some modern Raphael—when they (the Natives) sur-
rounded the remains of “Burke,” and bitterly wept; and with
their own hands protected his remains with their leafy mau-
soleum ! What a sphere is now opened up for the missionary,


the husbandman, the statesman, and the philanthropist! And
we hope, as circumstances require, that the skill, intelligence,
piety, and wealth of our race will be brought to bear°upon
this great island, until “ the wilderness shall become a fruitful
field, and the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose.”
3. To tell us what they enduredl Ah yes ! what they en-
dured ; for the history of their progress is inseparably inter-
woven with the history of their sufferings. They were oft
m perils of the desert; they endured hunger and thirst, and
had no certain dwelling-place. Every stage in their progress
had to be paid for by a heavy price of suffering; yet °they
bravely bore it all, sustained by the hope that when they
Reached their desert depot their sufferings would terminate ;
that there, in the midst of supplies, and the soothing influ-
ence of friendship, they should soon regain their wonted
stiength and elasticity. But, oh I to what bitter disappoint-
ment were they doomed ? They arrive, but only to find that
their companions had gone, and though almost within the
reach of their hail, they had not strength to follow; and thus
the nectar draught they had expected to quaff is dashed from
their lips; and from the pinnacle of hope they are plunged in
the depths of despair; and there they die ! So are the hopes
of men often destroyed. With their sufferings we deeply
sympathise—over their remains we would drop the tear of
sorrow—round their tombs we would aid to plant the cypress,
and to raise the monument —or to sculpture the urn that shall
do honour to the memory of men who so bravely toiled, and
suffered for the common weal, we would gladly unite.
It is pleasing to see the eagerness with which persons of
every grade in politics, of every diversity in religious creed,
oi without religious creed at all, and of every position in
society, obtain and read the affecting narratives which the
escaped one has sent. On how many minds is the outline of
the history of their deeds and sufferings indelibly engraved;
and how many tongues are eloquent on the pathetic theme.
Oh : would to Gfod that with respect to other narratives—
and of Another’s sufferings—and of another region—there
were the same profound and absorbing interest displayed. Of
that baptism of blood which He underwent “ who bore our
sins and carried our sorrows on the treeand of that state of
being to which we are all tending, and in which we shall have
an eternal existence. Oh !itis a melancholy feature in the
character of men, that while they give attention to the strife
of politics to naval and military conflicts—to scientific dis-
coveries and to the narratives of explorers—to all that which
is simply terrestrial—-that the great facts which affect us, as
moral and accountable beings, and which belong more imme-


diately to the realm of spirit, should be to so great an extent
unheeded. And when we think of all the agencies employed
to diffuse, in every direction, information so important as are
the o-reat verities of inspiration, and in which we must have
an undying interest, that there should be so much ignorance
respecting°them, and so much callous indifference about be-
coming acquainted with them, and so much immorality in spite
of them, it should be to us all for a lamentation! We should
“ behold the transgressor and be grieved.” Oh! that men
were so eager to read their Bibles as their newspapers.
And every observant mind must be struck with the readi-
ness with which the testimony of the escaped one is credited.
Job didn’t appear to doubt the testimony of him who told him
of the death of his children. Nor does any one seem to call
in question the accuracy of the narratives of those whose loss
we deplore, or of him who has escaped sharing a similar
fate. All are credited as truth; and yet, with respect
to the Inspired Records, how many question their Divine
authority and authenticity, although these are attested
by a great cloud of witnesses? There is the goodly
fellowship of the prophets —there is the noble army of
martyrs —there is the Holy Church throughout the world,
every member of which is a living monument of its power
and a witness to its truth. Oh! if we are so ready to
believe the testimony of fallible men, ought we not to be much
more ready to credit the declaration of Him who came forth
from the bosom of the Eternal Father that He might de-
clare Him unto us, and bring « life and immortality to light,”
and who is emphatically the Truth ? We regard it as one
of the evidences of a depraved heart, that men are so eager to
believe the record of earthly things, and so tardy to believe
the record of heavenly things.
But to us, as professing Christians, theie are some impoitant
respects in which we shall do well to imitate the departed
ones. I refer to their self-sacrifice. They went forth to their
work with their lives in their hand, not certain that they should
ever return. And the spirit of Christ is the spirit of self-sacrifice.
“ He came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to
give His life a ransom for many ;” and He whom we call
Master and Lord enjoins on us to do good unto all men,
specially to those who are of the household of faith; not to
look on our own things as the chief object in life, but on the
things of others ; not to seek our own, but another’s wealth ;
to bear each other’s burdens, and so to fulfil His law. And
he whose vision is bounded by himself—whose thoughts are
concentrated on himself, who never engages m anything that
does not minister to himself —knows nothing of that expan-


eiveness of soul, that loftiness of aim, that chivalrous ardour,
which embodies itself in the expression, “ This one thing I
do,—“ neither count Imy life dear to me that I mav finish my
course.” Then let us awake to the claims that rest upon us.
Let some high and noble object engross our thought and elicit
our action. Let us live, not sleep;—let us live in deeds, not
breaths;—let us Live so as to be missed when we die; let us live
so as to leave the world better than when we found it. Let
us engrave our names, if not in brass or marble, in what is
better still, the grateful remembrance of those among whom
we ha\e dwelt; and though no monument may* mark the place
where we died, many a monument will show where we have
Hied. Oh . it, at the call of their countrv, men are readv to
dare and toil, and even to sacrifice their life, surely we, who
profess to be " not our own, but bought with’ a price,”
and to be influenced by considerations that scorn the littleness
of time, and embrace within their meaning and sweep all that
is comprehended in the dread words, Eternity ! Heaven I
Hell: ought ever to be ready and willing to place ourselves
on the altar of sacrifice, and offer all to Him “ who gave
Himself for us,” “ Let this mind, then, be in you which was
also in Christ Jesus,’*
Imitate them in their /terscvrrance, Almost everv stage
in their progress was beset with difficulties, but they had
counted the cost, and were not deterred. They lost themselves
in the grandeur of their enterprise. It was the goal at which
they chiefly looked —not the difficulties that lay between.
He who is continually looking at the difficulties and trials
connected with the object to which he has, or ought
to have, consecrated himself, will quail at the sight of
every mole-hill, and stumble over every straw. Spectres
of evils which have no real existence will fill the
whole sphere of his vision, until his strength degenerates
into weakness, and “ I can’t,” becomes the expression of his
cowardly soul. We, my brethren, “ are called with a high
vocation”—we are summoned to run the heavenly race—we
are enlisted as soldiers, under the banner of the “ Prince of
I eace, ami we are to war a good warfare ; we have entered
into the vineyard, and we are to “ work the works of Him
who hath sent us while it is day —“ to do what our hands
fiad to do with our might —“ to be steadfast and immoveable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord”— to labour on
until the Master calls us to receive our hire. Ours is a “high
vocation. \\ e are to accomplish high objects, to be in-
fluenced by high motives, and to be faithful unto death. Oh I
when we think of the magnitude of the work, of the difficul-
ties ol the race, of the number and power of those spiritual


foes with whom we have to combat, we are ready to cry out,
“ Who is sufficient for these things ?”
But let us be encouraged to go on since we are not called
to war a warfare at our own charges. Let us quit our-
selves like men since the Master has promised to make our
strength equal to our day. And let the fact that the
eyes of ministering angels, and above all the eyes of the
Lord of all are ever upon us, urge us on in our
militant course. Let not the men of this world put
forth such energy for a corruptible crown, as shall exceed
ours for a crown that is incorruptible. Their rock is not as
our rock—their captain as our captain—their leader as our
leader—their reward as our reward. Go forth, then, in the
strength of Him in whose conquest of the world we see the
pledge and earnest of our own; and let these considerations
inspire us with an invincible determination to battle with
every foe, and never to return but with our shield or on it.
And going forth in this spirit, though we mav fall in the
conflict, yet he who never turns a cowardly back to the foe,
though he fall, falls a victor; and as he falls may write vici
on his shield.
These remarks are suitable for us in our present circum-
stances. We have entered on a great work for God and man
in this locality, and we shall meet with obstacles, but let us
not be deterred, nor permit our hands to know slackness or
our hearts faintness, since He who is for us is greater than
all that can be against us.
See in the necessities of those of whom we have spoken
a type of our own condition. When the deplored ones
returned to Cooper’s Creek well nigh exhausted both
in strength and stores, they wanted a friend, they wanted
help, and that, my friends, is what we are continually
wanting as we go on our heavenly pilgrimage. They
could not have what they wanted, but we may. “My God
shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory
by Christ Jesus.” There is something very pathetic in
the saying of Burke to his only companion King, when
he was about to die: —“ ’ Tin a comfort to know that name one
in hy* Yes, it is the instinctive cry of humanity for com-
panionship in death. No one likes to die alone, and yet
every one must die alone 1 Many may surround the body
and support or minister to it, but they cannot support
or help the soul. Alone it must struggle in that mortal
conflict. Alone it must tread that winepress. Alone it must
enter on its trackless path to eternity. But although mortals
may not keep company with the soul in that solemn and
eventful moment, there is One who can, and who can so


fill it with peace, and joy, and hope, and vigour, as to
enable it to say —“ Though I walk through the valley and
shadow of death I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy
rod and thy staff they comfort me.” May we, in our last
moments, have His presence, and then shall we indeed feel
that “ it is a comfort to have some one by.”
The Argus of November sth contained this sentence—“ The
name of R. O’Hara Burke will be a precious possession to the
people of Victoria.” Yes, it will; and we do not wish to
detract anything from its preciousness. But oh! there is
another name which we hope will be deemed far more precious
—“a name to every sinner dear”—a “name which is as
ointment poured forth”—a name that is above every
name in heaven or earth—a name before which every
knee shall bow, and “ crown Him Lord of all;” and it
is the “ only name given under heaven by which we
can be saved.” That name is Jesus. Happy if with our
latest breath we may but gasp that name ! May its music
refresh our souls in death. May we so know and believe in
Him who bears that name, that through Him we may obtain
entrance into that land where there is no death.
Amen I
1508 00247829 0
Wm. Goodhugh & Co., Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.
