

THE
RED BOOK.
A Post Bellum
Policy
for the
British People,
and more particularly for the
People
of Australia,
BY
AMBROSE PRATT.
1914.
Published by CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Mining Standard,
AUSTRALIA.




. . . . Germany is fighting the world
to-day with the money she won by
commerce with her enemies—from
us; by selling us her goods. And
it is certain that if we again permit
her to grow rich at our expense by
trading with us she will again try
to accomplish our destruction.—
Ambrose Pratt.


THE
RED BOOK.
A Post Bellum
Policy
for the
British People,
and more particularly for the
People
of Australia,
BY
AMBROSE PRATT.
1914.
f Published by CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Mining Standard,
AUSTRALIA.


Wholly Set up and Printed in Australia
by Mining Standard


INTRODUCTION.
To do our utmost in great things and in small
things to subdue the enemy and to bring the war
to a speedy close is a duty we all recognise. It
is our paramount active obligation; and we are
actively performing it. A more passive but no
less important duty simultaneously demands at-
tention. It is that we should set to work imme-
diately to formulate a rational policy of dealing
with the enemy after he has been subdued. Sub-
consciously we all recognise this obligation, too.
There is probably not a British patriot living in
any part of the world but has already given the
subject a deal of privy thought, and has formed
some notion (harsh or gentle, according to his
native disposition) as to how the British Empire
should behave towards Germany after the inevi-
table Treaty of Peace has been signed by the
now-belligerent Powers. Most Britons, how-
ever, have shrunk, and they still shrink, from
promulgating or discussing their views, out of a
mistaken, but natural and admirably delicate,
sense of modesty and restraint. They feel that
the war may last a very long time —two or three
years, perhaps—and, consequently, they hesitate


to suggest rules for our guidance in the future
lest they should seem impatient or vainglorious
or foolishly self-confident.
In my opinion, we should deliberately re-
lease ourselves from the fetters I have indicated,
and release ourselves at once. What if we should
look absurd ? What if we should be reproached
for counting our chickens before they are
hatched ? We are not so hypersensitive that we
cannot survive a breath of ridicule; and we are
not so humorless that we cannot smile back good-
naturedly at harmless mockery. We have much
to gain by forthwith drafting a post-bellum
policy, and much to lose by postponing it.
Sapient caution does not consist in waiting idly
for the future to unfold itself. Wisdom always
looks ahead, and guesses at the contents of a
darkness that it cannot penetrate. It would be
rank stupid to count our chickens if our eggs
were addled; but it would be not a whit less fool-
ish to refrain from reckoning on the ground that
something might conceivably occur to addle our
good eggs. It is true that the war may last for
years. But it may not last three months. All
we can say of it with any certainty is that it will
end in the defeat of Germany. Nobody doubts
this—except, perhaps, the deluded, news-starved
people of Berlin. Russia, Prance, and Britain
all believe it, and their belief is shared by every
onlooking neutral nation, including the United
States. That Germany is doomed to be defeated
by the Allies is axiomatic to well-nigh all the
world. It is our inveterate and unalloyed con-
viction that we must, and shall, win. Why,


then, should we fear to seem less confident than
our innate and intense belief ? That way lies im-
prudence—not in the path of candid private pre-
paration to promote our interests after and be-
yond the war.
Germany strenuously prepared for war dur-
ing ten years of peace. Let us prepare strenu-
ously for peace during the period of war that lies
ahead of us. We cannot create a full-fledged
post-bellum policy, worth having or acting upon,
in a day; and it would be a miracle were a sound
policy to emerge from the reactions and relaxa-
tions of a suddenly terminated war. At present
our minds are abnormally alert and abnormally
receptive. We are intellectually competent (as
we never were before) to settle great issues and
to decide great problems. The whole British race
is thinking intensely along one broad line of
thought. It has fused its aspirations and its
sympathies. It is co-operating and collaborat-
ing in a fashion unprecedented in our history,
and the individual units are in the closest pos-
sible spiritual accord.
But these conditions will quickly disperse
and disappear with Peace. When Peace arrives
—the very moment, indeed, that Peace discloses
her proportions clearly to the gaze of men—a
change will come. The unseen forces which
have drawn us into harmony will no longer ope-
rate effectively to seal divisions, to purify and to
amalgamate ambitions. Patriotic concentra-
tions of purpose will yield place to the centri-
fugal play of personal and sectional interests.


We should still form a policy, to be sure; but it
would be the policy of a majority, and not a
policy of the race. We are capable, now, of
forming a truly national post-bellum policy, be-
cause all our purposes have been dissolved and
blended in the supreme consideration our
country’s good. We dwell in an exalted mood.
Patriotism has burned out of our hearts the
petty flames of partizanship and prejudice all
petty flames, indeed; and, above all, it has
purged us of ignoble hates. The war has stirred
us to a love so deep and glowing for our country,
our kinsmen, and our friends, that we have lost,
in this splendid passion, the capacity to dread
and to detest. Unbalanced pacifists here and
there adjure us to refrain from hating Germany.
We do not need their counsel. The British
people, as a whole, regard the enemy (and will
continue to regard him while the war endures)
with a cool and wholly dispassionate mentality.
Germany represents to us a great impersonal
force which has challenged our existence as a
plague might challenge us. It is possible to
fear and to fight a plague with the greatest fury,
but it is impossible to hate a plague.
And we do not hate Germany. True
enough, we intend to expend our last resources
of men and money (if necessary) to overcome
Germany—and we contemplate destroying many
Germans in the act. But not from hate. Our
motive is self-preservation and the preservation
of our friends. That is our motive, our single-
minded motive. It animates us exclusively at
present, and the fact fits us perfectly to under


take the task of immediately shaping a plan, to
put in execution after our safety has been
temporarily secured by force of arms, which
may perpetuate our safety and protect us
from a repetition of the challenge we are
now contesting. The cardinal reason why we
should not defer the task until the war ends
is that a multitude of motives and pas-
sions will inevitably possess us as soon as the
German menace has been dissipated by de-
feat. We are not vengeful to-day; we may be
vengeful then. We may be too merciful. We
may be too merciless. The opportunity to inflict
inhuman punishments may well accrue to us—
and with it a terrible temptation to be unduly
cruel. The opportunity is not yet ours. The
temptation has not yet touched us. We are still
fighting for our friends, our country, and our
lives. Our hearts are still the shrines of nought
save noble purposes and generous emotions. I
say, then, now is the best time and the only
proper time to make up our minds how to treat
Germany when the war is over and the sword
is sheathed.


THE RED BOOK.
I.
THE NATURE OF THE GERMAN.
It is sound philosophy to deal with men accord-
ing to their kind. In order to discover a rational
policy of treating Germany after the war it
is essential in the first place to comprehend what
manner of human beings the Germans are
their psychology, their motives, their morality.
They are a materialistic people, with a
natural bent towards dreamy mysticism; but
they are not peace-loving. For more than a
quarter century all their dreams have been of
war; all their efforts have been directed towards
preparation for war. Their mysticism has been
diverted and entirely devoted to the cultivation
of a belief in their destiny to dominate the world.
Their government is a military semi-autocracy,
semi-bureaucracy. For decades they have been
taught in the schools and universities to con-
sider themselves supermen, superior to all other
races, and superior, also, to the moral principles
which rule the conduct of other races. Practi-
cally they are a nation of soldiers, and their gen-
eral attitude has been moulded on the directions
of the drill sergeant.


The effect of militarism on modem Ger-
many has been the brutalisation of all classes of
society. Brutality is an omnipresent feature of
German life. Their police have the manners of
beasts. The treatment by Germans of dumb
animals is savagely inhuman. “I have seen,”
says Mr. Austin Harrison, editor of the “English
Review,” “cavalry horses flogged till they
shrieked.” Brutality is a Teutonic synonym for
virility. The Germans notoriously treat women
as inferior creatures. Women are weaker than
men. In the schools, boys are whipped with
almost incredible severity for trivial offences—
the public approving. “it is necessary to harden
the youngsters.”
In the army seldom a week passes without
some unhappy private is driven to commit sui-
cide by the cruelty of his officers. “Drauf
schlagen!” (smash your way through) is the
common principle, universally practised. Pity
is a word which conveys little meaning to the
German mind. The whole nation has become
brutal in consequence of the deliberate national
training to that end.
To the man who knows modern Germany,
the accounts of German cruelties in the present
war occasion neither doubt nor surprise. They
treat their own weaklings too harshly to permit
of any finer mercy to the Belgians. Finally they
are an arrogant people, arrogant and insolent
beyond compare. Bullying is a national trait.
TEE REE BOOK.


It is deliberately fostered, in the army by the
compulsory use of duelling, and in civilian life
by the exaction of servile obedience from the
masses by the military caste and the bureaucracy.
It is the fixed custom of every German to
bully his neighbor—the nearest person socially
beneath him. The General bullies his officers.
The officers bully the sergeants. The sergeants
bully the men. The private soldiers bully the
civil population. The bureaucrats bully every-
one. The masses bully their wives and children.
There is no such thing as a German demo-
cracy. There is a numerous body of “ Social
Democrats” soi-disant; but they are slaves of
discipline; they have never yet dared to organise
one big strike, and they are just as much infa-
tuated with the national military policy as any
of the Kaiser’s entourage. To sum up, the
Germans are aristocrats, who believe themselves
demi-gods, and who cherish a sincere conviction
that the rest of mankind was created for Ger-
mans to exploit and victimise.
TEE BED BOOK .


II.
THE GERMAN WAR MOTIVE.
Lest there should he any question raised con-
cerning an Englishman’s interpretation of
Germany’s war motive, I propose to allow the
greatest of all German authorities to expound it
himself. General Bernhardi’s bookf is addressed
to Germany; and it has been frankly accepted by
the whole German nation as an accurate expres-
sion of the national spirit and national purpose
of the Teutonic Empire. The volume is, and
long has been, the Gospel of Germany; and even
the leaders of Social Democracy have openly
adopted its teaching. The following condensed
quotations will sufficiently explain themselves: —
War is a biological necessity. It is a phase
of the struggle for existence and the survival
of the fittest. It is a necessity for healthy
national life. Aspirations for peace would
poison the soul of the German people. War
is an indispensable factor of culture.
t More than 1,000,000 copies of General Bernhardi’s book hare
been purchased and circulated throughout Germany by the official
naval and military leagues, of which the Kaiser is the ruling spirit.
TEE RED BOOK.


War is also a moral necessity. It is
political idealism which calls for war, while
materialism—in theory—repudiates it. It is
only the state which strives after an enlarged
sphere of influence that creates the conditions
under which mankind develops into the most
splendid perfection.
When the state recoils from the war which
is necessary for its expansion, the citizens
become cramped, selfishness and intrigue
run riot, and luxury obliterates idealism.
Wars are necessary to save the state from
social petrifaction and stagnation.
Efforts directed to the abolition of war are
foolish, and must be stigmatised' as absolutely
immoral, as unworthy the human race.
The idea that a weak nation is to have the
same right to life as the strong nation is an
idea which represents a presumptuous en-
croachment on the natural laws of develop-
ment, and which can only lead to the
most disastrous consequences to humanity
generally.
War is a peculiar necessity for Germany
at the present time. All those things which
other nations attained in centuries of national
development—political union, colonies, naval
power, international trade—were denied to
Germany until recently. If we wish to attain
them they must be fought for, and won against
the forces of hostile interests and Powers.
TEE REE BOOK.


Germans are specially fit for the leader-
ship of the intellectual world. This fact im-
poses on us the obligation to secure that posi-
tion by force.
The fulfilment of Germany’s duty to the
world depends on two points—first, how many
millions of men in the world speak German;
secondly, how many of them are politically
members of the German Empire.
The issue presented to Germany is world
power or downfall. In meeting this issue,
Germany must take the aggressive, as did
Frederick the Great. Germany must not wait
until war is forced upon her. We must re-
main conscious in all eventualities that we
cannot, under any circumstances, avoid
fighting for our position in the world, and
that the all-important point is not to post-
pone that war as long as possible , but to bring
it on under the most favourable possible con-
ditions to ourselves. We must, therefore,
during the period of preparation, raise to the
supremest level the value and capabilities of
our troops, and then act on the offensive and
strike the first blow.
We must expect the hostility of the civilised
world. We must expect to be hated every-
where. We must expect the Triple Alliance to
break up by the withdrawal of Italy. Eng-
land will be our chief enemy. Our war
against England should start unexpectedly,
TEE RED BOOK.


and be fiercely prosecuted. The naval prizes
that fall into our hands must be remorse-
lessly destroyed. But it is upon France that
our first attack should be made.
France must he so completely crushed that
she can never again cross our path .
The neutrality of Belgium cannot be re-
spected. Neutrality is only a paper bulwark.
Germany must always maintain a predo-
minantly offensive military system.
The maintenance of peace never can or may
be the goal of German policy. The German
State must constantly draw new sustenance
from war.
’ Note.—The italics are mine.
Such is the spirit which has produced the
war now raging in Europe. It is a spirit that
disdainfully denies the right of small nations
to exist. It claims might as the only test of right.
It condemns as undesirable any German attempt
to develop peacefully and honestly by establish-
ing friendly relations with other Powers. Its sole
purpose is to convert Germany into the greatest
world Power by smashing other nations and seiz-
ing their possessions. It is the spirit of the brute.
Its excuses are the familiar excuses of the bri-
gand. Germany became a nation so late in the
day that, when she grew strong and looked
around her, she found the world occupied and the
world’s commerce parcelled up among the elder
nations. The sight infuriated her. Not for one
THE RED BOOK.


instant did she think of competing honestly with
other Powers to obtain a share in the world’s
trade or an opportunity to expand colonially.
Her one and only idea was to take the goods of
her neighbors by brute force, and to subjugate
and to enslave her rivals.
THE RED BOOK.


III.
GERMAN MORALITY.
In order to present a faithful and unbiassed
picture of the national moral code of modern
Germany, I propose to cite the testimony of a
competent, neutral, independent and impartial
witness —a man who has been acclaimed by
“The Times” of August 27, 1914, “as no pre-
judiced Englishman saturated with Germana-
phobia, but an American professor of history
in an American University; and he brings his
trained powers of observation to bear upon the
problem with complete detachment.” My wit-
ness is Roland G. Usher, Ph.D., Associate Pro-
fessor of History at Washington University.
Professor Usher made a profound study of
the moral code and purposes of the German
people, and he gave the fruits of his researches
to the world three years ago in his book “Pan-
Germanism.” The great value of his work is
that it is concerned only with a judicial exposi-
tion of facts. Professor Usher is never an advo-
cate, and he never condemns. He merely ex-
plains and discusses with the aloof and searching
spirit of the scientist; and he shows clearly in
THE RED BOOK .


the course of his writing that he recognises no
absolute standard of morality in international
relations. It is merely necessary to add that
Professor Usher’s book has withstood the test of
time and that the Germans themselves do not
dispute the accuracy of his conclusions. In what
follows, the essence of the volume is set forth in
condensed quotations from the author:—
It is literally true that Germany has become
Bismarckian. His heavy spirit has settled
upon it. It wears his scowl. It has adopted
his brutality, as it has his greatness. It has
taken his criterion of truth , which is Ger-
manic; his indifference to justice, which is
savage; his conception of a state, which is
sublime.
The Germans aim at nothing less than the
domination of Europe and of the world by
the Germanic race.
One of the fundamental errors, of which
idealists and advocates of peace have been
often guilty, is to treat this vast project as
an unreality. . . . An equally mistaken
view declares it the conception of an indivi-
dual which chances to find for the moment
a response in the German people, or a scheme
which depends for its existence upon the tran-
sient personal influence of a few men. No
doubt, a few men only know the full details
of the plans for the realisation of this stu-
pendous enterprise, but the whole nation is
TEE RED BOOK .


none the less fired by their spirit, and is
working as a unit in accordance with their
directions.
The vital factor in the modem international
situation is the aggression of Germany, her
determination to expand her territories, to
increase her wealth and power.
She must grow faster than her neighbors;
she must rob them instead of waiting for
them to rob her.
She is seeking the counterpart of the fer-
tile plains of Western Canada, of the rich
valleys of Northern Africa, where her people
may build a new Germany. But such a
promised land ... is not to be found.
Every available spot is held by England,
France or Russia. Germany can, therefore,
only obtain colonies suitable to her purposes
at the expense of these Powers. This is what
is meant by the oft-reiterated statements that
England, France, and Russia are by their
very existence inimical to Germany’s welfare,
and that, if she is to escape ruin, she must
fight them.
In reply to outcries denouncing these plans
as unprovoked aggression, the Germans de-
risively insist that their aims and methods
are identical with those other nations long
employed. Now that the latter’s work is com-
plete and their own future assured, they are
eager to establish moral, ethical, and legal
THE RED BOOK.


precepts, whose acceptance by Germany
would insure them the undisturbed possession
of all they now hold. This, the Germans
admit, is but natural; hut they ought not to
expect Germans to subscribe to such prin-
ciples.
The Germans, as a whole, refuse to admit
the validity of any theoretical notions whose
application would in any way restrict or
interfere with Germany’s full share in the
mastery of the world. They deny the validity
of any particular set of ethical notions of
right or wrong to decide issues vital to the
Germanic race.
The Germans believe that the power of
England is a myth. To Germans the British
Empire is nothing but bluster and show,
masking congenital weakness of the most
serious description. The wealth of England
is in reality a source of weakness rather than
of strength.
Not only does England, and to a great ex-
tent France, depend for its supplies of food
and raw material on distant countries, but
it has vast capital invested there without
the material means of defending it. What-
ever is written on paper is paper, and is not
to be made into factories or railways or
tangible assets of any kind by any process of
jugglery. . . Things are, and writing on
paper does not change the thing or its posi-
tion. The real wealth of England, the surplus
THE RED BOOK .


of which she is so proud, comes not from her
soil nor from her own factories—in other
words, from those things which no one can
take away from her, except by force of arms
and which she necessarily protects as long as
she continues her national existence but
from her income from the accumulations of
the past with whose actuality she has parted,
and from which she has received for decades
the payments represented by the excess of
her imports over her exports.
The world has paid her tribute, but the
world need continue to pay that tribute only
so long as it wishes. The moment the bor-
rowers refuse longer to recognise the validity
of her claims upon their revenues and in-
comes and begin to realise that they hold,
with a clutch which she cannot loosen, the
actual substance of wealth, then they will
begin to see that her wealth is not real, but
depends purely upon their willingness to
continue to pay her revenue, which they may
stop paying her at any moment without suf-
fering any consequences. To be sure, such
notions as these presume the violation of
every notion of commercial morality and ex-
pediency at present existing in the world,
but, as the Germans say, if they were violated,
what could England and France possibly do
to avert destruction ? It is true, they admit,
that such a wholesale repudiation of debts
would undoubtedly make it difficult for na-
THE RED BOOK.


tions to borrow from each other for some
time to come, but, they retort, if such a repu-
diation took place, the debtor nations would
not need to borrow money for generations to
come.
Germans must control the Channel in
order literally to destroy England by means
of economic weapons.
The moral code of the financial world, like
the moral code of the political world, is based
upon the notions of England and France,
upon ideas obviously themselves the result
of a peculiar situation, on whose continuance
the welfare of England and France depends.
Their moral code is based on their ownership
of the world and their desire to continue it in
perpetuity, and their moral code, therefore,
condemns Germany to insignificance. The
Germans refuse to recognise as moral any-
thing which jeopardises their national exist-
ence. They claim the right to protect them-
selves by any weapons which will secure the
desired result, and they have no intention of
foregoing the use of these terrible economic
weapons, simply from a supine acceptance
of so-called ethical notions, whose very pre-
sumptions militate against them.
The Germans admit that their economic
and industrial development has been largely
effected by borrowed capital chiefly French
and English; but they still owe the principal
and wish to avoid payment. They ask: Sup-
THE RED BOOK.


posing that Germany should repudiate the
whole debt which she owes other nations and
seize the capital out of which her economic
development was created, what then ? Would
she not actually possess her economic de-
velopment for nothing ?
So long as peace prevails she must con-
tinue to pay huge sums, must continue to part
with actual wealth in goods until the debt is
paid. But the moment war breaks out she
need pay nothing. If defeated she will merely
be compelled to pay what she was already
obligated to pay. If victorious, she need never
pay interest or principal.
It is an astounding fact that England and
France own the major part of the bonded in-
debtedness of the world. Russia, Turkey,
Egypt, India, China, Japan, and S. America
are probably owned, as far as any nation can
be owned, in London and Paris. If victorious
in war Germany might well seize a great part
of these securities.
. Pan-Germanism is the expression of a na-
tional determination to strengthen the cor-
porate life of a great people. Germany is
willing to employ all methods to that end.
The are strong, and they believe
that might is right. Their supreme ambition is
to crush France and to loot the British Em-
pire, and confiscate English and French
investments in other parts of the world.
Note.—The italics are mine.
THE RED BOOK.


IV.
THE GOSPEL OF REPUDIATION.
Events have positively and indisputably demon-
strated that Professor Usher interpreted cor-
rectly the moral code of the German people.
Germany has made war upon the world to re-
pudiate her debts, to get “her economic develop-
ment for nothing,” to loot the British Empire,
to confiscate the wealth and colonial possessions
of her rivals, and to dominate the world.
Her very first act in the war was to invade
Belgium, a state whose integrity she was
pledged by a solemn treaty to preserve inviolate.
When England protested and threatened war if
Germany should persist in the invasion of Bel-
gium, the German Chancellor heatedly ex-
claimed; “What, just for a word, neutrality; a
word which in war time has been so often disre-
garded— just for a scrap of paper Great Britain
was going to make war on a kindred nation.”
Later, speaking in the Reichstag on August
4, the Chancellor said: “We are now in a state
of necessity, and necessity knows no laic. Our
troops have occupied Luxembourg and perhaps
are already on Belgium soil. Gentlemen, that
THE RED BOOK .


is contrary to the dictates of international law.
. . . We were compelled to override the just
protest of Luxembourg and Belgium. The
wrong (I speak openly) that we are committing
we will endeavour to make good as soon as our
military goal has been reached. Anyone who is
threatened as we are can only hack his way
through!”
And the whole German nation applauded
the Chancellor’s astoundingly immoral utterance.
Why? The reason is self-evident. The whole
German nation had long been waiting ripe and
eager for the moment when it could denounce
and repudiate all its onerous engagements and
contracts, political and financial, with the civil-
ised world. The violation of the Belgian treaty of
neutrality was the sign that the long expected
moment had at length arrived. The German
Chancellor’s scornful reference to the treaty as
“just a scrap of paper,” expressed in one short,
phrase the acquired contempt of the whole Ger-
man race for debts of honor and the rights of
others.
The German people felt, when the war
started, that they had taken the first step to rid
themselves of a vast burden of public and pri-
vate debts owed to the foreigner. Were they to
be victorious they would never pay those debts.
They are fighting first and foremost to complete
the repudiation of their commercial obligations;
secondly, to enrich themselves still further by
forcibly appropriating the accumulated wealth
TEE BED BOOK.


of their prospective victims; and, thirdly, to live
luxuriously on the forced labor of peoples they
hope to conquer.
The war is a war between two moral sys-
tems. It is a war between the moral system
which encourages its advocates to rob in the name
of superior strength, and the moral system which
constrains its votaries to pay their debts without
compulsion, and to grant equal rights of justice
to the strong and to the weak.
It is a war between Tyranny and Liberty.
It is a war between a nation of thieves and
four honest States.
It is a war between a paganised, morally
corrupt and brutal aristocracy and the demo-
cratic principles of Christianity.
It is a war between savagery and civilisation.
It is a war, finally, between the Bismarckian
maxim, “It is the historic right of the strong to
prey upon the weak,” and the admonition of
Jesus, “Render unto Caesar the things that < are
Caesar’s.”
THE RED BOOK.


V.
HOW GERMANY GREW STRONG
ENOUGH TO BE FEARLESSLY IMMORAL.
How did Germany grow strong enough to be
immoral and to dare the experiment of forcing
her pervert pagan ethics on the world ? Less than
forty years ago she was insignificant and poor
in everything except the possession of an army.
Her people were mostly agriculturists. She
had no great industries; no factories; few schools.
What are the secrets of her rise ?
The huge war indemnity exacted from
France was the initial home factor of German
increase. The indemnity was indirectly distri-
buted to the nation and to individuals; for, al-
though nominally spent in defraying the cost of
the war, the nation itself received the money
either in wages or by the remission of taxation.
The second home factor was the establish-
ment of a high Protective Tariff. The war in-
demnity fertilised industry; the Tariff preserved,
stimulated and fostered Germany’s industrial
growth.
THE RED BOOK.


The third home factor was education a
system of primary, secondary, and industrial
education which gradually developed to a state
of more excellent completion than any other the
world has ever seen.
The chief external factors of German in-
crease are foreign trade, foreign capital, and the
unprotected market of Great Britain —and of
the three the third is possibly the greatest. The
extent to which Britain has invested money in
Germany may be estimated from the fact that in
1913 British exports to Germany amounted to
£45,000,000, while Britain took from Germany
in the form of manufactured articles and raw
material, goods to the value of £88,000,000. The
balance, £43,000,000, may be said to represent
roughly the interest on the debt which the Ger-
man people owe to the people of Great Britain.
England’s contributions to the cause of Ger-
many’s development, therefore, have been un-
limited stores of capital and a free market ini-
mitably capable of absorbing German products.
The home and external factors, above-
named, acting in combination, have operated
during the last quarter century to make Germany
the most prosperous and efficient industrial
Power in Continental Europe, and to place her
second in the list of manufacturing nations. Her
vast increase of population during the period
completed and compacted her strength. Her
military system did the rest that and the
peculiar moral texture of the race.
THE RED BOOK.


Germany owes more to Britain than could
be set forth in the pages of a large volume. Eng-
land was her instructor in the sciences and crafts,
bhe borrowed from England a thousand trade
secrets; she appropriated a thousand more with-
out acknowledgment. It was the invention of an
-Englishman which built up Germany’s huge
trade in chemical dyes. It was the invention
ox an Englishman which enabled Germany to use
her vast deposits of previously worthless iron
ores and to become one of the world’s largest
producers of steel and manufacturers of machi-
nery. Thus to name at random two from innu-
merable illustrations available to cite. And right
throughout the infancy of Germanv’s industrial
development until her full stature was attained,
Eritain provided Germany gratis with an Im-
perial open market for her wares.
It can be said truly that Britain has
done almost as much to make Germany
great as the genius of the German people.
If the phenomenon of German increase
were reduced to mathematical terms, it
would read like this Germany owes her
present strength as to 50 per centum to her-
self, as to 35 per centum to Great Britain, and as
to 15 per centum to the rest of the world. And
what was the response of Germany for the bene-
fits ungrudgingly accorded her? No sooner did
she begin to feel conscious of her strength, than
she deliberately determined to make war upon
the external human factors of her greatness——
THE RED BOOK.


with a view to cancelling her indebtedness to
them by destroying their capacity to enforce pay-
ment.
We can all respect the wonderful qualities
of mind and character which assimilated the
world’s knowledge and poured all human agen-
cies into the melting pot for the manufacture of
German greatness. We can all admire the mar-
vellous success which the skill and stubbornness
and untiring industry of the German nation
finally achieved.
But we must all condemn the dreadful pur-
pose to which Germany devoted her strength as
soon as it was tangible; and we must all
execrate the colossal selfishness and monstrous
ingratitude which induced her to attempt the
destruction of the Powers which had so
generously assisted her to climb “into the sun.”
THE RED BOOK.


VI.
DEDUCTIONS.
While conning the foregoing pages of examina-
tion, we have arrived at a rough and ready
understanding of the German people. We know,
now, the essential facts concerning them. And
we know that our comprehension, however in-
complete, is accurate. It is understanding of
a sweeping kind; general rather than particular.
But it is the kind we require; and it is true. Let
us tabulate the facets of our main conclusions.
(a) The Germans are a strong, a virile, and a
mighty people; enormously efficient in
science and industry; a military nation; a
race of soldiers and an aristocracy.
(b) The} 7 ' climbed to greatness by strenuously ap-
plying and imitating the nation-building
methods of older and more inventive races;
by developing to the utmost extent their
own native genius; by protecting their
own manufacturers and producers from
foreign competition; by calling to their
assistance vast stores of foreign (mostly
English) capital on a solemn promise to
THE REV BOOK.


honor faithfully the financial obligations
so created; and by exploiting the foreign
markets (mostly English) to which foreign
Powers gave them access and a cordial
welcome. Never let us forget that the
whole world was always willing for Ger-
many to become great, and never attempted
to restrict her expansional development
along the paths of peace and justice.
(c) As soon as Germany grew strong and fairly
self contained, she began to consider the
expediency of repudiating her immense
foreign indebtedness. The temptation to
cast oft the burden of debt and at one stroke
“possess her economic development for
nothing” overcame her powers of resist-
ance. Forthwith she invented and adopted
a new moral system which scoffs at the
sacredness of treaties, which denies the
validity of all old-fashioned ethical re-
straints, and which sanctions the settlement
of all contracts, both fiscal and political,
with a bullet in the heart of the German
creditor.
(d) Recognising the necessity of becoming a
giant before proceeding to butcher her
creditors, Germany built up the most
powerful military system in the world, and
the second strongest navy.
(e) As her military and naval strength increased
Germany’s new moral code expanded—and
her greed. Initially content to make war
THE RED BOOK.


for the repudiation of her debts, she even-
tually decided to vanquish her rivals in
order to seize their wealth and possessions,
and to establish a German world Empire
on the ruins of the world. A war of uni-
versal conquest, capture, and confiscation
became her fixed and unalterable aim. She
prepared for it with the energy of a Titan.
She abandoned all smaller ambitions. She
lived for war, and war alone.
(f) Germany’s spirit of militarism originated
from a mixture of the basest passions,
covered over with an excusatory mask of
spurious patriotism. The people realised
that their new morality was a meretricious
and damnable thing, but they taught them-
selves to think it good and glorious by per-
sistently pretending that its sole aim was
to promote the growth and welfare of the
State. Eventually their thoughts became
convictions. Inasmuch as the spirit of
militarism emanated from immorality, it
was inevitably destined, when translated
into a system, to increase the moral cor-
ruption of Germany. The inevitable hap-
pened. The effect of militarism on Ger-
many has been the brutalisation of all
classes of society. Germany now denies all
human rights to the weak. She worships
strength as the savages their wooden
images. She has no pity for the sufferings
of insignificance or immaturity. “Hack
THE RED BOOK.


your ivay through!” is the common prin-
ciple of the nation.
(g) The German people have become almost in-
credibly arrogant and vain. They regard
themselves as super-men and demigods, in-
finitely superior to the rest of mankind and
divinely authorised to abuse and maltreat
to the very last extremity the nations they
despise. Their selfishness exceeds any-
thing the world has seen, except, perhaps,
their greed and their ingratitude. The
national heart of Germany is compact with
cupidity and envy. Envy of the patiently
and industriously acquired wealth and
colonies of Britain and France is the
master passion of the race.
(h) Germany hopes to achieve all her desires in
the present war; but she does not fully
expect to do so—that is to say, her ruling
classes do not. The latter even contemplate
defeat; and they have cautiously prepared
for defeat. But no person in Germany has
prepared for the relinquishment or modifi-
cation of the national aims. On the con-
trary, the professors, writers, teachers and
generals of Germany have been sedulously
instructing the German people for many
years past to prepare for a series of wars,
with intermittent periods of peace, and to
renew repeatedly their assaults on civilisa-
tion until the whole world has been subju-
gated, crushed and Germanised.
THE RED BOOK .


(i) It is apparent that we must do something
more than defeat Germany in the present
war if we wish to re-establish Peace on
foundations of stability.
THE BED BOOK.


VII.
THE POLICY PROPOUNDED.
Believing as we do that Germany is sure to be
defeated, we may confidently assume that the
Allies will impose conditions of peace as stem as
her offending has been unwarranted.
Presumably, they will compel her to rein-
state Belgium financially, and to pay the cost of
the war. It is also probable that the map of
Europe will be reconstructed, and that Germany
will be obliged to consent to a general or partial
disarmament.
Germany, nevertheless, will still remain, in
any circumstances, an immensely powerful
nation; and no penalties can be directly inflicted
on her by the Allies, however severe, capable of
more than temporarily sterilising her mischiev-
ous activities. She may be shorn of territory, de-
prived of her navy, forced to disband her troops,
and condemned to pay enormous indemnities.
But all these expedients combined would avail
nothing to keep the peace of the world longer
than a few years unless supplemented with effec-
tive measures of an indirect character to prevent,
or at least to retard, indefinitely the reorganisa-
tion of Germany’s economic establishment.
THE BED BOOK .


War indemnities, however great, are feeble
deterrents of national recuperation. France paid
an indemnity of £200,000,000 to Prussia in four
years; and the efforts put forth to pay the fine
imparted a stimulus to French industry and en-
terprise which speedily resulted in making
France well-nigh the richest country in the world
-—a position she has ever since retained.
Contraction of territory is another agent of
little value in reducing the strength and aggres-
sive capacity of the shorn nation. It is arguable,
indeed, that Germany’s strength would be posi-
tively increased by the forfeiture of certain pro-
vinces—-notably, Alsace and Lorraine—which
have always been sources of weakness, danger
and disaffection. Moreover, the deprivation of
territory invariably supplies the deprived nation
with a new motive to hate and to prepare retalia-
tion.
Disarmament, again, is a measure of ex-
tremely doubtful efficacy. It has been often tested
in the history of the world, and more than once on
Germany; but it has never yet succeeded in its
purpose anywhere; and the reason is obvious. It
is impossible for the internal defence arrange-
ments of a nation to be policed by other nations;
and if the character of a defeated and exhausted
nation is naturally bellicose that nation will be
strong to fight immediately it has recovered its
financial strength. A permanently disarmed
Germany is a dream that never can be realised.
I doubt it will be seriously attempted.
THE RED BOOK.


If my conclusions are sound, and I con-
sider them irrefutable, it becomes evident
that we should not repose any faith in the capa-
city of any conditions of Peace, likely to be im-
posed on Germany, to restrain her for a great
length of time renewing her attempts to domin-
ate the world. Nothing the Allies may do in the
way of directly shearing, fining, or disarming her
could substantially impair her virility or curtail
her latent material and spiritual resources. Amd
it is a clear physical impossibility to destroy or
transmute her intellectual equipment and to
reduce her vital wealth. She will come out of
the war greatly impoverished in the fiscal sense,
no doubt; but she will be almost as populous as
before. And the people of a nation are, in the
last analysis, both the strength and the wealth
of the nation.
A quarter century ago Germany had only
half her present population. She was even then
a strong State, although economically poor. She
became economically rich by trading with the
outer world, by selling her cheap-made goods to
other people—chiefly to the people of our Em-
pire.
The question is—Shall history repeat itself?
It is for us to say yes or no. Our actions
must decide. The tremendous and terrible obli-
gation rests upon us to determine whether or not
we shall allow Germany to use us for her econ-
omic enrichment in order that she may once again
endeavour to destroy us. The issue is absolutely
THE RED BOOK .


straightforward and extremely simple. Germany
is fighting the world to-day with the wealth she
won by commerce with her enemies—from us;
by selling us her goods. And it is certain that if
we again permit her to grow rich at our expense
by trading with us she will again try to accom-
plish our destruction.
The leopard does not change his spots when
he is beaten. The professionaf burglar does not
become an honest man merely because his burg-
lar’s kit is removed from his possession. We have
examined the moral code of Germany, and we
know it for what it is. It is the moral code of the
burglar, the brigand, the exploiter, the bully, and
the brute. Defeat will not change the German
heart, nor will it give Germany a Christian con-
science. On the contrary, defeat will confirm the
Germans in their fanatical attachment to their
infamous moral system; it will inflame them with
undying fires of hate and vengeance; and it will
enormously consolidate the predatory purposes
of the nation.
What, then, must we do to postpone as long
as possible Germany’s next assault upon civilisa-
tion and the world’s peace?
First and foremost, we must build up as
many obstacles as possible to hinder German
trade. Self-preservation is the first law of na-
ture. Germany threatens us both in peace and
war. When peace is restored she will immedi-
ately endeavour to recapture her lost foreign
markets by flooding the world with low-priced
THE BED BOOK.


German goods. She must have vast stores on
hand at this moment which are now quite worth-
less to her. She could sell them at a mere frac-
tion of their cost and still profit greatly. When
peace is restored her factories will resume work-
ing at terrific pressure, and poverty will compel
the laborers of Germany to work for their
masters at a pittance. Thus Germany will be
enabled to manufacture trade goods at a cost to
beggar foreign competition. Added to which, it
is certain that the nation will readily undergo
great sacrifices in order to undersell the outer
world and gain access to foreign markets in
spite of tariffs.
We have to expect, therefore, and prepare
to meet, a colossal system of world-wide “dump-
ing” of German products. The danger is not
visionary. It is real. It will infallibly material-
ise, and if it is not obviated in advance, it is bound
to result in the swamping and ruin of thousands
of non-German manufacturers and the impover-
ishment of tens of thousands of non-German
workers. The British Empire is particularly
menaced, for England lacks any sort of protective
tariff, and the tariffs of all the Dominions are not
effectively protective. France, Russia and the
United States are in a better position to meet the
danger, for they have high tariffs. But we are
almost undefended.
Our paramount need, therefore, is for a Pro-
tectionist tariff capable of defending us from the
German dumper. We are entitled to ask our
THE RED BOOK.


national Parliament to impose a drastic tariff
supercharge on German goods; but we are en-
titled to demand that it will in any case give us,
forthwith, a tariff of a character to preserve our
industries from spoliation.
To accomplish Imperial Tariff Preference
is our next national duty. Australian statesmen
should persistently and strenuously urge Britain
to reform her tariff policy and grant reciprocal
preferential rates to the Dominions. The best
interests of our race require that the trade of
the Empire should be confined as much as pos-
sible within the Empire; for thus the various
parts of the Empire may most easily grow rich
and strong together.
Tariff Protection and Imperial Reciprocal
Customs Preference are Legislative obligations.
They should be reinforced in each British com-
munity with Governmental grants and bonuses
to foster the local establishment of German in-
dustries, so that we may use up in each British
State the raw material which has hitherto been
sent to Germany (e.g., copper, spelter, zinc and
leady concentrates, crude ores of various kinds*
wool, etc.) and returned in the shape of manufac-
tured goods—to our detriment and Germany’s
advantage.
But Tariffs and Preferences and Bonuses
are not, per se, sufficient instruments to achieve
our great design. They will do much to protect
us; but they cannot do everything that is required
to retard the vile purposes of the enemy and to
THE RED BOOK.


make ourselves great and prosperous and strong
despite his machinations.
When our Governments have done what they
can and should to help us we must complete the
work of Government by prudently and determin-
edly helping ourselves. We can *do this most ef-
fectively by collectively and individually engag-
ing that we shall not, for a period of, say, 20
years, purchase, use, nor have in our possession
any articles of German manufacture.
The name of the course I am pro-
posing is the boycott. It is an ugly term,
but we must face facts and put aside old
fears of names. A national boycott of German
goods and German trade is a necessity if
we desire to delay the recurrence of war; for
tariffs can be undermined or surmounted, and we
need a second line of defence. We must, there-
fore, solemnly, sacredly, and relentlessly vow our-
selves as patriots and lovers of peace, to deny
Germany any further opportunity to develop
economically at our expense. That is to say, we
must sturdily reject the products she will offer
us.
Every responsible Briton in the Empire
should immediately make himself a propagandist
of this policy, and by day and by night teach his
or her fellow-citizens to regard it as an unpa-
triotic, shameful and dishonorable thing to own
or to use or to control any product of German in-
dustry—be it no more than a lead pencil. The
leaders of thought in every British community
THE RED BOOK.


should consider it a duty to spread this gospel and
to make it part and parcel of the public opinion
of the nation, to the end that our most careless
and thoughtless citizens will at length dread to
break the unwritten law as actively as though it
were a statute.
The pacifist-at-any-price will no doubt de-
nounce the above policy as harsh and cruel —
arguing that instead of boycotting Germany we
should endeavor to convert the German people
with kindness and make them our prosperous and
happy friends.
My reply is—the thing is hopeless. Wild
beasts may be tamed by sweet affections, but not
the German race. It is because wild beasts are
non-moral and unreasoning creatures; whereas
the people of Germany are at the same time im-
moral and highly intellectual beings, and they
have deliberately adopted violence for their logic
and war for their religion.
The Germans have utterly denied and irre-
trievably abandoned the aims and principles
which animate all moral nations. Consider their
treatment of Belgium, a country they had
pledged their national honor to protect. The Bel-
gians are a small and peaceful and pitifully in-
offensive race. Germany saw their weakness and
coveted their treasures. She put forth her gigan-
tic strength and trampled them into the dust.
During the last few months German troops have
murdered thousands of Belgian soldiers, and
massacred hundreds of innocent Belgian civi-
THE RED BOOK.


Hans of both sexes. They have outraged innu-
merable Belgian women, and put scores of grey-
heads and infants to death ly torture. They have
sacked and burned countless Belgian cities, vil-
lages and towns; and to put a crown upon their
chivalry they have instituted the practice of
marching into battle behind a screen of Belgian
women and children.
How can we make friends with such a
people % How can we hold any sort of commerce
with them without forfeiting our self-respect?
What have they in common with us ?
I declare with emphasis, it is every civilised
nation’s duty to send these human tigers into Cov-
entry until the prostration of their minds and the
prostitution of their morals to the diabolic servi-
tude of inhumanity has been sincerely repented
and effectively redeemed.
I declare with emphasis it is every English-
man’s duty, if only in order to demonstrate his
reverence for women, to refuse to hold any sort
of intercourse with Germany.
And again I declare that it is every English-
woman’s duty—l could even say every woman's
duty—so to act towards Germany as to convince
the world that the female sex is interested in
making outrages against women eternally impos-
sible.
One more consideration yet demands atten-
tion. It is this. The war has sacrificed, and will
have sacrificed before it terminates, hundreds of
thousands of precious lives. Inasmuch as Ger-
TEE BED BOOK.


many forced the war upon the world, she is di-
rectly responsible for every life cut short so ruth-
lessly. Now, regard for the sacredness of human
life is the dividing line between civilisation and
savagery. What quality of regard has Germany
exhibited ? Good Heaven! She has shown her-
self as willing to devote battalions of her own
men to annihilation at the cannon’s mouth as she
has been ferociously eager to exterminate her
adversaries.
Germany is a twentieth century nation
reverted of fixed and inveterate intention to the
palaeolithic era. We should be more logical to
make housefellows of Papuan cannibals than to
fraternise with any of the “supermen” of Ger-
many. The Papuan has at least some excuse for
his man-eating proclivities, but what excuse can
the German people offer for their callous
butchery of helpless Belgians and for their abom-
inable ravishments of pure and noble women %
No—we are under no obligation to apologise
for the boycott. It is both our right to use it and
our duty. We must use it without hate, but also
we must use it without remorse, and use it as a
stern necessity—as a plain and useful method of
simultaneously preserving ourselves and con-
vincing Germany that she must either disown her
bestial contempt for human life and human
rights and improve her morals and her manners,
or remain a poor and isolated race.
She entered upon the war in a spirit of reck-
less self-confidence, knowing that if she won the
TEE RED BOOK.


world would be hers, and believing that if she lost
she would nevertheless be able to persuade the
world to resume intercourse with her on the old
basis—for the sake of peace.
We must teach her she has erred. We must
show her that we understand her—and her plans.
We must demonstrate to her that, although civi-
lised men and women do not necessarily hate bri-
gands and burglars, they nevertheless are unwill-
ing to accept self-convicted burglars and rav-
ishers and brigands as their trading equals, their
companions or their friends.
I come now to the third and final platform
of the policy. After the war it is certain there
will be a great exodus of population from Ger-
many. Tens and, maybe, hundreds of thousands
of impoverished Germans will be constrained to
roam abroad in search of an employment not pos-
sible to find immediately in their economically
debilitated country. Where will these people go ?
We need care little, provided they do not emi-
grate to Britain or to the Dominions.
With regard to Australia, we have room for
five times our present population. And popula-
tion is Australia’s sorest national need. But we
do not want Germans here. They make good citi-
zens as a rule; but we should invincibly resolve
omr minds to do without them, as a mere matter
of common prudence. Experience teaches. And
what is our experience ?
THE RED BOOK.


Think of the concrete emplacements for
siege guns built by German firms in time of peace
at Willesden, at Antwerp, and at Maubeuge.
Consider the legion of naturalised Germans
—spies and traitors—who abused the hospitality
of Britain to intrigue for her destruction; who
entered England as welcome guests and employed
their opportunities to plot her downfall before
the war, and duping the war to send secret infor-
mation to the enemy.
And we had spies, too, in Australia—hosts of
spies—although our country is so far removed
from the battlefields of Europe. Many of them
came here years ago, and made homes amongst
us. We treated them as brothers. We supplied
them with land, we advanced them public money,
we granted them every possible facility to share
in our prosperity.
And what was the recompense they paid us ?
Immediately war broke out they endeavored (not
always vainly) to betray us. Not for one mo-
ment do I accuse the majority of our German
citizens of any sort of treachery. It is my belief
that the majority remained loyal despite the tug-
gings of memoried associations at their heart-
strings. But the fact remains—a minority was
treacherous, and dangerously treacherous. So
much so, indeed, that we were compelled to enact
drastic and unprecedented laws to deal with them
for our protection.
The conclusion is—we have as many German
citizens in Australia as we require. Most of them
THE BED BOOK.


are honorable men and women, of whom we are
entitled to be proud.
But there is a manifest risk in acquiring
more, knowing as we do that war is Germany’s
religion, and that newcomers are more likely to
be and to remain German spies than to become
loyal Australian citizens.
Let us, then, round off and perfect the policy
of Tariff Protection, Imperial Reciprocal Cus-
toms Preference, and Boycott of German pro-
ducts, by rigidly excluding German emigrants
from access to the Commonwealth.
TEE BED BOOK.


VIII.
THE POLICY TABULATED.
(1) To protect our workers and manufacturers
effectively against foreign competition
with high customs duties, and to encourage
the establishment of new industries by
Governmental bonuses.
(2) To grant Preferential Tariff rates to goods
manufactured by Britons in other parts
of the British Empire.
(3) To persuade the Imperial Government and
the Governments of the Dominions mutu-
ally to reciprocate in Tariff concessions in
order that the trade and commerce of the
Empire should be carried on to the fullest
possible extent within the Empire.
(4) To impose customs supercharges on all
articles and goods of German origin,
manufacture or derivation.
(5) Never to buy from any merchant, home or
foreign, any articles or goods of German
origin, manufacture or derivation.
(6) To boycott local tradesmen who import or
stock German goods.
THE RED BOOK.


(7) To create and foster into active growth a
public opinion which will make it impos-
sible for careless individuals to purchase,
use, or possess German goods.
(8) Never to travel in a German steamer or a
German ship.
(9) Never to employ German ships or steamers
for the transport or conveyance of our in-
dustrial products.
(10) To regard it as a shameful, unpatriotic and
dishonorable thing to hold any sort of com-
merce with Germany.
(11) To restrict and prevent the immigration of
Germans.
(12) To teach our children in all our academies
and schools a proper execration of the
German moral system in order that the
next generation may understand, and if
need be, carry on our policy.
THE RED BOOK.


A WORD TO THE SOFT-HEARTED.
The British are distinguished from the
Germans by their larger charity, their juster,
more tolerant and kindly dispositions. The
Germans despise us for these gentle traits.
To them we seem to be always thanking
God, like the Pharisees, that we are not as
other people are; and they believe that we
practice virtue as a mask to hide our decadence
and weakness. We are neither decadent nor
weak; but we really are kind, and it will cost
us all a pang to harden our hearts against post-
bellum commerce with the enemy. To those of us
who will most suffer from the discipline I advo-
cate, those of us whose hearts are tenderest, I
suggest this reconciling thought:—Consider why
it is that the neat little shopkeepers of Belgium
and the sooty-faced tribesmen of Morocco and
Algeria are comrades in this war; why shirted
peasants from the Ukraine, moujiks from
Siberia, Sikhs and Gurkhas from Hindustan,
stalwart “cornstalks” from Australia, Anglo-
Saxon plainsmen and French Arcadians from
Canada, peaceful farmers from New Zealand,
and the wild mountaineers of Servia and Mon-
TEE RED BOOK .


tenegro are fighting shoulder to shoulder with the
armies of France, Russia, Britain and Japan
against the serried might of Teutonism. And con-
sider why it is that Italy has withdrawn from the
Triple Alliance and turned her back on Ger-
many ; and why Bulgaria, Rumania, Greece and
Portugal are all anxious to join the Allies in the
field. Consider also why it is that Germany’s
sole friend in all the world is Turkey—a nation
whose name is a synonym in two hemispheres for
all that is depraved, diseased, corrupt and bar-
barous. Reflect upon this contrast and be com-
forted, be strong. There is a logic in it to compel
the softest heart to oppose Germany in war and
in peace until the dreadful moral system which
rules and wields and animates the Germans is no
more.
THE RED BOOK.


MINING STANDARD
List of War Publications
WAR IN THE PACIFIC. A novel skilfully introducing
our fight with the Germans in the Pacific. By
GERMANY AND GOOD FAITH. By E. H. G. Oliphant.
250 pages demy octavo .. .. 3/6, by post 3/7
THE BARBARIAN AND HIS METHODS: Who Lifted
the Lid off Hell? German Bribery of the Press
(Official). The Kaiser’s White Book (Highly
Colored). Germany’s Ten Commandments. In
One Book 6d., by post 7d.
THE WHITE BOOK (Correspondence respecting the
European Crisis) 6d., by post 7d.
MILITARY WAR MAP (Published by authority of
Defence Department) 1/-, by post 1/1
COMMENTS ON THE WAR. (By the Author of
“Germany and Good Faith.”) 56 pages .. ..
6d., by post 7d.
THE EUROPEAN WAR AND HOW IT BEGAN. 32
pages 6d., by post 7d.
THE RED BOOK—A Post Bellum Policy for the
British People, and more particularly for the
People of Australia. By Ambrose Pratt .. ..
6d., by post 7d.
OTHER BOOKS IN ACTUAL PREPARATION.
Ambrose Pratt
1/6, by post 1/7
Published by
CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Mining Standard.
AUSTRALIA.


THE
India Rubber, Gutta Percha
and Telegraph Works Co.
Limited,
WORKS —SILVERTOWN, LONDON, ENGLAND.
HEAD OFFICE & WAREHOUSE —100-108 CANNON
ST., LONDON, E.C.
Established —England, 1858; Australia, 1885.
Directors:
Major LEONARD DARWIN, Chairman.
Lt.-Gl. A. WESTON JARVIS, C.M.G.
CHAS. H. MOORE, Esq. NIGEL HANBURY, Esq.
Managing Directors:
CHRISTIAN HAMILTON GRAY, Esq.
WILLIAM ERNEST GRAY, Esq.
As Manufacturing Electrical Engineers and
Contractors the I.R.G.P. & T.W. Co. Ltd. (The
SILVERTOWN COMPANY) is among the
oldest and foremost in the Empire, having
been the first to manufacture Dynamos in
England.
They are equally well known as Rubber
Manufacturers, among their best known pro-
ducts being the world-famous PALMER
CORD TYRE.
They are an entirely BRITISH Company, and
by giving them your support, your money
goes to employ British and Australian
workers, and the profits remain within the
Empire.
Branches throughout the British Empire*
THE SILVERTOWN CO.,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, PERTH,
BRISBANE, NEWCASTLE, HOBART, LAUNCES-
TON, CHRISTCHURCH.
