

Royal Australian Historical Society
and its Work.
An Address delivered by the President (J. A. Ferguson, 8.A.,
LL.B.) to the members on the occasion of the opening
of the Historical Exhibition on November 25, 1922.
Ladies and Gentlemen, Members of the Royal Australian
Historical Society, I desire to express our regret at the absence
of His Excellency, the Governor-General, Lord Forster, and His
Excellency Sir Walter Davidson, both of whom have been pre-
vented by prior engagements from honouring us with their pre-
sence.
This is an occasion of more than ordinary significance. The
inaugural meeting having been held in the Queen’s Hall, Pitt-
street, on March 15, 1901, our Society has attended its majority.
The founders of the Society were remarkable for their de-
votion to the cause of history, their love for Australia andher
traditions, and their confidence in the glory of her destiny.
They realised that as a nation we had been careless in our
records, because life with us in the past was too experimental
and too intense to admit of very definite record. Like child-
ren, too, we had not learned the relative value of things not
purchasable as compared with money and the things that
money will buy. On the other hand, they did not confound
history with mere antiquarianism. They recognised that it
should be the aim of history to bring the past into manifest
relation to the present, and to show how historical ideas and
experiences are being constantly projected into the present, are
in fact, the controlling forces in our social and industrial life.
Every important institution of our present civilisation they
found to be the evolved product of a whole series of historical
influences, and that the greater the student’s knowledge of the
past, the clearer his appreciation of the present and its pro-
blems.


In instituting this Society, they created a force potent for
good. They turned the attention of their fellow-countrymen
to the preservation of the records of the past—the study of
those records and the interpretation and proper valuation of
the present, of the ideas and forces which are now at work
around us.
The intellectual gain to the individual student of history
is incalculable. The study of history produces a kind of men-
tal discipline; it leads to a thoughtful weighing of evidence and
arguments, a survey of both sides of a question so as to reach
a reasonable conclusion, a sound and discriminating judgment.
In the words of Mr. H. G. Wells: —“The true scientific method
is this: To trust no statements without verification; to test all
things as rigorously as possible; to keep no secrets; to attempt
no monopolies; to give out one’s best modestly and plainly,
serving no other end but knowledge.”
Finally, they understood that history clarifies and refines
patriotism. The greater our knowledge of her past, the greater
our love of our country—“country” meaning not merely land,
with all its physical content, but comprising all the struggle
and suffering, the self-denial, tragedy, and triumph of the past.
The Australia of to-day is the product of the idealism of the
past.
The work started so bravely by these men (few of whom,
alas, survive) has been steadfastly carried on. Many volumes
of papers on historical subjects have been published; the ex-
periences of our pioneers have been recorded and preserved;
historic spots have been suitably marked; and sacred sites and
buildings preserved from the ravages of the Philistines, We
have attempted to interest the young in the lessons of the past,
have supplied information most cheerfully to many inquirers,
and, last, but not least, have preached in season and out of
season, the value and the fascination of historical study.
Our Society has no reason to be ashamed of its record.
Nevertheless it has a great work to perform. Some aspects of
this I would specially stress to-night—
1. We have urgent need of a permanent home for the
"Society. Its membership was never so large, the interest of
the members never more keen. Surely success will attend our
persistent effort. We appeal to the patriotism of our success-
ful citizens. Such a building would house our records (now
of great value) and the museum of historical pictures and


relics, of which lam now about to speak more fully. It would
provide accommodation for our members and Recording Sec-
retary, and a suitable Lecture Hall. Surely there is sufficient
wealth and patriotism in New South Wales to thus crown our
endeavour. This noble country has been lifted to its greamess
and prosperity by the self-denying effort, the unstinted sacrifice
of men and women of high ideals and supreme devotion to duty.
This devotion has been displayed in exploring and pioneering
amid danger and death from drought, fire, and flood; in home-
building amid toil, isolation, and privation. The same spirit
reached its highest consummation in the sublime devotion or
the Anzacs.
The supreme work of this Society is to keep green these
glorious memories of the past; to teach the successive genera-
tions these lessons of devotion to duty. We feel we have a
right to ask the support of every good Australian in our work.
2. The Exhibition before and around you is an effective
illustration of what the Society could and would eagerly do
to make the past live again did opportunity permit.
An historical museum has long been projected. We shall
see with great anguish the dispersal of this magnificent
collection. These objects should be on permanent display, re-
inforced by many others at present easily available. Every
civilised country has its historical museums, where the different
epochs of national life are reproduced in all their detail, and
the great pictures, documents, and relics of the nation are dis-
played. Australia is singularly lacking in such _ collections.
A small but courageous attempt has been made in Hobart,
where rooms devoted to various features of colonial life have
been fitted up. These comprise (a) Aboriginal Life; {h)
the Convict System; (c) Whaling and Seafaring; (d) Military
Life, etc. Again, in Melbourne the great National War
Museum is haunted by enormous crowds. We are confident
that the concourse of citizens who will visit this exhibition and
derive interest and instruction from the exhibits will conclu-
sively demonstrate that the public desires a permanent histori-
cal museum. This Society will not rest until such a museum
is an accomplished fact.
3. Finally, our membership must be increased. We desire
to interest the great body of our fellow-citizens in our past and
its lessons. It is futile to attempt this merely by lectures and
publications, attractive though these be. Our attack must
be more subtle.


Firstly, the child must be told in simple manner of the
heroes and the heroic exploits, of how the .common-places of
the present came to be. Then by our memorial tablets the man
in the street is informed that the ground whereon he stands
is holy ground. His interest is aroused, and he inquires tne
reason for the veneration for this building, for that pioneer..
Imperceptibly a new world opens before him.
An Exhibition such as this is the greatest missionary in
the cause of history we have. We trust its fascinating appeal
will lead many good Australians to join up and help in the
great work I have so inadequately sketched. Every citizen
who, loving his country, seeks to know its past, and to keep
alive its best traditions, is welcome to our ranks.
I have much pleasure in declaring this Exhibition open,
and in expressing the hope that our guests will enjoy their
examination of the exhibits and persuade their friends to avail
themselves of an unique opportunity.
fl K ■
