

EDUCATION
IN
IRELAND,
BEING A REPRINT OF THE 14th CHAPTER OF MEMORANDUMS
MADE IN IRELAND
IN THE AUTUMN OF
isss.
BY JOHN FORBES, M.D., F.R.S.,
HON. 8.C.L., OXON.,
PHYSICIAN TO HER MAJESTY’S HOUSEHOLD.
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES,
1858.
SYDNEY:
MIN TE D B Y READING AND W ELLB AN K
BRIDGE STREET.




INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.
ty 3 3 SS/P
Xe-s
At this juncture, when the opponents of Lord Stanley’s
system of National Education are unsparing in their efforts
to arrest its further progress in this Colony, and amongst
other means of effecting their object, do not scruple to assert
that the system has entirely failed in Ireland, it is thought
that the statements of fact, and the opinions of an unbiassed
and highly competent eye witness, as to its actual state
in that Country, in the year 1852, may be not without
their value in aiding the formation of a sound public
opinion.
With this object, the Chapter on Education is reprinted,
from Dr. Forbes’ Tour in Ireland, in a form which will
render it of easy reference to public men, and to those who
take and active interest in the great question of popular
Education.
The other portions of the work itself contain many
interesting details relative to Education, (showing more
fully the grounds on which Dr. Forbes has formed hjs
opinions,) as well as to other topics illustrative of the social
state of Ireland, rendering it well deserving of attentive
perusal.
Rerum ipsarum cognitio vera e rebus ipsis est.
Jul. Scal.
x
i..,




EDUCATION IN IRELAND.
The visit to the Model Schools in Marlborough Street, was
brief, but sufficed to show the completeness of the arrange-
ments there adopted for carrying into effect all the objects of
this admirable establishment, I was fortunate to find all
the schools in active operation; and had the honour of
having the various proceedings explained to me, after the
pupils had retired, by the Resident Commissioner himself.
To give a detailed account of these would occupy more space
and time than I have now at ray disposal; and this is the
less necessary, as all the essential details may be found in the
excellent Reports annually published by the Commissioners.
Beside the ordinary branches of instruction, music and draw-
ing are especially cultivated in this institution ; and in the
upper school, I heard and saw specimens- of both, which
would have done credit to the pupils in any academy.
Perhaps the most important department in the institution
is that devoted to the instruction of teachers for the National
Schools; and it is conducted in the same efficient manner as
the other departments. The only defect seems to be the
insufficient length of time the teachers are retained under
training; and this defect the Commissioners are endeavouring
to remedy by every means in their power. The number of
teachers trained in these schools in the year 1851, was 257,
viz. 169 males and 88 females. In the school for training
the female teachers, I was gratified to see that the important
art of cookery was taught among other accomplishments ; a
species of knowledge which, beside its advantage to the
individual, may prove beneficial to the whole country, as


these young women are likely to be spread through every
part of it.
The number of pupils on the rolls of these schools on the
30th September, 1851, was—males, 697; females, 473;
infants, 364 ; making a total of 1534 ; the daily average
attendance during the year being about 1200,
following Table shows the number on the rolls in
each school, for the week ending the 30th October, 1851,
with the religious denominations of the children
Boys.
Roman Catholics 500
Infants,
Church of England .. ..I 72
Presbyterians j 9
Protestant Dissenters .. ~ ■ 1
4
0
2
Jews 0
Total 582
391 |
This Table shows, as decidedly as any of our former
Tables, how predominant the Catholic element is, even in the
Schools of the Capital; evidencing there, as elsewhere, what
there, as elsewhere, what
is the characteristic religion of the land, and how the Church
of the minority holds her children aloof from the fountains
of instruction open to them by a paternal government.
It is gratifying to the friends of Ireland to be able to
state that, in that most important of all the departments of
social economy— Education, the country is, comparatively
speaking, greatly advanced. The numerous statistical
notices, under this head, given in almost every one of the
preceding Chapters, must have made this sufficiently evident
to my readers. The subject is, however, of such very great
importance, in relation to the actual condition and future
progress of the Irish people, that it claims some more special
notice than I have hitherto been able to bestow on it. I wish


it were in my power to do full justice to it; but I must be
contented with merely giving, in this place, a few additional
details of a somewhat more general character than would
have been proper when taking my Memorandums on the
spot.
The great characteristic feature in the system of Educa-
tion in Ireland, is that presented by the admirable Institution,
called the Board of National Education ; and the
remarks I am about to make will be confined, in a great
measure, to an exposition of its general plans, and the happy
results of its labours. To those who desire fuller information
respecting the proceedings of this Institution, I recommend a
perusal of the Official Reports adverted to above. For much
additional statistical matter of a like kind, I must also refer
to the Annual Reports of the numerous private societies,
instituted and maintained with the same benevolent object of
instructing the people ; and to that admirable epitome of
information of all sorts concerning Ireland, ‘ Thom’s Irish
Almanac.’
Until the establishment of the National Board in the
year 1831-2, Ireland, like England, was almost entirely
dependant on the exertion of individuals, acting singly, or
combined in societies, for the education of the great mass of
her people. A good many of these old societies still subsist;
but several of them have been absorbed by newer ones
having the same general objects, particularly by the great
Church Education Society. Among those partially or
totally suppressed societies, may be mentioned the old
Parochial Schools, mainly supported by the clergy; the
schools of the Association for Discountenancing Vice; the
London Hibernian Society ; the Chartered Schools of the
Incorporated Society, &c. The following list gives as near
an approximation as I can make to the present number
receiving instruction in all the schools in Ireland, high and
low. I have no doubt that the statement is far from being
correct; and 1 believe it can hardly be made so at present,
without a special official inquiry; its most prominent


(1.) Trinity College, Dublin ; and Queen’s Colleges
of Cork, Belfast, Galway
1600
(2.) Endowed Schools of Royal and Private Foun-
dation
1665
(3.) Schools on the Foundation of Erasmus Smith .
6535
(4.) College of Maynooth, and other Catholic
Colleges and Superior Schools
2200
(5.) College of St, Columba, Belfast Institution and
Academy, and other Protestant Schools of a
superior class
1000
inaccuracy will be found, I suspect, to lie on the side of
defect as to numbers; but I have been unwilling to run
any risk of exaggeration in a matter of such great importance.
That I cannot have made any great mistake on the other side
of the question, must appear from the fact, that nine-tenths,
at least, of the numbers given, are taken from official, or at
least authentic, documents :
IRISH COLLEGES AND SCHOOLS, „ N °- of
(1.) From the College Calendars.
Scholars.
(2.) According to the Parliamentary returns, 1852 ; viz.—9 Royal schools,
14 Diocesan schools; 22 Private schools.
(3.) According to the Parliamentary return of 1826, the number of the
schools belonging exclusively to the Foundation was given as 100, containing,
according to the Protestant returns, 7824, and according to the Catholic returns,
7612 scholars: taking the average of the two returns, we have 7771 as the
number of scholars. My informant in Dublin in 1852, (see vol. I, p. 164) gives
the present number of schools as 108, and supposes the average number in each
may be about 50 : this would make the total number of scholars 5900. Now,
taking the average of the two estimates, we have 6835. Accordingly I assume
this number in the list.
(4.) The fixed complement of Maynooth is 520. There are 24 other
Catholic colleges and Educational establishments of a superior order. I have
ascertained the actual number of pupils in several of them, and from the returns
have given an average of 70 students to each, which gives the number in the
text.
(5.) The present number of students in the Protestant college of St,
Columba is 127. In the other Protestant academies in Ulster, and Protestant
schools elsewhere, I have allowed 873 pupils to make up the round number of
1000 given in the table.


No. ol'
Scholars.
(6.) Charitable Institutions and Societies, with
Schools for the Maintenance and Education
of Children of particular classes, (Orphan
Schools, &c., &c.) 5000
(7) Private Pay-Schools of all kinds and for both
sexes, besides those included in the list of the
Superior Schools, (Nos. 2,3, 5,) say . . . 20,000
(8.) The Schools under the National Board . . . 520,401
(9.) Schools connected with the Church Education
Society 103,878
(10 ) Schools of the Irish Society 26,322
(11.) Irish Mission Schools 3500
(12.) Capt. Robinson’s Schools, and Incorporated
Society’s Schools (20) 2636
(6.) Looking at the great number of the establishments for Orphans in all
the large towns of Ireland, (there are upwards of 20 in Dublin alone,) and
reckoning the various Charity schools devoted to the children of different classes
of society, a very numerous list, I believe the number of 5000 assumed in the
Tables is considerably below the truth. See Thom’s Almanac for an account
of many of these schools.
(7.) In the Second Report of the Educational Inquiry in Ireland (1826),
there is a return under the head “ Pay Schools unconnected with Societies,”
comprising no less than 9352 schools, containing, according to the Protestant
returns 394,732, and, according to the Catholic returns, 403,777 scholars. In
the same report, under the head of “ Parish Schools,” constituted by the act of
Henry VIII, and superintended by the Clergy of the Established Church, 827
schools and 40,758, or 44,056 scholars (according to the Par. Com. returns
respectively) are returned. Now, assuming as I have done, that the great body
of scholars then provided for in these schools have been absorbed by the
National schools and the Church Educational Society’s schools, I can hardly
believe but that the estimate of 20,000, assumed in my list for these two classes
of schools, must be below the truth; but as I prefer being charged with
understating, rather than overstating, I allow the estimate to stand.
(8.) From the Report of 1852.
(9.) From the Report of 1852.
(10.) From the Report of 1851.
(11.) From the Report of the Society, 1852.
(12.) From a statement in the Church Education Society’s Report, 1852.


No. of
Scholars
(13.) Schools of 35 Workhouses not in connection
with the National Board 2000
(14.) Schools of the London Companies in Ulster . 2000
(15.) Presbyterian Mission Schools, including the
Belfast Ladies’ Schools, and Schools attached
to Presbyterian Churches, Baptist and
Wesleyan ditto 8000
(16.) Schools of the Christian Brothers, 1852 . , . 10,000
(17.) Nunnery Schools 12,000
(18.) Children in the Sunday Schools, not attending
other Schools. 100,000
828,737
Assuming, then, that the numbers here given are approxi-
matively accurate, and that the total number of children and
young persons at present under education in Ireland is, as
stated in the Table, 828,737; it follows, by comparing this
number with the population in 1851 (6,515,794), that the
proportion of scholars to the whole population is 1 in
7.86.
This estimate, which I regard as below the truth, places
(13.) Calculated proportionately from the other Workhouse Schools.
(14.) Calculated from the Reports of the Schools, (see vol. 11., Chap. VI.,
of the present work.)
(15.) Estimated from the Reports of the Societies and private information.
(16.) According to the Returns of 1826, the pupils of these Schools amounted
to 5541; the present number is taken from the Catholic Registry.
(17.) According to the Returns of 1826, the childeren in these Schools
amounted to 7575. I believe I am considerably underrating the present
number by fixing it at 12.000,
(18.) I hesitated some time before I admitted this class of scholars at all into
my list; but as they are not accounted for under any other heading, and they
receive no other schooling than that afforded by the Sunday Schools, I have
thought it just to add them to my list. The total number of children attending
Sunday t chools in Ireland on the Ist July, 1852, was no less than 222,028 : and
as it is stated in the Report, that, about 100,000 of these do not attend any
other Schools, I have placed this number in my list.


Ireland, in respect of Education, very far above England,
according to the estimate that has been usually hitherto
made of the attendants on her schools ; and places her still
above England, even according to the greatly-improved
estimate supplied by the Census of 1851 We had been
accustomed to consider the proportion of children attending
schools in England, as not being higher than 1 in 14 or 15 ;
and Mr. Kay, in his book on Education, makes the pro-
portion, in 1850, to be lin 14. In my calculations 1 had
accordingly assumed this proportion as approximatively
correct, and had so recorded it in these pages. But since
this Chapter was at press, Lord John Russell has announced
in Parliament, (April 4th, 1853,) the proportion as ascer-
tained by the last Census, instead of 1 in 14, to be
1 in 8.5.
This very gratifying correction of an erroneous
opinion, greatly lessens the assumed superiority of Ireland
as to Education ; though, as already stated, it still
leaves her the superiority. Both returns are most satis-
factory, as showing how both countries may now compare
themselves, with less shame, with the well-educated countries of
the Continent, or, at least, with some of those countries some
ten or twenty years before the present time. If the compari-
son were now made, it is probable that the continental nations
would be found to present a much higher educational
proportion than appears in the following Table. This Table
I have condensed from the work of Mr. Kay, already quoted,
interpolating Ireland, in its proper place, and transferring
England from the lowest place assigned to her by Mr. Kay,
to the place she is entitled to occupy, according to the author-
ity of the last Census.


kjislHPvLil U 1/fW UO/fcO/
in different Countries
! ]
Date of the Estimate. ! g c
tin
. 1841
. .. 1831 to 1844
. .. 1838 .
. 1838
1838
. .. 1834
. .. 1851
. .. 1838
. v . 1831
. .. 1842
. .. 1843
; .. ! 1851
. .. ! 1843
, .. 1851
1843
.. .. 1836
n to believe that Irelant
st of education, Ions’
Proportion
of Scholars to the General
Country.
Population
Saxony
Switzerland
Wirtemburg
Prussia
Baden (Duchy)
. Denmark
Ireland
Holland
Bavaria .. .. .
Scotland
Bohemia
England
Austria
1 cel and
France
! Proportion of the
I School Population to
the whole Population.
1 to 5.0
1 to 5.7
1 to 6.0
1 to 6.0
1 to 6.0
1 to 7.0
1 to 7.8
1 to 8.0
1 to 8.0
1 to 8.0
1 to 8.5
1 to 8.5
1 to 9.0
1 to 9.0
1 to 10.5
1 to 10.7
Belgium
There is reason to believe that Ireland was in advance of
England, in respect of education, long before the epoch of
the National Schools. The following little history is not
introduced as a proof of this superiority, but merely as an
apposite illustration, which I have received from an officer
who was present during the occurrence:
In the beginning of the present century, an Irish militia
regiment happened to be quartered in the same locality as the
Middlesex Militia of that day. A question having arisen
between the two commanding officers of the respective corps,
on this very subject of education in the two countries, it was
agreed to have it decided by a bet after actual examination
of the individual soldiers. The champion of the Irish won
his bet, as it was found that the proportion of men who could
read and write was greater in the Irish regiment.
But it is the establishment of the system of National


i
Schools in the year 1831-2, that Ireland must regard as the
foundation of all her present superiority and all her future
expected progress in Education : a measure second in real
importance to no social or domestic enactment of the British
Government, and almost worthy to be compared with that
noble act of the Scottish Parliament which established the
system of parochial schools in that country in the year
1696. 1
No one can examine the series of interesting documents,
published by the Commissioners under the form of Annual
Reports to the Lord Lieutenant, without being impressed
with the singular zeal, industry, and impartiality, which have
characterised the proceedings of the authorities appointed to
carry the government plan of Education into effect; and no
one can contemplate the actual results of their labours, as
seen in the present extent and condition of the schools, with-
out acknowledging that they have achieved, under great
difficulties, a truly-national work, already benefiting Ireland
in a very high degree, and, no doubt, destined to benefit her
in a still higher degree, through many generations.
The great obstacles the Commissioners have had to
contend with from the beginning, has been the prejudices
engendered by the different forms of relegion prevalent in
Ireland. Most carefully and wisely were the plans of the
Government framed, with the view of meeting the difficulties
arising from this cause ; and nothing could exceed the tender
care evinced by the Commissioners towards all objectors, in
putting these plans into execution. But no courtesies, no
concessions, no modifications consistent with the grand
fundamental principle on which the system was founded,
have been found adequate to meet the narrow views which
1 Although the formal statute establishing the present system of Parochial
Schools in Scotland was only passed at the above date, the Schools had been
virtually established long before: first, in 1616, by an act of the Privy
Council, ratified by Parliament in 1633 ; and secondly, in 1646, during the
Commonwealth, This last act was repealed at the Restoration, but was
afterwards incorporated in the “ Act tor settling Schools,” in 1696.


have unfortunately been adopted by the clergy of the
Established Church in Ireland. The consequence has been,
that though the great mass of the childeren of the lower
classes of the Catholic population have obtained nearly all
the benefits the schools are calculated to bestow, the children
of the same classes belonging to the Protestant Establishment,
have derived very little advantage from them. For this
great and irreparable loss to the poor, the ministers and
gentry of the Established Church in Ireland, are entirely
responsible; and although sectarian prejudice may for a
time make them blind to the evil they have done, and are
still doing, there can be but one opinion among enlightened
and impartial men as to their comduct. From a spirit of
hard sectarianism, not unmixed, it is to be feared, with
feelings of even a lower kind, they have sacrificed the highest
interests of those who have a claim on them for direction in
the right way ; and have, so far, done what in them lay, to
check the progress of their country in the career of improve-
ment and happiness.
In making this general charge against the clergy of the
Established Church in Ireland, I believe myself warranted
by their conduct generally. It would, however, be unjust
not to admit, that there have been some brilliant exceptions ;
—few in number, it is true, but sufficient to show how
delightfully different would have been the result had such
conduct been general and not exceptional. It is hardly
necessary to name Archbishop Whately, as the noble leader
of this liberal band.
It would have much less surprised most men in this
country, had the opposition arisen on the other side. But it
is undoubtedly true that, on this great occasion, it is the mem-
bers of the Catholic Church who have exhibited the liberality of
views, and the members of the Protestant Church who have
shown the narrow-mindedness and bigotry ; the two establish-
ments appearing, for once, to have changed sides. From
the very beginning, the Catholic clergy, generally speaking,
have been cordial supporters of the system ; though here and


there, and particularly in the diocese of Tuam, there has
been occasional opposition manifested.
One of the causes said to lie at the root of the opposition
by the English clergy, is the open exposure which would
necessarily be made of the comparative numbers of the two
churches, —and, consequently, the very inferior numbers of
their church, —if the children all congregated under the same
roof. Another cause alleged is, their unwilligness to mix on
equal terms, as they must necessarily do, in the supervision
of the schools, with their unendowed brethren of the Catholic
Church Painful as it is to admit these, or any other causes
not based on purely religious grounds, as helping to account
for the opposition of the English clergy, one is almost
compelled to have recourse to some such theory of inferior
motives; seeing that it is impossible to find any sufficient
reason of a real religious character to justify their conduct.
According to the provisons of the original plan laid down
by the Government, and most rigidly enforced by the Com-
missioners, all interference of the clergy of one sect with the
children of another, has been most carefully guarded against;
while all possible freedom of access has been secured to the
pastors for the express purpose of instructing the children of
their own flocks, in their own religious views. This must be
obvious to every visitor of these schools; and has been
made public in almost every report issued by the Com-
missioners. “The principle of the system is, and has
been from the beginning, that the National Schools
shall be open alike to Christians of all denominations;
and that, accordingly, no child shall be required to be
present at any religious instruction of which his parents or
guardians may disapprove; and that opportunities shall be
afforded to all children to receive separately, at particular
periods, such religious instruction as their parents or
guardians may provide for them.” 1 “One day, at least, in
each week (independently of Sunday) is to be set apart for
Eleventh Report, 184'i.


the religious instruction of the children, on which day
such pastors or other persons as are approved of by the
parents or guardians of the children, shall have access to
them for that purpose. I'’ 1 '’ The managers of schools are also
expected, should the parents of any child desire it, to afford
convenient opportunity and facility for the same purpose,
either before or after the ordinary school business, on other
days of the week. “ Any arrangement of this description
that may be made, is to be publicly notified in the schools,
in order that those children, and those only, may be present
at the religious instruction, whose parents and guardians
approve of their being so. 111
I can testify, from personal examination in every part
of Ireland, that these rules are rigidly adhered to by the
masters of the schools; and I believe that any attempt at
proselytism by them, is a thing unheard of.
The melancholy result of the opposition on the part of
the clergy of the Established Church has been, as above
stated, to exclude the great majority of the Protestant
children of the more Catholic parts of Ireland, from all
participation in the benefits of the National Schools,
This fact will appear sufficiently established by the
results of my own numerous enquiries in the schools, as
detailed in this work, the whole aspect of the schools, out of
Ulster, being essentially Catholic. In twelve schools visited
by me in Leinster, Munster and Connaught, containing in
all about 3000 children, not more than about 30 Protestants
were reported to me, being in the proportion of 1 Protestant
to 100 Catholics; while in four schools in Ulster, the
numbers were 440 Catholics to 141 Protestants, or about 1
Protestant to 3 Catholics.
It would appear, however, from the more extensive, and,
no doubt, more accurate inquiries instituted by the Board
itself, last year, at the request of the Lord Lieutenant, that
the proportion of Protestants in the schools generally,—
1 Second Report (Appendix), 1835.


Established Church
Presbyterians
40,fil8
Other Protestant Dissenters
1,908
Catholics ..
Established Church
.. 1
in
19.0
Presbyterians and other Protestant Dissenters ..
.. 1
in
11.5
Catholics ..
.. 1
in
1.15
Protestants of all denominations..
.. 1
in
7.3
including, of course, Ulster, —is considerably greater than
that just stated. Out of a total of 491,927 children, the
numbers belonging to each of the different religions were as
follows:
This would give the relative proportions in the schools,
as follows :
But even in these returns, it is evident that the
Established Church exhibits her special backwardness to
join the National Schools in comparison with the other
classes of Protestants; unless, indeed, we are to assume that
these last-named classes have increased of late years, in a
ratio vastly beyond that of the English Church. In the
returns of 1834, the proportion of the members of the
Established Church to Protestants of all other denominations,
was nearly as 8 to 6 ; but in these returns from the Schools,
the proportion is quite different, and even more than
reversed, there being only 5 members of the English Church
to 9 Presbyterians.
The following Table, however, shows results considerably
more satisfactory, and seems to prove that the opposition of
the Established Church is already beginning to relax,
although still only permitting a disparaging comparison with
tire Protestant Dissenters. It is taken from the Head
Inspector’s Reports of Model Schools, in the year 1851.


Model Schools.
No. of Children of each Religious Denomination
in each School.
Newry
Ballymena
Coleraine
Baillieborough
Clonmel
Presbyterians,
and other
Dissenters.
But dismissing from consideration these miserable
sectarian views, we must admit that the success of the
National School System, viewed as a system of National
Education, has been most satisfactory; leaving no
doubt, in the mind of liberal and impartial judges, of its
ultimate triumph over every form of obstruction that has
been raised or may be raised against it. It is believed
that the only event that could frustrate such a result, —
namely, the overthrow of the very principles of the system
by government, in accordance with the wishes of the
obstructing minority,—is one which, in the present and
prospective condition of the world, may be regarded as
next to impossible.
The Board of National Education, as already stated,
was founded by Government Order in the year 1831.
Although it commenced operations immediately, a good
deal of time was necessarily consumed in preliminary
arrangements, so that it did not publish its first Report
until 1834. The Society was further strengthened by
being incorporated by Royal Charter in the year 1845 ; the
Charter granting all the usual powers accorded in similar
cases.
The government of the Institution is exclusively vested
in a body of Commissioners, who are not to exceed fifteen,
but may consist of any less number. As vacancies occur,


Years.
■N o. of Schools
in operation.
1833
789
1835
1106
1836
1181
1837
1300
1838
1384
1839
1581
1840
1978
1841
2337
1842
2721
1843
2912
1844
3153
1845
3426
1846
3637
1847
3825
1848
4109
1849
4321
1850
4547
1851
4704
they are filled up by the Lord-Lieutenant. The present
number of Commissioners is fourteen, one of whom, the
Eight Hon. Alexander Macdonnell, is resident. There
are two chief secretaries. The present Staff employed under
the Board, in the supervision of the schools, consists of the
following officers :
4 Head Inspectors.
1 Agricultural Inspector.
36 District Inspectors,
8 Sub-Inspectors.
1 Agricultural ditto.
The whole of Ireland is divided into 44 districts, each of
which is superintended by an Inspector or Sub-Inspector.
In their last Report, the Commissioners express their inten-
tion to augment the number of both the Head and District
Inspectors.
The following Table exhibits at one view, the progress
of the Society from its commencement up to the year 1851.
No. of. Children
on the Rolls.
Annual
Expenditure.
107,042
145,521
153,707
166,929
169,548
192,971
232,560
281,849
319,792
355,320
395,550
432,844
456,410
402,632
507,469
480,623
511,239
520,401
£ s. d.
63,146 0 0
63,283 16 11
76,205 6 8
89,501 13 8
86,152 13 3
102,318 14 5
127,777 7 0
138,246 16 7
153,473 17 2
158,564 4 4


The following is a List of the Schools in operation, and
their respective attendance, in each of the different provinces,
during the half-year ending 30th of September, 1851.
No. of Schools. No. of Scholars.
The following Table shows the distribution of the Schools
throughout Ireland, according to provinces ; with the
proportion of schools and of scholars to the population of
each province; and also the proportional number of scholars
in each school in the respective
the schools and scholars are
Report of the National Board
of the National Board
from the Census of the
provinces The numbers of
taken from the Eighteenth
(1851), and the population
Province.
same year
Proportion of
Schools to the
Population.
Proportion of
Scholars to the
Population.
Proportional No. of
Scholars in each
Ulster . . . Ito 1071
Munster . . . Ito 1705
Leinster . • . Ito 1449
Connaught . . Ito 1735
1 to 13
1 to 11
1 to 12
1 to 14
School.
This Table exhibits a remarkable peculiarity in regard to
the province of Ulster, indicating, I presume, the more
effective system of instruction pursued in the schools of that
province. The peculiarity is this, —that while the propor-
tion of the population under instruction is greater in two of
the other provinces and nearly as great in the third, the
proportion of schools is much greater in Ulster, and
consequently the proportion of scholars in each school much
less. It admits of no question that the instruction of pupils
by one master or mistress must be greatly more effective,
when the number to be instructed is only 80, than when the


number is one half or two thirds greater. It is impossible
for one teacher to do full justice to 146 pupils, as in the
schools of Munster, or even to 117 or 118, as in the schools
of Leinster and Connaught. I regret that the mode of
returns given in the Church Education Society’s Reports,
prevents my being able to indicate the proportional numbers
in its schools according to the provinces.
From the data supplied by the Returns of the National
Schools, as given above, it would appear that the desire of
education among the lower classes of Ireland is quite as
great in the Catholic as in the Protestant districts.
I subjoin a Table drawn up on the same principle as the
above, in regard to the children in the Sunday Schools of
Ireland, from which it will appear that a very different
distribution of schools and scholars takes place in the
different provinces. I stated above that the total number of
scholars in the Sunday Schools of Ireland was on the Ist
January 1852, 222,628; and I may here add, as giving the
key to the results exhibited in the subjoined Table, that the
Sunday Schools, though by no means excluding Catholics, do
so practically, in a great measure, from the fact of being
scriptural schools, according to the tenets of Protestantism
Province.
Proportion of Proportion of
Schools to the Scholars to the
Population. ! Population.
Ulster
Leinster..
Munster,.
Connaught
1 to 1028 1 to 13
1 to 4575 1 to 105
1 to 3550 1 to 151
Ito 4561 \ Ito 80
In this Table Ulster appears pre-eminent not merely in
the number of schools, but in the proportion of her scholars
to the general population.
Although the National Board had complete control over
the whole of the schools in connection with them, from the
beginning, they, at first, required more or less pecuniary


support from the locality in which they are respectively
situated. The general principle on which the Commissioners
proceeded, was that of assisting local exertions for the
establishment of schools; except in the case of Model
Schools, of which they bore the whole expenses. This
requirement of local aid has, however, in a great many
instances, fallen into abeyance, the whole expense being often
now defrayed by the Board, The salaries granted to the
Teachers come under the head of gratuities ; though, for the
most part, these gentlemen receive little else in the form of
pay, except what arises from the children’s pence.
On the 31st of March, 1852, the number of Teachers of
all sorts and of both sexes, in the service of the Board, was
5822; they were divided as follows, according to their
religion:
Established Church .. .. .. .. .. .. 360
Presbyterians.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 760
Other Protestant Dissenters .. .. .. .. .. 49
Roman Catholics .. .. .. .. .. .. 4653
No evidence can be more conclusive than this, that the
National System of Education in Ireland, is, at present,
essentially one for the members of the Catholic body.
The Commissioners have been progressively augmenting
the salaries of their Teachers; but they are yet much too
small. The following is the Scale of Salaries as last
augmented, in the year 1851


An important class of Teachers in the schools, are the
Monitors. At the close of the year 1851, the number of
paid Monitors was 341, viz., eight male and four female for
each district. Their pay is as follows:—first year, U. ;
second year, 51. ; third year, *JI • ; fourth year, 8/.
One of the finest features in the Prussian system of
education is the elaborate care bestowed on the training of the
Masters, or teaching the Teachers. The Irish Commissioners
have paid all the attention possible, in their limited sphere, to
the same object; but they have not sufficient pecuniary or
educational means to effect all that is desirable. They are,
however, gradually extending their provisions in this way.
From the commencement of their operations up to the end of
the year 1851, they have sent out of their training schools
3118 Teachers. In the year 1851 only, they trained 257
National Teachers, viz. 169 males and 88 females.
It is manifest, from the whole of their Reports, how
deeply impressed the Commissioners always have been with
the importance of having a staff of well-trained Teachers;
and they seem to have done all that was practicable to create
such a staff. But the means at their disposal are totally
inadequate to raise the standard of intellectual acquirement,
among this class of men, to that point which it ought to
reach. In the first place, the period given up for their
instruction, is greatly too short for the acquisition of the
necessary knowledge ; and, in the second place, their salaries
are quite insufficient to give them that consideration in the,
eye of the public and their pupils which is essential to their
full success as Teachers ; or to enable them to attain that
position in social life which they ought to hold.
In proportion, however, as we increase the standard of
knowledge of the Teachers, we must at the same time
augment their income. Most justly does Mr. Kay remark,
that “ we must provide good situations for the teachers, or
we shall never obtain well-educated teachers for the schools
and I think the same gentleman’s estimate of what ought to


Religion of the Managers.
Number of Managers.
Number of Schools.
Clerical.
Lay.
Established Church
67
229
554
Presbyterians ....
247
151
670
Protestant Dissenters
4
12
23
Catholics
957
186
3187
be the situation of such men as not at all to high. “ Each
teacher (he says) ought to have a certain salary, of at least
50/. per annum, provided for him, as well as a house
and garden, and the school-fees.” 1
The individual schools have one or more gentlemen of
the district connected with them, who, under the name of
Patrons or Managers, are, or ought to be, the ordinary
supervisors of the schools, and have the power of nominating
the Teachers, with the sanction of the Board. In November,
1852, there were, in connection with the Board, in all, 4795
schools; and the following Table gives the number and
religion of the lay and clerical managers of 4434 of these
schools :
It will be observed in this Table, as in others, how
inferior a position is held by the Established Church, as to
the number of schools under its immediate management; and
what indicates still more strikingly the animus of the Clergy
of the Church, is the remarkable disproportion indicated
between the number of its lay and clerical managers, as
compared with the other Churches. Thus, while in the
Catholic Church, the proportion of clerical to lay managers
is as 5,1 to 1 ; and in the Presbyterian Church, as 1.6 to 1 ;
in the English Church it is only as 1 to 3.4.
Agricultural Schools. —Casual reference has been made
to these schools in several of the preceding pages, and their
high importance pointed out. There are none of the labours
1 ‘ Social 'Condition of the People.’


the Board ..
.. 12
2.
Under the management of local Patrons
.. 16
3.
Ordinary Agricultural Schools in connection with the Board
.. 38
4.
Workhouse Agricultural Schools
Total
of the Commissioners more praiseworthy than those relating
to these schools ; and none in which they seem to exhibit a
more enlightened zeal. They are every year gradually
augmenting their operations in this direction. At the close
of the year 1851 the kind and number of the Agricultural
Schools were as follows :
I. Model Agricultural Schools under the exclusive management of
When these schools have been increased four-fold, as they
will be erelong, it is not easy to over-estimate their importance
in improving the knowledge and habits of the young agri-
culturists of the country. But independently of this, the
mere practice of the art is higly beneficial in itself; “it keeps
in vigorous action the physical powers and mental faculties
of the children ; and by teaching them to labour, gives them
habits of useful industry.'” 1 At the same time, the Com-
missioners most wisely consider that all such industrial in-
struction must be kept within due bounds, and be always made
subordinate to mental culture. They say: “ The agri-
cultural and other industrial instruction which we are
endeavouring to promote, is intended by us to be only
supplementary to the ordinary branches of school instruction.
The latter is regarded as the primary object; and, according-
ly, we never make grants to schools exclusively agricultural
or industrial.'”’
Two main conclusions are manifestly deducible from the
whole of the preceding details: Ist. That the National
System of Education in Ireland has succeeded admirably
among that portion of the people who are either Catholics or
1 Eighteenth Report, 1851.
2 lbid.


Protestant Dissenters; 2nd. That it has comparatively
failed among the members of the Established Church, How-
ever much to be regretted is this incomplete success, it is
very satisfactory to know that the incompleteness attaches to
the side of the minority. Had the defalcation occurred
among the Catholics, who constitute the great body of the
people, the admirable scheme of National Education must
have been regarded as almost an entire failure. As it is, we
can only say that the success, though great, is less than it
was expected to be, might have been, or ought to have been.
The great practical question now is,—Can the obstacles to the
equal instruction of the children belonging to the Established
Church in Ireland, be removed by any interference of
Government, so as to extend to the whole of the population
the great benefits now received by a portion only ? In
considering such a question, it would evidently be most
unfair to the children of the minority to make them continue
to suffer on account of the short-sighted prejudices of their
superiors. It would be still more unfair to the children of
the majority, to make them suffer for the prejudices of
another sect. And it would be the unfairest proceeding of
all, to ruin the whole of the present admirable system of
education, by the vain attempt to conciliate its opponents by
altering its essential principles.
It is evident from several passages in the last Report of
the Commissoners that they regard the opposition of the
English Church as on the decline; and some of the statistics
given above seem to corroborate this opinion. It will, there-
fore, be but right to allow things to proceed as at present,
in the hopes that a few more years may bring about a more
satisfactory result.
So all-important, however, is Education, that its progress
cannot be allowed to be permanently impeded by the mis-
judgement of any sect or party. The children of the land
must not be permitted to fall into the ditch, because their
leaders are blind. They must be taught, though even at the
sacrifice, on the part of Government, of submitting its own


juster views to the requirements of prejudice. If the Protest-
ants of Ireland are found to persist in withholding the
childeren of their church from the National Schools, a just
and paternal rule must remember the loss and forget the
wrong; and build and endow schools for Protestants as well
as for Catholics. But the time has not yet come for making
this sacrifice.
Although I should be sorry to see any attempt now
made to alter the principles which guide the conduct of the
Commissioners of the National Schools of Ireland, as to
religious instruction, I am decidedly of opinion, that were the
Institution to be founded anew, it would be much wiser,
as leading to more harmony and to richer educational results,
to make the schools exclusively Secular Schools, as they
have been called, discarding all pretence and all attempts
to instruct the children religiously by the Masters of the
Schools. And 1 would advocate this plan even on religious
grounds alone, if on no other ; as I feel assured it would
lead to a much more complete religious education of all the
children, than is now attained either in the schools of Ireland
or England. Under the present system of what is called
religious instruction in the schools, parents and guardians,
and the clergy themselves in many cases, are lead to rely
mainly, if not altogether, on it, and so to neglect all separate
religious instruction at home or elesewhere; when the fact
unquestionably is, in a large proportion of cases at least,
that the religious teaching in the schools is very imperfect,
being too often merely technical and verbal, and learnt by
rote but not by heart. If parents capable of instructing their
children in religion, knew that it was not taught at school,
they would feel that the responsibility of this great work
necessarily devolved on themselves, and would surely act
accordingly. It will hardly be doubted that, cceteris
paribus , the instruction so given by the parents to their
children, will have a heartiness and warmth in it, which
covdd not fail to leave an impression very different from


that of the formal teaching of a hired master. In the
cases where parents are incapable of being themselves
the instructors—and even where they are so—l think
we might reasonably impose on the Clergy of every
parish or school-district the office of instructing in religion
the children of members of their own flock, and orphans of
of their own religion ; a duty they would, no doubt, like the
parents, feel the more imperative from knowing that the
entire responsibility of it was left to themselves, A suffi-
cient portion of one day in the week, or an hour each day,
mght be appropriated to the religious lessons ; and in order
that this most important duty might be fulfilled with perfect
convenience to all parties, I would have one or more rooms,
exclusively devoted to this object, attached to every school-
house, and placed in the immediate charge of the clergy.
Where it is not a mere pretence, it is certainly a delusion,
that there is any more impiety in teaching reading and
writing, and arithmetic, and geography, and history, without
any formal admixture of religious lessons, —than it is to teach
any art or trade without them. Both kinds of knowledge are,
no doubt, essential; but I maintain that here, as in so many
other departments of learning, each can be best taught by
itself. The division of labour will be found as valuable in
this, as in any other department of knowledge.
VM 'f r p
" *¥*
Reading and Wellbank, Printers, Bridge-street, Sydney.
