

INDIAN INFLUENCES
IN OLD-BALINESE ART
DR. W. F. STUTTERHEIM


INDIAN INFLUENCES IN OLD-BALINESE ART


INDIAN INFLUENCES
IN OLD-BALINESE ART
BY
DR. WILLEM F. STUTTERHEIM
LATE MEMBER OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SERVICE OF THE
NETHERLANDS EAST INDIES
THE INDIA SOCIETY
3, VICTORIA STREET, LONDON, S.W. 1
1935


Translated from the Dutch by Claire Holt.
Printed in Great Britain


CONTENTS
PAGE
List of Illustrations . . . . • vii
Preface . . , . , ix
Introduction . . . . . . xi
Bali before Hinduism , . . . . i
Bali after the Advent of Hinduism . . .6
History of Hinduistic Bali . . . .10
Religious Worship and the Cult of Kings . .18
Antiquities and their Style , . . .26
Conclusion . . . . . .40
Map of Bali . . . . .42


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
PLATE
SIVA OF BEDULU . . . . .1
MAKARA. PEDJENG . . . . .II
SIMHA. PEDJENG . . . . .11l
HEAD OF A STATUE. WANAYU . . . .IV
SEATED DEITY. SAWAH GUNUNG . . . .V
DOUBLE IMAGE OF SEATED KING AND QUEEN. PANULISAN . VI
DOUBLE IMAGE OF STANDING KING AND QUEEN. PANULISAN . VII
FEMALE FIGURE AS WATER-SPOUT. BEDULU . . . VIII
HARITI WITH HER CHILDREN. BIDULU . . .IX
IMAGE OF A KING. KUTRI . . . .X
CHATUHKAYA OF THE TRIMURTI. PEDJENG . • XI
SRADDHA IMAGE OF A KING. KUTRI . . .XII
STATUE OF A PRINCESS. PEDJENG .... XIII
STATUE OF A PRINCESS (SIDE VIEW). PEDJENG . , XIV
CHATUHKAYA. TAMPAK SIRING - . . .XV
RSHI WATER-SPOUT. PEDJENG .... XVI
HOLY-WATER VESSEL. PEDJENG .... XVII
NRSIMHA WATER-SPOUT. PEDJENG .... XVIII
ASHTAMUKHALINGA. PEDJENG .... XIX
CHATUHKAYA WITH MASKS. PEDJENG . . .XX
RAKSHASA WITH SKULL-BOWL. PEDJENG . . . XXI
MAKARA WATER-SPOUT. PEDJENG .... XXII
DESIGN OF WATER JUG. PEDJENG . . . XXIII


PREFACE
The illustrations in this book are made from photographs of the
Archaeological Service of the Netherlands East Indies, and are part of
the series reproduced in Oudheden van Bali , by the writer, pub-
lished by the Kirtya Liefrinck-van der Tuuk (Singaradja, Bali).
Further reproductions of Balinese antiquities may be found in
Oudheidkundige Ferslagen (Batavia, 1921, 1922, 1923, 1925), in
Nederlandsch Indie Oud en Nieuw (Amsterdam, 1925, 1926), in
Mededeelingen of the Kirtya Liefrinck-van der Tuuk (Singaradja,
Bali, vols. i, ii), in Acta Orientalia (Leiden, vol. xii), etc.
The author desires to record his thanks to the India Society for
their invitation to contribute this volume to its fine series of publica-
tions, and to the Kirtya Liefrinck-van der Tuuk for placing at his
disposal the cliches of the selected photographs.




INTRODUCTION
The island of Bali, some of whose antiquities will be discussed in the
following pages, hardly needs any introduction to the reader of
to-day. As ever, it would also be difficult to refrain from high-
sounding hymns of praise to this little island, blessed with most of the
beauties of the East, and to the lovability, artistic qualities, and
harmonious nature of its inhabitants. Leaving this to those whose
pen is willing to help to advertise the purely aesthetic enjoyment
of the island, I would rather acquaint the reader, by way of introduction,
with what has been done so far for the scientific knowledge of the
island and for the better understanding of its culture.
The discovery of Bali’s beauty, revealed to Holland in word and
picture by the Dutch painter Nieuwenkamp, and to the rest of the
Western world through the numerous photographs published by
the German physician Dr. Krause, was followed by a world-wide
pilgrimage to the island. Before long a trip to Bali became an indis-
pensable attraction in the programmes of travel-bureaux, and to-day
no round-the-world trip is complete without at least twenty-four hours
spent in a motor-car in Bali. Unfortunately, the scientific study of
the island could not progress at a similar pace.
After the Netherlands East Indies Government had, in the
middle of last century, made the northern part of the island into a
directly administered territory, a special scholar, Dr. H. Neubronner-
van der Tuuk, was appointed there in 1874 and charged with the
study of Bali’s language and literature, the importance of which
for the study of old Java had already been pointed out by Sir Stamford
Raffles. After years of persistent labour, and with the help of
literate Balinese, a voluminous dictionary came into existence, a
thesaurus which is up to the present the basis for all scientific study


of Bali. It is a key not only to contemporary Bali, but also to its old
literature, as well as to that of its neighbour Java —a literature whose
material was in greater part borrowed from the Hindus, but was
completely transformed into a purely national possession.
While the study of the literature alone was already a life’s work,
the discovery of historical documents, in the form of charters engraved
on copper plates, multiplied the gathered material to such an extent,
that only a considerable staff of experts could have mastered the task
within a limited time. Dozens of such charters, most of which may be
compared with our mediaeval deeds of land, were collected in 1919,
and partly published later by Dr. P. V. van Stein Callenfels. But
this was not all.
Earlier explorers of Bali had here and there encountered and
reported antiquities of another kind—statues, monuments and frag-
ments. And when in 1925 and the following years the writer was
charged by the Netherlands Government to make a systematic explora-
tion, the harvest in this field also exceeded all expectations.
The scientific interest of the Government could not be limited,
however, to antiquities and literature. Soon, with the installation of
Netherlands administration over the whole island, it appeared that
Balinese society represented such a peculiar and indissoluble com-
bination of old indigenous and Hindu elements, that a thorough
study of the ‘ adat ,* as well as of the existing religion, was deemed
absolutely necessary in order to work out a suitable system of
administration. The Government entrusted the first task to Dr.
V. Korn and the second to Dr. R. Goris.
This good example brought further beneficial consequences,
namely, the realization of a plan conceived by the Dutch resident
Caron: the foundation (in 1928) of a central library for Balinese
literary works, and for a centre of study for literate Balinese, which
1 l Adat, the social institutions based on old indigenous customs which remained in
force partly above and partly next to the Hindu law books. The word is Arabic, but
is used by scholars for all parts of the Archipelago.


was received by them with great enthusiasm and has been kept up
with the same enthusiasm to the present day. It is called the
“ Kirtya Liefrinck-van der Tuuk,” located in Singaradja, thereby
honouring the names of two of Bali’s greatest scholars of the past.
And, finally, it is very gratifying to see that my idea of a museum
for collections of different objects of historical, cultural and aesthetic
value, no longer used in daily life by the people, and threatened by
destruction (their export being prohibited in addition), has also been
realized with the opening of the Bali museum in Den Pasar in 1931.
From all these cultural studies it appeared that Bali and its
population represent an extremely interesting living document of
the past, whose significance for science cannot easily be over-
estimated. 1 For here, indeed, continued to live, fused into an
harmonious unity, at least two successive cultures. The first of
these, rooted in the village communities and dating back to a
prehistoric past, was by no means superseded by the second—
the culture of Hinduistic kingdoms. Side by side, but inseparably
connected, there subsisted in Bali for a long time villages next to
the palaces of princes, each in need of the other and both supporting
one harmonious social structure. And while the first might be
considered superior in wisdom and better adapted to the land,
climate and people, the second was the shielding power which had
saved the old social order from destruction through exposure to the
disturbing influences of the outer world.
This state of things found its reflection also in the creative art
of the Balinese, and it is the aim of the following chapters to elucidate
the particulars necessary for its understanding.
Yogtakarta,
May, 1934.
1 As the names of the writers who in books and articles contributed valuable material
toward the knowledge of Bali’s culture are too numerous to be mentioned here, I have
to confine myself to the official part of the research.




INDIAN INFLUENCES IN
OLD-BALINESE ART
BALI BEFORE HINDUISM ¹
Few nations should be able to understand better than the British how
a culture may consist of two quite separate elements, which, neverthe-
less, are joined harmoniously in a whole. For no nation of Europe
has managed to uphold with greater earnestness and perseverance
the cultural ideals of the Romans, while respecting and perpetuat-
ing many customs rooted in local and very ancient ideas. Bali
represents on a smaller scale a similar case.
Since those who have no knowledge of the old indigenous elements
in the present and earlier culture of the island must of necessity
misunderstand its essence, we shall try to exhibit in brief review
some few points of Bali’s oldest culture.
Though remains and data from pre-Hinduistic times in Bali are
very scarce, it is still possible to reconstruct approximately the
character of its early culture, mainly by analogy with related folks
which have never known Hinduism.
Bali is inhabited by representatives of the Indonesian race, one
of the members of the great Austronesian family (to which the
Mundas of India belong), which was once at home in South-East
Asia, and later spread over India and Further India. Therefore
we may accept that before Hindu influences reached the island the
culture of the Balinese was completely dominated by ancestor worship.
1 Following the Netherlands custom, I use the term “ Hinduism ” as meaning the
“ culture of India ” as it was brought to the Archipelago.


Daily life was directed by the souls of the departed ancestors who
were supposed to be dwelling in the mountains. It was they who
lived on at the hidden sources of the rivers, without whose waters
no rice would grow. They were the founders of the village com-
munities; they had established its customs and cared for its growth.
These ancestors also disposed of the sources of magic life-power, the
power which caused not only the life of man, but also that of animals
and plants, even of the community of men —the mysterious fluidum
without which no welfare was possible.
But not everyone was blessed with the right amount of this life-
power necessary for a happy existence— i.e., a life not disturbed by
misfortunes. Some had too little of it and slowly wasted away;
some, again, had too much and were consequently destroyed too.
And not everyone had the same capacity for being magically powerful,
which meant that there were only few who could receive without
danger great quantities of this magic life-power. They were either
the very old ones, or the unusual —like the priests. Weak were
children and the deformed.
Now those who were able to stand the high charge of magic
power were the right persons to get into contact with the souls of
the dead, to receive them temporarily into themselves, in order to
replenish the waning store of the community’s life-power, or to
furnish it with extra strength. For, as has already been said, the
village community possessed its own life-power—it was an organism
as man himself, and could be sick (which was manifested by
disasters, scarcity, etc.) or well off.
It was perceived that through many causes the balance, the right
amount of life-power of the community, could be disturbed. Some of
the causes were known, and some not to be discerned. Consequently,
there was a complicated and extensive system of acts and interdictions
evolved for the eventual restoration of the disturbed equilibrium.
The development, improvement and application of this system was
the task of the oldest members of the community, acting as priests,


and a survival of this system is the present l adat comprising all the
conceptions of laws and duties and social institutions of the various
village communities.
The place where the sacred acts intended to maintain the life-
power of the community were performed was the temple. It was
a piece of ground surrounded by a wall for protection against unknown,
and thus unmanageable, powers, on which special places were con-
structed as seats for the souls of the ancestors: upright stones for the
male, and horizontal stones for the female souls. For the soul of the
ancestor-founder of the tribe and community there was a whole
pyramid built of stones. And lastly, the temple was provided with
a stone-paved space for the ritual dances.
It was in these temple courts that the elders invoked the ancestors,
bringing themselves into a state of trance by incense, rhythmic move-
ments, chants or other means. This was often followed by ritual
dances, which proved to the people that the soul of the invoked ancestor
had taken possession of the body of the conjurer, whose actions and
uttered words were then regarded as the actions and utterances of
the ancestor. In awe the people knelt before the incarnations of
the forefathers who had descended from the mountains and from
the holy sources of the fertility-bringing rivers. For their presence
alone was sufficient to provide the community with the absolutely
necessary magic life-power; to further the growth of rice; to calm
the devastating overflowing streams; to subdue epidemics afflicting
the population.
It is therefore not surprising to find that the administration of
the village community did not consist of administrative measures in
our sense, but exclusively of functions connected with magic and
ancestor worship. Its sole purpose was the preservation or re-
establishment of the magic equilibrium and the prevention of
possible disturbances. For this end several of the oldest members
of the community, whose age was in itself a proof of their extra-
ordinary life-power, formed a council. It was convoked once a
2


month, at full moon, and with solemnity the elders consulted over all
disturbances of the magic equilibrium, caused either by members of
their own village or by causes outside of it. They gave the proper
instructions as to how the balance might be restored—in most cases
by magic means, and in extreme cases through the shedding of
blood, which contained such a tremendous charge of life-power.
In short, they were the “wise men”; and all they did was in
agreement with the institutions of the forefathers, in constant
reverence for the founders of the community with whom they were
one body and one soul. No wonder, then, that all their actions were
of a sacred nature.
In the above is given the main outline of what we may call the
spiritual culture of the pre-Hinduistic Balinese. Their interests did
not extend beyond the limits of their village community, or, where
it became inevitable through growth and expansion into bordering
villages, to a somewhat larger genealogical community whose members
formed one organic body. There was no room for the individual.
Just as no part of the human body can exist apart from the whole
organism, so every Balinese was only a more or less important part of
the communal body called “ village.” His property was the property
of the community, his interests those of the community. His
children were body and blood of the community, which had rights
over them as future members of its organism. And therefore every-
one’s place was explicitly defined : the heart cannot fulfil the
function of intestines, nor can the lungs be substituted by the liver.
So was the son of a priest, priest by birth, and the son of a smith,
smith.
But let us not digress into details. One more point, which will
prove of the greatest importance in the development of Hinduistic
art in Bali, requires our special consideration.
Although there are no remains to confirm it, we may conclude
from comparison with similar customs practised by other, non-
Hinduized, members of the Indonesian race, that in Bali there must


once have existed the custom of erecting stone or wooden figures
for the deceased village heads or priests. These figures were
simply elaborated and individualized specimens of the upright stones
that have been mentioned. Like the latter, they were destined
to serve as seats (receptacles) for the souls of the deceased whose
likeness they were supposed to render.
At a certain time after death, when the decay of the deposited
body had progressed so far that no flesh remained on the bones,
it was considered the proper moment to erect such a figure. To this
end the bones were collected and placed in an earthen jar, which
was then deposited on the holy, magically dangerous ground out-
side the village—the death-field, which will play such an important
role in Bali later. Then, with the slaughter of many buffaloes,
whose blood would restore the loss in the community’s life-power
caused by the death of a village head, a big death-feast was held
and the figure of the deceased consecrated. That such a figure must
have been executed in a very primitive manner is evident. Its
style, characterized by a closed, stiff appearance of the body, showed
that the figure was intended to represent the dead in a permanent
way—an effort to retain the person of the deceased in the community
in place of the corpse disappearing through decay. Simultaneously
was created a place which might at all times be recognized by the soul
as its own, so that it might be pleased to incarnate itself there from
time to time. Thus it was mortuary sculpture.
It is especially this custom, a variation of the skull and korwar
veneration of the Polynesians, that proved of such importance in
the development of Hinduistic art in Bali. In another chapter we
shall trace the results.


BALI AFTER THE ADVENT OF HINDUISM
Great were the changes that took place in Bali and in other islands
of the Archipelago with the coming of Hinduism. The manner of
its advent is, however, still involved in doubt. In the first place,
the exact time is not known, although there are indications that it
must have happened in the first centuries of our era. Secondly,
there lies a problem in the fact that, among the religious teachings
spread over Java and Bali, Sivaitic Brahmanism was predominant.
Now, it is generally known that, in contrast with Buddhism, Sivaitic
Brahmanism is essentially a national religion, propagated neither by
missions nor conversions, but mainly by birth. If there were ever
so slight indications that the Hindus had come to the Archipelago in
such numbers that the spread of their religion on the islands could be
explained by the propagation of their race, there would be no
problem. Just the contrary, however, seems true. Everything indi-
cates that the Hindus came in the same manner as all other foreigners
had come—namely, for trade only. They probably settled in small
colonies on the coasts, from whence the Hinduization of the population
proceeded. Intermarriage must have been a not uncommon occur-
rence. Soon there came into existence small domains ruled by
Hindu or Hinduized princes, whereby only the members of the court,
or furi , as it is called in Bali— i.e., the closest surroundings of the
prince—must have had Hindu blood in their veins. The mass of
the population was, and remained, Indonesian. Even to-day in Bali
the so-called trivamsa , the three castes of the Hindus, constitutes
only about 7 per cent, of the population. The rest call themselves
kaula (servants), or by the well-known term sudra.
Whatever may have been the case, the fact is that the Hindus
and their descendants introduced in the beginning of our era


something that up to that time was quite unknown in the Archi-
pelago—namely, kingship with all its cultural consequences, just as,
ages before, it had displaced the old native social order in India
itself.
The change was greater than can be realized at first glance. It
is difficult to imagine what it really meant to the old indigenous village
communities, described earlier, to feel the foreign power over them;
the sole power they recognized before having been the local ancestors.
But soon the gods of the new rulers, seemingly also ancestors —'
for did not they also dwell on mountains (Himalaya), and could they
not incarnate themselves on earth in mortals {avataras) ?—lowered the
position of the local forefathers.
Herein lies the key to the understanding of the place occupied in
Bali even to-day by proper Hinduism as practised by the Brahmanas:
the gods of the Hindus, the legends and hymns pertaining to therm
their deeds on earth in glorious incarnations, their divine laws—-in
short, the Indian culture crystallized around them—all this has at
all times been and still is to the Balinese the culture of the higher
castes, and it never became wholly in pure form the culture of
the great masses of the population. The kings called themselves
incarnations of gods; their poems were descriptions of feats of such
incarnated gods (Rama); their laws (derived mainly from the Matia-
vadharmaSdstra) gave no heed to the and were even
frequently in flagrant conflict with the common rights of the free
villagers of Bali. No wonder that to the present day the purely
Hinduistic part in Balinese religious worship is felt as something
remote, alien and incomprehensible, in contrast with the Hinduized
folk-religion, worship of the ancestor gods, which is close to the hearts
of the people.
Although the descendants of the Hindu-Balinese had the advan-
tage of superiority in spiritual culture and also possessed cor-
respondingly superior technical means, they were constantly checked
in their efforts to create one united Balinese kingdom by a paralyzing


counter-action, hidden in the endless division of the population into
small communities. In fact, at no time was the autonomy of
the innumerable village communities fully abolished, though efforts
in this direction were not lacking. It went even so far that the
kings ordered in some cases the destruction of charters which secured
the rights of these communities and contained threats of all
the punishments of hell to anyone attempting to violate them. Up
to the latest period of kings in Bali the authority of the ruler was
confined to the larger centres of administration, headed by an appointed
official and comprising several village communities. Within the
boundaries of each of these communities the king was, at least theoretic-
ally, powerless, and any intervention on his part was considered to
be tyranny.
In many cases, however, the division of cultural functions between
king and community led to happy results. Then the ruler was
accepted and honoured as the protector of the villages against
dangers threatening from without, and was gladly furnished with
armed men and with part of the crops. But, as soon as he over-
stepped the limits of his authority by interfering with the internal
affairs of the villages, he ran the risk of being driven out, which
sometimes actually happened.
Yet we must not imagine the relation of village communities and
royal puris as that of two quite separate, irreconcilable units, existing
side by side and co-operating only in extreme necessity. On the
contrary, one must realize that an intimate contact existed between
them—for, did not the mothers of many princes come from the
villages ? In other ways also there was ample opportunity for
contact, because these kings by no means dwelt in splendid isolation
and were not so high above and far removed from the people as their
decorated elephants from the black pigs of the peasants. There is
evidence in the old literature that in some cases, highly extolled by the
writers, the king was not only a protector from enemies, but in the true
sense a wise father to the people.


It is clear that this peculiar construction of Balinese society
after the coming of Hinduism must have had influence in the sphere
of art. For Hinduism, here in the adopted sense of a cultural
appearance, as absorbed by the Indonesian mind, has penetrated into
many phases of Balinese life. If we see, for instance, that the
stories of kings, as they were related in the books, form the main
material of the Balinese dance-drama, of the Balinese shadow-play,
of Balinese painting and Balinese literature, we also realize what an
endless store of new things was brought into the villages with these
stories, mostly understood as of avataras , incarnations of gods. Not
only stories, names and images, but also new conceptions, ethics,
views of human life and ideals came with them. There is hardly
a child in Bali to-day who does not know the general story of Rama’s
life, even though the monkeys, who play a part in it, for the
time being claim most of his attention. But for every Balinese child
there comes a time when the deeper meaning of the great Rama epic
occupies his mind. And while he may regard the fine character
of the hero as too noble and unattainable, far beyond his reach, there
will be among the many other heroes one whose character he may
adopt as his own ideal for life. That the Balinese thus follow Hindu
ideals is not realized by them; Rama is for them a Balinese prince, and
Hanuman a wonderful Balinese monkey-hero. All of which does
not diminish, but, on the contrary, magnifies, their significance
and influence.


HISTORY OF HINDUISTIC BALI
In connection with the remarks in the foregoing pages, it is a signi-
ficant fact that our best sources, from which we can learn something
about the old history of Bali, consist of charters in which some kings
renounce the few rights by which they could claim to derive income
from land. This they did in order that the income might be used for
the worship of gods; not of the Indian Trimurti, however, nor of the
TrayastrimSati, the thirty-three devas , but of the local gods, none
other than the deified ancestors, now adorned with Sanskrit names.
Actually there was no question of the king having any rights in
land—it was all the property of the ancestors, and only a part of the
income from it was allotted to the king; in no way were the rights of
the ancestors affected.
Unfortunately, there are only these charters to illuminate for
us Bali’s past. There are no elaborate poems about the royal
dynasties like those we have for Java. Therefore old Balinese history
remains but a skeleton of names and dates collected from charters,
without any of the other material that makes history interesting and
instructive.
Nor do the oldest documents from Bali date back as far as those
of Java. We know from the latter, that already in the fourth and
fifth centuries of our era there were kings of a dynasty whose
name ended with “ varman.” They reigned over a Hinduistic
kingdom in the west of the island near the present Bandung, and
caused the engraving of several inscriptions on river stones, which,
up to this day, testify to their deeds.
In Bali, however, the oldest discovered documents originate from
the time when the world-renowned Barabudur was already being
built in Java —the eighth and ninth centuries. They are small


stupas of varying sizes, made of clay dried in the sun, and containing
a pair of separately made round seals bearing the confession of Buddhist
faith impressed on them by means of a bronze stamp. A few sen-
tences, containing clearly Tantric-Buddhist mantras , show that the
kind of Buddhism professed by the monks who made these seals was
not merely Mahayana Buddhism, but specifically the Tantric school of
the Vajradharas. Here a few words may be said about Buddhism
in Bali.
Buddhism had reached the Archipelago at an early time, which is
confirmed by the reports of Chinese pilgrims, pre-eminently those of
Fa Hian. It came first in the form of Hlnayana, and later took root
as Mahayana in Tantric shape. Next to it stood Sivaism in a form of
the Siddhanta school, and near it, again, various teachings of other
schools, in which Siva (as well as Vishnu and Brahma) was regarded as
one of the appearances of the highest god Surya. Soon, however, there
was a complete fusion of the two religions. This even went so far
that charters commenced with praises to the Buddha and Siva in one
breath. In theological writings the oneness of these two was shown
in many ways. And while, on the one hand, the whole pantheon
of Sivaism was shown to be an emanation of the Dhyani Buddhas,
Sivaitic monuments, in turn, were built in such a manner that they
were mistaken later for Buddhist monuments.
It would seem that this fusion must be ascribed to that form of
Mahayana Buddhism which entered the Archipelago in the seventh
century and spread in Java in the eighth century a.d. Being of North
Indian origin, and already strongly influenced by Sivaitic elements,
it found a fertile soil for its all-absorbing doctrines among the higher
castes in Java and in Bali. For the ease with which foreign influences
are absorbed is typical of the Indonesian mind; it readily recognizes
its own ideas in the most different doctrines.
The result of this development can be clearly seen to-day in Bali,
where one special kind of priests has the adjunct designation buda\
but the difference between them and the other priests lies only in a


few external attributes; of a separate congregation of Buddhists there
is no trace. Buddhism, as a separate religion, seems to have dis-
appeared at a very early stage. It soon became a section of the official
Hindu-Balinese religion, as a deliverance-cult aiming at the release
from the eternal cycle of reincarnations, samara. In the end it
vanished completely.
But let us return to the history of Bali.
The clay stupas just mentioned must belong to the eighth or
ninth century a.d. But we do not possess a single charter or other
trace of royal rule from that period. Now, a similar situation
for any period in Old-Javanese history would not necessarily have
a negative significance only. The absence of charters during a certain
period is, in most cases, an indication that the region in question
had lost its independence, and that the residence of the rulers was
located elsewhere. Later, in the discussion of the worship of kings, we
shall see the reasons for this assumption. Meanwhile we must
accept these premises, and we will come to the conclusion that pre-
vious to the appearance of the first Balinese charters the island
must have been under the rule of another power. And what other
power could it have been, if not the Javanese Mataram, founded
in a.d. 732 by King Sanjaya—the kingdom which, according to
legends, ruled over Bali, Java, Sumatra, and even over parts of
Further India ? This offers a good explanation of the fact that
Sivaitic and Buddhist figures found in Bali from that time all bear
characteristics of the then Central-Javanese style. Safijaya’s king-
dom was in Central-Java.
The appearance of Buddhist monks in Bali might have been
connected then with Sanjaya’s successor, Pancapana. This was the
king who founded in a.d. 778 the well-known temple of Kalasan in
Central-Java, a Buddhist monument dedicated to Tara. Probably
it was he also who introduced Mahayana Buddhism into Java. During
his reign there even came into use for a short time the North Indian
Nagar! alphabet (at least, an early form of it), while before and after


his time a form of letters derived from those of the South Indian
Pallavas, the so-called Kawi alphabet, remained in use. Thus we
may accept that the eighth and ninth centuries were a period of strong
Javanization for Bali, which also meant second-hand Hinduization.
Should we nevertheless believe that at some time there were as well
at work in Bali direct influences from India ?
Charters or other historical sources give no evidence to this effect.
Yet the international character of Buddhism in those times warrants the
belief that the Buddhist influences, at least, were not necessarily
Javanese. Moreover, was there not an international centre for Buddhist
studies in the Archipelago at that time ? First, in the seventh century,
it was located in Java, and later in Sumatra, in the Srlvijaya kingdom
near Palembang. This latter was the place where Dharmapala, the
follower of Dignaga, taught, and where Vajrabodhi stayed for a
while on his way to China, where he was to introduce Tantrism; and
later still the famous Atlsa spent twelve years of his life there before
taking up his task of reformation in Tibet. The uncertain times for
Buddhism in India, and the fact that Chinese pilgrims, on their way
to the Holy Land of the Buddhists, not only had to pass the Archi-
pelago, but often had to stay there awaiting favourable winds for
their further journey, called forth the existence of such a centre. At
first it was used merely for gathering information about the Holy
Land from returning pilgrims, but later their help was obtained for
serious preparatory studies in Sanskrit and theology.
However, before long things changed.
In the tenth century the power of Javanese kings waned, and, as
a reflex, there arose in Bali a Balinese royal dynasty—that of the
Varmadevas. Its members have left evidence of their activities and of
various foundations in numerous charters.
One of them, perhaps the first, named Kesarivarmadeva, left an
inscription engraved on a round pillar (of the kind King ASoka used
to erect) which now stands in Sanur on the south coast of Bali. It
relates to the king’s victories beyond Bali in the first half of the tenth


century. The letters employed are both of the pre-Nagan style
and of the Kawi alphabet; the language is Sanskrit, as well as Old-
Balinese. Most surprising, however, is the fact that the king caused
the Old-Balinese part of the text to be inscribed in Nagar! letters,
incomprehensible to the Balinese, while, vice versa , the Sanskrit
text was written in Kawi script not intelligible to Hindus.
Another king, Chandrabhayasimhavarmadeva, ordered in a.d. 962
that a reservoir with suitable surroundings should be constructed at
the holiest spring in Bali. Even now, every year, on a certain day,
thousands of pilgrims stream from all parts of the island to this sacred
spring—Tirta Mpul is its name—in order to bathe in its holy waters.
In the name one recognizes the Sanskrit ttrtha —holy watering-place
and place of pilgrimage.
The dynasty of the Varmadevas reigned for at least two centuries.
In the beginning the kings restricted themselves exclusively to Bali,
but later they came again into closer contact with Java, but this
time not in the sense of dependence. A daughter of a Javanese king,
named Mahendradatta, or Gunapriyadharmapatn! after marriage,
wedded a Balinese prince of the Varmadeva dynasty, whose residence,
as shown by archaeological finds, lay in the district of the present
villages Pedjeng and Bedulu. A strongly renewed Javanization
(and, simultaneously, a more intensive Hinduization) resulted from
this marriage, and one must believe that this is the period in which
various Tantric rites came into vogue in Bali: their traces may still
be seen in the existing witch-dances and various Shamanistic per-
formances of the Balinese. It is distinctly mentioned in traditions
that these practices came from Java, which had already acquired
a certain fame abroad in matters of sorcery and Tantrism. Although
the true origin of these practices, strongly reminiscent of the
kapalikaSy has not been established with certainty, it seems
probable, nevertheless, that the country of their origin was South
India.
By this marriage of the Javanese princess with the Balinese


king a prince was born, the famous Erlangga. Through his
own intermarriage later he became king of Java, where, in his
turn, he disseminated Balinese influences. His reign was for many
reasons a very remarkable one, and, since the achievements of a
Balinese prince are involved here, we shall devote a few words
to his story. Besides, he is the only one of whom we know some
historical details.
Erlangga was born in Bali in a.d. 991. In the beginning of the
eleventh century he went to the court of Java’s king, Dharmavamsa,
in order to marry his daughter, whose name has not reached us. As
son-in-law of the king, he was probably charged with the administra-
tion of a province, similarly to the Indian yuvardjas. A big disaster
however, befell the royal house in a.d. 1006: an enemy penetrated
into the puri\ the king was killed and the palace devastated. Only
few escaped the bloodshed, but among them was Erlangga. For
years the youthful prince now had to roam through forests and
mountains, finding shelter with hermits. An account of these
events, expressed with touching simplicity, is contained in his
great charter (which is now one of the treasures of the Calcutta
Museum), on one side in Sanskrit, on the other in Old-Javanese.
Meanwhile, after this pralaya (disaster), the great kingdom of
Dharmavamsa fell apart; numerous small rajas were tearing the
country asunder in feuds. Erlangga then undertook the great task
of re-establishing the unity of the Old-Javanese kingdom. He
succeeded, indeed, with the help of devoted troops, incessantly pro-
gressing with smaller and greater victories, till, after thirty years, his
dream was realized: the kingdom was whole again, but only for
a short time. For, soon afterwards, he forsook the jewelled throne
to exchange it for the hard stone floor of a hermitage. He took
holy orders, dividing his kingdom between his two sons. But in
order to invest this division with a certain inviolability the king
called upon the magically powerful hermit and saint Bharada, and
the latter solemnly performed the division according to Tantric


ritual. In the solitude of his hermitage Erlangga must have died
about 1050 a.d.
It is natural that this king, whose complete royal title was Sri
Maharaja Sr! Dharmavamsa Erlangganantavikramottung-
gadeva, is glorified in many Balinese traditions—for was he not the
only Balinese prince who ever ruled over the two islands ? Still, the
place where his ashes were deposited is not in Bali. Enclosed in a
stone casket, they were buried under the pool of a holy watering-place
on the eastern slope of the Penanggungan mountain in Java. Figures
of Sr! and Lakshm! were put up there as spouts, the captured spring
streaming into the pool from their stone breasts, and a figure of
Erlangga himself, in the shape of Vishnu seated on Garuda, was
installed in a niche above the water. And now we return to Bali.
During the years of Erlangga’s residence in Java, when he could
not attend to his little homeland, his younger brother ruled there in
his name. The latter, out of respect for his illustrious elder brother,
never dared to sign charters with his own name and always referred to
himself as the “ youngest child ”of his parents. After his death his
ashes, with those of his wives, were entombed in a row of monuments
hewn in a wall of rock banking the upper course of one of Bali’s
holiest rivers near Tampak Siring. These tombs were once guarded
by hermits, whose numerous cells, in fact a whole monastery, also
hewn in the solid rock nearby, may still be seen to-day. Together
with the stately royal tombs they form most impressive remains of
Bali’s distant past.
After the death of Erlangga, Bali again regained its independence
and made its own history, of which we know, unfortunately, but little
more than a few names of kings. But Java remained watchful,
and, as soon as its own position was secure enough, repeatedly tried to
subjugate the island. This happened, though for a short time only,
during the reign of King Krtanagara (a.d. 1284) —the same king who
dared to insult the great Kublai Khan by sending his envoy back to
China with a mutilated face instead of paying tribute to the mighty


emperor. But, during the last Hinduistic kingdom of Java, Maja-
pahit, Bali was at last decisively subjected by Majapahit’s most illus-
trious king, Rajasanagara.
In a.d. 1343 a large fleet manned by soldiers left the Javanese
harbours, heading for Bali. There, from a landing-place on the south
coast, started the victorious expedition which put an end to the
Balinese royal house and erased all traces of its power. A dynasty
of Javanese blood was installed in its stead, and in place of the old
centre of power, Pedjeng, a new seat of Javanese rulers (vassals of
Majapahit) arose in Gelgel. Later it was transferred to Klungkung,
which is still a flourishing centre to-day. The power of the native
Balinese rajas was broken; but even after the Javanese kingdom of
Majapahit crumbled and perished, about one century later, the
Javanese vassals, gradually Balinized, continued to retain their
supremacy in Bali. When, in the nineteenth century, the Dutch
came into closer contact with the island, the most important power
there was still the raja of Klungkung, even though in the meantime
several smaller rajas had managed to assert their independence, and
the days of a central kingdom were gone for ever. To-day, long
after the establishment of Dutch government in Bali, the precedence
of Klungkung is still maintained in the regent’s title. It is Deva
Agung, the Great Deity; and whether or not it purports to imply that
even now this regent is regarded by Balinese as an incarnation of
a god, it raises him in rank over all other regents in the island.
Such is the history of Hinduistic Bali sketched in outline. As
one sees, Islam has never taken root on the island with its round-
one-million population, in spite of the fact that in course of the cen-
turies the many millions of Java have been converted to it in their
own way. True, there are Muslims in Bali, and even some Muslim
Balinese, but these are no longer regarded as such—they have
become aliens, if not outcasts. For Balinese Hinduism is essentially
a national religion, and whoever gives it up loses by consequence his
nationality as well.


RELIGIOUS WORSHIP AND THE CULT OF KINGS
An insight into the religious practices of the Old-Balinese can be
gained only through indirect evidence. True, one can learn some-
thing about their religious worship in the theological writings, but
these contain mainly mystical speculations and do not often touch
upon the practical aspects of worship. They comprise, for instance,
different systems of deliverance, derived principally from the Samkhya
school; these are partly or wholly elaborated and adapted for the
country’s use by translation and modifications, but they throw little
light on the public worship as performed by the priests in the past.
Nevertheless, we are not completely deprived of material, because,
in the first place, the present rituals must be the successive development
of former rites; secondly, we see from representations on the reliefs
of the great Javanese monuments that the old temples differed
but little, in their exterior aspect at any rate, from those of present-
day Bali. These reliefs tell even more; they show us an Old-Javanese
society which, in its main features, and frequently also in details, bears
distinct likeness to the life of Bali’s inhabitants to-day. As a matter
of fact, Bali’s present is just as important for the study of old Hindu-
istic Java, as the remains of the latter’s past are illuminative for Bali’s
cultural history.
Thus we have at least some certainty about the external form of
the Old-Balinese temples. They consisted of a piece of ground,
cleared of grass and weeds and surrounded by a wall about twice
the height of a man. Inner walls divided the temple terrain into
two or more courts. These courts were mostly situated behind one
another, or, where the location demanded it, next to each other—but
always so that the second court could be entered only through the first;


and if there was a third court, the first and second had to be passed in
order to enter it.
Entrance to the first court was afforded by a fairly large opening
in the wall, flanked on either side by pilaster-like constructions,
rising higher than the walls, and forming an open gate without roof
or doors. The remarkable feature of this construction, still common
in Bali, is, that the inner walls of the pilasters, facing each other
across the passage-way, are devoid of ornament or architectural
detail. They form absolutely plain vertical surfaces, which, if
brought together, would perfectly fit into each other. The impression
of the gate is thus of a small temple-like construction cut in half
and pushed asunder in the middle, the opening forming a passage.
This form of gate is called to-day in Bali tjandi bentar , which
means, split chandi.
In the first temple-court there were several rectangular stone
terraces, shaded, like the Indian mandapas , by thatched roofs resting
on wooden pillars. The largest of these terraces served as gathering-
places for the council of village elders; a special terrace was reserved
for the orchestra {gamelan)\ and often the sides of the stone bases
were decorated with reliefs depicting episodes from some well-known
stories, mostly from the Mahabharata and the Ramayana.
To the second court led a second, inner gate. This one, how-
ever, was provided with wooden, skilfully carved doors turning on
bronze-capped pivots and furnished with a wooden or bronze lock,
so that they could be securely shut. Its high towering roof was
surmounted by a lingo- or jewel-ornament. As this entrance was
properly destined for the use of gods and kings only, there was a
smaller gate to the right, or to the left, or one at either side; these
were also provided with doors, and served for daily use. In order to
pass either of the gates one had to mount a few steps at one side
and descend again at the other.
Having entered the last court, one found there a number of
structures dominated by a few which could be recognized from
3


a distance as dwellings for gods on account of their peculiar roofs;
such roofs one may find to-day also in Nepal, though in a some-
what different form. The whole structure is called at present by
the Balinese meru. Just as to-day, the merus formerly consisted
of a square stone terrace on which, supported by posts, rested a
single square wooden chamber with a double wooden door in front.
Above it rose the roof, formed by a pyramidal system of super-
posed storeys, each covered with palm-fibre or wooden shingles and
decreasing in size in their upward sequence. At the top, the whole
pyramidal structure of roofs, always uneven in number, culminated
in one point representing the lihga or the ratna (jewel). The name
meru., derived from Mahameru, the Indian mountain of the gods,
already indicates the destination of these structures; they were, as they
still are, dwellings for the temporary residence of gods when they de-
scended from their mountains to lend their presence to a temple-feast.
Besides these dwellings for the gods there were in the last court
several other smaller structures, mostly of the mandapa type; such
were the roofed terraces, sometimes with wide benches between the
pillars and with reliefs adorning their basements. Most of them
served for the placing of offerings, which consisted of fruit, flowers,
rice-cakes—the best of the harvest—skilfully arranged in towers
or other shapes and beautifully decorated. On important feasts
similar additional structures, built of light material (bamboo), were
erected in the temple-courts for temporary use. Further, there were
different traditional trees planted in the temple-courts, such as
ndgapushpas , bakulas , nahlkusumas , etc.
We cannot give the Old-Balinese or Old-Javanese names for all
these parts of the temple. It is only known that the outer wall
was designated mekhald , the closed gate with the roof was called
gopura or gupura, and the structure for offerings bale nydsa (bale
is the indigenous name for the small mandapas ).
It was in these temple-courts that the ceremonies of religious
worship took place. But the part played therein by Hinduistic


priests was not always the most important. True, fully adorned,
they had to receive Siva into themselves in order to transform the
flower-speckled water into holy water {toya tlrthd)\ also, through
recitation of their mantras , accompanied by the steady ringing of
their bell {ghantd ), burning incense {dhupa) and strewing flowers,
they had to consecrate different ritual objects and cleanse the temple
court from evil influences. But the actual celebration, the most
important part of the feast—the offering of the hundreds of colourful
sacrificial gifts to the gods—was not performed by the Brahmanas,
but by the folk-priest, the successor of the highest of the magic
village-heads of olden times.
For who indeed were the gods to whom the offerings were
brought ? Not Siva, nor Brahma, nor Vishnu —at least, not in the
first place, nor exclusively. They were again the local gods, the
deified founders of the village communities, of whom we spoke
before, but now adorned with titles like bhattdra and sometimes
bearing names that sounded like Sanskrit, but which were in reality
only Sanskritized Balinese names. In this, however, the Balinese
were not original; there was already in the eighth century the example
of a Javanese king, Raka (Baron) of Panangkaran, named Pantjapan,
who, in editing a charter in Sanskrit verse, had his name Sanskritized
into Kariyana Panamkarana Pancapana—probably also for the sake
of the metre.
Speaking of Sanskrit, in our days one can hardly recognize, or
distinguish at all, the mutilated Sanskrit terms in the holy mantras
murmured by the priests, which mantras are derived from various
Sanskrit works like the Puranic Siirydrchanas and others. If, in
addition to this, one should give any credence to the priests who
designate the delivery of these mantras as “ recitation of Vedas,”
one may arrive at completely wrong conclusions. In former times,
however, when there was constant contact with visiting Brahmanas
from India, the mantras must have been pure in wording and identical
with those used by corresponding sects in India.


It is regrettable that it has not been possible as yet to establish
with certainty from what Indian schools and sects these mantras and
offering rituals were taken. But we must bear in mind that only
a very small part of the numerous books of the priests have been
critically studied. Co-operation with Indian scholars would doubt-
less greatly increase our knowledge, and the previously-mentioned
institution in Bali offers a splendid opportunity for this.
Yet the common religious worship, as discussed in the preceding
pages, has not handed down to us the most important remains of Old-
Balinese art. It is quite another source that provided the statues,
reliefs, and monuments that to-day bear witness to the past art
of Bali.
Next to the habitual worship of gods there existed still another
of a more private character. It is difficult to find for it a better
designation than “ worship of kings.”
As we have seen already, it was an accepted view in Bali
that kings were incarnations of gods, especially of Indian gods, and
particularly of Vishnu. As such, their history formed a continu-
ation of the well-known avataras of this god; thereby the conquest
of one or another enemy was regarded as the reason for such an
incarnation, just as in the case of Rama and Ravana. Here one might
be of the opinion that, considering that the divine principle (Vishnu
or Siva) returned to heaven after the death of the temporal body, a
general worship of these deities would simultaneously be a sufficient
veneration of the deceased kings. But such a view would leave
unexplained a whole series of important things in the old culture
of Java and Bali.
What was actually the case ?
After the body of the dead king was cremated, numerous rites
were performed in order to convey his soul, liberated from earthly
bonds, to heaven. At a certain time after their completion one more
ceremony had to be held; it was to give to the dead final and complete
deliverance and bring him outside the circle of ceaseless rein


carnations. To this end his soul was called to incarnate itself
temporarily into a “ flower-body ” {pushpasarira ) which contained
his ashes. Then the pushpaSarira was burnt and its ashes solemnly
thrown into the sea. A part of the king’s ashes, however, was
retained.
Some time after this ceremony, which corresponded to the Indian
sraddha , It was customary to consecrate a special piece of ground,
to dig a pit and bury therein the conserved part of the king’s
ashes (his soul was now dwelling in the highest heavens). The
ashes were enclosed in a stone casket together with small bits of
various magic metals, each bearing an engraved syllable denoting a
certain deity. So far the ceremony followed in the main the Indian
tradition of entombing the ashes of the dead. As for the erection
of a small monument customary in India, we shall presently see
how the Balinese changed this custom and adapted it to their own
needs.
When the pit was closed, they placed over it a stone image. This
image represented the deity whose incarnation the dead king was sup-
posed to have been during his life-time. But certain deviations from
the traditional representations of that god indicated that the figure was
not intended to be an image of the god himself, but only one of his
incarnations. Furthermore, there was frequently erected round such
a figure a stone structure similar in shape to Indian temples; in former
times it was known under the name prasdda, but now it is generally
referred to in Java by the word chandi , which is probably derived
from chandigrha —House of the Goddess of Death. Finally, divine
worship was offered thereafter to the dead king by his successors,
in a certain month of every year, and on these occasions the soul of
the dead was supposed to enter the stone image. Thus it was possible
to maintain magic contact with the ancestors of the dynasty. 1
It appears that almost everything that remains from the ancient
art of Bali and Java pertained to this cult of deceased kings. Hardly
1 See, for further particulars, Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. li (193 1 ff.


any of the innumerable images found or excavated ever served for
the direct worship of a god in the manner customary in India
previously and now. Probably every one of them once stood in a
or in a simple mandapa, a pillared open hall, in both cases
serving for the same worship. All the stone reliefs now existing
formerly belonged to, or still decorate, such prasadas or chandis.
Nearly all the ruins one sees are remains of such chandis , of their
walls and gates, or of hermitages and holy watering-places that
belonged to them. In brief, nearly all the pieces of any significance,
fashioned of natural stone, and thus able to resist the wear of ages,
belonged in the past to the cult of dead kings.
Yet all this is not as strange as it might seem. From representa-
tions on reliefs we have clear evidence, confirming our assumption
based on analogy with present-day Bali, that most of the structures
not pertaining to the cult of kings were built of easily deteriorating
materials, at any rate not of hard stone. The temples— i.e., their
walls and gates —were built of brick, their shrines of wood. The
palaces were made of brick, wood and clay. That such buildings
could not have withstood the effects of tropical humidity for centuries
is clear.
Those of the structures, however, which were to last longer than
for one generation, and had to stand as long as the dynasty hoped
to endure—the places of contact between king and forefathers—
had to be constructed of permanent material, hard stone or, if
such could not be obtained, as in Bali, sandstone or tuff, which the
builders covered with a thin layer of diamond cement ( vajralepa ),
thus hardening the surface. And the charters, in which the rights
of such holy places were laid down, were to defy the ages; they were
engraved on stones or on copper plates, so that they could be pre-
served as long as these rights were respected.
Here a comparison with Egypt may be useful. There, like-
wise, by far the greater part of the remains from the past belonged
to the cult of dead kings, whereas palaces and dwellings have dis


appeared. Only, in Egypt the houses of the gods, the temples,
were built so solidly that they could hardly deteriorate. But we
must not forget that the temples of Egypt were really dwellings
for the gods, while in Bali they were, as they still are, merely
temporary abodes. No images other than for decorative purposes
were made in the Balinese temples, for the gods came to the
temples only on big feasts, and upon their termination they returned
to the mountains where they lived. This conception, in many re-
spects so different from the classical Indian view, is undoubtedly
due to the persistently enduring influences of the ancestor cult,
wherein gods were regarded primarily as forefathers, dwelling in
their heaven on the mountains. Later we shall see how these con-
ceptions affected the development of the style in Bali art.
That the above-sketched cult of kings was of extreme importance
to a reigning dynasty is evident from many passages in the old literature
of Java; as long as the chandi and its consecrated contents endured as
a source of magic power for the dynasty, this power could, at most, be
subjected for a time only; its capacity to rise again was, however,
ensured. Therefore the devastations of chandis, of which the ruina-
tion of the pit and its contents was obviously the main purpose,
should not be ascribed to the religious zeal of Muslims—by the
nature of things this was never the case in Bali—but to victorious
kings, who, having conquered a rival, desired to abolish for ever
the possibility of restoration of the latter’s dynastic power by ruining
his holy chandis. For the chandis were, indeed, the vulnerable
and hence carefully protected heart of the royal houses.
Now we shall see what time has left of them.


ANTIQUITIES AND THEIR STYLE
Material and Find-Spots. —What the blue slate was in the
art of Gandhara, the soft grey volcanic tuff was for the plastic art
of Bali; most of its sculpture was, and still is, executed in this kind of
stone. This means that one should not expect to find any pieces
wholly preserved, and it precludes the assumption that the damaged
state of nearly all antiquities should be ascribed to intentional demo-
lition. The stone, being of volcanic origin, is sometimes of uneven
composition and contains pieces of hard lava; sometimes it is no
more than compressed powder. Thus the greatest care was necessary
when the figures were photographed, and special precautions had
to be taken in the case of excavation. It is not surprising that in
many cases the makers of the figures covered them with a thin layer
of cement to prevent too rapid deterioration.
Next to stone statues, smaller figures of wood and bronze were
known in Bali. The latter were cast by the cire-perdue process, but
on the whole only a small number of them were found on the island.
As for wooden figures, they have naturally nearly all disappeared—
the few I saw were eaten by white ants and other insects to such an
extent that no traces of the details were left, which made their correct
dating impossible. Of old gold and silver objects, and especially
of old statuettes cast in these metals, Bali has yielded practically
nothing, although in Java quite a number of the latter were found.
It seems that in general the art of metal casting was much less developed
in Bali than in Java.
And, finally, the paintings. It is clear that owing to the climate
nothing is left of the numberless paintings on cloth which must once
have decorated the temples on festive occasions; and were it not for
the fact that the old writings were constantly transcribed on fresh


lontar-leaves, these likewise would have never reached us. Even now
the deterioration of an abandoned temple, for instance, progresses
so rapidly, that within a few years there is left little more than a
mound overgrown with weeds, in which the tuff-stones and bricks
of the mandapa- terraces undergo a steady process of disintegration.
It was, therefore, a great surprise when, following a landslide in
1924, there came to light near the village of Pedjeng several hundreds
of quite unimpaired clay stupas, which were not even baked, but
merely dried in the sun. 1 As a matter of fact, burying in the ground
is still the best method of conservation, because, next to the climatic
effects, it is mainly the rapid invasion of tropical vegetation that clears
away unprotected objects and structures.
As for the places where the antiquities were found, it is noteworthy
that most of the very old pieces were concentrated within a com-
paratively small area in the middle of the island. It would seem
justified to infer that this was the place where the puris of the Old-
Balinese rajas were situated, notwithstanding the fact that I could
find no definite traces of former royal dwellings there. This par-
ticular region, lying, like another Pafichala, between two rivers, the
Petanu and the Pakrisan, extends like a narrow strip from the southern
coast of the island up to the immense crater of the Batur, and com-
prises the present districts of Pedjeng and Bedulu. Even now these
districts are regarded as belonging to the heart of Bali, and their
importance is in no small degree augmented by the fact that within
their boundaries lies the holiest spring of Bali—Tirta Mpul. East-
wards and westwards from this region antiquities are rather scarce.
Therefore it seems natural that the old legends refer to this central
region as the place where the Old-Balinese kings fought their battles
with Javanese intruders struggling for supremacy over the
island.
Kinds of Antiquities. —By far the greater part of the antiquities
I found consisted of figures and fragments of figures. Yet the search
1 See Indian Art and Letters, N.S., vol. i, no. i (1927).


for a corresponding number of remains of structures, wherein these
figures could have once stood, was fruitless. The inference to be drawn
is that the majority of them were not placed originally in closed
structures, but that they had stood on roofed terraces similar to the
Indian mandapas. We know with certainty that in Java this was often
the case; for Bali we must accept the same conclusion. And, con-
sidering that Balinese art on the whole was more primitive than the
Old-Javanese art, we may readily assume that the number of solid
structures harbouring such figures must also have been considerably
less. However, even of such terraces I found but few traces, but
this fact presents no problem; it is natural that after the Balinese royal
houses had perished, the terraces and figures were either demolished
or abandoned, because, as we know already, the figures were not
images of gods, but posthumous statues of kings. In many cases,
however, the figures, still regarded as holy, and feared by the popula-
tion on account of their magic power, were installed in temples,
where they could be cared for and supplied with offerings. But their
original dwellings, the roofed terraces, were left to their fate, which
means that as soon as the protecting layer of cement had cracked in
several places the monsoons did not cease their work of destruction, if
no special measures for preservation were taken.
Thus I found the figures in places to which they did not properly
belong—namely, in temples (puras ), where the Balinese do not
exactly know what to make of them now. To the people these figures
are merely magically dangerous stones (fallen down from the sky,
according to popular belief), of which one is afraid and so they must
be cared for; their destruction might lead to some calamity. As for
their original significance, it is completely forgotten.
An interesting example illustrating this is offered by my ex-
perience at Tampak Siring. Not far from this locality, which has
acquired a certain fame among tourists owing to the so-called “ kings’
tombs ” situated there, lies the already mentioned very holy watering-
place, Tirta Mpul. Exploring the vicinity, I found a short distance


away, in a village named Manukaya, a much weather-worn in-
scription on a stone. None of the Balinese could decipher the old
engraved letters, nor were the contents of the inscription known to
anyone. The stone stood there, as every villager of Manukaya knew
it from childhood, wrapped in a white cloth and provided with the
regular offerings. I was told, however, that in the fourth month of
every year, at full moon, this stone (which is also said to have fallen
from the sky) is carried to the holy waters of Tirta Mpul and bathed
therein—much to the detriment of the stone, by the way, which is
a big slab of soft grey tuff covered as usual with a thin layer of
cement. Deciphering the inscription, I found that it was none
other than the charter of Tirta MpuFs foundation, made in the fourth
month, at full-moon day, in the year 962 a.d. Thus the people have
kept alive the connection between stone and watering-place for almost
one thousand years, and have always celebrated its anniversary cere-
mony on the correct day; but of the true meaning of this connection
every recollection was lost. I need hardly add that the communica-
tion of my findings was received in the place with no little interest.
To return to the figures and their sanctuaries, we may gain an
idea about the original shape of the ancient prasadas , chandis , or, as
some of them were also called, chatty as, from several still existing
monuments. Pre-eminent among finds of this kind were chandis
hewn directly in the rocks: they appear as a fairly deep vaulted niche,
excavated in a steep wall banking a valley or a river, with the chandi
proper protruding in its middle in high relief. This manner of
placing chandis may have developed from the making of stupa
reliefs, of which I found one specimen crowned by a thirteen-fold
chhattra not far from Bedulu. The chandi , being a solid mass in the
shape of an Indian temple, is adorned with a blank door, hence has no
chamber, and thus no pit for the ashes. However, these were deposited
under the chandi in a different manner, namely, through a horizontal
tunnel beginning under the basement of the monument and running
underneath to its centre. It is not improbable that the statue of the


king was usually placed here before the chandi , instead of within.
There is one single example to corroborate this assumption, the rock
chandi at the river Kalebutan, where the figure of the king stands out
in high relief against the false door. On the whole, no less than
twelve such rock chandis are known at present, of which the most
important are the complex of nine at Tampak Siring. 1
In several cases the rock chandis are flanked on either side by lower
niches formerly occupied by hermits. These niches, hewn in the rock,
have the form of the vanished ordinary hermitages—three walls of
clay and a sloping straw-thatched roof. Real cave hermitages are
also known in Bali. Shortly before my visit there was discovered
the now renowned cave of B6dulu. The entrance to this grotto is
formed by the gaping mouth of a huge monster-head; a narrow
passage provided with niches on either side leads to the proper
cavern, the whole being of a T-like formation.® A short while ago
another rock chandi was discovered in the vicinity of Tabanan, but this
time with a real chamber; it still awaits closer examination.
Further, I found a number of miniature chandis, carved of one
piece of stone. These, too, were solid, while in the external niches
at the four sides were the figures, customary for Java, of Durga Mahl-
shasuramardini (north), Ganesa (west, or, if the entrance faced
westwards, east), and one of a Rshi (south). At the presumable
entrance was, likewise in relief, the traditional figure of Siva, in the
shape of Mahadeva, with four arms, holding a chamara and akshamald
in the rear hands—doubtless on the same principle here as in the case
of the king’s figure at the rock chandi on the Kalebutan mentioned
before. These miniature chandis evidently stood on a base (jont)
and did service as real chandis , though in none of them could I discover
traces of formerly deposited ashes. These must have been placed in
the yoni.
This brings us to another category of antiquities—the yonis and
lihgas , which are found in Bali in great numbers. The lihgas are (as
1 See Oudkeidkundig Ferslag, 1921.
2 Ibid., 1925.


is usual also in Java) of a triple composition: below, a square base
partly fitting into a corresponding hollow in the yoni\ above it an
octagonal piece, which, in turn, is surmounted by a cylinder rounded
off at the top. Each of these inseparable three parts is of equal
height, width and length, so that each of them could be closely fitted
into a cube. It was striking that almost all measurements in these
lihgas were a multiple of three, and one is tempted to infer that
arrangements of mystic numbers were employed. Lin gas, too,
were monuments for the kings’ souls.
Among the lihgas I encountered a few mukhalihgas , and one
specimen which could be designated as ashtamukhalihga ; the
lihga proper being surrounded by eight busts of Siva, corresponding
to his eight munis, but all identical in form, and eight complete
figures of Siva seated around the lotus below (Plate XIX), Something
similar I found also at the base of a Buddhist stupa , but there, of
course, the figures were of dhyanibuddhas.
Further, I encountered another peculiar kind of sculptures, very
rare in Java, which I named chatuhkaya. They are presumably
variations of the chaturmukhalihgas , wherein the figures of Siva
(originally only heads) gradually gained in significance and grew in
dimensions till, at last, they completely displaced the lihga in the
middle, forming a compact group of four identical figures closely
placed together back to back. The Balinese regard such composi-
tions as representations of Brahma and call them tjaturmukas (chatur-
mukha). That this cannot be correct clearly follows from a particu-
larly fine specimen at Pedjeng, in which each of the four figures has
a third eye in the brow (Siva), in one hand a sankha (Vishnu), and in
the other a book (Brahma); thus, it can hardly be anything else but
a chatuhkaya of the trimurti (Plate XI).
Finally, this form has given rise to still other very peculiar four-
fold figures, where the faces are hidden behind stylized masks and
the component figures are all in alidha attitude (Plate XX). In
one case it is clear that the representation of Bhima was intended; this


appears from the presence of his attributes, known from his traditional
representation in the shadow-play ( panchanakha , checkered loin-cloth,
bare thighs and legs, crescent-shaped head-dress, etc.). A similar,
but single, figure, about six feet in height, is represented in
another case standing on a corpse, betraying a strong Tantric in-
fluence. Tantrism must have frequently flourished in secret among
the rulers of Java and Bali, mainly as a highly esteemed doctrine
of deliverance.
To those familiar with the customary figures of Hindu gods,
these strange outgrowths in Bali must seem to be either the result
of ignorance of traditional prescriptions, or of a loose play of
phantasy. Neither of the views seems to be just, however, and we
shall presently see how the makers of the figures arrived at these
peculiar forms.
It has already been pointed out that the figures were not images of
gods, but representations of dead kings, serving as a means of magic
contact between the soul of the dead and the survivors. Hence
was chosen the shape of the particular god of whom the deceased was
supposed to have been an incarnation. It was believed that he
reassumed this shape after his deliverance. But often the king was
regarded as having obtained deliverance already during his life
through the practice of Tantric teachings. Therefore the strong
deviations of these figures from the orthodox representations of gods
doubtless must be ascribed to Tantric sects and their doctrines.
Since, however, our knowledge concerning Tantrism in Java and Bali
is still very vague (Bhairava-sects probably were the most widely
spread), it is not yet possible to throw light on the exact origin of
these forms, and we can only guess at their secret meaning. That
the hero Bhlma was well suited to play the part of such a redeemer 1
have tried to prove recently in a separate article. In most cases,
however, it was Bhairava or another krodha-iotm of Siva.
But let us return to our enumeration.
Considering that the figures were of royal personages, one would


naturally expect to find among them also female representations.
For up to the advent of Dutch rule in Bali there still subsisted the
custom of burning widows together with the dead spouse. And,
indeed, I found a number of female images, but they practically
never had any distinguishing attributes identifying them with any
particular female deity. Further, it was striking that wherever
figures stood in groups, these groups consisted of one male and several
female deities, next to a rshi and a figure of Ganesa. Seen in the light
of the cult of dead kings, it is not at all impossible that these repre-
sented the king with his wives, his court-priest and his prime minister.
Although there is much that favours this assumption, I have not
yet been able to establish it with certainty.
In one single case I found a king and a queen placed together
on one lotus and standing against one back piece (Plate VII). In
a few similar cases there were even inscriptions on the back of
the figure which clearly confirmed the assumption that we are deal-
ing with regular ancestor figures and not with cult images of
gods.
Water-spouts in most varied shapes also form an important
portion of Bali’s antiquities. Watering-places are even now much
loved by the Balinese, and it seems that in former times it was
not different. Here, naturally, the artists could give free play to
their imagination, and thus we find most varied subjects fashioned
into spouts. Here it is an Arjuna practising tapas (asceticism);
there, a hermit pressing water out of a little human creature lying
in his hands (Plate XVI); then, again, it is a representation of
HiranyakaSipu’s death inflicted by Vishnu in the shape of Nrsimha
(Plate XVIII); and, sometimes, a strong feeling for a somewhat crude
humour caused a hermit to eject water from underneath his raised
loin-cloth. Makara spouts, so common in Java, also occurred among
the antiquities, though in distinctly Balinized form (Plate XXII).
Of reliefs, I found but few. The only old relief of significance is
the row of life-size representations on a rock near Bedulu, discovered


by Nieuwenkamp. 1 It must date from the latest period before
Bali’s final subjection to Java. Quite unique in style, these reliefs,
extending over sixty-five feet in length, served as ornamentation
for a hermitage situated nearby; they depict an unknown story of
a witch and a hunting incident.
Finally, we should not omit a beautiful large stone vessel for holy
water standing in a temple at Pedjeng. Its external surface is
elaborately decorated with rich reliefs inspired by the amrtamanthana ,
the Churning of the Ocean, though with considerable modifications
(Plate XVII).
After this brief survey of the various kinds of antiquities which
Bali offers to students of Indian influences in the Archipelago, we
pass to a short review of the changes undergone by the Indian style
in Bali under the influence of Indonesian principles.
Development of the Style. —As already stated, the oldest stone
figures found in Bali were of a style closely connected with that of
Central Java of the eighth and ninth centuries. This means that
they were distant offshoots of the Gupta art. I have also shown that the
explanation of this affinity must be sought in the political dependence
and, hence, strong exposure to cultural influences from Java, which
at that time was at the height of a flourishing period. But no
sooner did this period of bloom come to an end, than we see in
Bali the appearance of a more primitive style based, nevertheless,
on the same principles. The Balinese figures from this period
(beginning with the tenth century) are of much the same kind as
those we have from Java of the latest period of Hinduism there, which,
however, was four centuries later. The explanation for this is simple:
with the cessation of political dependence on Java, the Balinese
rulers endeavoured to develop their own powers, whereby they had to
allot more place to the indigenous Balinese, and generally Indonesian,
conceptions—a process which started in Java so much later because
of its stronger and repeated Hinduization. Thus, the development
1 See Oudheidkundig Versing, 1925.


of the style in Bali’s Hinduistic art shows a succession of distinct
periods, which may be enumerated as follows:
A Hindu-Balinese period , from the eighth to the tenth century,
during which, owing either to direct influences from India (Buddhism),
or influences from Java, or both, sculptures of decidedly Indian
character were created (Plates I-V).
This was followed by the Old-Balinese period , tenth to thirteenth
century, in which the Indian influences were adapted and incorporated
into an art which became distinctly Balinese and inevitably more
primitive in the beginning than that of the preceding period
(Plates VI-X).
The succeeding Middle-Balinese period forms a transition to the
modern art of Bali and flourished during the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries (Plates XI-XIV). 1
One must bear in mind, however, that the process of Balinization,
properly beginning with the Old-Balinese period, did not progress
steadily, and that new Balinese art may not be regarded as a direct
result of the basic principles characterizing that period. For, very
clearly, there came at intervals ever-renewed influences from Java,
especially during the reign of Erlangga’s mother (end of the tenth
century): pieces originating from or shortly after that time show
very marked Javanese characteristics.
In what direction, then, did the Balinese develop their art derived
from both Hindus and Javanese ?
This question calls for a double reply, considering that two
different directions are involved. The first is closely connected with
the difference in national character between the Balinese and the
Javanese; the second, common to both, is conditioned by the purpose
1 Beginning with the fourteenth century, the execution of figures in permanent material
must have come to a sudden standstill, judging by the complete absence of remains of
the following centuries. The sole possible and most probable explanation is that Bali,
deprived of its own kings, was no longer erecting images for their veneration and, hence,
no chandis with other consecrated places appertaining thereto.
4


for which certain figures were made, and thus involves mainly the
development of mortuary sculpture, affecting to a lesser degree
other products of art.
With regard to the first point, we must observe that the Balinese,
in contrast with the Javanese, especially those of Central-Java, have a
strong predilection for the baroque and for redundancy. While the
Javanese, as a personality, conveys the impression of modesty and
reserve, the Balinese asserts himself directly and is not averse to show-
ing off. And while the Javanese in his demeanour is either prince or
slave, the Balinese has more of the self-confident free citizen; on the
whole, there is more frankness in his disposition than in the nature
of the Javanese; he will not easily bear an injustice and will clearly
give expression to either his approval or disapproval. In contrast
with the Javanese, who is bent on mysticism and relishes above all a
profound discourse, the Balinese has a preference for things concrete,
and is, for instance, a great lover of a hearty meal. The ideal of the
Javanese is the refined knight, who bears misfortune and even in-
justice without flinching, but who also, in joy and triumph, is master
of his emotions. He seeks the refined, even the subtle and spiritual,
and his arts are marked by reserve and finesse. The Balinese, on the
other hand, likes the more coarsely expressive in jest and earnest; he
is lavish with gilt and bright colours; his music, though rich and
melodious, is characteristically explosive; and sudden outbursts of
rapid, jerky movements typify his vigorous dance-rhythms.
In the ancient sculpture of Bali the inclination toward the baroque
appears most markedly when one compares the almost Javanese
Siva of Bedulu (Plate I), a figure calm in form and lofty in expression,
with the Nrsimha spout of Pedjeng (Plate XVIII), superabundant in
form, baroque, wild, flaming. The first piece belongs to the Hindu-
Balinese period, the latter to the Middle-Balinese; thus, at least four
centuries of Bali’s art formation lie between them.
These characteristic baroque traits finally lead to the peculiar
contemporary art of Bali, whose coloured wooden figures of dancing


gods are the purest expression of the Balinese soul and phantasy.
Everybody knows them now —their demoniac features with bulging
eyes, their brawny limbs and over-ornate dress. Sparkling with gold
and with shining red, blue and green colours, they lead as it were a
round-dance, flashing with their eyes, stamping and snorting. This
is the way the Balinese also likes many of his gods best, not as pale
ascetic lords, but as vigorous super-Balinese.
This, however, does not explain another typical appearance
manifest in the antiquities—the peculiar stiffness and cramped appear-
ance of some figures, a rigidity which, in course of development,
becomes more pronounced, lending to the figures a corpse-like
aspect. Here no trace of the baroque nor semblance to anything
living can be discerned (Plates XIII and XIV).
Yet the reason for this is clear. These figures were erected
for dead kings after their sraddha\ they had come in place of,
and were a reversion to, the ancient indigenous ancestor figures,
being merely an improved, Hinduized edition of them. Thus, in
course of time the Balinese had gradually returned to representa-
tions of dead bodies after a period in which images of living gods,
of whom the kings were supposed to have been incarnations, had
served for the purpose of veneration. No wonder, therefore, that the
limbs of the figures, still freely placed in the Hindu-Balinese period,
though even then bound by traditional prescriptions, gradually stiffen
and come close to the body, as in case of the dead lying in state. No
wonder either that the dress binds the body ever tighter, like the
winding-sheet wrapped about the corpse.
This being the case, we may not regard these figures, belonging to
the cult of dead kings, as a norm for Balinese art of those days; and,
moreover, considering that almost everything that has come down to
us pertained to this cult, we can hardly form an opinion of Old-
Balinese everyday art. We incline to believe, however, that pieces
like the earlier-mentioned baroque spout (Plate XVIII) and the
holy-water vessel of Pedjeng (Plate XVII) show the true nature of


Old-Balinese art; it must have been gay, rich, baroque and some-
what overloaded. And if this is true, there is no need to strain our
imagination to bridge the wide gap between the mass of stiff, closed
mortuary sculptures and the lively, redundant and frolicsome revel in
forms of Bali’s art of to-day—it becomes unnecessary, as it would link
two unequivalent kinds of things. Of the true connecting links between
our Nrsimha spout and the sculptures of Bali of our days nothing, un-
fortunately, has remained. Yet, their relation seems sufficiently clear.
Lastly, it must be mentioned that in a few cases I found evidence
of distinct influences from Further India, be it Cambodia or Annam
(Champa). This is not surprising, inasmuch as we know that in Java
intermarriages between Further Indian and Indonesian royal houses
were not uncommon. And since most figures were images of kings,
it is not impossible that those bearing Further Indian features might
have been portrait statues of such foreign princes or princesses who
were entombed following their own customs, and whose figures
were, perhaps, made by artists from their own land. But that such
isolated cases should have had any lasting influence is hardly probable
(Plate IV).
Art Criticism. —ln conclusion, a few words regarding the appre-
ciation of Balinese antiquities as works of art. When viewing them
as such, one must bear in mind, firstly, that they were brought forth
by a purely agricultural people, whose kings were hardly raised above
the peasant class. Therefore one cannot expect their art to have been
particularly refined. To the Javanese the art of Bali in all its phases
appears almost offensively robust and crude, and, having regard to the
delicate restraint and fine execution of the ancient Javanese creations,
one must credit their opinion that Bali’s art is primarily a peasant
art; but this does not detract from its own high merit of having very
expressive national features. Secondly, we must realize that although
the Old-Hinduistic art of Bali brought forth in the beginning pieces
hardly inferior to the Javanese (c. 800 a.d.), its early relapse to more
primitive forms ( c . 900 a.d.) should not be regarded as a sign of


degeneration, as was once assumed in the case of Java, where the re-
appearance of indigenous Indonesian style-principles came to the front
only centuries later. For one should not decry an art because it does
not remain a copy of that foreign art to which it owes its origin;
on the contrary, it is in the deviations that we recognize the rise of
the proper national elements. If one regards Romanesque art as a
degeneration of the classics, one does injustice to the fact that the
creators of Romanesque art were not the Romans and not the Greeks.
And should one, in estimating Bali’s art, apply as standard the old
Hindu art of India, one might gain the impression of seeing a very
degenerated offspring of the glorious Guptas. But thereby one would
commit the same mistake as is made by those who, in their turn, regard
the Gupta art as a degeneration of Gandhara art, and this, again,
as a degenerated branch of Greek art. They all fail to recognize
the rebirth of the proper and national elements which happens at
the beginning of every new art-epoch from the fusion of the imported
and old indigenous conceptions. This fusion does not lead to sense-
less, accidental results, but represents a selection of those elements
from the foreign art that can serve as the expression of things already
living in the makers, and which can satisfy the requirements of the
national soul. The way chosen by the Javanese and the Balinese is
a typical example of this selective process; from all that Indian
architecture and sculpture in stone had to offer them they adopted
only that part which directly fitted their indigenous ancestor cult
and could lend to it a new and higher expression. They did not
imitate blindly the images of the gods of the Hindus, nor did they
build temples thoughtlessly after Indian models; they adapted both
temples and images, to their own needs, the cult of the dead.
With this point of view we arrive at a different attitude towards the
antiquities of Bali. We see in them the forerunners of the island’s con-
temporary art fertilized by Hinduism, and not degenerated descendants
of Hindu figures which, after all, they have never been in reality. And
with such a view we shall undoubtedly do them more justice.


CONCLUSION
In the foregoing pages I have endeavoured to give the reader an intro-
duction to the study of Bali’s antiquities and to outline their signifi-
cance for our knowledge of Balinese culture. To me as a member of
the nation assigned by destiny to the task of supervising Bali’s con-
tact with the modern world and modern ideas, the people of Bali
naturally remain a central interest. But, for the benefit of those
readers whose point of departure lies not in Bali but in India,
I wish to raise the question: of what significance was Bali to Indian
art ?
The reply to this may be as short as the role of Bali is negligible
in this respect. While we can say for Java that once, as centre of the
then Buddhist world, it gave to the same and to the rest of the world
one of the most beautiful, if not the most beautiful, Buddhist monu-
ment, Barabudur, nothing similar can be said of Bali.
Whatever Bali learned from India has been of the greatest import
for its art, and I may also say for its whole culture. It would be
difficult to point out anything in Bali to-day that does not show,
to a slight degree at least, the effect of Indian ideas; while, on the
other hand, there is the preponderant multitude of things wholly
imbued by the spirit of Hinduism. Bali has never played the role
of a disseminator of Indian culture as did its big neighbour, Java,
but it has striven whole-heartedly for a synthesis of Hinduism with
its indigenous culture; and this it has achieved with great success.
Therefore Bali represents a unique and perfect example of what Indian
culture could mean to peoples wholly different from the Hindus
themselves. Just as in Europe, where the culture of the classics
was re-created into a European culture, so, on a small scale, Bali
succeeded in creating out of Hinduism a proper, purely national


culture which undoubtedly raised its inhabitants to a higher plane.
True, India owes nothing to the little island, but it may regard the
present art and culture of Bali with the same satisfaction as a guru
contemplating with pride the work of his Hshya , who did not produce
a slavish imitation of his master’s work, but who applied the acquired
knowledge in order to arrive at his own system.


SCALE: 13 miles = 1 inch.


ILLUSTRATIONS


PLATE I
SEATED FIGURE OF ŚIVA. BĔDULU.
HINDU-BALINESE PERIOD (BTH-IOTH CENTURY).
Though slightly damaged, this piece is a good example of the
strong Hindu-Javanese influences prevalent in Bali at the begin-
ning of its Hinduistic art. The ornaments are, the same as those of
the corresponding period in Java. Such a one and similar figures
could have been found as well in Java of the Barabudur times. The
god may be recognized here by the skull and crescent in the braided
tresses of his hair; also by the chamara (fly-whisk) held in the left and
the akshamala (rosary) in the right back hand. The front hands
probably rested on the knees in a mudra (pose) which cannot be
reconstructed. At any rate, they were not held in the lap in
dhyanimudra , as was the custom in the case of kings’ figures in the
shape of a deity. Thus the figure may be perhaps regarded as one
of the few images found in Bali dedicated to the worship of a god.
Height 43 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE I


PLATE II
MAKARA. PEDJENG.
HINDU-BALINESE PERIOD (BTH-IOTH CENTURY).
One of the very few remnants attesting ancient solid structures
in Bali. It does not follow, however, that this fragment necessarily
belonged to a chandi , since such makaras could have decorated as well
the balustrades of a terrace or of a temple-gate. The mouth of this
makara is wide open and contains a protruding figure of a lion—a
motive well known in India. The lion’s front paws originally rested'
against his breast; the head is greatly damaged. There is no trace
yet of the strong stylization noticeable in the makara of Plate XXIII,
so that this piece must be ascribed to the oldest period. The style
shows strong affinity with the Central-Javanese style of the eighth
century, which can justify a further limitation of the period.
Height too cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE II


PLATE III
SIMHA. PEDJENG.
A S iii the case of the preceding piece, this also must have
once decorated some structure of the Hindu-Balinese period. The
posture of the animal, resting on its four legs, points to the period of the
Barabudur, where similar lions serve as guardians at portals of various
terraces. The manner in which the mane is stylized into a double
fringed round collar seems to point to that time, as a similar treatment
of a lion’s mane occurs also on the reliefs of the Barabudur. In any
case this piece belongs to a time preceding the Old-Balinese period.
Since several Buddha-images as well as fragments of stupas were
found in Pedjeng, it is possible that this lion once served as guardian
of such a stupa.
Height 78 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE III


PLATE IV
HEAD OF A STATUE. WANAYU.
The date of this exceptional piece cannot be ascertained, because
it is in no respect similar to anything else found in Bali or in Java.
Especially remarkable is the Khmer smile, completely unknown in the
sculptures of these islands. It is not impossible that this piece is of
Further Indian make, or inspired by such a model, and that it served
as a posthumous image of a Khmer prince who might have come into
a Balinese dynasty by intermarriage. On the very high tiara is a
lion’s head with outstretched tongue enclosed in a triple circle—a
decoration never found in Bali or in Java; further, it is orna-
mented with rosettes and other motifs also unusual for these islands.
On the body of the statue, which is greatly damaged, a similar lion’s-
head serves as belt-buckle. It is equally uncertain whether the whole
statue was intended to represent a bodhisattwa or a Sivaitic figure.
The open eyes distinctly point to a representation of a king. Not-
withstanding its very worn condition, the piece is still exceptionally
beautiful.
Height 38 cm. (Height of the whole figure 140 cm.—almost
life-size). Volcanic tuff.


PLATE IV


PLATE V
SEATED FIGERE. SAWAH GUNUNG.
This unfinished image (the ornaments of waist-bands and udara-
handha are missing) may have represented either a male or a female
deity, perhaps a four-armed Tara. Of the attributes only a part of the
akshamala , formerly held in the right front hand, is still visible at the
right knee; the other attributes are broken off with the hands. The
Balinese character is evident in this figure to a much higher degree
than in the figure of Plate I, <?.£.,■ in the execution of the ornaments,
the more squarely shaped head, whose expression, judging by the
preserved part, must have been excellent. The direction of the left
forearm cannot be determined, but most probably it also extended
towards the knee.
Height 78 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE V


PLATE VI
DOUBLE IMAGE OF SEATED KING AND QUEEN.
GUNUNG PANULISAN.
OLD-BALINESE PERIOD.
nr
AHE queen, seated in the fashion of women, is close to the king
on his left; the latter is seated in the manner customary for men.
Both wear the broad priestly band which seems to indicate that they
belonged to a Brahman family. Their hands are held in mudra pose
indicating the deliverance of the soul, regularly met with in post-
mortem figures of kings. This double image must belong to the same
category. This is a good example of the series of royal images that
started in the Old-Balinese period and continued throughout the
Middle-Balinese period. The preserved part of the queen’s face
shows more individual features than is usual with Indian images of
gods, so it is evidently more of a portrait.
Volcanic tuff.
PLATE VII
DOUBLE IMAGE OF STANDING KING AND QUEEN.
GUNUNG PANULISAN.
A.D. IOII. OLD-BALINESE PERIOD .
StILL more pronounced than in the preceding group appear here
the individual features of the personages represented. It is clearly
perceivable that the sculptor (called, according to the inscription at the
back, “ the Stutterer ”) wished to lay stress on the special, ritual mean-
ing of the figures—hence the disproportionately large hands holding the
ritual object, the dimensions of which even caused a displacement of
the queen’s breasts. This object is presumably the pushpalmga , the
liftga made of flowers, which was employed at the sraddha ceremony
as temporary receptacle of the soul of the deceased prior to its con-
veyance to heaven by the officiating priest. In the inscription at the
back is mentioned the name of the priest who seems to have performed
the deliverance ceremony, and who was also the maker of the figure.
Volcanic tuff.


PLATE VI
PLATE VII


PLATE VIII
SPOUT IN THE SHAPE OF A FEMALE FIGURE. GOA
GADJAH NEAR BĔDULU.
OLD-BALINESE PERIOD (10TH-13TH CENTURY).
A NUMBER of similar figures, male and female in shape, in one
case representing a Ganesa, once served as spouts at the holy watering-
place of the cave-hermitage near Bedulu. Their exact former
positions cannot now be traced. In the style of the figure, and
especially in its facial expression, Javanese influences are obvious.
This agrees with the approximate dating of the piece to the times of
Erlangga (f. a.d. iooo). Since his mother was a Javanese princess,
it is to be expected that during her time Javanese influences operated
with renewed force in Bali.
Volcanic tuff.


PLATE VIII


PLATE IX
GROUP OF HĀRITĪ WITH HER CHILDREN. AT THE
CAVE-HERMITAGE NEAR BĔDULU.
ABOUT A.D 1000. OLD-BALINESE PERIOD.
The yakshi Hariti, according to legends converted to Buddhism
by the Buddha himself, became a popular figure in Bali. Yet repre-
sentations depicting her with her children (whom she used to devour
prior to her conversion) are comparatively rare among its antiquities.
Her demonic origin may be recognized here by the small fangs pro-
truding over the lower lip; her children, too, seem to behave in a
clamorous manner. On her lap she holds the youngest, Pingala,
whom she was just on the point of devouring when converted by
the Buddha.
Hariti and her spouse have been fully adopted into Javanese and
Balinese folklore under the name of Men and Pan Brayut. They
play the role of poor parents caring for numberless children. Every
trace of their Buddhist legendary origin is gone.
Volcanic tuff.


PLATE IX


PLATE X
IMAGE OF A KING. KUTRI.
THE DATE IS UNCERTAIN. PROBABLY OLD-BALINESE
PERIOD (10TH-13TH CENTURY).
Th,s specimen is a good example of the effects on sculpture pro-
duced by the cult of the dead. The whole figure shows considerably
greater stiffness and is more cramped in form than the earlier figures.
The ornament deviates from the customary form, and is in some
places strongly exaggerated. Very pronounced individual features.
Height 94 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE X


PLATE XI
CHATUHKĀYA OF THE TRIMŪRTI. PEDLENG.
MIDDLE-BALINESE PERIOD (13TH AND 13TH CENT-
URY).
The three gods, Brahma, Siva and Vishnu, are indicated re-
spectively by the book, the third eye and the conch. The front hands
are folded in anjali attitude. This figure is perhaps also not an image
of the deities, but possibly one of a king who regarded himself as an
incarnation of the Trimurti. In favour of this latter view is the very
typical headdress consisting of a crown composed of rows of stylized
lotus-petals, which might have been derived from a headdress in lotus
form, indicating the king’s deliverance. Among the Balinese this
figure is known at present under the name Tjaturmuka, on account
of the four heads, and is regarded by them as a representation of
Brahma. The complete figure was originally composed of three
parts, of which the undermost is lost.
Height 116 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PI.ATE XI


PLATE XII
SEATED FIGURE OF A KING; A SRADDHA IMAGE.
KUTRI.
MIDDLE-BALINESE PERIOD (13TH-14TH CENTURY.)
The strong leaning to the baroque, which marks Bali’s art of the
Middle-Balinese period, is eloquently exemplified by this figure. The
ear-ornaments, originally small leaflike decorations behind the ear,
have grown here into gigantic vegetation; the slips of the dress form
large cloudlike motifs joining the figure to the back piece; also the
ornaments of the armlets and ear-pendants are exaggerated and
rendered in proportions probably never known in reality. (Compare
this with the simplicity of the figure on Plate I.) The king repre-
sented holds his hands in a mudra which is almost identical with
the attitude assumed by the Balinese to-day in the presence of a high-
stationed person; here it is addressed to a deity. This is the only
instance in Bali where a figure is depicted in this particular Balinese
anjali attitude.
Height 70 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE XII


PLATE XIII
STATUE OF A PRINCESS. PEDJENG.
A.D. 1342. END OF THE MIDDLE-BALINESE PERIOD.
In a.d. 1343 the Balinese royal dynasty was annihilated by the
Javanese, so that this might have been the last royal image of that
dynasty. The figure is an almost completely closed mass and illus-
trates the advanced stage of mortuary sculpture. The facial features
are strongly individual. In each hand the figure holds a sraddha
symbol. On the back piece, near the head, is a short inscription with
a date-in-words: krtta rasa tingal ing wong= die with four spots,
essence, eyes (of) man — i.e., 1264 of the £aka era. Exaggerated
ornaments; on the head a lotus-crown.
Height 107 cm. Volcanic tuff.
PLATE XIV
STATUE OF A PRINCESS. PEDJENG.
A.D. 1342. SIDE VIEW OF THE FIGURE ON THE
PRECEDING PLATE.


PLATE XIII
PLATE XIV


PLATE XV
CHATU[?]KĀYA. TAMPAK SIRING.
PERIOD UNCERTAIN, BUT UNDOUBTEDLY A PIECE OF
COMPARATIVELY RECENT DATE.
A GOOD example of the consequences of mortuary sculpture, to be
compared with Plate XI. The figure is of an almost purely In-
donesian primitive conception and corresponds to the Indonesian and
Polynesian ancestor figures, here, however, clearly inspired by the
Hinduistic chatuhkaya. Lotus- and flower-crown are merely indicated
by primitive motifs.
Height 81 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE XV


PLATE XVI
SPOUT. FOUND NEAR PEDJENG.
A RSHI holds in his hands a small human creature out of whose
body formerly issued the water-stream. Hermit’s headdress of
coiled tresses; neckpiece undecorated (unfinished ?). Figures of
rshis as spouts occur quite frequently in the old art of Bali, among
them also Arjuna as a hermit. The meaning of this representation,
however, is unknown.
Height 95 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE XVI


PLATE XVII
HOLY-WATER VESSEL. PEDJENG.
MIDDLE-BALINESE PERIOD.
The vessel is decorated by representations in relief running
around the whole piece. They depict eight ndgas carried by gods;
each pair of adjoining naga- tails supports a deity seated on a lotus.
The background for the whole scene is a mountain washed by the sea.
In the clouds are birds and heavenly beings; on the sea-shore fishers
and different small scenes. The upper edge of the vessel rs orna-
mented by a lotus-petal motif and bears in a medallion a date-in-
picture ( tjandra stngkala ), probably 1251 of the £aka era=A.D. 1329.
The vessel, broken in several places, is held in great sanctity by
the population of Pedjeng, where it is kept in one of the temples.
The depicted scenes are evidently inspired by the amrtamanthana,
the Churning of the Ocean, but deviate considerably from the Indian
rendering; perhaps they pertain to the story, found in Old-Balinese
and Javanese writings, about the mountain Mandara rolled away from
India to Java in order to fasten the island. On the way the gods lost
pieces of this mountain, which came down upon the island and were
the origin of the mountains of Java.
The profuse decoration, as in this vessel, might have been typical
for sculptures, other than mortuary, of the Middle-Balinese period.
Height 75 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE XVII


PLATE XVIII
SPOUT DEPICTING THE DEATH OF HIRA[?]YAKAŚIPU
CAUSED BY VISHŅU (NŖIMHAVATARA). PEDJENG.
PERIOD UNCERTAIN, BUT PROBABLY MIDDLE-BALINESE
(13TH OR 14TH CENTURY).
In this richly elaborated and ornamented piece the predilection for
the baroque, already manifest in Old-Balinese art, finds very clear
expression. Vishnu-Nrsimha holds the king of demons grasped
by his hair, having torn open his belly with his right hand. The whole
piece, characterized by strong movement of the broken masses and
by superabundant ornamentation, stands in strong contrast with the
calm figures of the Hindu-Balinese period.
Height 53 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE XVIII


PLATE XIX
ASHŢTAMUKHALI[?]GA. PEDJENG.
TIME OF ORIGIN UNCERTAIN, BUT PROBABLY THE
OLD- OR MIDDLE-BALINESE PERIOD (10TH-14.TH
CENTURY).
From a lotus, supported by eight seated Siva figures, arises a
lihga surrounded by eight busts of Siva, who is recognizable by the
skull and crescent in the headdress. The piece originally stood on a
yoni.
Height 120 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE XIX


PLATE XX
CHATU[?]KĀYA WITH MASKS. PEDJENG.
PERIOD UNCERTAIN.
The chatuhkaya is composed of Bhairava-like figures, each with
a mask before the face and armed with a sword with a hilt in the shape
of a serpent. On the mask, which seems to be a strongly stylized Kala
symbol, one can discern the highly conventionalized forms of one eye,
three teeth and two ears. The figures are all in altdha attitude. ■ The
whole group stands on a round lotus base. It is not improbable that
this figure pertained to a deliverance cult in which Bhairava, or even
Bhima—both are forms of Siva—acted as redeemers. In later times
the Bhima-form of Siva was identified with the renowned Pandava
of that name. This cult derived from the kalachakra sects, known
from India, which played an important role also in Buddhism.
Height 37 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE XX


PLATE XXI
RĀKSHASA WITH SKULL-BOWL. PEDJENG.
MIDDLE-BALINESE PERIOD.
The crown and ornaments of the rakshasa are also decorated
with skulls. The figure belongs to a larger than life-size statue of
a Bhairava standing on a corpse. Evidently kalachakra influences,
whose after-effects may still be seen in the witch-dances and black
magic practised now in Bali, though there is no question of a definite
sect of Bhairavas in our times. Yet there are books for instruction
in black magic as well as apprentices of this art who hold their gather-
ings at night on death-fields.
Height 163 cm. Volcanic tuff.
PLATE XXII
MAKARA SPOUT. PEDJENG.
MIDDLE-BALINESE PERIOD.
Compare this specimen with the makara on Plate II; the
strong stylization of this piece then becomes clear. Behind the eye
is the ear shaped in the form of a leaf, and behind the latter again the
ram’s-hom frequently found with the makaras of Java and Bali. To
the right is the opened mouth ; the upturned end of the trunk is
broken off.
Height 45 cm. Volcanic tuff.


PLATE XXI
PLATE XXII


PLATE XXIII
DESIGN OF AN ENGRAVED ORNAMENT ON A STONE
IN A HERMITAGE NEAR PEDJENG, REPRESENTING
A METAL WATER JUG OF A HERMIT.
EXAMPLE OF METAL WORK OF THE OLD-BALINESE
PERIOD (11TH CENTURY).


PLATE XXIII
