

?
# ?? ??'
<X SYDNEY :
> BEARD AND HOLMES, BEN FRANKLIN PRINTING OFFICE, (5
| 811 GEORGE STREET. i |
Bjm PRICE ONE SHILLING.
�-? =^3^15
L
Y vt* rfF l
COLONIAL LYRICS
ORIGINAL POEMS.
GEOEGE E. LOYAU, I
M
Author of Australian Seasons,? ? Leichhardt, the Lost Explorer,?
? Australian Wild Flowers,? ? Pounds, Shillings, and Pence,?
? Colonial Sketches,? &c. .&c.
DEDICATED, BY PERMISSION, TO
His Excellency SLR HERCULES ROBLNSON.
: . . . &


: ? i *


OLONIAL _/YRICS :
ORIGINAL POEMS.
GrEOEGrE E. LOYAII.
Author of ? Australian Seasons,? ? Leichhardt, the Lost Explorer, ?
� Australian Wild Flowers,? ? Pounds, Shillings, and Pence,?
?Colonial Sketches,? &c., &c.
DEDICATED, BY PERMISSION, TO
Excellency Robinson.
SYDNEY:
BEARD AND HOLMES, PRINTERS, BEN FRANKLIN PRINTING OFFICE.
311 George Street.
PRICE OUSTS SHILLING,


A NEW book is a new thing, given to men by its author:
It cometh, ?tis read, or too often cast off, by the Public.
If good, ?tis a glorious Creation, a great work constructed,
Sent forth to the world, like an alien seeking for success ;
The offspring of Brain, and its handmaids Thought, Study, and Beauty,
Combining their efforts, and working united together.
Events, times, seasons, and epochs, changes, losses, reverses,
Nations, kingdoms, and countries, powers, people, and potentates?
All these in its narratives blending, and compiled with order.
A good book is like gold refined many times in the fire ;
Therein are the words the soul seeketh, to render it tranquil;
Happiness beams on its pages?gems on its surface scatter?d,
While the peace of its atmosphere is healthful and life-giving.
?Tis a flower from the altar of Beauty, a star in the sky
Of Misfortune, shedding clear light on the path of the mourner.
No matter the title, or tinsel surrounding the binding,
The type, the set phrase, or position of words or of sentence.
Not these should we look at, or judge by, for deeper and nobler
Must be the true test of its greatness, its worth, or its power.


COLONIAL LYRICS.
Jo !
Seated in grandeur on our Southern Sea,
And girt with beauty round thy sunny shore ;
Daughter of Nations, thou yet queen shalt be,
E?en as thy mother wast in days of yore !
Wake from the deeply gather?d lethargy
Which wraps thy soul, cut from its inner core
The fistula of Sloth ; so shall true Liberty
Be thine, the perfect freedom of the Free !
Earth rings with praises of thy noble land,
Arouse thee, therefore, and take sole command
Of the high place which shall be offered thee !
There is a ring of Freedom in thy name ;
The forest boughs repeat it in their songs,
The great white waves in chorus sing thy Fame,
?Tis utter?d far and near by feather?d throngs,
All Nature tells it here ; then who shall blame
The Patriot heart that for a Future longs,
Wherein the trammel?d garments of thy Shame
Shall have no place, and unforgotten wrongs
Find a redress. Ah, yet on mem?ry throngs
The thought of evils which once bow?d thee down,
And added only to a false renown :
Of these thy bards have sung their truest Songs.
0
Come, from the darkness where thou long hast trod
Without a gleam of Hope to light the way !
Come forth ! armed with a fervent trust in God,
Rise from thy night of Sorrow into day !
Erect a shrine upon thy verdant sod
To royal Liberty?for ?tis a ray
From her great soul which falls into thine own :
And ever she will thy behests obey ;
Hast thou not heard the rapture of her tone ?
Or art thou dull, content as heretofore to groan,
A willing captive where Sloth holds its potent sway I


See how the Future beckons thee, with outspread hand
Pointing the place which thou must occupy :
Then shall pale Ignorance forsake thy strand,
And Crime have no rest ?neath a Southern sky.
Then Commerce on thy wide extended land
Shall find a home, and Cultivation lie
Round many spots where now vast plains expand.
Why art thou slothful! Echo answers, why ! !
Shake off these trammels and be firm and bold,
Come boldly out from thy young chrysalis mould?
Create a name, a Fame that cannot die !
The day is dawning o?er the Eastern sky ;
Filled with rich landscapes is yon fleecy cloud,
Aurora lifts her jewel?d curtain high
As changes swift on happy Fancy crowd :
The gorgeous pomp of such a regal morn
By far outvies all in which Art has share;
A glorious sheen is on the tassel?d corn
The soul of Beauty hath abiding there.
To numbers soft the wild creek chants its song
?Neath yonder brushwood where it seems to hide :
A winding course it gently glides along
And at each turn becomes a nobler tide.
Yon farm-house peeping forth where yonder trees
In all their arborescent pride appear,
Seems the abode of soul reviving Peace ;
I?ve sought it long and lo I find it here !
Now Nature reigns in mighty solitude,
From the great Bush all noisy ?sounds have fled,
Nor birds, nor insects on the scene intrude ;
Here every thing seems pulseless, hush?d, or dead :
How still the air is ! scarce a zephyr shakes
The gilded foliage in a world of green ;
And placid Sunshine one elysium makes,
Where?er it falleth in this lovely scene.
Ah, I can picture what perchance may be
In the bright Future?s evanescent years,
And on this scarce-known spot located see
Some mighty nation with new hopes and fears


Some giant city fill?d with busy looms
Where royal Labor holds the hands of Trade;
A place of note where cultur?d Commerce blooms
And Plenty stands in regal garb arrayed.
On yonder slope which rises from the verge
Of the far-spread uncultivated plain,
There too at Fancy?s call I see emerge
The car of Science and its glittering train.
Improvement sitting throned upon the hills
Looking with silent satisfaction round
Where mighty progress all the landscape fills,
And Genius rest and sympathy hath found.
Who knows the Future, who indeed can see
What yet may rise in that far distant time !
Imagination only holds the key
Which opes the portal of this dream sublime.
The past is number?d ?mong the things that were,
And therein once imperial cities rose
In majesty as grand, in form as fair
As these which here delicious Fancy shows.
And they have perish?d, ruins mark the site
Of Babylon, of Carnac, and an hundred more,
Whose armies proudly gather?d to the fight;
Assyrian conquerors in the days of yore.
See mystic Memphis, like a spectre stands,
Near the grim desert, guardian of the Past;
And the weird Sphinx, half-buried by the sands,
?Ere long on this drear scene shall look its last,
What are our petty triumphs, what our feats
Of skill or labor when compared with these ?
Here Art has triumphed, and Ambition meets
Its death blow, when such prodigies it sees.
Oh 1 chainless Mind, bright realm where Genius shines,
Thou art a gem of more than usual worth !
In the deep caverns of thy well-stored mines,
Were formed the plans which gave these relics birth.
The Human Mind, what can it not achieve
In its great sphere ! although before ?tis taught
Vainly it strives sweet magic spells to weave,
Or find a soil in which to plant the germs of Thought.
See polish?d Culture, wedded to the Muse,
How sweet the rapture of her well-tun?d strain !
Therein are colors of the brightest hues,
And melody as plaintive as the Main.


Sooth?d by its power the weaiy soul loves well
The nectar?d music from Euterpe?s hand ;
And thrill?d with joy in its entrancing spell
Creates new beauties with a fairy wand.
But stay ! for see the Present brings once more
From meaner things a stern Reality;
Changed is the scene from the rich sheen it wore,
Nor bears it now a pleasing charm for me.
A parching heat encircles earth and sky,
An arid mist surrounds the sun?s bright crown ;
While thunder-clad portentous vapours hie
Upon their, course with wild, malignant frown.
And such is Life ! its early hours are fair,
Its morning bright with many a lovely charm ;
The sultry noon-tide comes, dark clouds appear,
And rising troubles much the soul alarm.
Still, if Content and faithful Love be ours,
Why need we o?er Misfortune?s sallies mourn !
For Hope?s rich hand can strew Life?s path with flowers.
And bid each bitter care no more return.
LOUD j^ICTURES,
How lovely the tints on Night?s pale, starry crest,
When a royal Day fades away in the West !
Its curtains of Beauty are widely unfurl?d,
And Peace hovers round on the skirts of the world.
Superb in their grandeur the light vapours lie
With bright orange hues on the broad western sky ;
How glorious they look in the sun?s parting beams,
Like a landscape oft form?d in beautiful dreams !
There tower vast mountains with summits of snow.
Or proud fanes and temples their pinnacles show :
There Fancy can picture fair scenes to the sight,
And invest with strange charms that region of light.
But all that is lovely on earth or in sky,
Hath its moments of change ; thus I note with a sigh
How yon fading landscape too quickly departs,
And leaves but its memory green in our hearts !


Jn UHcmuriam
NICOL DRYSDALB STENHOUSB, ESQ., M.A.
Another bark launch?d on an unknown sea,
Another star obscured'in Life?s bright sky,
Another soul gone to Eternity,
A meteor Mind whose greatness cannot die !
Kind sympathy within his tender heart arose
When he beheld some suff?rer poor and lone ;
He shrank not from the sight of other?s woes.
But felt such sorrows as they were his own.
All that in man is truly great and good,
All that is God-like in a human form
Were his by Nature ; and affection warm
Rear?d her high temple in his honest soul.
Friends he had many in our Southern sphere,
And these by tender Memories imbued
With silent sadness gather?d round his bier ;
His mourning orphans? grief they?d fain console,
Though all their hearts could offer was, a tear !
He loved the Beautiful, where?er ?twas found,
The out-spread sea, whether in storm or rest;
Nature?s vast meadows were as hallow?d ground
To him ; all things in Nature had a zest
Which nought in Art?s domain could ever yield.
With books he was familiar, and with Men,
(The royal Minds which rule this nineteenth age>
True Genius in him met the ready friend,
The noble* patron, and the critic sage,
His generous hand was free to give or lend
To all in need, to aid with purse, or pen
Each new-form?d plan by Merit well design?d,
A benefactor he, of sterling kind !
Some may forget him ; unlike such, my heart
Utters his name with a regretful sigh;
His memory causes bitter tears to start
From tender founts, wherein deep sorrows lie.
Stenhouse ! to me still dear as aye thou art,
Let the cold world thy lonely grave pass by,
Without a thought ; whate?er my fate may be.
I?ll not forget thou wast a friend to me !


Pleasures of
A. POEM
Dedicated , by permission, to the late N. D. STENHOUSE, Esq., M.A.
I stood with. Fancy on Parnasus? mount
In the dim Past of bygone centuries,
While glorious visions round me seem?d to rise,
As if supplied from some Hyperion fount,
And spread their charms to greet my weary eyes.
There Homer seated on the topmost cone,
With Tasso, Goethe, and the kindred choir,
Still sang of Love and struck the quiv?ring wire
To tell Affection?s soul-entrancing claims ;
While Sappho, Virgil, and a thousand names
Dear to all nations, a right royal throng
Join?d in the chorus of the noble theme,
And lent to that delicious fleeting dream,
Harmonious measures in a realm of Song.
This was their lay, transcribed as it pour?d forth
From those great Minds, so full of sterling worth ;
And though its depths I never here may reach,
I am content to grasp the end they teach.
Love doth ennoble us, it draws away
Half the keen sadness of our outer life ;
Its presence casts some brightness in our way,
Cheers the lone hour, and cut's the bands of strife;
Breaks down all barriers come where?er they may,
And yields true peace, when fell Misfortune, rife
With resolutions to wake Sorrow?s tear
Hovers around Affection?s hallow?d path,
And moves the tempest of each mighty Fear
In human hearts with an unusual wrath :
?Tis then Love shines forth like some genial sun,
Parting the clouds which hang around Distress,
And with the smile of perfect happiness,
Proclaims new victories which its hand hath won.
Love is the essence of Divinity,
The mystic power which rules the wayward souls
Of men, and fills an universe of earth and sea,
* The MS. of this Poem was submitted to Mr. Stenhouse, who stated his
accordance with the sentiments it contained.


With all that?s really pure. It seems to be
The one great blessing which the Mind controls.
For it is drawn with kindred sympathy
?Neath the mild influence of its purity.
As some fair vestal with true fealty,
Bearing Hope?s symbols on the brow of youth,
Plighting the vow of constancy and truth
To one, whose Love shall henceforth be her stay,
Whose guardianship, with clear refulgent ray,
Will guide her on from Time into Eternity.
All things must bend before Affection?s rule,
The proud and haughty, or the truly great;
mi _? 4-1? ?
The rich or poor, the wise man or the fool,
All yield to Love their free-born, first estate.
And thou sweet Friendship, art her happy mate,
A germ of kindness in unselfish hearts ;
The Mind?s meek handmaid, who dost ever wait
To render justice to its noblest parts,
And gather sweets, which aliens cannot find.
If Love is deem?d the highest of all Arts
Surely its compeer in a sterling Mind
Is Friendship ! no external rind
However beautiful, by Taste design?d,
Has power its sovereignty to change,
Like callous souls, wherein its form is strange !
The lay was ended, but methought there rose
From out the vista of that pleasing dream,
A thousand bards, eager to chaunt the theme
Of Love and Friendship through a world of woes,
And by such means lull suffering to repose.
I saw them take their glorious harps in hand
And sally forth along the Future?s strand;
Hope?s star, with Faith?s pure rays allied,
(Like that grand orb at ancient Bethlehem
Which shepherds gazed on, in that hallow?d night,
When the meek Saviour came to set aright
Men?s wayward souls, and wear earth?s garb for them,
Even a lambent flame like this), their guide.
Thus went they onward, voidless of a fear,
And I did with strange wonder then behold
How true Affection has the power to fold
All things within its holy hemisphere.
Now roused from visions of that gifted throng
Sweet thoughts came trooping through my tired brain,
And brought rich music in their happy train,
With all the beauteous royalty of Song.
This nerv?d my purpose for a subject new,
And gave me strength its varied depths to scan,


While gentle Poesy lent her aid to plan
Each humble stanza, and thus brought to view
The lines, which reader ! here I offer you.
All honor?d theme, framed for the Poet?s lyre,
Affection ! whose rich gems all souls desire ;
My Muse invoke, and inspiration lend
To sing the value of a sterling friend.
To follow on Life?s strange and varied course
Each grade of friendship, and explore the source
Whence it derives that truly magic Art,
Which takes so firm a hold upon the heart.
To analyse the deep, empyrean spring,
Where real Love finds those lucid gems which bring
So high a price e?en in a selfish world;
And by whose aid, when Sorrow?s hand hath hurl?d
Its potent shafts around the poor man?s lot,
Tranquility is found within his cot!
Hail, social Love ! star in our firmament!
By Providence, thy pleasures here are sent,
To nerve the suff?ring, and with lasting zest
Pour holy calm into the woe-worn breast.
How dear thy consolations to each harras?d soul.
When even Hope is powerless to console !
How true thy sweets, how full of raptur?d Joy
Thy tranquil hours, whose blessings never cloy,
But are remembrances which form a part
Of all that?s sacred in the human heart.
From sultry Ind unto the frigid Zone,
Where ice-bound Oceans lie round lands unknown.
Where faint Aurora?s varied phases show
Rich hues of beauty on vast fields of snow,
There, calmly waiting for the wish?d-for Day,
Cheer?d by Affection?s ever-burning ray,
The Esquimaux contented bears his Fate,
Thanks God for living, and with heart elate
Pursues his calling near each icy ledge,
By dogs swift hurried in his rugged sledge.
But wherefore traverse distant lands like these !
Why seek Affection far ?mong stormy seas ;
Whose ice-clad realms (forsaken save by those
Stern Fate has lured into a world of snows
And doom?d to perish), proved the lonely grave
Of noble Franklin, and his seamen brave !
I need not leave my own dear native land,
Seeking Affection on some distant strand;
Stranger ?mong strangers, with a name unknown
And not a single friend to call my own.
Not e?en a wife, or happy child, whose glee


After my toil would run to welcome me.
Not e?en a schoolmate, one who ? knew me well,?
And had some tale too of the Past to tell,
Of bygone days, when ?neath pedantic rule,
We conn?d dull lessons at the village school.
Not e?en a sister, just to set my chair
Beside the fire, or mingle with the prayer
We said together at a Mother?s knee,
With pure-and infantile simplicity.
Fancy recalls the joyous days of Youth,
When petty Friendships seemed to verge on truth ;
And brief acquaintanceship assumed a place
Of high importance in Life?s eager race.
How quickly pass?d its weak, inconstant ties,
E?en at this distance to my weary eyes
Fond Memory brings with Youth?s delightful years,
The passing tribute of regretful tears :
That those I loved, that those who seem?d so true.
Too soon forsook the old friend for the new,
Caught by the glitter of some transient beam;
Some vain illusion, or deceitful dream,
From me they wander?d, and with deep regret
I almost wish that we had never met!
I knew an instance where true Friendship dwelt,
A glorious visitant in two young lives ;
Even as boys, its glow they early felt
With that deep pleasure, which the soul derives
In its exalted, high, etherial flame ;
Thus owned they Friendship which was more than name,
Albert and Edwin ! schoolmates, playmates, both
In sports true equals, and in all things loth
To outvie, lest of them it might be said,
? One was the best 1 ? and thus they onward sped
Their course with Time, and so together grew
Faithful unto the last; for when Death threw
Its shadow o?er one, then the other sigh?d
And sat with sorrow by his lone bed-side,
Clasping his friend?s hand, breathing fervent prayer
That God in pity would but deign to spare
His well-loved form, and (though the hope was vain)
Would raise him quickly to new Life again.
A few short days of bitterness and fears,
An interval of penitence and tears,
A wavering glimmer of Life?s burnt-out lamp
And then the final change, which cast a damp
On inmost Hopes, which now for aye had fled,
And left naught, save this promise from the dead,
? That Albert?s spirit, would oft near him stand
To guide his footsteps to that better land I ?
Edwin grew old soon, and the friends who saw


His pensive visage gazed on him with awe,
He seem?d to wear the symbols of such grief
That he of mourners might have pass?d as chief
And evidently felt as though a part,
(And that its best), were riven from his heart.
Oft as I?ve looked on that imperial face,
And mark?d its workings, Time can ne?er efface
My bitter feelings, as I saw the cost,
Love dared to pay to one too early lost.
See Nature in sweet innocence array?d
Deck with rude grandeur every forest shade,
When Spring?s rich carpet lines fair Albion?s isle.
And Peace and Plenty round her hamlets smile.
From every hill-side beam perennial flowers,
Birds chant glad strains within the hawthorn bowers.
And all are happy ?neath the greenwood tree,
In the true light of Love?s felicity.
Here happy Hodge, the rustic, unkempt swain
Who holds the plough, or guides the farmer?s wain,
Woo?s some fair Lucy in the calm evetide
And soon invests her with the name of Bride.
Her virgin modesty, so well attired
In its own gracefulness; by few admired
Grows like the violet in her native field,
A germ of beauty from all eyes concealed.
No prying peer, or liveried Fortune?s slave,
Eager to promise, and to be a knave,
Hath lured the maid with Falsehood?s airy tongue,
Or cast aside her heart by anguish wrung.
Thus here she blooms in this unnoticed spot,
And sheds a charm within a rustic?s cot,
See when Day gathers in the florid West,
And twilight looms forth on Night?s starry crest;
When zephyrs lightly fan th? umbrageous trees,
And softly wake melodious symphonies,
Goes forth fair Lucy from her cottage small,
(Half hid by ivy on its moss-grown wall),
To meet her husband on his homeward road.
And ease some portion of his heavy load
Of gather?d sticks (which though he well can bear
This forest burthen ?does but show her care :
Her true wife-feeling of deep sympathy
Though unexpress?d in tender words it be,
Yet speaks out plainly from her tranquil soul
With fervent feeling, voidless of control).
Bright years glide by, the round of seasons hold
The usual blessings, while new cares unfold
Their varied hues, and happy children come,
To add endearments to that cottar's home.
?Tis then Affection takes a new degree


And breaks the charms of dull monotony;
Creates the Parent?and erects a shrine
Within each heart, of something more divine
Than the mere impulse of a passion?d Love;
Something more stable which naught can remove
Save Death?and this but raises Hope on high,
And lifts the mind to ?things which cannot die.?
Their lives? have now no interrupted course,
Just like some tranquil streamlet from its source,
Time brings few changes in then- lowly state,
Nor fashion?s ills which vex the rich and great ;
In blissful ignorance their hours are spent
Their offspring healthy, mated with Content,
A half-clad band, whose boisterous shouts of glee,
Awake loud echoes ?neath the greenwood tree.
At times divided, yet at night as one,
All wrangling?s ended when the day is done ;
All faults forgiven, as with sweet repose,
They bring each weak contention to a close.
When true, how pleasing Love?s appearance seems ;
When false, how dull its once enraptur?d dreams,
While its mild visage, form?d an object dear,
Looks clouded, troubled by some rising fear.
See Jealousy with hasty, keen-edg?d words
Dissever all Affection?s well-drawn chords,
And undermine Love?s still devoted claim,
With hints of treason, which exists in name.
Base maddening Jealousy, why snatch a brand
From Love?s fierce fire to desecrate the land!
Why bring forth Misery, such as Friends must feel,
Who find their best joys crush?d beneath thy heel!
lago-like thou walk?st the humble paths of Peace,
And jibing bid?st all dark suspicion cease,
Speaking thine honey?d words to minds distrest
And prating peace to those who know no rest;
Hearts whence the calm of happiness hath fled,
Hearts thou hast blasted, wherein hopes lie dead,
And Homes where blossom?d once tranquility
Grown to deep plague spots marked by Infamy.
These are thy works ! these thy true end in life.
The perjur?d husband, or the injur?d wife,
The mask of Innocence where all is guile,
And reckless Sorrow dares to force a smile :
While Friendship bartered for the cause of Lust,
Sits sadly crooning o?er its misplaced trust.
Strange, is it not, that Jealousy should strain
A point to trespass on Love?s vast domain,
And oft by means of petty schemes and spies,
Suspicion raise, where no suspicion lies !


Oh, who is she with wild, dishevell?d hair,
With streaming eyes, and snowy bosom bare,
Who Midnight?s vigil keeps ?mong lonely tombs,
And takes rude pleasure in funereal glooms !
Who singles out one grave above the rest,
A baby?s grave ! and walks on tip-toe, lest
Her very footfall, or her hurried tread
Should break the stillness near the long-loved dead ?
She is a Mother ! is, or once was so,
Pride of the village, which peeps out below
?Mong yonder trees, and in the calm moonlight
Adds a new beauty to a lovely night.
Her fault was Love, if fault it e?er can be,
Virtue is weak, and virtuous was she,
Till Harry came to win the artless maid
And then departed (scorning Love betray?d)
To ruin others in some far-off clime,
And left her mourning o?er a nameless crime.
Her Father cursed the melancholy day
That saw his daughter lured from home away;
Her Mother wept, her Brother strove in vain
To coax the ? lost one ? to their cot again;
Spoke words of comfort, such as Brothers can!
(William was all that Nature needs in Man),
And often stopped her in the village street,
And tried to draw her from the lone retreat,
A ruin?d cabin near the public road,
Where she and Misery had found abode.
Ah why the painful stoiy here protract,
Few village annals, but possess such fact
Recorded ?mong its histories of old,
And still at eventide by weak gossips told !
That woe-worn breast which never more could find,
The peace which once o?erspread the happy mind,
That little babe, of which in her distress
She dared become a wretched murderess ;
Nor felt compunction, or a tearful eye,
When she beheld it on its cold bier lie,
When drawn by neighbours from the river bed,
An earth-born seraph, calmly smiling, dead !
?Twas after that, when lucid moments came,
And woke the mind from its lethargic shame,
And roused a tempest in its Lethal sea
With all the force of injured Memory,
She understood it then ; and oft would glide
Crazed by Misfortune to the lone grave-side,
Where her dear babe slept in a grass-grown mound.
And drop hot tears upon that sacred ground.
By Anguish often when her mind was wrung,
Words forced themselves to find a ready tongue,
And framed weak lamentations o?er her shame,


Her ruined hopes, and Virtue?s blighted name.
All this is known, then wherefore here relate
With new additions the last direful fate,
Of one who loved too well, and early died,
A poor, forsaken, outcast, suicide 1
Love has strange phases, this of all most drear,
Is surely worthy of sweet Pity?s tear !
For what more sad than some lorn ruin?d maid,
By Falsehood crush?d, by Artifice betrayed I
Hail blissful Love ! the Love that?s ever true,
No passing passion for some object new ;
But one, which stronger grows with length of days,
And gathers blessings on ? Life?s rugged ways.?
Within the soul it rears a noble shrine,
And deems its idol faultless, and divine;
Without one blemish, or a trace of sin
To blight the heaven of holy calm within.
Love sees no fault here, no deceit can find ;
?Tis truly said ? that Love too oft is blind 1 ?
Blind to all things which mar the royal face
Of sweet perfection, and of matchless grace ;
A keener vision, seeking gems which hide,
Beneath the surface of a mean outside ;
What others carp at, that Love cannot see,
Used to appearance in the first degree,
It notes not marks which draw forth others? jeers,
But finds true sympathy with woman?s tears.
Love is most potent in those darken?d hours,
When fierce, mysterious Trouble round us lowers,
And rises forth in all its Majesty,
The Mentor and the trusty guide to be,
Of fainting Manhood on Life?s weary road,
Oppress?d with griefs and seeking an abode
Far from the labyrinth of deep despair
When Hope is powerless to cope with Care.
It deems its own existence poor in price,
If needed lastly, as a sacrifice
To turn aside, or perhaps some pang control
From those it worships in its secret soul.
What can be dearer than the name of Wife,
To him who grapples with the world?s fierce strife,
And only finds in her unclouded face
The peace he seeks for in some other place I
There were two hearts who long together grew,
Husband and Wife, with wants and wishes few;
Their joys in union, all their troubles one,
With bright Hope shining like a mighty sun
On their small home, where some few trials came
But ne?er extinguish?d Love?s ethereal flame.


P rom Childhood hours to a mature estate
Link d hand in hand they walk?d with hearts elate,
And from themselves those consolations drew,
Which others strove to find, but never knew.
Hard was their lot, for they were truly poor,
Scant too their meals?enough?but little more,
Yet tranquil Love its boundless blessings lent,
In an existence fraught with sweet content.
At last a direful stroke upon him fell,
And sank him firmer in Misfortune?s hell ;
The shafts of Heaven amid an awful storm,
100 well directed to his fragile form,
YV rapp?d with deep clouds each pleasing source of sight,
And doom?d his vision to perpetual Night.
Vainly he groped with sticks his usual way
And wept with tears the long departed Day,
While rising horrors round him seem?d to creep,
And oft dispell d the balm of wish?d-for sleep.
At times he?d take his plaintive violin,
And try from Memory some joy to win,
From a familiar, well-remember?d tune,
Like ? Tara?s Halls,? or Burns? ? Bonnie Doon ! ?
Hither and thither travelled now the pair,
To many a rural town or village fail?,
Known to each rustic, was his humble name,
And even country lasses lisp?d his fame;
He?d variations, few like him could play,
Or keep the music up ?till break of day,?
His wondrous touch aroused each happy boor,
And legs then danced that never danced before,
All townships hail?d him, as their greatest prize
And none, save he, regretted want of eyes.
Though she, his partner, as Time onward flew,
And days between them and the grave were few,
Noted the changes that each winter brought
To him whose image filled each anxious thought.
Oft would she lead him in the summer time,
To visit Nature in its vernal clime,
Guide well his steps to some delightful nook,
And read of ?comfort,? in God?s holy Book,
Point out the landscape stretching far away
With guileless children in the woods at play,
Note too the woolly flocks and lowing kine,
With noble gardens, where the lordly vine
Drunk the rich moisture from the verdant soil
And well rewarded all the gardeners toil.
There sitting ?neath the wide umbrageous trees
He loved to listen to their symphonies,
They seem?d Orphean, and touch?d every part
Of the deep music in his ardent heart.
Full well he loved the mild, melodious strains,


Pour?d forth by song birds on the out-spread plains,
And learn?d new beauties from the happy choir
Whose sweet love-notes might even Jove inspire.
The sea he loved, and when his faithful guide,
Would seat him near its long weed-margin?d side,
Would often say ? he seem?d to feel its breath,
And deem?d its shores the boundary of Death
The dancing billows with storm-crested foam,
He said, ? appeared to seek for rest and home,
Ocean their mother might not be less kind,
But they were driven by each varied wind,
Just as he had been by misfortune hurl?d,
Blind, poor, and friendless, over half the world.?
?Twas something touching, just to see his face
Light up with joy, though ?neath its smile a trace
Of sadness lurk?d, while Melancholy drear,
Hid its dark visage ?neath a rising tear.
Was he not bless?d, though doom?d to walk in night,
In knowing nothing of the ills which sight
Entails on those who poverty endure,
And see the direful sorrows of the poor ?
?Tis true, his angel wife each day would hide,
How she alone by want was sorely tried,
How evils which the blind man never knew
Gather?d about her, and how Flattery threw
Seductive offers in her path, and turned
Her peace to gall, when she its bounty spurn?d.
These facts he heard not, innocent was he ;
She dared not tell him things he could not see.
So bore with fortitude each bitter day,
As she with Hope pursued her rugged way,
?Mong darker trials, and ?mid greater gloom,
To reach that last estate, a peaceful tomb.
They were not separated at the last,
When Death came to them, and with kindness cast
His arms around them, and brought that true ease
To souls which yearn to find a lasting peace.
No stone now marks the spot where they have found
Rest from their troubles ; but a little mound,
One among many in yon flower-clad vale,
Is the sole witness to my humble tale.
Oh Sympathy, thou art a blessed thing,
A fragrant flower, cull?d in Love?s genial spring ;
Kindred to Friendship, germ of all that?s good,
To each how welcome, though scarce understood,
Thy glorious charms, thy simple tenderness,
Save in the furnaced hours of bitterness.
When dull and impotent our Nature?s stand,
Seeking in vain to grasp some friendly hand,


Then the faint heart looks up, nor longer grieves,
For that sweet compact, it at once perceives,
And hails thy presence, which may claim to be
One step the nearer to Divinity.
From thee springs Friendship, whose delightful form
Heeds no appearance of the coming storm,
Which Poverty and reckless Fate may rise
In the calm heaven of new-born sympathies.
Friendship is honest, manly, generous, frank,
Nor makes distinctions on ? the plea of rank,?
Looks with fond eyes on those who e?er impart
One ray of pleasure to its truthful heart.
Not often found, when found, how very dear,
A constant friend our loneliness to cheer,
To utter words of comfort, and employ
New arts to weave around us spells of joy.
So that in gaining such, on bended knee
With something of our childhood?s purity.
Looking to God, as we before him bend,
We well may thank him for this gift ?a friend !
How hard to know, how difficult to meet,
Is one true friend in Poverty?s retreat I
For seldom Friendship cares afar to roam
To bring sweet comfort to some poor man?s home !
How distant, too, appears its tranquil face,
Whereon reposes every lordly grace,
Which raises mortals, and can never fail
To elevate them in the social scale.
That ? Wealth gains Friendship ! ? has been said of old,
That even gems like this are bought and sold ;
While sons of sorrow sink with rising shame,
And mourn the weakness of their humble claim.
But happy I, for early ?twas I found
One among many on Life?s varied round ;
Who like some meteor flash?d upon mjr sight,
And turn?d my darkness into glorious light.
Who what I most desir?d deign?d to supply,
And watch?d my failings with an anxious eye ;
Who bade me with my troubles early cope,
And nerv?d my heart by many gleams of Hope ;
Who cheer?d my hours when they were sad and lone,
And rais?d my spirits when my strength was gone,
And who, departing, breath?d a fervent prayer,
Pointed to Heaven, and bade me not despair.
Perchance when lifted there on wings of Faith
She will conduct me after Time and Death,
Through the long vista of Eternity ;
My mentor and my seraph guide to be,


Even as she was here, without pretence ;
Angelic Friendship, in its highest sense !
Ah, what is all the Friendship of the world,
To that great Love whose vastness is unfurl?d
From Pole to Pole, from boundless sea to sea,
Begun and ended in Eternity !
Man, fallen Man, doom?d in his first estate
By sin?s delusions to a direful fate,
Was rescued, raised by perfect Love on high
To an inheritance beyond the sky.
His wretchedness, his long hugg?d woes and pain,
No longer vex him, though they still remain
With his weak heirs, who here yet onward plod
A troubled way devoid of trust in God.
We prate of Love in things allied to earth,
And deem our Friendships have immortal birth,
But what are they to His, who left a throne
In Heaven to suffer for weak man alone ?
Whose high examples had their base on Love
And could the power of Ignorance remove,
Nerved the pale suff?rer, aided too the strong,
And spoke compassion to the weak and young,
Who was through life to all a ? Friend in need ! ?
Nor made distinctions in a caste or creed ;
Had words of comfort for each wand?rer?s ear,
And dried the widow, and the orphan?s tear,
And lastly when he had achieved the end
For which he came (to be Man?s earthly friend !)
In triumph went to his high home above
And left us here true record of his Love.
Man?s friendship varies, (like the stormy sea,
One moment calm, the next by tempests tost),
One instant faithful, though the next ?tis lost
By some strange whim or inconsistency ;
His boasted love has seldom constancy,
(And Love with some calls up a blush of shame)
Lured by new objects, its first holy flame
Loses the essence of true purity,
Semblance of something which it ought to be.
Ah, blest are they who in this ?Vale of Tears ?
Have met with friends to cheer them on the way !
Who?ve found through every phase of changingyean*
Their trust well placed, their hopes not cast away,
On objects false, who win and then betray ;
Affection on their tranquil lot hath cast a ray
Of perfect peace ; to them are known few fears
?Neath the strong influence of its glorious sway.
Happy indeed their course through Life they wend :
Wretched alone is he who owns no friend!


J3 USH j^ELIC.
Something you?ve found in my old bush chest,
Say, what is it, lady fair ?
Why need it raise in your tender breast
Emotions strange ; for it stands confes?d
Tis a skull that?s resting there!
Why should you fear, it can do no harm !
Take it in your hand, and see
How little there is for your false alarm,
Though once it belonged to a human form,
And had speech like you or me !
You shudder! indeed, I don?t wonder, too,
At your pale and blanching cheek ;
I look?d just the same when it came in view,
On the drouthy plains of the dry Barcoo,
And my heart felt like to break.
We were out for cattle, but found them not;
(There was Charley, Ned, and I);
When we saw this skull in that arid spot,
Though why it lay there by the world forgot,
None could tell the reason why !
There wasn?t of clothes a single shred,
Near where this grim relic lay ;
Nought there to tell the name of the dead,
Or manner of death ; though my comrades said
? He was one who?d lost his way ! ?
You wonder, perhaps, at my humble tale,
And think it a record drear:
But many such might be often told,
Of miners who?ve gone to seek for gold,
And been lost like the stranger here.


JhE y^UTHOR^
Avaunt with noise, let hoarse voiced Eow depart;
Let discord seek new spots where peace has fled;
I cry to brats, who vex my aching heart,
?Ye reckless children, let me earn your bread! ?
My life is passed beneath an iron rule,
Stern Study sways her sceptre o?er my head;
I?m still in Poverty?s degraded school,
And merely write ?yes, write for daily bread !
Yet I am sick of desks, and ink, and pen,
And sigh for verdant fields and waving trees;
I?m grown disgusted with my office ? den,?
And long for sight of other things than these.
On Nature?s face, oh, how I yearn to gaze,
And revel in her wide out-spread domain I
Fain would I linger with her all my days,
Or live a boy?s existence o?er again.
I weary with the long-continued sight
Of clerkly books, and old portentous tomes ;
My soul is far away in landscapes bright,
Where carking care and sorrow never comes.
There all is peace, and this insensate strife,
This jostling, grasping, money-grubbing crowd,
Are all unfelt; for there that calmer life
Knows no vexation from the cold and proud.
Yet 1 hav� children, and my care they claim,
Though I am bent, tear-dimm?d, with pain and grief;
I still must write, though not perchance for Fame ;
Time and the Future may perhaps bring relief.
Dark as my lot is, still I trust in One,
Who knows the bitter annals of the poor ;
Who when all peace and joy on earth seems gone,
Sustains the weak, and sends them Hope once more.


JhE j^IOI^EERS.
The night is young and beautiful; serene
In all its noon-tide grandeur goes the moon,
Enwreath?d in clouds, whose landscapes fill
Half the vast empire of the western skies,
The many-featured trees assume strange shapes,
Wild Gorgon faces, which in times of old,
As we have heard our childhood nurses tell,
Were then allied to living things, and dwelt
The giant-scourges of the human race :
Now dis-embodied spirits, they are doom?d
To haunt the charnel where our fathers lie,
Or make abode with Fancy?s twilight-hour,
?Mong trees, rocks, stones, and everything
Which looks grotesque at such a silent time,
When half the world is wrapp?d in slumber,
And nought is waking save the chainless Mind
Wedded to Nature and her mysteries.
?Twas such a night in Queensland, long ago,
We had encamp?d beside the Bunyah range ;
Three of us settlers, looking after runs,
And pushing outward for a country new,
Explored by Stuart, by Burke, King, Wills, and Gray ?
Names that are records on Australia?s scroll,
Of all that valour and bold men can do.
For we had heard that there were noble lands,
Great untill?d prairies stretching far away,
Like mighty oceans ?out on the Barcoo,
Where Thompson gathers all her waters in,
And glides with royal stream to greet the sea,
Leaving dull Cooper?s Creek ?girt with a belt
Of stunted gums and stony arid wastes,
With its associations which still speak
A direful warning to all those who dare
Seek in such place hereafter rest and home.
We?d heard of such ! and thus each impulse turned
With more than usual yearnings to that ? promised land.
Guerdon for those who go to ? do or die,?
And guard from hostile tribes their humble roof
By rightful means, based on the law of Force.
For ere the white man sought these distant vales,
And fenced the land about from sea to sea,
Or brought his varied kine, or woolly flocks
To crop the gorgeous herbage from the side
Of bratling creeks, and lofty pine-clad slopes


Which pierce high heaven?s vault in many forms,
The native tribes had made their ? towri ? here,*
And here from enemies a refuge found.
Here, too, the kangaroo and emu roved,
?Mong tranquil glens wherein they loved to bask
At ease beneath the shade of verdant gums,
Or sought the new burnt herbage on the hills,
Whose purple gullies echo?d back each sound,
And warned them truly of the coming foe.
Ere bark-ringed trees, and well-made stock-yards stood,
To note the track of Labour?s busy hand,
Or sheds and pens which hold the hurdled flocks,
Lined the long brow of ridges far and near
And showed the station of the settler form?d :
The aborigines were Nature?s heirs,
And held their freehold from forgotten time.
Well! we had camp?d beside a rugged ridge,
Some upheaved remnant of telluric force ;
Judging from scoriae piled about, and burnt
Into strange forms. Above us stretched the scrub,
A belted line of tangled vines, which hung
Like cordage from the tall yet pleasing shrubs;
Fringed at short intervals with bottle trees.
The fire at which our evening meal was cooked
And where we?d also boiled the usual quart
Of bushman?s tea, still smouldered, and shot up
At intervals small jets of living flame ;
Therefrom I took a brand, and lit my pipe,
And sat with Silence smoking pensively,
And weaving pleasant dreams of my old home
In Sydney?s city, many leagues away.
It was my watch that night; we took by turns
The weary hours ; and this was middle time,
Some few brief minutes to the midnight stroke,
Which ushers In the epoch of a day.
My comrades slept (the ground, though hard, their bed)
On well-worn blankets, and a ?possum rug,
Some antique trophy from a native camp :
Sweet Innocence can sleep in any place,
But hapless Guilt lies wide awake on down.
Our horses feeding in the neighb?ring swamps,
Found in new herbage all that they desired,
A perfect heaven for each jaded beast,
Confined by hobbles to one certain place,
?Mong long lagoons, and densely growing reeds.
Now, as I sat upon the ground soft Sleep
Shaped out fantastic things, and dull, cold eyes
* ? Towri,? native name for country or birthright.


And hideous mouths gaped full at me,
And I .saw scornful Hate with halting Fear
Flinging their gibes around, while one shrill cry
Awoke the mountain echoes, and I sprang
Rifle in hand unto my trembling feet,
And saw a horror greater than my dream.
From the vast depths of a Reality.
Dimly at first, but afterwards too keen,
Loom?d noxious shapes, which grew from Fancy?s realm
Into an untamed and scarce human foe,
Who came with Murder to our peaceful camp
And left long tracks of blood upon the grass,
While sprinkled leaves and blankets wore the hue
Of that red stream, and on the trampled ground
Lay senseless forms amid a bed of gore.
My comrades once, alas, too early slain
In their calm rest, killed in a quiet sleep !
For weary journeys over these rude hills,
Had made repose a thing securely sound:
Advancing, perhaps, on direr deeds intent,
I saw the savages, a scattered band,
All armed with mogo, boomerang, and spear,
Impatient, thirsting for my very blood
To add its current to the sacred tide.
Still welling from the hearts of constant friends ;
My hands grew strong, and with an iron nerve
And prayers to God for my success, just then
I drew the trigger of my faithful piece
And saw with trembling joy two rash fiends fall.
Another shot told well, and then they fled
Hurling in passing many well-poised spears
Which harmless sped to splinter in the trees
And leave thereon the deep, dull marks of strife
Mementos of that ne?er forgotten night.
And now the gully was all still, a calm
Came 'with the breath of Morning on the sense ;
And lock?d the tree tops in a soft embrace :
A holy stillness, like the Sabbath-day,
Usher?d to life beyond the hum of things,
In the dull paths of well-built busy towns
A pleasing Morn with vernal roseate skies
Wrought by God?s fingers and replete with all
Man hails as beautiful; whose tranquil hours
Are full of incense from Health?s altar stone.
All this I heeded not, for by the light
Of dim Aurora on the eastern brow
Of those huge cones, friends of my soul I saw
Dead in their youth, by Murder?s hand struck down
So I could weep, as only Men can do
In contemplation of a scene like this !


They were two brothers, schoolmates dear of mine,
Many a time in the dim Long Ago
Of ne?er forgotten golden days of youth
Passed by the Hunter?s broad gum-border?d stream,
We mingled boyish cares and boyish plays
With those maturer thoughts of joys to come ;
The bright Utopia of a childish dream.
Sisters they had, two fair Australian belles,
Sweet flowers blooming on a fragile stem ;
Who knew my heart upon the matter well,
And when in jesting tones they spoke of Love,
A truant blush came stealing o?er my cheek
And told the tale that I would fain conceal.
Though in my Ada?s eyes there seem?d to lie
A mighty problem, deep, and fathomless,
Meek, happy Jenny seem?d to read my soul.
Thus loving and beloved we parted ; they
To ripe like fruits into maturer growth,
And I to seek in the primeval bush
A spot for clearing and a settler?s home.
Death is at all times terrible, we fear
His coming even in our ? curtain?d sleep,?
With comforts round us, and our dearest friends
Watching last moments with a tear dimm?d eye :
But oh ! how sharp a pang to be cut down,
Snapt off as ?twere without a single prayer
To nerve the truant soul upon its course ;
To die, as those two died in slumber deep,
Without a moment given to repent
The many follies of a wayward life,
Is sad : and the avenging Nemesis,
Dealing strict retribution for each crime
Which wanders unscourged o?er this beauteous earth
And by its presence stains the gorgeous realm
Of Nature, this indeed shall make in full
The restitution Justice fain desires.
How time speeds on ! who could have thought ?tis now
More than five years since these events occurred !
Five changing seasons filled with drought or flood,
Five moody winters strewing leaves upon the graves
Of those who rest from trouble peacefully
Upon the borders of that ancient scrub,
Hard by the tangled glen wherein they died.
Now, where the Thompson opes extended arms
Behold my station and my well-fed kine,
While Ada, with one tiny pledge of love,
Sheds hallow?d smiles around my tranquil lot.
We keep our sorrow in our hearts, nor cast


Forth deep-felt woes to show them to a world,
Whose sympathy at best is coldly strange;
But often when the nights are fine, beside
Our humble hut we sit, and talk of days
Link?d by sweet memory to a golden Past,
When Beauty, Love, and Youth were friends,
Amid sweet Hunter?s homely Spring-clad vales.
We speak not often of the blow which Fate
Hath hurled upon us, for in Ada?s eyes
Its anniversary brings up salt tears,
Recall?d by Memory and the thoughts of Home.
Yet she is happy otherwise, and I have here
All that I seek on earth ?a truthful Love
To welcome Toil at Eve with pleasing smiles,
And cast a civilizing charm around
A lot by Fortune linked to troubled ways,
And redolent of much which harbors Fear,
Her brother?s fate may e?en be ours, we know
Scarcely the moment when the stroke may fall;
Though while we trust in God we feel this Hope :
That He has power to guard from Danger here,
And safely keep us through all future woes !
jSuiCIDE.
The river winds to the restless sea,
?Tis night by the lonely river ;
A maiden fair, who a bride should be,
Is now waiting there ; forlorn is she,
A restless light in her eyes I see,
As she gazeth out on the river.
The whispering winds in yon leafless trees
Sigh their weird songs to the river:
She lists to them, and the strong North breeze
Awakes in her soul old memories
Of one who is far beyond the seas,
Who plighted his troth by the river.
The royal moon from its starry throne
Looks down on the flashing river,
And beholds a maid, seduced and lone;
A being from whom all hope has flown,
A moment more, and its beams are thrown
On her drowning form in the river.


A moment more ! and see there she lies
?Mong weeds in that cold, dark river ;
A dull, fix?d stare in her starting eyes,
See the mud and slime each fair tress dies,
Hands raised in prayer ; ?twas with tears and sighs
She sought Death in the lonely river.
The moon veils in clouds her sweet bright head,
The breeze wails loud, by the river
Its requiem for the lovely dead,
And tells the tale of the life she led,
Ere with broken heart from guilt she fled
To end all her cares in the river.
jSAYED FROM pEATH !
Why do ye wail, O Winds ! wail as ye pass me by ?
How long must I list to your voices weird,
And your drear wild lullaby ?
I see in the night a lurid light,
A fierce and a fitful flame,
And hear the yell of the reckless fiends
Who have brought me woe and shame.
A hut in yonder glen my fancy still can see ;
Two strong and able men, as hale as men could be.
Weep ! weep ! weep !
My vigil lone I keep ;
1 am full of Tears, and drop sad tears,
I do naught all night but weep !
I was a happy wife, glad as a wife should be,
In the earth?s expanse not a girl was there
Who was half so glad as me.
But husband, child, and friend,
I lost in one brief day ;
Oh God 1 that ever I lived to see,
The end of that bloody fray I
The savage arm was strong, his look was fierce and wild,
As with a yell his tomahawk was raised o?er my only child
Husband, and husband?s friend, I think I see them there,
With the smoke which cuii?d from our burning hut
In the still, cool morning air.
Weep 1 weep ! weep 1
For me there?s no more sleep;


When I close my eyes I see arise
In fancy, a gory heap?
Bodies stiff and stark ! Bodies red and cold !
Ah, there they lie, and here am I, like a sheep without a fold.
Wasn?t my husband dear ! dearer than all to me !
Aye, more than ties I left afar
In a land across the sea !
Think of the death he died, killed in a quiet sleep !
Think of my murder?d child ?ask me not why I weep !
Dead ! dead 1 dead 1
Killed by a single blow ;
Oh, I could curse, as no other cursed,
The axe which laid them low !
But why did I escape ! why did they spare my life,
To linger on with a direful grief, a lost and wretched wife ?
My heart is in his grave, buried with him I love,
And my body here with an old, old grief,
Which Time can ne?er remove !
Oh how I?m forced to mourn ;
Mourn through the long, long years !
From the dust I cry to God on high,
For he can dry my tears I
Weep ! weep I weep !
Tears now are nothing new ;
I sit and weep, while others sleep,
For I?ve nought else to do I
j^ABOF^
The ?possum sported on the neighb?ring tree,
As ?neath its deepening shade I took my way ;
The locust with its usual song of glee
Sang the long record of the passing day ;
The essence of a thousand balmy flowers
Lent to the air a sweet exotic smell;
A magic calmness seem?d to wrapt the hours,
With all the fulness of a holy spell.
How fair is this delightful eventime !
Toil joins with tranquil Rest her busy hand ;
And save the slaves of Pleasure or of Crime
Few are abroad to agitate the land.


Behold in sight, my dear, though humble cot,
Whose memory wheresoever I may roam
Has power to bind my heart to one old spot,
Enshrined within it by the name of Home.
There wedded Love, and mutual tastes are found,
There children gather when the day is done,
While Peace and Joy the fire-side surround
And hold their empire till the rising sun.
This is the heaven of my inner life,
Which naught external hath the power to move ;
A sweet Nepenthe to the world?s rude strife,
A realm whose base is firmly fixed on Love.
I?ve reach?d the threshold, from within the gleam
Of new-lit tapers cast a kindly light;
As through the casement long rays mildly beam,
And flash with welcome on the wand?rer?s sight.
Ye treasured beings who my love can claim,
Long may I feel thy presence as I roam
?Mid the dull paths of Life, and the pure flame,
Affection closer bind my soul to home.
J-TNES, ON Rr REFUGEES
Robinson?s visit to Rathurst.
He comes ! the ruler of the land, let us rejoice to-day ;
Let Unity on every hand assert its tranquil sway :
Here Discord now shall find no place, and old contentions
cease,
For Strife hath laid its broken sword beside the feet of Peace.
Australia?s sons with gladness shout, and many now are here,
?Tis only honest men peal out that soul-enliv?ning cheer !
They bid him welcome to this spot, and as they near him stand,
Each heart bums with a Patriot?s fire at touch of his kind hand.
Now let us look through that dim veil of Power, Pomp and
State,
Divested of its titled badge, ? Insignia of the Great;
And looking at him as a man looks on his fellow part
Behold nought but his kindliness, and sympathising heart.


Perchance when time hath glided by, and far away from here,
When louder plaudits from the crowd grate harshly on his ear,
He will remember those who now have gather?d to the scene,
To welcome to their humble midst one honour?d by our Queen.
God bless thee ever, Governor 1 great star of Austral?s isle I
May peace, and happiness be thine, and on thy labours smile;
The partner of thy tranquil lot may Heav?n long deign to
spare,
And in thy private life, true friends be never wanting there!
He goes ! and now a last farewell peals forth from every tongue,
Let hill and vale with that adieu, that last loud cheer be rung;
Farewell unto the poor man?s friend, who can our hearts
command,
Farewell! may every good attend the Guardian of our land.
JHE jSTOCK/VIAN?S jSoNG.
Let us build up our fire by yon ironbark tree,
?Neath its green shady branches we?ll feel we are free :
Fill the quarts from yon streamlet, delightfully cool,
While the zephyrs at intervals flash o?er its pool.
Chorus ?Hark ! along the mountain track,
I hear my comrades? stockwhips crack !
They bring a herd both wild and free,
But stockmen curb their liberty.
Crack ! crack 1 crack !
I hear my comrades? stockwhips crack !
Yes, now upon the mountain track,
I hear their loud-ton?d stockwhips crack !
Then turn out the horses, fine grasses are here,
Let them crop the sweet herbage devoid of a fear,
And we by our fire contented can be
In the twofold enjoyment of damper and tea.
Chorus, &c.
All day after cattle these mountains we?ve sought
And evetide to us no success yet has brought;
To-morrow shall greet us at dawn of the day,
Near creeks where the wild herds have straggled away.
Chorus?Hark, along the mountain, &c.,
Crack ! crack ! crack !
The stockwhip?s sound, which well I ken,
The voices, and the laugh of men
Is echoed now from each wild glen.


thf Rattle of
The blood-stain?d banners o?er the city wave,
And from each lofty and projecting tower
The loud-voiced cannon opes a yawning grave,
And lends new terrors to the direful hour :
A mighty mass forth from their houses pour
To add their corpses to the one great bier,
While shrieking women (sane, alas, no more!)
Rush panic-stricken to and fro, while Fear
Cuts every human heart e?en to its core.
All nations tremble when the news they hear,
And sympathy awakes from souls that feel?a tear.
Ambition was the motive, and how fair
Appears its form to those who ever dwell
The Slaves of Custom, and who lightly bear
The yoke they wear beneath its hated spell.
Ambition ! was it for this thousands fell
And left their mangled trunks upon the field ?
For this! war turn?d our city to a hell,
And gave us burning ruins, wounds unhealed,
And left a record which for aye shall dwell
Within our bosoms, of this crimson flood,
Which wraps our land around with mighty seas of blood I
We have been happy here, beside the Rhine
Dwelt sweet Contentment, and with honest Toil
Brought to perfection the oft gather?d vine
Springing spontaneous from the fertile soil,
And poured from presses the imperial wine.
Our hamlets were the tourists? special pride,
Our palaces the seat of many kings,
Our noble country with all others vied,
And made us feel an inborn joy that springs
From such elysium, where all turmoils cease
And each succeeding day is redolent of Peace.
Here rose the temple with its marble porch,
Here skyward rear?d the sacred fane?s high head,
Here pious rhetoric sounded through the church,
And even while the towns with blood were red,
And the hoarse thunder of the cannon woke
The neighb?ring valleys on the Sabbath mom,
Some zealous preacher to the people spoke,


And whisper?d comfort to those most forlorn.
Pale, haggard women, hearts that war had broke,
Were there, with wounded brothers from the van
Of the dark struggle, waging, raging round Sedan.
Now, shorn of former pomp and regal sway,
See once proud France a helpless victim lies ;
Pale Famine in her cities stands at bay,
And flashes vengeance from her fiery eyes,
While pale-faced Hope a pensive captive dies.
The victor triumphs everywhere he goes,
Leaving his footprints, as the Simoon?s breath
In Eastern lands its cursed presence shows,
And marks its burning route with certain death.
Are these Ambition?s trophies ? these great woes
What Nations fight for ? Such deeds are a stain
On Civilization?s records, they with Time remain.
jIIStpWERA.
The wild river leaps on its path from the mountains,
?Tis swollen by torrents, the relics of rains :
There?s grandeur surrounding its fierce, rolling fountains.
As they rush to demolish the farms on the plains ;
She sits in her sorrow and terrible ire,
With brow bending low, and eyes flashing fire,
By the side of Ulalah?s fierce water ;
Her cheek is unruffled by traces of tears,
For strangers they?ve been to her eyelids for years,
Though her sadness is great, her heart knows few fears,
For she is Ulambi?s first daughter !
Enowera, pride of the dark-featured race,
Now sits on the ground, and hides her pale face.*
Her brothers have come from the slaughter.
On a litter of branches her lover they bore ;
The ?possum cloak o?er him was dabbled with gore,
He was mortally wounded, and naught could restore,
As they laid him beside the fierce water ;
By the side of Ulalah?s wild water I
There?s a shriek, and a moan; and she sits all alone
With her dead by Ulalah?s wild water!
* Strange as this expression may seem, it is strictly true.


There?s an army of chieftains array?d for the battle,
They are silently waiting the new-dawning day ;
Each sits by his camp-fire, ?to-morrow the rattle
Of spears will be heard in another fierce fray.
Euroka has gone to his place of repose,
Yestermorn on a scene of carnage he rose
By the side of Ulalah?s dark water :
The flower of Ulambi were found with the slain,
Their blood lapp?d by dingos which scour the plain :
Ah, dire was the hour of their slaughter 1
Enowera sat like a goddess of night,
And listened in vain for news from the fight,
Till at length the sad tidings they brought her.
From the chief whom she loved how hard ?twas to sever,
Death closed his mild eyes near the dark seething river,
By the side of Ulalah?s fierce water ;
And to-morrow she?ll go, to avenge on the foe
His death, like a king?s regal daughter,
And blood shall be running like water I
j3uSH jScENERY.
Spreading branches intertwining, thick with leaves of frosted
green
In the lurid sunlight shining, adding glory to the scene;
High and tall the pines are waving far above the forest fair,
Languid zephyrs ?mid them breathing, sigh sweet anthems on
the air: ?
See where yonder gathering shadows lie athwart the tangled
glen,
Spots appear of regal verdure, like those near the haunts of
men !
From the covert?s gentle darkness upwards starts the kangaroo,
High amid the topmost foliage screams the hungry cockatoo.
Here the shrubs, a sort of network, as you walk your progress
stay,
Ever turning, grasping, twining ?obstacles to bar the way :
Rope-like from the misty jungle hang in tangled mass the
vines,
With thefr slender fibres clinging to the hoar and ancient
pines ;
Here the noble bottle-trees, calymus, and myrtle stand,
On the borders of the forest, in their glory sternly grand.


Near them mark the flick?ring embers of some wild man?s fire
glare,
Whence at intervals arises snowy smoke-wreaths in the air ;
Sheets of bark and broken bushes still appear to note the
place
Where have rested in their wand?rings members of a Nomad
race;
Muscle-shells and ragged garments strewn upon the ground
we see,
Here last night the natives gather?d for a weird corroboree.
Hark, the bleat of sheep is sounding from the mighty plain
below 1
Far outspread a flock is feeding where the choicest grasses
grow;
See the leaders nimbly browsing, joyously they spend the
hours,
While the stragglers idly linger, munching rarest herbs and
flowers ;
And the drowsy shepherd, sitting ?neath the tall gum?s verdant
shade,
Wanders far away with fancy to the dream-land he has made ;
Solitude he heeds no longer in that dim and fleeting dream,
There deceit and crime are strangers, friends are all that they
would seem :
His a life of sweet Contentment, passed amid the tranquil
glen ;
His the calm that never dwelleth in the busy haunts of men.
Mortal wishing to be happy, much too anxious bliss to know,
Learn this, ? only true Contentment is the source of bliss
below 1 ?
pAUGHTER OF pYE.
In the twilight I see her deck?d out as a lure,
She, the poor country maiden, once artless and pure ;
She hath trusted a tempter, who dared to deceive,
And now cast on the world is the Daughter of Eve.
Still how calm were the hours of that beautiful day,
When a lover appeared on her life?s cloudless way ;
Ah, how strange were emotions and warring within
The pure soul which till then had been stranger to sin !


Tho? brief is her story, ?tis the same as of yore ;
Mean seduction and crime, with a future in store
Of direful repentance. Oh, ?tis madness to think !
So she drowns all her sorrow in torrents of drink.
Pale and haggard, I see her slink home at the dawn,
Not the rosy cheek?d maiden I met on the lawn,
Who once sprang with the sun from her chamber of rest,
Like a lark in the morning when leaving its nest.
But her father and mother lie low in the tomb,
And above them the daisies and wild flowers bloom ;
Broken-hearted they wept o?er then? recreant child,
Once a gem of the forest, now impure and defiled.
She seeks in the wine-cup to banish her pain,
And ease the wild anguish which bums in her brain;
With a curse on her lips, from its horror she flies,
And life?s lamp at some door step fades, flickers, and dies,
See now at the dead-house she?s laid out in her shroud,
While girls e?en as abandon?d mix with the crowd.;
Well they know her, and pass from the spot with a jeer,
But there?s none e?er bestow on the lost one a tear.
JHE jBuSHMAN.
The morning mists had long since left the earth,
Save where at intervals the purple slopes
Had girt themselves about with clouds rough-piled
And bearing thunder in their snowy forms,
Just as dark passions lie within a breast
Of spotless hue. There dreary silence hung
Her mighty garment near the once full creeks,
Whose brattle now had lost its wonted tone ;
Some were mere dust paths, trodden cattle tracks,
With here and there an arid, muddy pool,
Half hid beneath luxuriant ferns and grass,
Which lined the borders, and spread far around
The surface of supremely verdant glens,
Sacred to echo and forgotten things.
Dim coverts shaded by o?er-arching trees ;
Grim, mast-like pines, whose dreary song awakes
Feelings of sorrow and monotony ;


And tangled myrtles, or the calymus,
Form?d a safe refuge for the denizens
Of these vast woods ; there sped the kangaroo,
Flying from fears which had no certain cause,
And trembling at the sound of his own feet,
Feeling true safety only with his mates,
Upon the green sward of some open space.
?Twas far up North, where scrub-clad Burnett shapes
A sunward course, and the tall bunya rears
Its head above the line of evergreens,
My record looms out from last New Tear?s day,
A season sacred to young Bevel?s rule,
A time when e?en acquaintances seem friends;
While Love and Hope lift high the Future?s pall,
And point to better eras yet to come.
Seasons unvex?d by fire and flood ; unwrought
By many losses into Memory?s scroll, ?
All knew Old Turner, whose fine wether flock,
Had on our station made his name renown?d,
A shepherd clown yet envied by the ? hands,?
Whose lean and faulty flocks bespoke a want
Of honest care. The squatter prais?d him oft,
And e?en the rough-spun Yankee Overseer
Confess?d his merits, when he counted out
The happy sheep upon that last calm eve,
Which saw their master on his road to town :
(A spot where lock-up, inn, and slab-built stores
Jostle each other in the ways of trade)
Cheque in his pocket for the ? usual spree,?
Such as Old Christmas or the New Year brings.
Now, having wasted all his hard-earned cash,
Behold him started on the road for home,
With grog bemuddled, and a bottled stock
Merely to cheer the dullness of the way;
No wonder, then, he left the beaten track
And woke to know the truth of being lost?
Fatigued, and footsore, with delirium wild,
Half mad with parching lips and burning brain ;
Death met the shepherd in the tangled brash,
With Famine gnawing at his very soul ;
While starting eyes from the weird gums look?d out
Like ghastly faces of forgotten friends
Long buried with the Past in tranquil tombs,
In some old churchyard on fair England?s strand.
The day wore on, and still the wanderer lay
Unnerv?d and dying, with a hellish drought,
Yet filled with visions of great Plenty?s store,
And sounds of voices from the ? absent ones,?


Who never more his coming back shall greet
With heart-felt welcomes to his native land.
The vine-clad timber fenced his path about,
And sway?d its twisted branches in the breeze,
While leaves wind-scatter?d ever and anon
By zephyrs stirr?d gave forth sweet dreamy sounds
And then stood still with old monotony.
He roused him often, but as often sank
Back to a lethargy which sleep had lent
To give relief from all reality,
And make his pangs of misery less keen :
His faithful comrade licked his pallid face,
And felt the grief he could not understand. ?
But wherefore such a painful scene protract,
Or linger by the lost one?s lonely bier I
What need to picture honest Pompey, too,
Whose long repeated mournful howl awoke
The frighted echoes from those nameless glens,
And scared the dingos from their luckless prey.
The shepherd?s body after many days
We found, and rolled it in the rags which hung
In tatter?d fragments round the bleaching bones ;
Then made a grave hard by upon the ridge,
And scarcely wept for him a single tear :
A cross we rudely carved upon the bark
Of a tall tree beside his resting place,
An ? In Memoriam ? strange in such a spot.
Once more the New Year?s sunny smile appears
With pleasing hopes, cast in a brittle mould ;
But he who last year just about this time
His homeward way from the bush tavern bent,
And bought experience at too dear a price,
Still lingers in the depths of memory.
A fate so dire the heart can ne?er forget!
Such may be warning to the reckless crew,
Who for a single glass ? would sell their souls,?
And to Intemperance build a higher shrine.


Jhe J^OUr^TRY.
Remote from business, and its number?d cares,
Far from the ills which vex the bustling town,
The country with its mild and balmy airs,
Its hills and dales engirt with heather brown,
Now claims attention : here, the livelong day,
Forgetful of the past I idly stray
Through tranquil groves, where birds? sweet melody
Impart new feelings of relief to me.
I love the country, and detest the town,
Its heat, its clamour, and its noisy crowd;
There Pride and Fashion struggle for renown,
And lonely Misery sits in ashes bowed
By the strong hand of an opposing Fate,
Escape from such must any soul elate
And make it feel unusual thankfulness,
In leaving far behind such wretchedness.
I love the country when some regal morn
Opens right joyously the gates of Day,
And floods with burnish?d gold the tassell?d corn,
Near some small hamlet on the mountain way ;
Then with a comrade dear, a long loved friend,
With basket stored our steps we?ll early wend
To that bush realm of shadows, germs, and flowers,
Where not a care disturbs the happy hours.
USH J' 1 ICTUF^E.
We sat and gossip?d ?neath the trees,
Tall gums which tower?d o?er our heads,
Around us hum?d the busy bees,
On flower beds.
We sat upon a rocky ledge,
?Mong tangled masses of rich vines,
Where sars?parilla formed a hedge,
Of strange designs,


The North wind with a plaintive wail,
?Mid ironbarks shriek?d out its song,
The old swamp-oaks took up the tale,
The whole day long.
We sat upon that height, and walked
With Fancy o?er each olden scene ;
And with a raptur?d feeling talked
Of all we?d seen.
Adown the wild and rugged steep,
The foliage wore a pleasing sheen ;
And sunbeams now and then would peep,
The leaves between.
Upon the far extending plain,
A lowing herd stood at their ease,
Beside some holes fill?d by the rain,
Beneath the trees.
Ah, all was beauty there above !
And all seem?d beauty down below ;
For our true hearts were full of Love,
And Friendship?s glow.
Two artless children then were we,
And Life before us promised fair ;
Our happy souls from sorrow free,
Knew not a care.
And now I linger here alone,
For she is in the silent grave ;
She rests amid the bush unknown,
Where wild gums wave.
Oft Memory recalls that day,
And Fancy paints this lovely spot;
By me, no matter where I stray,
?Tis unforgot!


jbON^ETS.
While some to idle sports their lives incline,
And fortune?s smile each anxious soul pursues,
I?ll seek for satisfaction at a shrine
Sacred to Love, to Beauty, and the Muse.
What, though stern Poverty surrounds my lot,
And pensive Sorrow lingers in my cot,
Hope leads my spirit on a flower-clad way,
And brings it forth from darkness into day.
For where sweet Poesy is, the world looks bright,
She walks the landscape with a train of light ;
Her lovely image finds its counterpart
In the clear mirror of my constant heart;
And when united Love and Beauty fair,
All things on earth their brightest hue must wear.
Some spot there will be in Eternity
Where Love may find a last and best abode ;
There, Ada ! we removed shall surely be
From all the troubles which now crowd Life?s road,
And find a haven, wherein perfect joy
May be our own without the least alloy.
Should?st thou soon leave me for that blessed sphere,
I will not mourn thy loss, for I shall know
Thou?rt but transplanted from the world below
To one far brighter, and thou?lt still be near,
On seraph wings, with Purpose all divine,
To guide my soul through Death?s dark vale to thine
What cause for grief, Love dries each starting tear,
We shall renew in Heaven vows utter?d here !
Pn Pettef^s.
Here are Love?s fragments, faded too and worn,
Are these mementos of the golden Past!
How dear they once were, though they now are cast
Into the ruthless flames, all crushed and torn.
Destroyed I but yet there lives within my heart
Th* electric spark of their remembrance,
I?ve treasured them as idols, and I glance


E?en on their ashes, as they were a part
Of something sacred which I?ve lost to-day.
Farewell, ye treasur?d souvenirs of years,
Your authors now are mingled with the clay ;
And there are none to heed the burning tears
Which in my calmer moments oft I shed,
Over these relics of the sainted dead 1
Jlight Rounds in the
The dusky wing of star-bespangled Night
Comes softly stealing round these nameless glens,
The tired sheep safe housed within their pens,
With joyous bleatings testify delight.
The locusts now have ceased their jocund song,
But in the column?d trees whose branches spread
Their dark, stern visage o?er the trav?ilers head,
Opossums sport, a free, delighted throng !
The curlew shrieks in gullies lone, and fills
The voiceless echoes of a thousand hills
Sacred to Solitude. ?Tis here among
This loneliness that I would live and die,
Forgetting all the Past, where garner?d Wrong
Doth like a mirage on Life?s prospect lie.
pNES ON yHE p ENJ'EHARJ- OF
Robert JBurns.
(25th January, 1859.) *
Let social glee and mirth abound
For see, the hallow?d day comes round
With bright new lustre dawning,
Tis Robbie Burns? natal day,
And tho? he?s long since passed away,
Still, I will give one humble lay
To his memory this morning.
* The above lines were composed at Gayndah, Queensland, on the morning
of the Burns Centenary. They were quite impromptu, and have never been
altered since. lam well aware they contain imperfections, but as alterations,
io matter how good, may destroy the sense, as well as the force of some of the
lines, I have deemed it best to give them in their original state.?AUTHOR.


Where have we found a man like Burns,
So true to Nature ! Scotia mourns
Her lost sincerely,
For she?ll ne?er see his like again,
So noble and still yet so plain,
The peasant bard will ever reign
Within our hearts full dearly.
What sweetness there pervades each line,
There?s no deceit there, not one sign
Of servile notion ;
But all is finest harmony,
The very soul of poetry,
In style from affectation free,
A patriot?s true devotion.
He lov?d his country, had he been
In that dark battle?s bloody scene
Where Wallace bled,
He would have rous?d each clansman there
With that stern song of power rare,
Till the shrill pibroch on the air
Told foes had fled.
Old Albion?s glories have been sung,
And Moore his lyre for Erin strung
With noble fire ;
But Bums rever?d dear Scotia?s name,
And thirsting to extol her fame,
He rose to rescue her from shame
And swept his lyre.
But he has pass?d ; a hundred years
Of varied joys, of hopes, and fears,
Have onward sped
Into oblivion?s mystic womb, ?
That dark, unknown, and mighty tomb, ?
Yet still poor Burns? relics bloom
Beyond the dead.
Neglected by the world around,
A troubled lot herein he found,
And woman?s smile
Was all that cheer?d his humble lot;
Still every trouble he forgot
When bonny Jean bloom?d near his cot
Devoid of guile.
There is a calm surrounds the heart
To read his poems ; every part
With beauty teems ;


p A/VIALATA.
Of all he wrote be this our boast,
Not one soul-passion?d line was lost,
Though critics gather?d round a host,
To blight his themes.
And now, e?en in Australia?s clime
We often read those lays sublime,
And such revere ;
Yet when we think upon them, still
At times our very heart strings thrill
And the soft eyes unthought-for fill
With many a tear.
His monument is in our hearts,
Where worldly scorn nor critic darts
Can touch the same ;
And tho? one hundred years are past
And a new era here hath cast
Its mantle o?er us, still shall last
Dear Burns? fame.
Farewell poetic Nature?s child !
E?en in this place remote and wild,
This humble spot;
Whatever changes earth may see,
Though nations pass and empires flee,
Till time fades in eternity,
Thou shalt not be forgot.
?o what shall I compare thee, love ! to what shall I compare
thee ?
'o royal stars in heaven above, to flowers which stud the
prairie ;
'o Seraphs, who around us move and soothe away our sorrows,
'o human angels, whose pure love cheers all Life?s troubled
morrows ?
* Moore in ? Lalla Rookh ? speaks of Hafez comparing his mistress's hair to
le Camalata. According to Sir W. Jones, the Camalata, or Love?s creeper,
a mythological plant, by which all desires are granted in Paradise. Lin-
ens calls it, ? Ipomoea, or celestial red.?


I?ll liken thee to Ipomoea, the paradisian flower ?
? Celestial red, Love?s proper hue,? the gem of Nature?s
bower,
Whose virtues are a magic key to every good emotion,
And ope the long eternity of happy Love?s devotion !
Oh sweetheart, dear, my heart?s first hope ! meek, star-eyed
Camalata!
Death shall not part thy soul from mine, though sever?d mind
and matter :
In yon bright realm where Love ne?er dies, united there for
ever,
A holy calm shall flood our path, nor cares our joys dissever I
It seems as though an angel sits
Upon yon vacant chair ;
Again, methinks, her noble form
Is half reclining there.
Love beaming from her glorious eyes,
With bright coruscant ray,
The light which parts the Night from Dawn
Is not more fair than they.
Again, her low and plaintive voice
Comes stealing up the gloom ;
And soul-felt thoughts of sweet import
Seem to pervade the room.
For here it was my darling lived
A true and happy bride ;
Here gave she all her heart to me,
And here she drooped and died.
Behold, her well-tuned instrument,
What power was in her touch !
A rapture hung around the strings,?
She loved her harp so much.
It seemed as if her life were full
Of beauty, love, and song :
Whene?er she?d play, I fain could stay
To list the whole day long.


It may have been a zephyr passed
With a deep sigh or moan
Athwart its chords, just then the harp
Gave forth a plaintive tone ;
So sighs my lonely heart for thee,
Immortal spirit, dear!
Where?er I roam each spot is home,
If thou wilt still he near.
'J' HE j^IRATES.
Hear the ocean's load commotion, 'ids a strange euphonious
How how it dashes, along the craggy shore 1
How h ???about the bar, like thnmto rf*
Or the sound of giant armies when gathmng to the w
How the laughing billows togs* ? & billows
When rude storms around them sweep, a
With a h mmble like deep thunder, with a white troth-crested
?Tis a suTht?to strike with wonder e'en the sea-birds in their
home.
Ho 1 for the canvas spread, o?er the billows wild ami white^
Ho 1 for the band with sturdy hand, who fee ! tl) ? ood
Danger may look in a craven face, and make the heart-blood
May make?the landsman ask for grace, for i^^on?the tlim'^
Right soon shall we have royal fee ;
Our spoil, the crafts that throng the sea,
Peril may walk the wide sea path,
Boldly we?ll dare the tempest?s wrath I
Our hearts are staunch, our comrades brave,
None of them fear a seaman?s grave.
Once more a sail in sight we view,
Prize for the gallant pirate crew 1


j^IDELITY.
An arbour green, a snug retreat
Hath always been my fay?rite seat;
And here I watch on each New Year,
The sun go down, the moon appear !
I love the wild and plaintive breeze,
As it goes wailing through the trees,
And whispers secretly and low,
A blissful dream of ? Long Ago.?
Well I remember one bright eve
Love?s royal pledge I did receive ;
A pledge whose very tones remain
Still ringing through my tired brain.
Here on this spot her love she gave,
Here made me her most-willing slave ;
Ah, none I?ve found ?mid earth?s dull strife
Like her who bore my name as wife!
How swiftly epochs pass away I
Seven years ago this very day
I placed her in the clay-cold ground,
And raised above her head a mound
Just by this arbour?s cool retreat,
In life her old, familiar seat;
And here I watch on each New Year,
The sun go down, the moon appear.
JdOLS OF THE J-fEART.
Oh smile not, stranger, at these tears !
Nor scorn my simple grief ;
I hear no more each happy voice,
And weeping gives relief.
I loved them all, alas, too well !
Those idols of my heart ;
Ere Death with bitter pang stepp?d in,
And destined us to part.


Three little cherubs once had I,
A humble mother?s pride ;
Early they faded from my sight,
They bloomed, then droop?d, and died.
With sorrow I beheld them fade,
For they had formed a part
Of all'that wore the brightest hue,
Within my aching heart
When they were gone, I then had left
A husband and a friend ;
None else, amid my bitter grief
On whom I could depend !
None, did I say I when God was near
To take a mourner?s part:
Alas ! I never thought of him,
Though bowed with breaking heart.
And once again dire sickness came,
I saw my husband lie,
Pain moving every muscle there,
And lustreless his eye ;
? He shall not die ! ? I eager cried,
? How can I bear the smart,
And yield up this last, tender tie,
The idol of my heart ? ?
But now resign?d, each trial o?er,
I?ve learned to look on high,
And trust to meet those gone before
In triumph to the sky :
My children, and my husband dear,
Who all earth?s joys did share ;
Oh ! if so well I loved them here,
I?ll love them better there !
J_OOK ON THE RIGHT jSIDE.
The earth is beautifully warm and bright,
Joy teems forth everywhere outside Man?s door,
Peace walks the landscape with a train of light,
Tranquility is born on Nature?s floor.


We are too apt to seek out duller things,
Which vex us by the wormwood of their tone,
Forgetting that from us the evil springs,
And that in bitterness our acts are sown ;
Acts which are really rotten at the root,
And germinate no tree, nor yield a fruit.
Look on the best side of all earthly things,
For there are two sides to each picture ; see
How fair is Nature, and how vast the springs
Therein of God-created Unity !
The essence of all beauty there we find,
The germ of Love, an undivided soul
Of Being, through the wide extended whole,
A taste of heaven for the weary mind :
Art but obscures the charm which hangs around
The realm of Nature, and its hallow?d ground !
Man should be thankful for his lot, and look
On things external with a cheerful eye ;
Is there not everywhere an outspread book
Of Nature open on the earth or sky ?
?Tis useless grieving o?er some fancied wrong,
Insane ! absurd, to wail o?er ideal woe !
The chains of Custom bind us oft so strong,
We love our griefs, and will not let them go;
Why act thus madly, when in all else round,
Save Self?s sad heart, an unthrall?d joy is found !
None who love Freedom need seek far away ;
She s Nature?s bride, note the wild breezes pass
Like happy schoolboys just let loose to play,
And revel in the sunshine on the grass.
Gaze on yon clouds, whose panoramas show
Etherial grandeur, ?neath such Art is tame;
Mark there weird Alpine cones which grow
Strangely fantastic, lit by the last red flame
From the great sun, as he in glory dies
Out from the empire of the Western skies.
Look on the bright side I Hope is still the same
As in our childhood, and the days as fair
As when in innocence and calm we came
7 Tuth ' 8 shrine, and laid our off?rings there.
We tis who?re changed, not the glad earth
Which teems with fertile beauty as of yore ;
Small things will vex us and engender birth,
The birth of sorrow in the lone and poor.
Let?s trust in God, whatever may betide,
Then will Life wear its best and brightest side !
Beard and Holmes, Printers, 311 George Street, Sydney.


'
?
V * ?:'????-? 'V
/. \ ;- :"- ' ,* ' _ . - ' - , \ r. -


7
>:
?' ?
PATRONS AND SUBSCRIBERS
TO THIS PUBLICATION.
His Excellency Sir Hercules Robinson, G.C.M.G.
The Hon. Sir William Manning, Knt.
The Hon. E. Deas Thomson, C.B.
The Hon. Henry Parkes, Colonial Secretary.
The Hon. W. B. Dailey, M.L.C.
The Hon. John Sutherland, M.L.A.
The Hon. Thos. S. Mort.
His Plonor Justice Hargraves.
His Honor Justice Faucett.
Henry Halloran, Esq., Under Colonial Secretary.
A. C. Budge, Esq., Clerk to Executive Council.
Chas. Cowper, Esq., Water Police Magistrate.
Rev. W. B. Clarke, M.A., F.K.S.
Rev. John Dunmore Lang, D.D
Rev. Canon Allwood, M.A.
Rev. G. C. Bode, M.A.
Rev. Thomas Hayden, B.A.
Rev. John G. Fraser, M.A.
Rev. Archdeacon Clarke, M.A.
Rev. G Sutherland.
Rev. J. Fullerton, LL.D.
Rev. J. S. White, M.A., LL.D.
Rev. W. Bradley.
Rev. W. Beg, LL.D.
Rev. Daniel Allen.
Rev. Thos. Johnson.
Rev. H. H. Gaud.
Dr. W. Woods, P.F.D., Parramatta.
M. Fitzpatrick, Esq., M.L.A.
R. H. Sempill, Esq.
John Frazer, Esq.
R. A. A. Morehead, Esq.
W. A. Duncan, Esq., H.M. Customs.
H. N. Montagu, Esq., B.A.
And over 400 others,
To whom the Author returns sincere thanks.
