

Synopsis of Lectures
on THE
CREDIBILITY OF THE GOSPEL
HISTORY
ESPECIALLY IN St. MARK
St. ANDREW'S COLLEGE.
!9^o
r 112000/-




Synopsis of Lectures.
LECTURES I. and 11.
INTRODUCTORY.
Evidences for Truth of Historical Events.
i. Internal. Inherent credibility from the nature
of the events themselves. Possibility and Credibility.
2. External. Testimony. Evidence of Con-
temporary Writers.
Heathenism and Judaism of the Period.
References to Christians of Pliny (96th Letter to
Trajan), Tacitus (Ann. xv. 44).
Qualifications of St. Mark as a Biographer.
He was a contemporary living at the time when
many events recorded took place. Son of a promi-
nent member of the Apostolic Church. A companion
of St. Paid. A friend of St. Peter.
LECTURE lII*
MARK AS A BIOGRAPHER,
Mark’s Gospel first mentioned in “ Fragments
of Papias,” preserved in Eusebius and published about
130 A.D.


Papias of Hierapolis, born about 60 or 70 A.D.,
over 30 at the death of John.
Many who had seen Christ would be alive in 70
or 80 and some in 95 A.D.
Sixtieth Anniversary of Waterloo, Seventy-six
Waterloo officers still alive.
A man of twenty present at any of Christ’s
miracles, parables, etc., would be only sixty in 70
A.D., the date of Mark’s Gospel.
Papias’ account of Mark; his relation to Peter.
Mark’s Gospel apparently for Latin readers, nine
Latin terms in it.
Most improbable that a Gospel by such a man
would be lost ; more improbable still that one by
another would be substituted in its place.
LECTURE IV.
MARK AS A SYNOPTIST.
Many omissions in Mark as compared with
Matthew and Luke.
The Genealogies, Birth, Presentation in the
Temple, Flight into Egypt, Visit of the Magi, Jesus’
visit to Jerusalem when about eleven years old. Also
the Sermon on the Mount and the Lord’s Prayer.
The Miracles of Jesus in All the Gospels Thirty-
fve. In Mark only Eighteen.
Parables Thirty-nine. In Mark only Nine.


Only Two Miracles and Two Parables peculiar
to him.
None of the Gospels profess to give every event
in Jesus’ life.
The omission of some incidents no argument
against the truth of those given.
Specimens of Apostolic Preaching in Acts ii. and xi.
This kind of preaching and oral teaching would
continue about forty years before Mark appeared.
Written records became necessary. Luke states
many records had appeared before his. These
probably brief and incomplete. Written records also
necessary for converts in Asia Minor, Greece and
Rome, etc.
Mark seldom gives material for dates, order of
events, etc.
Luke supplies such as iii. 1-2.
Probable date of the Birth of Jesus four years
earlier than the received.
John the Baptist. His Baptism and Christian—
Difference Between Them. Strauss’ Objection
Respecting Jesus being Baptised by John and “ John
knew him not.”
LECTURE V*
The truth of the supernatural events depends
upon the reality of Miracle afterwards to be con-
sidered.
The Temptation. Mark i. 12. Matthew iv. 1-14.
Luke iv. 1-13 ;


Temptation in general of Christ —partly
objective, partly subjective. How a sinless one can
be tempted. Forty days’ fasting. Dr. Tanner.
Temptation necessary as a preparation for His great
work.
LECTURE VL
THE EARLIEST EVENTS OF JESUS’
MINISTRY.
A Narrative may be Incredible though Non-
miraculous.
May be self-contradictory —contradict commonly
accredited facts.
People deeply stirred by John and Christ.
Solitary meditation. Good preparation for future
work.
Following events between temptation and First
appearance as told by Mark:
Testimony of Baptist to Jesus. Calling of
Andrew and Simon. Calling of Philip and
Nathaniel. Turning water into wine at Cana. At
the Passover and purged the Temple. Conversation
with Nicodemus. Journey to Judea. Baptism.
Eulogy on Baptist.
Professor Menzies’ Objection. The following
could not be the beginning of Christ’s work.
“ Preach the Gospel of the Kingdom. Believe the


Gospel,” which they had not heard. Not necessarily
the actual words but the substance of what Christ
said given by Mark.
Luke mentions visit to Nazareth. Sea or Lake
of Galilee. In the Synagogue liberal provisions for
addressing those present. Christ’s teaching different
from that of the Rabbis. Practical calling of
Disciples—“ Come and follow me.”
Disciples and Apostles. A band of followers not
a School of Philosophy.
Life of Christ much compressed: Of Darwin, 3 ;
Pusey, 4; Chalmers, 4 volumes.
LECTURE VIL
THE GALILEAN MlNlSTRY—(Continued).
Can we apply Inspiration to prove the Truth of
the History?
General Truth of Scripture must be proved
before Inspiration.
An Infallible Church desired an external
authority, and an infallible book.
The variety in the Inscription on the Cross.
Luke ; “ This is the King of the Jew's.” John ; “ Jesus
of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.” Mark: “The
King of the Jews.” Matthew; “This is Jesus, the
King of the Jews.” All cannot be the ipsissima
verba.


The Lord’s Prayer.
“ Thy will be done on earth as it is done in
Heaven ” omitted by Luke.
Luke’s “ sins ” for Matthew’s “ debts.”
It seems impossible to reconcile the above
differences with the Verbal Theory.
The opposite extreme would be “ There was no
Inscription.”
Thucydides (v. 47) gives thirty variations in a
treaty from the actual text recently discovered.
Credibility of the Narrative as a Whole, and not
of details, must be established.
The four Disciples accompany Him to Caper-
naum.
Enters the Synagogue on the Sabbath. Teaches.
Permission to speak usually given to strangers.
His teaching. Its effects on the people.
First of the Eighteen Miracles. Cleansing of a
man with an unclean spirit (by Luke also).
2. Cure of Peter’s wife’s mother (by the
Three).
3. Cured many at night. Why then?
Compare the Three Synoptists, Mark i. 32;
Matthew vii. 16; Luke iv. 40; and Abbot’s Climax.
One day’s work in Capernaum.
Teaching of Jews on the Sabbath. Of Jesus.
Combination of teaching and miracles. Not so in
Thaumaturgists, Exorcists, etc.
His teaching not that of oratorical skill, but of
spiritual power.


LECTURE VIIL
GALI LEAN MINI STR Y—(Continued)
He retires to a desert place for prayer, y/hy
pray now? Perhaps that He might use His popularity
aright.
He goes to other places—throughout all Galilee,
preaching in the Synagogues. Meaning of: “To this
end I came forth.” Consolation and enlightenment
of His teaching.
Cure of the Leper: Kneeling down and saying
“ If Thou wilt, Thou can'st make me clean/'
He had compassion on him. Sadness of leprosy.
“ Strictly (sternly) charged him ‘ See thou say nothing
to any man.’ ” Why?
Holtzmann on the cleansing of the leper.
Christ’s teaching gradual and internal. Miracles
will not convert.
His popidarity is increasing.
The Paralytic brought on a bed. “ That you
may know that the Son of Man has power to forgive
sin.”
Opposition of Scribes and Pharisees now begin-
ning to show itself. Why?
Development both in the Life and Teaching of
Christ.
LECTURE IX.
GALILEAN MlNlSTRY—(Continued).
Opposition of Scribes and Pharisees increasing
on account of His teaching respecting the Sabbath,
fasting and the forgiveness of sin.


Scribes made the law more burdensome. How ?
Explain how the Bridegroom might be taken
from them, new cloth on old garment.
Christ vindicated works of mercy on the Sabbath.
Instances, The good of man. The end of the
Sabbath, fasting, etc.
Open rupture with the Pharisees who consulted
with the Herodians.
Asserted that this occurs too early in Mark. Is
this so?
This not a “ conspiracy,” but only a “ consulta-
tion.”
The celebrity of Christ increasing as rapidly as
the opposition. Crowds come to Him from Galilee,
Judea, beyond Jordan and neighbourhood of Tyre
and Sidon. Curiosity might draw many to Him.
The Appointment of the Teachers. Mark iii. 16;
Matthew x. 2; Luke vi. 12.
The connection and names not the same in all
the Synoptists. The differences.
The nature of their work given in Matthew x. 1.
LECTURE X*
GALILEAN MINISTRY —(Continued).
Hitherto the order of Mark has been followed,
Christ’s Baptism, Temptation, Works in Capernaum,
Calling and Sending Forth of the Twelve.
Christ still continued His work. Healing and
Preaching in Galilee, an outline of which I subjoin.


Parable of the Sower, near the Lake; and other
Parables, such as Light under a Bushel, Of the Seed,
The Mustard Seed, and others.
In going to the other side, He stilled the tempest,
came among the Gerasenes, where He cured the
demoniac in the tombs.
Crossing over again, there was a multitude by
the sea, near Capernaum, when he restored Jairus’
daughter to life, and cured the woman of the issue of
blood.
Then He went to His own country, where He
could do no mighty work because of their unbelief,
only healed a few sick. The Episode of Herod, The
Baptist, after the charge to the Apostles.
He and the Disciples went in a boat to a desert
place where He fed the Five Thousand.
Then went in a boat to Bethsaida, where He
appeared to them walking on the sea.
Then to Genneserat where men brought their
sick, who were healed, and where Scribes and
Pharisees from Jerusalem encountered Him respect-
ing washing and purification.
Then to borders of Tyre and Sidon, where He
Cured the Syrophenician’s daughter.
Came to Sea of Galilee through the borders of
Decapolis, where the man with impediment in his
speech was cured.
In those days came a great multitude, and He fed
4,000.
Straightway came in a ship into parts of
Dalmanutha where the Pharisees sought a sign from
Heaven.


Departed to the other side and came to Beth-
saida, where a blind man was cured.
He and the Disciples went into Caesarea-
Philippi, in the way, asked the Disciples Who He was.
After six days was the Transfiguration, charged
them to tell no man what they had seen, cured the
boy with the dumb spirit.
Thence passed through Galilee, when he tells
the Disciples of His impending death, but they under-
stood not.
Came again to Capernaum. Took children in
His arms. Discoursed of those performing miracles
who did not follow Him, and of future punishment.
Arose from thence and came to borders of
Judea, where ends the Gailiean Ministry.
We now consider the chief incidents of His life
and work, so far as the question of credibility is
concerned.
CHRIST’S TEACHING.
(i) Teaching Respecting Himself. He calls
Himself “ The Son of Man ” twelve times, in Mark ii.
io; viii. 31-38; ix. 9; x. 33; xiii. 2.6; xiv. 21, 41, 61.
A Son of Man. The Son of Man.
The Son of Man “ forgives sin,” “ was to rise the
third day,” “ come in the clouds with great glory,”
“to give His life a ransom for many.” Necessarily
denotes someone superhuman.
Generally admitted that the Jews in Christ’s time
did not apply it to the Messiah. It was not understood


by the multitude when they asked who is “ the Son
of Man.” John xii. 34.
In the Synoptists not a fully developed doctrine
of the person of Christ’s as in John; but if the above
expressions do not necessarily assert His Divinity,
they at least suggest it.
In viii. 28 we have the first formal acknowledge-
ment of his Messiah-ship.
Strauss’ objection—inconsistent with any
previous acknowledgement. It does not follow, if
they had this connection once, they would always
retain it. The Baptist’s case in point. Fluctuation
of feeling and conviction, common, respecting all
causes.
The Samaritan woman—circumstances different.
(2) Teaching on the Sabbath, fasting, and His
relation to Publican and Sinners, already treated.
Parables.—Forty in all the Gospels, nine in Mark,
two peculiar to him, viz., The Growth of Seed and
Household Watching.
Six delivered near the Sea of Galilee, two Mount
of Olives, and one at Jerusalem. No specimen of
the Synagogue addresses given in any of the Gospels.
He drew His illustrations from Nature and
common life.
The Sower presents vividly the effects of the
Gospel. PTuman effort needed, but the labourers
themselves cannot produce the result desired. He
spake with authority and not as the Scribes.


LECTURE XL
MIRACLES.
If Christianity is a supernatural Religion, miracle
must be considered in Apologetics.
There have been great changes in all branches of
Theology, so in Apologetics.
(i ) The possibility of the miraculous consistently
denied only by Materialists and Pantheists.
If miracles were excised from the New Testa-
ment, would the residuum remain as it is. and be still
valuable ? Doubtful.
Unbelievers (Strauss, e.g.) seldom rest their case
on the impossibility.
Balfour on Miracles.
This impossibility rests on the uniformity of the
Laws of Nature. Some sort of uniformity no one
doubts, not even savages; will not expect rain or
thunder under a cloudless sky.
If an arrow is aimed in an easterly direction no
one expects it to turn to the west.
None expect uniformity in the weather; it is
contrary to experience.
The weather may be reduced to system. That
is a matter of faith, not a fact of science.
Mere assumptions, plausible possibilities, slender
probabilities, must not usurp the place of established
truth.
Supernatural a relative term. It implies fwe
know the natural; its bounds or limits.


That writing should convey our thoughts beyond
the limits of the natural to the savage.
The steam-engine, telegraph, telephone would
have appeared miraculous to all the world 200 years
ago.
Progress of knowledge tends to lessen the
boundaries of the supernatural. Thunder, disease,
pestilence.
A certain uniformity in Nature, necessary for the
business of life.
If law reigns in all regions we know, strong
probability that it also reigns in those of which we
are ignorant.
Miracles imply law. Were there no law, it would
be miracle or chaos all through. Extraordinary
implies the ordinary.
No room for extraordinary (preferential accord-
ing to Balfour) in our universe, according to Spinoza
and other Pantheists. Everything happens neces-
sarily—it cannot be other than it is.
Baden Powell's “ invariable operation of a series
of eternally impressed consequences.”
Fichte’s views on same.
Mansel’s answer.
An Atheist and Pantheist must deny this
possibility, an Agnostic need not.
Professor Huxley’s views. “No one is entitled
to say a priori that any given so-called miraculous
event is impossible.”


LECTURE XIL
MIRACLES —(Continued).
(2) Huxley says: “ Laws of Nature are neither
forces nor agents, but only modes of operation—
ways of working.”
Sir Oliver Lodge’s view.
According to the most recent dictum of a great
scientific authority, this possibility of miracle is con-
ceded.
Possibility, something, not much
We must not confine our attention to external
Nature alone. Physics regards matter and motion,
Chemistry adds chemical force or affinity, the
Biologist life, and the Psychologist mind. Mind must
be taken into account, as it is more potent than either
matter, force, affinity or life.
Were there no mind—no music, no Phidias,
Milton, Dante, or Newton.
Mind the key to solve the riddles of the universe.
Here the cities on the earth, the crops on the
fields, the art treasures in our galleries, spring not
into existence by natural law. Not by it, but in spite
of it, yet according to it; not through it, but through
agents, distinct personalities.
Man in this sense is supernatural—above Nature.
Can use, subdue, adapt it to gain his own ends.
This idea very well worked out by Bushnell of
America in “ Nature and the Supernatural.”


God is above Nature and man —uses both for
the highest ends of the universe—can use, fashion,
change, adapt according to infinite wisdom.
To say that God would not or could not do such
works is gross presumption; that he has not, is to
beg the question.
.Some begin their investigations on the assump-
tions that miracles have never happened, just as in
Butler’s day many thought Christianity not worth
examining. Unscientific.
Hume's argument. Testimony. Possibility not
denied.
Many replied to Hume in his day—Campbell of
Aberdeen, Bishop Douglas. Dr. Chalmers since.
We cannot know the laws of Nature without
testimony.
The savage chief denied the possibility of ice—
it was contrary to his experience. All beyond
individual experience depends upon testimony and
inference.
Hume’s argument, and that of Tillotson against
Transubstantiation. The two not parallel.
LECTURE XIIL
MlRACLES—(Continued).
If Hume’s argument is valid we are in as sad a
predicament as if miracles were impossible. It is not
more tenable than that of impossibility.
Miracle contrary to experience. Whose ex-
perience? To mine? How do I know all outside


my experience? By testimony. Testimony must be
brought in again, accordingly the argument loses its
force.
Are we shut up to absolute credulity or universal
scepticism ?
Dr. Chalmers directed attention to the kinds of
Testimony, various degrees between possibility,
probability, and moral certainty.
That several persons of honesty, intelligence,
intimate acquaintance with the fact attested, and
suffering death for their testimony, should testify to
a falsehood would be a real miracle. None such has
ever taken place.
Paley's statement of the case of twelve men.
Huxley says Hume irrefragable in so far as he
he demands that, for all alleged interruptions of the
known order of Nature, very strong evidence must
be produced. That a man should rise from the dead
not a violation of laws of Nature, but that knowledge
of these laws is necessarily incomplete.
Sir Oliver Lodge says; “ Anything may be
believed which is not a contradiction, and what is
not contrary to ascertained truth.
The above statement of Huxley and Lodge
contrary to those of Baden Powell and Fichte.
Some hold that miracles performed would prove
that God's laws were imperfect or that He lacked
foresight to provide for every emergency.
This objection would destroy a good many other
things besides miracles. Are God's ways of working
always the same ? Should there be anything
imperfect in the universe? Not an after-thought—


Christians would maintain that if every thing and
person in the world were exactly the same now,
miracles would still take place as then.
The end of miracles must be taken into account,
without which they would be aimless wonders.
They are not ordinary displays of power as the
sunrise, eruptions of Vesuvius, but extraordinary—
cannot be accounted for by ordinary laws of Nature,
but for a wise purpose.
An act of Divine power to produce a trifling
effect not likely to take place, such as turning a pen-
wiper into a pen.
Christ's miracles contrasted with those of
Appollonius of Tyana, the Ecclestical and Heathen.
Fairbairn’s remark on the sanity of Christ’s
miracles.
LECTURE XIV.
THE MIRACLES OF JESUS.
(3) The moral and spiritual ends they were
designed to serve.
Our attention confined to these in Mark as even
the third of these proved, would go a long way to
establish all. All antecedent improbability would be
removed.
The sanity, sobriety, and benevolence of Christ’s,
conspicuous throughout.
Three classes : Healing of the Soul (demoniacs),
Healing of the Body, and those of Nature.
(1) Demoniacal possession.
Difficulties connected therewith, Psychological,
Theological, and Exegetical.


The existence of spirits intermediate between
God and man probable even apart from Revelation.
Even some Christians sceptical on the subject—
Schleurrnacher, Donaldson.
Alfred R. Wallace once denied spirit in the
universe, and soul in man; renouncing Materialism,,
he accepted Mind in the universe and in man.
Taking their existence as asserted in Scripture,,
how are we to describe possession?
Is it a popular or customary mode of describing
certain bodily or mental diseases?
Lunatic a case in point. Do all using it, mean
that lunatics are moonstruck?
“ Panic ” originally of idolatrous application.
Are we who use it guilty of believing in the God
“ Pan.”
In Matthew iv. 24 are the words
If we take the first literally “ possessed of
demons,” we must take the second also “ moon-
struck.”
Were this all we might treat them as “ lunatic ”
and “ panicstricken.” Something more than a name.
Always associated with some mental or bodily
disease. Not always the same disease. The
Gaderene evidently a raving maniac. The first case
in Capernaum, one of convulsions. Boy. ix. 18, a
dumb spirit; foameth, a case of epilepsy. Not all
dumb, nor convulsed.
Some regard them as those in whom indulgence
in sinful and degrading vice had begotten a more
than ordinary degree of wickedness.


Not applicable to them all.
Belief in demoniacal possession, if not universal
was wide-spread among Jews and Heathen.
Josephus. “ Souls of the wicked leave them in
the grave, enter other people and lead them into sin.”
Case from Appollonius.
Kinds of healing effected :
Fever, 2.
Leprosy, 2 cases, one includes 10.
Blindness, 4 (5) one case of 2.
Paralysis, 3.
Issue of Blood
Deaf and Dumb
Dropsy
Lameness
Malcus’ Ear
1 each.
Raised from Death, 3.
Some miracles admitted by Harnack, Abbot, P.
Gardiner, and even Schmiedel.
Some ascribe Christ’s miracles to mesmerism or
hypnotism.
If real, how did a Galilean peasant possess this
power 1,900 years ago?
Absurdity of Schmiedel’s test—” Whatever can
be done now by Psychical methods may be attributed
to Christ.”
In the opinion of believers and unbelievers the
theory of fraud has completely failed.
Something artificial, as if for show, about other
miracles.


Some think the possessed knew more about
Christ than others, because of demoniacal influence.
Not necessarily; Insane often quick at taking up
rumours.
Difficulties of the Gaderene. Discrepancies
With whom had Huxley a controversy on this
topic ?
Bruce’s idea respecting the Gaderene.
Demoniac rushed upon the swine with fury, who
then ran into the sea.
He, first “ spokesman,” then “ agent ” for the
demons.
We do not yet know enough of the spirit world
to say how or in what form they influence human
beings.
Missionaries have sometimes come in contact
with phenomena resembling possession.
Menzies’ quotation from Dr. Nevins, missionary
to China, where prayer through Christ seemed to
cure.
Why are such phenomena found in China, were
in Galilee in Jesus’ day and not apparently among us?
Diseases appear, disappear, and return again.
Seven cases of demoniacal possession in the four
Gospels together, four in Mark.
Always connected with some disease, but all
diseases not connected. Not blindness (once
excepted), nor leprosy.
Miracles in all thirty-five.
Healing the possessed, 7 ; healing bodily diseases,
19; Nature miracles, 9.


LECTURE XV*
NATURE MIRACLES.
Nine Nature Miracles.
Triple Tradition . . . . . . n miracles.
By Two Evangelists—
Matthew and Mark . . . . 4 miracles.
Matthew and Luke . . . . 2 miracles.
Mark and Luke . . . . 1 miracle.
By One Evangelist—
Matthew . . . . . . 3 miracles.
Mark . . . . . . . . 2 miracles.
Luke . . . . . . . . 6 miracles.
John . . . . . . . . 6 miracles.
Total . . 35 miracles.
Nature miracles apparently have not so distinctly
a benevolent end in view. The end in view always
important to the Apologetic in indicating the reality
of miracles.
All these miracles have also a benevolent end.
Cursing the barren tree an apparent exception
Even the latter may represent Israel as possess-
ing abundant leaves, profession, relgious rites, etc.,
but little righteousness, as benevolence. Flowers
often cut up for a botanical lesson.
The other miracles in Mark, feeding of the
multitude, stilling of the tempest, walking on the
sea, may serve a good spiritual purpose. Why have
you not faith?


Jesus always near in imminent peril.
Stilling the tempest. Some say storms on the
lake rose suddenly, fell suddenly, and Christ only
predicted it would soon be over.
The rebuke and the cairn seem related as cause
and effect.
Some not opposed to miracles in general, seem
to divest the Nature ones as much as possible of
miraculous power.
These works all worthy of the “ Son of Man,”
the Saviour of the World.
Some of the methods adopted to get rid of the
reality of these works.
(t) Fraud Theory. All pure inventions. The
narrators and even Christ himself knew that they
were not really cured, and that no one ever rose from
the dead. Christianity, therefore, an imposture.
This generally abandoned.
(2) Rationalistic Theory. Prevailed much in
Germany till Strauss’ time. Paulus its commentator,
Wegscheider it dogmatist.
All miracles strictly natural occurrences.
Gospels honest reports. Authors wrote what
appeared, e.g., Lepers were not really cleansed, but
pronounced clean.
Demoniacal possession a form of madness, they
believed themselves possessed. Christ persuaded
them that the demon had left them. They believed
Him and were thus cured.
(3) The mythical theory of Strauss. They were
pure myths, the result of Messianic ideas which


grew up naturally and unconsciously, and were pro-
duced in the Gospels about the middle of the second
century, long after the death of all the Apostles.
Neander, Tholuck, Hase, De Wette, replied to
Strauss.
(4) Tendency theory of Baur. The Tubingen
School; very wide division in the early Church
between the universalism of Paul, and the Judaism or
Nationalism of the Twelve. This difference after-
wards reconciled. New Testament Books to be
judged according to their relation to these divisions.
Paul’s four genuine epistles, Romans, I. and 11.
Corinthians, Galatians, universalistic. The Apoca-
lypse nationalistic.
Paul’s other epistles not genuine.
Those next in time were conciliatory, e.g., Acts
of the Apostles. Gospels; Matthew on the Judaistic
side. Luke on the Universalistic. Mark ignobly
neutral. These not altogether reliable. John least
so of all.
The above theories all abandoned, but many still
accept some of their negations. Have left their mark
on Criticism.
Schmiedel accepts five texts as absolutely trust-
worthy, viz., Mark x. 17; Matthew xii. 31-32 ; Mark
iii. 21; Mark xiii. 32; Matthew xxvii. 46. To these he
adds four others regarding miracles: Mark viii. 12;
Mark vi. 5 ; Mark viii. 14; Matthew xi. 5.
This selection is thoroughly arbitrary, purely
negative, and these texts are difficult of interpretation.
The meaning of such “ foundation pillars ” ought to
be obvious to everyone.


Schmiedel on “ There shall no sign be given
them.” He admits Christ must have uttered a
thousand-fold more discourses than are recorded.
Parables to a certain extent fully reported. One
or two almost verbatim.
LECTURE XVL
THE RESURRECTION OF JESUS CHRIST.
Several important topics we must pass over, such
as the Trial, Condemnation, and Death of Jesus.
The Resurrection the great event in the History
of Jesus.
I. Cor. xv. 14: “If Christ hath not been raised,
then our preaching is in vain, your faith is also vain.
You are yet in your sins.
The Resurrection took place on the first day of
the week, and about dawn. Mary Magdalene first
saw the Lord. All the Synoptists add, the mother
of James. To both these, Luke adds “ Joanna and
other women." They all found the stone rolled away
on their arrival.
Matthew alone mentioning the earthquake, and
the angel rolling away the stone. We may say that
the whole matter came to the Apostles from the
women by whom there would of necessity be
differences of impression and expression. These
visions or phantasms were previous to the appearance
of Jesus Himself, to the women or to any of the
Disciples.


They were commanded to tell the matter to the
Disciples, Mark adds, and to Peter.
“ They went out from the tomb and fled, for
trembling and astonishment came upon them; and
they said nothing to anyone, for they were afraid.”
Schmiedel objects; this is inconceivable.
It is not only conceivable, but highly probable
that they should be affrighted after such a sight, and
that they would not recover for some time. This
would prevent them from speaking to anyone on the
first flush of excitement.
These visions took place before Jesus appeared
to anyone.
Although the order is not quite certain, He
appeared eleven times after the Resurrection.
(i) To certain women as they returned from the
sepulchre, the two Marys, Salome, and
others. Matthew xxviii. i-io.
(2) To Mary Magdalen at the sepulchre, prob-
ably on her second visit, after telling Peter
and John. John xx. 11.
(3) To Peter, not described, but alluded to,
Luke xxiv. 34; and Paul I. Cor. xv. 5 (on
the day of Resurrection).
(4) The two on the way to Emmaus. Luke
xxiv. 13.
(5) To the ten Apostles—Thomas absent.
Luke 33 (evening of Resurrection).
(6) The eleven—Thomas present. John xx.
26-28.
(7) To several Disciples, at Sea of Galilee.
John xxi. 1-23.


(8) The Apostles and 500 brethren, by Paul,
apparently alluded to, Matthew xxviii.
16-20, and to James, by Paul only.
(10) The Apostles at Jerusalem, immediately be-
fore the Ascension. Luke xxiv. 50-2.
Acts i. 3-8.
(11) To the Apostle Paul on his way to
Damascus. Acts i. 3. Appearing'
by the space of forty days.
The record of the closing scenes of the Life, and
of the Death of Christ, omits many things we should
like to know. The Gospels not only do not profess
to give a complete record, but some of them expressly
affirm, and others imply, that they have not included
every thing in their account.
Some of Schmiedel’s objections considered.
The strength of evidence for the genuineness of
the Gospels greater than that for classical authors.
The truth of Christianity, so far as testimony is
concerned, could rest upon that of Paul alone. Pfe
was the most bitter and distinguished opponent, and
became the ablest and most earnest defender of
Christianity, and died a martyr for its truth.
What became of the body of Christ? , Un-
believers have never yet accounted for it, on the
supposition that He did not rise.
(For this and other matters, see our Text-Book.
Bruce’s Apologetics.)
W. C. Penfold & Co,, Printers, 183 Pitt Street, Sydney.
