









THE
URUGUAYAN BLUE BOOK
THE ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF
URUGUAY
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Secretary of State:
DR. ALBERTO GUANI
Outline of Events prior
to the sinking of the
ADMIRAL GRAF SPEE
and the internment of
the merchant vessel
TACOMA




URUGUAYAN BLUE BOOK
The Documents relating to the
sinking of the ADMIRAL GRAF
SPEE and the internment of
the merchant vessel TACOMA




URUGUAYAN BLUE BOOK
THE ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Secretary of State
DR. ALBERTO GUANI
THE DOCUMENTS RELATING TO
THE SINKING OF THE
ADMIRAL GRAF SPEE
AND THE INTERNMENT OF
THE MERCHANT VESSEL
TACOMA


MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN.
AT GAINSBOROUGH PRESS, ST. ALBANS,
BY FISHER, KNIGHT AND CO., LTD.


CONTENTS
Page
(A) The Facts 13
(B) Outline of Events Prior to the Sinking of the “Admiral Graf
Spee” 23
No.
1 The Captain of the Uruguayan cruiser Uruguay sends to the Inspector
General of the Navy a detailed statement relative to the naval battle
between the German battleship Admiral Graf Spee and the British
cruisers Ajax, Achilles and Exeter near Punta del Este, in which it is
stated that except for the first few minutes of the engagement, the
entire battle took place in Uruguayan territorial waters. Maldonado
Bay, 14th December, 1939 23
2 Entry noted on page 112 of the “Log of arrival and departure of battle-
ships” kept by the Port Naval Authorities, relative to the arrival at
Montevideo of the Admiral Graf Spee. Montevideo, 13th December,
1939 24
3 The Special Branch of the Montevideo Police notifies the Chief of Police of
the disembarkation of five wounded members of the crew of the
Admiral Graf Spee, who were detained in the Pasteur Hospital.
Montevideo, 16th December, 1939 25
4 The Ministry of the Interior sends to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs the
foregoing document. Montevideo, 18th December, 1939 25
5 The German Legation in Montevideo informs the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the arrival of the German battleship Admiral Graf Spee, and
requests that the vessel be allowed a sufficient stay in Montevideo
harbour to repair damage and re-establish seaworthiness. Montevideo,
14th December, 1939 26
0 Government Decree ordering the Maritime Authorities to examine the
extent of damage of the German battleship Admiral Graf Spee, in
order to decide the minimum period necessary to effect repairs com-
mensurate with the seaworthiness of the said warship. Montevideo,
14th December, 1939 27
7 Text of the report of the Technical Commission of the Port Naval Authori-
ties relative to the damage sustained by the Admiral Graf Spee.
Montevideo, 14th December, 1939 28
8 Statement of damage sustained by the Admiral Graf Spee, submitted by
the Captain of the said vessel, and attached to the above-mentioned
report. Montevideo, 14th December, 1939 29
8 The Inspector General of the Navy passes on the report of the Technical
Commission of the Port Naval Authorities relative to the damage
sustained by the Admiral Graf Spee. Montevideo, 15th December,
1939 29
10 The German Legation in Montevideo requests the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs to grant the Admiral Graf Spee a stay of 16 days in the port
of Montevideo. Montevideo, 14th December, 1939 30
11 The British Legation in Montevideo requests the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs that the German battleship Admiral Graf Spee be interned if
her stay in the port of Montevideo exceeds twenty-four hours.
Montevideo, 14th December, 1939 31
12 The French Legation in Montevideo requests the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs that the Admiral Graf Spee and her crew be interned for the
duration of the war. Montevideo, 15th December, 1939 32


No.
Page
13 The German Legation in Montevideo requests permission of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs for 320 members of the crew of the Admiral Graf
Spee to be allowed to disembark in order to attend the burial of the
German sailors killed in the Battle of Punta del Este. Montevideo
14th December, 1939 ’ 33
14 Decree authorising the landing of an armed contingent of the crew of the
Admiral Graf Spee in order to render homage at the burial of the crew
of the said vessel. Montevideo, 14th December, 1939 33
15 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs informs the German Legation in Monte-
video of the above-mentioned decree. Montevideo, 14th December, 1939.'. 34
16 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs requests the Uruguayan Legation in London
by telegraph, to draw the attention of the British Government to the
reservations of the Uruguayan Government in connection with the
violation of territorial waters and follows this with the Note setting
out the reasons on which these reservations are based. Montevideo
14th December, 1939 ’ 35
17 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs requests the Uruguayan Legation in Berlin,
by telegraph, similarly to draw the attention of the German Govern-
ment to the reservations, following this with a Note setting out the
reasons on which these reservations are based. Montevideo. 14th
December, 1939 3S
18 Government decree stipulating that in view of the request put forward by
the German Legation under No. 5 and the report of the Technical
Commission, under No. 7, a stay of 72 hours be granted for the carry-
ing out of repairs to the Admiral Graf Spee in order to re-establish her
seaworthiness, such period to expire at 8 p.m. on 17th December
Montevideo, 15th December, 1939 ' 3 g
19 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs informs the German Legation in Monte-
video of the measure adopted in the foregoing Decree. Montevideo.
16th December, 1939 ’ 38
20 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs replies to the Note of the British Legation
in Montevideo, under No. 11, stating that in applying the articles of
the XIII Hague Convention of 1907, in determining the stay of the
Admiral Graf Spee it was acting strictly within the text of the Articles
cited which do not differentiate as to the cause of damage, prohibiting,
in accordance with the said Convention, any repairs for the purpose
of increasing the fighting strength of the vessel. Montevideo, 16th
December, 1939 39
21 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs replies to the Note'of the French Legation
in Montevideo, under No. 12, stating that the Government of the
Republic fulfilling Articles 14 and 17 of the Hague Convention and
the Decree of its Neutrality of 6th September, 1939, has granted to
the Admiral Graf Spee a stay in Montevideo’harbour. Montevideo
16th December, 1939 ..... ’ 41
22 In its capacity of intermediary for consultations'envisaged in the Declara-
tion of 3rd October, 1939, the Ministry of 1 Foreign Affairs of the
Republic, sends by telegraph, to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Panama, an account of the naval battle of Punta del Este, suggesting
that the said event which took place within the American area fixed
in Panama, constitutes the basis of a representation or joint or
individual measures referred to in the said Declaration of 3rd October
Montevideo, 16th December, 1939 42
0 ' ••••••••■•
23 Item relative to the departure of the Admiral Graf Spee entered on page 113
of the “Log of arrival and departure of battleships”. Montevideo,
17th December, 1939... . ... 43


No Page
24 The Inspectorate General of the Navy informs the Minister of National
Defence of the departure of the Admiral Graf Spec from the harbour
of Montevideo, and of the blowing-up of the same, four miles off Punta
de Yeguas. Montevideo, 27th December, 1939 43
25 The German Legation in Montevideo notifies the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
that the Captain of the Admiral Graf Spec has protested at the decision
of the Uruguayan Government relative to the stay of the vessel, and
forwards—in accordance with instructions received from his Govern-
ment—his protest that a longer stay for the warship was refused.
Montevideo, 17th December, 1939.. 44
26 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs replies to the above mentioned Note from
the German Legation in Montevideo informing them that the Govern-
ment of Uruguay rejects the protest contained in the said Note.
Montevideo, 19th December, 1939 -. 45
(C) Outline of Events Prior to the Internment of S.S. “Tacoma” 49
27 Telegraphic communication from the Republic’s Legation in Santiago,
Chile, setting out details of the departure of the steamship Tacoma,
German flag, from the port of Talcahuano. Santiago, Chile, 4th
January, 1940 49
28 Item entered on page 242 of the “Log of arrival and departure of foreign
Ships”, concerning the arrival in Montevideo harbour of the merchant
vessel Tacoma, German flag. Montevideo, 22nd November, 1939..,.., 49
29 Events relative to the request for 1,600 tons of fuel oil and 30 tons of gas
oil destined for refuelling the Tacoma. Montevideo, 22nd November-
13th December, 1939 50
30 The Captain of the Tacoma informs 'the Port Authorities that extraordinary
circumstances compelled him to ileave urgently without clearing his
vessel through an Agency. Montevideo, 17th December, 1939. 57
31 Summary of a report instructing investigation of the motives for the
departure of the Tacoma from the port of Montevideo and the part
played by the said ship relative to events in connection with the
blowing-up and sinking of the Admiral Graf Spec. Montevideo,
18th-21st December, 1939 68
32 The Ministry of National Defence sends to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs the
Conclusions of the summary of the report above mentioned. Monte-
video, 21st December, 1939 64
33 The Ministry of National Defence sends to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
a statement of facts prior to the finding on board the Tacoma of one of
the launches of the Admiral Graf Spec. Montevideo, 19th-20th
December, 1939 I 66
34 Proceedings undertaken to ascertain whether the cargo of fuel oil and gas
oil loaded by the. Tacoma was actually aboard the said ship. Monte-
video, 19th-20th December, 1939 67
35 Decree of the Government declaring the merchant steamer Tacoma,
German flag, to be an auxiliary war vessel, and fixing a time of
24 hours within which she must leave the port of Montevideo, and
measures relative to the carrying out of the same and internment
of the said ship. Montevideo, 30th December, 1939-2nd January, 1940 70
36 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs sends a copy of the above-mentioned Decree
to the German Legation, Montevideo. Montevideo, 30th December,
1939 75
37 The German Legation inform the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that they
do not admit that the Tacoma, German flag, should be considered as
a fleet auxiliary, since the activities of the vessel were motivated by
humanitarian principles'; they reserve the right to protest in the
name of their Government, the ship-owners, and the crew, and attach
a note of protest from the Captain. Montevideo, 31st December, 1939 75


No. Page
38 Text of the protest made by the Captain of the Tacoma to the Port Naval
Authorities, against the Decree of 30th December, 1939. Montevideo,
31st December-2nd January, 1940 77
39 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs replies to the Note of the German Legation
published under 37, indicating the reasons on which the Government
of the Republic based their Decree of 30th December, 1939, relative
to the s.s. Tacoma. Montevideo, 16th January, 1940 78
40 Telegraphic despatch from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Legation
of the Republic in Berlin, communicating the measures adopted by
the Government concerning the steamer Tacoma, and the reasons for
arriving at these decisions. Montevideo, 2nd January, 1940 80
(D) Outline of Events Prior to the Internment op the Crew of the
“Admiral Graf Spee” and the “Tacoma” 83
41 The Minister of National Defence forwards to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs an outline of events concerning four of the crew of the Admiral
Graf Spec and service personnel of the same, landed by the steamer
Tacoma. Montevideo, 19th-20th December, 1939 85
42 From the German Legation in Montevideo to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, advising that five ratings who belonged to the office staff of
the Admiral Graf Spee have been appointed assistants to the Air and
Naval Attaches to the Embassies in Buenos Aires, Rio de Janeiro and
Santiago de Chile, and to the Legations in Montevideo and Asuncion
and requesting the required entrance visas. Montevideo, 18th
December, 1939 86
43 The German Legation in Montevideo to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
advising that the Senior Medical Officer of the Admiral Graf Spee has
been appointed to the German Legation in Montevideo as its Doctor
and requests the granting of the customary entrance visas. Montevideo,
18th December, 1939 87
44 The German Legation in Montevideo to the Minister of Foreign Affairs
advising that five German Officers belonging to the Staff of the Admiral
Graf Spee have been appointed permanent Assistants to the Naval
and Air Attaches to the German Embassies in Buenos Aires, Rio de
Janeiro, Santiago de Chile, and to the Legations in Montevideo and
Asuncion and request the authorization of the respective entrance
visas. Montevideo, 18th December, 1939 88
45 The German Legation in Montevideo to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
advising that five Administrative employees of the Admiral Graf Spee
were appointed to augment the personnel of the Legation in Monte-
video and requests the authorization of the customary entrance visas.
Montevideo, 18th December, 1939 89
46 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the German Legation in Montevideo,
replies to the notes which are reproduced under Nos. 42, 43, 44 and 45,
and in connection with the requests made in them, which are under
examination, asks for the names of the officers and ratings which it is ...
intended to send to the German Embassies in Buenos Aires, Rio de
Janeiro, Santiago de Chile and the Legations of Montevideo and
Asuncion. Montevideo, 23rd December, 1939 90
47 German Legation to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, giving the names of
the officers and ratings appointed to the different German Legations in
South America. Montevideo, 29th December, 1939 90
48 The Minister of Foreign Affairs to the German Legation at Montevideo,
asking whether consent has been given by the Governments of
Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Paraguay to the officers and ratings of
the Admiral Graf Spee being appointed as permanent assistants to
the German Naval and Air Attaches in the respective Embassies and
Legations. Montevideo, 9th January, 1940 91


No. Page
49 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the German Legation in Montevideo,
states that as no reply has been received to the request as set out
in the preceding Note, the Government of the Republic will not delay
in defining the situation of the officers and ratings in accordance with
the opinion given above. Montevideo, 19th January, 1940 92
50 Decree stating that the sick and wounded of the Admiral Graf Spee, at
present in hospital, will be interned once they are discharged and
stating that the officers and ratings referred to in the preceding
Notes are to be interned, and placing at liberty the Doctor of the
aforementioned warship. Montevideo, 23rd January, 1940 93
51 Decree by which the order of internment set forth in the preceding Docu-
ment is applied to the Officers and crew of the German ship Tacoma,
at present detained in the port of Montevideo. Montevideo, 23rd
January, 1940 95




(A) THE FACTS




(A) THE FACTS
1. The German battleship Admiral Graf Spee entered Monte-
video harbour on Wednesday, 13th December, 1939, at 10.30
p.m. On that same day she had been engaged in an action of!
Punta del Este, inside Uruguayan territorial waters, with the
British cruisers, H.M.S. Exeter, Ajax and Achilles. The German
-warship entered Montevideo harbour with a crew of 1,096 men
on board, commanded by Captain Hans Langsdorff. At 1.30
a.m. on 14th December, five wounded members of the crew of the
Admiral Graf Spee were taken ashore and driven in ambulances
belonging to the Ministry of Public Health to the Pasteur Hospital,
where they were detained. Later in the same day four members
of the crew were taken to the Military Hospital, and at 10 a.m.
on 15th December the thirty-six men killed during the action
were buried in the Cementerio del Norte. Military honours were
rendered by Uruguayan sailors and a detachment of 320 men
from the Admiral Graf Spee, permission for the latter’s presence
having been granted at the request of the German Legation.
2. On 14th December the German Minister accredited to our
Government, Herr Otto Langmann, officially acquainted the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs with the presence of the Admiral
Graf Spee in Montevideo harbour, requesting that the necessary
time be allowed to repair the damage which the vessel had sus-
tained, in order to make it seaworthy.
In consequence the Government issued a decree, which taking
into account the Republic’s neutrality declared on sth September,
1939, in accordance with the Conventions laid down at the Hague
Conference of 1907, ordered the competent maritime authorities
to carry out an examination of the damage sustained by the
Admiral Graf Spee in order to determine the minimum time
necessary to restore the vessel to a state of seaworthiness.
3. The Technical Department of the Port Authorities started
their examination of the damage to the Admiral Graf Spee at
7 p.m. on 14th December. The examination was carried out on
the basis of particulars furnished by the German ship’s Command.
On the same day, the German Minister in Montevideo, Herr Otto
Langmann, requested the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that a
period of fifteen days’ stay in Montevideo harbour be granted to
the Admiral Graf Spee in order that the necessary repairs might


be carried out. At the same time the British Minister in Monte-
video, Mr. Eugen Millington Drake, requested the Chancellery
that, in accordance with the XIII Hague Convention, the German
vessel be interned if its stay in Montevideo harbour exceeded
twenty-four hours. On 15th December a similar request was
addressed to the Chancellery by the French Minister in Monte-
video, M. Francois Gentil.
4. On the night of the 14th at 11.45 p.m. the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs dispatched telegraphic communications to the
Republic’s representatives in Great Britain and Germany request-
ing them to make representations to the governments of those
countries concerning the fact that the combat of 13th December
had taken place within Uruguayan territorial waters.
5. Taking into account the request of the German Legation
that the Admiral Graf Spee be granted a stay for repairs and
also taking into consideration the report of the Technical Depart-
ment which carried out an examination of the damage, the
Executive Power issued a decree on 15th December, 1939, ruling
that a period of 72 hours be allowed to carry out the necessary
repairs. The time limit was to expire on 17th December at 8 p.m.
6. On 16th December, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs replied
to the requests sent on the 14th and 15th respectively by the
British and French Legations in Montevideo that the Admiral
Graf Spee be interned if she exceeded a stay of twenty-four hours
in Montevideo harbour. In their reply the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs pointed out that in granting the Admiral Graf Sfee a stay
of more than twenty-four hours they were strictly adhering to
the text of Articles 12, 14 and 17 of the XIII Hague Convention
of 1907 in which no distinction is made as to the cause of the
damage sustained. Likewise, in order to comply with Articles
17 and 18 of the XIII Hague Convention, the Chancellery decided
to prohibit any repairs likely to increase the fighting strength of
the ship by renewing her armaments, or by effecting repairs to
her military structure.
7. On 16th December, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs com-
municated by telegraph with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Panama giving details of the naval battle on 13th off Punta del
Este within the security zone set down by Panama, and request-
ing him in his capacity as intermediary to communicate the facts
to all American States, with the suggestion that these facts and
their possible consequences might be the subject of representa


tions or measures on the part of all or individual states as laid
down by Article 3 of the Panama Declaration of 3rd October, 1939.
8. On 17th December, 1939, at 3 p.m., the Diplomatic
Representatives of all the American States accredited to the
Republican Government, met in the "Cabildo”, 1 in the office of
the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Dr. Alberto Guani, in order to
receive collectively details of the international situation at the
moment.
After hearing an account given by the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, the Diplomatic Representatives expressed cordial soli-
darity with the Government and Uruguayan people.
9. On 17th December, at 3.30 p.m., the German Legation
informed the Port Naval Authorities that the Admiral Graf Spee
would leave Montevideo harbour at 6.45 p.m. In the evening
of the same day at 4 p.m. 31 wounded members of the Admiral
Graf Sfee’s crew who were still aboard, were taken to the Military
Hospital. At 6.15 p.m. the Admiral Graf Spee put out to sea.
At 6.45 p.m. on the same day, the merchant vessel, Tacoma,
flying the German flag, which had been lying at anchor in Monte-
video harbour, put out to sea without a pilot and without com-
plying with harbour regulations. She followed the same course
as the Admiral Graf Spee, subsequently anchoring in her vicinity.
The crew of the battleship were transferred to the Tacoma and
then to a launch, and two Argentine tugs which had drawn up
alongside her. At 8 p.m. the Admiral Graf Spee was blown up
four miles to the south of Punta Yeguas,
10. The R.O.U. Uruguay ordered the Tacoma to return to
port, and the latter’s captain asked for a pilot to take his ship
to the outer harbour, where she anchored at 1.15 a.m. on 19th
December, 1939. As soon as she had anchored, four members
of the crew of the Admiral Graf Spee who had been responsible
for blowing her up, and six Chinese members of the ship’s service
personnel, were landed. From that time the Tacoma and her
crew have been kept under observation.
11. After the blowing up of the Admiral Graf Spee the
Uruguayan naval sloops Zapicdn and Huracdn detained, within
territorial waters, the naval launch with Captain Hans
Langsdorff on board. The Chancellery, however, decreed
that as Captain Langsdorff was complying with the order
1 The “Cabildo” is the Foreign Office building, an historic relic of Colonial
times.


to leave Montevideo harbour he should be allowed to proceed.
12. On 17th December the German Legation in Montevideo
informed the Minister of Foreign Affairs that the Captain of the
Admiral Graf Spee had protested against the Uruguayan Govern-
ment’s decision regarding the time limit accorded to his ship,
and that, acting on orders from his Government he made a formal
protest at the Admiral Graf Spee’s not being granted a longer
stay, which in his opinion was a violation of international
law and practice.
13. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, being unable to take
official cognizance of the protest formulated by the Captain of
the Admiral Graf Spee, rejected on 19th December that of the
German Legation in Montevideo, “conscious of having strictly
carried out its duty”, adding that the blowing-up of the ship in
Uruguayan waters off Montevideo could have no explanation in
relation to the question of international law raised in the German
Minister’s note.
14. The merchant vessel Tacoma was found at anchor at
dawn, on 22nd November, 1939, in the outer road, together with
the Lahn, a German steamer. Through the intermediary of her
maritime agents, Messrs. Bernitt and Co., she asked for the
services of a Port Pilot.
When the authorities arrived on board, her Captain, Hans
Konow, informed the Port Naval Authorities that she was a ship of
5,013 tons, had a crew of 62, and was proceeding from Talca-
huano, Chile, which she had left on 9th November, 1939. “Force
majeure” was responsible for her being in the port. His vessel
was carrying cargo in transit. He had on board 450,000 kilo-
grams of fuel oil and 5,000 kilograms of gas oil. The fuel con
sumption of the vessel was 50,000 kilograms per 24 hour day
She intended taking on board 1,500,000 kilograms of fuel oil ant.
20,000 kilograms of gas oil. The Captain further declared that
he was not on his country’s Naval War Reserve and that he had
neither arms, munitions nor explosives on board.
He signed a notification forbidding him the use of his tele-
graphic and telephonic apparatus whilst in port or Uruguayan
waters, the signing on of crew or troops in the said port or waters ;
the taking on board of war contraband or any materials likely
to be used to convert his ship into a merchant raider or warship, as
well as taking on board fuel without a special Government permit.


15. On 22nd November, la “Compania Sud Americana de
Comercio S.A.” “Riberena del Plata” communicated with the
Management of the National Administration for Fuel, Alcohol and
Portland, suggesting that the Ministry of Industry should be
approached in order to grant the necessary permit for the Tacoma
to take on board 1,600,000 kilograms of fuel oil and 30,000 kilo-
grams of gas oil bought by the same Company and intended for
the consumption of the ship mentioned.
16. After consultation, in which was taken into account the
excessive quantity of oil requested, and bearing in mind a declara-
tion from the German Legation in Montevideo in which it was
explained that the Tacoma once having completed loading in
Montevideo would make a straight course for Hamburg, The
National Administration for Fuel, Alcohol and Portland was
authorised to supply the Tacoma, from stock, with the requested
amount of fuel oil and gas oil, and charge to the account of the
“Riberena del Plata”. On 14th December, 1939, the fuel was
taken on board. The loading took place in La Teja Dock, after
which the Tacoma weighed anchor in the outer harbour, which
she had left on 13th for the purpose of refuelling. She remained
there until the events of 17th December, already described, when
the Admiral Graf Spec left port.
17. From enquiries made relative to the reasons for the
sudden departure of the Tacoma from the harbour of Monte-
video in the evening of 17th December, the following facts were
established : That the ship had left harbour without the necessary
clearance papers and without pilot; that on board the 1 acoma
were the members of the crew of the A dmiral Graf Spec, and that
from the Tacoma this crew was transferred to the Argentine tugs
Coloso and Gigante and to the launch Chiriguana, which took
them to Buenos Aires ; and that during the entire period the
Captain of the Tacoma was under orders from the Captain of the
Admiral Graf Spec.
18. Bearing these facts in mind, as well as Articles 1 and 25
of the XIII Hague Convention, of 18th October, 1907, in which
it is laid down that belligerents must respect the sovereign rights
of Neutral Powers who, in turn, undertake to prevent their
ports, islands or waters being used for naval operations ; and
also taking into account that merchant vessels placed, at the dis-
posal of belligerent warships are to be treated as auxiliaries of
belligerent navies from the moment of entry into that service,


the Government of the Republic by decree of 30th December,
1939, decided to give the Tacoma 24 hours to leave the port of
Montevideo, in accordance with XIII Hague Convention already
mentioned, provision being made for measures to enforce the
decision. This decision was communicated to the German
Legation in Montevideo in a Note sent at 11.55 a.m. on 30th
December and received by them at 1.30 a.m. on 31st.
19. On 31st December, 1939, at 6.30 a.m., the Port Naval
Authorities notified the Captain of the Tacoma, Herr Hans
Konow, of the Decree issued by the Executive Power on the
30th, which classified his ship as being a fleet auxiliary and gave
her 24 hours to leave the Port of Montevideo. The period was
to start from the time of notification.
20. In the early hours of the morning of Ist January,
1940, the Minister of Foreign Affairs ordered that the German
Legation in Montevideo be informed that the “Cabildo” would
remain open as usual in spite of the day being a holiday, in
order that any communication or request from the Legation
might be received.
21. The time limit having elapsed—at 6.30 a.m. on Ist
January—for the Tacoma to leave port, and the said vessel not
having complied with the terms of the notification mentioned
in paragraph 23, the Port Authorities informed Captain Hans
Konow at 9.15 a.m. that the vessel was now interned in accord-
ance with the decree of 30th December. The Captain was
informed in writing that he was at liberty to make any represen-
tation or appeal for supplies before the maritime authorities.
The same applied to the ship’s agents, and since the authorities
had expressly kept their office open, the Captain or his agents
could get into touch with the said authorities at any moment.
22. On being acquainted with the terms of the decree of
30th December, Captain Hans Konow, of the Tacoma protested
to the Port Authorities about the Uruguayan Government’s
decision. He reserved the right to amplify his protest, and to
claim from the party responsible for the decision any damage
that might ensue. On the same day, 31st December, the German
Legation in Montevideo in a note addressed to the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, also lodged a protest. They maintained that
the Tacoma had in no way acted as a warship, nor had she
violated Uruguay’s neutrality, and that her activities in connec-
tion with the departure and subsequent scuttling of the Admiral


Graf Spee were of a humanitarian nature. The Legation reserved
the right to lodge a claim in the name of its Government, the ship
owners, the crew of the Tacoma and any other injured party.
23. In a note on 16th January, 1940, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs repudiated the interpretation given by the German
Minister to the events which motivated the Decree of 30th
December, 1939. The Ministry maintained that the Tacoma
by the act of trans-shipping and transporting the crew of the
Admiral Graf Spee had violated the neutrality of Uruguayan
waters with the obvious purpose of placing the crew of that
vessel in such a position that on their arrival in the Argentine
Republic there would be no grounds for their internment by the
authorities. The Chancellery added that in applying the XIII
Hague Convention it had acted in the spirit of Article XXVI,
in accordance with which, when a Power invokes the said Con-
vention, it cannot be held to constitute an unfriendly act.
24. On 18th December, 1939, four members of the crew of
the Admiral Graf Spee who had taken an active part in the
blowing up of the battle cruiser, together with six washermen
of Chinese nationality, belonging to the service personnel of the
ship, were taken from the Tacoma to the Maritime Police Station.
The former were kept in custody, whilst the latter, at the request
of the German Legation in Montevideo in a Verbal Note of
30th December, 1939, were allowed to return to their country
of origin.
25. On 18th December, 1939, the German Legation in Monte-
video communicated with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the
effect that five officers and five non-commissioned officers of the
Admiral Graf Spee had been appointed Permanent Assistants and
Assistants respectively to the Naval and Air Attaches at the
German Embassies in the Argentine, Brazil and Chile, and the
Legations of Uruguay and Paraguay. Whilst awaiting the com-
pletion of passport formalities, the men had been provisionally
attached to the German Legation in Montevideo, which latter
asked the Ministry to authorize the necessary visas for entrance
to the country. On the same date, the German Legation in Monte-
video also requested visas for the Doctor of the Admiral Graf
Spee and five administrative clerks of the same ship, and who
were now attached to the said Legation.
26. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs requested the German


Legation in Montevideo to let them know as soon as possible
whether the Governments of Argentine, Chile, Brazil and Para-
guay had given their consent to the appointment of the officers
and non-commissioned officers belonging to the Admiral Graf
Spec, as assistants to the Naval and Air Attaches. They added
that, in the opinion of the Chancellery, the said officers and non-
commissioned officers must be considered as internees in accord-
ance with international law.
27. In view of the foregoing, concerning the presence in the
Republic of the said officers and crew of the Admiral Graf Spee,
the Government of the Republic decreed on 23rd January that
the sick and wounded belonging to the ship, in hospital in Monte-
video, would be asked not to leave the country when they left
hospital; that the officers and crew should be interned, and that
the doctor attached to the Admiral Graf Spee be released. The
foregoing decision were taken in accordance with the Decree of
Neutrality of sth September, 1939, and Article 24 of the XIII
Hague Convention which laid down that a neutral Power must
intern the officers and crew of a belligerent warship if the latter
does not leave port when requested to do so. The crew of the
Admiral Graf Spee constitute such a case.
28. By decree of the same date it was decided to apply the
terms of the foregoing paragraph with reference to internment
to the officers and crew of the German merchantman Tacoma,
which had been declared an auxiliary of a belligerent war fleet
and detained in Montevideo harbour.


(B) OUTLINE OF EVENTS PRIOR TO THE
SINKING OF THE ADMIRAL GRAF SPEE




(B) OUTLINE OF EVENTS PRIOR TO THE SINKING
OF THE ADMIRAL GRAF SPEE
No. i
(The Captain of the Uruguayan cruiser Uruguay sends to the
Inspector-General of the Navy a detailed statement relative
to the naval battle between the German battleship Admiral
Graf Spee and the British cruisers Ajax, Achilles and Exeter
near Punta del Este, in which it is stated that except for
the first few minutes of the engagement the entire battle
took place in Uruguayan territorial waters.)
Maldonado Bay, 14th Dec., 1939.
Report No. 56. —14.X11.39. —Confidential.—Maldonado Bay,
14th December, 1939. —To the Inspector-General of the Navy. —
I respectfully submit to the Inspector-General an account of
yesterday’s happenings. In accordance with instructions from
the General Inspectorate, I weighed anchor at 4.42 p.m. yester-
day, leaving Maldonado Harbour, making a S E course. We
proceeded until 6.14 p.m. without incident, by which time we
were 4 = 35 06' S W 54 51 W. At 60 degrees on the beam we
sighted a warship, which proved to be the German Admiral Graf
Spee. At 6.44 p.m. the said vessel fired two shots in the direction
of a thick mass of smoke observed on the horizon, 90 0 on the
beam. The Admiral Graf Spee, proceeding at about 18 knots,
approached within two miles of the Isle of Lobos, from thence
making a westerly course. The ship flies the German flag, and
hoists on her halyard a signal which we cannot make out at
such a distance. Her firing control tower also impeded vision.
I immediately hoisted the B.V. International Code signal, the
meaning of which is : “I see your signals, but cannot make them
out; but I assume that they are a warning of the existence of
a danger zone.” At 6.30 p.m. we were 4 = 35 10' S W 54 52 W ;
we sighted at 45 0 and 90 0 on the beam two English warships of
the Ajax class, converging on the German battleship. At 7 p.m.,
and as I was 4 = 35 n' 5 W 54 41 W and considered that an
action near our coasts was imminent, I decided to change my
course and to make for territorial waters with the object of
watching events. I took this decision in spite of the danger in
steering a course between the enemy vessels, and also in spite


of the supposed warning of danger given by the German battle-
ship, thus carrying out my duty of enforcing respect for our
territorial waters. I ordered our speed to be increased with the
purpose of making territorial waters as soon as possible. One
of the English vessels, the one sighted at 90° on the beam, made
a WN W course, increasing her speed to 32 knots. She passed
within m - of our stern and with her battle signal flying.
The other vessel approaches our coast, then, making a westerly
course, passes between Lobos and the coast. At 7.50 p.m. the
English ship on a W course opens fire when off Punta Negra,
about 8 miles from the coast and within territorial waters. The
German battleship, which is now between the above-mentioned
English vessel and the buoy E of Banco Ingles, returns fire.
The action continues in a W direction. During combat the
English ship throws out a smoke screen behind which she makes
a complete turn. The other English vessel, which had stopped
approximately 12 miles to the S of Punta Ballena, hauled down
her battle signal, which was immediately hoisted by the afore-
mentioned ship, and then makes a W course, taking no further
part in the combat as far as we could see. At 8.42 p.m. the
last flashes from the guns are seen. At 19 minutes after midnight
on this day I anchored near the Isle of Flores, 4 = 34 56' S W
55 44 W. At 4.20 a.m. a darkened warship was sighted. The
ship was making an E course, and at 5 a.m. making a turn of
180 0 makes westward. At 4.55 a.m. we weighed anchor and
proceeded on patrol until 10.05 a.m. when we dropped anchor at
Punta del Este.
I must state categorically that the whole of the action, with
the exception of the first few minutes, took place within territorial
waters, as can be verified from the enclosed chart.
Yours obediently,
CAPTAIN FERNANDO J. FUENTES.
No. 2
(Entry noted on page 112 of the “Log of Arrival and Departure
of Battleships” kept by Port Naval Authorities, relative to
the arrival at Montevideo of the Admiral Graf Spee.)
Montevideo, 13th Dec., 1939.
On 13th December, at 10.50 p.m., the German battleship
Admiral Graf Spec proceeding from Wilhelmshaven, commanded
by Captain Hans Langsdorff.


No. 3
(The Special Branch of the Montevideo Police notifies the Chief
of Police of the disembarkation of five wounded members
of the crew of the Admiral Graf Spee, who were detained in
the Pasteur Hospital.)
Montevideo, 15 th Dec., 1939.
Montevideo Police, Special Branch, Commissariat of the 15th
Section.
Report No. 4516.
Item No. 103551.
Subject ; German Sailors : communication respecting admission
to Pasteur Hospital.
Montevideo, Dec., 1939.
To the Chief of the Police Department of Montevideo.
General Don Serafin Martinez.
Sir,
I beg to inform you that on 14th of this month, at about
1.30 a.m., the German sailors, Hissen Hermann, Paul Lukenz,
Helmuth Borggendi, Leo Lenken and Leo Bilichit, all single, and
aged 20, 26, 33, 25 and 22 years respectively, belonging to the
German battleship Admiral Graf Spee, were taken by an ambu-
lance of the Ministry of Public Health to the Pasteur Hospital
where they were detained for treatment in Ward No. 25.
The necessary measures were taken by this Section and
reports duly made.
Your obedient servant,
JOSE P. CANCELA,
Commissar.
No 4
(The Ministry' of the Interior sends to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs the foregoing document.)
Montevideo, 18 th Dec., 1939.
Police Headquarters, Montevideo.
Division : “Legal Affairs”.
No. 27.416/39.
Montevideo, 1 8th December, 1939.
To the Minister of the Interior,
Dr. Don Manuel E. Tiscornia.
Sir ;
I am enclosing herewith for your future guidance Corn


munication No. 4516 from the 15th Section Commissariat referring
to the admittance to the Pasteur Hospital of the German sailors
belonging to the German battleship Admiral Graf Spee. Their
names are Hissen Hermann, Paul Lukenz, Helmuth Borggendi,
Leo Lenken and Leo Bilichit, all single, and aged 20, 26, 33, 25
and 22 years respectively.
Your obedient servant,
The Chief of Police,
GENERAL SERAFIN MARTINEZ.
The Ministry of the Interior.
Montevideo, 2 8th December, 1939.
To be passed on to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for perusal
and guidance.
On behalf of the Minister,
VARZI,
Director General.
No. 5
(The German Legation in Montevideo informs the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the arrival of the German battleship
Admiral Graf Spee, and requests that the vessel be allowed
a sufficient stay in Montevideo harbour to. repair damage
and re-establish seaworthiness.)
Montevideo, 14 th Dec., 1939.
German Legation.
A 495/39-
Montevideo, 14th December, 1939.
Sir :
I beg to inform Your Excellency that late last night the
German warship Admiral Graf Spee entered the harbour of
Montevideo after being engaged in action with three English
cruisers. Owing to the damage sustained by the vessel, I request
Your Excellency, in accordance with Article 7 of; the Decree of
7th August, 1914, referring to the “Neutrality of the Republic”,
that, through the intermediary of the national authorities con-
cerned, the necessary stay in Montevideo harbour be granted in
order that repairs may be carried out to make, the said vessel
seaworthy.


I take advantage of the opportunity to assure Your Excellency
of my highest esteem and consideration.
LANGMANN.
To His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Doctor Don Alberto Guani.
No. 6
(Government Decree ordering the Maritime Authorities to
examine the extent of damage of the German battleship
Admiral Graf Spee, in order to decide the minimum period
necessary to effect repairs commensurate with the sea-
worthiness of the said warship.)
Montevideo, 14th Dec., 1939.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, I.4th December, 1939.
Under Consideration : note of the German Legation
accredited to the Republican Government, dated this day,
referring to the arrival in Montevideo harbour of the German
warship Admiral Graf Spee after having been in action with
British cruisers, and requesting that the vessel be allowed to
stay long enough to re-establish seaworthiness.
According to : the Decree of sth September of this year
declaring neutrality in the present war in accordance with the
Conventions laid down at the Hague Peace Conferences and the
Convention relating to the rights and duties of Neutrals in the
case of naval warfare, dated 18th October, 1907, which states
in Article 17 that warships of belligerents may not make repairs
in the ports and roads of neutrals beyond those necessary for
safety at sea, and may not increase in any way the fighting
efficiency of the vessel;
Taking into consideration : that the ruling of this Con-
vention allows for distinction in the nature of the damage in
order to ascertain legitimate repair always provided that no
repairs are made to fighting equipment;
The President of the Republic
DECREES
1. - that the Ministry of National Defence issue orders to


the competent maritime authorities immediately to carry out
examination of the damage sustained by the warship Admiral
Graf Sfee, at present at anchor in Montevideo harbour ;
2. that in accordance with such technical report as the
competent maritime authorities make, as mentioned in the
above paragraph, the minimum stay necessary for carrying out
repairs commensurate with seaworthiness of the aforementioned
vessel, be granted ;
3. that all repairs be carried out under the supervision and
vigilance of the said maritime authorities ;
4. that the Decree be communicated to the officials concerned.
BALDOMIR. A. GUANI.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
Montevideo, 14 th December, 1939.
No. 7
(Text of the report of the Technical Commission of the Port
Authorities relative to the damage sustained by Admiral
Graf Spee.)
Montevideo, 14 th December, 1939.
To the Inspector General of the Navy.
In accordance with your verbal instructions and the time
being 7 p.m. of this date, the undersigned proceeded on board
the German battleship Graf Spee, where we were received by
her Captain, the Minister and Naval Attache of Germany.
Having acquainted them with the object of our visit, we were
given a list of “damage affecting the seaworthiness of the ship”.
This list is attached herewith. After an examination, we arrived
at the following conclusions ;
1. There were not only 9 holes but 15 on the starboard
side and 12 on the port side, the holes being both large and
small.
2. The fire fighting equipment, although reduced in efficiency
could not be deemed as affecting seaworthiness.
3. We noticed no cracks in the stern.
4. As far as the galley, bakery and laundry are concerned,
one cooking cauldron, pipes and electric equipment were damaged
by a shell.
5. With regard to the auxiliary boiler of the fresh water


plant, we enquired of the Captain whether its machinery had
sustained damage, and he informed us that as this was situated
under the armoured deck it was undamaged. We therefore did
not examine it.
6. The result of our investigation is that provisional repairs
can be carried out in three days. This, of course, is subject to
your own good judgment.
Yours obediently,
COMMANDER JOSE RODRIGUEZ VARELA.
LIEUTENANT COMMANDER ENG. FERNANDO A.
FONTANA.
No. 8
(Statement of damage sustained by the Admiral Graf Spec sub-
mitted by the Captain of the said vessel, and attached to
the above-mentioned report.)
Montevideo , 14 th Dec., 1939.
Damage affecting the seaworthiness of the ship.
Nine holes in the hull, of which two in the stern measure
approximately 2x2 metres and 0.70 x 0.60 metres respectively,
and one on the starboard side in the centre of the waterline.
The fire fighting equipment is reduced in efficiency.
There are cracks in the stern.
Essential equipment in the galley, bakery and laundry.
Repairs to the auxiliary boiler of the fresh-water plant.
■No. 9
(The Inspector General of the Navy passes on the report of the
Technical Commission of the Port Authorities relative to
the damage sustained by the Admiral Graf Spee .)
Montevideo, 15 th December, 1939.
Inspectorate General of the Navy.
Montevideo, 15 th December, 1939.
To the Minister of National Defence.
In view of the copy of the note sent by the German Legation
to the Minister of Foreign Affairs and transmitted confidentially
to this Inspectorate, the undersigned ordered the Technical


Commission of the Port Authorities to proceed with the inspec-
tion of the German battleship Graf Spee.
In accordance with the report made by the said Commission
the undersigned considers that a period of three days’ stay in
our port is necessary to carry out provisional repairs to the
said ship.
I remain, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
REAR ADMIRAL GUSTAVO A. SCHRODER.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 15 th December , 1939.
fo be forwarded to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for their
guidance, and to be returned in due course.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
No. 10
(The German Legation in Montevideo requests the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs to grant the Admiral Graf Spee a stay of
days in the Port of Montevideo.)
Montevideo, \Afh December, 1939.
German Legation.
A 495/39 n.
Montevideo, 14 th December, 1939.
Sir,
With reference to the Note dated 14th December and my
conversation with Your Excellency of midday to-day, I have
the honour to inform you that the Commission of Experts
appointed by the Maritime Inspectorate which was on board the
Admiral Graf Spee from 7 p.m. to 9 p.m. has admitted the
necessity for repairs to be carried out in order to make the
vessel seaworthy. As the Commission has not fixed a definite
period of time, it will, to-night, report to its superior authority.
The time allowed to complete repairs will depend on the speed
with which the necessary materials are supplied.
In accordance with the view of the ship’s captain and tech-
nical experts, I beg to request Your Excellency to grant to the
vessel a fifteen days stay in Montevideo harbour.


I take this opportunity of reiterating to Your Excellency the
expression of my highest and most deferential esteem.
LANGMANN.
To His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Doctor Don Alberto Guani.
No. ii
(The British Legation in Montevideo requests the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs that the German battleship Admiral Graf
Spee be interned if her stay in the Port of Montevideo
exceeds twenty-four hours.)
Montevideo, 14th Dec., 1939.
British Legation.
No. 105.
Montevideo, 14th December, 1939.
Sir,
In accordance with instructions received from the Secretary
of State for Foreign Affairs, I beg to request that the German
battleship be interned if her stay in Montevideo harbour exceeds
24 hours.
This request is based on Hague Convention No. 13 which
determines Uruguayan neutrality as per the Uruguayan Govern-
ment’s decree of neutrality of the sth September last.
In accordance with Article 12 of this Convention, the Graf
Spee may not be allowed a stay of more than 24 hours, excepting
in case of damage or bad weather as per Article 14. In any
event, in accordance with Article 17, only repairs which are
absolutely necessary to make the vessel seaworthy may be
carried out, and nothing that could in any way increase her
armed force.
I understand it is the opinion of the Uruguayan authorities
that this battleship is, in fact, not in a fit condition to sail.
This is evidently due to the damage she sustained when in action
against the British cruisers, the result of which damage being
that she had to enter Montevideo harbour. Although Article 17
does not definitely disallow repairing this damage, the Uruguayan
Government can differentiate between damage caused by bad
weather and that sustained in combat, and whilst allowing


repairs to the former, refuse the latter. For example, Article <9
of the Havana Convention definitely makes this distinction, ancd
lays down that damage caused by enemy fire may in no cas<e
be repaired. The same line of conduct has been adopted by
the Governments of Norway, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, and
Sweden in the neutrality regulations which they adopted in
1938 and which apply to the present war. The Balkan states
and Cuba have adopted similar measures.
In these circumstances, and acting on instructions I have
received, I must urgently request that the Graf Spee be not
granted a stay of more than 24 hours in this harbour to carry
out repairs to damage caused by the British cruisers.
I am taking advantage of this opportunity to assure Your
Excellency of my highest consideration and personal esteem.
E. MILLINGTON DRAKE.
To His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Doctor Alberto Guani.
No. 12
(The French Legation in Montevideo requests the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs that the Admiral Graf Spee and her crew be
interned for the duration of the war.)
Montevideo, 15 th Dec., 1939.
French Legation.
No. 63.
Montevideo, 15 th December, 1939.
Sir,
I beg to inform Your Excellency that the Governments of
France and Britain are in complete agreement in their request
to the Uruguayan Government that the German battleship Graf
von Spee and her crew be interned for the duration of the war.
This request is based on the Hague Convention, the terms of
which Uruguay had decided to apply to its declaration of
neutrality of sth September, ult.
I beg Your Excellency to accept the expression of my highest
regard.
F. GENTIL
To His Excellency Dr. Alberto Guani,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Montevideo.


No. 13
(The German Legation in Montevideo requests permission of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs for 320 members of the crew of
the Admiral Graf Spee to be allowed to disembark in order
to attend the burial of the German sailors killed in the
battle of Punta del Este.)
Montevideo, 14 th Dec., 1939.
German Legation.
No. 509/39—A.
Montevideo, 14th December, 1939.
Sir,
I beg to request Your Excellency that permission be given
for 320 members of the crew of the Admiral Graf Spee to go
ashore to-morrow in order to be present at the burial of the
victims of the naval battle and so that they may render the tradi-
tional honours to their comrades. A detachment of the said
members of the crew will disembark, with arms, as a firing party
in order to fire three volleys. For the same reason I request
Your Excellency that the accompanying officers be allowed to
carry arms so that they also may be able to render the last
honours to their fallen comrades.
I beg Your Excellency to be kind enough to forward this
request to the Uruguayan authorities whom it concerns, and I
take this opportunity of reaffirming to Your Excellency the
expression of my highest and most deferential regard.
LANGMANN.
To His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Doctor Don Alberto Guani.
No. 14
(Decree authorizing the landing of an armed contingent of the
crew of the Admiral Graf Spee in order to render homage
at the burial of the crew of the said vessel.)
Montevideo, 14 th Dec., 1939.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 14 th December, 1939.
In view of the request made by the German Legation that
B


permission be granted for an armed contingent from the battle-
ship Admiral Graf Spee to disembark in order to pay homage at
the burial of the members of the crew belonging to the said ship ;
and acting in accordance with what is laid down by the Con-
stitution of the Republic in Article 73, Section 11,
The President of the Republic
DECREES
1. that permission be granted for an armed contingent of
the German battleship Admiral Graf Spee to disembark and
render homage at the above-mentioned burial.
2. that the Decree be communicated to the officials con-
cerned.
BALDOMIR. A. GUANI.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
No. 15
(The Ministry of Foreign Affairs informs the German Legation in
Montevideo of the above-mentioned decree.)
Montevideo, 14th Dec., 1939.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Montevideo, 14th December, 1939.
Diplomatic.
1464/39 (3940).
Sir,
I have the honour to send you herewith a copy of the Decree
issued to-day. By this Decree your request is granted and per-
mission is, therefore, given for an armed contingent from the
battleship Admiral Graf Spee to disembark in order to render
honour at the burial of the members of the crew belonging to
the said ship.
I express once again to you, Sir, the assurance of my highest
consideration.
A. GUANI.
To His Excellency Herr Otto Langmann,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of
Germany.


No. 16
(The Ministry of Foreign Affairs requests the Uruguayan Lega-
tion, in London, by telegraph, to draw the attention of the
British Government to the reservations of the Uruguayan
Government in connection with the violation of territorial
waters and follows this with a Note setting out the reasons
on which these reservations are based.)
Montevideo, 14th Dec., 1939.
Presidency of the Republic.
Code, Telegraph and Telephone Office. Western.
Montevideo, 14 th December, 1939.
Uruguayan Legation,
London.
Time ; 11.45 p.m.
Please inform the British Government that we make all
reservations respecting the naval battle which took place yester-
day between German and English ships in the vicinity of Mal-
donado Harbour and within Uruguayan territorial waters. A
Note setting out the reasons for this communication will follow.
ALBERTO GUANI,
Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Montevideo—Uruguay. (Air Mail.)
Diplomatic.
1464/939—3749-
Sir:
I beg to confirm my telegram of 14th inst., and as intimated
therein I herewith set out the reasons on which we base the
reservations indicated.
The naval battle between the German battleship Admiral
Graf von Spee and the British cruisers Exeter, Achilles and Ajax
off Punta del Este on 13th inst. obliges the Republican Govern-
ment to advance the reservations motivated by this event.
The battle started outside, and continued within, territorial
waters, thus constituting a breach of our sovereign rights.
According to the report made by the cruiser Uruguay on
patrol duty in this area, the battle was started outside territorial
waters by the Admiral Graf von Spee. One of the English cruisers,
making a W course, opened fire when off Punta Negra at about


8 miles from shore on the said battleship, the action then con-
tinuing in a W direction.
I request you, in the first instance, to forward to the Govern-
ment of Great Britain our protest against the violation of our
national sovereignty by the Captains of the Exeter, Achilles and
Ajax in fighting an action within Uruguayan territorial waters.
The Government of the Republic makes this protest without
prejudice to any action that may be taken after consultation
between the American Republics as a result of the said vessels
having ignored the safety zone laid down by the Panama declara-
tion of 3rd October, 1939.
The Government of the Republic expects measures to be
taken to avoid the recurrence of events such as those which
form the basis of this protest.
I assure Your Excellency of my highest esteem.
A. GUANI.
To Dr. Daniel Castellanos, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of the Uruguayan Republic in Great Britain.
London.
No. 17
(The Ministry of Foreign Affairs requests the Uruguayan Legation
in Berlin, by telegraph, similarly to draw the attention of the
German Government to the reservations following this with
a Note setting out the reasons on which these reservations
are based.)
Montevideo, 14 th Dec., 1939.
Presidency of the Republic.
Code, Telegraph and Telephone Office. Western.
Uruguayan Legation.
Berlin.
Time : 11.55 p.m.
Please inform the German Government that we make all
reservations respecting the naval battle which took place yester-
day between German and English ships in the vicinity of Mal-
donado Harbour and within Uruguayan territorial waters. A
Note setting out the reasons for this communication will follow.
ALBERTO GUANI.
Minister of Foreign Affairs,


Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Montevideo, Uruguay. (Air Mail.)
Diplomatic.
14.64/939—3748.
Sir :
I beg to confirm my telegram of 14th inst., and as intimated
therein I herewith set out the reasons on which we base the
reservations indicated.
The naval battle between the German battleship Admiral
Graf von Spec and the British cruisers Exeter, Achilles and Ajax
off Punta del Este on 13th inst., obliges the Republican Govern-
ment to advance the reservations motivated by this event.
The battle started outside, and continued within, territorial
waters, thus constituting a breach of our sovereign rights.
According to the report made by the cruiser Uruguay on
patrol duty in this area, the battle was started outside territorial
waters by the Admiral Graf von Spee. One of the English cruisers,
making a W course, opened fire, when off Punta Negra at about
8 miles from shore, on the said battleship, the action continuing
in a W direction.
I request you, in the first instance, to forward to the Govern-
ment of Germany our protest against the violation of our national
sovereignty by the Captain of the battleship Admiral Graf von
Spee in fighting an action within Uruguayan territorial waters.
The Government of the Republic makes this protest without
prejudice to any action that may be taken after consultation
between the American Republics as a result of the said vessel
having ignored the safety zone laid down by the Panama declara-
tion of 3rd October, 1939.
The Government of the Republic expects measures to be
taken to avoid the recurrence of events such as form the basis
of this protest.
I assure Your Excellency of my highest esteem.
A. GUANI.
To Senor Virgilio Sampognaro, Envoy Extraordinary and
Minister Plenipotentiary of the Uruguayan Republic in
Germany. Berlin.


No. 18
(Government decree stipulating that in view of the request put
forward by the German Legation under No. 5, and the
report of the Technical Commission, under No. 7, a stay of
72 hours be granted for the carrying out of repairs to the
Admiral Graf Spec in order to re-establish her seaworthiness,
such period to expire at 8 p.m. on 17th Dec.)
Montevideo, 15 th Dec., 1939.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 15th December, 1939.
In view of the Decree issued yesterday referring to the
request made by the German Legation for a period of time to be
granted for carrying out repairs with a view to establishing the
seaworthiness of the German battleship Admiral Graf Spee lying
at anchor in Montevideo harbour, and in view also of the report
of the Technical Commission of the Port Authorities, appointed
to inspect the above-mentioned battleship
The President of the Republic
DECREES
1. that a period of 72 hours be allowed for the carrying out
of repairs necessary to ensure the seaworthiness of the German
battleship Admiral Graf Spee, the time limit to expire at 8 p.m.
on 17th inst.,
2. that the Decree be communicated to the officials concerned.
Signed : BALDOMIR. A. GUANI.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
No. ig
(The Ministry of Foreign Affairs informs the German Legation
in Montevideo of the measure adopted in the foregoing Decree.)
Montevideo, \sth Dec., 1939.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Montevideo, 15 th December, 1939.
Sir :
In reply to Your Excellency’s Notes of yesterday’s date, in
which you requested that a period of time be granted to the
German battleship Admiral Graf Spee, now lying at anchor in


Montevideo harbour, for the purpose of carrying out repairs to
the damage sustained, I beg to inform you that my Government
have decreed that a period of 72 hours be allowed, this time to
expire at 8 p.m. on 17th inst.
I express once again to Your Excellency the assurance of my
highest consideration.
A. GUANI.
To His Excellency Herr Otto Langmann,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of
Germany.
No. 20
(The Ministry of Foreign Affairs replies to the Note of the British
Legation in Montevideo, under No. 11, stating that in
applying the articles of the XIII Hague Convention of 1907,
in determining the stay of the Admiral Graf Spee it was
acting strictly within the text of the Articles cited, which
do not differentiate as to the cause of damage, prohibiting
in accordance with the said Convention any repairs for the
purpose of increasing the fighting strength of the vessel.)
Montevideo, 16th Dec., 1939.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Diplomatic.
1464/939—3659.
Montevideo, 16th Decenfber, 1939.
Sir :
I beg to acknowledge receipt of Your Excellency’s Note of
14th inst,, No. 105, referring to the presence in Montevideo
harbour of the German battleship Admiral Graf Spee, relative
to the neutrality ruling followed by the Government of the
Republic.
As Your Excellency points out, Articles 12, 14 and 17 of
the XIII of the Hague Convention dated 18th October, 1907,
are those which have been taken into consideration in granting
to the German vessel a period of time exceeding 24 hours in
order that repairs sufficient to ensure seaworthiness may be
carried out—provided always that her fighting strength is in no
way increased.
Moreover, the Government of the Republic bore particularly


in mind Article 18 which forbids belligerent vessels using har-
bours, roads or territorial waters of neutrals for renewing or
increasing their military supplies, armaments or crews.
It is admitted that, within the meaning of the said Con-
vention of the Hague, it is permissible to carry out repairs in
order to ensure the seaworthiness of the ship or ships without
discrimination as to whether the damage sustained be caused
by bad weather, by enemy fire or any other cause. The delega-
tion appointed by Great Britain to the Hague Conference of 1907
is responsible for Articles 15 and 19 of the said Convention, by
which it was held that belligerent ships seeking refuge in neutral
waters in order to evade capture, damage or destruction by
enemy ships be interned, and the reparation of damage sustained
in combat expressly forbidden. Although the British motion
was supported by a number of other delegations, the majority
view was that put forward by Russia, according to which a neutral
State need not investigate the cause of damage.
The Government of the Republic maintains, however, that
in order to comply duly with Article 17 and 18 above mentioned,
all repairs likely to increase the fighting strength of the ship
be forbidden, as well as the renewal of armaments, or any work
affecting her military capacity. With this in view, the necessary
orders were issued on 14th December for a Commission of Naval
Technicians to examine, without delay, the nature and extent
of the damage suffered by the German warship in order that the
necessary time be allowed for carrying out, as quickly as possible,
the authorized repairs. Numerous historical precedents may be
cited in support of this thesis. One of the best known occurred
during the world war of 1914 when Holland allowed repairs to
a submarine after damage in action, such repairs being limited
to those necessary to ensure the seaworthiness of the vessel with-
out her fighting strength being increased in any way or manner.
In the same way the Brazilian Government applied this ruling,
in the said war, in the case of the cruisers Glasgow and Carnarvon,
enabling them to repair, in a Brazilian harbour, damage sustained
in action (see The American Journal of International Law, Vol.
33. No. 3, July 1939, pages 471-72. H. Accioly, “Tratado de
Direito Internacional Publico”. Rio de Janeiro, 1935. Vol. HI,
pages 314-15).
The Uruguayan Government, in issuing the Decrees of 14th
and 15th December, 1939, a copy of which I beg to enclose


herewith, has adhered strictly to the rulings of the Hague Con-
vention.
Once again I assure Your Excellency of my highest esteem.
A. GUANI.
To His Excellency Mr. Eugen Millington Drake,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Great
Britain.
No. 21
(The Ministry of Foreign Affairs replies to the Note of the French
Legation in Montevideo, under No. 12, stating that the
government of the Republic fulfilling Articles 14 and 17
of the Hague Convention and the Decree of its Neutrality
of sth Sept., 1939, has granted to the Admiral Graf Spee a
stay in Montevideo harbour.)
Montevideo, 16 th Dec., 1939.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Diplomatic.
1464/939—3662
Montevideo, 16 th December, 1939.
Sir,
I beg to acknowledge receipt of your Note No. 63, dated
15th December, 1939, in which Your Excellency brings to my
notice that the French and British Governments are in agree-
ment in requesting the Uruguayan Government that the German
battleship Graf von Spee, together with her crew, be interned for
the duration of the war.
In reply I beg to inform you that the Government of the
Republic has granted a short stay in our harbour to the vessel
referred to, in accordance with Articles 14 and 17 of the Hague
Convention, dated 18th October, 1907, and following on the
Decree dated sth September of the present year.
I assure Your Excellency of my highest esteem.
A. GUANI.
To His Excellency Monsieur Francois Gentil,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of
France.


No. 22
(In its capacity of intermediary for consultations envisaged in
the Declaration of 3rd October, 1939, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Republic sends by telegraph to the Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Panama an account of the naval battle
of Punta del Este, suggesting that the said event which took
place within the American area fixed in Panama con-
stitutes the basis of a representation or joint or individual
measures referred to in the said Declaration of 3rd October.)
Montevideo, 16 th Dec., 1939.
Presidency of the Republic.
Code, Telegraph and Telephones Office.—Via All America.
Montevideo, 16 th December, 1939.
To His Excellency Senor Narciso Garay,
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Communications.
Panama. Time: 1.15 a.m.
On the morning of the 13th inst., and at a distance of 200
miles from our coast, a naval action began, continuing into the
afternoon off Punta del Este, between a German and English
battleships, ending with the German battleship Admiral Graf
Spee entering Montevideo harbour. The action was fought
within the American zone determined by the Panama Declara-
tion, and is held to be connected with the activities of belligerent
vessels against merchant ships within the said safety zone. In
view of this and taking advantage of the happy fact that your
Government is the party entrusted with passing on all questions,
opinions and reports, I beg to request you to communicate this
information to the American states, suggesting that the events
themselves, and all consequences thereof, could be the grounds
for representations or measures, either joint or single, envisaged
in Article 3 of the declaration of 3rd October which safeguards
the legitimate interests of all three Americas. It is understood
that Uruguay is at liberty to claim all rights proper to its
sovereignty as laid down in Panama.
Assuring Your Excellency of my highest esteem, etc.
ALBERTO GUANI.
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Uruguay.


No. 23
(Item relative to the departure of the Admiral Graf Spee entered
on page 113 of the “Log of Arrival and Departure of Battle-
ships”.)
Montevideo, nyth Dec., 1939.
(ADMIRAL GRAF SPEE.)
Year 1939, month of December, day 17th.
Time 6.15 p.m. Put out to sea.
No. 24
(The Inspectorate General of the Navy informs the Minister of
National Defence of the departure of the Admiral Graf Spee
from the harbour of Montevideo, and of the blowing up of
the same four miles off Punta de Yeguas.)
Montevideo, 27th Dec., 1939.
Inspectorate General of the Navy.
Montevideo, 27th December, 1939.
To the Minister of National Defence.
The vessel put out to sea and was blown up four miles south
of Punta de Yeguas.
The German steamer Tacoma, without complying with the
Port regulations in force, sailed to act under orders from the
battleship, trans-shipping whilst within Montevideo harbour a
large part of the warship’s crew and luggage.
Three Argentine coasting vessels took on board, within our
territorial waters, the crew of the Graf Spee, thus also contra-
vening the existing regulations.
Meanwhile the Uruguayan ship Uruguay was ordered to sea
to bring the Tacoma back to port and place her under strict
vigilance at the disposal of the national authorities. It was
also ordered that summary proceedings be initiated. Four
members of the crew of the battleship Graf Spee and six others
belonging to the personnel of the said ship were taken from the
Tacoma, whilst the crew of the latter, together with a launch
belonging to the battleship, were left on board until further
notice.


The sloops Zapicdn and Huracdn drew alongside the Captain’s
launch, which was in territorial waters. She was allowed to
proceed by superior authority, since she was complying with
the order to leave port.
REAR ADMIRAL GUSTAVO A. SCHRODER,
Inspector General of the Navy.
No. 25
(The German Legation in Montevideo ribtifies the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs that the Captain of the Admiral Graf Spec
has protested at the decision of the Uruguayan Government
relative to the stay of the vessel, and forwards —in accord-
ance with instructions received from his Government—his
protest that a longer stay for the warship was refused.)
Montevideo , 1 yth Dec., 1939.
German Legation.
A 505/39
Montevideo, lyth December, 1939.
Sir :
The Captain of the battleship Admiral Graf Spee has lodged
a formal protest at this Legation against the decision taken by
the Executive Power of the Government of Uruguay in con-
nection with the length of stay granted to this vessel, of which
Your Excellency notified me on 15th of this month. Therefore,
acting on orders received from my Government, I hereby make
my protest to the Uruguayan Government for having denied
the damaged vessel a stay sufficient to carry out repairs to
re-establish seaworthiness, thereby violating international law and
practice.
I should not like to omit expressing to Your Excellency,
also on this occasion, the assurance of my highest esteem.
LANGMANN.
To His Excellency, the Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Dr. Don Alberto Guani.


No. 26.
(The Ministry of Foreign Affairs replies to the above-mentioned
note from the German Legation in Montevideo, informing
them that the Government of Uruguay rejects the protest
contained in the said note.)
Montevideo, lofih Bee., 1939.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Montevideo, igth December, 1939.
Sir :
I beg to refer to your Note, dated 17th. inst., in which you
state that the Captain of the A dmiral Graf Spec lodged a protest
with Your Excellency against my Government’s decision relating
to the length of stay in our port accorded to the said battleship.
Your Note, following instructions received by you from the
German Government in which is laid down Your Excellency’s
protest, expresses the view that the refusal to grant an “evident”
period long enough to re-establish the seaworthiness of the
battleship constitutes a violation of international law and
practice.
Your Excellency does not advance any reasons in support
of such allegation, and I, on my part, am unable to take official
cognizance of the terms in which the Captain of the battleship
made his protest, and I can do no more than inform you that the
Uruguayan Government rejects your protest, conscious of having
adhered strictly to their international obligations.
Upon the arrival of the Admiral Graf Spec, the Uruguayan
Government applied the terms of laws and rules in force relating
to the matter, as may be conclusively verified on reference to the
text of the Decrees dated 14th and 15th of this month, a copy of
which I enclose herewith.
Therefore, Sir, it is my considered opinion that the blowing up
of the vessel in the River Plate off Montevideo has no connection
with the point of international law raised in your Note.
I do not wish to let the occasion pass without expressing to
Your Excellency my highest esteem.
A. GUANI.
To His Excellency, Herr Otto Langmann,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of
Germany.




(C) OUTLINE OF EVENTS PRIOR TO THE
INTERNMENT OF S.S. TACOMA




(C) OUTLINE OF EVENTS PRIOR TO THE INTERN-
MENT OF S.S. TACOMA
No. 27
(Telegraphic communication from the Republic’s Legation in
Santiago, Chile, setting out details of the departure of the
steamship Tacoma, German flag, from the port of Talcahuano.)
Santiago, Chile, 4th January, 1940.
Code, Telegraph and Telephones Office of the Presidency of the
Republic.
Origin : Santiago, Chile.
Time of dispatch : 4.15 p.m. yesterday. 4 th January, 1940.
Diplomacy. Montevideo.
Steamship Tacoma left Talcahuano on 9th November for
Hamburg after loading merchandise for that port in Los Angeles,
San Francisco and Vancouver. Whilst in Talcahuano neither
coal nor oil were taken on board, but ample provisions, sufficient
to reach Europe, were shipped. The vessel carries no cargo for
Montevideo, Buenos Aires or any Brazilian port. As the crew
was made up of many Chinese sailors they mutinied and were
disembarked at Talcahuano. A fresh crew was signed on com-
posed of sailors belonging to other German vessels lying in Chilean
ports, mainly ship’s boys from S.S. Priwld in Valparaiso, deemed
to be a German auxiliary naval training ship. I am sending
further details and a copy of the ship’s manifest received to-day
from the ship’s agents in Talcahuano.
Uruguayan Legation in Chile.
No. 28
(Item entered on page 242 of the “Log of Arrival and Departure
of Foreign Ships”, concerning the arrival in Montevideo
harbour of the merchant vessel Tacoma, German flag.)
Montevideo, 22nd November, 1939.
No. 1698. Year 1939. Month of November, day 22nd.
Ship under German flag Tacoma, 5,013 tons, crew 62, no passen


gers. Proceeding from Talcahuano. Agents : Bernitt and Co.
Name of Captain, Hans Konow.
No. 29
(Events relative to the request for 1,600 tons of fuel oil and 30
tons of gas oil destined for refuelling the Tacoma.)
Montevideo, 22nd November — l3th December, 1939.
Montevideo, 22nd November, 1939. To the General Man-
ager of National Administration for Fuel, Alcohol and Portland.
Eng. D. Carlo R. Vegh Garzon, Montevideo. Sir: Having
purchased 1,600,000 kilos of fuel oil and 30,000 kilos of gas oil
from your Organization, for consumption by the German steam-
ship Tacoma, we beg to request that your Administration obtain
from the Ministry of Industry and Labour the necessary export
permit in accordance with the Government Decree dated 14th
September, 1939. The Tacoma is at present in Montevideo
outer harbour. We tender our cordial respects to the Director
General. For the Riverena del Plata Compania Sudamericana
de Comercio S.A.
(Two illegible signatures).
National Administration for Fuel, Alcohol, and Port-
land. 23rd November, 1939. In accordance with the authority
given to this General Management by the Directorate of this
Organization on 22nd September last, pass on to Ministry of
Industry and Labour requesting the necessary permit to
supply the S.S. Tacoma under German flag, with 1,600 tons of
heavy fuel oil and 30 tons of gas oil, for her own consumption.
It is placed on record that at present the stock of said fuels in our
possession is 24,132,008 and 7,477,526 kgs. respectively, which is
deemed to be sufficient to meet sales for about 5 months in the
case of fuel oil, and 6£ months in the case of gas oil.
Eng. C. R. Vegh Garz6n, General Manager.
Ministry of Industry and Labour, Montevideo, 28th
November, 1939. In view of the large amount of fuel requested
for the sole use of the vessel Tacoma, German flag, it is
decided that the said request be passed to the Ministry of Foreign


Affairs asking them to express an opinion as to whether the act
of supplying such a large quantity of fuel violates the neutrality
laws.
POSADAS.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Montevideo, 28th Novem-
ber, 1939. In order to ascertain the exact measures to be applied
to the Tacoma, German flag, it is necessary, in the first
place, to know if Article 12 of the Decree of 7th August, 1914,
has been complied with ; that is to say, it must be ascer-
tained whether the necessary declaration regarding the class of
activity which brings the vessel to Uruguay, has been made, in
order to determine whether the vessel may be classified as
employed in legitimate trading. As the ship is a merchantman
sailing under the flag of a belligerent, Article 2 of the Decree of
15th December, 1914, relating to neutrality law should be applied
to her, provided that her arrival in Montevideo is in any way
connected with the present state of war. This Article 2 lays
down that before a ship, in these circumstances, may leave port,
the consular representative of the country to which the vessel
belongs, must make a declaration stating the ports of call and
the port of destination, giving at the same time an assurance that
the purposes of sailing are purely commercial. In the case of
these conditions being fulfilled, the Ministry for Industry and
Labour is in a position to authorize the loading of a reasonable
amount of fuel oil and gas oil sufficient to reach the port of
destination, provided that she does not put in at any other port
m route. The foregoing is based on Article 2 of the Decree of
15th December, 1914, concerning the coaling of warships in the
Republic’s ports, the text of which is as follows : “For the pur-
pose of determining the maximum amount of fuel to be loaded,
the authorities concerned will take into account the normal con-
sumption of the ship in relation to her rate of speed and the
distance to the nearest port. The usage and practice adopted in
America in the present war inclines to limit the supply of fuel to
the amount required for the vessel to reach the nearest port en
route to the port of destination. The ruling recommended at the
recent Panama Conference follows this Article in maintaining that
neutral powers are empowered to inspect and examine, in their
country’s ports, all belligerent merchant ships and their passen-
gers, documents and cargo. The consular representative is to


give a signed declaration as to the ports of call and destination,
as well as stating that the voyage is being made for the sole
purpose of legitimate trading. Moreover, the said powers are
empowered to supply the said vessels with a reasonable amount
of fuel commensurate with their reaching a port of call in another
of the American Republics where they intend to re-provision.
The exception to this is the case of a ship or ships proceeding
without stop to another continent, in which circumstances the
neutral powers are empowered to allow the fuel necessary to
reach port there. If it be proved that the said ships have
supplied fuel to belligerent warships, they will be held to be
auxiliary transport. The Government of the Argentine rules
that as far as the Argentine is concerned, vessels carrying national
produce will be supplied with sufficient fuel to reach any port in
the Isle of Cabo Verde, the Canaries, Dakar or Casablanca accord-
ing to itinerary, provided that the produce mentioned constitutes
either the whole cargo or three-fourths of it. Chartered merchant
ships bound for Europe, and whose cargoes of Argentine produce
do not reach the above-stated amount, will, according to the
Argentine ruling, be supplied with sufficient fuel to reach Per-
nambuco."
Until the complete Decree laying down the neutrality rulings
which is now under consideration by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs be passed, the Article to be applied is Article 12 of the
Decree of 7th August, 1914, and Article 2 of 15th December of
the same year concerning maritime rulings to be followed in the
case of belligerent vessels, as duly mentioned above, taking
into account the restrictive element governing the supply
of fuel.
A. GUANI.
Ministry of Industry and Labour.
Montevideo, 29 th November, 1939.
To be passed to the Ministry of National Defence with the
request that the maritime authorities be approached in order
to ascertain whether in this particular instance Article 12 of the
Decree of 7th August, 1914, and all other rulings in force on the
matter have been complied with.
POSADAS.


Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 29 th November, 1939.
To be passed to the Inspectorate General of the Navy for
execution. By order of the Minister and on his behalf Colonel
Eduardo Zubia, Director General, Inspectorate General of the
Navy. Montevideo, 29th November, 1939. The Port Naval
Authorities are requested to make a report. By order of the
Inspector General of the Navy and on his behalf : Commander
Juan Angel Battione, Sub-Inspector, Port Naval Authorities.
Montevideo, 30th November, 1939. To the Inspector General
of the Navy : Acting on instructions as above I beg to report as
follows : (1) that the German merchant ship Tacoma belonging
to the Hamburg-Amerikan Line and consigned to the “Agenda
Maritima Bernitt & Cie” of this city, put into this port of Talca-
huano ; (2) on arrival at Montevideo port the Captain of the
Tacoma made on that same day, 22nd November, the following
declaration to the maritime authorities : “I declare that I do not
hold consular clearance papers for this port as I had to put in
here owing to force majeure, namely, lack of fuel for our
engines ; (3) the above declaration was recorded in writing at the
express request of the maritime authorities in conformity with
the ruling of Article 12 of the Decree of 7th August, 1914 ;
(4) as stipulated in Article 2 of the Decree dated 16th December,
1914, the said maritime authorities before authorizing the sailing
of the vessel, will require the Captain of the S.S. Tacoma —if it
be so decided—to produce the consular declaration to which the
said Decree refers. This is all I have to report. Yours, etc.,
Harbour Prefect General, Commander Juan J. Miller. Inspec-
torate General of the Navy. Montevideo, 30th November,
1939. To be returned to Port Authorities in order that they may
execute the carrying out of the ruling laid down in Article 2 of
the Decree dated 16th December, 1914. By order of the Inspec-
tor General of the Navy and on his behalf : the Sub-Inspector,
Commander Juan Angel Battione. Port Naval Authorities.
Montevideo, 13th November, 1939. To be passed to the Port
Department office for transmission to the maritime agents of the
German ship Tacoma. The said agents must comply with the
ruling laid down in Article 2 of the Decree of 16th December,
1914. On completion of this it is to be returned. Harbour
Prefect General, Commander Juan J. Miller. Port Depart-
ment Office. Montevideo, 13th November, 1939. This day


I informed Messrs. Bernitt & Cie that the German ship Tacoma
will not be given her clearance papers unless the consular repre-
sentative’s declaration be forthcoming indicating the ports of
call and the port of destination, and, moreover, giving an assur-
ance that the voyage is for no other than legitimate trading
purposes. In proof of this, this document is signed by all
present including myself. Chief of the Port Department Office.
Leandro Sandobal. Principal Assistant. Montevideo, ist Decem-
ber, 1939.
Inspector General of the Navy. Having carried out
instructions received yesterday from that Department, I beg to
return to you the documents in question. Yours, etc., The
Harbour Prefect General, Commander Juan J. Miller. Inspec-
torate General of the Navy. Montevideo, ist December,
1 939- To the Ministry of National Defence : I beg to send you
herewith these documents reporting that: —At the request of
Port Naval Authorities, the Captain of the S.S. Tacoma has
declared that his ship sailed from the Chilean port of Talcahuano
without consular clearance for our port due to the fact that he
put in here owing to force majeure, namely lack of fuel. In
conformity with the ruling of Article 2 of the Decree dated 16th
December, 1914, the maritime authorities requested the Captain
of the said vessel to hand over the consular declaration men-
tioned in the said decree (Inf. de fjs. 5 y vta.) before authorizing
departure. Yours, etc., Rear Admiral Gustavo A. Schroder,
Inspector General of the Navy. Ministry of National
Defence. Montevideo, 2nd December, 1939. To be returned to
the Ministry of Industry and Labour together with the report of
the Inspectorate General of the Navy. Divisional General
Alfredo R. Campos.
Ministry of Industry and Labour. Montevideo, 7th
December, 1939. In view of the request made by the National
Administration of Fuel, Alcohol and Portland, to be allowed to
supply, out of stock, and for account of the “Riberena del
Plata”, Companfa Sudamericana de Comercio S.A. the Tacoma,
German flag, with one million six hundred thousand kilos
(1,600,000) of heavy fuel oil and thirty thousand kilos of gas oil,
purchased by the said Company from the said Organization, and
for consumption by the said vessel. Taking into account —as may
be seen from the relative reports —that in this instance the
rulings laid down by Article 12 of the Decree of 7th August, 1914,


and Article 2 of 15th December of the same year referring to
maritime law to be observed in connection with vessels belonging
to belligerent nations, have been complied with. According to
the report of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and National
Defence, and the National Administration of Fuel, Alcohol and
Portland ; and—in accordance with the rulings of Article 1 of the
Decree of 14th December last referring to fuel export lt has
been decided ; To authorize the National Administration of
Fuel, Alcohol and Portland to supply, out of stock and for account
of the “Ribereha del Plata”, Compama Sudamericana de
Comercio S.A. the Tacoma German flag, with one million six
hundred thousand kilos of heavy fuel oil, and thirty thousand
kilos (30,000) of gas oil, purchased by the said Company from
the said Organization, and for consumption by the said vessel.
Pass on this information, and return the documents to the
Ministry of National Defence to be dealt with.
POSADAS.
German Legation.— Declaration : The German Legation
declares that the S.S. Tacoma, on completion of loading in
Montevideo and in accordance with the treaty of commercial
interchange between Uruguay and Germany, will sail direct to
the port of Hamburg, and will not, due to circumstances which
are well known, call at any other port.
The voyage is purely for commercial purposes.
Montevideo, sth December, 1939.
F. RADEMACHER, First Secretary.
(Stamp here reading as follows :)
‘‘Deutsche Gesandtschaft in Montevideo”
Montevideo, sth December, 1939.
To The Inspector General of the Navy :
In accordance with the ruling made by this Department in
the corresponding report, I beg to send you herewith a declaration
by the German Legation, in compliance with the ruling of Article
2 of the Decree dated 16th December, 1914, referring to sailing
from this port of the German S.S. Tacoma which will take place
shortly.
Yours, etc.,
The Harbour Prefect General,
COMMANDER JUAN J. MILLER.


Inspectorate General of the Navy.
Montevideo, 6th December, 1939.
To the Minister of National Defence.
Referring to the report of this Inspectorate General of the
Navy, dated Ist inst., relative to the German S.S. Tacoma
(request of the “Ribereha del Plata” S.A. re the supplying of gas
oil and fuel oil), I beg to send you the foregoing communication
from the Port Naval Authorities with the German Legation’s
declaration, in order that these may be attached to the docu-
ments already submitted, if you deem this expedient. Yours,
etc.,
REAR ADMIRAL GUSTAVO A. SCHRODER.
Inspector General of the Navy
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 6th December, 1939.
Pass on this dossier to the Ministry of Industry and Labour
requesting them to attach to documents sent to them on 2nd of
the current month.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
Ministry of Industry and Labour.
Montevideo, 6th December, 1939.
Attach to documents already sent.
For the Minister,
JOSE CERNADAS REY,
Secretariat Director General.
Montevideo, 7th December, 1939.
I hereby confirm that on this date, as requested, the dossier
has been duly attached to the documents received earlier.
JUAN A. BAGLIVI,
Archivist.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 11th December, 1939.
Return to the Inspectorate General of the Navy, together
with the particulars attached to it, for attention.


For the Minister and on his instructions: the Director
General.
COLONEL EDUARDO ZUBIA.
Inspectorate General of the Navy.
Montevideo, 12 th December, 1939.
Pass to the Port Authorities for attention.
For the Inspector General of the Navy and on his instructions,
the Sub-Inspector,
COMMANDER JUAN ANGEL BATTIONE.
Montevideo, 13 th December, 1939.
Secretariat please note, and pass to the Port Office for
appropriate action. The Port Office will notify the interested
parties of the decision of the Ministry of Industry appearing on
page 7 of this document.
YOLANDO D. MOGNONI,
Secretary.
Montevideo, 13th December, 1939.
I hereby confirm that note has been taken.
Assistant, Third Class, JOSE A. LUZURIAGA.
No. 30
(The Captain of the Tacoma informs the Port Naval Authorities
that extraordinary circumstances compelled him to leave
urgently without clearing his vessel through an Agency.)
Montevideo, 17 th December, 1939.
To the Harbour Prefect.
Unforeseen circumstances oblige me to leave port to-night,
and as it is a Sunday and I am pressed for time, I am unable


to carry out the clearing formalities through my agents. In lieu
thereof I request you accept this declaration.
Yours truly,
(Signed) H. KONOW,
Captain of S.S. Tacoma.
I testify that this is a true and exact translation ;
BERNITT.
0
Port Naval Authorities.
Montevideo, 1 8th December, 1939.
To be passed to Instructing Magistrate, Lieutenant Com-
mander Yolando D. Mognoni.
Harbour Prefect General,
COMMANDER JUAN J. MILLER.
No. 31
(Summary of a report instructing investigation of the motives for
the departure of the Tacoma from the port of Montevideo
and the part played by the said ship relative to events in
connection with the blowing-up and sinking of the Admiral
Graf Spec.)
Montevideo, i&th-2ist Dec., 1939.
Communication No. 1844/17/XII/939.
Montevideo, i&th December, 1939.
Port Naval Authorities.
To the Secretary of the Port Authorities, Lieutenant
Commander Yolando D. Mognoni.
I beg to advise you that you have been appointed Instructing
Magistrate in connection with the investigation of the sudden
sailing, the day before yesterday, of the S.S. Tacoma, German
flag, as well as to ascertain the part played by the said
vessel in the events of the said day, as a result of which the
German battleship Admiral Graf von Spec caught fire.
Yours, etc.,
COMMANDER JUAN J. MILLER,
Harbour Prefect General.


Montevideo, 1 8th December, 1939.
Communication received at noon to-day, and in accordance
with instructions contained therein, I proceeded to appoint a
secretary. The person appointed was Corporal, 2nd Class, Adolfo
Otero, who on being acquainted with this, gave his oath to
discharge his duties to the best of his ability. In testimony he
signs with me. I hereby place this on record.
LIEUTENANT COMMANDER YOLANDO D. MOGNONI,
Instructing Magistrate.
Montevideo, 18 th December, 1939.
Attach to this document the declaration of sailing of the
German S.S. Tacoma signed by the Captain of the same.
LIEUTENANT COMMANDER YOLANDO D. MOGNONI,
Instructing Magistrate.
Montevideo, 18 th December, 1939.
On this date the orders issued by Instructing Magistrate
Lieutenant Commander Yolando D. Mognoni were carried out.
This is hereby placed on record.
Corporal, 2nd Class, ADOLFO OTERO, Secretary.
Montevideo, 18 th December, 1939.
It has been ordered that the Captain, first and second officers,
and first and second engineers of the German S.S. Tacoma, as
well as Messrs. Bernitt & Co., agents for the said vessel, appear
in court before the Instructing Magistrate.
LIEUTENANT COMMANDER YOLANDO D. MOGNONI,
Instructing Magistrate.
Montevideo, 1 8th December, 1939.
On this date, the foregoing orders issued by Instructing
Magistrate were carried out. This is hereby placed on record.
Corporal, 2nd Class, ADOLFO OTERO, Secretary.
Montevideo, 1 8th December, 1939.
Corporal Arnold Glutz, Ist Class, is to carry out the
duties of interpreter.
LIEUTENANT COMMANDER YOLANDO D. MOGNONI,
Instructing Magistrate.


Montevideo, 1 8th December, 1939.
On this date, and as decreed by the Instructing Magistrate,
Corporal Arnold Glutz, Ist Class, was notified of the above, and
signs with me. This is hereby placed on record.
Corporal, Ist Class, ARNOLD GLUTZ, Interpreter.
Corporal, 2nd Class, ADOLFO OTERO, Secretary.
In Montevideo on the eighteenth day of December, nineteen
hundred and thirty-nine, a person is brought before me, who
when asked for his name, age, nationality and domicile, said :
he was called Hans Konow, aged 55, a German subject and
domiciled in the German steamer Tacoma, of which he is Captain.
Asked : Why he left port on 17th December of the current year
at 6.30 p.m. and what his destination was, he said he was going
to the assistance of the crew of the German battleship Admiral
Graf Spec in case they were wrecked and needed his help. He
had no destination in view. Asked why he had not asked for a
pilot or for his clearance papers, he said it was a matter of urgency
and there was no time. This he had already explained in a letter
to the Port Naval Authorities. Asked if the agency know of his
sailing, he said : No. Asked if he took aboard any of the crew of
the battleship Von Spee and if so, on whose orders and with what
object, he said : Yes, he took members of the crew of the battle-
ship Von Spee on board his ship, and it was at the request of the
Commander of this vessel and with the object of leaving as few
of the crew on board as possible. Asked : How many and where
they came aboard, he said he could not say how many, but he
imagined there were about eight hundred, and the transfer took
place in the outer harbour before the German cruiser weighed
anchor. Asked : What happened to the crew, he said that after
the German battleship was destroyed he transferred them —in
the roads —to a launch and two Argentine tugs which had come
alongside him. Asked : Where this new transfer took place, he
said it was in the canal and four miles from the coast. Asked if
any of the crew remained in his boat, he said : Yes ; four of the
crew who were Germans and six Chinamen. The former were
the last to come from the Von Spee after the Argentine tugs had
left. Asked if he knew where the Argentine vessels were going
with the crew of the German battleship, he said : No. Asked if
he had anything else to say, he said : Yes ; that if he had broken
any regulations he had done so due to the fact that he
sailed hurriedly to hasten to assist possible shipwreck


victims in danger. He was motivated by humanitarian prin-
ciples. It was not his intention to defy the authorities, or to
break the regulations. Asked the reason for his statements, he
said, because he took part in the affair.
This statement was read and then ratified and signed.
CAPTAIN HANS KONOW.
LIEUTENANT COMMANDER YOLANDO D. MOGNONI,
Instructing Magistrate.
Corporal, 2nd Class, ADOLFO OTERO, Secretary.
Corporal, Ist Class, ARNOLD GLUTZ, Interpreter.
In Montevideo on the eighteenth day of December, nineteen
hundred and thirty-nine, at 6.30 p.m., a person was brought
before this court, who when asked for his name, age, nationality
and domicile, replied; that he was Otto Fuller, aged 50, of German
nationality, and that he was domiciled in S.S. Tacoma, of which
he was First Officer. Asked if he saw the transfer of members of
the crew of the German battleship Von Spec to the Tacoma on
17th of December of the present year, he said : Yes, certainly he
saw the transfer of members of the crew of the Von Spec. Asked:
Where the transfer was made and how many there were, he said
the embarkation was made in the outer harbour before the
German battleship weighed anchor. He could not give the
number, but he estimated there were approximately eight
hundred. Asked : Where they were going, he said ; The Tacoma
weighed anchor, shortly after the German battleship had done so,
until they came to the roads about four miles from the coast,
where they dropped anchor and transferred them to two tugs and
an Argentine launch which left for a destination unknown to him.
Asked if in the roads they took on board more members of the
crew of the battleship, he said : Yes, they took on board those
who had remained on board the warship, and they, too, were
transferred to the Argentine vessels. Asked if any member of
the crew of the German battleship remained on board the Tacoma,
he said : Yes ; four of the German crew and six Chinamen
remained, and that the former were the last to leave the German
battleship. They remained on board as the Argentine vessels
had already weighed anchor. Asked if he had anything further
to say, he said, No. Asked the reason for his statement, he said,
for the part he took in the affair in his capacity of First Officer of
the Tacoma.


This statement was read and then ratified and signed.
FIRST OFFICER OTTO FALTER.
LIEUTENANT COMMANDER YOLANDO D. MOGNONI,
Instructing Magistrate.
Corporal, 2nd Class, ADOLFO OTERO, Secretary.
Corporal, ist Class, ARNOLD GLUTZ, Interpreter.
In Montevideo on the eighteenth day of December, nineteen
hundred and thirty-nine, at 6.30 p.m., a person was brought
before this court, who when asked for his name, age, nationality
and domicile, replied he was called Georg Birmann, age 59, a
German subject, domiciled in the Tacoma, of which he was First
Engineer. Asked if, on 17th of the present month, he saw four
members of the crew of the German battleship Von Spec taken
aboard the Tacoma, he said : Yes. Asked: How the transfer was
made and how many there were, he said the embarkation was
carried out in the outer harbour before the German battleship
weighed anchor, and he could not say how many there were as
he had spent most of the time in the engine-room and out of view
of the deck. Asked : Where they were going, he said the Tacoma
weighed anchor shortly after the German battleship had done so,
and once anchored in the roads he saw they were transferred to two
tugs and an Argentine launch, which left for an unknown destina-
tion. Asked if they took on board any more members of the crew of
the German battleship in the roads, he said : He was on duty in
the engine-room and could see nothing. Asked if any of the
members of the crew of the German battleship remained in the
Tacoma, he said : Yes ; only to-day, in the morning, he had dis-
covered that four German sailors and some Chinamen had
remained on board. Asked if he had anything else to say, he
said ; No. Asked the reason for his statement, he said, for the
part he took in the affair in his capacity of First Engineer in the
Tacoma.
This statement was read, ratified and signed.
CHIEF ENGINEER GEORG BIRMANN.
LIEUTENANT COMMANDER YOLANDO D. MOGNONI,
Instructing Magistrate.
Corporal, 2nd Class, ADOLFO OTERO, Secretary.
Corporal, ist Class, ARNOLD GLUTZ, Interpreter.


In Montevideo on the eighteenth day of December, nineteen
hundred and thirty-nine, at 6.30 p.m., a person was brought
before this court, who, when asked for his name, age, nationality
and domicile, replied he was called Rodolfo Bernitt, aged 63,
German, and of this town, Misiones Street 1472. Asked if he
was the shipping agent for the German S.S. Tacoma, he said :
Yes. Asked if he knew the said vessel was to sail on 17th of
the month, he said : No. Asked if he had anything else to say,
he said : No. Asked the reason for his statement, he said, because
it is the truth.
This statement was read, ratified and signed
RODOLFO BERNITT.
LIEUTENANT COMMANDER YOLANDO D. MOGNONI,
Instructing Magistrate.
Corporal, 2nd Class, ADOLFO OTERO, Secretary.
Corporal, Ist Class, ARNOLD GLUTZ, Interpreter.
Montevideo, 20 th December, 1939.
It has been resolved that the Captain of the German S.S.
Tacoma shall be summoned to appear before this Court to amplify
his testimony at to-day’s sitting.
LIEUTENANT COMMANDER YOLANDO D. MOGNONI,
Instructing Magistrate.
Montevideo, 20th December, 1939.
On this day the order of the Instructing Magistrate was put
into effect. This is hereby placed on record.
Corporal, 2nd Class, ADOLFO OTERO, Secretary.
In Montevideo on the twentieth day of December,
nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, the Captain of the
German S.S. Tacoma, Hans Konow, was brought before
this court, who, when asked if any of the belongings of
the German battleship Admiral Graf von Spec are to be
found in his ship, said : Yes ; there is a small motor launch,
some suit cases, the number of which he cannot state, but he
imagines five or six, belonging to the crew of the German battle-
ship. Asked why these articles are on board his ship, he said :


The launch which he presumed belonged to the Captain, came
alongside damaged, taking water, and with the four members of
the crew whom he subsequently handed over to the Prefecture.
As the launch was in danger of sinking, he took both it and the
four members of the crew on board just as the two tugs and the
Argentine launch were moving away. They sailed with the crew
of the German cruiser aboard without being able to take away
the said launch and crew. With regard to the suit cases, theste
were forgotten and were left on board by their owners when they
transferred to the Argentine vessels. Asked if he had anything
else to say, he said ; No. Asked the reasons for his statement,
he said, because it is the truth.
This statement was read, ratified and signed.
CAPTAIN HANS KONOW.
LIEUTENANT COMMANDER YOLANDO D. MOGNONI,
Instructing Magistrate.
Corporal, 2nd Class, ADOLFO OTERO, Secretary.
Corporal, Ist Class, ARNOLD GLUTZ, Interpreter.
Montevideo, 21 st December, 1939.
To the Harbour Prefect General.
These proceedings having terminated and the undersigned
considering that the statements made by the Captain, the Firs':
Officer and the Chief Engineer of the S.S. Tacoma and Senor
Rodolfo Bernitt, agent of the said vessel, are sufficient, I beg to
present this summary to you, without stipulating measures to
ensue therefrom, and leaving to higher authority the interpreta-
tion of the said statements.
Yours faithfully,
LIEUTENANT COMMANDER YOLANDO D. MOGNONI,
Instructing Magistrate.
No. 32
(The Ministry of National Defence sends to the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs the conclusions of the summary of the report
above mentioned.)
Montevideo, 21 st December, 1939.


Port Inspectorate General.
Reference No. 1864/21/XII/939.
Communication No. 643830.
Montevideo, 21 st December, 1939.
To the Inspector General of the Navy.
For your attention allow me to submit the attached report
which has been made in order to determine the part taken by the
merchant vessel Tacoma, German flag, in the events which
took place in our port on 17th day of the present month, and
which culminated in the burning of the German battleship
Admiral Graf von Spec.
As a result of the investigation carried out by the Instructing
Magistrate, it is deduced :
1. That the German ship Tacoma left this port on the after-
noon of 17th of this month without the necessary clearance
papers, and without a pilot. Therefore and in accordance with
Article 135 of the Pilots’ Regulations the corresponding sanction
was applied.
2. That in the judgment of this Prefecture, the Captain of
the S.S. Tacoma acted—in the events previously detailed—in
connivance with the Captain of the battleship Admiral Graf
von Spee.
3. That members of the crew of the said battleship embarked
ti the Tacoma and were afterwards transferred to the tugs
Coloso and Gigante and the launch Chiriguana, these vessels
sailing under the Argentine flag.
4. That a launch belonging to the Admiral Graf von Spee
is in the Tacoma, as well as some baggage of the crew of the said
battleship.
Finally, I must inform you that the merchant vessel in
question is detained in Dock II awaiting the decision of superior
authority on the subject in question.
Yours faithfully,
COMMANDER JUAN J. MILLER,
Harbour Prefect General.
Inspectorate General of the Navy.
Montevideo, 21 st December, 1939.
To the Ministry of National Defence.
I beg to submit to you, for the necessary decision, the attached
report of proceedings taken by order of the Port Authorities in
c


order to determine the part played by the merchant vessel
Tacoma on 17th of this month during the event of the burning
of the German battleship Admiral Graf von Spec, and to inform
you :
[a) That the German ship Tacoma left this port on the after-
noon of 17th of this month without the necessary clearance
papers and without a pilot. Therefore and in accordance with
Article 135 of the Pilots’ Regulations, the Port Authorities applied
the corresponding sanction.
{h) That it transpires that the Captain of the S.S. Tacoma
took part in the events illustrated above, in connivance wdth the
Command of the Admiral Graf von Spec.
(c) That members of the crew of the said battleship embarked
in the Tacoma and were afterwards transferred to the tugs Coloso
and Gigante and the launch Chiriguana, these vessels sailing
under the Argentine flag.
{d) That a launch belonging to the battleship is in the Tacoma,
as well as some baggage of the crew of the said vessel.
Yours etc.
’ REAR ADMIRAL GUSTAVO A. SCHRODER,
Inspector General of the Navy.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 21st December, 1939.
To be passed to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for attention.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
No. 33
(The Ministry of National Defence sends to the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs a statement of facts prior to the finding on
board the Tacoma of one of the launches of the Admiral Graf
von Spec.)
Montevideo, 19/20 th December, 1939.
Port Naval Authorities.
Ref. No. 1853/19/XII/939.
Communication No. 392327.
Montevideo, igth December, 1939.
To the Inspector General of the Navy.
I beg to inform you herewith that it has been ascertained that


one of the launches of the German battleship Admiral Graf von
Spee is now on board S.S. Tacoma, German flag.
Yours, etc.,
COMMANDER JUAN J. MILLER,
Harbour Prefect General.
General Inspectorate of the Navy.
Montevideo, 19 th December, 1939.
To the Minister of National Defence.
I have the honour to pass to you the foregoing communication
from the Port Naval Authorities which records that it has been
ascertained that one of the launches belonging to the German
battleship Admiral Graf von Spee is now on board the S.S. Tacoma,
German flag.
Yours, etc.,
REAR ADMIRAL GUSTAVO A. SCHRODER,
Inspector General of the Navy.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 20th December, 1939.
Pass to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in order that they
may take such measures as they consider necessary.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
No. 34
(Proceedings undertaken to ascertain whether the cargo of fuel
oil and gas oil loaded by the Tacoma was actually aboard
the said ship.)
Montevideo, igth/zoth December, 1939.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, iqth December, 1939.
To the Inspector General of the Navy.
You are herewith instructed to carry out a detailed inspection
on board the S.S. Tacoma, sailing under the German flag, detained
in Montevideo harbour, in order to ascertain whether the 1,600


tons of fuel oil and 300 tons of Diesel oil, supply of which was
recently authorized, are, in fact, on board.
Yours etc.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
Inspectorate General of the Navy.
Montevideo, igth December, 1939.
To be passed to the Port Naval Authorities for due attention.
By order of the Inspector General of the Navy, and on his
behalf,
COMMANDER JUAN ANGEL BATTIONE,
Sub-Inspector.
Port Naval Authorities.
Montevideo, 'LOjth December, 1939.
Commander Jose Rodriguez Varela and Lieutenant Com-
mander E. Fernando Fontana, are hereby instructed to carry out
the orders issued by superior authority as per communication
herewith.
The Prefect General of the Navy,
COMMANDER JUAN J. MILLER.
Montevideo, 19 th December, 1939.
To the Harbour Prefect General.
In accordance with the foregoing decree, we submit the
following, being the result of the inspection carried out this day
at 12.30 midday on board the S.S. Tacoma, German flag.
(1) After inspecting stowage, double bottoms, superstructure,
engine and boiler room, as well as the rest of the ship, it was
ascertained that the fuel oil, also the Diesel oil, are to be found in
the tanks only.
(2) The diagram attached herewith shows the quantity of
fuel on board, its quality and the stowage for same, at the time
of the inspection.
(3) As may be seen from the above-mentioned diagram, the
ship has stowage for two thousand one hundred and thirty tons of
fuel oil, whilst the amount at present is one thousand nine hundred
and fifty tons (1,950). There is stowage for one hundred and one
tons of Diesel oil, the quantity at present being forty-four (44)
tons.


(4) There is, therefore, between the actual stock of fuel on
board and the figures mentioned in the above, a surplus of three
hundred and fifty fons of fuel oil and a deficit of two hundred and
six tons of Diesel oil.
This is all we have to report.
Yours, etc.,
COMMANDER JOS£ RODRIGUEZ VARELA.
LIEUT. COMMANDER ENG. FERNANDO FONTANA.
Montevideo, igth December, 1939.
To the Inspector General of the Navy.
In accordance with the decree issued by the Inspectorate
General, and taking into account the foregoing report of the
Commission appointed by the Port Naval Authorities, following
instructions from superior authority as per communication that
heads these documents, I beg to inform you :
(1) That the quantity of fuel oil on board the S.S. Tacoma,
sailing under the German flag, amounts to one thousand nine
hundred and fifty tons, and is, therefore, higher than the amount
stated in the communication referred to.
(2) That the quantity of gas oil, supply of which to the said
vessel was authorized by the Ministry of Industry and Labour on
7th inst.—as recorded in this set of documents—amounts to
thirty thousand tons (30,000) and not 300 tons as indicated in
Note No. 2490 of the Ministry of National Defence.
(3) That it was ascertained from the inspection carried out
that the quantity of Diesel oil in the tanks of the Tacoma is forty-
four (44) tons ; and
(4) That, therefore, as shown by the foregoing, the fuel,
supply of which was recently authorized, is now on board the
Tacoma.
This is all I have to report.
Yours, etc.,
COMMANDER JUAN J. MILLER,
Harbour Prefect General.
Montevideo, igth December, 1939.
To the Minister of National Defence;
In accordance with the decision of this Ministry dated 19th
of this month, I beg to inform you of the following :


(a) That the quantity of fuel oil on board the S.S. Tacoma,
German flag, amounts to one thousand nine hundred and fifty
tons, and is, therefore, higher than the amount stated in the
communication referred to ;
(b) That the quantity of gas oil, supply of which to the said
vessel was authorized by the Ministry of Industry and Labour on
7th inst.—as recorded in this set of documents—amounts to
thirty thousand tons (30,000) and not 300 tons as indicated in
Note No. 2490 of the Ministry of National Defence.
(c) That it was ascertained from the inspection carried out
that the quantity of Diesel oil in the tanks of the Tacoma is
forty-four (44) tons ; and
(( d ) That, therefore, as shown by the foregoing, the fuel, supply
of which was recently authorized, is now on board the Tacoma.
Yours, etc.,
REAR ADMIRAL GUSTAVO A. SCHRODER.
Inspector General of the Navy.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 20th December, 1939.
Pass to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, for their information
and attention.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
\' ' -
No. 35
(Decree of the Government t declaring the merchant steamer
Tacoma, German flag, to be an auxiliary war vessel, and
fixing a time of 24 hours within which she must leave the
port of Montevideo, and measures relative to the carrying
out of the same and internment of the said ship.)
Montevideo, 30th December, 1939 — 2nd January, 1940.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 30 th December, 1939.
In View of the result of the proceedings taken by the Port
Authorities besides all other facts related to the arrival and stay
of the merchant ship Tacoma, sailing under the German flag, with
the purpose of defining the part taken by the said ship on the


occasion of the scuttling of the German battleship Admiral Graf
Spee on the 17th inst. ;
laking into Account that in the course of the activities of
the S.S. Tacoma she acted in such a way as to make it evident
that her Captain was under orders from the Command of the said
battleship to whom she gave assistance in connection with the
blowing-up of the ship ;
Taking into Account that the Tacoma at the time of the
sinking acted as a transport ship of the battleship’s crew who
were later transhipped from the Tacoma to other vessels while
several belongings of the battleship were kept on board the
Tacoma ;
Taking into Account that ten members of the crew of the
Admiral Graf Spee remained on board the Tacoma and were
afterwards landed by order of the Maritime Authorities ;
Taking into Account that during these entire proceedings
the merchant ship above mentioned was in the Republic’s terri-
torial waters on the occasion of her sailing from the harbour of
Montevideo to follow in the wake of the battleship Admiral Graf
Spee and by so doing without a permit from the Port Naval
Authorities and without having a pilot on board, gave cause for
sanctions to be imposed on her in accordance with Article 135 of
the General Regulations for Pilots ;
Considering that one of the fundamental duties of belligerents
as per Article No. 1 of the XIII Hague Convention, dated 18th
October, 1907, is to respect the sovereign rights of the Neutral
Powers while the said belligerents are also under the obligation of
“refraining while in the territory of the country or neutral waters
from committing any act constituting a breach of neutrality of
the country in question” ;
Considering that if acts such as these committed by the
S.S. Tacoma on 17th December within territorial waters while
under orders from the Command of a belligerent warship were
allowed, there would result from such acts an evident violation
of the neutrality of the Republic, since it is definitely prohibited
to belligerent nations to make use of the ports of neutral waters
as a base for a naval operation ;
Considering that the neutral Governments, according to
Article 25 of the above mentioned Convention, are definitely
under obligation to keep vigilance commensurate with the means
at their disposal, to prevent their ports, roads and waters being


used contrary to the rulings of the above mentioned Convention ;
Considering that in accordance with existing historic prece-
dent merchant ships that place themselves in the position of being
considered and dealt with as fleet-auxiliaries of the belligerent
navy in question, from the very moment when the merchant ship
places herself at the disposal of the latter ; it follows that in such
cases the rulings laid down in the XIII Hague Convention, 18th
October, 1907, should be applied and these rulings are those to be
adhered to by the Government of the Republic, in accordance
with the Decree of sth September, 1939, defining its neutrality in
the present war ;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC DECREES
1. The rulings laid down in the XIII Hague Convention
dated 18th October, 1907, concerning belligerent warships be
applied to the ship under German flag, Tacoma, and a period of
24 hours be fixed for the said ship to leave Montevideo harbour
pending the possible application of any measures to be taken in
accordance with the said Convention.
2. The period of time will start from the moment the Captain
of the ship is informed of this Decree.
3. That the interested party be informed, etc.
A. BALDOMIR.
A. GUANI.
GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
Montevideo , 30 th December, 1939.
Pass to the Ministry of National Defence for attention.
GUANI.
Montevideo, 30 th December, 1939-
Pass to the Inspectorate General of the Navy for attention.
GENERAL CAMPOS.
Inspectorate General of the Navy.
Montevideo, 30 th December, 1939.
Pass to the Port Naval Authorities for attention.
Inspector General of the Navy and by order of the same, Sub-
Inspector,
COMMANDER JUAN ANGEL BATTIONE.
Port Naval Authorities.


Montevideo, 2nd January, 1940.
To the Inspector General of the Navy.
Report No. 1/2/I/940.
I beg to forward to you this report of proceedings, informing
you that the decree on which action has been based, has been
duly complied with. On 31st December last, at 6.30 a.m., the
decision made was communicated to the Captain of the German
S.S. Tacoma, Herr Hans Konow, in the terms which appeared in
document C. No. 392303, a copy of which reads as follows :
“Port Naval Authorities. In Montevideo on 31st Decem-
ber, 1939, at 6.30 a.m., and in the offices of the Port Naval
Authorities, the Captain of the S.S. Tacoma, German flag, was
informed that :
“(1) By decree of the Government it has been decided to
apply to his ship the rulings of the XIII Hague Convention,
dated 18th October, 1907, referring to belligerent warships, and
that in consequence thereof a period of 24 hours has been fixed
for his ship to leave Montevideo harbour, pending the determi-
nation of any further measures which might be taken in accord-
ance with the said Convention.
“(2) That the said period of 24 hours will run from the time
of this notification.
“(3) That this Authority has ordered that as soon as possible
the S.S. Tacoma shall be laid up in a place in the outer harbour
to be duly indicated, for which purpose her Captain shall take all
measures necessary. This has been duly notified to the interested
parties (signed) H. Konow, Captain of the S.S. Tacoma. Com-
mander (signed) Yolando D. Mognoni, Secretary to the Port
Naval Authority. Naval Lieutenant (signed) Guillermo Nacht-
weigh, Interpreter.”
The period of 24 hours for leaving the harbour of Montevideo
having expired on Ist January, 1940, at 6 a.m., without the
Tacoma complying with the orders given in the Communication
mentioned in the above paragraph, her Captain was at once
informed that, in accordance with instructions received from the
Inspectorate General of the Navy, the vessel under his command
was interned as per the terms of the Decree in question, as from
9.15 a.m. of that same day. The following is a transcription of the
above mentioned notification, as appears in Document C. No.
390066 Port Naval Authorities :
“In Montevideo, on ist day of the month of January, 1940, the


time being 9.15 a.m., the Captain of the German S.S. Tacoma is
informed that, as the vessel under his command has not complied
with the order to leave the port of Montevideo within a period of
24 hours, as duly notified to the Captain yesterday in a Writ, a
copy of the Decree of the Executive Power having been pre-
viously sent to the German Legation, the Authority is proceeding
with the internment of the ship in accordance with the said
Decree. It is hereby recorded that the Captain of the ship or the
agents could and can at any time, bring forward any claim,
complaint, declaration or request for supplies, utilising for the
purpose the channels and procedure established by existing
regulations. In order to receive such complaints, claims, etc., the
offices concerned are remaining constantly open,as was the case on
the occasion of the procedure followed by the agents of the German
ship Tacoma on 31st December, 1939, when they applied for the
landing of luggage from the said ship, a request which was granted
by the Department concerned. This has been duly notified to
the interested parties : (Signed) H. Konow, Commander (signed)
Yolando D. Mognoni, Secretary to the Port Naval Authorities,
Interpreter (signed) Bernitt.”
It was ordered, accordingly, that an officer and three armed
seamen attached to the Port Naval Authority be detailed on
board the German vessel Tacoma, with instructions to prevent
the working of the ship or the landing of any members of the
crew with the exception of the Captain.
This is all I have to report.
Yours, etc.,
Harbour Prefect General,
COMMANDER JUAN J. MILLER,
Inspectorate General of the Navy.
Montevideo, 2nd January, 1940.
To the Minister of National Defence.
Herewith I beg to send you Report No. 1 from the Port
Naval Authorities, containing proceedings relative to the fulfil-
ment of the foregoing Decree of the Executive Power.
I beg to inform you that, pending further instructions, it has
been ordered that the crew of the said ship remain on board.
Yours, etc.,
REAR ADMIRAL GUSTAVO A. SCHRODER,
Inspector General of the Navy.


Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 2nd January, 1940.
To be passed to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for their
information and attention.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
No. 36
(The Ministry of Foreign Affairs sends a copy of the above
mentioned Decree to the German Legation, Montevideo.)
Montevideo, 30 th December, 1939.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Montevideo, 30 th December, 1939.
Sir,
I beg to send you herewith copy of the Decree issued this
day by the Government of the Republic, relative to the merchant
ship Tacoma, German flag, and now at anchor in Montevideo
harbour.
Assuring you, once again, of my highest esteem.
A. GUANI.
To His Excellency,
Herr Otto Langmann, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Pleni-
potentiary of Germany.
No. 37
(The German Legation inform the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
that they do not admit that the Tacoma, German flag, should
be considered as a fleet-auxiliary, since the activities of the
vessel were motivated by humanitarian principles ; they
reserve the right to protest in the name of their Government,
the ship-owners, and the crew, and attach a note of protest
from the Captain.)
Montevideo, 31st December, 1939.


A 519/39-
Montevideo, 31 st December, 1939.
Sir,
I beg to reply to your Note dated 30th December, 1939, to
which v/as attached a copy of a Uruguayan Government Decree of
that date, referring to the German S.S. Tacoma as follows ;
I do not admit that the German merchant ship should be
considered as a fleet auxiliary, therefore I protest against the
decision. As your Note was delivered to me on the night of
goth/gist December, namely at 1.30 a.m., and as both the 31st
December and the Ist January are national holidays, I reserve
the right to enter into the details of the question at a future date.
I beg to submit, however, that the German ship Tacoma has not
been guilty of any military act nor has she violated neutrality,
her activities have been solely of a humanitarian nature. I
reserve the right to forward any claim formulated either by my
Government, by the owners of the ship, by her crew or by any
party who may be entitled to damages occasioned by the decision
of the Uruguayan Government. I attach to this Note a written
protest from the ship-owners’ agents, together with the written
protest formulated by the Captain of the ship. I observe, in this
respect, that in spite of the Captain having been compelled by
the Maritime Authorities to appear personally on the Sunday at
6.30 a.m. at the CAPITANIA , this,
that is to say the Maritime Authorities refused, after having
opened the letter tendered by the Captain, to take official cogni-
zance of the same, which letter contained the points in law cited
against the “Uruguayan decision”, the Maritime Authorities
advancing as an explanation of their action that as the day was a
holiday they could not take official cognizance of such document.
I take advantage also of this opportunity to assure Your
Excellency of my high esteem.
LANGMANN.
To His Excellency, the Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Dr. Don Alberto Guani.
No. 38
(Text of the protest made by the Captain of the Tacoma to the
Port Naval Authorities, against the Decree of 30th Decem-
ber, 1939.^


Montevideo, 31 st December, January, 1940.
Port Naval Authorities.
No. 6/2/I/193Q.
C. No. 643812.
Montevideo, 2nd January, 1940.
To the Inspector General of the Navy.
For your information I beg to inform you that on 31st
December last, the Captain of the S.S. Tacoma, German
flag, appeared personally before the Port Naval Authori-
ties' officials concerned, and made the following statement:
'“Montevideo, 30th December, 1939. This day at 6.30 a.m. Herr
Hans Konow, Captain of the German S.S. Tacoma, made the
following statement in person : That he protests strongly against
the Uruguayan Government’s decision to classify his ship as a
fleet-auxiliary of the German Navy, and holds all parties con-
cerned responsible for any damage and loss that may ensue, at
the same time reserving the right to amplify his protest as often
as he considers necessary. This statement was read to him and
after ratification he signed : (Signed): H. Konow. “Assistant (Ist
Class) Luis A. Paciello”.
I have to inform you, moreover, that the original of this state-
ment was passed to the Merchant Navy Directorate to be duly
recorded and registered in the Actuaries’ Naval Office.
Yours, etc.,
The Harbour Prefect General,
COMMANDER JUAN J. MILLER.
Inspectorate General of the Navy.
Montevideo, 2nd January, 1940.
To the Minister of National Defence.
I beg to submit for your consideration the foregoing Note
from the Port Naval Authorities setting out the protest made by
the Captain of the German S.S. Tacoma in respect of the intern-
ment of his vessel.
Yours, etc.,
REAR ADMIRAL GUSTAVO A. SCHRODER,
Inspector General of the Navy.


Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 2nd January, 1940.
Pass to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for their information
and attention.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
No. 39
(The Ministry of Foreign Affairs replies to the Note of the
German Legation published under 37, indicating the reasons
on which the Government of the Republic based their Decree
of 30th December, 1939, relative to the S.S. Tacoma.)
Montevideo, 15 th January, 1940.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Montevideo, 15th January, 1940.
Sir,
I beg to acknowledge receipt of your Note A 519/939 of 31st
December last concerning the Decree issued by the Government
of the Republic in respect of S.S. Tacoma, German flag.
The text of the Decree of 30th December, 1939, which I
remitted to you on the same date, contains the account of facts
and points in law which made this Government consider the
said ship as a fleet-auxiliary, and to treat her as such, due to
the part she took on the occasion of the scuttling of the battle-
ship Admiral Graf Spec.
Your Excellency’s Note in which you oppose the decision
taken by the Government, whilst failing to refute facts,
reasons and points in law invoked in the matter, states that the
Tacoma did not take part in any naval activities, nor did she
violate neutrality by her activities in connection with the events
which took place, and that the vessel’s action was, in Your
Excellency’s opinion, motivated by humanitarian reasons.
Your Excellency bases his statement on the belief that the
German ship Tacoma was acting in no way as a naval vessel,
neither was she violating the neutrality of the Republic ; the
part taken by the ship in the events was tantamount—in Your
Excellency’s opinion—to rendering humanitarian help to the
said crew. In accordance with this way of thinking, the German
Legation reserves the right to put forward claims on behalf of
the German Government, the ship-owners, the crew of the vessel


or any other party, as a result of damages deriving from the
Government’s action.
I beg to differ from Your Excellency’s opinion as expressed
above. I am unable to estimate as help of a philanthropic char-
acter the trans-shipment and transport of the crew of the battle-
ship Admiral Graf Spee in the circumstances preceding the
sailing of the said ship and her sinking in Uruguayan territorial
waters.
1. Because the actions in question were carried out, as is
shown in the respective deposition, on the orders given to the
Captain of the Tacoma by the Commander of the warship when
anchored in our port.
2. Because it is unquestionable that the said Officer had
decided, at the time he ordered such measures to the Captain of
the Tacoma, the fate destined for the battleship Admiral Graf
Sfee a few hours later.
As is well-known, this was the scuttling of the ship.
3- It is known by all the efforts made by the German
Embassy in Buenos Aires to avoid the internment of the crew
of the Admiral Graf Spee at the time of their arrival there, in
the sense that the seamen composing it should be considered as
shipwrecked sailors by the Government of the Argentine Republic.
4. Such an interpretation of the circumstances was firmly
rejected by the Argentine Government. (See Decree dated iqth
December, 1939.)
Therefore, it is evident that the act of trans-shipping and
transport of the members of the crew referred to, to the Tacoma
in our port, shows the intention to avoid probable internment of
the crew in Buenos Aires, in view of the steps taken by the
German Diplomatic Representatives and which were later
rejected by the Argentine Authorities.
5. What therefore was the meaning of this proposal which
initiated in Montevideo ? It meant nothing less than placing at
liberty the officers and crew of the Admiral Graf Spee, on their
arrival at Buenos Aires, thus allowing them without difficulty
to return to their activities as active members of the German
armed forces.
6. In these circumstances was the refuge taken on board
the Tacoma by the crew in question a violation or not
of out neutrality ? Was it or not an act of overt complicity, that
the I acoma committed in our waters ?


The answer to the question is the finding that the ship referred
to was, by her acts, transformed into a real auxiliary war vessel
during the time she remained active in Montevideo.
Neutral governments, amongst which Uruguay is one, are
obliged, according to Article 25 of the Hague Convention, to
exercise the most strict vigilance in order to make certain that
neutrality is not violated in their ports, roads, and waters. And
to it must be added the yet stronger obligation, under the Decree
of the sth September, 1939, declaring that the Government of
the Republic remains neutral during the present war.
Placed in this situation and confronted with the obligations
of a neutral, the fulfilment of which is laid down inflexibly, and
faced with fully proved acts which departed from these obliga-
tions, the Uruguayan Government had no other recourse than to
carry out to the full the measures dictated by the events as
developed and the principles and rulings called for in the case
of a neutral in maritime war.
The Uruguayan Government is glad on this occasion that it
can repeat that in carrying out the principles of the above referred
to Hague Convention, it has done so in the spirit of Article XXVI
of the same, according to which the exercise of the rights defined
in it by a Power cannot be considered as an unfriendly act.
Assuring you of my highest esteem.
A. GUANI.
To His Excellency Herr Otto Langmann,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of
Germany.
No. 40
(Telegraphic despatch from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to
the Legation of the Republic in Berlin, communicating the
measures adopted by the Government concerning the
steamer Tacoma, and the reasons for arriving at these
decisions.)
Montevideo, 2nd January, 1940.
Presidency of the Republic.
Code, Telegraphs and Telephones Office.
2nd January, 1940.
Uruguayan Legation in Berlin.
I inform you that by decree dated 30th December last, the


German steamer Tacoma was declared an auxiliary war vessel
and was given 24 hours’ grace to leave the port of Montevideo.
As she had not sailed within the stipulated time, she was interned
on the morning of the first. The above decision was founded on
the following precedents : Steamer Tacoma helped in different
manoeuvres of the battleship Graf Spec and trans-shipped her
crew on the occasion of the sinking of the said ship, thus violating
Article One of the XIII Hague Convention of 1907. The Govern-
ment of the Republic, considering that the toleration of such
acts implies a violation of neutrality and that the merchant
vessels placed at the service of belligerent warships should be
considered in accordance with existing precedents as auxiliary
war vessels, applied the rulings of the aforesaid Hague Con-
vention in accordance with Article XXVI of the same, according
to which the exercise of the rights which it defines cannot be
considered as an unfriendly act.
ALBERTO GUANI,
Minister of Foreign Affairs.




(D) OUTLINE OF EVENTS PRIOR TO THE
INTERNMENT OF THE CREWS OF THE
ADMIRAL GRAF SPEE AND THE TACOMA




(D) OUTLINE OF EVENTS PRIOR TO THE INTERN-
MENT OF THE CREWS OF THE ADMIRAL GRAF
SPEE AND THE TACOMA
No. 41
(The Minister of National Defence forwards to the Minister of
Foreign Affairs an outline of events concerning four of the
crew of the Admiral Graf Spec and service personnel of the
same, landed by the steamer Tacoma.)
Montevideo, igth/20th December, 1939.
Port Naval Authorities.
Of. No. 1852/XII/19/939.
C. No. 392328.
Montevideo, igth December, 1939.
The Inspector General of the Navy.
I beg to advise you that on the 18th instant, at 4 o’clock,
the following members of the crew of the German battleship
Admiral Graf Spee were landed from the German steamer Tacoma
and lodged in the Maritime Police Barracks : Ist Class Petty
Officer Otto Wallschuss, 2nd Class Petty Officer Erich Meyer,
2nd Class Petty Officer Hermann Luhrs, and 2nd Class Machinist
Petty Officer Herbert Jakob. Also on the same day, at 18 hours,
the following washermen belonging to the aforesaid battleship
were also landed from the Tacoma. They are all of Chinese
nationality and were also lodged in the above-mentioned Barracks.
Their names are given herewith : Chin Chaung Sun, Cheng
Shing Juen, Lin Nue Kung, Ching Ah Lee, Koo Chung Tuck,
and Yue Sue-Sing. A
The above personnel await the decision of Higher Authority
as to their future.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Prefect General of the Port,
FRIGATE CAPTAIN JOHN J. MILLER.
General Inspectorate of the Navy.
Montevideo, igth December, 1939.
To the Minister of National Defence.
I have the honour to forward for the decision of the Minister the
preceding despatch from the Port Naval Authority which advises


that the following personnel belonging to the German battleship
Admiral Graf Von Spee were landed from the German steamer
Tacoma and lodged in the Marine Police Barracks : ist Class
Petty Officer Otto Wallschuco, 2nd Class Petty Officer Errich
Meyer, 2nd Class Petty Officer Hermann Luhrs and 2nd Class
Machinist Petty Officer Herbert Jakob, and the washermen
belonging to the above-mentioned battleship. Chin Chaung Sun,
Cheng Shing Juen, Lin Nue Rung, Ching Ah Lee, Koo Chung
Tuck and Yue Sue-Sing. I salute you cordially.
REAR-ADMIRAL GUSTAVO A. SCHRODER,
Inspector General of the Navy.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 20th December, 1939.
Forward to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that it may
take the steps it considers necessary.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO R. CAMPOS.
No. 42
(From the German Legation in Montevideo to the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, advising that five ratings who belonged to
the office staff of the Admiral Graf Spee have been appointed
assistants to the Air and Naval Attaches to the Embassies
in Buenos Aires, Rio de Janeiro and Santiago de Chile and
to the Legations in Montevideo and Asuncion and requesting
the required entrance visas.)
Montevideo, 18 th December, 1939.
German Legation.
Montevideo, 1 8th December, 1939.
B 1345/39-
Sir,
In the name of my Government, I have the honour to com-
municate the following to Your Excellency ;
The following German "ratings” who were employed as office
personnel on board the German ship Admiral Graf Spee, Ober-
maat Taubner, Obermaat Necker, Obermaat Schwer, Obermaat
Ries, Maat Wittenschlager, have been appointed as office assis-
tants to the Naval and Air Attaches of the German Embassies


in Buenos Aires, Rio de Janeiro, Santiago de Chile and the
Legations in Montevideo and Asuncion, to increase the personnel
of the aforementioned Legations. Until the necessary Passport
formalities have been arranged they have been temporarily
appointed to the German Legation in Montevideo. They presented
themselves at this Legation at midday yesterday to enter on
their duties.
As it was Sunday yesterday, it is only to-day that I can
present to Your Excellency their official Passports and I beg
that you will authorize the necessary entrance visas.
I take this opportunity to greet Your Excellency with my
highest esteem.
LANGMANN.
To His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Doctor Don
Alberto Guani.
N°. 43
(The German Legation in Montevideo to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs advising that the Senior Medical Officer of the
Admiral Graf Spec has been appointed to the German
Legation in Montevideo as its Doctor and request the
granting of the customary entrance visa.)
Montevideo, 1 8th December, 1939.
German Legation.
B 1346—39-
Montevideo, i&th December, 1939.
Sir,
I have the honour to advise Your Excellency that Dr. Kerzen-
dorff, until now Senior Medical Officer in the Admiral Graf Spec,
has been appointed to the German Legation in Montevideo as
Doctor to the Legation. His post will consist of consultations
which may arise with the Uruguayan Sanitary Authorities in
connection with the care of the German sick and wounded of the
German ship Admiral Graf Spee who are at present under treat-
ment in hospitals here. Furthermore, he will be concerned in
matters connected with the graves of the dead Germans buried
here and will conduct correspondence with their families. He


presented himself at this Legation at midday to-day to enter
upon his duties.
As yesterday was Sunday, I am only able to-day to place his
official Passport before Your Excellency, and would beg you to
authorize the necessary entrance visa.
I take this opportunity of saluting Your Excellency with my
highest esteem.
LANGMANN.
To His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Doctor Don
Alberto Guani.
No. 44
(The German Legation in Montevideo to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs advising that five German Officers belonging to the
Staff of the Admiral Graf Spee have been appointed perma-
nent Assistants to the Naval and Air Attaches to the German
Embassies in Buenos Aires, Rio de Janeiro, Santiago de
Chile and to the Legations in Montevideo and Asuncion and
request the authorization of the respective entrance visas.)
Montevideo, 1 8th December, 1939.
German Legation.
B 1347/39-
Montevideo, 18th December, 1939-
Sir,
In the name of my Government, I have the honour to com-
municate to Your Excellency the following :
The German Officers mentioned below and until now belonging
to the Staff of the German ship Admiral Graf Spee, Kapitanleut-
nant Fromme, Kapitanleutnant Hirsemann, Oberleutnant zur
See Diggins, Oberleutnant zur See Schauenburg, Leutnant zur
See Klette, have been appointed as permanent assistants to the
Naval and Air Attaches to the German Embassies at Buenos
Aires, Rio de Janeiro, Santiago de Chile and the Legations at
Montevideo and Asuncion in order to increase the personnel of
these Legations. Until Passport formalities have been arranged
they have been provisionally appointed to the German Legation


in Montevideo. They presented themselves at midday yesterday
in order to enter upon their duties.
As it was Sunday yesterday, it is only to-day that I am able
to place their Passports before your Excellency and request that
you will authorize the necessary entrance visas.
I take this opportunity to salute Your Excellency with my
highest esteem.
LANGMANN.
To His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Doctor Don
Alberto Guani.
No. 45
(The German Legation in Montevideo to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, advising that five Administrative employees of the
Admiral Graf Spee were appointed to augment the personnel
of the Legation in Montevideo and request the authorization
of the customary entrance visas.)
Montevideo, 18 th December, 1939.
German Legation.
B 1348/39-
Montevideo, 1 8th December, 1939.
Sir,
In the name of my Government I have the honour to advise
Your Excellency that the following civilians, administrative
employees, have been provisionally appointed to the German
Legation in Montevideo in order to increase the personnel: Dr.
Walden, Inspector Ebeling, Inspector Hinz, Functionary Weide-
mann, Functionary Fennekohl.
They arrived on board the German ship Admiral Graf Spee and
presented themselves at this Legation at midday yesterday.
As yesterday was Sunday, it is only to-day that I am able to
place their official Passports before Your Excellency, and I
request that you will authorize the necessary entrance visas.
I take this opportunity to assure Your Excellency of my
highest esteem.
LANGMANN.
To His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Doctor Don
Alberto Guani.


No. 46
(The Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the German Legation in
Montevideo, replies to the notes which are reproduced under
Nos. 42, 43, 44 and 45 and in connection with the requests
made in them, which are under examination, asks for the
names of the officers and ratings whom it is intended to send
to the German Embassies in Buenos Aires, Rio de Janeiro,
Santiago de Chile and the Legations of Montevideo and
Asuncion.)
Montevideo, 2 3rd December, 1939.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
1464/39.
Montevideo, 23rd December, 1939.
Sir,
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt to Your Excellency
of your Notes B 1345/39- B 1 34 6 /39- B *347/39 and B 1 34 8 /39-
dated the 18th of the current month in which you ask for “entrance
visas” on the passports for several persons who belonged to the
Staff and crew of the battleship Admiral Graf Spec.
Although unable to give a decision in advance to Your
Excellency on the request referred to and which is actually under
consideration, I should be obliged if you would be good enough
to furnish me with the names of the officers and ratings whom
you wish to send to the German Embassies in Buenos Aires, Rio de
Janeiro, Santiago de Chile and to the Legation in Asuncion.
I express to you once again the assurance of my highest
esteem.
A. GUANI.
To His Excellency,
Herr Otto Langmann,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of
Germany.
• No. 47
(German Legation to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, giving the
names of the officers and ratings appointed to the different
German Legations in South America.)
Montevideo, 29 th December, 1939.


German Legation.
B 1347/39 11.
Montevideo, 29 th December, 1939.
Sir,
I have the honour to refer to Your Excellency’s Note of the
23rd December last (1464/939) in which you asked for the names
of the officers and ratings appointed to different German Embas-
sies and Legations. Below I beg to give you the names and
corresponding destinations to the several German Legations in
South America.
Montevideo : Kapitanleutnant Fromme, Obermaat Taubner.
Buenos Aires : Oberleutnant zur See Diggins, Leutnant zur
See Klette, Obermaat Ries, Maat Wittenschlager.
Rio de Janeiro : Kapitanleutnant Hirsemann, Obermaat
Necker.
Santiago de Chile: Oberleutnant zur See Schauenberg,
Obermaat Schwer.
I take this opportunity of assuring Your Excellency of my
highest esteem.
LANGMANN.
To His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Doctor Don Alberto Guani.
No. 48
(The Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the German Legation at
Montevideo, asking whether consent has been given by the
Governments of Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Paraguay to the
officers and ratings of the Admiral Graf Spee being appointed
as permanent assistants to the German Naval and Air
Attaches in the respective Embassies and Legations.)
Montevideo, gth January, 1940.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Diplomats.
1464/939/(100).
Montevideo, gth January, 1940.
Sir,
Referring to Your Excellency’s Note No. B 1347/39 11, dated
29th December last and in accordance with our last conversation,


I have the honour to request you to let me know with the least
possible delay whether consent has been given by the Govern-
ments of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Paraguay to the appoint-
ment as permanent Assistants to the German Naval and Air
Attaches to the several Embassies and Legations of the executive
officers of the battleship Admiral Graf Spec.
On my part I wish to inform you that, in the opinion of this
Chancellery, the Officers referred to, as well as their assistants,
belonged to the war personnel of this battleship and will have to
be considered, during their stay in our territory, as internees as
provided for in the international regulations applicable to the case.
I repeat the assurance of my highest esteem.
A. GUANI.
To His Excellency Herr Otto Langmann, Envoy Extraordinary
and Minister Plenipotentiary of Germany.
No. 49
(The Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the German Legation in
Montevideo, states that as no reply has been received to
the request as set out in the preceding Note, the Government
of the Republic will not delay in defining the situation of the
officers and ratings in accordance with the opinion given
above.)
Montevideo, igth January, 1940.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Diplomats.
1464/939 (254)-
Montevideo, igth January, 1940.
Sir,
As, up to the present, I have received no reply from your
Legation to my note of the 9th instant concerning the consent
which may have been given by the Governments of Argentina,
Brazil, Chile and Paraguay to the appointments of several officers
and ratings of the Admiral Graf Spec as Naval and Air Attaches
at the several Embassies and Legations, I have the honour to
inform Your Excellency that in accordance with the finding given
in my note referred to above, the Government of the Republic


will not delay in deciding the case of the above mentioned officers
and ratings.
I assure you of my highest esteem.
A. GUANI.
To His Excellency,
Herr D. Otto Langmann,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of
Germany.
No. 50
(Decree stating that the sick and wounded of the Admiral Graf
Spec , at present in hospital, will be interned on discharge,
and stating that the officers and ratings referred to in the
preceding notes are to be interned, and placing at liberty
the Doctor of the aforementioned warship.)
Montevideo, 2 yd January, 1940.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Ministry of the Interior.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 23 rd January, 1940.
Given : The antecedents concerning the presence in territory
of the Republic of a given number of Officers and ratings of the
warship Admiral Graf Spee, German flag, sunk in home waters on
the 17th December last;
and the Decree of the sth September, 1939, which set forth
that for the observance of neutrality the Conventions signed at
The Hague on the 29th July and 18th October, 1907, would apply.
Noted : that the case of the sick and wounded who were
landed from that battleship is covered by Article 10 of the Hague
Convention signed in 1899, adapted for Naval Warfare, the
principles of the Geneva Convention, according to which, casta-
ways, wounded or sick landed in a neutral port with the consent
of the local Authority may be held so that they may take no
further part in hostilities ;
and that Article 24 of the XIII Hague Convention signed
18th October, 1907, calls on a Neutral Power to hold the Officers
and crew of a belligerent war vessel when this does not leave the
port in which it has no right to stay.
Considering : That in order to deal with the case of the
Officers and ratings and other personnel whose stay in our port
was known after the sinking of the ship, Article 24 of the XIII


Convention applies, as it is given that a ship obliged to leave
must do so with all Officers and crew and that the details which
were left on shore or were trans-shipped just before the sinking do
not acquire in these circumstances the right to remain in the
territory of the Republic for a longer period than that fixed for
the stay of the ship.
That, furthermore, in cases not provided for by the same
Convention the general principles of the Rights of Peoples should
be taken into account, for which the preamble expressly provides
and which is a normal course to pursue and uniformly applied, is
that the Neutral Power is bound to intern fighting forces or
military personnel of the combatants which enter its territory ;
and that the Medical personnel are covered by the humani-
tarian principles of the Geneva Convention whose adoption in
Naval warfare was agreed to by the Hague Convention.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
DECREES
1. The sick and wounded from the German warship Admiral
Graf Spee, at present in hospital, shall be detained in the territory
of the Republic once they are discharged in such a way as to
prevent their taking further part in the conduct of the war, and
placing at liberty those who are, in the opinion of the National
Military Authorities, totally incapable of further military service.
2. The officers belonging to the Staff of the battleship and
at present actually in territory of the Republic, are to be interned
in the City of Montevideo and will be allowed to be at liberty, on
parole, and on the undertaking that they will not absent them-
selves without written authority to do so from the Ministry of
the Interior.
3. The crew will be interned where indicated by the Ministry
of the Interior, under guard and under conditions which will be
formulated in due course.
4. The Doctor of the aforementioned battleship whose
presence in Montevideo was notified by the German Legation
on the 18th of December last be placed at liberty.
5. That it be communicated, etc.
BALDOMIR.
A. GUANI.
MANUEL E. TISCORNIA.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO E. CAMPOS.


No. 51
(Decree by which the order of internment set forth in the pre-
ceding Document is applied to the Officers and crew of the
German ship Tacoma, at present detained in the port of
Montevideo.)
Montevideo, 23 rd January, 1940.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Ministry of the Interior.
Ministry of National Defence.
Montevideo, 23 rd January, 1940.
Given : The Decree of 30th December, 1939, by which the
German ship Tacoma was declared an auxiliary naval vessel and
giving her therefore 24 hours’ grace to leave the port of Monte-
video, and as she had not sailed on expiry of the time allowed
she was interned ;
and the Decree of to-day by which the measures to be taken
for the interning of the Officers and crew of the Admiral Graf Spec
are set forth.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
DECREES:
1, That to the Officers and crew of the German ship Tacoma,
til present detained in the Port of Montevideo, the same condi-
t’l .-us i applied as those made in the case of the Officers and crew
of A iral Graf Spec.
2, That it be communicated.
BALDOMIR.
A. GUANI.
DIVISIONAL GENERAL ALFREDO B. CAMPOS
MANUEL E. TISCORNIA.














