



MEMOIR
OF THE
REV. WILLIAM CROSS,
WESLEYAN MISSIONARY
TO THE
FRIENDLY AND FEEJEE ISLANDS;
WITH A SHORT NOTICE
OF THE
EARLY HISTORY OF THE MISSIONS.
BY THE REV. J. HUNT,
MISSIONARY TO FEEJEE.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED BY JOHN MASON, 14, CITY-ROAD;
SOLD AT 66, PATERNOSTER-ROW.
1846.


ROCUE, PRINTER, 25, HOXTON-SQU A HE, LONDON.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
Birth—Parentage—Visits Southsea —Is convinced of sin—Marries
—Joins the Wesleyan Society—Receives a sense of his accept-
ance with God—The results—Removes to Bath—Begins to
preach—Obtains perfect love—Offers himself as a Missionary-
Death of his mother—ls appointed by the Wesleyan Missionary
Committee to New-Zealand—Removes to Liverpool—Sails to
Sydney, and arrives in one hundred and fifteen days—ls appointed
to the Friendly islands—Sails for Tongataboo, and arrives
November 2d, 1827.— Pages I —7.
CHAPTER 11.
Short geography of the Friendly isles—Early history of the
Tonga Mission —State of the work when Mr, Cross arrived—
Usefulness of two Tahitian Teachers—Remarks—Opposition of
the Heathen Chiefs to Tubou—lts cause—Opposition continued
—Tubou determines to leave the island—He at length yields to
the Heathen, and abandons Christianity—Character of Fatu—
Remarks—District-Meeting.— Pages B—l 7.
CHAPTER 111. 1828-9.
Remarks —Extract from journal—Mr. Cross begins to preach in
Tonguese—Tubou again abandons Heathenism—Effects on the
people—Usefulness of Christianity—The Missionaries attempt
to enlarge their sphere of laboitr—Prosperity of the work
—Employment of the Missionaries—Evidences of piety in
the people—A Chief is baptized—Tracts in the native language
—First lovefeast—Account of a little girl—Sixty-nine persons
baptized—State of the work, and of Mr. Cross’s mind—
Remarks.— Pages 18—27.
a 2


CHAPTER IV. 1830.
Mr. Thomas appointed to Haabai —A native Teacher named Peter
sent to Lefuka to commence the Mission—Peter returns for Mr.
Thomas*—Tubou is baptized—Account of the ceremony
Queen Mary—Mr. Thomas removes to Haabai —Young men
commence exhorting—Cheering intelligence from Haabai 1
Disaffection of one of the Chiefs of that place—Remarks —Pro-
gress of the work at Nukualofa—State of Mr. Cross’s mind
Intelligence from Haabai—Messrs. Williams and Barf visit
Nukualofa—Mr. and Mrs. Cross accompany them to Haabai—
Occurrence while there—Mr. and Mrs. Cross return to Nukua-
lofa—Extracts from journal—Trials of faith experienced by the
Missionaries and people—Steadfastness of the people—lmport-
ance of unwavering confidence in Providence in a Missionary.—
Pages 28—35.
CHAPTER V. 1831.
Female school opened by the wives of the Missionaries—Arrival
of Messrs. Watkin, Turner, and Woon in Tongataboo—Removal
of Mr. N. Turner to the Colony—Efficiency of the new Mission-
aries—Mr. Cross’s journal and labours—Sixty-eight adults
baptized—Remarks on their fitness for that ordinance—A new
chapel opened by Mr. Cross at Nukunuku—Account of the place
—Continued opposition of Ata, the Chief of Hihifo—Mr. Cross’s
opportune visit to that Chief—Opposition at Nukunuku—Vavau
becomes Christian —Temples and idols burned—Account of the
manner in which the people of Nukualofa spend their Sabbaths
—Extract of a letter from Mr. Cross to his sister —Letter to Mr.
Hayden, of Bath.— Pages 36—47.
CHAPTER VI. 1832.
Remarks—Mr. Cross leaves Tongataboo for Vavau—The canoe
is wrecked —Mrs. Cross and several of the natives lost—Mr.
Cross reaches Nukualofa in great weakness —Mrs. Cross’s
funeral—Remarks —Extract of a letter from Mrs. Cross to her
parents.— Pages 48—58.
CHAPTER VII. 1832-33-34.
Mr. Cross’s weakness of body—Proceeds to Vavau in a schooner
—Arrives in safety —Sympathy of Finau, King of Haabai—Mr.


Cross's sufferings bodily and mental, but all sanctified—Extracts
from his journal, with remarks—Mr. Cross visits Niua, Keppel’s
Island —Journal of voyage —Transactions there, and return to
Lefuka—Result of the visit —Return to Yavau—Finau baptized
and eight of his children —Opening of a new chapel—Mr. Cross
proposes visiting the Colony—Removes to Tonga to attend the
District-Meeting—Mr. Cross’s ill-health—Visits New South
Wales by way of New-Zealand—ls married to Miss Smith, of
Paramatta, New South Wales —Extract from his journal —Re-
turns to Tonga by way of New-Zealand, in company with Mr. and
Mrs. Cargill—Arrives in safety—Removes to Haabai—Revival
of religion at Vavau and Haabai—Remarks.— Pages 59—68.
CHAPTER VIII. 1835.
Messrs. Cross and Cargill appointed for Feejee—Remarks —Brief
account of the geography of the Feejee islands —Commence-
ment of a Mission to Lakemba —Reception of the Missionaries
—Remarks —Fitness of Lakemba for a first Station—Privations
of the Missionaries —Anecdotes from Mr. Cross’s journal, illus -
trating the character of the people, &c.~ Pages 69— SI,
CHAPTER IX. 1836-7. -
Mr. Cross visits Oneata, and opens a ch Asm oUthirty
one adults at Lakemba, chiefly Tonguese— Uaptism of seventy-
nine adults, and seventeen children — Admiaistra ion of the
Lord’s supper—lndirect influence of Missionary labours at
Ono—Her Britannic Majesty’s Ship “Victor ” visits Lakemba —
Remarks —Tuinayau persecutes the Christians, though both he
and the gods profess themselves friendly—Speech of one of the
gods—Missionaries determine to separate, in order to be more
extensively useful—Mr. Cross appointed to Bau—The ortho-
graphy of the language settled—Variety of dialects—Trials of
the Missionaries from the scarcity of food —Usefulness of the
Wesleyan periodicals to Mr. Cross —State of his mind, &c.—
Anecdotes from his journal respecting consulting the gods
of Lakemba—Native lovefeast —Experience of the people—
Tuinavau openly opposes Christianity—State of the work. —
Pages 82—93.


CHAPTER X. 1838.
Mr. Cross leaves Lakemba, and arrives at Ban—lnterview with Seru,
the ruling Chief —State of Ban at that time—Reasons for not
settling at Ban—Settles at Rewa —Extract from a Letter to the
Committee —First Sabbath in Rewa —Mr. Cross’s severe illness
—Thinks of removing to the Colony for the good of his health—
Very unwilling to do so—Recovery—Curious circumstance—
New Mission-House —Mr. Cross preaches in three different
parts of the town —A small society formed—Persecution—
Attempts made to burn the preaching-house and town of Rewa
—Tuindrekete defends the Missionary—Some of the royal
family begin to learn to read, but soon desist —Meeting of the
Chiefs of Bau and Rewa for the consolidation of peace—Account
of the meeting—Namosemalua spared—The reason why—
Namosemalua desires to embrace Christianity—Remarks of
Tanoa—French brig taken by Namosemalua’s nephew—Yewa
burned —Effects on the Chief.— Pages 94—106.
CHAPTER XL 1839.
The writer’s personal acquaintance with Mr. Cross commences—
State of the work at Rewa at that time—lncrease of numbers—
Visits to Yewa—Mr. Cross attempts to form a Mission Station
at Ban—Persecution at Rewa—Christians plundered—The
Xing calls a meeting of the Chiefs—Steadfastness of the converts
during; the persecution—Cruelty of the natives—Cannibalism —
Altered character of the Chief at Yewa —Cannibalism—Mis-
sionaries a check on it where they reside—Messrs. Cargill,
Jaggar, Lyth, and Spinner arrive in Rewa —Mr. Cross’s friendly
disposition—District-Meeting—Mr. Cross stationed for Bau —
Remarks of Tanoa—Mr. Cross determines to go to Yewa—
Description of the island —Mr. Cross removes—ls well received
by the natives—Avocation of a Missionary—Mr. Cross’s fitness
for the particular kind of work to which God had called
him.— Pages 107—117.
CHAPTER XII. 1840.
Mr. Cross’s circumstances—Seru’s opposition to Christianity—
Anecdote from the Journal—Death of the Priest of Yewa—
Remarks on the gods of Feejee, &c.—Death of Mrs. Cargill


—Mr, Cross visits Rewa—Preaches at the District-Meeting
Kindness to Mr. Cargill —lntegrity—Mr. Waterhouse visits the
islands -Namoseinalua engages in war—His mercy to the
besieged—Sera’s remarks —State of the work at Yewa, and of
Mr. Cross’s mind.— Pages 118 130.
CHAPTER XIII. 1841.
Mr. Cross’s growth in grace—“ Lives of early Methodist Preachers ”
—War at Yewa —Treachery of Verani—Murder of the Mathoe
people—The god of war consulted—Ceremony described—
Extracts of letters —Mr. Cross’s trying circumstances—State
of his mind—His remarks on doing the will of God. —
Pages 131—139.
CHAPTER XIV. 1842.
Closing year of Mr. Cross’s life—Death of Mr. Waterhouse—
Trying circumstances of the Feejeean Mission—lll health of
Mr. Cross—Extract of a letter from Mr. Calvert—District-
Meeting—Mr. Cross allowed to remove to New South Wales—
Consents to remain if he may be stationed with Mr. Lyth—
Mr. Lyth stationed with him at Yewa —Mr. Cross visits Rewa—
Mr. Lyth’s indisposition—Mr. Cross is very poorly —Events at
Rewa —Wreck of the canoe, &c.—Leaves Yewa for Somosomo
—State of the work at Yewa—Account of Mr. Cross’s illness,
and death —Character.— Pages 140—162.
Letter from the Rev. Richard Burdsall Lvth to the
Secretaries of the Wesleyan Missionary Society.—
Pages 163—167.


MEMOIR
OF THE
REV. WILLIAM CROSS.
CHAPTER I.
For by grace are ye saved through faith.”—Eph. ii. 8.
Mr. William Cross was born July 22d, 1797, at
Cirencester, Gloucestershire. His parents were mem-
bers of the Established Church, who taught their family
the nature of religion, so far as it was understood by
themselves. Nor were their instructions useless, as the
dread of grieving them was, for a time, at least, a
salutary check on their son William, even when he
had but little of the “ fear of God before his eyes.”
Mr. Cross recorded but little of his personal history
previous to his leaving the paternal roof, to enter more
fully upon the ocean of life. This is, at all times, a
critical period in life, and often proves exceedingly
injurious to moral character and training. Such was
the case with the subject of this memoir. He was then
about eighteen years of age, destitute of religion, ex-
posed to many temptations, without either wisdom or
grace to resist them ; and so miserably dissatisfied with
the pleasures of sin, that he often made attempts to put
an end to an existence which he felt to be almost insup-
portable. “ The way of transgressors is hard.” In
the order of Divine Providence, during the year 1818,
Mr. Cross visited Mr. and Mrs. Simpson, in Portsmouth,
B


who were members of the Wesleyan-Methodist society.
They faithfully reproved their guest for what they con-
sidered improper in his conduct, and affectionately in-
vited him to attend the Methodist ministry. After some
hesitation, he acquiesced in the proposal, and heard a
funeral sermon on the death of a young lady, who had
been eminent for piety and usefulness. The text (John
xvi. 22) and the sermon made a salutary and lasting-
impression on his mind. He was deeply convinced of sin,
and only prevented by shame from immediately joining
the society. This was the more remarkable, as he had,
until that period, felt an aversion even to the name of
Methodist. His friends urged him to decide at once,
and attend the class-meeting; observing, in language
not capable of being misunderstood, “You must bear
the cross, or you cannot wear the crown.” The circum-
stance of not being at that time settled in any particular
line of business, appears to have been one of the principal
reasons why he did not yield to the solicitations of his
friends, and to his own sense of duty.
From this time he considered sin his enemy, and
fought against it with his might. He was, however, far
from being conqueror, being destitute of that simple
faith in Jesus Christ which, whilst it deprives the sinner
of his own strength, overcomes the world. It was im-
pressed upon his mind that if he were to marry, he
should possess greater opportunities of serving God
acceptably; he therefore entered into that state Nov. 2d,
1818. The Lord blessed him with an excellent wife;
nor was he disappointed in his expectation of spiritual
good from his new relationship. In the spring of 1820,
Mr. Cross, for the first time, attended a Methodist class-
meeting, at Cheltenham, and in the same year was
admitted a member of the society, to which he was
subsequently devotedly attached. Mr. Cross soon expe-
rienced the advantages of the privileges he now enjoyed,


and proved that them who honour God He will honour.
Tn July, under the ministry of the Rev. Thomas Edwards,
he was enabled to trust in Christ, as his personal and
present Saviour; and received the forgiveness of sins
through faith in his blood, and an assurance of his
acceptance with God, by the Holy Spirit bearing witness
with his spirit that he was a child of God. On this
occasion he observes, “My confidence in God continued
to increase, and my heart was filled with love to him
and his service. I experienced such love to my fellow-
creatures as I never felt before, especially to those who
loved God.” Thus did the witnessing, renewing Spirit,
produce his own fruit, —supreme love to God, a strong
attachment toward those who bear his image, and pity
and compassion for phe world at large.
At this comparatively early period of his Christian
course, it was strongly impressed on the mind of
Mr. Cross that God would ultimately call him to
preach the Gospel. He placed himself entirely at the
divine disposal, attending to present duty, and leaving
future events with him.
In February, 1822, Mr. and Mrs. Cross removed to
Bath; where Providence began to direct his steps more
plainly with reference to his future vocation. In May,
he was appointed a Prayer-Leader in the Wesleyan
society; and shortly after was prevailed upon to give
an exhortation in public. He succeeded better in this
his first attempt than he anticipated, observing that he
was “ a little elated , as well as encourax/ed.” His next
attempt, however, which was far from being a suc-
cessful one, completely destroyed his self-confidence :
he ever after had a low estimate of his pulpit talents,
and pursued his public course with great meekness and
humility.
While the “ Lord of the harvest ” was thus “ thrust-
ing forth the labourer into his harvest,” the Holy Spirit
B 2


was carrying on in his soul that work of sanctification
which is so essential to all who would labour usefully
and to the glory of God. The following are his words
on this important subject:—“ I saw the necessity of
being saved from all sin: I felt the remains of the
‘ carnal mind ’ a sore burden. The language of my
heart was, ‘ Truly my soul panteth after holiness ; root
out, I entreat thee, O Lord, every bitter thing from my
heart, and fill me with thyself.’ ” His prayer was
heard by Him whose name is Holy, and who delights to
impress his image on his people. January 27th, 1823,
Mr. Cross writes: “ This day the Lord cleansed me
from all sin; the remains of the old man were
destroyed. I did not feel that fulness of joy that I had
anticipated.” “ Sunday, February 9th. Since the above
was written, I have felt more peace, more humility, more
resigned to the will of my heavenly Father, more love
to him, and to all men. Sometimes lam led to doubt
the reality of the work; but I thank the Lord that,
under the word preached this forenoon by the Rev.
William Worth, every doubt has been removed. I trust
I shall press onwards to ‘ comprehend with all saints
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height,
and to know the love of Christ which passeth know-
ledge, that I might be filled with all the fulness of God.’ ”
“September 10th. ‘Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all his benefits.’
‘ My soul breaks out in strong desire
The perfect bliss to prove ;
My longing heart is all on fire
To be dissolved in love.’
I wish to become all that God would have me, and to
fulfil all that he would have me do.”
“ December 14th. I was refreshed under the word
preached ; greatly humbled on account of my past un


faithfulness, and ashamed of having so often distrusted
the goodness of God. Give me, O Lord, power on all
occasions, and in every situation, to be resigned to thee.
Thou hast made me thy child by adoption and grace
through faith in our Lord Jesus Christ: help me to look
unto thee as my reconciled Father.” An increase of
grateful love to God ; an earnest desire for more of the
0 1
spirit of holiness ; a willingness to be employed in any
way for the good of others; deep humility and self-
abasement ; and a satisfactory sense of the divine favour,
are observable in these extracts. An abundant increase
in all these essentials in Christian experience is the
never-failing fruit of devotedness to God.
In this state of mind Mr. Cross began to think of the
Mission work. October 6th, he writes : “My mind is
much exercised respecting my being fully given up to
the sacred ministry. Lord, make my way plain. I wish
to do thy will. Sometimes it appears so clear that God
will call me to labour as a Missionary, that I feel as
confident that it will take place, as if I were actually
employed in the work. It is a subject that greatly
occupies my thoughts, both in sleeping and when awake.
Sometimes I have such a view of my inability, that I
tremble at the thought.”
The impression that God would call him to preach
the Gospel to the Heathen, soon ripened into a firm
conviction that it was his duty to offer himself to the
Wesleyan Missionary Committee as a candidate. On
this subject he writes : “I feel that if I had waited until
1 was too old to be employed in the Missionary field
before I disclosed the impression which pressed so
heavily on my mind, I should never have been happy
again. My mind is now at ease.” Mr. Cross’s offer was
accepted: he passed the Quarterly and District Meetings
satisfactorily, and had every reason to believe that the
Missionary field would be the scene of his future life.


During the ensuing year, 1826, Mr. Cross was called
to endure a painful affliction, in the death of his mother.
He had the mournful satisfaction of being with her
during the closing event, and of knowing that she died
in the hope of the Gospel.
With much fear and trembling, but with satisfaction
to the Missionary Committee, Mr. Cross underwent the
ordinary examination, in London, respecting his Chris-
tian experience and ability to preach the Gospel. The
result was his appointment to New-Zealand, and his
ordination in London, March 27th, 1827. We must
now consider him as entering upon his Missionary
work; for certainly, taking leave of friends, country,
and home, are a few among the severest trials which a
Missionary has to endure. The love of these are
important ingredients in a Missionary’s character ; with-
out which he would be utterly unfit for his hallowed
enterprise: and, though love to the souls of men makes
him willing to sacrifice all, that surrender is no stoical
abandonment of that which is dear; it is but loving
“father, and mother, and brethren, and sisters” less
than Christ.
On the 10th of April, 1827, Mr. and Mrs. Cross
sailed from Liverpool for New South Wales, and landed
in Sydney, August the 3d following. Nothing re-
markable occurred during the voyage : the same may
be said of their short, but profitable, residence in the
colony. The New South Wales District-Meeting had
directed Mr. Cross to commence a Mission at Hokianga,
in New-Zealand ; but intelligence of an important nature
arriving from Tonga, it was deemed advisable to alter
this arrangement, and he was appointed to Tongataboo,
in the Friendly Islands, with the Rev. Nathaniel
Turner, and Mr. Weiss, a Local Preacher from Sydney.
On the morning of October Bth, the Mission party
set sail for their destination ; and on the 2d of Novem


ber Mr. Cross thus records the termination of their
voyage ; “ Glory be to God for his unspeakable good-
ness towards us. This day, after a speedy and safe
passage, we arrived at Tongataboo.”
A protracted voyage is in some degree a good intro-
duction to the work of a Missionary in these islands,
having so frequently to be exposed to the raging
elements in slight and uncomfortable canoes. In addi-
tion to this, he learns numerous lessons of confidence
and gratitude during a voyage of fifteen or sixteen
thousand miles, and becomes prepared to place implicit
trust under the shadow of the wings of Him “ whom
winds and seas obey.” The ocean over which he has
passed is not an unfit emblem of the people among
whom he is placed: he takes up his residence among
savage tribes, who are guided principally by malignant
passions, which more often rage than rule. But “ the
God of his salvation is the confidence of all the ends of
the earth, and of them that are afar off upon the sea.—
Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their
waves, and the tumult of the people." (Psal. Ixv. 5, 7.)


CHAPTER II.
“ And that we may he delivered from unreasonable and wicked
men.”—1 Thess. iii. 2.
Before I proceed to give an account of Mr. Cross
in his new field of labour, it may be needful to say
something respecting the geography of the Friendly
Islands. To this I shall add a short account of the
first Missionaries in Tongataboo, some of whom
“sowed in tears,” and were not permitted to “reap
in joy.”
The Friendly Islands consist of three groups ; namely,
Tonga, Haabai, and Vavau. The first was discovered
by Abel Janson Tasman, a Dutch navigator, in January,
1643. The Haabai group, by Maurelle, a Spaniard,
in 1781. The last-named navigator was the first also
who recognised the Vavau group. Niua, or Keppel’s
Island, was discovered by Schouten, in 1616.
The principal island in the Tonga group is Tonga-
taboo : it is the largest and best-populated of any, being
about sixty miles in circumference, and containing a
population of about ten thousand. Nukualofa is the
chief town; but Hihifo, Bea, Mua, Vaini, and Houma
are also considerable towns, being the residence of
powerful Chiefs. Eooa is also an island of importance
in the Tonga group. It is a beautiful spot, difficult of
access, and so fruitful that it has been termed the
granary of Tongataboo.
The Haabai group lies north of Tonga. Some of the
isles which compose it are not more than fifty-four miles
from Tongataboo. Lefooka, the principal, is perhaps


one hundred miles distant. The whole group is
numerous, and separated from each other. Eighteen
only are inhabited. The names of the principal islands
are as follows :—Tofua and Kao to the southward and
westward of the group, and northward and westward of
Tongataboo; Namuka, the nearest of the group to
Tongataboo ; Mango, Fenoifua, Fetoa, Matuku, Oua,
Haafeva, Kotu, Fotuhaa, Lofanga, Tungua, Uiha, Le-
fooka, Foa, Haano, and Moungaone.
The Vavau group lies sixty miles to the north of
Haabai. The principal islands are Hunga, Nuababu,
Labe, Ovaka, Kaba, Taunga, Fuaamotu, Ofu, Oloua,
Ngaunoko, Okoa, Koloa, Toku, Late, and Fonualei to
the southward, and Vavau the principal island. Except
Late, they are all contiguous to each other. Vavau is
a fine country, and next to Tongataboo in size. The
generality of them are small.
At the time Mr. Cross arrived, Tubou, now r Josiah
Tubou, was King of Tonga; Taufaahau, now George,
was King of Haabai; and Feenau of Vavau. Feenau is
since dead, and George now governs Vavau..
In April, 1797, Captain Wilson, of the “Duff,” left
ten mechanics at Hihifo, Tongataboo, in the capacity
of Missionaries. They resided together for some time,
but afterwards separated for the laudable purpose of
being more extensively useful. Their labours, however,
were of comparatively little use ; partly on account
of three sailors who resided on the island, who did all
in their power to oppose and annoy them. Captain
Wilson took two of these ungodly men away, and the
other was killed in a quarrel with the natives. The
effects of their bad counsel, and worse example, re-
mained ; so that the natives continued to treat with
indifference and contempt both the Missionaries and
the instructions they gave. At length the Chief, under
whose protection they resided, was barbarously mur-
b 5


dered by his own brother, and the island involved in a
sanguinary and desolating war. As the Missionaries
had declined to take any part in the conflict, they
expected to be treated as a neutral party. One day, as
a party of the enemies of the murdered Chief were re-
turning victorious from a fight, the Missionaries went
on the outside of their dwelling to look at them, not
anticipating any danger. At that moment one of the
warriors remembered having been denied some very
unreasonable request which he had made of one of the
Mission party, and determined to take this opportunity
of being revenged. His companions joined him with
eagerness, and the three Missionaries, with an American
seaman, were clubbed on the spot.
The Missionaries on the other stations were obliged
to seek safety among the rocks and dens of the island.
The Heathen plundered them of their property, stripped
them of their wearing apparel, and subjected them to
various kinds of insult. At length hunger obliged them
to leave their places of retreat, and once more to seek
the society of these, not very “ friendly,” islanders.
When the strife terminated, the Missionaries en-
deavoured to support themselves by hard labour. The
rapacious natives having stolen everything they pos-
sessed, it was with great difficulty they succeeded in
constructing a forge. When this was accomplished,
the furtive inhabitants actually brought the very articles
which they had stolen, in order to be manufactured into
some other form that pleased them better. But greater
afflictions than these awaited them, in the awful and
complete apostasy of one of the Mission party. The
name of this individual was Yeeson, who became so far
Paganised as to renounce the Bible, and to take a
formal leave of his deeply-afflicted companions, and
recklessly to abandon the cause he had been com-
missioned to promote. The rest remained faithful :in


the midst of war, famine, and poverty, the martyrdom
of their friends, and every species of trouble and con-
tempt, they continued to labour for their bread, and to
do what they could in order to effect the regeneration
of a proud and despiteful people.
In 1800 the English ship “ Betsy ” arrived in the
islands, in which the Captain offered the distressed
Missionaries a passage to New South Wales. As they
were utterly destitute, and had but little prospect of
doing good among the natives, they gladly accepted the
proposal; and thus the Mission for a time was abandoned.
Several of the Chiefs and natives went on board the
vessel to take leave of the Missionaries. Doubtless
there were a few, in whose consciences existed a witness
that these rejected servants of the Most High had not
laboured in vain, nor spent their strength for nought.
The invidious and wretched sailors before alluded to
had taught the natives to believe that all the calamities
which had happened to them were in answer to the
prayers of the Missionaries ; and so fully did the people
believe the assertions of these depraved and wicked men,
that, in 1822, when the Rev. Walter Lawry was in
Tonga, one of the elder Chiefs said of him and his
party, “ See these people: they are always praying to
their God, as the other Missionaries also were ; and what
was the consequence of such praying 1 Why, the wars
broke out, and all the Chiefs were killed ! ”*
The Rev. Walter Lawry, of the Wesleyan Missionary
Society, arrived in Tongataboo, August 16th, 1822. He
was kindly received by the people, and for a time was
treated well. Like his predecessors, he experienced but
little encouragement. The natives considered him the
harbinger of soldiers, who would shortly come to kill
them and seize their land ; and consequently treated him
* See Pickins’s “ English Missionaries.”


with suspicion. He was ultimately obliged to remove
to the colony in the latter end of 1823, on account of
domestic circumstances. Had he remained, there is no
doubt but his labours would have been successful. The
islanders were sorry to part with him, notwithstanding
their deep-rooted prejudices against the Christian Mis-
sionary, no matter by what name he was called.
The Committee of the Wesleyan Missionary Society
considered the state of things in the Friendly Islands
such as to warrant the expectation of ultimate prosperity.
Accordingly, in 1825, the Rev. Messrs. John Thomas
and John Hutchinson were appointed to Tongataboo.
They landed in the month of June, 1826, and fixed their
station at Hihifo; where they erected a substantial
dwelling-house, and commenced the study of the language
and instructing the people. They met with great
opposition, and but little success.
We shall now direct the attention of our readers to
Nukualofa, and also to the Missionaries who arrived
there in 1827. Two Christian Teachers, Tahitians, had
already been employed in that locality scattering the
seed of divine truth, and preparing the way for the
entrance of the ambassadors of Christ. They read the
Scriptures and preached to the people in the Tahitian
language, which the Tonguese generally do not under-
stand. They were not, however, useless : a place of
worship had been erected, and two hundred and forty
persons attended their teaching. An extract from the
journal of Mr. Cross will give his opinion respecting
the state of things on his arrival; and though it is the
result of a first impression, we are disposed to think that
it is both just and charitable :
“Nov. 11th. —This morning we accompanied the
people to the house of God. To me it was a solemn
and refreshing season. I felt mingled sensations of joy
and sorrow. I could not but rejoice to see so con


venient a house built for the worship of God in this
heathen land, and beholding it so well attended, and
also the ardent desire which was manifested by the
people to be instructed in the knowledge of God. On
the other, I felt regret that we were not able at present
to communicate instruction. The information they
receive from the Tahitian Teachers cannot be great,
inasmuch as they read and preach in the Tahitian
tongue.”
But, although these simple-hearted and sincere men
had not been able to accomplish much in the way of
communicating instruction, they had been made a
blessing; and their history is exceedingly encouraging
to all who are engaged in the Mission work, showing
that no well-directed and prayerful effort can be ulti-
mately in vain. The Head of the church will honour
those who comply with his last command, “ Go ye out
into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature.” Few r have felt their obligation to attend to this
command more fully than the Directors of the London
Missionary Society, whose untiring and unexampled
zeal commenced the Tahitian and Tonga Missions ; and
few societies have been more honoured from on high.
At first, the Tonga Mission seemed to be an utter
failure. Their Missionaries were murdered, or obliged
to quit the field before a single place of worship was
erected, or a single member brought into the fold of
Christ. At length they were successful in Tahiti ;
afterwards two of their people in that island who had
been sent to the Friendly Islands, were the means of
building a chapel, and raising a congregation, on the
very spot where the English Missionaries had laboured
and suffered. The principal Chief of Tongataboo, with
two hundred and forty of his people, whom Mr. Cross
found worshipping the true God on his arrival, must be
regarded as some of the fruits of that glorious harvest


which has since been gathered. The London Missionary
Society, after scattering the seed, and offering the first-
fruits, the result of mutual and friendly negotiation,
meekly retired, and left the Wesleyan Society to gather
the harvest. Herein is that saying true, “ One soweth,
and another reapeth.” Those who sow, frequently
appear to do comparatively nothing; but He “ who seeth
not as man seeth ” knows the part they take in his work,
and listens to the prayers of those who labour apparently
with no success: these are often the men who, above all
others, are the honoured instruments of much of the
success which afterward appears. Fathers and brethren,
together with the friends of Missions in general, labour,
pray, in order to send forth the ambassadors for Christ
into all lands. The world is yours : take possession of
every part, in the name of the world’s Redeemer; and
though your first possession, in many places, may only
be a solitary grave in which some of your Missionaries
are inhumed, yet the promise to the Son is sure, “ Ask
of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine in-
heritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession; ” (Psalm ii. 8;) and the promise to you is
equally so: “He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing
precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing,
bringing his sheaves with him.” (Psalm cxxvi. 6.)
Meantime let those who sow and those who reap rejoice
together, remembering that we scatter the same seed,
and gather our harvest into the same garner.
When the church makes a bold and vigorous attack
on the kingdom of darkness, the god of this world will
stand on the defensive. So it was in the present case
Tubou, now Josiah Tubou, the King of Tonga, was
a professor of Christianity. The Heathen Chiefs around
him endeavoured to persuade him to abandon his creed,
and return to the religion of his ancestors. The old
motives were urged ; namely, that the English Mis


stonaries intended either to kill them, or to take them to
England, and then take possession of the country.
However absurd these reasons may appear, they were
such as powerfully affected the minds of the barbarous
people with whom we were surrounded, unacquainted as
they were with the usages of all civilized nations.
When the Chiefs were unable to succeed with Tubou
by persuasion, they threatened those among the lower
orders with death, if they continued to attend the
chapel. These threats had indeed some little influence
on the people for a week or two; but they had to be
repeated again and again, ere Tubou or his people paid
much attention to them.
The persecutors, however, became more determined
to arrest the progress of Christianity. Tubou was
equally so not to yield ; but not being able to make any
vigorous stand against the combined force of his adver-
saries, should he be compelled to fight, he prepared to
leave the island, and seek elsewhere a place in which he
could quietly worship the one and true God. A canoe
was launched, and he desired the Missionaries to accom-
pany him. They were unwilling, however, to do so,
inasmuch as they thought they ought not to leave the
island until they were driven away.
The Heathen discovering that the Chief was unmoved
by threats, tried what promises would accomplish.
Accordingly, they engaged to consecrate him Tuika-
nukuholu, that is, “ King of Kanukubolu,” (the name of
a part of Tongataboo,) provided he would engage to
abandon Christianity. This is the highest honour a
Tonga Chief can attain. Though Tubou was proof
against threats, he could not withstand this temptation
to honour: he therefore consented to leave off praying
to Jehovah for the present, as a kind of amende
honorable; but allowed the inferior Chiefs and people to
do as they pleased. It is by no means improbable that


Tubou’s apparent firmness partook much more of Tonga
obstinacy, than of Christian constancy, and that he was
led to succumb to his foes solely on account of the
advantages he hoped to realize from his new honours.
The fact, however, must be told : he was not sincere
either in his adherence to Christianity, or in his re-
nunciation of it. Worldly motives exercise a fearful
influence on the mind of a Chief just emerging from
barbarism. The character which Mr, Cross gives of
Fatu, the Chief with whom Mr. Lawry resided, is a
common one. “ Fatu,” he states, “ wishes to have
Missionaries to reside with him ; but we are informed,
it is not for the love he has to them, or the principles
they teach, but for their property.” What, indeed, can
we expect from men who are so profoundly ignorant of
the nature of Christianity ? They cannot be supposed
to be influenced by pure and disinterested motives in de-
siring the labours of Protestant Missionaries among them.
Even after they have renounced Heathenism, they are
very slow to learn, (and who is not ?) that “ the kingdom
of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and
peace, and joy, in the Holy Ghost.”
It is, however, a cause of thankfulness when they are
found willing to place themselves under religious in-
struction, though that desire may arise partly from
worldly and secular motives. We believe that even
much of this is the result of the grace of God. It is
not natural for men ever to prefer religion to poverty.
How many in our country sacrifice everything to avoid
the odium of being true Christians! Health, fortune,
character, body and soul, is the price they pay for living
to themselves ; all of which might be saved by living to
God. The carnal mind is enmity against God ; and the
mind never returns to its true allegiance, but by the
regenerating influence of divine grace.
At the close of the year 1827 the Missionaries held


their District-Meeting, and were pleased to find that
they had great cause for encouragement in the prose-
cution of their work. The past year had been one of
deep and thrilling interest to Mr. Cross. It was, in
fact, the most important era in his Missionary life.
Providence had placed him in a sphere of labour, which
involved much responsibility and duty, together with
results of the most interesting and glorious character.
The Great Head of the Church in a peculiar manner
said, “Occupy till I come.’’ On the faithful employment
of his talents and present opportunities were suspended
his eternal happiness and glory, together with the sal-
vation of thousands, not only of this, but of all succeeding
generations. Mr. Cross recognised his Master’s voice,
and the following pages will not fail to show that his
talents were employed so as to answer the design of
their Giver.


CHAPTER III.
1828—9.
“And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the
brightness of thy rising."-Isaiah lx. 3.
The extension of the kingdom of Christ was a subject
dear to the heart of Mr, Cross ; and he was blessed with
numerous qualifications for becoming an instrument in
effecting this desirable object. He was a zealous
evangelist, and delighted in seeking that he might
“ save which is lost.” Preaching the Gospel to
the Heathen is to some an act of great self-denial; it
might have been so to the subject of this memoir : if so,
he denied himself in such a manner that to others the
work appeared to be both easy and natural to him. In
his own house, in those of the people, in the streets, or
wherever he met with a poor sinner, he affectionately,
and with faithfulness, warned him to “flee from the
wrath to come.”
In commencing a new Mission, it is often impossible
to accomplish more than the establishment of a single
station in some central position. As the people have
everything to learn, and for a considerable time none
but the Missionary to instruct them, it is impossible
that he should perform the work of an evangelist to any
great extent, without neglecting that of a Pastor.
This was the case in Tongataboo. Two stations had
been formed; one at Hihifo, the other at Nukualofa.
A few had embraced the truth as it is in Jesus at the
former, and a considerable number at the latter, place;
and as the whole Mission apparatus had to be prepared,


as well as set in motion, Mr. Cross and his colleagues
found but little time to extend their labours, except to
the surrounding villages. The Haabai and Varan
groups could not be visited without an increase of
labourers, although they were in great need of the
Gospel, and to a considerable extent prepared to
receive it.
Such circumstances are exceedingly trying. A lover
of souls cannot carelessly enjoy the light of his own
favoured Goshen, while the world around him is in
darkness. But what can he do ? He sees his fellow-
creatures wretched in the extreme; he knows the
remedy for all their ills is the Gospel; he holds the
Gospel in his hand ; it glows in his heart, which pants
to publish it to all; but he cannot accomplish what he
desires. Distance, a thing almost unknown in England,
is a mighty obstacle. If he come to the conclusion that
his usefulness is as limited as his sphere of action, he
will be discouraged. This conclusion, however, is not
by any means a just one. The indirect influence of
the Gospel, like the reflected light of the sun, is an
incalculable blessing, though often too little regarded.
Reports respecting Christianity, circulated by the
natives themselves, have often been the means of great
and extensive good. Light in this milder form is
sometimes received, when its full splendour would be
rejected ; and the Missionary is delighted to find that
those whom he had thought farthest from the truth, are
among the first to embrace it, “I was found of them
that sought me not; I was made manifest to them that
asked not after me.” (Rom. x. 20.) Such was the case
in the Friendly Islands. Vavau and Haabai had not
been visited by a Missionary; but the Chiefs of these
groups were favourably disposed from the good report
they had heard of the nature and obligations of Chris-
tianity. In 1828, these Chiefs visited Tongataboo;


when they expressed themselves as anxious to be placed
under religious instruction as soon as a Missionary
should be sent to them.
The following extracts from Mr. Cross’s journal will
give the reader some idea of the manner in which he
was employed, and also of the success that attended his
labours, and those of his excellent coadjutors. The
first extract will show what kind of characters a
Missionary is occasionally obliged to designate his
countrymen when far from the land of his fathers:—
“ This day a melancholy circumstance transpired in
reference to an Englishman who was left on this island
sick by the Captain of the vessel that brought us from
Sydney. We often conversed with him respecting
spiritual and eternal things, and frequently prayed with
him. He appeared extremely ignorant, and manifested
a pharisaical disposition. I believe he had no scriptural
conviction of sin. For the last four days he has been
supposed near death. To-day he prevailed on some of
the people to carry him to the chapel, where he might,
as he said, have more air; and there, with a razor,
which he had concealed in his clothes, cut his throat.
He died shortly after. It is lamentable that such an
event should have taken place in the sight of the
Heathen.” Suicide is rare among the natives of these
islands. In the Feejee group it is, in some degree,
prevalent among widows whose friends have refused to
strangle them on the death of the husband. They
generally effect this purpose by leaping from some
high rock.
Early this year Mr. Cross and his wife were both
afflicted : the former soon recovered, but the latter
remained a considerable time indisposed. Their afflic-
tions were borne with Christian patience, although they
desired to live but for one object, namely, to glorify
God.


One of the earliest and most severe trials which a
Missionary has to endure, is the inability under which
he labours at once to communicate to the people, in
their own language, the tidings of salvation. Mr. Cross
had cause for thankfulness in this respect, as he was
able, in a less period than five months after he landed,
to conduct divine service in Tonguese. Messrs. Turner
and Thomas, with himself, had prepared hymns to be
sung in the native language ; and a book of lessons was
forwarded to Port Jackson to be printed. A school for
the adult and youthful population was in active operation,
and the people had commenced learning to read from
manuscript books written by the Missionaries. Tubou
ere long began again to attend the worship of God; and
the Chiefs did not, at least for the present, offer any
molestation. Tubou absented himself from the Mis-
sionaries about six months. The congregations were
much increased by his return, inasmuch as the people
required his example, as well as permission, to encourage
them to attend.
July 30th, Mr. Cross writes: “Our chapel, which
contains upwards of three hundred, is now well filled
every Sabbath-day. The services on Wednesday are
well attended; and the congregation manifest increasing
interest in the things they hear.” Some of those who
had sat under the sound of the Gospel for several months
began now to feel its power, and manifested a strong
desire to “flee from the wrath to come.” These were
accordingly formed into a class, which held its first
meeting on the 14th of October. Shortly after, a
second class was instituted ; so that, before the close of
the year, the Missionaries were enabled to rejoice over
upwards of twenty individuals who had united them-
selves in church fellowship. Christianity now began to
exert an influence on the social habits of the people.
A Chief, of considerable rank, was married ; one of the


Christian community died with a good hope through
grace ; and his friends showed the influence that re-
ligion had upon them, by abstaining from certain
barbarous ceremonies, and other expressions of immod-
erate grief, which made a part of their funeral rites
when they lived “without hope.” The religion of
Christ alone can administer solace under bereavement,
because it “ brings immortality to light.”
Mr. Cross, and his colleague, began to extend their
labours, and attempts were made to introduce the
preaching of the Gospel into the villages around them.
Their labours were not in vain. One of the principal
Priests became a Christian: while, at the same time, the
Gospel was not preached in vain to the poor; though it
has generally happened that the Chiefs have taken the
lead in embracing Christianity in these islands. While,
however, the work of God was prospering under the
instrumentality of Mr. Cross, Mr. Thomas, at Hihifo,
was experiencing considerable opposition, Mr. Cross
writes, November 19th: “We have just received intel-
ligence from Mr. Thomas. The Lord has wrought a
great deliverance for them. The Chief of that place
ordered them away some tinte ago, and insisted upon
his mandate being immediately regarded. He had also
determined to destroy the Mission premises, and had
appointed the men who were to perform that work.
The Lord gave our brother courage to assure the Chief,
that he should not leave the place. The furious
Heathen replied, ‘Do you not fear me ? ’ He an-
swered, ‘ No! Ido not fear you: I fear no one but
God.’ The rage of the Chief is in some measure
abated, and our friends remain at their post.”
Mr. Cross closed the year, as usual, with thankfulness
for past mercies, and renewed consecration of himself
to God. He had numerous trials, but, at the same
time, so many mercies, and so much to accomplish in


the service of the Giver, that he scarcely felt this world
to be a vale of tears, but rather a field of happy though
laborious toil.
1829.—This year was one of steady prosperity to the
cause of God in Tongataboo. The people, who were
under the immediate care of the Missionaries, gave in-
creasing evidence of growth in grace, as well as in the
knowledge of God. The journal of Mr. Cross shows
how fully he was employed in preaching, meeting
classes, attending the schools, visiting the sick, both in
a medical and pastoral character. Much of his time
was occupied in writing and transcribing lessons for the
schools, as he possessed none printed for that purpose.
He complains of having to spend so much time in
superintending the buildings, &c., which had been com-
menced. Indeed, a Missionary in these islands has to
look after everything, otherwise'nothing would be done
right. Mr. Cross, however, found time to visit the
depraved population around him
the Chiefs; when he ceaselessly endeavoured to per-
suade them to embrace the truth. In the meantime
the Christians manifested advancement in grace by a
strict attendance to family religion, as well as to the
public ordinances of the house of God. The young
people were diligent in persuading their friends to
embrace the faith which had made them happy ; and
thus, both by their hallowed zeal and Christian con-
sistency, they rejoiced the hearts of their Pastors, and
contributed greatly to the increase of godliness in the
surrounding villages. Many who resided at a distance,
removed to Nukualofa, that they might be near the
Missionaries, to attend with regularity on their in-
structions ; so that, sometimes, on the Sabbath, the
congregation amounted to not less than five hundred
persons. Among those who were baptized this year,
was a Chief of considerable rank, who also had been a


Priest. Speaking of what he was formerly, Mr. Cross
observes, “ He could demand anything the island pro-
duced, no one daring to refuse him. It requires some-
thing more than a mere desire to change his religious
profession to induce a man thus to surrender such
privileges. He had six wives, five of whom he has
abandoned. The one to whom he is married, with
two of those who were discarded, are baptized. He
has met in class six months.”
The Missionaries had not only the pleasure of wit-
nessing the usefulness of their public instructions, but
also that their other labours were not in vain ; especially
the tedious work of writing and transcribing books in
the native language.
Sept. 26th, Mr. Cross writes: “During the last
six days I have translated in the Tonguese language, the
substance of several chapters of the Ist Book of Kings.
I have written my translations in small tracts, for the
use of the natives. These I lend as I prepare them, in
a similar way to the Tract Societies at home. Thus
each portion is read by a great number of persons, and
heard by many more, the children in many cases being
able to read to their parents. Several of the people also,
when visiting their friends in different parts of the island,
take these little books with them, which they read to
those who are unable to read themselves. By this means
a number hear the word of God; and others have also
learned to read, and even to write, who have never
entered the school.”
The substance of many parts of the journal of Mr.
Cross is given in the preceding paragraphs : the following
deserves to be stated more at leng h :
“Sept. 11th.—We held our first lovefeast. About
one hundred and forty individuals were present, and
between thirty and forty spoke of what great things God
had done for them. Several stated that they attended


to religion a long time before they understood it; but
now they felt themselves to be great sinners, and Jesus
Christ their only Saviour.
“Nov. 11th.—I baptized a little girl about twelve
years of age; the daughter of a Chief woman, and
relative of Tubou. She was rather an extraordinary
child, both sensible and steady; but sickly. Some time
since, her mother wished Mrs. Cross to adopt her,
which she did, and about five months ago we took her to
live with us, hoping that by a little attention she might
recover. For a time she appeared better, but soon
relapsed. About two months ago, at her own desire,
she began to meet in class, paid great attention to what
was said, and I believe was truly penitent. She gradu-
ally grew weaker; and this morning, as I thought she was
near her end, I baptized her. This afternoon she died.
I believe she is gone to glory. A few days since I asked
her if she should prefer to die now, and go to heaven,
or stay a little longer here. She replied, ‘ Oku lelei
kotoabe; ’ that is, ‘ All is good ’ (to live or die). A short
time before she expired, I asked, ‘lf you should die,
where do you think you will go ? ’ She instantly
replied, ‘Ki langi; ’ that is, ‘To heaven.’ This evening
I constructed a coffin for her, the first I ever made.
“Dec. 20th.—This has been an interesting day, and
one much to be remembered by the people of this island.
Sixty-nine persons, all adults, (twenty men and forty-
nine women,) were received into the church of Christ
by the ordinance of baptism. The men were baptized
in the morning, and the women in the afternoon. In
the evening seventeen couples were married. With the
conduct of these people we are much pleased. Of the
sincerity of their profession of Christianity, we have no
reason to doubt. We believe that a real work of grace
is begun on their minds ; and have much reason to
hope that many of them will become ‘ fathers and
c


mothers in Israel.’ Many are inquiring what they
must do to be saved. May we be enabled to direct
them to ‘ the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of
the world.’ Glory be to God, it is our ‘ meat and
drink’ to do his will.”
From the preceding extract it will be seen that Mr.
Cross and his colleagues kept the great object of their
Mission in view; namely, the present and eternal salva-
tion of the people, and that they were visited with an
encouraging degree of success. Several were joined to
the church, and a few gathered into the garner of God,
by their instrumentality.
It is evident, also, that while they attended to this
great object, they adopted effectual measures to ame-
liorate the temporal condition of the people. True
civilization cannot be separated from true conversion to
Christianity. Conscientious integrity, and undissembled
and active benevolence, make an essential part of the
law written on the heart of every renewed man ; and no
one can claim to be a believer who is not honest and
industrious. Again: before a person who has been
living in a state of concubinage or polygamy is admitted
to baptism by our Missionaries, he must become “ the
husband of one wife.” The marriage ceremony is so-
lemnized according to the form in the Book of Common
Prayer, with the exception of the ring, and is in many
instances a very serious service, and a fine test of
character in a man who had been accustomed to have as
many wives as he could obtain.
That Christianity inspires a thirst for knowledge, and
a desire to communicate it to others, is evident from
the zeal of the people of Nukualofa to learn to read
and write, and then to teach these useful arts to
their friends; while their moderation and decent
behaviour at the funerals of their friends, and their
devout and regular attention to the ordinances of re


ligion, show how much may be effected by the word
and Spirit of God in a few months. These are facts,
which are multiplying continually. They speak for
themselves. To the friends of Missions they say, Go
forward; you have a sure remedy for the civil, social,
and spiritual maladies of the world. Make haste and
apply it. “ For godliness is profitable unto all things,
having promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come.”
c 2


CHAPTER IV.
1830.
“Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but
fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God.”—
Eph. ii. 19.
Several opportunities occurred during the preceding
year, of having intercourse with the King of Haabai,
who still greatly desired a Missionary. Mr. Thomas
had left the Hihifo station, the Chief of that place having
such an inveterate antipathy to Christianity, that it was
considered almost useless to remain with him: his services
were therefore offered to the King of Haabai, which the
latter gladly accepted. Circumstances, however, pre-
vented Mr. Thomas immediately commencing the
Mission : a native Teacher was therefore sent, who had
been baptized by the name of Peter. He laboured
successfully for a time, preparing the way for Mr. Thomas,
and then returned. “ Jan. 9th. Our hearts were
gladdened by the arrival of Peter from Haabai. He has
brought us cheering intelligence. The King has sent
for Mr. Thomas : he has already burned several of his
Heathen temples ; and others would have been destroyed,
but he thought they might be of some use to the Mission.
It is proposed to convert one into a kitchen. Peter
reports, that the people who have abandoned their false
gods, are more in number than the Christians in this
island.”
The day after this encouraging intelligence was re-
ceived, Tubou was admitted into the church by baptism,


and married to Queen Mary. She had been one of his
former wives. Five of the Chief’s children were also
baptized. The following particulars are taken from
Mr. Cross’s account of the proceedings :—“ Previously
to the ordinance being administered, Tubou stood up in
the midst of the congregation, (amounting to not less
than six hundred persons,) and made a pxxblic profession
of his religious belief. Among other things he said,
that he had renounced his former gods, and the foolish
customs of the land, believing them to be all lies and
folly: that he came to the house of God this day, to
give his body, and soul, and children, to Jehovah, and
his Son Jesus Christ, whom he believed to be the true
God, and that this God was his God. He expressed
his thanks to those of his relatives and friends who had
been baptized before him, and stated that he had
waited a little that he might better understand the
nature of our religion. He exhorted all who had em-
braced Christianity to persevere, and not to think of the
things of this life, which would soon end, but to think
of God and heaven. He urged the wavering to decision
of character, warning them of their danger. His
desire, he said, was to go to heaven, and he wished
his people to accompany him,” &c., &c. His Queen
had been previously baptized. Respecting her, Mr.
Cross writes :—“ Since her baptism, she has conducted
herself so as to ‘ adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour.
I think it has been her constant desire to please God.
She is becoming a very useful member of the church ;
is a Teacher in the day-school, which she superintends;
is a Class-Leader, and will, I have no doubt, if spared,
be a ‘ mother indeed in Israel,’ and an example to her
sex. Two other persons were also married to indi-
viduals with whom they had been living according to
Tonga customs.”
“Jan. 29th.— Mr. and Mrs. Thomas sailed for


Haabai, and subsequently laboured with remarkable
success among a willing people.”
Several of the young men in Nukualofa, warm in their
first love, began, of their own accord, to exhort in the
houses of their friends. This, though irregular, is much
better than that cold, insipid formality which leads so
many Christians studiously to avoid making known the
Saviour to others. The Missionaries assembled these
young men, and explained to them their duty, allowing
some, whom they thought fit, to give an exhortation
when and where they should appoint: the rest were
desired to desist for the present.
During this month (January) Mr. Cross had the
pleasure of hearing from Mr. Thomas. Many had
already placed themselves under his instruction. The
King of Haabai was sincere in his profession of the true
religion : though some of his subjects were determined
to oppose him by adhering to their former customs, and
even manifested a determination to throw off their
allegiance to him. It may seem strange to many, that
Kings, who are in many respects absolute, should meet
with so much opposition from inferior Chiefs and their
people. The fact is, that the Monarch is only a superior
Chief, and is absolute no longer than he is supported
by others, many of whom have nearly as much
power as himself, and in some instances more. In con-
sequence of the polygamy of the principal men, a
younger brother of the King is, in some cases, a greater
Chief than he is himself, his mother being of higher
rank than the King’s mother.
March 27th, Mr. Cross writes :—“ Thirteen weeks
ago, I commenced a class of three members: now there
is a company of twenty-three, whom I have formed into
two classes. I have now a class to meet every day
in the week. The Lord make me the instrument in
leading them to heaven.”


Sometimes a Missionary is so occupied with various,
or I might say numberless and necessary duties, that he
is in danger of neglecting his own spiritual concerns.
Mr. Cross guarded against this evil, and was kept from
becoming either high-minded on the one hand, or careless
on the other by outward and temporary prosperity.
One means of keeping his soul in a humble frame
and alive to God, was domestic trials. Mrs. Cross
was often the subject of affliction, which, to a man of
his tender spirit, was a constant source of affectionate
sympathy and fervent prayer. His trials were happily
sanctified. He observes, “I cannot but be thankful
for the whole, when I consider that * all things work
together for good to them that love God.’ I know that
I love him ; therefore all the dispensations of his provi-
dence will work together for my good. Thank the
Lord! amidst all, my soul has kept close to him : I have
been favoured with an ardent desire to devote myself
entirely to God. He hath done great things for me,
whereof I am glad ; and it is just ground of complaint
that I do not make more suitable returns.”
In June, Mr, Cross received from the King of Haabai
two substantial proofs of the usefulness of Mr. Thomas’s
labours; namely, a letter written by the King’s own
hand, and an idol which he and his people had formerly
worshipped.
On the 25th of this month, Messrs. Williams and
Barf, of the London Missionary Society, arrived in
Tongataboo, from the Society Islands. Mr. Cross
accompanied these excellent men to the Haabai group ;
partly to pay Mr. Thomas a visit, and partly on account
of the health of Mrs. Cross, it being thought the voyage
might be of service to her.
The party set sail July 6th, and arrived at Lefuka
on the Bth; where they received a hearty welcome
from Mr. Thomas and Taufaahau. Mr. C. writes,


“ Taufaahau appeared gratified by our visit. He showed
us his different houses, some of which are erected in a
masterly manner: they are doubtless the best habita-
tions I have seen in the islands. His largest house is
used as a chapel, which I suppose will contain not less
than four hundred people. In one of the temples the
Chief had suspended some of his most splendid idols
by the neck, observing, ‘ I have hung them there to
show all the people that they dead.’ Mr. Williams
requested one, which was immediately granted; the
Chief adding, ‘ They are of no use to me.’ ” After a
short stay at Haabai, Mr. Cross returned to his beloved
people and employment at Nukualofa. The health of
his wife was benefited by the visit, and both felt more
than ever determined to devote.themselves to the cause
of the Most High. The infinite obligations under
which the goodness of God had laid him, by the innu-
merable benefits conferred upon him; the ample oppor-
tunities he had of showing his gratitude to God by
doing good to men, being surrounded by thousands of
souls who were perishing for lack of knowledge ; the
shortness of the time allotted to man in this world “ to
pay the mighty debt he owes,” —at most a day,—a day
of which a great part is gone before we can begin to
labour; a day which may very soon end, for the night
cometh; were considerations which at this time
deeply affected the mind of Mr. Cross, and led him to
consecrate himself afresh on the Missionary altar.
The following remarks on the subject of bringing up
children in the Friendly Islands, are not only just, but
equally applicable to the Feejee Islands, inasmuch as
they present us with a view of the domestic wretchedness
of Heathenism:—
“Sunday, Oct. 24th.—Expounded 1 Sam. ii. 27—36,
a subject especially suitable for the people of this
island, as they generally allow their children, while


young, to do as they please. The consequence is, that
as soon as they arrive at ten or twelve years of age,
they leave their parents, and act as their corrupt and
ungoverned nature leads them. Hence, in old age or
affliction, parents are frequently altogether disregarded
by their offspring. There are many youths who care
not whether their parents are naked or clothed, full or
hungry, dead or alive. In reference to most of the
children, it is only the want of the necessaries of life, or
the wretchedness attendant on personal affliction, that
can bring them to their father’s dwelling. Generally
speaking, they are entirely destitute of gratitude, or
even a sense of obligation to their parents.” It is also
extremely difficult, even after they have abandoned
Heathenism as a system, to persuade them to pay due
respect to them. In their heathen state, after a boy
has arrived at the age of seventeen or eighteen, his
father scarcely dares speak to him. In many instances
the whole family are “ without natural affection, im-
placable, unmerciful - r ” and a house with such inmates is
often “ a habitation of cruelty.”
The Missionaries in Tongataboo had several trials of
their faith in the superintending power of Divine Pro-
vidence during the early years of their residence. At
three different times the vessels conveying their stock of
provisions, stores, &c., had been lost. The incon-
venience which this caused must have been exceedingly
great. In addition, the island, at that period, was fast
verging on famine, there having been no rain for five
successive months. Many of the people were ill, and
many had scarcely any food. Circumstances like these
have a powerful effect on the minds of people who are
only imperfectly acquainted with the government of the
Most High, which was as yet the case with many of
the Christian Tonguese. By the grace of God, how-
ever, they stood firm, and,
c 5


“Through every low’ring cloud look’d up,
And hoped for happier days.”
These came ; many prayers were offered, and God
graciously regarded them. The Lord sent rain upon the
earth, and visited his people with spiritual prosperity,
so that at the close of the year 1830 there were between
three and four hundred church members, and more
than one thousand under regular instruction in Tonga-
taboo.
Confidence in Divine Providence was a very pro-
minent feature in Mr. Cross’s character. He saw the
promises, he was persuaded of them, and embraced
them accordingly. No dangers could deter him from
the path of duty, and no trials induced him to suspect
the wisdom and goodness of God. This confidence
saved him from that uneasiness and dissatisfaction, that
discontent and morbid melancholy, which, when com-
bined, constitute “ the sorrow of the world, which
worketh death it diffused through his soul a perpetual
gladness, which made him “ready for every good work,”
however unpleasant.
Want of trust in Providence is felt by every Christian
to be a great hinderance to happiness; but in a Mis-
sionary, it affects his usefulness equally so. He must
often risk all, even life itself, or neglect his proper
work. This Mr. Cross prepared to do. He would
have been ashamed to indulge in anxious care when in
the path of duty, knowing, as he did, that God was his
Father, and that he who feeds the fowls of the air, and
clothes the lilies of the field, supplies the wants of the
Heathen, and promises to add everything that is needful
to those who seek first his kingdom and righteousness.
The doctrine of a superintending and ever-watchful
Providence, as taught by our Lord, (Matt. vi. 25 34,)
was inscribed on the heart of Mr. Cross, and manifested
itself in all his spirit and conduct. When the writer


first was admitted into his friendship, this important part
of his character had attained a happy maturity. In
him was fulfilled the words of the Prophet, “ Thou wilt
keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusteth in thee.” (Isai. xxvi. 3 ; compared
with Phil. i. 6,7.) Not that he was careless; far
from it. He was anxiously careful to do what God had
given him to do; but he left events to their sovereign
Disposer. These two kinds of anxiety are exceedingly
different in their nature, though they affect the mind in
a way somewhat similar. To be tremblingly alive to
the calls of duty, and, at the same time, fully resigned
to every event that may transpire, is a state of mind
always desirable in a Missionary, whose duties are so
many, and his circumstances so varied. Mr, Cross
was remarkable for this qualification for his work and
circumstances, both of which were peculiar. One con-
sideration will often prompt an individual situated as he
was to diligence and fidelity ; namely, that if he neglect
the work of God, there is no other to attend to it; and
when no human aid is nigh, it is easier to trust in God,


CHAPTER V.
1831.
“And the idols he shall utterly abolish.”—Isai. ii. 18.
Early in the year, a school for the female Christians
was instituted by the wives of the Missionaries, in which
Mrs. Cross took a very active part. The object of it
was to teach the natives sewing, &c., in addition to
reading, and to encourage conversation on scriptural
topics. Mr. Cross had much labour and care devolving
upon him at this time. Mr. Weiss had recently re-
moved to the colony, Mr. Thomas to Haabai, and Mr.
N. Turner was so indisposed that his removal to a more
healthy climate seemed essential. Mr. Cross was
therefore almost alone at Tongataboo. In such cir-
cumstances, one may judge what would be his feelings
when, in the month of March, three new Missionaries
arrived; namely, Messrs. Watkins, P. Turner, and
Woon. Two of them, Messrs. Watkins and Woon,
were appointed for Nukualofa; and as they brought a
printing-press with them, this station now assumed the
form of a regular establishment. Mr. N. Turner’s removal
shortly after was deeply felt, both by his brethren and
the people. His zeal and Missionary talents had
rendered him, by the blessing of God, of peculiar
service to the infant cause in Tonga ; and being the
senior Missionary, he was regarded by all as an elder
brother. Mr. Watkins soon became acquainted with
the language, so as to render Mr. Cross essential
service in the work; and Mr. Woon laboured hard in


the printing department, and supplied the, eager people
with books. Mr. Cross’s journal is rather copious for
this year, from whence we extract some of the principal
passages. The whole journal is a record of incessant
and continuous labour for the good of the people.
“March 20th.—We baptized sixty-eight adults,
thirty-three males and thirty-five females. There is not
one among them of whom we have not some reason to
believe he or she is sincerely endeavouring to serve God.
Many have been candidates for baptism twelve, and a few
not less than eighteen, months. They have a tolerably
correct idea of those parts of God’s word which are gene-
rally considered as containing the doctrines essential to
salvation, and some of them rejoice in the assurance
which they feel that God, for Christ’s sake, hath
blotted out their transgressions. There are some
whose grey hairs remind us that their days on earth
are nearly accomplished. What a blessing that these
have been brought in their last days to ‘ cast away
their idols, and turn to the living and true God!’”
“ April 7th. —In company with Tubou, and upwards
of one hundred of our people, I walked to Nukunuku,
to open a new chapel. The building is good, very neat,
and pleasantly situated, about one hundred and fifty
yards from the sea beach. It is sixty feet by twenty,
and will be found quite large enough for the present,
though it did not contain more than one-sixth of the
people assembled at the opening. Nukunuku is a large
village, about eight miles from Nukualofa, and four
miles from Hihifo. The Chief, Tuivakakano, is still a
Heathen; but his son has been for some time very
favourably disposed. In consequence of this, the
people are divided: those who desire to be Christians
cleave to the son; those who prefer being Heathens
continue with the father. The Christian party are
now building themselves a town near the chapel. The


old Chief does not object to their proceedings, as he
does not wish to offend his son. The people considered
themselves much honoured by a visit from Tubou, and
prepared a large quantity of kava and provisions as an
expression of their respect. We waited on the Heathen
Chief, made him a small present, thanked him for
allowing his son and a number of others to worship the
true God, and exhorted him to make one among them.
He made no objection, but stated that he wished to be
friendly with us, and remain a Heathen for the
present.
“ About one, p.m., we commenced our service.
After a few general observations, I discoursed from
1 Tim. i. 15. After I had concluded, Tubou addressed
the people. He commended them for their attention
to the commands of God, exhorted them to persevere,
to cease from all evil, to live in peace, and behave
respectfully to their Chief, though he still remains a
Heathen. On our way home, Tubou pointed out to us
several places which had formerly been considered
sacred. In one of them the people were accustomed
to assemble in times of scarcity to collect roots and
fruits from the bush. He observed that one reason
why they assembled at that particular place, was,
because there was plenty of firewood without cutting it;
which was a consideration when they had nothing but
stone axes. Another place was also beheld so sacred,
that it was said to be unlawful to take a stick or
anything from it.” Sacred things, persons, and places
are very numerous in these islands. Everything seems
to be unlawful in its turn. Sometimes it is unlawful to
cough, sneeze, and even to speak. Various kinds of
food are continually tamhu, as it is called. Nothing but
sin escapes the tamhu : it is always lawful. Thus they
are under a two-fold spiritual slavery : they are slaves
to their religion and their lusts.


The preceding extracts give a pleasing view of the
growing and spreading work in Tonga taboo: the fol-
lowing will show that it had another characteristic of a
work of God ; namely, that it met with opposition.
Ata, the Chief of Hihifo, still retained his enmity to
Christianity. After Mr. Thomas left this station, Vee-
hala, an adopted son of Ata, (who had recently joined
the Christian party,) and upwards of twenty people, con-
tinued to meet regularly for singing and prayer. Ata
professed to have no particular objection to his son
being a Christian, but he was exceedingly opposed to
these prayer-meetings. He wished his son to keep his
religion to himself. This, however, he dared not do,
and therefore determined neither to desist from holding
his meetings nor leave the place, but to continue in
the path of duty, and leave events with God. Ata, to
intimidate the Christians, and to prevent others from
joining them, ordered one man to be shot. A person
attempted to shoot him; but the gun missed fire, and
the man escaped. Ata gave orders that all who became
Christians were to be killed or beaten ; and an assembly
of the Chiefs was also called to determine what further
steps should be taken to arrest the progress of the new
religion. Providentially, on the very day that the
council was to be held, Tubou and Mr. Cross visited
Hihifo. The latter had a long and conciliatory con-
versation with Ata, and considerably strengthened the
hands of his persecuted son. This young man, after
several years’ pious labour and patient suffering for his
Lord and Master, entered into his joy, and now “rests
from his labours.” His name after his baptism was
Shadrach. A memoir of him, written by the excellent
Mr. Tucker, appeared in the Wesleyan Magazine,
August, 1840.
In the month of June, the old Chief of Nukunuku,
before referred to, was angry with his son, and seized a club


with which to kill him, and also fire to burn the chapel.
On seeing the people assembled in and around the
chapel, the old man was afraid, and desisted. The
people acknowledged God as their deliverer.
While the church in Tongataboo was thus advancing
amid considerable opposition, the most cheering and
encouraging intelligence was received from Haabai and
Yavau. Taufaahau had given sufficient evidence, not
only of the sincerity of his profession of Christianity, but
also of his earnest desire that it might become the
religion of the Friendly Islands. He had for some
time been preparing for a visit to Yavau on some
important business: the Missionaries had frequently
prayed that this visit might be made the means of
extending the cause of Christ- They were scarcely
prepared, however, to expect that it would be the
means of the entire overthrow of idolatry in Yavau.
By the blessing of God, this was the case.
Finau, or Ulukalala, the King of Yavau, had desired
a Missionary three years before ; but he subsequently
became a cruel persecutor, and was zealously- devoted
to his idols. Messrs. Thomas and Turner of Haabai,
wrote him a friendly letter, which was entrusted to
Peter, the native Teacher. Peter read it and explained
it to Finau, who appeared much pleased, but was not
prepared to turn to God at present. He observed that
he had some few objections to receiving a Missionary,
except one should come direct from England. He
opened his mind fully to Taufaahau, a near relative, who
wrote down the substance of what he said, that he
might be enabled to give a fair statement to the Mis-
sionaries at Haabai. He considered the affair of so
much importance, that he set sail for Haabai as soon as
the weather permitted, leaving his people at Vavau.
May 21st, he arrived in Lefuka, and produced
his paper, which he styled, “ A Letter containing the


mind of Finauand requested an answer as soon as
possible. The Missionaries read the letter, answered
the objections of the Chief, exhorted him to dismiss his
prejudices, and worship the true God. Taufaahau
hastened back to Yavau with the communication.
Among other things, the document stated, that the
British Conference had appointed Mr. Cross to Yavau ;
so that Finau need not wait till a Missionary should
arrive from England. All difficulties being now re-
moved, Taufaahau exhorted Finau to renounce his false
gods at once. The King at length yielded, and said,
“Well, I will; and I will spend the Lord’s day in
worshipping the true God.” He then gave orders to
his servants to worship Jehovah. Two of his wives and
his sister also joined the party. One of the principal
Chiefs had already renounced his false gods. A number
of the people, of their own accord, ere long joined them
in singing and prayer, bowing the knee to the Most
High, which is the first act which a person performs
who becomes a Christian in these islands. They had
a blessed Sabbath at Yavau, the first of a series, which
we hope may end only with time. As soon as the
Sabbath was over, the King gave directions that seven
of the principal idols should be placed in a row. He
then addressed them in language similar to the follow-
ing;—“ I have brought you here to prove you ; and I
tell you beforehand what I am about to do, that you
may be without excuse.” Then commencing with the
first, he said, “ If you are a god, run away, or you shall
be burned in the fire which I have prepared ! ” The
god made no attempt to escape. He then addressed
the next in like manner, until he came to the last. As
none of them ran, the King gave orders that they and
their temples should be destroyed. His orders were
promptly obeyed, and eighteen temples with their
several deities were set on fire. The weather being


wet, they were three days before they were entirely
consumed. Some of the Vavauans were greatly alarmed
at these proceedings, considering them very bold and
wicked ; but their friends from Haabai, encouraged by
their Chief, were utterly fearless, and with great zeal
and alacrity carried on the work of destruction.
As the Haabai people were only on a visit, their
Vavau friends laid aside their ordinary employment,
that they might learn all they could respecting the
nature and obligations of Christianity. “ Let us,” said
they, “ learn to serve God while you are with us, as
we can attend to our other duties when you have left
us.” They kept one poor man awake four successive
nights, reading to them, conversing with them, singing,
praying, &c. When one party retired, another ap-
peared ; so anxious were they to hear of the things of
God. Such was the progress of the Gospel, that in a
short time, Taufaahau had the pleasure of seeing the
King, and one thousand of his people, prostrate “before
Jehovah’s awful throne.” The Chiefs and their people
were not, however, altogether of one mind. After the
King of Haabai left them, a Chief, named Lua, a
relative of Finau, and a number of people, began to
make preparations for war. Taufaahau, however, ar-
rived again in Vavau before hostilities had commenced,
and thus prevented bloodshed. This man, who has
been a father to the Vavau people, advised that those
who refused to embrace Christianity, had better re-
move to some other land. Lua and his people accord-
ingly departed to Tongataboo, where the Heathen
party are still numerous and influential.
This was, without doubt, the most advisable step
that could have been taken, as it appeared the only
way of preserving the inhabitants in a state of peace.
Mr. Cross obtained the preceding account from Tau-
faahau himself, who had been thus happily instrumental


in the commencement of a work for which thousands
will praise God for ever. We now return to Nuku-
alofa.
The following description of the manner in which the
Christians of Nukualofa spent the Sabbath, will give
some idea of the character of the work in that place.
“At daybreak they have family worship. It is de-
lightful to listen to the prayers and praises of the
people, in every part of the town, ascending to heaven
with the opening morn. After prayer, they breakfast.
This being accomplished, they assemble in distinct
and separate parties to repeat the Catechism, and to
sing hymns. At eight o’clock the male school com-
mences ; at nine, the public service. Many, especially
females, are to be seen sitting at the chapel-gate,
waiting for the time of service; so that in five or ten
minutes after the door is opened, the chapel is filled
with sedate and attentive worshippers. After the
service is concluded, a native Teacher gives a word of
exhortation in some canoe-house, and has frequently
many hearers. After dinner, the time is spent in
various ways. Some, according to the Tonga custom,
lay down and sleep ; others attend their classes, &c.
Most of the women assemble in parties, when one reads
a portion of the Scriptures, after which they sing and
pray. At two o’clock the female school commences;
at three, the afternoon service in the chapel begins ;
and after that a native Teacher', as in the forenoon,
addresses a small congregation. Subsequently a few
classes meet. After family worship, the evening is
spent in singing, rehearsing the Catechism, and talking
about what they have heard during the day. I believe
that by many the whole of the Sabbath is conscientiously
devoted to God.” The heart bleeds on reading this,
when we think how the Lord’s day is desecrated in our
favoured country, while her Missionaries are success


fully teaching distant and barbarous nations to keep the
Sabbath-day holy.
The following extracts of letters, written at the close
of 1831, will give further information respecting the
progress of the work, and of Mr. Cross’s state of mind.
The first is to his sister.
“ Dear Sister,
“You may imagine that I have been much
disappointed in not hearing from you for so long a
time, hrom Thomas’s letter I learned you were well,
and had been blessed with a son and daughter. Before
this reaches you, your family may be much increased.
May you have wisdom to bring them up in the fear and
love of God!
The Lord has hitherto dealt very graciously with
me. I have enjoyed my health here as well as I did in
England; so that I have been able to attend to my
duties, and also to render considerable assistance to
Brother Turner, who was much afflicted, previous to
his leaving for the colony.
“ Nearly one hundred have been added to the classes
since April last, and two new places opened for preach-
ing. We have four hundred members in society, who
are divided into thirty-three classes, six of which I meet
weekly: the rest are met by Leaders raised up from the
natives. We have nearly one thousand persons in our
schools, and thirteen young men have been selected to
act as Exhortefs. Will you not say with me, ‘ Glory be
to God ? What hath God wrought ? ’ At the Haabai
group the work is equally prosperous ; and at Yavau,
our next station, the Chief, and a thousand of his
people, have renounced their false gods. Wh expect to
remove to Yavau in a few weeks.
“ Now let me ask, how is it with you, in respect of
spiritual concerns ? Is your soul alive to God ? Are


you following hard after him ? Are you led by the
Spirit ? Whatever you do, live to God. That his
blessing may rest upon you all, is the earnest prayer
of
“ Your affectionate brother,
“ WILLIAM CROSS.”
To Mr. Hayden, of Bath, he writes as follows :
“ Glory be to God! he makes it a delightful work
to labour for him. Amidst all my trials, the Lord has
enabled me to look unto him, and I have been saved.
In reference to my progress in the divine life, I thank
God, I am going forward, though sometimes it is with
a slow pace. I adore him, that I never felt my soul
more alive to God than Ido at the present time. I
desire to live to glorify him in all things. I was
thinking the other evening of the necessity of living
more fully with reference to eternity. I saw more than
ever the importance of spending every day as though it
were my last. This led me to ask myself, How should
I wish to live to-morrow, if I was sure it would be my
last day ? Immediately a crowd of duties rushed into
my mind, some of which would have been attended to
long since, had I more fully regarded the rule, ‘ To
leave nothing till to-morrow which may and should be
done to-day.’ As respects my health, I have great
cause for thankfulness. I have been as well hitherto as
I was in England. Mrs. Cross has often been the
subject of affliction, and is still poorly; but, thank God,
she continues to cleave to him.”
The letters of a Missionary are seldom so spiritual as
those of a private Christian, or even a regular Minister.
The friends of the former would not be satisfied with
receiving a statement of his own experience : they wish


to learn from him how the work of God prospers
among the Heathen. His letters to the Secretaries of
the Wesleyan Missionary Society must also contain
information respecting the Mission more than himself.
He, therefore, naturally acquires the habit of com-
municating information respecting almost everything
save himself. This plan of writing will probably
extend to his journal, as well as to his correspond-
ence : the actions and events of the day will gene-
rally be more likely to find a place in its pages than
his personal feelings, except on some particular occa-
sions. Such was the case with Mr. Cross. He but
seldom enters into particulars respecting his spiritual
state. His journal does not record the successive
spiritual blessings bestowed on him as an individual,
but in general only those which he enjoyed in con-
nexion with the people of his charge. We are but
seldom taken to the closet, but more frequently to
the house of God, and the various scenes of active
Missionary toil. From the spirit and manner in
which these duties were performed, however, we are
constrained to conclude that he was frequently in secret
with God; and, if success in his work be a proof, he
was not there in vain.
“Bj their fruits ye shall know them,” is a test to
which Mr. Cross’s piety and call to the ministry
may be fearlessly put. His devotedness to his work
was admired by all who knew him. He was not a
man so much formed for contemplation as for activity.
From the dawn of the morning to late at night he was
fully employed. In my own opinion he spent too
little time in the improvement of his mind during the
early years of his public life ; perhaps his circum-
stances were such that this neglect was unavoidable:
in after-life he himself thought that active duty had
too fully engrossed his attention. The fault is an


uncommon one: the opposite is much more frequent.
Time that ought to be spent in visiting the sick, the
poor, and the ignorant, especially the latter, is often
spent in useless reading, or in still more useless con-
versation, &c. This is not only the fault of many
youthful Ministers, hut also of the people.


CHAPTER VI.
1832.
“ In perils in the sea.”—2 Cor. xi. 26.
The course of Mr. Cross had, hitherto, been com-
paratively smooth and pleasant. He enjoyed good
health, while ardent love to his Master, and constant
prosperity in his work, conspired to render his arduous
labours delightful. No remarkable family affliction
had interrupted the happiness of his home. Mrs. Cross,
it is true, had been afflicted, but not seriously; and he
had the prospect of a continuance of every social
comfort, —an unspeakable blessing anywhere, but especi-
ally in these distant and half-civilized islands. He was
soon, however, called to endure a breach in his domestic
circle, which made a lasting and affecting impression on
his body and mind, in the loss of his beloved wife,
under circumstances peculiarly trying. The following
is the account which Mr. Cross has given of this painful
event:—
“ J an - 7th, 18,32.—We left Nukualofa in a large canoe
belonging to Tubou, to proceed to our new station at
Yavau. We had waited a few days for a favourable
breeze. On Saturday morning the wind became more
auspicious. We rose at four, a.m., to prepare for
sailing, and proceeded to the canoe between six and
seven o’clock. It was an interesting season. Many
surrounded us, weeping because of our departure.
Having been at Nukualofa more than four years, the
people had acquired a strong attachment to us. Two
smaller canoes were to accompany us; but as we were


detained by the lading of our boat, they sailed about
an hour earlier. We put to sea, and for a few hours
went forward with a fair and moderate wind ; although
there was a heavy swell, which increased as the wind
became more strong. This occasioned the breaking of
the yard, and shortly after of the mast, which happened
about noon. The sail was immediately taken down,
and another smaller set. By the time these arrange-
ments were completed, we had lost sight of the two
canoes. As the evening advanced, the sailors were
anxiously looking out for land, anticipating that we
were near Namuka, one of the Haabai Islands, where
we intended to have spent the Sabbath. Night, however,
came on, but no land appeared. The men having
toiled hard all day, and provisions being scarce, many
of them slept through weariness, and those whose
anxiety for the safety of the vessel kept them awake,
were unable to manage her ; consequently we made no
head-way. We were driven hither and thither till
break of day; but no land appeared till about an hour
after sunrise. We now indulged the hope that we
should reach Namuka. The people fearing the wind
might change, and thus prevent us reaching the island
before dark, inquired if they might prepare a small
mast and yard. I said, ‘lf you cannot reach the
island without working, you must do so, as it is lawful
to work on the Sabbath-day to save life.’ They imme-
diately began to prepare another sail, and then made
towards the land. As we drew near it, various were
the opinions as to what land it was. Some thought
we had drifted so far back in the night, that we were
nearer Tonga, and that the island in sight was Cooachi.
Others imagined it was one of the Feejee Islands; but
arriving about noon, we found it was one of two unin-
habited islands called Hunga Tonga, and Hunga
Haabai. These islands are but seldom seen by the
n


natives, and this will account for their being unac-
quainted with them. On approaching the island, we
found it impossible to land, on account of the steepness
of the rocks and the heavy swell of the sea. After
deliberating for some time as to what we should do, it
was determined to attempt to return to Tongataboo.
In order to lighten the canoe, the mast and part of the
yard were thrown into the sea. The wind now became
favourable, blowing from the north; and the canoe being
lighter, there was less motion. My dear wife and I took
a little refreshment, both of us being very faint. I had
not taken any food for upwards of thirty hours, and
Mrs. Cross had only tasted a little cocoa-nut milk.
M hat added to the weakness of the latter, was, that she
had been very ill on the previous Saturday. However,
the wind being favourable, we made way, and sighted
one of the Tonga isles, called Atata, before sunset.
This occasioned a general thanksgiving. The people
expected soon to make this island, which was not more
than seven miles from Tongataboo, and then to proceed
homeward on Monday. By nine o’clock we were not
distant more than three or four miles. But as the
moon went down, tho wind changed, and blew tremend-
ously against us. The people immediately took down
the sail, and had scarcely reached their paddles, when
the canoe was driven with fearful violence on the reef,
and began to break up. Joseph, a native Teacher, came
to me and said, in the native tongue, ‘ Mr. Cross, be
strong our mind toward God: we are all dead.’ We
committed ourselves to God, and in a few minutes were
washed off the canoe into the sea, and the boat was im-
mediately dashed to pieces. I had my arms round Mrs.
Cross, nor did I let her go. The water was six or seven
feet in depth. Several times we rose to the surface,
but were as often overwhelmed by the surf. I con-
tinued to hold my dear wife with my right arm, while


my left was employed in catching at poles and broken
pieces of the canoe, by which means we had an oppor-
tunity of breathing. No word of complaint or fear
escaped her lips; but she several times said, ‘ Lord,
have mercy upon us. Lord, deliver us in this our time
of need.’ I said, ‘ Look to the Lord, my love : we are
both going to heaven together,’ A few more seconds and
she spoke no more. I still clasped her with my right arm,
was perfectly recollected, and expected in a few moments
to be in heaven with her : but the Lord, contrary to my
expectation, made a way for my escape.
“A short time after the spirit of Mrs. Cross had fled,
I found myself contiguous to some boards, part of the
deck of the canoe. My strength was nearly exhausted,
but I still held the body of my dear wife. One of our
people, a Feejeean, a member of our society in Tonga-
taboo, then discovered me, and taking me by the hand,
kept me close to the boards as they were driven about
in the water. I became very weak ; but another of
our people assisted me to get on the boards. Being
unable any longer to take care of the body of Mrs. Cross,
I desired Jonathan, the Feejeean, to make it fast to
the piece of the wreck upon which they had placed
me ; which was done. By this time several parts of
the canoe were lashed together, forming a raft, and
upwards of twenty persons seated thereon. We were
then driven about we knew not whither. The general
expectation was, from the course of the wind, that if
the boards held together, we should be driven to
Hihifo, which is about eight miles from the place where
we were. In about two hours after the canoe had
broken up, to our great joy, we found ourselves drifted
to an uninhabited island, called Tokeloke. We might
have been driven above or below it, but such was the
goodness of God, we were taken against it. It was
difficult to land, on account of the sharp rocks that
n 2


hung over the sea, and the dashing of the waves; but
through divine mercy, all who were on the raft got safe
ashore. I shall not soon forget how eagerly the men
caught hold of a tree which overhung the sea, to which
they tied the raft. Some climbed up, and these as-
sisted others, so that ultimately we were all saved from
a watery grave. But the body of my dear wife was not
to be found. Being safe on land, the natives with
much difficulty kindled a fire, and warmed a cocoa-nut
for me. They likewise made a little shed with some
branches of the cocoa-nut tree and a mat. Though
more than twenty persons landed by means of the raft,
this was but a small number out of seventy. We were
much concerned respecting the others, and felt exceed-
ingly glad as one and another was driven to the island,
some on boards, others by means of a paddle, and two
on a gate which we were taking to Yavau. The fire
we had kindled was also of a great assistance to them in
finding the landing-place. During the night one man
reached the shore whose sister had perished. He had
but recently made a profession of Christianity, and was
ill prepared to bear such a trial. The poor fellow threw
himself upon the ground, and roared as one deranged.
Another individual said to me, ‘ I was much afraid of
dying without having worshipped God with all my
heart, and I long to get home that I may do so.’
“I now wished much to be at Nukualofa, and con-
sulted the men about it, urging them to attempt to
proceed on the raft, as I thought, if I remained another
night on the island, I also should die. But the people
being all very feeble, and the wind blowing a gale, none
were willing to venture with me, fearing we should lose
our lives in the attempt. The wind became more
moderate about noon : we were afterwards visited by
four men in a small canoe from Hihifo, who having dis-
covered some pieces of the canoe which had drifted


ashore, had come out to see what they could find. I
asked them if they would venture to take me to Nukua-
lofa, promising to reward them well, They consented,
and I was soon in the canoe; but such was the
agitated state of the sea, that in two or three minutes
the boat was overturned. As there was only about
five feet depth of water, I remained in the sea
until the people emptied the canoe, and then re-
sumed my position. Had the canoe upset in deep
water, in all probability we should have been drowned.
It was now agreed that one of the men belonging to
the canoe should remain on the island, and the others
proceed with me, the boat being safer with only four
persons in her. It being low water, they were obliged to
put me ashore about four miles from the Mission pie~
mises; which distance, though I was in a very enfeebled
condition, the Lord enabled me to walk. When 1 had
proceeded about two miles, I was overtaken by a mes-
senger from Hihifo, sent by Ata to Tubou, to inform
him that the body of Mrs. Cross had been found at
Hihifo. As soon as I reached home a number of men
were sent to convey the body, while Mr. Thomas
directed the carpenter to make a coffin. After taking
some refreshment, I, with a sad heart, retired to rest.
“Tuesday, Jan. 10th.—Very weak in body; never-
theless, such was the goodness of God, that I was able
to be present at the funeral. lam considerably bruised,
but not so much as others of my companions ; and,
considering my situation, it is astonishing that I did not
suffer more,
“ The total loss of life connected with this melancholy
event, is fourteen adults and five children. The
greater part of my books, furniture, and wearing ap-
parel, a number of useful articles, together with a
considerable quantity of Mission property, are lost. Of
my property I think but little : my greatest loss is, the


partner of my life. We had enjoyed each other’s
society thirteen years; and though we have always been
happy during our union, yet I think we have been
increasingly so during the past year. Mrs. Cross had
long lived in the enjoyment of the favour of God, and
could daily look to him as her reconciled Father
through faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. She is now, I
doubt not,
‘ Far from a world of grief and sin,
With God eternally shut in.’
“ As regards myself, I feel thankful for the deliver-
ance which has been wrought out for me, in the preser-
vation of my life, and desire to spend what remains
thereof in the service of God. Had I been taken away,
I believe the Lord would have received me to himself.
I did not feel anxious to live, but to labour for him.
The people consider the wreck of the canoe as a punish-
ment on account of their sins, and acknowledge the
preservation of some of them as a special instance of
the mercy of God. Many were the sincere and fervent
prayers that were offered by some, while they were strug-
gling in the water. We have good hope of several who
have been drowned ; and have reason to think that this
dispensation, painful as it has proved, will be overruled
for the good of the people generally.”
To this account, I need not add anything. It shows
the perils to which Missionaries in these regions are
liable, in the slightly-built canoes of the natives, on
an ocean, by no means pacific, and exposed to storms,
which scarcely any vessel can resist. Mrs. Cross was
an excellent woman. She suffered considerably dur-
ing her residence in Tongataboo, occasioned chiefly
through the carelessness of the natives when she first
ai rived. The boat in which the Mission party left the
vessel, which conveyed the passengers to land, could not


make the shore, in consequence of the tide having
fallen. Two natives undertook to carry Mrs. Cross to
land ; but when they had come but part of the distance,
they set her down in the water; thinking, probably,
that she only wished to be carried in order to avoid
walking, and not to escape getting wet. Mrs. Cross
took a violent cold, her legs became painfully affected,
from the effects of which she never recovered. This
imprudent and ignorant proceeding cost her much pain,
which she patiently endured. When able, she was
diligent in instructing the natives in reading, needle-
work, &c., as well as constructing for them various
articles of European clothing.
The following letter, written by Mrs. Cross a few
weeks before her melancholy death, is the only one
in my possession. The reader will, doubtless, be
pleased to see it inserted. It is addressed to her
parents.
a Tongataboo, Dec. 10th, 1831.
“Dear Parents,
“ Your letter of June 29th, 1829, came to hand
in March last. It afforded me great pleasure to hear
that you were still in the land of the living, and that the
Lord had continued to be mindful of you, giving you
those things that are needful for the body. We know
he will not withhold those which are requisite for the
soul, from any who strive to serve him, in the way
his word directs. He is more ready to give than
we are disposed to ask. We are informed in the sacred
Scripture, that, with reference to some blessings, we
have them not, because we ask not for them, or be-
cause we ask amiss. May the Lord impart to you, my
dear parents, and to us, his Holy Spirit, to teach us,
that we may so ask that we may obtain what he
is willing to impart. I hope that you, and my dear


brothers and sisters, with all belonging to me, will strive
to love and serve God, that we may finally meet in
peace where parting shall be no more.
“ It would afford me much pleasure to see you again
in this world. I sometimes indulge the hope that it
may be so. It is true that when we left you, we did
not expect to return in less than twenty years, but com-
ing to Tongataboo instead of New-Zealand, the period
will be shorter, on account of the difference in the
climate. Few will be found so strong as to be able
to labour twenty years in these islands. If we should
fall ill, we shall probably remove to a colder climate, for
a time, where we can obtain medical assistance.
“We have much cause to be thankful to God for his
goodness to us since we left you. It is true we have
had our trials; but the Lord has been ‘ better to us than
our fears,’ and has not laid upon us more than he has
given us strength to bear. The work of God continues
to prosper in this island. Not a week passes, but some
are turning ‘ from idols, to serve the living and true
God. It would gladden your hearts if you could see
and hear what we witness. The prevailing desire of
many is, that they may please God on earth, and find
their way to heaven. They frequently begin to pray
before daylight in the morning, and often sing them-
selves to sleep at night. 1 often feel ashamed of myself,
when I hear little children pray to God, with such pro-
priety, and without a book. ‘This is the Lord’s doing,
and it is marvellous in our eyes.’ It is a great blessing,
and leads us to praise the Lord that he so prospers the
work of our hands. Three new Missionaries, and their
wives, joined us in March last. One of them is a
printer, so that we have already a great many books
printed, and have a considerable part of the Scriptures
ready for the press. Mr. Cross has translated the four
Gospels, the Acts, and a large portion of the Epistles;


also the book of Genesis, and other detached parts of
Scripture. * The Lord has helped him much. O
that his health may be continued, and his life spared to
labour for God! We soon expect to leave Tongataboo
for Yavau, a group of islands about two hundred miles
distant. The inhabitants speak the same language, and
many of them are frequently here. We have seen the
Chief, who, with about one thousand of his people, has
renounced Heathenism. A native Teacher is with them
until we can remove.”
It is not necessary to make any remarks on the pain-
ful events which have been recorded in this chapter.
Every person will sympathize with the surviver, who
lost his all at a stroke. His resignation to the will of
God was scriptural, in which he must have been in-
spired by divine grace. No word of complaint was
uttered, but, on the contrary, every evidence was forth-
coming that proved his submission to the will of
God, however painful it might be. It is evident that
he was saved from the anxious love of life, as well
as from the fear of death. His affections were fixed on
“ things above, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of
God.” Like the Apostle, he had a “desire to depart
and be with Christ, which is far better ; ” but was ready
to remain in the flesh, for the good of the cause of his
Saviour.
The same spirit was evidently possessed by his be-
loved wife. She expresses a hope, that she might see
* These were not literal translations, but between a literal
rendering and a paraphrase. The same portions of Scripture, and
some others, were rendered into Feejeean in the same way, by
Mr. Cross, who laboured incessantly in this, as well as every
other department of the Mission work. Few of his translations
have been printed; but they have been very useful, and are
monuments of the industry and good sense of their author.
D 5


her friends again in this world. This is perfectly natural,
nay, it is amiable, especially in a daughter, but quite
consistent with perfect willingness to die in the work, if
God should require it. Christianity refines our natural
affections, at the same time that it enables us to live
above them. Distance and time could not destroy or
decrease the affection of this Christian daughter to her
friends at home; but the grace of God enabled her to
resign her body to the mighty deep, with, doubtless, the
same composure as she would have sunk into the arms
of a beloved sister or mother, in the tranquil room. If
Christian Missionaries be not so loud and boisterous in
braving death as the boasting warrior, they can meet the
monster with much more calmness than he, unless he be
sustained by the same “like precious faith.”


CHAPTER VII.
1832-33-34.
“In journeyings often, —in weariness and painfulness, in watch-
ings often.”—2 Cor. xi. 26, 27.
“ Now thanks be unto God, which always causeth us to triumph
in Christ, and maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by us
in every place.”—2 Cor. ii. 14.
Incessant labours, almost uninterrupted mental and
bodily suffering, with an encouraging degree of success,
continued to mark the course of Mr. Cross. Subse-
quent to the painful events recorded in the preceding-
chapter, his health failed; but he employed the strength
he possessed in instructing the people, translating the
Scriptures, and other duties of his station. He did not
for a moment give up his intention of removing to
Vavau, though he had now to go alone, and had lost
many things which were essential to his comfort and
success in commencing a new station,
A small schooner arriving at Tongataboo about the
time that he was able to proceed to his station, he
engaged the Captain to take him. The agreement, as is
usual in such cases, was made with some difficulty.
Forty pounds were to be paid for the voyage, and Mr. C.
was to have but one day’s notice. It was with great
difficulty they reached Vavau, in consequence of the
wretched condition of the schooner, and the ignorance
of the crew. Mr. Cross was obliged to take up his resi-
dence on deck in a boat, it being the only tolerable part
of the craft, except the cabin, which was occupied by


the Captain’s mistress, a Tahitian. This is only one
among many of the difficulties Missionaries in these
seas met with, in removing from one station to another,
before God put it into the hearts of the Christians
of England to send out a Missionary ship.
By the mercy of God, they reached Yavau on the
20th. Mr. Cross was gladly received by the Chief and his
people, who were, emphatically, “all waiting for him.”
Feb. 22d, Mr. Cross preached his first sermon in
Yavau, from Ezek. xxiii. 11. “About a hundred indi-
viduals were present; and, although it was not the
Sabbath, they were very attentive. Joy beamed in
many of their countenances, while I endeavoured to
unfold to them the great love of God to a sinful world.”
Finau deeply sympathized with his afflicted Mission-
ary, and did what he could to assuage his sorrows ; but
it is evident, from his journal, that his sufferings at
this period were severe. Far removed from any of his
brethren, in a state of great bodily weakness, and de-
prived of many of the comforts of life, the enemy of his
soul, taking advantage of his circumstances, assailed
him with the fiercest temptations. The Lord, however,
was with him, and kept him from sinking under his
trials, and from “ giving place to the devil.” His sorrow
was not “ the sorrow of the world, which worketh death.”
It led him to the word of God, and to communion with
Him: he also found true consolation in spiritual pros-
perity, the scriptural fruit of sanctified affliction. He
writes,
“April 9th. —I slept very little last night, and am
poorly to-day, but am thankful that I am able to do
something. Though my circumstances are peculiarly
trying, I have much to be thankful for, and am
conscious that to be out of hell is more than I deserve.
I rejoice in God, and strive to resign myself cheerfully
to the dispensations of his providence, and to manifest


my love to him, by patiently suffering his will. But I
must acknowledge, I feel greatly the want of society.
I do pretty well during the day, when attending to
my various duties; but it is when these duties are
concluded that I feel the loss I have sustained. I
direct my thoughts to God, and strive to meditate on his
word ; but, alas ! how difficult it is to stay my mind on
any subject. Lord, undertake for me !
“ April 28th.—I have this week read Mr. Wesley’s
‘ Account of Christian Perfection,’ and also the ‘ Di-
rections for renewing our Covenant with God.’ I hope
to be eternally benefited thereby. I mourn before
God, because I come short in many of those things,
which 1 feel to be my duty and privilege. Blessed
be his holy name ! he has favoured me with an earnest
desire, and full determination, to ‘ press toward the
mark for the prize of my high calling. ’ He is teaching
me various important lessons, by pain and by weak-
ness. I begin to discover, more fully, that religion
is what I often thought it to be when in prosperity,
when the candle of the Lord shone upon me, and par-
ticulaxdy when in my ‘ first love.’ Then I conjectured
that I could be happy anywhere, in a prison, or in a
poor-house, or in affliction of body, or when distressed
in circumstances. Since it has pleased God to permit
me to be tried in a somewhat extraordinary manner, I
have been prone to give way to the temptations by
which I have been so strongly assailed. But, blessed
be God! I ‘cried unto him, and he heard me;’ he
strengthened and delivered me, so that I am enabled to
rejoice exceedingly. I think I can assert with greater
confidence than I ever did before, ‘Lord, do with me
as seemeth good in thy sight. Fulfil thy word, in which
thou hast caused me to trust, and grant that thy grace
may be sufficient for me, and that as my day, so my
strength may be.’ ”


The Lord more than sustained his servant. He was
“in heaviness,” but not “in darkness;” the trial of his
faith was severe, but “precious,” which “will be found
unto praise and honour and glory, at the appearance of
Jesus Christ.” It says much also for entire holiness, that
we esteem it most in affliction. A more copious baptism
of the Spirit raises us above our trials, and enables us to
“glory in tribulations also.” Mr. Cross had tasted the
perfect love of God before this, and he now found consola-
tion in nothing less. His weakness of body, however, did
not prevent him undertaking a voyage to Niua, or Keppel’s
Island. Finau proposed this visit, and engaged a whaler
from Port-Jackson, then at anchor at Yavau, to take them
thither, and they were to return in canoes.
May Bth, Finau, Mr. Cross, and about one hundred
Vavauans embarked, and sailed for Keppel’s Island.
They arrived on the 10th, and were kindly received by
the Chief of the place. As they went on Missionary
business, they soon communicated their object to the
King, Maatoo. Mr. Cross writes, —
“May 11th—After family-prayer, we waited on the
Chief, to inform him of the design of our visit. He
spoke very kindly, and said, he and his people certainly
should embrace Christianity, and all the islands round
would do the same. *ln fact,’ he said, ‘we have
virtually embraced it already, only I am waiting a little ;
but I shall return with you to Yavau,’ Finau then
made him a large present of various articles, principally
European, and Maatoo in return gave him a canoe.
“ 12th.—Slept but little last night. I felt persuaded
that a few more such would bring me to the place ap-
pointed for all living. The house being entirely open
all round, I was exposed to the evening air, which, with
the thousands of mosquitoes around me, rendered my
situation anything but desirable. Having obtained but
little rest since I departed from Yavau, I am now very


feeble. I have made a sort of hammock, of a strong
rug, which I brought with me: this the natives have
slung to the roof of the house, so that I shall not
be so much exposed to the cold. I have also obtained
some native cloth for a curtain.
“13th, Sabbath.—Preached in the forenoon under a
large tree, from Luke v. 31, 32. I was so debilitated
that I imagined I should not be able to go through
with the service; but the Lord strengthened me, so
that for a time I felt quite well. About one hundred
strangers attended the service, but sat at a distance:
these heard, probably, for the first time, the ‘ Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ.’
“ 16th.—Preached under a large tree.
“ 20th, Sabbath. —Conducted divine service on the
beach. Many of the natives of this island came to hear.
Some (among whom is a Chief of considerable rank) have
renounced their idols, and taken the Lord for their God.
Some came from curiosity, and sat at a distance.
These I addressed from a part of Matt, x., and in the
evening from Rom. xii.
“21st.—The wind being fair, we commenced our pre-
parations for returning to Vavau. We found, however,
that our canoe would not carry one hundred and twenty
persons with the cargo; so we have to wait until
another is repaired. I met the class to which linau
belongs, and for the first time requested him to engage
in prayer. I was much pleased with the manner in
which he performed the duty. I feel thankful to God
for the great change which has been wrought in his mind.
He professes to have repented of his former sins, and to
be daily striving to regulate his conduct by the word of
God ; he believes in our Lord Jesus Christ with all his
heart, and that God has in mercy blotted out his
transgressions.
“ 27th.—Conducted divine service on the beach,


morning and afternoon. Another family has renounced
Heathenism, and is determined to be on the Lord’s side.
“ June 3d.—Though not so well as I have been
during the last three weeks, I conducted divine service,
as on the last Sabbath. A Chief with his people, who
have lately arrived from Haamoa, embraced Chris-
tianity. I increased a cold by preaching out of doors.
sth. Kept awake during the night with violent
cough and difficulty of breathing.
“6th.— Preached on the beach as usual.
“ 10th.—Though ill able, I preached twice.
17th. Last night I was so ill, that I thought it
would have been my last; but it pleased the Lord to
spare me.
‘ 18th. Yesterday I was brought very low, I think
close to the gate of death. I requested Finau to pro-
cure me a little arrow-root, which was obtained and
prepared with some difficulty, the water being boiled in
a cocoa-nut shell. I felt refreshed by it.
25th. Wind fair. Seven canoes and above four
hundred persons prepared to sail for Vavau. I went
on board Finau s canoe. Only three were observed to
follow us : it was supposed the Heathen were afraid to
sail with us. As night came on we lost sight of those
that had put to sea.
26th. About three, p.m., our mast broke within
four feet of the deck, and fell, providentially, without
hurting any.
“27th.—Raised our mast by three, p.m. It is sup-
posed we have been drifting towards Feejee, the last
twenty-four hours.
“ 2 8 th.—Sighted a small island about thirty or forty
miles from Vavau; but the wind would not permit us
to lay to.
“ 29th. Wind very stormy. We reached Kao, one
of the Haabai group, this morning. I attained the


shore with difficulty, but could scarcely stand, I was so
weak. We could not remain at the place at which we
landed, in consequence of there being no anchorage.
“30th. —A perfect calm. But as it was unsafe to
remain at Kao, and there being no food, we determined
to try to make Kotu, another of the Haabai group.
We left Kao about sunrise: the men labouring hard,
we reached Kotu about ten, p.m.
“ July Ist.—Being Lord’s day, we rested at Kotu.
Though extremely weak, I preached twice.
“ 2d.—We made Lefuka about two o’clock, after
having been eight days in the canoe. I was kindly
received by the brethren, Watkin and Turner, who, with
their wives, did all they could to make me comfortable.
Thus ended a voyage of toil and suffering. The imme-
diate result of which was, the introduction of Christianity
into an island, where it has since made pleasing and
extensive progress.”
Mr. Cross rested a few days at Lefuka, during which
time, it was determined that Mr. P. Turner should
accompany him to Vavau. In a few days they sailed,
and were again exposed to considerable danger ; but
ultimately they reached Vavau in safety.
The work of a Missionary is not done when the
people to whom he is sent have embraced Christianity
merely as a system : in a certain sense, it is but just
commenced. He now feels the anxiety of a father, and
gives himself to the work of instructing, nurturing,
and admonishing those who are thus the object of his
care. Each step they take in knowledge and piety gives
him renewed pleasure, while he mourns over the slothful
and untractable : in a word, he feels the joys and sorrows
of a spiritual parent. The following extracts from
Mr. Cross’s journal will show that he participated in both.
“Aug. sth.—Finau and eight of his children were
baptized.


“ 6th.—About forty persons desired to be admitted as
candidates for baptism.
“ I9tb.—Four couples were married.
“ 22d.—Three couples were married.
“ 26th.—Twenty-one adults were baptized.
“Sept. 17th. —A new chapel was opened in Vavau,
Nearly three thousand people were present at the
morning service ; three-fourths of whom were unable to
gain admittance. The sacrament of the Lord’s supper
was afterwards administered to about twenty communi-
cants, all accredited members of the church: a few
out of the many professing Christians who were striving
to be Christians indeed.”
At the close of the year 1832, Mr. Cross removed to
Tongataboo, to attend the District-Meeting, and re-
quested leave of the brethren to visit Sydney. The
District-Meeting considered themselves warranted to
allow him to visit the colony, and he accordingly left
Tongataboo, February 12th, 1833, and arrived at New-
Zealand on the 26th. He left that interesting spot
May 3d, and landed in Sydney on the 26th. July 30th
he was united in marriage to Miss Smith, of Para-
matta, who now, with five children, feel the privations
peculiar to the fatherless and widow.
Respecting this union Mr. Cross observes, —“ We
are united in desire and determination, by the grace of
God, to devote ourselves to him. May it please the
Lord to sanctify our union, and spare us to each other
and to his church, I feel a strong desire to be all that
he would have me to be. I wish to live and labour for
him, and shall rejoice when an opportunity offers to
proceed to our field of labour.”
In November, Mr. and Mrs. Cross took leave of their
friends in Paramatta, and on the 7th of December, with
Mr. and Mrs. Cargill, sailed from Sydney to the Friendly
Islands, by way of New-Zealand. They landed in New-


Zealand, January 2d, 1834; left that colony on the 13th,
and arrived safe in Nukualofa on the 24th.
Mr. Cross was glad to meet again with his old friends,
and while he remained among them, did all he could to
promote their improvement. The period, however, was
not long, as he removed to Haabai in October. At this
time there was a very gracious revival of religion in the
Yavau and Haabai groups. Mr. Cross greatly exulted
in this work of God, and did what he could to promote
and consolidate it. It was truly a pentecostal visitation:
sudden but saving ; spreading from one island and
group to another, almost with the rapidity of lightning;
and though there was doubtless much of human ex-
citement, and many counterfeit conversions, yet, this
was what the circumstances of the case and the state
of the people warranted all to expect. Hundreds,
however, were made the subjects of saving grace, as
their subsequent conduct manifested, and, on the whole,
this remarkable visitation deserves to be remembered as
a special exhibition of the grace and mercy of God, in
answer to special prayer, and extraordinary efforts to
save souls from death. There was nothing peculiar in
the situation of the people to favour such a work of
grace. A revival was needed. This was felt; and so
acknowledged as to be lamented before God. The
ordinary means, preaching the word, and prayer, were
employed with increased faith in the power and willing-
ness of God to make them effectual. At length the
promised blessing came. The Spirit was poured out
from on high, and the glorious results which followed,
show that the doctrine of revivals is fully applicable to
the case of modern Missions, and is what, in fact,
in many places is greatly needed. Why may we not
expect such seasons of refreshing from the presence of
the Lord ? Ought not the church to direct prayer to
God for this special purpose ? Much intercession has


been made by the universal church for the conversion
of the Heathen. These have been answered to a con-
siderable extent. Many thousands have bowed the
knee to Christ, and call themselves by his name; and
now the prayers of the church must follow the work
which has been begun, and never cease until there is as
extensive an ingathering into the true spiritual church,
as there has been within the outward pale. A more
abundant effusion of the Holy Spirit on the Missionaries
and the infant churches over whom they preside, is
necessary to effect this. Ordinary means may be suffi-
cient, but ordinary influence is not. The means to be
used are in fact plainly laid down in the great commis-
sion, “ Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every creature,” &c. The word is to be preached, the
ordinances are to be administered, and then that measure
of divine influence is to be secured by fervent, persever-
ing, believing prayer, which shall make the means
effectual.


CHAPTER VIII.
1835.
“But as it is written, To whom he was not spoken of, they
shall see: and they that have not heard shall understand.”
Rom. xv. 21.
In January, 1835, Messrs. Cross and Cargill were
appointed to the Feejee Islands; the former of whom
removed to Yavau to await an opportunity of proceeding
to that group. Mr. Cargill was already at Yavau.
During their residence in that island they were not
unemployed; they gave all diligence in confirming the
new converts, instructing the native Teachers, and in
learning the Feejeean language.
By the assistance of some natives residing at Yavau,
an elementary book was prepared in the vernacular
tongue; and Mr. Cross also executed a rough translation
of a part of the book of Genesis into Feejee.
On leaving the Friendly Islands, Mr. Cross must have
felt exceedingly thankful. What a change had taken
place since his arrival in 1827 ! The wilderness had
become a fruitful field ; and since the late effusion of the
Spirit, the fruitful field might indeed be counted for a
forest. He had also taken an active part in the work,
and had been favoured with an encouraging degree of
success. The history of the Tonga Mission has, since
Mr. Cross’s departure, by no means been one of unin-
terrupted prosperity; but yet, on the whole, it is en-
couraging. The Missionaries and Christians of the
Friendly Islands have been exceedingly zealous and


even successful in carrying the Gospel to the “ regions
beyond.” Feejee, Hamoa, Niuatobutabu, or Keppel’s
Island, Niuafouo, Rotumah, Inui, or Savage Island, and
Uvea, or Wallis’s Island, have been the scene of their
zealous labours. Perhaps Christianity in the Friendly
Islands is becoming more and more similar to what it is
in England. The mass are Christians only in name :
the few are the Christians indeed. Formerly the stream
of evangelical experience and practice was wide and
shallow, now it is narrow but deep. Anew leaven has
been thrown into the meal, and if the Missionaries,
together with the people, are but faithful, no doubt it
will leaven the whole lump. A part of Tongataboo is
still heathen ; but there a great change for the better is
evident among them, and in some places a gracious
work is going on. We shall now conduct the reader to
a new scene, and to one which was originally a branch
of the Friendly Isles Mission.
Before, however, we proceed with this memoir, we
shall give some details respecting the Feejee group, as
many remarks will afterwards necessarily occur, which
cannot be understood without a knowledge of the
geography and political circumstances of these islands.
The Feejee Islands were discovered by Tasman, in the
year 1643. He named those he saw “ Prince William’s
Islands and “ Heeniskirk’s Shoals.” Captain Bligh
passed through a part of the group in the “ Bounty’s
Launch, in 1/80, and again in the 41 Providence,” in
1792. The group lies between 16° and 21° south
latitude, and between 177° east longitude and 178° west
longitude, occupying an area of about 40,000 square
miles. The above has been furnished by Captain Buck,
of the “ Triton.” A survey has lately been made by an
American squadron, but I am not w,ell acquainted with
the result.
The group may be conveniently divided into three


parts; namely, the large, the windward, and the
leeward islands. The large islands are two in number.
One is called Navetelavu, or large Feejee; the other
Vanualavu, or large land; and often Thakandrove,
from the name of a town on the eastern coast. These
two stretch, north-east and south-west, nearly through
the whole breadth of the group. They are each about
three hundred miles in circumference, and about thirty
miles distant from each other. The south-western
island, Navetelavu is more populous, containing about
one hundred thousand inhabitants. The windward
islands lay eastward of the larger group, and to the
leeward of the west. There are, probably, one hundred
inhabited islands, besides the two large ones, and many
which are uninhabited. They are of various dimensions,
from two to sixty miles in circumference. The windward
islands are not more in number than the leeward, but,
when taken as a whole, are much larger, and possess a
greater population. Kandavu is the principal island
toward the south. It is a fine well-populated island,
and admirably situated for shipping. Near it are the
following smaller islands : —Dravuni, Yankuvir, Bulia,
and Ono. These form an insignificant group to them-
selves, and are the most southerly of all the leeward
islands. Bengga, Yatulele, and Yanutha are near
Navetelavu. Malolo is the principal of the most westerly
group, which form a small cluster, called Natuyasawa,
or Sau Islands. Mathuata, Jekombia, and others, are
near Vanualavu. The names of the principal windward
islands are as follows :—those connected with Lakemba
are strictly the windward islands, as Yatoa, or Turtle
Island, Ono, Ongaa, Yulange, Namuka, Oneata, Mothe,
Kambara, Yanuavatu, Nayau, and some smaller ones,
which constitute the kingdom of Tuinayau, King of
Lakemba. Thethea, Tuvutha, Munea, and Yanua-
balavu, form a kind of separate kingdom. The Chiefs


of Thakandrove and Lakemba have, however, con-
siderable influence over them. Taveune, often called
Somosomo, from the name of the principal town, is the
residence of the Chiefs of Thakandrove. Lauthala,
Nggamea, Naitaube, and Rambe, are near Yanualavu,
and, with a number of towns on that island, form the
kingdom of Thakandrove. Koro, Nairai, Ngau, Ba-
teke, Wakaya, Makougai, Naingane, Ovalau, Yanutha,
Motureke, and Vewa, are subject to Bau. Bau, or
Mbau, is about two miles in circumference, and most in-
conveniently situated for everything, except for defence.
The town is continually in ruins from fire, some part of
it being constantly ignited by careless or malicious
people. It is one of the largest native towns I have
seen, and at present it is the metropolis of Feejee.
From what has already been stated, it will be seen that
Feejee is politically divided into a number of states or
kingdoms. I use the word kingdom for want of a
better. According to the ideas of the natives, the
group is divided into a number of empires : almost every
town boasts of a King and government, and is so far a
kingdom. A number of these, in some instances ten, in
others one hundred and fifty, are united under one
Chief, who is not called the King of the whole, but the
“ Turanga Levu ,” or, great Chief. He is consecrated
King of one place only, but he rules over the whole.
In many instances there are two “ great Chiefs,” as
in Bau. One is called “ RoJcotuembau,” that is, King of
Bau; and the other, “ JVa Vunevalu,” or the “root of
war.” They are both consecrated to their office. The
principal part of the ceremony of consecration consists in
tying a native head-dress round the arm of the Chief.
It is somewhat like a piece of muslin. He lives more
like a poor man than a King, several days after. At
Bau, the Vunevalu is the principal personage; but
in other places the Vunevalu has but little power.


Beside these principal Chiefs, each tribe is subject to a
Chief of its own; indeed, according to their own account,
they are almost all Chiefs, in the more populous towns.
The principal officers of state are called “ Namaiane-
vanua,” or “ eyes of the land.” One or more of them
is generally contiguous to the person of the King ; and
is, in fact, the connecting link between him and the
people. They receive all messengers, report their
business to him, and communicate his orders to the
people, &c. In some places they are numerous, and
possess great influence. Many of them are special
messengers to particular towns, the name of which, with
the word “ mata” prefixed, constitutes their title, as,
“ Mata ki Bau.” The towns connected with Bau are
of two kinds, namely, the Nggali, and the Bati: the
former is composed of the vassals of the great Chiefs ;
their lives and property being at their disposal. The
latter render the King whatsoever service he may require;
but it is considered a voluntary one, and therefore
considerable respect is paid to them. All these towns,
both Nggali and Bati, possess Chiefs, whom they call
Kings, and who exercise as much influence in their
respective, though smaller towns, as the great Chief in
his more extended sphere of action.
I have given a general view of the kingdom of Bau :
the rest are, as far as I know, similar. The natives
consider that there are thirty-two places in the group
which are entitled to the name of “ Matanetu” which
we translate kingdom, or, “ vanua turaya” chief lands.
The principal are the following Bau, Rawa, Nan-
dronga, Ba, Rakerake, and Varata. These are all, with
the exception of Bau, on Navetelevu; Bua, Mathuata,
and Thakandrove, on and nearYanualavu ; and Lakemba
to the windward. On the supposition that there are
three hundred thousand inhabitants in the group, which
I imagine is probable, fifteen thousand are subject to
E


the King of Ban; and the other great Chiefs possess
perhaps from five to ten thousand each. Several of these,
however, are tributary to Bau. There are many inde-
pendent towns, and especially in the interior, of which
nothing more than their names are known by the people
on the coast. The islands are considered among the
finest in the South Seas. The soil is rich, and available
for all kinds of tropical produce. The climate is not
very salubrious, nor particularly unfriendly to health.
Both natives and foreigners suffer considerably from
complaints affecting the bowels. There are hot springs
at Nasavusavu; and a fine lake on the top of one of the
highest mountains in the group, in the island of Tavenue.
The large islands are intersected with rivers, navigable
by canoes and boats : wood and water are everywhere
plentiful. Respecting the inhabitants, I shall at present
say but little. Something of their real character may
be learned from the facts already recorded in these
pages. I shall now return to the memoir.
Oct. Bth, 1835, Mr. Cross and colleague went on
board the “ Blackbird” to proceed to Feejee. The
people of Yavau testified their affection for the Mission-
aries by tears ; and in this the Missionaries reciprocated.
They arrived off Lakemba on the 12th; and Messrs.
Cross and Cargill went ashore in the boat, even before
the vessel came to anchor. They were kindly received
by Tuinayau, the King of Lakemba.
The usual manner of receiving visiters in the Feejee
Islands is exceedingly formal, and apparently kind and
courteous; though in some instances the darkest designs
are concealed under this seeming kindness. Add to
this, most of the intercourse they have had with nomi-
nally respectable people of civilized nations, has been
with Captains of vessels, many of whom have not tran-
sacted any kind of business with them, except that of
making them presents, and purchasing provisions. They


naturally anticipate receiving much from a Missionary
in a pecuniary consideration; and the sight of a number
of chests, cases, casks, &c., containing clothes, flour, and
other necessaries, raises their expectations yet higher,
as they are led to imagine that they are full of whales’-
teeth, hatchets, &c., to be disposed of in a Chief-like
manner, namely, in presents to the Chiefs, and in barter
among the people. While these ideas are entertained
they will promise anything, but intend to perform as they
may afterwards judge proper. Too much dependence,
therefore, ought not to be placed on an apparent cordial
reception; nor should we be surprised if we hear of
Missionaries in these apparently friendly districts, be-
coming comparatively unsuccessful in their work.
Oct. 11th, Mr. Cross writes, “ Mr. Cargill and I
went ashore in a boat. We waited on the King, who
received us with kindness, promised to attend to our
instructions, build us houses, &c.
“ 14th.—The Chief put up two temporary houses.”
The reader may imagine what kind of houses these were,
when two were built in one day. They resemble the
sheds that are put up in the fields in many parts of
England, for the purpose of protecting the cattle from
the cold during the winter.
“ 17th. —All our goods are in the store, and we
and our families have taken possession of our new
habitations.
“ 18th.—Having previously consulted the King, and
requested his attendance, we held divine service in the
Tonguese language. About two hundred persons were
present, to whom I explained the first chapter of Genesis.
The King afterwards told me that he understood the
whole. We had about one hundred and fifty attendants
in the afternoon.”
Though Lakemba is by no means the most important
place in Feejee, it is, nevertheless, singularly fitted for
e 2


the introduction of the Christian ministry by Missionaries
from Tonga. There are many Tonguese in Lakemba;
and the heralds of the cross understanding their lan-
guage, were saved the painful process of learning it, and
collecting a congregation, before they commenced the
work of preaching the Gospel. The Tonguese needed
instruction as much as the Feejeans ; and among them
the Gospel had its earliest success in Feejee.
Very shortly, a Tonga Chief and his people made
public profession of Christianity. Tuinayau was con-
siderably affected, and promised to embrace the religion
of Christ if the Tonga Chief would remain at Lakemba,
instead of accompanying his people to Somosomo, as he
intended. His request was complied with; but the
King yet waited for a “ more convenient season.” He
was then, as he is now, much afraid of his superior lord,
the King of Bau, and did not wish to offend him by
becoming a Christian.
The following extract from Mr. Cross’s journal gives
another and more correct view of the character of this
Chief:—
“Dec. 4th.—The pigs on this island have been
iamboo (that is, unlawful to be eaten) for the last two
years, in consequence of the death of the late King.
The consequence is, that we have had but little to eat
since our arrival, except a few vegetables. Although
the King has not allowed any pigs to be sold to us, he
told the Captain of a vessel which arrived here yester-
day, (the Sabbath,) that if he would wait till morning, he
should have some. We were very thankful that the
King had so much regard for the Lord’s day, as not to
wish to violate it by selling pigs.” The character of
the Feejeeans is full of inconsistency and contradiction
of this kind. Here was an evident carelessness about
the personal comfort of the Missionaries, and at the
same time an evident regard for their instructions.


How much easier for a Missionary to bear than the
reverse!
Dec. 10th, Mr. Cross makes the following entry
in his journal, which I think worthy of transcribing,
as tending to show some of those domestic miseries of
savage life, which nothing but Christianity can alleviate,
by making the poor honest, and the rich humane ; by
preventing crime, and ameliorating punishment:
“ Some time since a person stole a pig from the King.
He was very angry, and ordered his wife to be taken
from him, and given to the second Chief, (the King’s
brother,) as a slave. The woman was so uneasy in her
new situation, that she told her master she would rather
die than remain with him. He replied, * Wait a little,
and you shall die.’ The eventful period arrived this
day, on which he intended that she should be killed.
Her master had several persons employed preparing a
taro plantation ; and as he was in want of something
for them to eat, he sent to have the poor woman put to
death and cooked for them. The men who were sent
to execute his orders refused, on the ground ot love to
the woman : so that she is still alive. I believe the real
cause of the refusal was, they have some degree of the fear
of God before their eyes. Much evil has, I have no doubt,
been prevented since our arrival, on similar grounds.
This has been the case in other places where Mission-
aries reside, although the people have not as yet openly
renounced Heathenism. At Somosomo, for instance,
where the Chiefs were accustomed to tell us that
‘ strangling women, and eating human flesh, were acts
worthy of Chiefs, and men of courage,’ and even threat-
ened us with death for presuming to reprove them, or
even to show our dislike to their practices, are now so
altered, that Mr. Lyth has recently been successful in
saving a number of women from being strangled by ap-
plying to the King for that purpose, though their husbands


had been killed in war. Such is the indirect influence
of Christianity.”
During the rest of the year the Missionaries had their
trials, as well as mercies. Their houses were blown down
by a hurricane. Mr. Cross’s little boy had a narrow
escape from the falling of some of the timbers of the
dwelling. From the old habitations, they built a chapel,
which was a great achievement; and thus more eligible
houses were built for themselves. Their families also
suffered considerable inconvenience from scarcity of
provisions ; but the Lord blessed them with health, so
that they could enjoy what they obtained. The opposi-
tion they met with from the heathen Priests was more
ridiculous than dangerous; such as the threatening to
drive the Mission families into the sea, by storms of
wind and rain, and if the scheme failed, to overturn the
island and involve Christians and Heathens, with them-
selves (of course), in one common ruin ! On the whole,
they had great cause to be thankful; for though they
had only been in the island a few months, a chapel had
been erected, in which a good congregation regularly
and comfortably worshipped God; a school had been
commenced; and a small society formed from among the
Tonguese. Thus did the seed sown spring up, they
knew not how, and the work had the appearance of
being established, almost from its commencement.
Hitherto the providence of God had been wonderfully
manifested in the preservation of the lives and property
of the Missionaries in these islands. Five or six per-
sons had been murdered by the natives, during the last
few years; two of whom were masters of vessels; and two
others, persons of some respectability. Covetousness
generally leads the people to such acts of violence : they
see property that would answer their purpose, and they are
too great cowards to attempt taking it by force so long
as there is any danger in doing so. Their plan, therefore,


is to pretend friendship towards their victim, then
watch the moment he is off his guard, and put him to
death. The two Captains referred to, one of whom was
a Frenchman, and the other an Englishman, both were
murdered in this manner. The former had been ex-
ceedingly kind to the natives, as they all acknowledged:
and the latter was on such terms of intimacy with the
Chief who murdered him, that he had actually allowed
him and a number of his men to come on board his
vessel the day he was to sail. The friend remained
until the anchor was up, and was standing on the
deck behind the Captain while he was giving orders
to his crew, when just as he had uttered the words,
“ Belay there! ” he laid him dead on the deck with a
single blow of his club, and immediately took possession
of the vessel. The seamen, being providentially pro-
vided with a case of muskets in the main-tops, succeeded
in clearing the deck of the natives, shot the Chief as he
sat in the cabin, and retook the vessel. The Mate was
severely wounded, and others of the sailors injured.
The name of the unfortunate Captain was Hutchins.
He was much beloved by the natives, and had been in
Feejee before : he came in the “ Sir David Ogleby, the
vessel in which he lost his life. The only reason the
natives had for murdering him, was to secure his pro-
perty. The Missionaries have possessed valuables to a
considerable amount in the estimation of a native, whose
notions of much and little are very different from ours ;
and yet the Lord has hitherto preserved them from the
violence of men, who consider a few whales’-teeth of
infinitely more value than human life.
One circumstance, not generally known, may have
been employed by Providence to check their covetous
desire to obtain the property of the Missionaries by any
violent means ; at least such is the opinion of the natives
themselves. The first white people with whom the


Feejeeans had any intercourse, were four or five ship-
wrecked mariners, one or two of whom were dressed
something like those Ministers of religion ; probably the
Master and a passenger. The vessel was wrecked on a
reef near Oneata, called Bukatatanoa, and the party
referred to were either killed at Oneata or Lakemba,
and, I fear, eaten also. Shortly after their death, a
dreadful distemper scourged the natives. It appears,
from the description given of it, to have been a very
acute dysentery, or a form of cholera. Its progress
through the group was fearfully rapid and destructive;
in many places it was with the greatest difficulty that
persons could be found to bury the dead. Those who
were seized, died in the most excruciating agonies.
The natives naturally considered this visitation as a
punishment for killing the white men; and I cannot
learn that any were murdered for many years after,
though two or three ships were wrecked in the group,
and many white men were entirely in their power. In-
deed, for a length of time they appear to have been
very lenient to foreigners, until some runaway convicts,
who had settled in Feejee, behaved so insolently to the
Bau Chiefs, that they clubbed several of them in their
rage. Finding no evil follow, they have since been
more bold, and many have been massacred during the
last ten or fifteen years. Yet, as they believe the first
persons who were murdered were Missionaries, the cir-
cumstance may still have some effect upon them, so far
at least as these heralds of the cross are concerned. Pro-
vidence often acts in a manner unknown to us, and pre-
serves by means as extraordinary as they appear adapted
to answer the end proposed. Many of the natives are
amazed that so few white people have been killed in these
islands, considering how defenceless they are, and how
little life is valued among them. Those of the white people
who make no pretensions to religion, nevertheless ac


knowledge that a special providence has almost always
avenged on the natives the injuries which they have
suffered from them. The people themselves begin to see
that there is a retributive providence, and that murder,
strangling, infanticide, &c., are dangerous crimes. For-
merly natural death was an accident in Feejee. It
was the rule recognised among them to strangle the sick,
and is even now to a great extent; but better views
are gaining ground, and will, we hope, ultimately
prevail.
E 5


CHAPTER IX.
1836—7.
“ They have no knowledge, that—pray unto a God that cannot
save.”—Isai. xlv. 20.
“Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for
I am God, and there is none else.” —Isai. xlv. 22.
Nothing remarkable occurs in the journal of Mr. Cross
this year, (1836,) until February 12th, when he set sail
for Oneata, an island about thirty miles from Lakemba,
for the purpose of opening a place of worship. He says,—
“Feb. 12th.—Wind and weather being favourable,
we sailed at sunrise for Oneata; where we arrived
about one, p.m. I waited on the Chief, conversed with
some of the people, and in the evening conducted divine
service in Tonguese. The chapel will contain about
ninety or one hundred people. It was quite full; and I
suppose there were about one hundred outside the
building, who could not obtain entrance. The greater
part were drawn together by sheer curiosity. At the
close of the meeting, 1 took the names of those who
desired to learn to read. The number of adults and
children is thirty-eight. These are to be instructed
five days in a week, the men in the morning, the women
in the afternoon. The chapel had been built under the
direction of two Tahitian Teachers, who were left on the
island in 1830. They and Takai, the Chief, under
whose protection they reside, requested to be taken
under our pastoral care. It is remarkable that though
these Teachers have been in Feejee nearly six years,
neither of them has attempted either to exhort or pray


in the Feejeean or Tonguese languages, nor to teach
any of the people to read. This being the case, we
considered it necessary to place another Teacher with
them, and fixed upon one who understands both.”
The following extracts will show that the work con-
tinued to prosper at Lakemba, especially among the
Tonguese :
“ March 20th.—This morning, after sermon, Mr. Car-
gill and myself baptized thirty-one adults; nineteen
males, and twelve females. Among the females, one
was a Feejeean, and one of the males a Hamoan; the
rest were Tonguese. We feel thankful to the Lord that
he has thus far blessed our labours. We have several
under instruction as candidates for baptism ; and many
others have actually embraced Christianity. In the
evening twenty-three children received the initiatory
ordinance.
“31st.—I walked five miles to marry a man, who
has walked ten miles every Sabbath-day since we have
been in Feejee, to attend the preaching of the word.
He has now become a candidate for baptism.
“Dec. 11th.—This day seventy-nine adults and
seventeen children were received into the Christian
church by baptism. Glory be to God, for having given
us these tokens of his approbation of our work ! It
was an interesting season. I felt much assisted while
discoursing on the duties and privileges of those who
take the Lord for their God.
“ 25th. —We administered the sacrament of the
Lord’s supper to about two hundred and eighty persons,
eighty of whom have lately come from Tonga.”
About this time the Missionaries at Lakemba, became
acquainted with the introduction of Christianity into
Ono, an island about one hundred and forty miles from
Lakemba. The following particulars were kindly
furnished to the writer by the Rev. James Calvert:—


Takai, a Chief of Oneata, had visited Tonga and
Tahiti, before Missionaries arrived in Lakenaba, and
had embraced the truth. He had an interview with
a Chief of Ono, named Wai, whom he persuaded to
abandon his false gods, and worship the God who had
recently been made known in Tonga. Wai returned to
Ono, and commenced what he termed being a Christian,
by keeping a part of the Sabbath-day holy, and by
attending to his worldly affairs the remaining part. A
few others joined him, and attended to some religious
observance in a similar way. They had learned that
prayer was acceptable to the true God ; but it appears
they did not know that it was lawful to offer it in
behalf of themselves ; they therefore engaged one of the
heathen Priests to pray for them, thinking, I suppose,
that the sacredness of his character would ensure
success. The Priest, willing to oblige his countrymen,
or afraid to refuse, engaged to be their Chaplain, and
offered a prayer for them in some such language as the
following :—“ Lord, bless these thy people ; keep them
from all evil. They worship thee. I turn my back on
thee for the present, and worship another god : but do
thou bless these thy people.” Though the Priest
prayed for them in the best manner he was able, yet the
people were not satisfied, and determined to send one of
their number to the Friendly Islands to request help
from the Missionaries there. An English vessel, bound
for the Friendly Isles, lying off Ono at the time, a
passage for the messenger was speedily obtained in her.
When the vessel reached Tonga, the Rev. Messrs. Cross
and Cargill had proceeded to Lakemba, and the interest-
ing inquirer after instructors was directed to them.”
During the absence of their messenger, the Ono people
had continued to worship God according to the light
they possessed, until some Tonguese, who had drifted to
Ono when on their way to Tonga, “taught them the


way of God more perfectly.” Respecting this canoe
Mr. Cross writes :
“Nov. 21st. —Twenty-two members of our society,
and twelve others who are on trial for church member-
ship, left this place in May last to proceed to Tonga.
They have not succeeded in reaching that island, and
the canoe and most of the people are now at Fetoa.
Josiah, one of the members of our society, belonging to
this canoe, visited Ono, and succeeded in persuading
at least forty Feejeeans to embrace Christianity. We
are informed that they have built a chapel large enough
to contain one hundred persons. They keep the Sab-
bath, and meet regularly to sing and pray.”
So correct was the theory of “ Scriptural Christianity,”
sketched by Mr. Wesley in his sermon on the subject
before the University, in 1744: “It begins to exist in
individuals, spreads from one to another, and fills the
earth.” Only the agents employed in the work must
be “all filled with the Holy Ghost.” It was this im-
portant circumstance that distinguished Mr. Wesley
from many of the useless and injurious Clergymen of
his day, and allied him to the Apostles by a true suc-
cession, namely, similarity of character, labours, and
success. “He was a good man ; full of the Holy Ghost
and of faith, and much people was added to the Lord.”
How important that the world should be filled with
such men ! Then it would soon abound with “ the
knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover
the sea.” When shall it once be ?
December Ist, Mr. Cross writes: —“ H. B. M. brig,
‘ Victor,’ Capt. Crozier, arrived at Lakemba. The
principal object of this visit is to inquire into the mur-
der of a boat’s crew belonging to the ‘ Active,’ lately
wrecked in this group. The Captain ascertained that
the murderers were at Lakemba, and requested us to
inform the King that he had come in the name of the


King of England to demand them; and he must give
them up. The Chief replied that they were not his
people, but belonged to another land, and therefore he
could not give them up, or interfere ; in a word, he was
afraid. The Captain then took other steps to effect the
capture of the murderers, which also proved unsuccessful.
Notwithstanding, we believe an important end will be
answered by the visit of the brig, and especially at this
time. The people are very fearful, and I believe no
other European will be killed by any who may hear of
what has now taken place. They are surprised that a
report respecting the murdered men had so soon reached
Sydney. Capt. Crozier, having called at Yavau, kindly
brought us letters, and a providential supply of various
articles of which we stood in need.”
The officers of men-of-war who have visited these
islands, have generally been so kind, as to prove to the
natives that they are the friends of the Missionaries, and
well-wishers to the cause which they are sent to promote.
It is at all times a cause of joy to us when we are
favoured with their company; and a more frequent repe-
tition of such visits would greatly tend to promote the
interests of the natives, as well as completely keep them
in fear of doing mischief. The boldest of them tremble
at the sight of a Queen’s ship, especially when conscience
accuses them of having merited punishment. The
opinion of Mr. Cross that no one who heard the report
of the “ Victor’s” visit would be guilty of murdering
Europeans, might be a true one; but very few would
hear of it.
In 1840 two officers belonging to the United States
squadron, then surveying these islands, were most bar-
barously murdered at Malole, a small island to the
leeward. They had gone ashore in a boat to purchase
fruit, &c., when the natives attacked and destroyed them
without any provocation whatever having been offered.


They did not escape punishment. Refusing to give up
the culprits, the town was destroyed; many of the
inhabitants perished in the contest, and the rest, having
humbled themselves, were spared. The conduct of
the American officers in Feejee was praiseworthy.
They manifested great kindness to the Missionaries, and
an intense desire to promote the interests of the natives.
1837. —Early in this year the Missionaries had addi-
tional evidence of the wretched deceitfulness of Tuinayau.
He pretended to favour the introduction of Christianity
among the people, and proposed an extraordinary method
of bringing them quickly to a decision. This was, to
make them prepare large quantities of food for the gods
of Lakemba, so that by this means they might become
weary of their service. At the same time he prevented
the people of two or three villages from embracing the
truth, though they were heartily weary of the servile
slavery of their former idols. Even the gods themselves
pretend to be favourably disposed towards the God of
the Missionaries. A quantity of food being presented
to one of their deities, he made a speech, through the
medium of the Priest, to the following effect. He stated
that he was well satisfied with their attention to him.
“ All things,” said he, “ are in a good state in Feejee at
present, in consequence of the gods of the white people
having taken up their residence among us. These gods
are very powerful, and have driven a number of the
deities of Feejee to a small island, where they are kept
in bondage. Wars have now ceased, and must not again
commence, or the gods of the white people will be angry
with, and punish us.” This speech was perfectly in
keeping with the conduct of the King, and no doubt
was intended to please both the Missionaries and the
Priests. Some time previous to this, the former had
determined to separate from each other, for the laudable
purpose of being more extensively useful. It was judged


most fitting that Mr. Cross should proceed to Bau by
the first opportunity. Before Mr. Cross removed, it was
thought necessary to make some effort in order to settle
the orthography of the language ; and they accomplished
this, much to their credit. To some, perhaps, an alpha-
bet may seem a trifling thing; it is, nevertheless, of
great importance to have an effective one : such the
Feejeean certainly is. It has a letter for every elementary
sound in the language, and none useless. But the
principal improvement now made in the alphabet was the
adoption of a single letter to express such combined con-
sonantal sounds as ngg, mb, and nd. Formerly Lakemba
was written in native as in English, as also Mbengga,
Nggara, Kandavu, &c. Now we write Lakeba, Bega,
Gara, and Kadavu. The his made to serve for mb, g
for ngg, and d for nd ; p and t being used for b, and d
in proper names, as Paranapasa, and Tevita. The use
of g for ng, and c for the initial sound of th, was adopted
at the commencement. The advantage of such an
alphabet to a native is great, as, in general, in these
languages, every consonant is followed by a vowel, which
makes the language easy to be read ; and, no wonder: the
eye and the ear are not at variance as in reading English ;
but in general you know how a word should be pro-
nounced the moment you see it, though you have never
heard it uttered. This is in part due to the excellent
alphabet, which owed its chief value to the ingenuity
of Mr. Cross. It ought to be said in Mr. Cargill’s
favour, that, though he was much superior to Mr. Cross
as a man of letters, he adopted his improved alphabet,
being convinced of its usefulness. Mr. Cross now began
to devote a portion of his time to the study of the Bewa
dialect, which he prepared in several elementary books.
In this work he was assisted by a native of Rewa then
residing at Lakemba. He observes, that “ out of five
hundred words in the dialect of Lakemba, more than


half of them were different, in Rewa.” The numerous
variations in the Feejee tongue, are, indeed, a serious
affair, inasmuch as they greatly increase the labour of
the Missionary, and materially retard the work of
instruction. The difference in the dialects of the Feejee
is somewhat analogous to what we find in the various
counties in England. In some districts it is comparatively
slight; in others it is greater; and in almost all, it is such
as to make it necessary to preach and print elementary
books in all. Sometimes villages contiguous to each
other have many words altogether distinct: even such
simple words as sengai, “no,” at Yewa, are, at places
not more than four miles distant, warai. It is impos-
sible to say how many dialects there are in the group;
but it is certain there is a great number.
A variety of similar variations is a subject of but small
concern in England, where literature and intercourse have
established a common dialect, which all men of business
or reading perfectly understand; but in Feejee, where
intercourse is limited, and letters unknown, it is an almost
insuperable obstacle to the diffusion of knowledge. It
is true we can make ourselves understood on ordinary
subjects in almost every part of the group, if we employ
the Bau dialect, and more especially if we converse with
the Chiefs ; but if we attempt to preach the Gospel to
the poor of one part of Feejee in the dialect of another
part, we shall be “ barbarians to them, and they bar-
barians to us.” It must also be remembered that the
truths of Christianity are new to the people, and, in giving
utterance to them, we have to use words in a sense in
which they have never been employed before ; so that, if
we preach in their own peculiar dialect, there is still
sufficient obscurity, arising from new ideas, and an un-
common use of words. What, then, must be the difficulty
when both the words and ideas are new ? as is the case
if we preach to them in another dialect. The same


remarks will apply to school and various elementary
works of instruction, except the alphabet and spelling-
book. In the Friendly Islands they experience none of
these difficulties, nor in those of the South Seas, gene-
rally, as far as my knowledge extends.
During a considerable part of this year, the Mission
families were in trying circumstances, arising from the
scarcity of provisions. This was owing to two things;
namely, the want of articles of barter, and the deficient
quantity of food on the island. Mr. Cross was also put
to great inconvenience for want of suitable premises :he
was, however, enabled to repair his house by the kind-
ness of Mr. Tucker, who sent him trade from the
Friendly Islands.
In July, Mr. Cross speaks of the pleasure and profit
he found in reading the speeches delivered at the May
Meeting in Exeter-hall, upwards of a year previous.
While gratefully acknowledging the prosperity of the
work of God in various parts of the world, he felt his
soul quickened, and was constrained to consecrate him-
self afresh to the Most High on the Missionary altar.
Mr. Cross does not often record his religious feelings; but
when he does, there is sufficient evidence of his sincere
and ardent desire to be the Lord’s, and that all might
learn and magnify his grace. He devoted a consider-
able part of the time he could secure from public en-
gagements, to the reading of practical divinity, especially
Mr. Wesley’s Works, which he found very profitable.
Indeed, it is essential to all in similar circumstances to
pay systematic attention to their spiritual progress.
This Mr. Cross endeavoured to do ; and, as Mr. Calvert
observes, “he was frequently as much immersed in cares
and toils as any man of business, yet he continued to grow
in grace.” Commencing new stations, which Mr. Cross
was doing almost the whole of his Missionary life, is
peculiarly trying both to faith and patience. He was


frequently called off from most important employments,
and obliged to submit to be the gazing-stock of a
number of people, who came to see and admire him
and his house. Mr. Cross, however, could make a good
use of such occasions, by embracing the opportunity and
preaching the Gospel to his visiters.
About this time a curious circumstance occurred. A
quantity of native cloth and other property was brought
from Tonga to Lakemba, by the Christian Tonguese.
The Chiefs had now so little fear of the gods before
their eyes, that they determined to cheat them out of
their share of the riches. When it was divided, the
god was angry, because he was neglected; but the
brother of the King had an answer ready. He observed,
“ The property now brought has been given to us by
people who worship a new God; and we thought it would
be wrong to present it to you, because we have received
it from people of another religion.” The Priest, not
having an answer ready, only said, in reply, “ The speech
is good.” Some of the heathen Chiefs from Tonga
had more respect for the gods than the Lakemba people,
as the following fact will show :
“ July 20th.—Lualala, a heathen Chief lately arrived
from Tonga, sailed to-day. Previously to his departure,
he consulted the god, called ‘ Tuilakemba,’ respecting
the wind. The following is the substance of the sup-
pliant’s petition, ‘ O Lord, you know I continue to
adhere to you, and that I came from Tonga to bring
you property. I now wish to return to Tonga, and
after awhile I shall visit you again, and bring you more.
Therefore be propitious, and give me a good wind.’
To which the god is said to have replied, by means of
heathen Priests, ‘lt is a very easy thing to give you a
good wind. You do well in cleaving to me ; and I would
have you know, that I only remain a god in this land, to
order and manage for you; all the other gods having


run away. I now declare to you, that you shall have a
good wind for three days, by which you may reach
Tonga: but if you remain longer than three days, I
shall afterwards do as I please.’ The Chief said, ‘ I
thank you for your promise : I shall now sail. I wish,
however, to state to you, that the people who attend to
the new religion say, there is no God but Jehovah.’
To this the god made no reply, and the ceremony con-
cluded. Lualala, however, set off with a fair wind,
which only took him about thirty-five miles, and then
began to blow direct from Tonga, to the great confusion
of the Heathen, and their god. Some time ago another
Tonga Chief was served in a similar way by the same
deity, who did not bear the disappointment with so
much equanimity as Lualala. He demanded the pre-
sent he had offered to the god to be returned, which was
accordingly done. He did not, however, renounce
Heathenism, though many of his people did. Lualala
commended the constancy of his countryman, and ex-
horted him to maintain their heathen dances, &c. } as
formerly. The Chief replied, ‘ I have nobody to dance :
my people have all become Christians.’ Lualala is
himself a Christian now, though he opposed the truth
for a length of time, both in Tonga and Lakemba.”
July 23d, Mr. Cross writes, “ This afternoon we had
our lovefeast. It was a gracious season. We had not had
a service of this description for a length of time, having
no flour with which to make the bread. Necessity led
us to make cakes of arrow-root, which answered our
purpose well as a substitute. The reason of our being
without bread is, that the Captain who brought our stores
to the Friendly Islands had orders to leave them there; so
we must wait until the arrival of another vessel. ” Thank
God and the Christians of England for the Missionary ship !
Many interesting details were given at the lovefeast.
Some stated that they became Christians through per


sonal afflictions, others from family trials, some from
a fear of hell, and others from a desire to go to heaven,
another from being reproved and warned by the Mission-
ary, others because their friends had embraced the
truth, and some even against their will abandoned their
false gods and worshipped Jehovah ; being obliged to do
so, perhaps, by their friends. Some renounced their
false gods in profession only, and continued to live in
sin, until by the preaching of the Gospel they were
brought to repentance. Some remembered the particu-
lar text and the sermon, which had been of use to them
in bringing them “ out of darkness into marvellous
light.” The good work was not confined to the Ton-
guese, or to Tumbou, the chief town of Lakemba, but
spread among the villages around. At one of them the
Chief and several of his people made a profession of the
faith of Christ. Tuinayau determined to put a stop to
the work ; and under pretence of punishing the people
for disobedience to his commands, he had them plun-
dered of their property, and even threatened, &c. The
Chief, however, remained faithful; but the greater part
of the people returned to their old practices. The
work prospered at Ono, Oneata, and Mothe. The
Circuit report for 1837 states that “one hundred and
thirteen had been added to the class during the year;
one hundred adults and forty-five children had been
baptized. In October about three hundred persons
removed to the Friendly Islands, who had been brought
to the profession of Christianity in Lakemba, two
hundred of whom were meeting in class.”


CHAPTER X.
1838.
“But none of these things move me, neither count I my life
dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and
the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the
Gospel of the grace of God.”—Acts xx. 24.
Dec. 28th, 1837, Mr. Cross and family left Lakemba,
and proceeded to Ban in the “ Jess,” a vessel belonging to
Chevalier Dillon. After visiting Moala, they anchored
at Kiuba, a town about midway between Ban and Rewa.
Mr. Cross and his colleagues had hitherto seen but little
of Feejee; and the present undertaking was, humanly
speaking, a hazardous one, and required much prudence
in its execution. Bau being, with regard to rank and
influence, at the head of the whole group, it was Mr.
Cross’s intention to commence a Mission there, if pos-
sible ; but an interview with Seru, the son of Tanoa,
King of Bau, convinced him that such a step would, for
the present, be imprudent. Bau was just recovering
from the shock of a seven years’ civil war, in which
Tanoa had been deposed and driven into exile : one of
his sons had been killed, and the reins of government
seized by a few daring and powerful Chiefs. Seru
remained in Bau the whole of the time; for which reason
he is often called Thakombau, that is, “ Bau is badand
he so far outwitted the rebel Chiefs as completely to
effect their destruction. With the assistance of his father,
who was then at Rewa, he gained a strong party in Bau
itself to his interest, and though only a youth, he carried
on his plans with such skill, secrecy, and despatch, that


the rebels found the town divided by a fence before
they knew anything of his designs. He was as successful
in executing, as in devising, his plans. The part of the
town in the possession of the rebels was burned, and the
rebels themselves obliged to seek refuge in the towns on
Navetelevu, which professed to be favourable to their
cause. Seru pursued them there ; and partly by rewards,
and partly by threatenings, he induced the Chiefs of the
towns where they had taken refuge to give them up into
his hands, dead or alive; and thus the most powerful
Chiefs in the group were conquered, and many of them
eaten, at the command of a mere lad.
This young Chief was going on with the work of
destruction when Mr. Cross arrived. In answer to his
request for permission to take up his residence with him,
he said, “ It will be most agreeable to me if you think
well; but I will not hide it from you, that I am now
engaged in war, and cannot attend to your instructions,
or even assure you of safety.” As there was no pro-
spect either of security or success at Bau, Mr. Cross
turned his attention to Rewa, the second place in Feejee
in rank and influence. On January Bth, Mr. Cross
landed at that place, which is only about twenty miles
from Ban by water, perhaps not more than ten by land.
He was received in the usual friendly manner by the
King, Tuindrekete, who promised to protect him and his
property, and to allow his people to embrace Christianity
who wished to do so. He attended to the first part of
his promise, but not at all times to the other and more
important part. The following extracts from Mr. Cross’s
journal will show the manner in which he commenced
his labours at Rewa, and the sufferings he was called to
endure on his lonely station :
“ January 13th.—I waited on the King, and informed
him that the next day was our sacred day, the day on
which Christians meet to worship God ; and added, ( You


know there are a few such in Rewa, and I wish to meet
them to-morrow, that I may instruct them.’ The King
said it was quite agreeable to him for me to instruct
those who now worship our God, and any others who
might do so in future.
“14th.—Our first Sabbath in Rewa. I conducted divine
worship in the dialect of Lakemba. Twelve adults were
present, some of whom had been induced to renounce
Heathenism by a Tonga Chief (called Fatafehe) when on
a visit to Rewa. Most of them are Tonguese, or what
are called, “ Tonga Feejee,” persons whose fathers were
Tonguese, and mothers Feejeeans. Three out of the
twelve came with us from Lakemba. As there are
several Europeans residing in Rewa, I proposed holding
divine service in English. Only two were present.
The Chevalier sent his boat to Rewa to trade, notwith-
standing it was the Sabbath.
“21st.—I conducted religious worship for the first
time in the dialect of Rewa.
“ 23d.—1 was taken ill, and not able to preach during
the six following Sabbaths. My illness commenced with
an intermittent fever. In a few days the fever abated,
and I hoped I should be able to attend to my work
again ; but it quickly returned with increased violence.
A few days after, I had an attack of cholera, which
lasted twelve hours, and which I imagined would have
brought me to the grave. But the Lord was ‘ better to
us than our fears.’ After the cholera ceased, typhus
fever came on, which brought me so low, that I could
not raise myself in bed. This was a trying season,
though, respecting myself, I was without fear. I knew
in whom I had believed, and felt persuaded that, if
‘ absent from the body,’ I should be ‘ present with the
Lord.’ But I greatly desired that, if it pleased God,
I might be raised to labour for him. It was pecu-
liarly distressing to see a weeping wife, and three


helpless children, in a land of cannibals, without a single
earthly friend. The sailors who were residing in Rewa
were of course unable to render any assistance. I knew,
however, that there was a number of white people
residing at Levuka, Ovalau, an island about fifty miles
from Rewa, of whom I had heard a favourable account.
I accordingly sent to them, stating my circumstances, and
one of them kindly came to our assistance.” This was an
American, named David Whippy, a sensible, well-behaved
man. “He rendered us considerable help by sitting
up with me during the night. Indeed, but for him, Mrs.
Cross must have been laid up herself. That she and the
children escaped the disease is remarkable, especially as
we all lived together; our house containing but one
room, which served for bed-room, parlour, servant’s
apartment, and store. The walls of the house were also
low, and it was built on damp ground, almost surrounded
by a moat of stagnant water; and in rainy weather,
which is frequent, it emits an almost intolerable stench.
The habitations have no windows, and the doors are only
three feet in height.”
Mr. Cross now began to imagine that he should, ere
long, be obliged to leave his beloved work in Feejee.
He mentioned the subject to Mrs. Cross, who wept at
the thought of being obliged, under such circumstances,
so soon to leave a field of action where labourers are
so much needed. The necessity of the ease, however,
urged him to request the District-Meeting to allow him
to remove to the colony, until the determination of the
Wesleyan Missionary Committee should be known.
His request was acceded toby his brethren, so far as they
were concerned ; but the Lord graciously interposed, and
raised his servant up again, and .gave him and his
excellent wife the desire of their hearts, by allowing
them still to continue in the field for the good of the
Feejeeans.
F


On the 21st of February, during Mr. Cross’s illness,
a curious circumstance occurred, which occasioned
considerable alarm in the Mission family, until the cause
of it was known. “About eight o’clock, p.m., the
natives suddenly commenced a tremendous firing of mus-
kets, beating of native drums, screaming, shouting, &c.
We thought, certainly war is commenced in the town, and
felt considerably concerned: we could only, however,
give ourselves to God, and confide in his mercy. After
some time we were informed of the cause of this uproar :
it was as follows :—A chief woman was ill, and some
one supposed the god desired to take her away to be his
wife, and that he had actually entered the town for that
purpose, and all this noise was made for the purpose of
frightening the god away. After it had continued about
an hour, all became quiet. The lady died two days after.’'
Things of this nature frequently occur among the
Feejeeans!
“ Shortly after the former occurrence, some of the
people declared that they saw a ball of fire descend
from the sky in the direction of the Mission-house.
They supposed it would set the building in flames, but
before it reached the roof it re-ascended. They then
said it was our God, who had come down to see how we
were circumstanced, and finding we were living in peace,
he went back again.”
In the month of March, the King built the Mission
family a substantial and convenient dwelling-house. It
had this advantage over the former one, it was in an airy
situation, and had doors, windows, apartments, &c.
The circumstances of the Mission family were also much
improved by the arrival in Rewa of H. B. M. ship
“ Conway,” Capt. Bethune, who kindly brought Mr.
Cross a number of stores which his family greatly needed.
Previous to this, they had sold a considerable part of
their wearing-apparel in order to obtain food.


Mr. Cross being recovered from bis sickness, be
commenced preaching in three different parts of the
town of Rewa. Sometimes he had twenty hearers,
sometimes one hundred. A school was formed, which
in September had thirty-five scholars, who were taught
reading and writing. Though fully employed, Mr. Cross
found time to translate, read, visit the Heathen in their
houses, and converse with those who visited him. A
small society was formed, and a Chief of considerable
rank in Rewa, who, with his wife, had renounced
Heathenism, offered his house for the accommodation of
the congregation on the Sabbath morning, and Wed-
nesday afternoon. Things could not long go on thus
without opposition. One of the King’s brothers began to
annoy the Missionary and his people, by throwing stones
at them while conducting the worship of God in the
open air. On one occasion Mr. Cross was very near
being killed by a large missile ; and on another occasion
a bold attempt was made to set the preaching-house on
fire, which the people declared nothing but the true God
could have prevented.
The town of Rewa was at this time in a very unsettled
state. Several attempts had been made to burn it, and
part of it had been actually consumed. The incendiaries
were supposed to be some of the King’s brothers, of
whom there were at that time four, who were by no
means well-affected either towards the King or the
Mission. Some of them wished the King to send
Mr. Cross away; but he replied, “ The Missionary did
not come by your authority, nor shall any one send him
away.” Tuindrekete most zealously defended Mr. Cross
against all who opposed him. He also sent his eldest
daughter to school, and himself and the Queen commenced
learning to read ; until the Priests became alarmed, and
assured the King that reading was an essential part of
Christianity. As the King did not wish to become
f 2


“ altogether a Christian ” at present, the royal family
ceased to attend to their studies. The opinion of the
Rewa Priests is common in these islands. We can
scarcely ever prevail on parents to send their children to
school until they embrace Christianity. They have no
idea of the use of education except for religious purposes.
In the month of September, the King of Rewa
presented thirty-nine canoes to Tanoa, and attended a
meeting convened by him, for the consolidation of peace.
As the meeting gives some idea of the manner in which
such kind of business is transacted, the following account
of it, from Mr. Cross’s papers, maybe interesting. The
following were the principal Chiefs who constituted the
meeting:—Tanoa, the ruling King of Bau; Roko-
tuembau, the titled King; Tuiveikoso, an elder brother
of Tanoa, whom the rebels had made King while Tanoa
was in exile; Tuindrekete, the King of Rewa; Namose-
malua, Chief of Yewa; Tueveikau, the principal Chief
of Namara, one of the leading free-towns of Bau, called
“ hate.” Tanoa was fully restored to his dignity when
this meeting was convened; there was, however, a great
deal of uncertainty as to the object of the meeting.
Some thought it was the intention of Tanoa to punish
those of the rebels who were still alive, among whom
Namosemalua was considered the principal. The pre-
parations, as is usual on such occasions, were on a large
scale, consisting of baked pigs, yams, taro, and yang-
gona. Rokotuembau opened the business of the day by
presenting three whale’s-teeth to Tanoa, as a peace-
offering, assuring him that he knew nothing of the
designs of his enemies, and entreated that he and his
people might live. Tanoa received his offering, and
sent him five whale’s-teeth as a proof of his good-will,
after which he addressed Rokotuembau as follows;
You and I are friends. Don’t you know ? You know
I have been driven from my land ; but my anger is now


oVer, and my enemies are punished. They are dead; but
as to myself, lam not as a man, but as a god. Hence,
though I have been driven hither and thither alone, I
am now at home again. I wish we may now live in
peace. You be kind to me, and I will be kind to you;
but remember, if any do ill, I shall have them killed.”
Tuindrekete then rose and presented one whale’s-tooth
as an offering. He said, “ I present this that this
meeting may be truly for the establishment of peace,
and that we may cease to do evil. If Bau be at peace,
we shall all be at peace, and all will be well: if Bau be
at war, we shall be at war, and all will be ill.”
Tuiveikoso then addressed Tanoa. He said, “I only
am one with you. You and I are two. I knew not
the design of your enemies. They brought your title to
me; but I desired it not, nor did I take any part against
you; therefore be gracious to me, that I may live.”
Tanoa rose and kissed him, and they wept together.
Tanoa said to him, “ Fear not; what should Ido to you:
you can no longer do anything, nor will I do anything
to harm you. You are not as I am. lam yet strong,
and able to go to other lands ; you can do nothing: you
are like a large pig, which has grown too fat to walk
about; all you can do is, to sit, and sleep, and wake,
and choose your food.” They both laughed heartily, and
sat down. Tuiveikoso is an old man, very corpulent,
and lame in his feet. Part of the assembly then drank
yang-gona together, and Namosemalua retired. While
they were drinking yang-gona, an inquiry was made
respecting the person who was the originator of the late
rebellion. All declared they did not know. Tanoa
then said, “ No, the man who was the cause of it has
retired : no doubt he has gone to contrive something else
that is evil: we will adjourn the meeting till to-morrow,
and then have him tried.” The person referred to was
Namosemalua : accordingly the next day he was brought


before the assembly, and charged with having been the
originator of the late rebellion : this he denied. He was
then charged with having engaged to kill Tanoa. This
he acknowledged, and stated, that the rebels gave him
six whale’s-teeth, and a niece of Tanoa for his wife, as
an inducement to accomplish this object. Tanoa, ad-
dressing Namosemalua, said, “ Then you engaged to
kill me for six whale’s-teeth and a woman.” He
answered, “ Yes, Sir.” Tanoa said, “ That is good.
I like you for speaking the truth: I wish to know it.
You shall not die, though you have done evil to me.”
Tueveikau then addressed Namosemalua, charging him
with the whole of the late troubles, adding, “ If the King
will allow us, we will kill you at once.” A tumult
ensued, which was put a stop to by the King of Rewa,
who addressed the assembly in a conciliatory, speech,
and the meeting broke up.
All were astonished that Namosemalua was spared,
as all considered him the worst of the rebels. They,
however, only knew a part of the truth, or they would
have been less surprised at the clemency shown him by
Tanoa. The fact of the case was, that Namosemalua
joined the rebels in appearance, and at the same time
did what he could to preserve the life of the King,
instead of killing him according to his engagement. By
so doing he secured the favour of both parties, which
was all he desired.
Tanoa was at Nairai, an island about sixty miles from
Bau, when Namosemalua agreed with the rebels to kill
him. Namosemalua and a Bau Chief sailed after him.
They knew the town where Tanoa was residing; but
Namosemalua refused to land there, and take the King
by surprise, stating that the men were weary, and must
have a night’s rest and some food before they proceeded.
They accordingly landed on a part of the island a con-
siderable distance from the King’s residence. During


the night a messenger was despatched to Tanoa by
Namosemalua, to inform him of all that had taken place,
and urging him to make his escape to Rewa, or some
other place. The King ordered his men on board his
canoe, and put to sea; but the wind was contrary, so that
they did not get very far from the land before daylight.
Namosemalua, fearing Tanoa might not have believed
his messenger, determined still to proceed with caution.
He ordered all the people next morning to follow him,
that he might enter the town first. When they reached
the town they saw Tanoa’s canoe out at sea. Namose-
malua said, “Nevermind, he is not going far: he will
soon return to some other town on the island.” He
amused the people in this way until he saw the King
make sail and proceed towards Somosomo. He then
proposed returning to Bau, as it would be useless to
follow him to Somosomo with their present force. The
rebel Chiefs were by no means pleased; but they had
not the least idea of Namosemalua’s duplicity. To keep
them quiet, he proposed that a large fleet should be
equipped, and proceed to Somosomo, and demand the
King from the Chiefs of that place. The fleet sailed;
but the Chiefs of Somosomo not only refused to deliver
the King into their hands, but so insulted them, that
they were glad to get back again to Bau. Tanoa
remained at Somosomo for some time, until Lajeke, now T
Feinau, and Tubou, two Tonga Chiefs, who reside in
Lakemba, took him to Rewa, where he co-operated with
his son in those measures which have been referred to,
and which resulted in his restoration. It is not sur-
prising that Tanoa should preserve a man who had saved
his life at the peril of his own; a thing of rare occurrence
in Feejee.
At the latter end of the year 1838, Namosemalua sent
for Mr. Cross to ask his opinion on a point of importance to
him and his people, on which it will be necessary to make


a remark or two. When Ban was in the possession of the
rebels, a French brig had been taken by Yarane, Namo-
semalua’s nephew, and the Captain murdered. Yarane
was obliged by the Bau Chiefs to kill the Captain or be
strangled, according to the account of the affair given
by the natives. Before a French man-of-war arrived to
punish the murderers, the Bau Chiefs concerned in it
were dead : they had not, however, died a natural death,
most of them had been as barbarously murdered as the
French Captain. As Verani was considered the most
guilty, the town of Yewa was reduced to ashes, but no
one was killed, though there were many on the island.
Others fled to the large island, Navetelevu, as soon as
they saw the vessels come to anchor, and knew the
object for which they had come. Namosemalua no doubt
had something to do with taking the brig, but he refused
to murder the Captain: he, however, was the principal
sufferer, as he lost his all, and at a time when he had
many enemies, who would have rejoiced in his entire
destruction. How wonderful are the ways of Providence!
This proud Chief was now fully humbled, and ready to
fly to anything that should offer him security. He
observed, “ he now knew that the gods of Feejee were
powerless, as they could not save their own temple from
the fire;” but he was soon made acquainted with the
true God. Happy had it been for him had he fully
taken him for his God,
Shortly after Yewa was burned, a Bau man, called
Koroelongavatu, had a conversation with a Feejeean
named Isaac, who had accompanied Mr. Cross from
Lakemba, which was the means eventually of Namo-
semalua becoming a Christian. Isaac asked the Feejeean
if Namosemalua loved his town. The reply was in the
affirmative. Then, said Isaac, “he should become
a Christian: if he does, his town will not be burned
again. The Bauan took the message to Namosemalua,


who repeated it to his people. It was agreed to send
at once to Mr. Cross to inquire more particularly into
the meaning of the good news they had heard. Mr. Cross
told the messenger that he thought if Namosemalua
became a good man, neither the French nor English
would give him any further trouble. Namosemalua and
a few of his people renounced Heathenism as soon as the
messenger returned. At the Chief’s request a Teacher
was placed among them, and several others joined the
new converts.
It is difficult to form a proper estimate of Namose-
malua’s religious character. Those who know all his
circumstances can make much allowance for him. He
is very much under the influence of the Chiefs of Bau,
and would risk a great deal if he abandoned all for Christ.
Being without saving grace, he is not prepared “ to lose
his life that he may find it unto life eternal.” There is
no other Chief in the group of any rank who has become
a Christian, and very few who dare take such a step in
the present agitated and political state of the islands ; so
that he stands alone. His nephew is still a desperate
Heathen, and has considerable influence with the ruling
Chiefs of Bau, and could, if he wished, do his uncle a
great deal of harm. Namosemalua cannot, therefore,
do as he pleases; and this may be one, though I fear
not the only circumstance, which prevents him becoming
a consistent Christian. The people are, many of them,
much more consistent than himself; and the fact of
Namosemalua being even a professing Christian, has
been a means of inducing many to abandon their false
gods and place themselves under religious instruction.
Some of these have, and others no doubt will, ere long,
become Christians indeed.
Mr. Cross’s Circuit was now enlarged, and his prospects
began to brighten. Yewa was visited by him as fre-
quently as circumstances would allow. There was at
f 5


the close of the year every prospect of success at this
interesting place.
It is one of the objects of Christian biography to
show that the religion of the Bible is, when tested by
experiment, all that it professes to be. It boasts of
being able to support the mind under all the cir-
cumstances of life, however trying, and that it can
keep the heart true to its own interests, though all kinds
of present suffering must be the consequence of faith-
fulness. All this it effected for Mr. Cross during his
affliction at Rewa. His circumstances were, in fact,
as uncomfortable as they well could be. In a wretched
house, in want of suitable food, reduced to the last
extremity by sickness, and indeed with the prospect of
leaving his wife and family in the midst of cannibals,
this servant of God was nevertheless enabled cheerfully
to resign all to Him whose he was and whom he served.
The greatest trial was the prospect of leaving Feejee.
There is sometimes a sublimity in tears; and seldom
are tears more sublime than when they are shed over
the souls of perishing men, by those who greatly desire
their salvation, but which they cannot be instrumental
in effecting. The circumstance of having laboured for
the good of others, unites us more closely to them, in
tender sympathy ; and the pain of leaving a field in which
we have laboured without seeing the fruit, is much
greater than we can suffer from any privations connected
with remaining in it. But it is religion that inspires
this love to souls. He who wept over Jerusalem inspires
us with his spirit, and then we feel and weep like him.


CHAPTER XI.
1839.
“The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this
house; his hands shall also finish it. —For who hath despised the
day of small things?”—Zech. iv. 9, 10.
I have now brought this memoir to the period when
my personal acquaintance with Mr. Cross began. Janu-
ary 7th, 1839, we anchored in Rewa harbour, and in
the afternoon proceeded to the Mission premises. We
were most affectionately received by Mr. and Mrs. Cross,
and from the first felt ourselves quite at home in their
company. There being but one Mission house, we
became part of their family, which was of advantage to
us in many respects. It was gratifying to us to find
Mr. Cross in so good a state of health: had he been
obliged to remove by the vessel that conveyed us to
Rewa, as we expected, we should have been left alone,
entirely ignorant of the language and people, and but
little acquainted with the Mission work. To us Mr.
Cross was a father. Attachments were mutually formed,
which were the source of many a happy hour during the
few months we were together, and. the remembrance of
which still inspires pleasing emotions. We have lived
portions of the time over again and again by recollecting
the happy hours we spent together.
We found the work had commenced in Rewa: a few
appeared in earnest to serve God. Some of them had
met with considerable opposition ; and the details they
afterwards gave of their first struggles are really curious,
and will not be uninteresting to the reader.


Among those who renounced Heathenism through the
instructions of Fatafehe, the Tonga Chief, mentioned in
a former chapter, were two brothers. They determined
to burn their household god, which consisted of some
oil and turmeric hung up in a native basket. “ If,”
said they, “ the god be true, he will put the fire out;
but if he cannot, he is false.” The oil, turmeric, and
basket blazed well, which confirmed the two brothers
in their new faith. Their friends, however, were much
enraged with them for destroying the sacred basket and
its contents. After Mr. Cross arrived, the younger
went to reside with him. He afterwards became our
servant, and he and his wife have dwelt with us almost
ever since.
Another of Fatefehe’s converts was a messenger of
the King of Rewa. The Priests assured him he would
die in two days after he began to pray to Jehovah. He
determined, however, to venture his life. The result
confirmed him in his determination to be a Christian.
Another who embraced the faith of the Gospel after the
arrival of Mr. Cross, was a woman who had been partly
buried by her unmerciful friends while she was a Heathen.
Sfie was a real Feejeean, but the wife of a Tonguese,
who had beaten most of the teeth out of her head, as he
said, from necessity, owing to the violence of her temper.
At length she was taken ill, and went home to her
friends for the good of her health. They attended to
her for a short time, and then determined to put an end
to their trouble by burying her alive. She, however,
resisted them, and succeeded in making her escape.
Subsequently she returned to Rewa, and then, with her
husband, embraced Christianity. She died a short time
after our arrival; I believe, “in the Lord.” The change
religion had produced in her was amazing; much greater
than in her husband, who was formerly, according to
his own account, much the better of the two.


Shortly after our arrival several others renounced
Heathenism, both in Rewa and Yewa; so that in July
the number of professing Christians in the Circuit
amounted to one hundred and forty.
But though we had the great pleasure of seeing the
work of the Lord prosper, we were not without our
trouble and anxiety. One of the King’s brothers gave
us considerable uneasiness, by persecuting the people,
and throwing stones, dirt, &c., at us while we were con-
ducting our services in the open air. One night he
collected a mob, and plundered our people’s houses,
taking away what he thought would be of service to
himself, and destroying the rest. We expected to have
our turn the following night. At this time Mrs. Hunt
and I lived in Mr. Cross’s study, at some distance from
his house. We were not very comfortable, especially
about midnight, when the death-like stillness of the
town was broken by the firing of a musket. We thought,
“ Surely this is the signal for the attack; ” and expected
nothing less than to have our stores plundered, or some-
thing of the kind. Mr. Cross slept comfortably enough.
He was the old veteran who had stood the shock of
many a battle : we were the new recruits, just intro-
duced into the field, and consequently we felt the timidity
which most experience on the first charge. The Chief
never came near us ; and the King called a meeting of
Chiefs shortly after, which was the means of checking
the persecution for a time. Our people stood firm
during these trials, and were enabled to “ take joyfully
the spoiling of their goods,” affectingly referring to
“ their better and more enduring substance.” Soon
after our arrival, one of the Christian party came to
inform us, that he had just buried a woman who had
been entirely abandoned by her friends, and thrown into
an uninhabited house to die. When he found her, a
number of boys and others had dragged her out of the


house, and were throwing stones and sticks at her,
intending to kill her, and throw her into the river.
When she saw the Christian man, she spoke to him, and
told him she was very hungry. He delivered her from
her tormentors, and procured her some food, which she
ate, and died. He and another person buried her in a
decent manner. Some of the Heathen proposed that
her body should be left exposed for the pigs to eat!
The native children are trained up to acts of cruelty;
and even their ordinary sports show how apt they
are in learning the degrading lessons of Feejeean depra-
vity. It is particularly painful to see them acting a
cannibal feast. One of them will feign himself dead,
and the others carry him about, singing the cannibal
song. But what is far worse, in many instances, the
children are almost obliged by their parents to eat human
flesh. Nay, it is a common practice to make infants
-suck a piece of it, to prevent a disease they call “ rang-
ganibakola.”
The preceding will show something of what Heathenism
is : the following will also exhibit what Christianity is
calculated to do for the worst of Heathens, though they
do not experience its saving power. Shortly after a
number of the Yewa people had embraced Christianity,
a man of some note sent a message to the King of Bau
to allow him to kill Namosemalua. Instead of comply-
ing with his request, the King sent to Namosemalua to
inform him of what had taken place, advising him to
kill the traitor, and the whole of his relations. Namo-
semalua said, “ No, it is not consistent with the laws
of Christianity to punish the innocent with the guilty.”
(This, however, is Feejeean law.) The traitor himself
was spared, when he sued for mercy. This is the more
remarkable, as Namosemalua has been noted for killing
his own people for trifling offences, and often for none
at all, but merely because he suspected them. The


person whom he thus generously pardoned is now a
member of the church.
We had peace and prosperity in our borders, and I
may also say, in our souls. Our class-meetings were
truly means of grace. I remember how clearly Mr.
Cross used to express himself on the great salvation
from inward sin. His experience seemed to have
attained a maturity which perhaps it never had before.
June 4th, he writes as follows :—“ Read fifty pages
of Memoirs of Mrs. Mortimer, and derived much plea-
sure therefrom. My soul is quickened, and my desire
to live to purpose increased. O, my God, give me
wisdom that I may know how to do thy will at all times,
and power to perform the same. Glory be to God, he
makes me happy in serving him. I cannot praise him
enough for what he has done for me, and for what he
continues to do. Great God, heavenly Father, help me
to live to thy glory! Blessed Saviour, be always with
me, help me always to follow thee ; to cleave to thee
‘ with purpose of heart; ’ to labour for thee with
my might. O make me ‘ wise to win souls.’ Make
my feeble endeavours very successful. I feel that
without thee I can do nothing to purpose.”
The following particulars from Mr. Cross’s journal
respecting one of our visits to the heathen part of the
population, will doubtless be interesting :
“ June sth.—Visited the principal Priest of Rewa,
with Brother Hunt. The Priest said, ‘ I only am a
great Priest. This is my land: Bau, Somosomo, and
all lands are mine. lam very strong, and very angry.
I delight in war. Go you away : this is a different land ’
(meaning, there is no relation between Rewa and Eng-
land). We spoke a few words to him, and he became
quite calm, and said, he was only angry with some other
land. We offered him a small present, which he gladly
received: but an old woman, and two men, zealous


servants of Satan, urged him by no means to take it, but
to throw it away. They repeatedly urged us to go
away; but we did not like to go under such circum-
stances. When we appeared determined to remain, the
Priest ran away from us, and left us with the women,
and all-hut furious old men. They then armed them-
selves with clubs, axes, &c., thinking to frighten us ;
but we remained till they became somewhat calm, and
then went quietly away. The next day we saw the
Priest again, who appeared much ashamed, and laid all
the blame on the old women and ‘ kaissee,’ or poor
people, stating, that he himself had no objection to us.”
We visited Yewa once a fortnight; and sometimes
called on Tanoa, at Bau, who often promised to build
a Mission house at that place, and I think would have
done so, had not his son interfered.
One of Mr. Cross’s visits to Yewa is thus recorded.
“ June 9th.—Preached twice at Yewa, and visited many
of the people. Two adults renounced Heathenism, and
ten others have done so during the last fortnight. A
party of Yewa people, who are still heathen, were sent
out a day or two since to kill a few people for those
employed in building a temple now in progress at Bau.
Verani, Namosemalua’s nephew, was at the head of the
party. They arrived at Yewa this morning, with three
individuals whom they had murdered. They would
have obtained more, but were routed by the friends of
the victims, and were obliged to leave one behind, whom
they had succeeded in depriving of life. I spoke to the
young Chief, who excused himself by saying, ‘ that it
was only an act of justice to put to death these people,
as they had insulted the Yewa people, and attempted
to kill some of them some time before.’ I urged him
to embrace Christianity, and ‘ cease to do evil,’ that
he might obtain mercy from God. He said, what I
told him was very good ; but that he could not become a


Christian so long as he was subject to Seru, who would
be continually sending to him to go and murder men
for him, and he dare not refuse.”
The dead bodies of human beings are in continual
request at Bau. The building of temples, chief-houses,
taking down the masts of new canoes, visits of the
Somosomo people with their canoes and property,
are all the occasion of numerous murders, for the sole
purpose of gratifying their superstitious fancies, and
cannibal appetites. Formerly the people of Yewa and
Lasakau (the name of a part of Bau) were very busy
on these occasions. They used to attack persons in
their gardens, or on the roads, and sometimes a whole
town, and carry off as many as they were able. Not
long ago, a town was attacked in this manner, and
fourteen or fifteen were killed and presented to the
Somosomo people, who were then at Bau. The occasion
was, the taking down of the mast of a large canoe for
the first time. We were at Somosomo when this canoe
was built. When she was launched it was proposed to
kill some people ; but we interfered, and prevented it.
It was also intended to destroy one or more, wherever
she touched on her first sailing excursion ; but this
also was hindered. We rejoiced in seeing her go to
Bau a bloodless bark, and hoped she would remain so ;
blit the Chiefs of Bau are not so willing to give up their
horrid practices as some others of less rank; and this is
doubtless the reason they will not build a Mission house,
as it would be a check, at any rate, on some of their
shameful practices, in which even they can only glory in
the absence of a Missionary.
The preceding facts account for Feejeeans always
being armed. They need to be so, as they do not know
who may be seeking their lives. Mr. Cross records
a case in his journal, in which a poor man was enticed
by another on board his canoe, for the purpose of being


slain. The man being armed contended the point with
the murderer, and laid him dead in his canoe, and would
have carried him off, had not his companions come to his
assistance.
July 15th.—We had the pleasure of welcoming
Messrs. Cargill, Jaggar, Lyth, and Spinney, to Rewa.
We heard in the morning that an English vessel was at
anchor off Nukulau, and about noon the boat appeared
with some of the party. I set out for the rest in a
canoe ; so that before midnight, six of us, with our wives
and families, were assembled together in the house of
Mr. Cross. A rare thing in Feejee ! It was, when in
company with his brethren, on such occasions, that
Mr. Cross appeared to advantage. He was all life and
animation, attending to every one, and showing us how
happy he was in making us so. At the District-
Meeting, it was determined that Mr. Cross should
remove to Bau as soon as possible, and again perform
the arduous work of pioneer, for which he was par-
ticularly adapted. This would have been a more
difficult task than any he had yet undertaken. Tanoa
was aware of this; and being afraid to receive a
Missionary at present, because his son and others were
opposed to it, he attempted to frighten Mr. Cross by
placing before him the difficulty of the undertaking.
He observed, which was quite true, “ The island is
small, the people foolish. I fear they will take your
property from you. Water and fire-wood are difficult to
obtain” (there being neither on the island). He might
have added food too : everything except a little water to
wash in, has to be brought from the large land, more
than a mile from Bau. Mr. Cross’s answer was
characteristic. He said, “ The smallness of the island,
the distance of wood and water, are not difficult to me:
as for the people, Ido not fear them, I fear no one but
God; and if you will only give your consent, I will be in


Bau in three days.” The King was now obliged to
speak out, and absolutely refused to have a Missionary.
But though Mr. Cross was courageous and even daring,
he was judicious, and seldom offended a Heathen. He
did not expect much from them, and consequently was
seldom disappointed or dissatisfied with the treatment he
received ; he never trifled with them.
Being prevented from commencing a Mission station
at Bau, he turned his attention to Yewa, until the way
should be opened to the metropolis. Yewa is a small
island about three miles in circumference, and two from
Bau. Though small, it has almost every variety of hill
and dale in miniature. It is nearly covered with bread-
fruit trees, and eve, a kind of chestnut, the flowers of
which have an odour so like a violet, that the island
sometimes has the delicious fragrance of that plant.
There are many patches under cultivation, which has
been much more attended to since the people became
Christians. There is but one town on the island, which
contains upwards of one hundred and fifty inhabitants,
perhaps an average population of Feejeean towns. The
chapel stands on a hill, a short distance from the town.
It was built by Namosemalua, under circumstances of
peculiar difficulty, and does him great credit, as being a
bold step in favour of Christianity, which few Feejeean
Chiefs in his circumstances would have dared to
undertake.
Mr. Cross removed to Yewa in August. Though
the Rewa people stole but little from him during
his residence with them, they determined to get what
they were able, now that he was about to depart.
Mrs. Cross being taken ill on the canoe, her husband
could not keep a sufficient watch upon the natives : the
consequence was, that they stole what they could con-
veniently hide in the hold of the canoe. When they
reached Yewa, the missing articles were recovered.


The remaining part of the year was spent in attending
to the usual duties of a Missionary, which in these islands
are both numerous and onerous. The natives have
everything to learn, and none but the Missionaries and
native Teachers to teach them. Beside his regular
work of preaching, &c., a herald of the cross must teach
the natives to read, write, sing, &c.; and then he has
to make the books they read, and the hymns they
sing. Beside this, much time is taken in adminis-
tering medicine, and attending to affairs which are
merely secular : such as carpentering, gardening; and
sometimes, as in Mr. Cross’s case, preparing and cook-
ing his food, as he had great difficulty in obtaining
servants.
Mr. Cross possessed two excellent qualifications for
his peculiar calling as a pioneer. He was diligent,
never unemployed, and ashamed of nothing but sin.
Nature and grace had exactly formed him for the
peculiar circumstances in which he was placed during
the greater part of his ministerial career. For several
years he was never settled. In fact, it was only during
his residence in Tongataboo, at the commencement of
his course, and in Yewa at its close, that he could be
said to be anything but a sojourner. He was continually
receiving appointments to new stations; and a person
thus situated will often suffer more inconveniences in
one year, than he may afterwards in five.
Though Missionaries may not expect miraculous
powers, yet they often have extraordinary assistance,
in gifts which would otherwise be of little use to them;
and the more a Missionary is devoted to his work, the
more of these he may reasonably expect. The gifts
bestowed on the Apostles and first Christians were
exactly adapted to their circumstances, and the work
they were called to perform. The great design of their
bestowment was, the salvation of sinners, and the edifi


cation of the church: and as the church has still to be
instrumental in converting the world, and its Minis--
ters and members to unite in “building each other
up in their most holy faith,” gifts necessary for those
ends will no doubt be afforded to all who seek them
aright.


CHAPTER XII.
1840.
“They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy.”—
Jonah ii. 8.
Mr. Cross’s circumstances were now comparatively
comfortable. He was among his own spiritual children,
who loved him, and who gladly listened to his ministry.
Seru, the Chief of Bau, was, however, much opposed to
Christianity, and persuaded his uncle, who had aban-
doned Heathenism while residing at Yewa, to apos-
tatize ; and, as a proof of it, to dismiss the native
Teacher who had accompanied him to Bau. The
Teacher was unwilling to go away, expressing his
readiness “ not only to suffer, but to die for the Lord
Jesus.” Mr. Cross faithfully reproved Seru for his
vices ; and plainly set before him the consequences of
continuing a Heathen, and an opposer of the truth.
He declared, however, that he would always oppose it,
and that none of his family should ever be Christians if
he could prevent it. These warnings were not in vain ;
and the Chief is now of a different mind. Only a few
weeks ago, one of his daughters became a Christian.
About twelve months since she was taken ill of an
intermittent fever, and was placed under the writer’s
care at Yewa. She recovered, but soon had a relapse.
Her father said, “ Take her to Yewa again, and let her
become a Christianbut the person who acts as her
guardian prevented her father’s wishes from being
carried into execution. A short time since, she was
again taken ill; and her guardian, becoming alarmed,


brought her to Yewa, where she, her nurse, and a
servant, publicly renounced Heathenism. She recovered
in two days. She is about five years old, and one of
the greatest Princesses in the group. “It is the Lord’s
doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes,” and even in
the eyes of the Heathen themselves.
The following is entered in Mr. Cross’s journal,
without a date. It is an example of the miseries people
endure whose lives are at the disposal of Chiefs who act
according to no law but that of their malignant passions.
These are the legislators and magistrates of Feejee.
How thankful those should be who live in a land
of wise government, upright Judges, and humane in-
stitutions !
“ The Chief of Nandaro, a town near Yewa, was
angry with some of his people for having stolen property
which had been brought to him from another town.
He summoned a certain tribe to appear before him, and
ordered an oven to be prepared, intending to roast some
of them alive. The people assembled; but on seeing
the oven and the angry Chief, they ran away in great
fright. They all escaped but one. He was bound and
laid on his back on the burning coals and red-hot stones
till that part of his back was completely roasted. They
then turned him over, and roasted the other side ; the
people feasting their eyes with the horrid spectacle, and
listening to his cries and groans with hearts unmoved
by pity or humanity.” Thus even the administration
of justice becomes a crime by the manner in which it is
performed.
Though Namosemalua and several of his people had
embraced Christianity, his nephew and a strong party
remained heathen, some of whom did what they could
to oppose the progress of the good cause. Among these
is enumerated one of the principal Priests. “in the
month of March, this old man was taken ill, and began


to distrust his gods when he needed their help the most.
He was so distressed, that he desired the people to carry
him to the chapel, that he might publicly profess his
belief in the one true Jehovah; but he died before they
could comply with his request.”
About the same time the head Priest of Vewa died.
In 1843 his temple was rebuilt; but when it was finished
no Priest was to be found to officiate, both the sons of
the old idolater having become Christians. The people
have but little intercourse with their gods except through
the Priest; so that their “house is” literally “left to them
desolate.” A man of dubious character had been per-
suaded to become Priest; but it was a poor affair ; the
line of succession is broken, which in some priestly
tribes in Feejee, as well as in England, is considered a
matter of no small moment. The rightful successor to
the order is now a student in the native Institution, and
I hope will become a useful Teacher.
As I have said nothing respecting the gods of Feejee,
or of the religion of this degraded people, a few words
on the subject will not fail to be acceptable, I shall
not enter at large into the subject, but refer to a few
particulars which are remarkable in their religious
system. Their gods, though very numerous, may be
arranged under two classes. First, those who were
gods in their origin, which are called, “ na halou vu; ”
and, secondly, those which are acknowledged to be the
spirits of departed Chiefs or other persons. Some of
their gods had a disgusting origin, some as ridiculous as
any of the gods of the ancient Heathen.
Many of the natives believe in the existence of a deity
called “ Ove,” who is considered the maker of all men,
and is supposed to reside in the heavens, some say in
the moon. He is not worshipped, to my knowledge,
by any of the Feejeans. Though he is the supposed
creator of all men, yet different parts of the group


ascribe their origin to other gods. A certain female
deity is said to have created the Yewa people ; and yet
if a child is born malformed, it is. attributed to an over-
sight of Ove. The god most generally known, next to
Ove, is Dengei. He resides in a cave near Rakerake,
on the northern coast of Navetelavu. He is supposed to
be enshrined in a serpent, on which account the Christian
natives say he is the devil. All the gods have shrines,
when they are supposed to visit this world, some a fish,
others vegetables, others birds, and some even men. It is
unlawful to eat the shrine of their gods ; so that some of
the natives dare not partake of certain fish, birds,
vegetables, &c., and a few, on this account, abstain even
fiom feeding on human flesh. They have no idols,
properly so called, though these shrines may be con-
sidered as such : and, like all other idolaters, the ig-
norant make scarcely any distinction between the shrine
and the god; so that we frequently hear them say of the
former, “ That is my god.”
The principal residence of the gods, and of all
separate spirits, is called “ hulu” Of this place there
are various accounts. Some suppose it to be a place of
rest and quiet: others think it is much the same as the
present world.
As to the nature of their gods, they consider them
very much like themselves, only more expert in evil.
All kinds of human passions and vices are attributed to
them. If a handsome woman die, they say some god
has fallen in love with her, and taken her for his wife.
As they consider their gods are possessed of like passions
with themselves, they employ the same means to frighten
or appease them as succeed among themselves. In
times of affliction, or any other calamity, they sometimes
challenge them to fight, and demand an explanation of
their conduct in thus afflicting them. If the gods are
supposed to be angry, they present an offering similar to
G


those presented to an angry Chief: the gift has the
same name, and is presented in the same way.
The number of their deities is prodigious. Every
tribe has its god, while some are acknowledged by all.
They profess to multiply them at pleasure, as the
departed spirits of their friends are all eligible to the
same office: the only difficulty is in finding some
person who has impudence and hypocrisy enough to
declare that the spirit of a certain person has visited
him in the character of a god, and selected him for his
Priest.
The Priest is the connecting link between the people
and their gods. He is the living interpreter of their
will, and receives in their names the offerings of the
people.
These offerings are of two kinds ; the sois, or atone-
ment for sin, and the mandrale, or thank-offering : both
are often called mandrale , which is a general name for
religious offerings.
The power of their gods is confined to the present
life, with the following exception :—When a person dies
he is furnished with a club, or other instrument of war,
that he may contend successfully with a deity called,
ravuyalo , soul-killer,” who is posted somewhere
in the passage between this world and “ bulu,
for the purpose of clubbing the souls of the dead. If
they escape this evil, they become the companions of
the divinities in “ bulu” All their offerings refer to
the present life. They propitiate their gods for fa-
vourable winds, fruitful seasons, success in war, deliver-
ance from sickness, &c., &c. ; but their religious ideas
do neither extend to the soul, nor to another world.
They prepare for death just as for a feast, and the
wives of Chiefs are strangled under the consideration
that they will be as necessary and useful in the next
world as in the present.


Besides the priesthood, they have also Prophets,
called “ Rairai,'' literally “Seers;” together with a
number of inspired persons of an inferior order, an-
swering to prognosticators, fortune-tellers, witches, &c.
The poets also are supposed to be inspired.
Most marvellous tales are told of the Rairai. They
are said to foretell future events with great precision.
The present agitated state of the group was foretold by
one of them four or five years ago. The Prophet
declared, that of the five Chiefs of Rewa, one would
die a natural death, another would float away on the
sea, two would be killed, and the shortest of the whole
would be King of Rewa.” One has died a natural
death; another has been taken to America, where he
died. The Bau Chiefs have long been attempting to
kill, the other two, and to make the most diminutive of
the five King of Rewa.
This prediction was delivered to Namosemalua, who
told it to the writer, and pledged his word for its truth.
At any rate, it was a happy guess. I must not enlarge :
it will at once occur to the reader that there are many
things in their religious views which are favourable to
their understanding Christianity. It is not difficult
for them to conceive of the inspiration of the Scriptures.
Their own Prophets, Priests, and poets, &c., are re-
cognised as inspired persons. They may also com-
prehend the important distinction between an atoning
sacrifice and a thank-offering. The absence of gross
idolatry, and the acknowledged distinction between gods
who were originally such and those who are only the
spirits of men, is a knowledge of a spiritual world not
without its use. At the same time it must be lamented
that their worst crimes are sanctioned, and are con-
tinually promoted, by their divinities, who are not only
cannibals and adulterers like themselves, but have
pleasure in those that are such. Their religion only
G 2


pertains to the body and the present life. It is
amazing how this notion respecting it cleaves to them,
even after they have renounced their former deities.
You will hear them continually inferring the favour of
God to them, from the health and strength of their
bodies, notwithstanding they are living in enormous
sin. Though they have some idea of a spiritual
world, they find it very difficult to conceive of the
spirituality of religion, and are very slow in learning
that “ the kingdom of God is not meat and drink,
but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost.”
One remark more shall close this digression. It is
this : the natives of the South Sea islands appear to be a
people upon whom the “ Mother of Harlots ” shall operate
for the purposes of superstition and error. They would
see no absurdity in worshipping the Virgin Mary, or
any number of saints: a religion which consists chiefly
in external ceremonies would exactly meet their views,
and suit their natural taste. Pictures, images, &c.,
affect them exceedingly. Sacred days, things, persons,
&c., would be readily countenanced : in short, a religion,
however expensive, that would dispense with the strict
morality of the New Testament, is certain of having
free course among them. One thing would be difficult;
namely, receiving the eucharist according to Romish
views. The Feejeeans dare not even eat the shrine of
their god: it would, therefore, be difficult to persuade
them to eat the god himself. This they would con-
sider the height of impiety.
Surely the Protestant Missionary Societies ought to
exert themselves to the utmost to take possession of the
numerous groups of islands in the Pacific yet destitute
of their agents. A great deal remains to be done.
Nominal Christians are not unfit subjects for Popery;
and many, very many, of the Christians of the South


Seas are of this character; numerous groups being
destitute of the means of religious instruction. Rome
is exerting herself with new and increasing vigour in
these parts; and we know not what the Head of the
church may permit as the punishment of our supineness
and neglect. Unless we bestir ourselves, the pro-
bability is, that we shall have to convert many of the
South Sea islanders from Popery instead of from
Heathenism, which is much more difficult and danger-
ous. The world must be converted to the truth: and
who can think of the struggle between truth and
Popery without thinking of the Inquisition and its
tortures, public and private murders, wholesale butcheries,
fire and faggot, together with all the hideous forms
of death ?
We have no reason to expect that Popery will
change. Babylon will fall, but it will fall as Babylon.
She will retain her character to the last, and continue,
as opportunity serves, to glut herself with the blood of
the saints, until the “mighty angel” shall proclaim
her eternal ruin. The time to rescue ourselves, or
rather our successors, from another sanguinary struggle
with Popery is now. Let Protestants, at any rate, do
what lies in their power to secure the South Seas,
which have evidently been placed in their hands.
Where have Missions succeeded as they have done
here ? and yet there are some of the finest groups
without a single herald of the cross. I mention New-
Guinea, New-Ireland, New-Britain, New-Hebrides,
Solomon’s-Islands, and New-Caledonia.*
* The following brief account of the islands mentioned above,
is taken from the best sources the writer has met with. The
accounts of many of the South-Sea islands found in the common
geographies are not to be depended on, and those in the narratives
of voyagers are necessarily very imperfect: it is from the latter
source that the following particulars are taken


Under the date of June 2d, I find the following
mournful entry in the journal of Mr. Cross :—“ At six
New-Guinea, or Papua, is the largest mass of southern continent
next to New-Holland. It is from twelve hundred to fourteen
hundred miles in length, and varying from one hundred and fifty
to two hundred miles in breadth, and is probably one of the
finest countries in the world. There is abundance of pine, cocoa-
nut trees, and bread-fruit trees. The inhabitants appear to he
very rude; and from the circumstance of many of them building
their houses on posts in the water, it would appear that they are
frequently at war. Like the Feejeeans, they trade in sea-slug, or
biche-de-mar, and tortoise-shell. But very little is known of
the inhabitants, either as it respects their number or character.
New-Britain and New-Ireland are a series of groups of islands,
beginning near the north-eastern boundary of New-Guinea, and
ranging in a circuitous line parallel to New-Holland, and in the
direction of New-Zealand. The inhabitants have been supposed
to be of two kinds, the Malay and the Negro; but I imagine that
visiters have been led into this opinion by the striking difference
often to be seen between the Chiefs and the common people,—a
difference which I believe exists in most of the South Sea islands.
The difference in Feejee is very striking, more so perhaps among
the female than the male part of the population ; hut it may he
accounted for, without supposing them to be of different races.
They have numerous temples, and a regular form of idolatrous
worship.
Solomon’s Islands. They were discovered by Nandana in 1567.
The inhabitants appear to he much the same as the Feejeeans; hut
they are little known. Eighteen islands of considerable size have
been named.
New-Hebrides are a group to the south of the last-mentioned.
The northern islands were discovered by Ciuiros in 1606, and
surveyed by Captain Cook. They have lately become famous by
the murder of the Missionary Williams, on one of them, -named
Erromanga. The inhabitants are said to be fierce and energetic,
and are supposed to be two hundred thousand in number.
New-Caledonia is an island about two hundred and fifty miles
long, and forms the southern termination of this great range of
archipelago. The soil is very fertile. The inhabitants are
reckoned at forty thousand. The manners and customs resemble
those of the other islanders, so far as they are known.


o’clock, a.m., a messenger arrived from Mr. Cargill,
Rewa, to inform me that his infant daughter was dead,
and that Mrs. Cargill was very ill. I immediately
proceeded to Rewa. On my arrival, I found that Mrs.
Cargill’s spirit had gone to glory. She died about the
time the messenger arrived to inform me of her illness.
What is our life ? O that the Lord may enable me to
derive instruction from this event! May it please him
to be very gracious to the children who are thus deprived
of their mother.”
On the 3d, Mr. Cross read the funeral service over
the remains of Mrs. Cargill and her infant; and they
were committed to the silent grave, “in sure and certain
hope of a joyful resurrection.”
A short time after, the writer had the opportunity of
seeing Mr. Cargill at Rewa; having gone thither to
attend the District-Meeting, and to console our afflicted
brother.
During the District-Meeting, Mr. Cross preached
from, “ And we know that all things work together for
good to them that love God.” In the course of the
sermon he seemed naturally led to refer to his own
experience of the truth of the text. It was encouraging
to hear this veteran Missionary, who had passed through
many and varied trials, state, with the utmost cheer-
fulness and gratitude, “ And we know that all things
work together for good to them that love God.” Indeed
his happy countenance, his animated action, his exulting
tone of voice, together with his well-known history and
character, were no mean illustration of the text. Some
Preachers are eloquent from what they are, more than
from what they say. His kindness to Mr. Cargill, who
was about to leave us for England, was unbounded;
indeed, he always appeared to “ show mercy with cheer-
fulness;” and though he opposed his immediate removal
to England, it was only because even sympathy for the


afflicted could not induce him to sanction anything, the
propriety of which he even doubted.
In June, Mr. Cross had the happiness of welcoming
Mr. Waterhouse to Feejee. A General Superintendent,
and a Mission vessel, were what we needed. Less
could not be said of Mr. Waterhouse, than that in
addition to peculiar fitness for his responsible and
laborious office, he had a fatherly regard for us all.
About this time Mr. Cross writes :—“ Namosemalua
was induced, after many threats from the Bau Chiefs,
to conduct an army to Mathuata, to punish the people of
that island for insults they had offered to the Chiefs of
Bau. He laid siege to Mathuata ; but the inhabitants
held out eight days. As they had no water in the
fortification, they were reduced to the greatest distress.
A messenger was then sent to Namosemalua, begging
him to have compassion on them, and spare their lives,
promising in the name of the Chiefs and people to be
subject to Bau. The poor man urged his petition with
the greatest vehemency and importunity, stating that
they were famishing for want of wateri Namosemalua
remembered the word which says, “ If thine enemy
hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink,” and
immediately ordered them to bring their vessels and fill
them with water; though he had not yet accepted their
conditions of peace. This had a most extraordinary
effect. The people declared it was a new thing in
Feejee, and were willing to come to any terms with
their merciful conqueror. The Chief of Bau was
indignant at such a way of conducting a war. Namo-
semalua had returned without killing a single man.
“ Nothing,” said Seru, “ but the entire destruction of
Mathuata will satisfy me. Why did you spare them ?
I regard not their offers of peace: yea, I hate them.
I am very angry because they live.” He requested
Namosemalua to assist him in the war with Somosorao,


which was then in operation; but he refused, stating, “ I
fear God.” The other replied, “A great thing indeed
is Christianity ! Because of it, we are to have no men
to eat.” This was in. October ; and Mr. Cross writes
the following with evident surprise, as indicating a
better state of things:—“l do not know that a single
person has been eaten in the Bau district since March ! ”
At the close of this year Mr. Cross states there were
thirteen members in society in the Yewa Circuit, now
separate from Rewa, and twenty-seven on trial. The
number of professing Christians was one hundred and
twelve adults, and thirty children. One had died in
the Lord. Four of the former and three of the latter
had been baptized, and a few married. The average
congregation on the Sabbath, at Yewa, was about eighty.
With respect to himself, he thus writes:
“ December 27th.—A good day to my soul. I think
I love the Lord my God with all my heart. I greatly
desire to live to please him. He is very gracious to me,
and I delight to serve him.”
“ 31st. —Closed the year with a grateful heart. The
last few months have been among the happiest of my
life. Happy in the enjoyment of the favour of God,
happy in my work, and in my family.”
Mr. Cross proved, what many besides himself have
acknowledged; namely, that happiness cannot be
complete and constant without Christian perfection.
The carnal mind is as much opposed to our happiness as
to the law of God ; and until perfect love destroys it, we
shall not be able to “ rejoice evermore, to pray without
ceasing, and in everything give thanks.”
How often is our joy in the Lord interrupted by the
risings of pride ! Indeed it is difficult in many instances
to avoid being pleased with ourselves when we are happy,
especially when our happiness is the result of any success
with which we may have been favoured. But wounded
g 5


pride is still more painful. It destroys all peace ; and
how easily it is wounded where it exists! Envy is
misery itself. It repines at another’s welfare ; and
prevents us enjoying what we have, because we cannot
feel another’s joy, though we may be in very superior
circumstances. Malice is the storekeeper of misery. It
reserves the things which make us uncomfortable to-day,
to perpetuate our misery. Uncharitableness prevents
us from feeling a happy complacency in others, by
hiding their excellencies from us. It is blind misery.
None is so unhappy as the censorious. He is a social
pest; and in many instances a public nuisance. But
he has his reward. Impatience, whether with God or
man, is directly opposed to happiness. It prevents us
feeling the blessed calm of contentment, the only state of
mind which fits us for all circumstances.
Anger, unbelief, the love of the world, the fear of
man, and the carnal mind, open a perpetual source of
disquietude to all who love holiness. Now perfect love
effectually destroys all these, and communicates an
habitual state of feeling directly opposed to them all.
Fulness of joy is the natural result; so that those who
are established in perfect love are always happy, always
devotional,always thankful; for they “ rejoice evermore,
pray without ceasing, and in everything give thanks.”
Reader, “ this is the will of God in Christ Jesus con-
cerning you.”


CHAPTER XIII.
1841.
“Their tongue is as an arrow shot out; it speaketh deceit: one
speaketh peaceably to his neighbour with his mouth, but in
heart he layeth his wait.”—Jer. ix. 8.
Growth in grace is easily observable in the experi-
ence of Mr. Cross from the close of the past year to the
termination of his earthly career. He speaks of having
derived great benefit from reading the “ Lives of early
Methodist Preachers,” published by the Rev. Thomas
Jackson; and prays, “ O that my piety and zeal, my
patience and forbearance, might equal theirs!” Few
books are more calculated to revive the genuine spirit
of Wesleyan Methodism than these simple memorials
of the fathers of our Connexion.
I have purposely avoided giving details of Feejeean
wars, believing that in general they would only shock
the feelings of the reader, without conveying instruction
of any kind. The following, however, which is taken
from the journal of Mr. Cross, is so illustrative of the
character of Feejeeans, and of the piety and faith of the
relater, that I cannot altogether omit it.
In the year 1840 a war commenced between
Somosomo and a town on the same island, called
Yuna. The Bau people took the part of Yuna, which
eventually caused a war between Somosomo and Bau.
The elder brother, or rather cousin, of Seru, having-
disgraced himself, fled to Somosomo, and assisted the
King of that place against Bau. By means of this
Chief, and a son of the principal officer of Tanoa, who


had also espoused the cause of the King of Somosomo,
a considerable party of the allies of Bau joined Somo-
somo. Among these, the principal was a powerful
town called Namena. Private messengers were sent to
Vewa from this place to engage Verani and Namose-
malua on their side. Verani received the messengers
with kindness, and promised them his support, stating
that all the people of Vewa were of the same mind.
He immediately communicated what he had done to
Seru, and assured him that by this means he should
place the Namena people at his entire disposal. Sern
had attempted in vain to subdue the inhabitants of
Namena, and was of course exceedingly glad that
\ erani had undertaken to effect the object in another
way. He sent Verani a large present, promised him
one of his daughters for a wife, and said, “ My house
and its riches are yours; only effect the destruction of
the people of Namena.”
Verani, thus encouraged, began to think of the means
by which his object should be accomplished. In order
to secure the co-operation of Namosemalua, he cir-
culated a report that the Bau Chiefs were exceedingly
angry with the Vewa people, and had determined
utterly to destroy them. This report failed in pro-
ducing the desired effect.
Shortly after an event occurred which Verani had
skill enough to press into his service. The principal
wife of Namosemalua had displeased him, and in his
rage he had beaten her most unmercifully. Being
a niece of Tanoa s, she ran away to her friends, (a
common practice by which the ladies of Feejee revenge
themselves on their husbands,) and declared that she
would never return. After much persuasion, however,
she was induced to go back ; but she had only been in
Vewa a few days when a report was brought to Namo-
semalua that was calculated more than anything to


make him the enemy of Bau. The report was, that a
young Chief of Bau had committed adultery with the
Queen of Yewa, during her absence from her husband.
Verani on hearing this appeared much enraged, and
urged the propriety of making immediate preparations
for war, in order that they might be revenged on Bau
for the insult; and proposed that they should at once
declare in favour of Namena and Somosomo. Namo-
semalua said that he would not join Somosomo against
Bau, wishing to make war upon that tribe only which
had insulted him. His nephew, however, prevailed
upon him to fall in with his proposition, and the prepa-
rations for war commenced.
Mr. Cross now interposed, and reasoned with the
Chiefs and people on the impropriety of involving
many tribes in war on account of an injury they had
suffered from one tribe only ; and assured the Christian
party, that it would be much more consistent with their
character and profession “ to suffer wrong,” rather than
avenge themselves in this manner. Afterward several
feared to proceed, and the speech of the Missionary
bade fair to keep the country in peace.
Verani, however, was indefatigable. He caused
reports to be taken to Namosemalua, of plots that had.
been discovered against his life ; and declared that the
Bau people had actually collected a number of yams to
be offered to their gods, but had neglected, as was usual,
to collect pigs to be presented with them, as they
intended the bodies of the Yewa people to serve instead
of that animal.
Namosemalua could hesitate no longer; and as the war
appeared to be strictly defensive, the Christians joined
them heartily in fortifying the town.
Yerani now sent to the Namena people to request
their aid in defending Yewa, and twelve canoes with
about one hundred and forty men were sent from a place


called Mathoe. This exactly met the wishes of the Bau
Chiefs. One hundred and forty men could not be
formidable to them, and yet they were sufficient to
gratify their revenge, and intimidate their enemies.
The poor Mathoe people were in the net, and Yerani
and Seru formed the plan of securing them as quickly
as possible. It was arranged that Seru should attack
Yewa with a large force, which was to be divided into
three companies. The strongest, with Seru at its head,
was to land at a part of the island most distant from the
town, and the others to be posted so as to cut off those
who might attempt to escape. Yerani met the party
that was to attack the town, and pretended to oppose
their landing. After a few muskets had been fired on
both sides, Yerani explained his whole design to his
men, many of whom had known nothing of it till that
moment. Seru did the same to his warriors, warning
them not to kill any Yewa men, as they were their
friends, nor to touch anything belonging to the Mis-
sionary, but to assist Yerani to kill the Mathoe warriors.
During the firing, some of the Bau people pretended to
be shot, and the news was immediately taken to the
town that an enemy had fallen : the Mathoe people, who
were to die in a few moments, clapped their hands, and
rattled their spears for joy. The drum was beating, to
indicate success on the Yewa side, and all was joy in
the town, when Yerani and his party rushed in with the
Bau people close after them, and fell on their surprised
victims like so many wolves. In the space of a few
minutes about one hundred of them were massacred.
A few were shot, others were cut to pieces with hatchets,
others had their brains dashed out with the fearful clubs
of “ these horrible dogs of war.” Many of them fell
within a few paces of the Mission-house, and some close
by the door.
Notwithstanding they were so hotly pursued, the


Christian party succeeded in saving several of them, by
hiding them in their houses, and sending them home in
the night. The rest were taken to Bau, cooked and eaten.
Mr. Cross and the native Teachers had shut them-
selves up in the middle room of the Mission-house, and
piled chests and cases, &c., one upon another, as a
barricade. Mr. Cross observes, he had full confidence
that God would deliver them ; and he did. Not a hair
of their heads perished ; and not a single man who feared
God fell, though several Yewa men were killed.
This is as good a specimen of Feejeean warfare as I
am acquainted with. The success of their conflicts does
not result from their courage, (for they are cowards to a
man,) but on their skill in stratagem. Many believe
that Namosemalua had to do with scheming this plot.
He denies it; and there is no direct evidence against
him, except that he has always been remarkable for
affairs of this kind, and that they are always laid to his
charge, whether he be innocent or guilty. Mr. Cross
believed him to be unimplicated in this affair. Before
the actual commencement of hostilities between Bau
and Yewa, a Priest from Bau visited Namosemalua,
apparently for the purpose of persuading him not to
make preparations for war; but it was difficult from his
language to know what was his object. Mr. Cross
writes, “ Soon after the arrival of the Chief and the
Priest, it was reported that the god entered the latter.
This was supposed to be signified by the shaking,
writhing, and groaning of the Priest like one in con-
vulsions. The house in which he was inspired being
contiguous to ours, I heard him as soon as he com-
menced his antics, and hastened to see him, to learn
what he had to say. When the supposed deity has
taken possession of the Priest, the people regard him as
a god. I sat down at the door opposite the man pos-
sessed. When I had sat but a short time, he said to


me, “ Come in : it is agreeable to me : I know that from
your land come riches.” He continued to shake and
groan, occasionally speaking; but many of his words
were without meaning and of doubtful signification, and
put together very incoherently. At one time he might
be supposed to encourage the people to make preparations
for war, at another time to dissuade them from it. He
frequently addressed the Chief, who had accompanied
him from Bau, as if he wished him to say what should
e done. The Chief replied to his inquiries by saying,
1 You know, Sir, what should be done.” He then pre-
ceded:—“l am the god of war. I only am strong, and
vise to fight. I can do as I please. War is that by
which I amuse myself. I love it. I wish now to sport
n war. War is the proper exercise of Chiefs :it becomes
them. There are two things worthy of gods and of
Chiefs, —war and feasting. Go on. Build your walls,
erect your fences. War is good : I will fight: my hand
is strong, and long also; I can extend it to all lands, —
to Somosomo, to Tonga, to Britain, to all lands.
Well, prepare your fences. The people of Yungalei
(a town near Vewa) are preparing theirs. All the towns
are preparing for war; but none will prevail against
Bau.”
He then addressed Namosemalua as follows :—“ Your
children are for sporting and amusing themselves with
war. If they go too far, lay your preventing hand upon
them.” He then called for yanggona, stating that he
was weary with sitting. He said he came from “ bulu”
(the separate state) yesterday, and had been awake all
night, watching over the Vewa people. Yanggona was
prepared, and the Priest drank it most voraciously. After-
wards the god retired without further ceremony. When
the inspiration left him, the Priest pretended to faint,
and appeared as one dying. After awhile he awoke
out of his stupor, like a person rising from sleep after a


fit of the nightmare ; and rubbing his limbs, &c., he
became a man again. The god, however, had not taken
his final departure, but was gone to enjoy a walk after
drinking his yanggona. He soon entered the Priest
again, and went through the same manoeuvres as before.
On this occasion, however, he became very impatient for
yanggona. The Bau Chief seeing this, said to him in
an angry tone, “ There is no yanggona : here is some
sugar-cane; take that, and go.” To this insulting
speech the god made no reply, but patiently waited
till the yanggona was prepared: he drank it off, and
departed for “ hulu .” The old Chief from Bau offered me
his hand, and said, “ The god who has just visited us,
was once my son. He died, went to ‘ hulu ,’ and there
became the god of war.” Mr. Cross endeavoured to
convince both him and the Priest of their error, and
affectionately exhorted them to worship the true God.
It requires more than ordinary grace to sustain the
mind amidst abounding iniquity of the worst kind, when
the body is weakened by labour and depressed by suf-
fering, and when we are prevented from communion with
our brethren. Such at this time were the circumstances
of Mr. Cross. After the massacre at Yewa, war and
bloodshed raged in every part of the neighbourhood :
intercourse with his brethren was very difficult, and his
bodily weakness and suffering were very great.
The following extracts from letters written to Mr.
Calvert, and from his journal, will give some idea of the
debility of Mr. Cross during the trying circumstances
above detailed, and of the peaceful and prosperous state
of his soul:—
“ Vewa , September 10 th, 1841.
“ Dear Brother,
“You will pity me when you hear that I have
not been able to do anything in my study for nearly


five months. This is to me a great trial. Mrs. Cross is
still weak; but I praise God that she still lives, and
have hope that he will yet spare us, and give us grace
to live to his glory. We love God, and are very happy,
and shall be still more so if it should please him to give
us strength to labour in his cause.”
To the same.
“November 10 th, 1841.
“ I am thankful to say, we are better than when
I last wrote. I have been doing a little in my study,
and have a strong desire that it may please the Lord to
grant me strength to labour.”
The following is from Mr. Cross’s journal:—
“ December 14th.—I have been much better in health
during the last fortnight than for some time past. For
this I am thankful to the Giver of all good. I desire
especially to praise him for the desire he gives me to
devote myself to his service. I do, by his help, strive
to improve my time by living with eternity in view.
I feel that ‘ God hath done great things for me, whereof
lam glad and I much desire to show my gratitude
by doing all his will, and in a proper manner. That
the will of God may ‘be done on earth as it is in
heaven,’ is a subject which has been much on my mind
of late.
“ To assert the possibility of this would be monstrous
to many who call themselves Christians. But that it
is practicable must be allowed by all who receive and
repeat the Lord’s prayer. No true believer in the
divinity of Christ can imagine that he would direct us
to pray for what is impracticable. O Lord, enable me
to do thy will as it is done in heaven; and may the
happy day soon arrive when thy will shall be done by
all the inhabitants of the earth.”


Notwithstanding the many painful events of this
year, which were calculated to be as injurious to the
work of God as they were painful to the Missionary, the
work prospered. At the close of the year, Mr. Cross states
that there had been an increase of ten to the society;
and the number of professing Christians in the Circuit
was one hundred and thirty-four, twenty-two more than
in 1840. Two of the new converts were Chiefs from
other places, who would be the means of introducing
Christianity into their own districts, and thus of ex-
tending the good work. One hundred and twenty-one
persons were under religious instruction in the town of
Yewa, some of whom felt the power of the truth that
makes us free.
Three Yewa men are now (1844) useful native
Teachers. They are excellent men, truly converted
to God, and zealous in promoting the interests of
Christianity. One of them has been trained in the
Institution established for native Teachers by the late
Rev. John Waterhouse: he has made great progress in
his theological studies ; writes a good hand, is a
fluent speaker, has some acquaintance with geography,
and is truly devoted to God.


CHAPTER XIV.
1842.
“Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of
that man is peace.”—Psalm xxxvii. 37.
We now come to the last year of Mr. Cross’s life.
His constitution was not strong, and had never re-
covered the shock which it received in 1832, by the
wreck of the canoe, and the circumstances that followed.
During the year 1841, he suffered from a complaint in
his stomach, accompanied with a distressing cough.
Mrs. Cross observes that “he could not relish the food
which constitutes the Missionaries’ fare in these islands,”
and colonial supplies grew short long before the
“Triton” arrived with a fresh store. He was, how-
ever, able to attend to his various duties until April,
J 842, when he became very ill, and only preached
twice afterwards during his stay in Yewa. While he
had strength, he devoted it most conscientiously to his
Master’s service, and evidently increased in love to
him, and zeal for his glory.
January 7th, 1842, he thus writes to Mr. Calvert:
“ The Lord is good, very good, to me and mine. I
want to show forth his praise. I wish to live to his
glory. 1 would be wholly his. I can never, never
‘ pay the mighty debt I owe.’ O that his name may
soon be praised by all the inhabitants of the world !
May we praise him for ever.”
On May sth, 1842, he wrote to the same as
follows :—“ I have not been well enough to conduct
service in the chapel since April 24th: I then preached,


and felt much worse for it. I have a violent cough,
attended with asthma and fever. lam now somewhat
better, but far from being well. I have made up my
mind to request the District-Meeting to allow me to
remove this year to the colony. 1 think this is abso-
lutely necessary, if I remove at all, as I imagine it very
probable that I should not live another year in Feejee.
Lucy Ann has been ill for the last six weeks, and
remains so still. Mrs. Cross’s rest has been much dis-
turbed thereby, and she has been very poorly. We
were glad to hear of your welfare, and are greatly
obliged by your kindness in supplying us with flour.
The children thank you and Brother Williams for
sending them flour, that they may have bread to eat.
I know not how to thank you for the great kindness
manifested in your letters, and for your willingness to
assist us in any way.”
In August the “ Triton ” arrived, and brought us the
melancholy news of the death of the Rev. John Water-
house. Our circumstances as a District were exceedingly
trying: we had lost our General Superintendent, and
now it appeared necessary that our Chairman should
leave us. We had so few Missionaries, that it seemed
all but impossible to supply the stations already com-
menced, and we had no hopes of a speedy increase to
our number. Still we could not deny the request of
Mr. Cross to remove to the colony, as he was evidently
worn out in the service. We had one resource left,
and that was found in the medical skill of our excellent
brother Lyth. He had been made the instrument in
the hands of God of raising Mrs. Hunt from the margin
of the grave during the previous year ; and it was now
fully believed that his professional attention and society
would be of essential use to Mr. Cross. Mr. and Mrs.
Cross were of the same opinion: they therefore nobly
offered to remain another year in Feejee, on condition


that they might be stationed with Mr. Lyth. Mr. Cross
could not have removed with comfort to the colony if
any station was to be given up in consequence. It was
far easier to die in the work, than, under such circum-
stances, to leave it. During the business of the District-
Meeting Mr. Cross appeared to revive. His mind in-
vigorated his body, and he was able to attend to his
duties as Chairman with considerable ease and comfort.
Our assembly was eminently a devotional one. We
had many cares, which we could dispose of in no other
way but by turning them into prayer, and thus casting
them on Him “ who careth for us.”
For this part of our work Mr. Cross was eminently
prepared. He possessed the spirit of prayer in a re-
markable degree. Many times has he “ poured out his
heart before God ” with a freedom and fulness which I
have seldom witnessed. Indeed it was evident to us
all that he belonged more to heaven than to earth, and
that his soul was ripening for the vision of God, by
that intercourse with him which was as purifying as it
was delightful. He rose from his knees, as Moses re-
turned from the mount, with the evidence that he had
been in converse with God; not in the brightness of
his countenance so much as in the sweetness of his
temper, and the peculiar glow of devotional feeling
which mingled itself with all he did and said,
Mr. Cross was a man of prayer. He not only prayed
when on his knees, but he lived in the spirit of sup-
plication, and received signal blessings. Like Jacob, he
wrestled with the Angel of the covenant, and He blessed
him there. There was a spirit of pleading in his in-
tercessions for others which still urged its suit, until
God seemed to say, “Let me alone.” So far as he was
concerned, prayer was not the mere performance of duty,
but an implicit attention to the Saviour’s direction, and
a full belief of his promise : “ Ask, and ye shall receive,


that your joy may be full.” After the District-
Meeting we removed to Rewa; some of us on our way
to our respective stations, and Mr. Cross to convey his
stores to Yewa. During our stay at Rewa, we had the
pleasure of receiving the sacrament of the Lord’s
supper from the hands of Mr. Cross. It was a blessed
season. The whole soul of our Chairman seemed
absorbed in the Saviour’s love, thus solemnly brought
to mind.
The day for our departure arrived, and we were
accompanied by our brethren Cross and Jaggar to the
“Triton,” August 19th. We quickly set sail for
Lakemba, while our friends, Messrs. Cross and Jaggar,
returned to Rewa with a cargo of stores. After visiting
Lakemba, to leave the brethren who were stationed
there, the “ Triton ” proceeded to Somosomo to take
brother Lyth to Yewa ; but he was in so poor a state of
health, that we thought him unfit for the exertion of
removing. It was therefore determined that the writer
should proceed to Yewa, and Mr. Cross join brother
Lyth at Somosomo. This arrangement fully met the
views of Mr. Cross, as all the stations would be supplied,
while he would enjoy the advantage of Mr. Lyth’s
advice.
August 30th.—We anchored off Yewa, but found
Mr. Cross had not yet returned from Rewa. He had
been detained in consequence of an accident that had
happened to the canoe, after they left the “ Triton ” on
the 19th. The town of Rewa is upwards of five miles
from the anchorage ; and the passage from the anchorage
to the mouth of the river, which leads to the town, is
rendered very disagreeable, and in bad weather dan-
gerous, by a foul bar which extends across the mouth
of the river.
August 19th, Mr. Cross writes:—“ On crossing the
bar, the canoe was broken, and our lives placed in


jeopardy. After awhile we got safe on shore by means
of a small canoe that was passing by. Our goods were
much damaged, and some of them lost in the water,
others were stolen, and the remainder taken by the
person to whom the canoe belonged, and kept by him
until he considered himself sufficiently paid for his
canoe.” After a great deal of trouble and expense, the
goods were returned, and Mr. Cross returned to Vewa
on the 30th. Much rain fell during the night; and Mr.
Cross, being late, was drenched with wet, which had no
good effect upon his health. We found him considerably
weaker than when we left him : still we had hopes that
medicine and society would be of service. He was
cheerful and contented, as he had been during the
whole of that unpleasant affair.
We had the happiness of spending a few days with
our old friends before they removed to Soraosomo. It
was the last of our seasons of intercourse in this world.
I shall not forget the manner in which Mr. Cross gave
me his last blessing when on board our vessel, the
“ Triton.” Looking at me with great affection, he said,
“ I wish you every blessing you can wish for yourself.”
His looks and manner said much more.
The only remark which Mr. Cross made in his journal
respecting leaving Vewa, is as follows ;
“ September 10th.—I took my family on board the
‘ Triton,’ and we sailed from Vewa, where we have
laboured three years. The Lord be gracious to the
inhabitants thereof, and make them his people.”
Mr. Cross had not laboured in vain at Vewa. Since
his arrival, thirty-eight persons had been united in
church fellowship. Four new places had been added
to the Vewa Circuit, and Teachers or Catechists placed
at each. Mr. Cross and his Teachers had three hundred
and fifty-six people under religious instruction in
June, 1842.


Few of the members of society had a satisfactory
sense of their acceptance with God, but many of them
were firm in their adherence to Christianity, and were
earnestly seeking the Gospel salvation. “ Many of
them,” Mr. Cross observes, “ would die for the sake of
the Gospel rather than renounce it.”
Mr. Cross and family reached Somosorao on the 17th,
and were affectionately received by Mr. and Mrs. Lyth.
September 18th. Mr. Cross writes, “ I conducted a
short service in the native language.”
2oth. Too poorly to take any part in divine
service.
“ 30th.—Very poorly.
October Ist—Poorly still. Put my study in order,
&c.
‘ Conducted a short service in English.”
This is the last entry in his journal. Accounts of
his last illness and death are furnished by his mourning
widow, and his excellent colleague, the Rev. R. B. Lyth.
Mr. Lyth s account is as follows :
An account of the Rev . W. Cross’s last illness and death.
Brother Cross and family arrived at the Somosomo
station, on Saturday, September 17th, 1842. He was
evidently in a delicate state of health, yet I was glad to
see him look as well as he did. For the first few days
he appeared tolerably free from complaint, but from
time to time he stated that he laboured under general
weakness. A fortnight had perhaps elapsed, when
a slight dysentery manifested itself, which he traced to
a bowel complaint under which he was suffering on his
arrival at Somosomo. He took medicine for a few
days, was enjoined rest, and placed upon a suitable diet
By these means the disease was in some degree subdued,
and he felt himself so much better, that on Friday, the
7th of October, he pronounced himself all but recovered.
H


Nevertheless, I saw it was necessary to caution him to
continue quiet, and particularly so, as his active dis-
position led him to think and act as though he were in
health. In the afternoon of that day we had a Preachers’-
Meeting in his study, in company with the native
helpers. The conducting of the interview devolved
upon me ; but brother Cross prayed in Tonguese at the
conclusion of the meeting. After this I took tea with
him, and he was cheerful. But in the evening the
disease returned with increased violence. I had him
put to bed, and restricted to his room, from which he
never returned alive.
The complaint assumed a violent character, and con-
tinued its exhausting ravages night and day with
scarcely any intermission. On the following Wednesday
the disease became really alarming. The means em-
ployed were so far beneficial as to moderate in some
degree the violence of the symptoms; but extreme
exhaustion, and a troublesome hiccup, prevented our
indulging any but the faintest hopes of recovery.
The state of brother Cross’s mind during this painful
trial, was one of undisturbed peace, and of calm re-
signation to the divine will. It was evident from the
first, that death was not viewed by him as an unwelcome
or an unexpected guest. He had no doubt of his per-
sonal interest in the blood of the atonement, on which
he rested with unshaken confidence to the last.
On entering his room on Tuesday morning, he said he
was much worse. I replied, “It is true, brother Cross, you
are very ill.” “ Well,” he said, “as to myself I have
no fear; but if it please the Lord, I should like to live
for the sake of my family, and that I might work for
him. But I know the Lord can do without me.”
On another occasion he said, “ I have no fears about
my soul; for I have no doubt the Lord will have mercy
upon me, for my Saviour’s sake : not for anything there


is in me; I have been an unprofitable servant; but for
Christ’s sake.”
On the same morning Tuiilaila, the young King,
called in to see him. “ Tell the Chief,” he said, “I am
not afraid to die, and that I am quite willing that God
should do with me as he pleases.”
On Friday evening I observed a change for the worse.
Besides much restlessness, there was much excitement
of mind and incoherency in his remarks. He had a
restless night; but his mind was at intervals more com-
posed, and much engaged in prayer to God.
He was quite calm and collected when I first visited
him on Saturday morning, the day on which he died ; and
he appeared happy. He told me he thought he should
recover; but my opinion was, that his end was near,
and I said to him, “ Well, brother Cross, you have long
found the Lord to be with you, and he will be with you
even unto the end.” “ Yes,” he replied, “he was with
me last night, and I brought the whole case before him,
my wife, my children, the state of Feejee; and I am
convinced the Lord will spare me: only I would not
rest too much on an impression. I would only believe
it if it were written in the Bible.” I said, I was satis-
fied that it was the best to leave it in the Lord’s hands,
and He would do all things well. In this he acquiesced.
Upon inquiring into the present state of his soul, he
again replied, as on former occasions, that he had no
doubt the Lord would save him ; and added, that he
ought to be thankful that the enemy had not been per-
mitted to disturb him. Satan had attacked him once,
but knowing it to be temptation, he resisted and con-
quered, and had not been troubled again.
On telling him that it was my opinion that he was in
a dying state, which I thought it my duty to do, in case
he should wish to do anything further, or give any
directions about his affairs, he smiled, and said, “ I am
h 2


not afraid to die.” I asked him, “ Brother Cross, do you
still find Jesus precious?” He replied, “Yes, yes:
unto them that believe he is precious.”
He now wished finally to adjust his temporal affairs,
which had been done partially on the Wednesday. This
being accomplished, he gave his parting advice to his
weeping wife. It was an affecting scene, and worthy
of a man of God : what he said, was expressive of his
love to her, and his concern for her spiritual welfare.
He strongly exhorted her to live to God, having no
doubt that God would take care of her and the dear
children. He then desired his children to be brought
in ; but it was feared it would be too much for him in
his present exhausted state. It was his intention to have
given them his farewell kiss and blessing. It was not
done : it was in his heart; and who can doubt, but that
God heard his dying servant’s prayer, and that, in
answer to it, the blessing of Him in whom “ the father-
less findeth mercy ” will come upon them ?
Shortly after, he observed, “ As for myself, to depart
is far better; ” but pointing to his wife, he said, “ I
thought, for her sake and the children’s, it would be
better for me to remain. But the Lord knows best.”
He soon after passed into a state of delirium. His
last words while yet sensible, or as he was passing from
a state of consciousness to one of mental alienation, were
in a similar strain to the last. Stretching out his right
arm, and raising his voice, he exclaimed with great
emphasis, “ Best for a Missionary to go home, to
escape to the skies, and join the enraptured host of
heaven, and be with Jesus and angels.” Here I lost
him : he was now delirious ; but it was gratifying that,
notwithstanding, he uttered nothing that did not comport
with the man of God, but rather those things which be-
spoke a holy and Christian mind. Toward evening brother
Cross passed into a state of insensibility while we watched


over him, expecting every hour would be his last.
There was no doubt entertained by any of us, that all
would be well with the dying Missionary, and that that
Saviour in whom he had trusted
“Would not now his servant leave,
But bring him through at last.”
It was satisfactory to find that, after many hours of
delirium and suffering, there was a happy though
transient gleam of consciousness, before the vital spark
was extinct. Mrs. Cross was sitting by, and perceived
him to beckon with his hand. She took hold of it, and
said, “My dear?” To which he faintly answered, “Yes.’’
She said, “Do you know me ? if you do, press my
hand:” which he instantly did. She said again, “Are
you happy? if you are, press my hand;” which was done
immediately, as before. This was his closing effort
before the tabernacle dissolved. He comforted the
bleeding heart of his dearest earthly friend, by assuring
her that he was happy in Christ, and then hastened to a
better world, on Saturday, October 15th, 1842.
But for the exhausting nature of brother Cross’s
complaint, he would doubtless have said much more,
as he himself observed on one occasion ; but he could
have uttered nothing more satisfactory. He had lived
to God, and was joyfully prepared to die. He had no
doubt for a moment of his acceptance through the
Beloved, and he rejoiced in hope of eternal salvation
through him.
The blessed manifestation with which he was favoured
during the night of Friday, tended greatly to the
support of his faith. He much wished to have given
me a particular account of it, but was too much
exhausted.
Besides the above particulars, which passed under
my own observation, much more took place between


himself and his affectionate wife, showing that death to
him was eternal gain.
Brother Cross’s spirit and temper, during his short
but sharp affliction, bore satisfactory testimony to his
piety. His complaint was one usually characterized by
much irritability of mind, which makes it trying to the
patience of the sufferer. Brother Cross felt this, and on
one occasion observed, “ I find it necessary to guard
against impatience.” From this time his words were
marked by a remarkable degree of Christian meekness
and thankfulness.
He was eminently resigned to the will of God. All
his words and actions appeared to say, “It is the Lord,
let him do what seemeth him good.” Even the painful
task of giving up his wife and children appeared easy.
The grace of God carried him above all, and he was
“more than conqueror through Him that loved us.”
During brother Cross’s short career at Somosomo,
he preached twice. On the first Sabbath he published
to the perishing Feejeeans, with his usual earnestness,
God’s love to a lost world ; and on the following Sabbath
gave an affectionate and earnest exhortation to Christian
steadfastness, on John xv. 4, to the members of the
Mission families.
Thus closed the life and labours of William Cross, in
the forty-sixth year of his age, and the sixteenth of his
ministry.
RICHARD BURDSALL LYTH.
Somosomo, January sth, 1844.
The following is the substance of what Mrs. Cross has
written in addition to what has been laid before our
readers, extracted from Mr. Cross’s journal:—
“ Monday, October 3d.—We held our class-meeting.
The following is the substance of what Mr. Cross stated


as being his experience at that time: it is furnished by
Mr. Lyth, who conducted the meeting:—
“ ‘ He expressed his thankfulness to God for a present
salvation. He stated his exercises of mind, arising
from present state of health, with other varied circum-
stances, which had exercised an influence in damping
his joy. He spoke of the abundant peace he had been
wont to feel when fully employed in the work, and the
happiness it would afford him to be again able to labour
for God and the good of souls ; but, if otherwise, he
desired to be resigned to the will of his heavenly
Father.’
“ The disease continued to increase during the re-
mainder of the week. On Saturday, Mr. Lyth advised
him not to leave his room. The next day he was
unable to rise from his bed, and he slept but little
during the night. On Monday morning he observed to
me, ‘ The devil has been very busy with me all night;
but lam easy now.’ Tuesday morning, after having
been informed by Mr, Lyth of the dangerous state he
was in, as respected his body, I said to him, 4 You are
very ill: perhaps the Lord is about to take you. What
is the state of your mind ?’ He smiled, and said, ‘ For
me it is far better; but lam willing to live, if it please
God, for your sake and the children’s,’ I asked, ‘ Are
you free from all doubt and fear? ’ He replied, ‘ Yes;
free from all,’ I then inquired, ‘ Are you quite
happy? ’ He answered, ‘ Yes ; quite happy! ’ Thurs-
day he was unable to talk much, being very weak; but
happy and resigned to the will of God. On one
occasion I said to him, ‘ You are going to leave me :
you will be happy in heaven, I shall have to toil alone.’
He replied, ‘Yes; it would be a selfish feeling did I
long to be gone; lam quite willing to stay, and help
you, if it should please God.’ I then said, £ Give me
some promise to comfort me.’ He immediately replied,


‘ Cast thy burden on the Lord, and he will sustain
thee.’ ‘ Casting all your care upon him, for he careth
for you.’ ‘All the Missionaries will be kind to you.
Look to the Lord! Live to him, and he will take care
of you.’
“ About three o’clock on Saturday morning, he said
to me, ‘ I have seen glorious things during the night;
things that it is not lawful to tell you. I have been
talking with God ; and I think I shall recover.’ A short
time after he said, ‘ O how I love you! What an
excellent thing love is ! Let us try to get more of it.’
On one occasion I said to him, ‘ I wish you could talk
with me a little.’ He replied, ‘I think much about
you, and pray much for you ; but I cannot talk.’ I said,
‘I think you will soon leave me.’ He said, ‘Yes; I
am going before ; but I shall welcome you to the skies.’
I made particular inquiries respecting the state of his
mind, when he assured me again, with a smile on his
countenance, ‘ I have no doubt, no fear: all is right:
I am quite happy; ’ and shortly afterwards added, ‘ I
could say much of my Saviour, were I able to talk.’
He then became delirious, and lay with his eyes fixed
upwards, occasionally moving his hands and feet, his
breath becoming shorter and shorter.
About half an hour before he died, I perceived he
was sensible, and wished to speak to me, but was not
able. I said, ‘My dear, if you know me, press my
hand.’ This he did. I inquired, ‘ Are you happy? if so,
press my hand again.’ He did so. I made another
inquiry; but either his reason had fled, or his strength
had failed, as he did not repeat the sign.
He was now sinking apace. He lay breathing
gently. I then thought I did not perceive him breathe.
His happy spirit had fled, to join the hosts above, and
commence his everlasting Sabbath. The next day a
coffin was made for him by the native Teachers, and in


the afternoon his remains were interred close by the
graves of the children of Messrs. Lyth and Hunt.”
The Rev. T. Williams prepared a monument of wood,
which serves to point out the spot where his dust and
that of his companions in the grave are interred.
From what has already been said, it will be seen that
Mr. Cross’s piety was purely scriptural. His faith in
Christ was preceded by genuine repentance, and was in
its constant exercise, simple, exclusive, and saving. He
had no superstitious dependence on the ordinances of
Christ, but trusted in him as his Saviour, and used the
ordinances because they were appointed by the Saviour
to lead us to himself. He did not limit the efficacy of
the precious blood of Christ, or the renewing and
sanctifying power of the Holy Spirit; but sought and
found that full salvation which consists in being cleansed
from all sin, and the habitual possession of such a
degree of the Spirit’s grace as enables us to love the
Lord our God with all our heart, and mind, and soul,
and strength; and every man as our own soul. This
great blessing he obtained before he commenced his
ministerial career; and though he did not make such
proficiency in holiness as some have done, he never
became a lukewarm, half-hearted professor; but con-
sidered it the sole business of life to attain perfect
holiness, and to do good in every possible way to the
bodies and souls of men. I shall not enter into any
description of Mr. Cross’s character as a man and a
Christian, but confine myself to a few particulars
respecting his character as a Missionary.
One of the most remarkable features in his character
was his untiring industry. “ Never be unemployed ;
never be triflingly employed ; never while away time
was one of the grand rules of his life. His almost
innumerable engagements were well arranged, so that
h 5


nothing was neglected; and his time was so well
husbanded, that but little was lost. He was, indeed,
“diligent in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.’ 1
“ His mind,” says Mr. Jaggar, in a brief sketch of
Mr. Cross now before me, “ was of an active temper-
ament, and he naturally possessed a great flow of animal
spirits, which was fully directed to objects the most
benevolent. This principle gave a zest to all his
engagements. Whatever he undertook he performed
with all his might: there was no relaxing in his efforts,
but what he believed to be his duty, he accomplished;
his natural resolution and moral courage carried him
through with it. He knew of no obstacle to oppose
him in the path of duty, neither would he soon cry out,
‘ There is a lion in the way.’
“ In his Missionary character I regarded him as a
pattern of zeal and diligence worthy of imitation. In
labours he was more abundant; a great redeemer of
time ; faithful in the ministry of the word ; and strictly
conscientious in every secular engagement. He was
cheerful in his work, and always acted as if raised
above the possibility of distrust and despondency. His
eye was single, and his whole body full of light. The
confidence he had in the faithfulness of God was strong,
and he counted nothing a sacrifice when the good of his
fellow-creatures was secured.”
Another very striking feature in Mr. Cross’s cha-
racter as a Missionary, was his uprightness and integrity.
Even the natives were forcibly struck with this. When
I informed Namosemalua of his death, he put his finger
out as straight as he could, and feelingly said,
“ Mr. Cross was just like that; ” meaning he was quite
straight. He never trifled with his conscience, or with
the sacred claims of right and wrong. He was con-
sequently a person who invited your confidence. You
had no hesitation in trusting him. Mr. Jaggar observes,


in the paper already alluded to, “ He had a very high
sense of justice between man and man, and was
scrupulously conscientious in his attention to the dis-
charge of every debt of duty and obligation, as well as
to the fulfilment of every promise ; and I know of no one
of my acquaintance who was so attentive to little things.”
Industry and integrity were not the only excellencies
of Mr. Cross, but to the writer they were the most
prominent. In these he was eminent; in many others
not defective. It may be well now to refer briefly to
the manner in which he performed some of the many
duties which devolved upon him : such a statement may
serve to show what the employments of a Missionary
are in these islands, and how they are observed by
faithful men.
1. Learning languages , and reducing them to a written
form. Mr. Cross was not favoured with many ad-
vantages in early life in a literary point of view,—a
circumstance which he must have felt from the com-
mencement to the close of his Missionary career; for he
had more literary work to do than many whose lives are
devoted to such pursuits. His want of opportunity was
his misfortune, not his fault : he, however, made good
use of the time in which he was a scholar, and attained
more real knowledge than many whose youth is con-
sumed in what might be properly called, “playing at
going to school.” Mr. Cross’s knowledge of the English
language was good; and he acquired, according to the
testimony of competent witnesses, a good knowledge
of the Tonga language. In acquiring this tongue, he
was, what all must be who would excel, enthusiastic ;
so much so, that he scarcely read English at all, except
for devotional purposes, for some years ; spending the
whole of his time in studying, preaching, and writing in
Tonguese. This he afterwards regretted, and probably
it was not wise ; but it shows how fully he was devoted


to the peculiar object of his calling, and did not spend
his time in pleasing himself, but in doing good. He
never became so well acquainted with the Feejeean
language as he was with that of the Friendly Islands;
but his knowledge of Feejeean was very respectable.
Both languages are very simple, and a person may
soon acquire as much as is necessary to make himself
understood ; but a critical knowledge of either requires
great application.
2. Translating the Scriptures, preparing school-boolcs,
composing hymns, tyc., make a very important part of a
Missionary’s work in these distant islands. In this
department of Mission-work Mr. Cross was truly inde-
fatigable. A chapter, or part of a chapter, translated
during the day, generally formed part of the record of
the day’s labour in his journal. It is really astonishing
how much he effected in this way. It must not be
understood that ignorance of Greek and Hebrew totally
unfits a man for translating the Scriptures. A person
with the authorized version, Campbell’s “Dissertations,”
a good Commentary, and good common sense, may
make a tolerable translation of the Scriptures into any
language which he understands. Mr. Cross had all
these qualifications and helps, and he used them well ;
the consequence of which was, that he sometimes made
a better version than those who translated from the
original. Nevertheless it would be wrong to say his
translations were perfect. Not many of them have
been printed: they are, however, evidences of his
admirable industry to serve the cause of Christ in
every possible way. Translating was to him a means
of grace. While preparing the bread of life for others,
his own soul was fed.
3. As an English Preacher Mr. Cross did not par-
ticularly excel. There was sometimes a degree of
hesitancy in his manner, which made it easy to see he


could think better than speak. In native, he was
entirely free from embarrassment, and his sermons were
often plain, pointed, and powerful. Some of his
sermons could not be forgotten by his hearers. He
often took large portions of Scripture for a text, and
dealt largely in illustrations from Scripture history.
4. Mr. Cross delighted in visiting the people as their
Pastor, counsellor, and friend. He not only visited the
Christians, but considered all, however ignorant and
degraded, as committed to his care, and made oppor-
tunity the only limit of his exertions to do good. He
was a man of one business : feeling that he had nothing
to do but to save souls, he devoted himself entirely to
this one object. Respecting his faithfulness in reproving
sin, Mr. Jaggar remarks: “In delivering his soul, he
was very faithful ; he would on no account sutler sin in
any; and so great was his earnestness in reproving or
correcting error on some occasions, that it had the
appearance of zeal untempered with kindness, whereas
it was nothing but the strong expression of his concern
for the person reproved, and his hatred to sin.” His
reproofs had sometimes the appearance of sharpness,
and his natural temper was evidently irritable : this,
with a weakly body, and strong feelings, sometimes laid
him open to the suspicion of want of meekness, especially
in the difficult work of opposing what he believed to be
wrong. Some persons allow almost everything to pass
unreproved, while others administer reproof in such a
manner as to leave the transgressor as unconcerned
about the consequence of sin, as the reprover appears to
be; others again are so apparently angry when they
oppose error, that the person reproved is led to conclude
that sin is only regarded by him as a personal insult:
few, indeed, who are faithful in reproving “ all who sin
in their presence,” so far as possible, doit always in love
and meekness of wisdom.


5. Administering medicine was another way in which
Mr. Cross laudably exerted himself for the good of
others. This is a very responsible, laborious, and
useful part of a Missionary’s work in these islands.
Though the natives have some knowledge both of
diseases and medicines, they readily yield to the superior
skill of a Missionary who will take the necessary pains
to understand their complaints and give them medicine,
for which they will generally remunerate him according
to their ability. Mr. Cross had not had the privilege
of regular instruction in the healing art; but he was
often successful in his efforts to alleviate suffering, and
remove disease. His favourite book was Graham’s
“ Domestic Medicine; ” and he found it, as many others
have done, on the whole, a safe guide. He would
speak of his success in this part of his work in a manner
which showed the kindness and benevolence of his heart.
6. Every Missionary is a schoolmaster. Mr. Cross
was well fitted for this duty, having been employed in
the work of instructing youth before he left England.
Schools are of the utmost importance in these islands;
but we have never yet been able to prevail upon the
heathen population to attend them. As soon as a
person has been to the house of God, and renounced
Heathenism by publicly bowing the knee to Jehovah, he
repairs to the Mission-house for a book, and immediately
begins to learn to read. There have been a few instances
of persons learning to read while still Heathen ; but such
cases are very rare: the people generally consider
learning to read, and every other step towards civilization,
an essential part of Christianity. We have not taught
them to connect the two so rigorously, having frequently
requested the Heathen to send their children to school :
they, however, refuse ; so essential is Christianity to the
civilization of this people. In fact many of them hate
civilization as such. Many angry threats have been


thrown out against the Christians of Vewa by their
heathen neighbours, because they wear decent Tonguese
dresses, instead of the abominably indecent clothes of
the Feejeeans; and the men are despised who attend
to their families in their own homes, instead of idling
their time away in the native bure, or tavern. Heathens
glory in their shame, and despise everything pure,
lovely, and of good report, as effeminate and unworthy
the notice of brave men : while war, cannibalism, and
every degrading, beastly, and diabolical vice, are admired.
No sooner do they become Christians than they feel the
force of the Apostle’s words, “What fruit had ye then
in those things whereof ye are now ashamed ? ” They
become ashamed of the barbarism in which they before
gloried, and are prepared for the best form of civilization,
that which is taught in the New Testament. Mr. Cross
was very desirous to civilize the natives; but he knew
that the only way to accomplish this object was to make
them Christians. He therefore devoted all his strength
to this work, and God honoured him with success. The
secondary effects have followed. Incipient civilization
is to be found even in Feejee. The Christians are many
of them distinguished from their heathen neighbours
by their love of truth, justice, and mercy; by their care
over their families, their superior clothing, their industry
and good order. Only the other day, in the town
where I am writing this, a woman, of whom I had not
much opinion as a Christian, refused to sacrifice her
chastity at the risk of her life. The man who was the
cause of her being placed in such peril and temptation,
belonged to a vessel, the Captain of which makes con-
siderable pretensions to Christianity. It would be a
blessing indeed to the Mission cause, if the people from
civilized nations visiting these islands were only half as
much civilized as the generality of the Christian natives
in Feejee are at this day.


7. It only remains on this part of our subject to
mention Mr. Cross’s manner of dealing with the natives
in general. A Missionary has to fill every capacity with
reference to his people. His advice is asked on a vast
variety of subjects, especially if he succeed in gaining
their esteem and confidence. He has to employ them,
to trade with them for his provisions, &c., and is con-
nected in one way or other with many things with which
a Minister in England has nothing to do practically.
Mr. Cross was judicious. He always kept clear of
Feejeean politics and parties. He gave his opinion and
advice as a Missionary, and not as a politician. He
never squandered away the property of the Mission by
needless or foolish purchases, or injured the cause by
giving less for what he bought than was just and right.
In all these things he was particular, acting in all with
a single eye, having the spiritual and eternal good of the
people at heart, and remembering that all his trans-
actions with them had an influence on their present and
eternal destiny. He did not expect too much from the
natives, and was consequently seldom disappointed with
them. He never trifled with them, or indeed with any
one, and therefore was not trifled with ; for natives will
generally pay a Missionary in his own coin. These are
little things ; but life is made up of such, and he who
attends well to every part, attends well to the whole.
Respecting Mr. Cross’s character as a friend, Mr.
Jaggar observes: “During ray personal acquaintance
with Mr. Cross, I found in him a friend and brother, at
once kind-hearted, affable, free, and generous. To
establish and increase our intimacy by continued marks
of affection, seemed his study and delight. He appeared
to me to be eminently the same man under every cir-
cumstance, and carefully did he avoid saying or doing
anything that might give offence. He was far removed
from everything like narrow-mindedness : a noble and


generous principle pervaded his heart, which gave
frankness to his friendship. He was not like some men
who require a long acquaintance to be known and
loved, or to be long known to be well known. Above
all, Mr. Cross was fully convinced of the necessity of
union in heart and affection among those who are the
Lord s messengers, and was most happy when circum-
stances favoured such a pleasing state of things.”
Mr. Jaggar further observes on another part of Mr,
Cross s character : “In his family he was a kind father,
an affectionate husband, and was especially fond of
domestic order and good management, ‘ ruling well his
own house.’ His piety was seen to great advantage
in the hallowed devotional engagements of the family
altar, when his prayers were richly adorned with sim-
plicity, and the sanctifying influence of faith. On such
occasions he seemed to bring everything before the
Lord, and the manifestation of the divine presence was
vouchsafed, I cannot but think of those social seasons of
blessing with heartfelt pleasure.”
On the same subject his excellent widow observes :
“He was a most affectionate and tender husband and
father ; always pleased when he could do anything for the
comfort and happiness of his family, and ever striving
to promote their spiritual welfare. He loved his children
much. Many were the prayers he offered on their
behalf, that they might be made partakers of the grace
of God in early life; and his last direction respecting
them was that they should be brought up Wesleyan
Methodists.”
“To Methodism,” Mr. Jaggar observes, “he was
warmly attached. He loved its principles, doctrines,
and discipline, and honoured its institutions.”
Lastly, he died in the Mission field. His dust rests
in Feejee ; from whence it will not be called alone in
that day. Many then will be his joy and crown of


rejoicing. O ! that day will show the relative value of
the time, the property, the talent, and influence which
have been spent in the cause of Missions. Many a
mighty Monarch, many a conqueror of nations, will then
envy the man who fell in the cause of his Judge, and
who has thus lost his life, but found it. Mr. Cross has
left a widow and five children : the eldest is ten years of
age, and the youngest three. They will doubtless have
an interest in the prayers of the people of God, and in
His care and bounty who has said, “ Leave thy father-
less children, I will preserve them alive, and let thy
widows trust in me.”


Letter from the Rev. Richard Burdsall Lyth, addressed
to the Secretaries of the Wesleyan Missionary
Society.
Somosomo, Eeejee, January 6th, 1843.
Dear Fathers and Brethren,
By the last communications from this District
you would learn that brother Hunt had removed from
Somosomo to Yewa, and that brother Cross had
become my colleague in this station ; being unwilling,
notwithstanding his very infirm state of health, to
remove from the field of labour in the present circum-
stances of the Mission. I have now to give you the
painful information of his affliction and death.
Mr. Cross and family had just become comfortably
settled in Somosomo, and we were all indulging the
pleasing thought of a happy year together, when he was
seized with dysentery. His disease was first of a
mild kind, and was apparently drawing to a favourable
termination, when he suffered a relapse : the disease
then put on a violent character. This relapse took
place on Friday, October 7th, 1842.
On the Wesdnesday following, the complaint became
very alarming. There was a slight mitigation of some
of the symptoms on Thursday, but extreme exhaustion
and a troublesome hiccup prevented our indulging any
but the faintest hopes of his recovery. On Friday
evening I observed a change for the worse. Besides
much restlessness, there was much excitement of mind,
and incoherency in his remarks. On Saturday morning
my worst fears were painfully confirmed. Mr. Cross’s
mind was composed and tranquil, but it was evident
the closing scene was fast approaching. He now, for


the first time, indulged hopes of his recovery; but these,
I told him, were no longer cherished by myself. He
was now evidently sinking ; and fearing lest his mind
should be buoyed up by vain hopes, and be unconscious
of his approaching end, I said to him, that I believed he
would soon be in a better world. He smiled, and said,
“I am not afraid to die.” After a short pause, he said
to Mrs. Cross, that it was my opinion he would not
recover. He now wished to close his temporal affairs,
which had been done in part on the Wednesday. When
this was done, he gave his parting advice to his wife.
This was an affecting scene, and worthy of a man
of God. What he said was expressive of his love
to her, and his concern for her spiritual welfare. He
strongly exhorted her to live to God, having no doubt
that God would take care of her and the children.
He then desired his children to be brought in; but it
was feared it would be too much for him in his present
exhausted state. It was his intention to give them his
parting kiss and blessing. It was not done, but it was
in his heart; and who can doubt but that God heard his
dying servant’s prayer, and that, in answer to it, the
blessing of Him in whom * the fatherless findeth mercy,’
shall come upon them ?
Shortly after, he observed, “As for myself, to depart
is far betterbut (pointing to his wife) he said,
“ I thought for her sake, and the children’s, it would
be better for me to remain. But the Lord knows best.”
He soon after passed into a state of delirium. His last
words, while yet sensible, or as he was passing from
one state to the other, were in a similar strain to the
last. Stretching out his right arm, and raising his
voice, he exclaimed, with great emphasis, “ Best for a
Missionary to go home; to escape to the skies, and
join the enraptured hosts of heaven, and be with Jesus
and angels.” Here I lost him : he was now delirious ;


but it was gratifying that, notwithstanding, he uttered
nothing that did not comport with the man of God,
but rather such things as bespoke a holy, a Christian,
mind.
Toward evening, Mr. Cross passed into a state of
total unconsciousness, and we watched over him, ex-
pecting every hour would be his last.
There was no doubt whatever, in any of our minds,
that all would be well with the dying saint, and that
that Saviour in whom he had trusted,
“ Would not now his servant leave.
But bring him through at last:”
yet it was satisfactory, after many hours of delirium and
suffering, that there was a happy, though transient,
gleam of consciousness before the vital spark escaped
away. Mrs. Cross was sitting by, and perceived him
beckon with his hand. She took hold of his hand, and
said, “ Father; ” (as she had been wont to address him ;)
to which he faintly answered, “ Yes.” She said, “Do
you know me ? if you do, press my hand; ” which he
did instantly. She said again, “ Are you happy? if
you are, press my hand ; ” which was immediately done,
as before. This was his closing effort before the
tabernacle was quite taken in pieces : he comforted the
bleeding heart of his dearest earthly friend, by assuring
her he was happy in Jesus, and then hastened to be
dissolved.
Before his death he had one or two convulsive
motions of the face, after which he breathed more
and more gently, till at last (we could not tell the
precise moment) it was evident he had breathed his last,
and his happy spirit had departed “ to be with Christ,
which is far better.”
Concerning Mr. Cross’s state of mind, I may, briefly,
further remark, that it was evident from the first that


death was not viewed by him as an unwelcome or
unexpected guest. He had lived to God, and was now
joyfully prepared to die. He had no doubt, even for a
moment, of his personal salvation through the blood of
the atonement. The enemy made one grand attack
upon him; but he instantly resisted the devil, and he
fled from him. He more than conquered, through faith
in the “ blood of the Lamb.” This was his only plea,
and from it he never moved. His invariable answer,
when questioned on the state of his mind, was, that
he had no doubt of his present and final salvation
through Christ his Saviour.
We could not well postpone the funeral till after the
Sabbath ; so we had a coffin made by two of our natives,
and by 5 p.m. all was completed. Mr. Cross’s remains
were then conveyed to the burial-ground where
Mr. Hunt’s and my child were laid, and there deposited
to be seen no more till the resurrection of the just.
Several Feejeeans as well as Tonguese witnessed the
ceremony, and conducted themselves with the greatest
propriety. For their sakes I gave a short address in
Feejeean ; but the service itself was conducted in English,
according to the form of the Church of England. All
was concluded while it was yet day.
Since Mr. Cross’s decease, in October, 1842, sister
Cross and family have been residing in Somosomo,
awaiting the coming of the “ Triton,” which arrived
in Feejee early in July. Her mind has been gra-
ciously supported under her bereavement. Her
youngest child was for a long time in a very pre-
carious state of health, but has now recovered.
Sister Cross and the other children are at present
in tolerable health. We expect that in a few days
more they will embark for New South Wales. So
the “ Triton ” will take away two widowed mothers,
with each five children under their care. May a


kind Providence watch over them all, and sanctify
these painful bereavements to our good and his, own
glory!
I am,
Rev. and dear Fathers and Brethren,
Your obedient servant,
RICHARD BURDSALL LYTH.
ROCHE, PRINTER, 25, HOXTON-SQUARE, LONDON.




