

Mmmm ♦ ♦
*yf a
By T. S. REED.
PRICE-ONE SHILLING.
♦ ♦ %ms. fife.
Printed bt W, k. Thomas & Co.
me.




c




SBsiL®
MEMORIES OF LONG
LIFE,
By THOMSS S. REED.
:
Printed by W. K. Thomas & Co.
1896.


4 nil*
“ say oft of the years as they pass from sight,
This is life with its golden store;
I have it once, but it comes no more.”


IMssoc//-
I.—INTRODUCTORY.
The following narrative is descriptive of
personal reminiscences, extending over a long
and varied life, during which I have been
brought into contact with many well-known
public characters, and even circumstances of
national importance. To young Australians
this record should be of some interest and
value as illustrating the decided change that
has taken place in social and other conditions
of life. The recollections date from the riots
at Bristol in 1831, associated with the reform
movement; and include the cholera, old-time
elections, early experiments in mesmerism
and other modern discoveries; interviews with
various notables of that time; experiences at
the respective Exhibitions of 1851 and 1862,
and that of Paris in 1855, besides many other
interesting episodes in English life of the last
generation.
Personal,
I was born at Wellington-place, Bristol, on
May 22, 1818, and have possessed the advan-
tages of a worthy ancestry, including the
names of Risdon Darracott, of Wellington (an
ejected clergyman), described by his biogra-
phers as the “Star of the West,” and also of
Oliver Peard, of Devon, an ancestor of Captain
Peard, well known as “Garibaldi’s English-
man.” My grandparents, of whom two old
paintings of the Gainsborough type are in our
possession, were bom somewhere between


1724 and 1730. My grandfather is mentioned
in “Cottle’s Reminiscences” as “a worthy
bookseller in Bristol, and a publisher of some
of Coleridge’s works.” In reference to my
grandmother, I was often told the story of an
uncle who had served in the navy in the early
part of the Peninsular Campaign, to whom at
the close of some engagement a brother officer
had said —
“How is it that in all the brushes we have
had together you have never had a scratch?”
“My mother,” he replied, “is always
praying for me.”
My father was born in 1774, and was for
many years a wine merchant and shipowner
in Bristol, having removed in 1824 from
Wellington-place to Charlotte-street, Queen-
square, the centre of a block of seven
houses facing the banqueting-room of the
Mansion-house, of which more hereafter.
My father was a perfect embodiment of a
Christian gentleman, and under such a calm
exterior that I never once saw him angry in
my life. During his last years he lived at the
Mall, Clifton, where he died in his ninetieth
year, on an autumn afternoon, with the sunset
just streaming into the room. His brother
merchants lowered the flags halfmast high
throughout the shipping at the port in respect
to his memory.
JOHN FOSTER AND ROBERT HALL.
My early recollections embrace some of the
fortnightly lectures of John Foster at Broad
mead Chapel, and I can still remem-
ber, not the matter, but the manner
of his discourses, which were delivered
in a low,' deep, mumbling kind of tone.
It was well known that Erskine and
Brougham had once travelled all the way from


London on purpose to hear one of these
Wednesday evening short sermons. Foster
often came into Bristol from his house at
Downend, apparently absorbed in thought,
and quite unconscious of his own personal
appearance in the matter of dress, which con.
sisted notably of a long, loose, green baize
study coat and a pair of huge spectacles. He
had, as is recorded in his life, “ such marvellous
powers of description, and such sublimity in
conception and imagery,” that it was the
common custom with two of the college
students to walk over to his house at Downend
on the Sunday evening, agreeing together
beforehand to introduce some special subject,
on which Foster would at once launch out, en-
chaining their attention until often past mid-
night. Just at this time Robert Hall accepted
an invitation to the pastorate of Broadmead
Church. Foster at once relinquished his
lectures, saying—-
“Jupiter is come. To continue them would
be bordering on impertinence.”
His opinion of this great preacher is thus
expressed in a letter written to a friend.
“In some remarkable manner everything
about Robert Hall —all he does or says—is
instinct with power. Jupiter seems to emanate
in his attitude, gesture, look, and tone of
voice. Even a common sentence, when he
utters one, seems to tell how much more he
can do. His intellect is peculiarly potential,
and his imagination robes without obscuring
the colossal form of his mind. ”
A glowing description indeed, but fully
borne out by the reality. Although only a
boy of eleven I can recall with vivid distinct-
ness his impassioned eloquence, his rapid
delivery, and the holy inspiration with which


he wound up every sermon. More than once
have I seen and taken part in what is recorded
in his life, that “ amidst the sublimity of his.
descriptions, so impressive, so solemnizing,
one after another would rise up unconsciously,
lean forward on the edge of the high pew,
their eyes fixed upon him, until a large portion
of the congregation was standing, and remained
so until the end, when they would slowly
resume their seats.” He was an intense
sufferer from calculus, which obliged him
to lean one arm on the pulpit cushion.
Every now and then, when at the
close of a period, he would retire
a step or two back in the pulpit;
when the hitherto breathless silence was at
once broken by a storm of coughs from the
great mass of his hearers, as some relief from
the extreme tension of listening. His preach-
ing attracted men of all ranges of thought.
Francis W. Newman, brother of the
late Cardinal, who sat immediately before us,
Dr. Addington, Dr. Pritchard, author of the
“Races of Man,” &c., and at the far corner of
the left gallery sat John Foster.
Robert Hall was very ready in ripartee, and
when occasion demanded equally pungent.
One instance stated in his life was quite
familiar to me at that time, and I mention it
here, as not long since I noticed the same
thing attributed to some clergyman in our
day. It was the case of a young man of inor-
dinate vanity, who incidentally had Robert
Hall for a listener, and afterwards asked him
in the vestry what he thought of his sermon.
Mr. Hall at first made no reply, but upon the
question being repeated said —
‘ ‘ There was one passage, Sir, that I admired
exceedingly.”


“ Indeed, Sir, what was that?” the young
minister eagerly said.
“The passage from the pulpit to the vestry,
Sir.”
On another occasion some one observing to
Mr. Hall that his animation increased with,
his years. “Indeed, Sir, then I am like
touchwood, the more decayed the more easily
fired.”
His powers of conversation in private were-
as rich and varied as was his preaching, and
my mother would sometimes send for him to
spend the evening, when Mrs. Hall would
arrange three chairs or a sofa as he wished, for
him to lie upon. This was the only endurable
position from the intense pain he suffered.
Indeed, at Broadmead it was his custom at
last to lie down on his back on the bare boards
of the vestry until just before the sermon. I)r.
Addington diagnosed the disease as “an
apparatus of torture,” and if one saw as I did the-
character and sizeof the fifty-three sharp many-
pointed calculi removed at the post mortem —
similar in shape to our thorny grass seeds, only
much larger —the definition would be fully
endorsed. There is a published statement by
Dr. Addington that in the fifteen hours pre-
ceding his death he had taken no less than
125 grains of solid opium, equal to 4 oz. of
laudanum. >
ROWLAND HILL.
About this period I had repeated opportuni-
ties of hearing the Rev. Rowland Hill, minister
of Surrey chapel, who often came to Bristol.
Although an ordained Episcopal clergyman, he
preached in Chapels of every denomination
and sometimes in the open air. He was very
pithy, often bringing in touches of humour
bordering upon the ludicrous, that provoked a-


smile or even a laugh, a far more exceptional
circumstance in that day than at present.
And his long, grave face, full-wrinkled cheeks,
and very small eyes intensified one’s sense of
the ludicrous. He always gave me the thought
that he looked like a grave reverend old
■elephant. Once when at Wapping he com-
menced his sermon by saying—
“ I am come to preach to great sinners, to
notorious sinners, to profane sinners, yea, to
Wapping sinners.”
But the one well-known sentence I heard
from him when preaching at Cathay Chapel
about two years before his death fixed itself
irrevocably upon my boyish memory, and I
have him and the dry manner in which he said
it in my mind’s eye at this moment.
“Ah! When I go up there many of you
will be glad to lay hold of the skirts of my
garment, but I’ll nab you all, for I’ll go up in
a spencer.”
NOEL, PITT, AND WILBERB’ORCE.
Just at this time I occasionally heard the
Hon. Baptist Noel. He was a delightful
preacher—his manner earnest and persuasive,
with a singularly winning and melodious voice.
And although his preaching was never
dazzling, he attracted large congregations, his
favourite theme being the love of Christ in re-
-demption. Pitt and Wilberforce once heard
him together, and at the close of the sermon
Wilberforce said—
“That was a perfect exposition of gospel
truth. What did you think of it?”
“I did not understand a single word from
beginning to end,” replied Pitt.
It was a clear illustration of spiritual dis-
cernment of spiritual truth on the one hand
and the total absence of it on the other.


lI.—THE BRISTOL RIOTS.
The one prominent event in my early days
was the Bristol riots in October, 1831, of
which, from the position of my father’s house,
I was incidentally an eye-witness. This riot
was the worst of the many acts of violence
that occurred throughout the kingdom conse-
quent upon the rejection of the Reform Bill.
Sir Charles Wetherell, then Recorder of
Bristol, was among the strongest opponents
of the Bill, and from the rancour and violence
of his speeches was regarded as one of the
most unpopular men in England. He had
arrived at the precincts of the city on that
Saturday afternoon, previously to entering the
Sheriff’s carriage provided for his public entry,
in order to open the Commission at the Guild-
hall for the Assize on the following
Monday. A dense, threatening mob had
assembled even there —two miles from the
city—and he was strongly advised by the
Sheriff to make as private an entry as possible.
But the warning was disregarded, and
although escorted by a large body of special
■constables and upwards of 300 gentlemen on
horseback, he reached the Guildhall with the
greatest difficulty. Stones were constantly
thrown at him and at the attendants, many of
whom were much injured; and all this amid
the fearful yells and execrations of the mob,
who became so turbulent while at the Hall
that constables were called in and scattered
through the masses, with the vain endeavour
to preserve some kind of order. After the
Recorder had arrived at the Mansion House
the rioters became so furious that the Mayor,
Mr. Charles Pinney, repeatedly came out just


in front of our house, remonstrating with
them. To make matters worse, in a tussle
with the constables one of their number had
killed a rioter by a violent blow on the head
with his bludgeon. This so increased their
exasperation that a general attack was made
upon the constables, who were completely
routed.
The Mayor then came out and read the Riot
Act, but had no sooner retired than the
Mansion House itself was assailed ; the
windows were smashed and shutters shivered
into splinters, the rioters finding their way
into the lower rooms and breaking every
article of furniture they could find.
The Mayor and his party had now
barricaded themselves in the inner rooms.
Sir Charles had escaped over the roofs of the-
adjoining houses, and left the city in disguise.
Unfortunately this was not made known until
noon next day, or the riot might possibly have
ended. We now saw the mob make a sudden
rush towards a woodyard in Little King-street
close by, and bring out a number of faggots,
with the intention of firing the Mansion
House, and the Mayor sent at once for a troop
of soldiers, which soon arrived under the
command of Colonel Brereton. The Colonel’s,
instructions, however, were so vacillating, and
he himself so good-natured, ringing the
changes between handshakings, threats, and
remonstrances, that the presence of the troops,
was a mere farce, and they were soon
after ordered back to their quarters. Things,
after this became comparatively quiet, and I
hoped the row was nearly over, as the car*
penters were at work all Saturday night
boarding up the lower windows and securing
more effectively the entrance door. The con-


trast on that Saturday afternoon, between
the shattered and barricaded windows beneath
and the banqueting-room above, the long
tables covered with snow-white linen laid for a
hundred guests, glittering with glass and
covered with the Corporation plate, was a
thing to be remembered. The plate, however,
was removed immediately the riots began to
look very threatening.
On Sunday morning the mob began to pour
in in crowds, when they again broke into the
Mansion House and proceeded to throw out the
furniture into the square. This was followed
by the sacking of the cellars, and it was said
that more than a hundred dozen of fine old
wines were brought out and drunk during that
Sunday and the following night. I well re-
member seeing the first bottle brought up and
broken by a rioter, who had no sooner tasted
it than he flung the bottle away with a look of
unutterable disgust. It was hock! But he
and the others had full compensation in
the champagnes and fine old port that fol-
lowed. The rioters had now become so in-
furiated by the drink as to be thoroughly reck-
less of consequences. The adjoining houses
were ransacked; furniture, wines, and spirits
were carried out into the square, and crowds-
of men and women of all ages were seen lying
in a state of beastly intoxication all over the
grass, one of them being removed soon after-
wards quite dead from the drink. In the
afternoon reports came in to us of one calamity
after another. First the doors of the Bride-
well prison had been beaten in, then those of
the Gloucester County Gaol, after that the
House of Correction, and finally the new gaol,
the prisons being fired and the prisoners re-
leased in each case, thus adding materially to


the force and temper of the mob. The Bishop’s
Palace was next attacked and fired, and we
now felt from the apparent excitement of the
mob that a crisis was fast approaching in our
'own immediate locality. On that Sunday
■evening the Mayor’s chaplain—Rev. Thomas
Curme —had come to see us, and as he was
conducting family worship one of the servants
on guard in the drawing-room burst in, and
;said—
“They have fired the Mansion House.’'
We found, on going upstairs, the flames
burning fiercely in several places, the begin-
ning of a great and rapid conflagration. In
the space of three hours the mob had fired
round the two sides of Queen-square (the size
■of Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London), comprising
the Mansion House, the Custom House, at
the other corner of the same block, and forty-
two private houses, besides the Bishop’s
Palace, and the four gaols already mentioned.
Near the Custom House was a private dwelling
with some extensive wine cellars underneath,
belonging to a Mr. Webb, whom we well
knew. This house was guarded by his
managing clerk and six men. Two mere
boys, of about eighteen or nineteen, broke into
the place, and the seven men left the pre-
mises, apparently paralysed, without offering
the least resistance. I heard it often said
through that awful night that so devoid of
moral courage was that mob that half a dozen
men well armed would have stopped them at
any turn.
At this juncture a young lawyer friend,
Louis Livett, came in with half a dozen others,
armed with bludgeons, offering my father any
assistance they could give. Louis told us of
the sacking of Webb’s wine cellars, and that


one of the rioters had said—“ Now, let’s go*
over to Reed’s;” but that a man cried out,
‘No, don’t touch him; he’s a good fellow,” -
and that the mob had then gone on to the next
premises. We could then thank God for the
worth of a good name. There were traitors in
the field, nevertheless. About an hour after-
wards, when our friends had departed, my
father, who had gone upstairs, suddenly called
mj. On going up to his bedroom I saw him
take a large pair of pistols out of their case,
which he loaded with small slug shot. He
gave me no explanation, and seemed perfectly
calm about it; but on promptly descending to
the drawing-room I knew the reason why.
Two men were lying down on the cellar doors
in the courtyard below, trying to force open
the lock. My father leaned over and said,
“ Begone from this,” when one of them looked
up with an impudent grin and said, “ I shan’t.”'
He then stepped back for the pistols, laid
them on the window sill, the barrels just
projecting over the edge, with this brief ex-
hortation—
“I will give you five minutes, then you will
take the consequences.”
Within a minute or so they slunk away and
never returned! We were thus again pre
served. In the middle of that night I went
with my father to the centre of the square and
stood- close to the statue. The whole space-
between this point and the burning houses was.
covered with furniture —pianos, tables, chairs,
—cases of wine, barrels of beer, casks of
spirits; and crowded with men and women
drinking, shouting, swearing, many of them
lying dead drunk on the ground, and the-
whole scene a perfect pandemonium. The
heat, even at that distance, was intense. We-


looked across at the Custom - house, which
was faced by a large leaden-roofed portico.
The lead had melted and was flowing over the
edges to the ground like beautiful silver
stalactities.
Suddenly we saw a large black body of a
man fall down from an upper window into the
melted lead, when he curled up and dis-
appeared. It should here be said that these
upper apartments had been occupied as care-
taker by a Miss Brickdale, sister of the
Comptroller, who had abandoned them
only a few hours before. This unfor-
tunate man was one of sixteen rioters
who were known to have gone up to
these rooms, and finding a good larder, got
up some rum from the cellars below, resolving
to have a good feast. They all perished. Two
fell into the molten lead, three jumped out
into the street, the rest died in the flames
which burst upon them in a moment, through
the explosion of the rum casks in the cellars
beneath, which enveloped the whole building
in a perfect sheet of flame. Ten days after,
when walking over the Custom-house ruins, I
picked up a small piece of (I suppose) this very
man’s armbone, broken across diagonally, the
marrow cells being filled with minute leaden
fibres! Charles Kingsley, then a boy of my
own age, speaks also of going along the north
. side of the square three days after the fire and
seeing a ghastly row of charred fragments, one
that of a woman. These I remember seeing
distinctly, at the western end of the broad
path.
But to return. As the night wore on the
citizens generally were moved to indignation
at the indecision of the Magistracy, who were
so shamed into action that early on Monday


morning a troop of the 14th Light Dragoons
were sent for, under Major Mack worth, with
direct orders to disperse the mob at all
hazards. That grand charge I shall never
forget. They came into position for a moment
or two at the head of Charlotte-street, when
my mother, who was at the drawing-room
window, said to the officer —
“ Do your duty.”
With a wave of his sword for the reply he
gave the word “ C-h-a-r-g-e,” and away they
went past our house at a full canter into the
square. The first two sabre cuts I saw as they
passed by. One took off the top of a woman’s
straw bonnet, which flew whizzing through the
air like a flat oyster-shell. The other made a
clean vertical cut through a man’s nose. He
was just opposite our window, and I can see
that man’s utter astonishment now and the
blood streaming down his face. The Blues
then leaped over the wooden rails, making a
splendid charge almost at full gallop right
through the square, scattering the now terrified
mob, who flew in all directions, some even
rushing into the burning ruins, where it was
said two of them perished. A large body of
special constables now arrived, and, acting in
concert with the troops, arrested a number of
the leading rioters, when the disturbances
practically came to an end, and the fires were
gradually extinguished.
The week or ten days following were to me,
and no doubt to all other boys, intensely in-
teresting. The fierce fires that had raged
through these forty-four buildings had left
standing an almost innumerable array of tot-
tering walls, high chimney-stacks, and por-
tions of buildings—a standing menace to the
lives of those who ventured within range.


Many of those did fall of their own accord.
For the far greater number a large force of
men had to be set on with every needed
appliance—scaling-ladders, ropes, and chains,
and heavy scaffold-poles—with which either to
prise or to pull down the whole of these
tottering structures, and a sensational period
it was to crowds of lookers-on.
Shortly after the termination of the riots
Colonel Brereton was tried by court-martial
for tampering with the mob. I was inciden-
tally present at the last day’s proceedings,
unhappily brought to a close the next morning-
through the sad intelligence that he had shot
himself in the night. The leading rioters were
arraigned before a Special Commission of
Judges in the December following, when four
of the ringleaders were hanged and upwaras
of fifty transported for life.
III—THELWALL AND ERSKINE.
In this year (1832) I attended a course of
lectures and elocution delivered by Thelwall—
lectures full of interest in themselves, but still
more so through his previous history. Thel-
wall, together with Horne Tooke and Hardy,
were tried in 1794 for high treason as members
of some political society supposed to be in
sympathy with France. They were acquitted.
Thelwall himself was a tall, thin, wiry-looking
man, but bearing a dignified presence and full
of fire. This was fully evidenced at his trial.
He was so dissatisfied at something that
occurred in the course of Erskine’s defence
that he wrote upon a piece of paper, which he
threw to Erskine, “ I’ll be hanged if I don’t
plead my own cause.” Erskine at once
returned the answer —“You’ll be hanged if
you do!”


THE CHOLERA PLAGUE,
In this same year the cholera made its first
appearance in Bristol, striking terror
into all the inhabitants both rich and
poor. It attacked mainly those of dirty
and intemperate habits, especially in
localities of bad drainage. The highest death-
rate recorded in Bristol in one day (from
cholera alone) was seventy-two in a population
of about a hundred and twenty thousand. On
that day I remember standing with others in
Corn-street when the large black-painted
th cart was being slowly driven along*
giving us all a shudder. I heard then that
the proper thing at a time of cholera is
generous giving and plenty of salt, as the first
thing the disease does is to extract all the
saline elements from the system. This sug-
gestion is supported by a paragraph I read
some years since in the Scientific American
(giving particulars and where it occurred), viz.,
that the cholera when raging in the States had
attacked a large proportion of passengers on
one particular steamer. The captain adminis-
tered this dose to each patient and never lost
a case:—A teaspoonful of cayenne pepper and
a tablespoonful of salt to a pint of hot water.
One need not add “to be drunk as hot as pos-
sible.” I commend the prescription with due
respect to the faculty, trusting that the occa-
sion may never arise for the use of it. This
disease was, I believe, the origin of the Boards
of Health, which were established throughout
the kingdom under the most stringent regula-
tions with respect to cleanliness.
CHARLIES.
A never-to-be-forgotten relic of former days
was the night watchman, nick - named


“ Charley, ” who, as he paced his accustomed
round, called out the hours of the night or
morning, always adding a report on the
weather.
In those days of housebreaking, and
generally by masked burglars, no one, in
this day, can imagine the general sense of in-
security, and the comfort it was while lying in
bed to hear the cry of the night guardian,
“Pastil o’clock and a cloude-e-e night,” or
“ Past 3 o’clock. Al-l-l-s well.” But at times
your slumbers were suddenly broken by the
loud springing of the rattle, startling enough
in the stillness of the night to the stoutest
heart; for it meant either a robbery, a fire, or
an assault upon the watchman. In some
instances he brought this upon himself, for if
discovered asleep in his box by any late
homecomers from their potations, the box and
its drowsy contents were promptly knocked
over.
Another well-known character in my early
days was the hackney coachman, who bore the
dignified title of “Jarvy,” a title applied
equally to the driver in town or on the roads.
These coachmen, almost without exception,
wore a brownish-drab greatcoat, surmounted
by a huge eight or ten fold cape. In long
journeys by mail, and with sundry exchanges
of drivers, the fees came to money, especially
if (as in later days was often the case) the team
was handled by a gentleman. I remember one
very popular coach on the Cheltenham-road
that was driven by an army captain—l need
not say minus the overcoat, as above. He
never thought of soliciting a fee, but every one
of us went up very voluntarily to drop one
into his hand, then and then only extended.


and accepted with a quiet “Thank you,” as-
a tribute justly due for our priviliges.
And his fee (as between Gloster and Chelten-
ham) was sometimes approximate to the fare.
JEMMY WOOD.
I often visited Cheltenham, and en route-
once saw the well-known form of Jemmy
Wood (the miser) standing on the doorstep of
his Bank. Both he and his father scraped
together every halfpenny they could, living
upon next to nothing. One day in a liberal
mood Jemmy bought a bunch of flowers, took
them in, and said, “Here, father, smell this?”
The loving father growled out, “How much?”’
Said Jemmy, “A penny,” when the old man
took one out of his pocket, held it up close tO’
Jemmy’s nose, and said, “Smell that.”
I cannot here forbear mentioning a farcical
tragedy in his life’s history. Some friend had
sent Jemmy a duck and a bottle of fine old
port, and he therefore laid his plans for a nice-
little dinner. Having occasion to leave the
cottage for an hour or two, he placed the duck in
charge of a country youth with strict injunctions-
as to the spitting andbastingduringhis absence.
As a wise precaution he also labelled the
bottle “ Poison,” showing it to the youth, and
telling him not to touch it as he valued his
life. He left; the youth stood at the spit and
rotated the duck. At first pale, then a light-
brown, then browner and browner, and
emitting an odour so fragrant as to call forth
from the lad an audible sniff. . . . The
sweet odours now increased, and with them
the sniffs, and he thought, “If it smells so golly
what must it taste?” He dipped his finger into-
the gravy dish, and rubbed it against the duck
again and again until his head swam. Stop-
ping the spit with the thought “one slic&


would never be missed, ” he cut one, and then
another and another, until the bird was nearly
finished, when, falling back with horror at
what he had done, he caught sight of the
bottle of poison. “ I’ll take it,” he exclaimed,
“ and be a sooecide.” The poor boy then bade
adieu to life, gave a thought to his mother,
took the poison, and laid himself down as he
thought to die, leaving a mental, if not a real
nscription on the label, “I’ve taken it, for
I’ve eaten the duck.”
Jemmy Wood died in 1836 at eighty, leaving
a million and a half in several wills so conflict-
ing in character that both kinship and money
were claimed by half the Woods in the King-
dom in Chancery suits that lasted for years, to
the great delight of the bigwigs, and absorbed
three-fourths of the money.
“reform bill !”
The Reform Bill was carried a third time by
the House of Commons in the following year
amid great rejoicings, and ultimately by the
Lords. I went with my father to the great
Reform banquet that was given in Bristol a
year or two after to Lord John Russell, when he
was presented with a silver candelabra, raised
by sixpenny subscriptions. Lord Ebrington
and, I think, Mr. Roebuck also were present.
One very funny caricature of the King,
William IY., came out at this time—drawn as
taking his usual constitutional stroll in the
Park, and suddenly coming up to a high wall
on which were painted in large white letters
the words, “ Reform—Bill!” Shading his eyes }
the King reads the inscription and says, “Can
that be me ?”


No. IV.
OLDEN TIME ELECTIONS.
The elections at that time differed essentially
from those of the present day, the polling ex-
tending from a fortnight to three weeks.
Political parties then were the Whig on the
one side and the Tory on the other; Radicals,
Liberals, Unionists, and Parnellites being un-
known. Party feeling ran very high in those
days, and many a respectable tradesman, especi-
ally in country towns, was half ruined by the
withdrawal of custom from adherents of the
opposite party. Almost every one you met,
voter or not, wore a blue or yellow cockade, and
if they did not, it was through fear of loss of
trade. Every one knew on which side you were,
and how you had voted. The extent of bribery,
corruption, and public-house treating was
beyond all conception. Some were plied with
liquor, or drugged, and then taken far away
into the country, where they were feasted or
kept there nolens volens until the election was
over. Two guineas a man was often given for
a plumper, and a guinea for a single vote, the
payments being as a rule deferred until after
the candidate was returned. The first great
contest I can remember was between Richard
Hart Davis and William Miles, of
Leigh Court, as Tories, and Thomas
Protheroe (a relative of the Castle
family) as Whig candidate, in which the
latter came in (with Davis) victorious. A
free open fight with bludgeons between
the two factions was a common sight at every
election. I have now in my mind’s eye a
batch of about twenty gentlemen led by a
merchant (Mr, V. H), all wearing blue


cockades and armed with bludgeons. They
entered at one corner of the square waving
their weapons as a challenge to a number of
yellows who were lurking about at the other
end. Each party then ran towards the other,
fought until they were satisfied, eventually
retiring with many a broken head; but I never
heard at Bristol of any serious injuries. The
.staves were either ash or pine, certainly not
blue or red gum.
CHAIRING THE MEMBERS.
The one great ceremony was chairing the
successful members. The chair tsielf was
a gorgeous structure, gilded, carved, and
cushioned with coloured velvet, resting on two
long skids and supported by at least a dozen
men on either side. Many an instance was
known, although I never saw one at Bristol,
in which a deliberate charge was made by the
opposing faction against the chair itself, ending
in the ignominious upset of the member into
the crowd. But if saved from this he had
always to run the gauntlet of yells and groans
and hisses, sometimes of stones or brickbats,
flavoured now and then with eggs, and these
not recently laid.
A SUCCESSFUL CAMPAIGN.
The hardest battle ever fought at Bristol in
any time was between Mr. Philip Miles and
Sir Richard Yyvyan against the Whig candi-
date, the Honorable Henry Berkeley (brother
of the then Lord Segrave, afterwards Earl
Fitzhardinge, an Earldom promised him by
the Government if he got in his four brothers
.at the next elections, which he did). Berkeley
defeated Vyvyan by a majority of, I think,
about fifty. The Tories had made a firm
stand, determined at whatever cost to get in
both their men, and the scale ran up and down


between Berkeley and Yyvyan during the
whole fortnight. I worked hard on Berkeley’s
Committee, and was incidentally in the hust-
ings room at the adding up of the approximate
total, when two of us had a race together to
the Bush Hotel, where Berkeley was anxiously
waiting for the result. I won by three or four
yards, and rushed into the room shouting, “You
are in. You have won.” He just grasped my
hand ; but was so overcome that for a moment
or two he could not utter a word. He served
Bristol faithfully for five and twenty years
until the time of his death. The ballot has
now altered the whole character of the present
elections, removing the great source of bitter-
ness which formerly prevailed.
CELEBRITIES.
I often visited some relatives at Oxford, and
on one occasion met at my uncle’s house Mr.,
after Dr., Elvey, the organist. At Wyatt’s,
the well-known engraver, I also met Webster,
the painter. He was the Mulready of his day,
his well-known pictures being “ The Dame’s
School,” “The Slide,” “The Village Play-
ground,” &c., &c. Some years after we stood
side by side at a Royal Academy Exhibition
in front of Turner’s celebrated picture “ Rain,
Storm, and Speed,” when he spoke of the
wonderful force of the painting as if caused
by one accidental splash after another of the
brush, and yet producing exactly the effect
desired. There were. I think, about half a
dozen of this class of pictures that excited so
much attention, and that stood out in such
contrast to his early and highly-finished
works.
On a subsequent occasion I was at an
election dinner given by my uncle to the
Liberal members for Oxford and the


County, Sir William Harcourt, and Lord
Camoys. Apart from the politics, the one
curiosity at this dinner was some hock and
some sherry recently bought at a nobleman’s
sale that had been ninety years in bottle, and
of which we were all vouchsafed a wine glass of
each. The hock was perfectly sound although
a little ropy, but the sherry had a peculiar,
almost drug-like flavour. On one of these
Oxford visits I dined at Queen’s College with
Samuel Lucas, whom I had known well as a
brother member of a junior debating society at
Bristol. He gained the English prize poem
that year, and was afterwards on the Times
staff for many years.
FIRST ENGLISH iERONAUT.
When at Oxford I was introduced on one
occasion to a great uncle, in an oilpainting,
who commended himself to my affectionate
interest ever after. He was represented as en-
tangled in the car ropes of a balloon which had
descended with him into the Irish Channel,
and was now evidently being blown and
dragged along at great speed. He was happily
saved from drowning by some fisherman’s craft
sailing close by at the time.
Wyndham Sadler, they told me, was the
first English aeronaut. This inaugural effort,
which failed owing to his using a balloon on
the Montgolfier principle, took place at Shot-
over Hill, near Oxford, on September 12, 1784,
three days before the ascent of Leonardi.
Subsequently he made several successful as-
cents, culminating in the one from Liverpool,
as represented in the painting, after which
terrestrial pursuits engaged his entire atten-
tion.
EDWARD IRVING.
Returning again to Bristol —I often went


from mere curiosity on coming back from
our Sunday service—to a small Irvingite
Chapel in Princes-street, and stood with others
outside the door anxiously waiting for the
“manifestation of tongues.” The utterances
always seemed to me to come at a slight drop
or pause in the address. One or two I still
remember, uttered in a shrill voice, that
sounded at first almost unearthly, “Woe, woe,
woe,” repeated many times, and also “Why
are His chariot wheels so long in coming?”'
We well knew one rich Irvingite lady, living
at Ashley-place, who for some years—l think
until her death —had her table laid daily with
silverplate and snow-white linen in expectation
of the Lord’s second coming.
In the Christmas week of this year, 1833, I
was asked to sing “Comfort ye My people” at
a Moravian Love Feast —an annual religious
gathering, in which the “ Messiah” music was
a main element. I sang the same piece soon
afterwards at the opening of a new organ at
Hope Chapel, Clifton, when the Rev. William
Jay preached.
Almost every year we received a visit from
an old Oxford friend, who with his manservant
came for a week or two, always taking me
under his wing for some nice excursion; but
never omitting one or two visits to Bath, its-
well-known pump-room, and the hot baths,
and hot springs adjoining. It was as much
the fashion then both for ladies and gentlemen
to do the warm baths as to promenade in the
pump-room ; indeed, the large bath was itself
a kind of promenade, ladies and gentlemen all
bathing together, slowly walking about in
thick brown linen kind of gowns slightly
leaded. Many a liquid walk have I had
there. The one fashionable conveyance then


for balls, dinners, and afternoon calls was the
well-known Bath chair, just large enough for
one, and borne by two men with straps slung
from their shoulders round the ends of the
skidpoles, one on either side. The great con-
venience of this chair was that it could be
taken into the hall of a house, there dis-
charging the precious cargo, instead of in the
cold or damp air outside.
BATH AND WELLS.
The origin of the combined Bishoprics, as I
always heard it at both places, was, that on
the original preferment, the question was put
to a Norfolk clergyman as to which he would
choose, Bath or Wells? It is well-known that
no Norfolk man, however pure his diction in
other respects, can properly pronounce the
word “both.” This reverend gentleman is
said, therefore, to have replied “baoth” —the
real rendering in pronunciation is between
“baith” and “both” intending to say
“Bath.” They thought, however, that he
meant “both,” and so gave him the two Sees!
There is another version, but whether this is
the real, or merely traditional origin, I am not
prepared to say.
A SEPULCHRAL CURIO.
A great hobby of mine at this time was a
small museum of curios, collected together in
a small room over my father’s office, compris-
ing snakes, lizards, and scorpions, of all kinds,
in spirits obtained from ship captains; and also
a large cabinet of coleoptera, in collecting which
I had much assistance from Mr. (afterwards
the late Dr.) Thwaites, of Colombo, who him-
self had then a large collection, beautifully
arranged and classified. My greatest curiosity
was a small piece of cerement with the dried
flesh adhering to it of “Catherine Parr.” It


was undoubtedly genuine. She was buried at
Sudeley, near Cheltenham. The vault and
also the coffin had only recently been opened
in the presence of a number of persons, when
there was a great scramble fcr relics, and my
friend obtained a strip of this cerement from
a gentleman who was in the vault at the time.
SCIENTIFIC FRAUD.
Another and very curious relic was not
genuine. This was a small animal about three
inches high, somewhat angular in shape, with
a fin-like body and a rather broad little beak
at the higher angle, and given to me by a
West Indian captain as “A Cockatrice” (as
mentioned in Scripture), who lived on and
sprung from the clefts of the rocks into the
water. It was a great curiosity to every one
who inspected it, as indeed to myself; but I
never could decide from the first as to its
ability to make this aforesaid spring from the
rocks. So I asked a friend, Samuel Stuch-
bury, Curator of the Museum (than whom none
was better qualified) to come and see it. He
looked at it very intently for some time, and
said —“ Of course it isn’t a cockatrice, but it is
very ingenious I It was a little infant ray , with
the sides turned up into shape, the mouth
twisted together into a beak, and the inside
just touched up with Vermillion to resemble a
mouth. “ Sic transit gloria Cockatricia. ”
A BLOODLESS DECAPITATION.
On the walls of my fresco museum was a set
of framed “ Elgin Marbles” in plaster of paris.
and round the room casts from well-known
statues on pedestals, such as the Three
Graces and Venus of Canova, Laocoon,
Apollo, Magdalen, &c., &c., besides a set of
busts. One of these was that of Napoleon the
Great, which I had bought of an Italian boy.


It was very thinly cast, and I had turned him
on his head to pour in more plaster, as an
outer cuticle. Napoleon in consequence broke
off at the neck, and when the Italian next
came, his smiling reply to my rather wrathful
remonstrance was, “Did he bl-e-e-d?” I was
immediately pacified, and we smoled together.
ENGLISH BOUNDARY RIDING.
One occupation of great interest to me as a
boy was found in the old custom at Bristol of
“striking the bounds,” which was formally
done once a year. I think it was the Church
Warden and the parish clerk who officiated as-
leaders, supported by thirty or forty boys,
armed with white willow rods or “ withes.”
The procession started from a given point
all round the parish, and the rods were
struck violently against each boundary as it
was reached, which, I need not say, was to us-
boys very great fun. I remember one boun-
dary was a certain point on the stage of the-
Bristol Theatre.
HANNAH MORE.
About this time my father, in speaking to-
me about Hannah More’s writings, said,
“You ought to take an opportunity of seeing
her. She is very old and cannot live long.’’
So I went up to Clifton one morning, and
waited and waited on the Crescent where sho
lived, until at last a sweet-looking aged lady
with silvery hair came to the window, and I
had seen Hannah More.
BURDOCK MURDER CASE.
In 1836 my father was the unwitting instru-
ment in bringing to light a case of murder at
Bristol that formed one of the “ Causes Cele-
bres” for years after. A widow lady, named
Clara Ann Smith —for whose late husband my
father had acted as trustee —had died. He>


therefore enquired without delay into her pro-
perty and effects from the landlady with whom
she had lodged—one Mary Ann Burdoch in
Trinity-street. Her statements were so un-
satisfactory and so suggestive of foul play that
my father sent his lawyer to carefully investi-
gate the whole matter. The body was exhumed,
the contents of the stomach analysed by Wil-
liam Herapath, in conjunction with the emi-
nent physicians Dr. Riley and Dr. Symonds,
and found to be strongly impregnated with
arsenic. Mrs. Burdoch was tried by Sir Charles
Wetherell, and upon the evidence of a servant
and others sentenced to death and hanged.
The trial lasted for three days, and she sat
therein the dock a sad picture, dressed as if for
a promenade and highly rouged as if only to be
admired; for she was a tall, fine-looking
woman.
HANGING FOB FORGERY ABOLISHED.
The last case of hanging for forgery was
that of Fauntleroy, the banker. After this
a strong revulsion of feeling set in against
capital punishment for forgery and similar
crimes, for in the early part of the century a
man was hung for stealing a shilling. The
law was now altered, and transportation was
prescribed instead. I once saw a London
“hanging mob” at Newgate, and never cared
to see another. The summura bonum of the
criminal then was to “die game before his
pals.” Happily this kind of hero worship is
now impossible by the adoption of private
executions, as suggested by Charles Dickens,
though not in its entirety, for his theory was
the tolling of abelland closing the shops during
the whole hour.
CLIFTON SUSPENSION-BRIDGE.
The Clifton Suspension-bridge was first de-


signed by Telford in 1830, and at this early
stage progressed only as far as a portion of
the two piers, when it was stopped owing to
the failure of the contractors, Messrs Orton
and Paxton. It then remained in abeyance
until 1836, when a new design was furnished
by Mr. Isambard Brunei, and the foundation-
stone laid by the Marquis of Northampton,
who stood on the abutment surrounded by
other members of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science, then holdiug its
meetings at Bristol. Having joined the Asso-
ciation I went and got an excellent standing-
ing-place not far from the noble Mason. Some
weeks after an iron-stranded rope was passed
across and bolted firmly to each abutment,
this rope carrying a strong wicker basket to
carry four, suspended on running wheels. The
first journey across from pier to pier, 702 feet
in span, was made by Mr. Brunei, Captain
Claxton, his son, and Mr. Mac Adam (nephew
of the “ roads” inventor) It was then thrown
open to the public; and I went over on the
next evening and alone. The basket was kept
in a little wooden house, and I stood there
just before getting in, shuddering. The depth
to the water beneath was 231 feet, the rope
itself looked like a slender gossamer, and the
deflection appeared so great from the enor-
mous span that it looked like a flying leap
halfway down to the river; but I had to go,
and did. The confining hook was with-
drawn, and away flew the basket, whiz-
zing down the rope at a great speed,
the impetus carrying it fully halfway up
the ascending part of the bar on the
other side, when I was pulled up to the oppo-
site pier by a rope attached to a windlass.
This process was repeated on the return


journey. It was a lovely summer’s evening;
and looking over the edge of the basket at the
river steamers beneath, their passengers ap-
peared at that depth like little pigmies. This
iron rope remained in position for many years
longer, a standing reproach to Bristol apathy,
until at last a Company was formed to pur-
chase the chains of the Hungerford Suspension
Bridge, which were eventually fixed up at Clif-
ton under the direction of Mr. Barlow and
Mr. Hawkshaw, and the bridge opened in
1864, thirty years after its commencement.
The same evil spirits that hovered around the
London Monument spat out their venom on
the bridge at Clifton, for suicides became so
frequent that special guards had to be adjusted
to the sides of the bridge rails, and a vigilant
watch kept up, which acted as an effectual
preventive.
No. V.
BRITISH ASSOCIATION.
The meetings of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science in 1836 as afore-
said, were full of interest, the various sections
comprising the great scientists of the day.
Among these were Brewster and Whewell
(with their opposite theories on the plurality of
worlds), Forbes, Danbeny, Coneybeare, Bab-
bage, Sir D. Lubbuck, Sir W. Hamilton, Mur-
chison, Stuchbury, and W. Herapath, both of
whom I knew well. Herapath read a paper
on “American Poisonings,” rendered doubly
interesting to us at Bristol by the recent Bur-
dock case; and Professor Wheatstone read a
paper on “ Electric Light.” In the course of
the week we took a trip down the river, when


Professor Coneybeare explained the strata of
some banks of the Avon. Great interest was
also excited by the experiments of a Mr.
Pocock, who exhibited a light carriage he had
constructed to hold two, drawn by two large
kites, fled bv three strings, one in the centre
and one at each wing, and which he manipu-
lated splendidly.
The general meeting of all the sections was
held at the Theatre Royal. Among the other
speakers was Tom More. I well remember his
■opening remarks, “ It is said that knowledge
is power; I say that knowledge is virtue, too.”
DON, MY JEWEL.
My father had two vessels in the Oporto
trade, the Vintage and the Avon, and on the
•civil wars occurring at this period be
tween Don Pedro and Don Miguel,
the Avon was chartered by the latter
faction to convey stores and ammunition.
While attempting to cross the bar she was
fired into, seized, and finally abandoned by
captain and crew. No pecuniary loss was sus-
tained, as we received full compensation. In
the face of his cruelties and excesses, Don
Miguel received from the Oporto ladies the
title of “Don, my Jewel.”
THE WHITE man’s GBAVE.
One branch of our business was in the
supply of bonded wines to captains in the
West Indian and African trade; in the latter
especially, trading between Bristol and Sierra
Leone, truly named “ the white man’s grave,”
from the almost innumerable victims to the
fatal malarial fever. The two principal
appointments there were the Justiceship and
the Bishopric. One after another have I
known go out to the Judgeship, each hoping
y care and strength of constitution to escape;


but all were stricken down. The miasma
would rise up like steam, especially towards
evening, causing many fatal cases, not only on
land, but also among the ships’ crews in the
harbour. The mortality was less among the
captains, who were no doubt more careful in
diet, and in taking constant doses of quinine
but in many cases they were crippled for life.
A Captain Wood, whom I knew well, told me
that although he always strove to keep as much
as possible out of the stagnant air, yet he
always knew when the fever was coming on,
and had to succumb in nearly every voyage,
the fever in each instance attacking both
fingers and thumbs. His hands, if he could
have spared them, would have been a curiosity
in any museum —fingers and thumbs with
hardly an exception bent together, twisted,
or withered away almost to the bone. Long
after this period, I think between 1846 and
1850, we lost a very intimate friend, Owen V.,
who went out to the Bishopric and died a year
or two after. The salaries paid in these ap-
pointments were high, as also to the ship cap-
tains and crews, the trade being profitable to
the merchant at home, viz., the bartering of
ornaments, beads, bangles, coloured linen,
&c., &c., with the native chiefs and authorities
for gold dust.
OXFORD —THE BOAR’S HEAD.
I remember once witnessing at Queen’s Col-
lege, Oxford, an ancient custom, observed
every Christmas, when a boar’s head is borne
on the shoulders of the officials, followed in
solemn procession through the quadrangle into-
the College, by the Dons and any under-
graduates who may be there at the time; and
all “ chanting” the old rhythm
The boar’s head in hand bear I
Dedecked with baize and rosemary,” &c.,


The custom arose, I believe, from an under-
graduate in former times having been attacked
in the New Forest (in Hampshire) by a wild
boar, “ whom he did then slaye.”
MUSIC.
In the course of this year I heard four
notable performers —Ole Bull, Clara Novello,
'Thalberg, and Bochsa. Ole Bull was a charm-
ing violinist, and was said to approach Paga-
nini both in tone and execution, especially in
his three string bowings, for which he also,
like Paganini, had great length of finger.
Clara Novello was unsurpassed in sacred
music, singing as she always did with such
deep feeling. Thalberg seemed to excel in
chords and to revel in thumping them.
Bochsa was the first solo harpist of his day;
but to me the simple airs of the formerly well-
known blind Welsh harpist, who used to play
outside Monmouth Castle, were infinitely
more touching.
MESMERISM.
Early in 1837 a German Professor delivered
a series of lectures on mesmerism. The ex-
periments were tried on pale cataleptic sub-
jects, who were “rigidized” and then sub-
mitted to the audience for testings, such as
hanging a heavy weight on the extended
limb, or pricking with a pin some choice little
sensitive spot on the arm, which with others
on the platform I did, trying both tests, but
without producing the smallest consciousness
of sensation.
These lectures were followed by one of a
still more sensational character by Mr. Hera-
path (a great chemist' of that day) on the
properties of nitrous oxide gas, given at the
Horticultural Room, Clifton. I would here
remark that in this lecture-room a range of
wooden seats was fixed ranging from the floor


in front of the lecturer nearly to the ceiling at
the opposite end. The effect produced by the
gas as administered to persons of different
temperaments seemed to differ in every
instance. The first inhaler—l presume a
young literary spouter —stepped suddenly
forward, threw out his arms in a most tragic
attitude, rendered a quotation from Shaks-
peare, and then collapsed. The next stood up
in front of Herapath, squaring at him in true
pugilistic form. The third fled up the seats,
apparently as lightly as a bird, in the midst of
the audience (both ladies and gentlemen) from
floor to ceiling. He produced a great sensa-
tion, but with apparently no injury what-
ever to any one. At the top he seemed to come
to himself, and quietly came back in a civilized
condition.
I witnessed this same result years after
(under nitrous ether gas) at the London Uni-
versity, when a medical student whom they
called “ Smike” (and tall and thin and poorly
clad he was, like Dickens’s character) also
fled up the seats between the students
to the top of the amphitheatre, close to where
I was sitting, but so lightly that no one
appeared to be the least disturbed in any
way.
A STARTLING INTRODUCTION.
Not long after this I tried an experiment
myself in this same room on some of the pro-
perties of equilibrium. It was successful.
Underneath this range of ascending seats was
of course the flooring on which they were
fixed. A lecture was going on, and the small
side door leading into this dark interior had
been carelessly left open, a tacit invitation
to three of us boys to enter in. We were now
under all the people, and on reaching the first
accessible seat or foot plank, eight or nine feet


from the floor, and at about a five feet per-
pendicular, I peered up between seat and foot
plank to see immediately above me an old
gentleman intently listening to the lecturer,
with both hands resting hard upon the handle
of his walking-stick, the end of the stick being
close to the edge of the foot plank. The door
was then opened in readiness for a decamp. I
returned to find the old gentleman still there ;
a smart blow from the side of my hand
then dislodged that stick, and we heard
a commotion, without stopping to enquire
into the particulars. But, without doubt,
that old gentleman had been introduced unex-
pectedly to the family immediately in front,
and to whom until now he had probably been
an entire stranger.
FOUR JUDGES.
The leading counsel in the Oxford Circuit at
this time were Cockburn and Erie, two men of
marked ability and yet diametrically opposite
in temperament; Erie with his quiet, earnest
gravity, and Cockburn brimming over with
dry humour.
Cockburn became Lord Chief Justice in 1859
on the resignation of Lord Campbell, whom I
well remember seeing on the Bench at West-
minster some years before, when, as a change
of position, he would sometimes stand up, and
with his usual calm, dignified bearing, hands
in pockets, quietly listened to the pleadings;
an apparent contrast to the aged Baron Pol-
lock, whom I remember at this same period*
who never seemed to be listening, being appa-
rently fast asleep! But the moment anything
occurred to call for comment or question, he
was as wideawake as counsel who addressed
him.
In this same year died the gifted Malibran,


at Manchester. My second cousin, Lot Gard-
ner, was Mayor at the time, and led her stag-
gering off the stage just previously to her
lamented death.
At this time I often visited a lady cousin at
Bath, and who sometimes took me to the Bath
Balls. We were ushered in by Colonel
Jervois, who was then Master of the Cere-
monies, and as such ranked in order of prece-
dence next to the Speaker, and, therefore, as
tne second gentleman in England. The same
rank was held by the Master of Ceremonies at
Almack’s. At one of these balls I was intro-
duced to an Admiral who had seen much ser
vice, Sir William Hotham, and afterwards met
him at a reception of my cousin’s with other
notables, whose names I cannot now recall.
No. VI.
BECKFORD.
I also knew the Goodridges of that city, Mr.
G. being architect to the late Thomas Beck-
ford, author of “Yathek,” a prominent Bath
character, and a man of great taste, but very
eccentric. He was a widower, his only
daughter being married to the then Duke
of Hamilton. His table was laid daily for
sixteen guests, although as a rule he dined
alone. He lost a favourite dog, and buried it
in his garden, where he erected a splendid
monument to perpetuate its memory; and he
also built a high tower, desiring in his will that
he should be buried at the top of it, with
the idea, it was said, of being, so far on the
way upwards; but Bath people uncharitably
said it was as near as he would ever get.
Mr. Goodridge took me into this tower, beau-
tifully fitted up as a library with a splendid


collection of rare and valuable books in the
choicest bindings, many in vellum, ranged on
oaken shelves round each room, the shelves
relieved with stamped vermillion leather.
The artistic effect was perfect. Mr. Beck-
ford had also a wonderful collection of
curios at Fonthill Abbey, which was after-
wards sold.
PRINCESS CHARLOTTE.
In August, 1839, I took a trip to London,
visiting all the sights. I select only one which
may not be known to all, but which impressed
me strongly. This was the apotheosis of the
late Princess Charlotte in the mausoleum
erected to her memory at Windsor or Frog-
more—l forget which. She is sculptured in
pure white marble, as if ascending up to
heaven. High up over the figure was a dome
of light orange-coloured glass, throwing a
faint golden light that was inconceivably
beautiful.
THE DUKE OF CAMBRIDGE,
In leaving London, I crossed from Ports-
mouth to Ryde one wet Saturday afternoon,
the only other passengers being the late Duke
of Cambridge and his German valet. They
often conversed together in French, his
general reply being “ Sans doute, sans doute .”
He was very pleasant and chatty the whole
passage. Returning to Portsmouth, in visiting
the Victory (on which Nelson fell) I was
present at a Court-martial, then sitting on
some officer, at which Admiral Parker pre-
sided, then nearly ninety, and the oldest
Admiral afloat.
BRISTOL MADRIGAL SOCIETY.
I was an alto in the Bristol Madrigal Society
for seven years. We were thirty-six in num-
ber —men in all branches—lawyers, doctors,
merchants, &c., besides the minor canons, and


Cathedral choristers, twelve in number—the
whole led by Mr. Corfe, the organist. Dr
Bleeck being President, and divided into
trebles (two), altos, tenor, and basses. The
music was strictly confined to madrigals
by Benet, Wilbye, Orlando, Gibbons, Dow-
land, &c., and Pearsall (modern) who wrote-
some lovely pieces, “Lightof my soul arise,
arise” especially. We met once a fortnight for
practice, each singer furnished with “part”
only, the score copy being confined to the con-
ductor. With a wrong note came at once the
tap of the baton, when the error was inti-
mated not to the part, but the offender, and
we began again. All the practices invariably
ended with the old waits madrigal “ Fal la
la la.” Once a year we had a “ Ladies’Night”
to defray expenses of music and of the concert,
when our force was strengthened by either the
Westminster or Salisbury choristers. The
room held 1,750 persons. We always had
applications for a third more than the number,,
and on one occasion two of the German
Princes came down from London.
A COLOSSAL HOAX.
One of the most sensational events in Bristol
business life was a gigantic hoax. My father
received an order one afternoon for six dozens
of wine to be sent the next morning to the
house of a gentleman in Berkeley-square,
Clifton. It was returned after some hours.
The principal streets of Bristol —Wine-street,.
Corn-street, College Green, and Park-street,
leading to Berkeley-square—on that morning
were absolutely lined with carts, carriages,
and vehicles of every description from all the
principal business houses—drapers, jewellers,
grocers, wine merchants, livery stable-
keepers, and even undertakers. There
was a hearse, mourning coaches, carriages-


as for a wedding, wagons with furniture, and
■carts with every description of article and pro-
duce, not one of which was either ordered or
wanted. No one ever seemed to know the
perpetrator. The unfortunate gentleman him-
self may have guessed, but made no sign or
■effort, for he immediately left the city.
WRESTLING MATCH.
In the autumn of 1841 when visiting a friend
at South Molton (Devon), I saw a champion
wrestling match between Devon and Cornwall.
It was a revolting sight—an illustration of
brute endurance in a cruel practice of kicking
the shins, and with heavy boots—in one case
indeed iron-toed 5 but the combatant was
hooted as being against rule. As both shoul-
ders must touch the ground to constitute a
“fair fall” it meant in every such instance a
clean uplift and a terrible resounding thud.
The topic is dismissed.
THE INIMITABLE JULIEN.
This same year was marked by the first de-
livery of “Musical Lectures, illustrated with
■ Scottish Songs,” by Wilson. He had a pure,
rich tenor, and the lectures were a great
1 success. But the great sensation in the
musical world centered in the highly-deco-
rated Julien, who initiated the celebrated
“promenade” concerts. He dressed in the
extreme of fashion—diamond studs, a coat with
the widest lappels, and a shirt front giving as
prominent an effect as the inflated breast of a
white capon. Add to these his wonderful
head of black hair, and his baton (given him
by the Emperor Nicholas), glittering with
diamonds and rubies. Such was Julien! He
was beloved by his band, and everything he did
was splendidly performed, although the music
itself was of no high order—polkas, waltzes, &c.
Every season he brought out a fresh polka or


■galop that became at once the rage. He
.always seemed to aim at great effects, and his
pieces generally concluded with a grand
staccato crash note, bringing down thunders of
applause. Poor fellow, he was afterwards un-
successful, eventually succumbed under money
anxieties, and died in Paris a poor man.
HERR STANDIGL.
The lowest bass notes I ever remember were
■sung by Herr Staudigl, who sang principally
in sacred and operatic music. His rendering
of the bass passage in the “ Creation,” “With
sinuous trace” was something wonderful.
No. VII.
THE GREAT BRITAIN.
1 was present at the launching of the Great
Britain at Bristol in 1843, when the Prince
Consort came down for the occasion. This
was the first of the large type of steamers, and
ber career was watched with much interest.
At the launching she was named by Miss Miles,
»of Leigh Court, but under circumstances that
were regarded as inauspicious. By some acci-
dent the bottle of champagne fell short in its
.swing and missed the figurehead, so that this
part of the ceremony had to be repeated, when
4;he ship’s bow was effectually soused. The
bluejackets said this was a bad omen, and
probably remembered it three years after
when she stranded in Dundrum Bay, Ireland.
It was eleven months before she could be
floated again with hydraulic and other costly
.appliances by Mr. Isambard Brunei.
THE ENGLISH LAKES.
My marriage occurred in 1844, succeeded by


an excursion to the Cumberland lakes, where
our first experience was in a small boat on
the proverbially stormy Ullswater, a London
rector, the Rev. Henry Wood, of St. Sepul-
chre’s, being our fellow-passenger. The little
craft, laden with luggage, shipped so much
water that made us all feel very thankful for
a safe arrival at the landing and within the
welcome portico of the hotel. We there met
with a Captain Postans and his wife—both
well-known writers on the history of the
Scinde and its campaigns—with whom we so
fraternized that it was mutually determined
on the next day to take all our carriage excur-
sions and afterwards dine together —an
arrangement which was carried out very en-
joyably for the next ten days.
THE FLOATING ISLAND.
One morning at Keswick, Captain Postans
and I rowed out before breakfast towards the
island on Derwentwater, for a bathe. I dived in
from the boat, apparently sinking to a great
depth. After coming to the surface and swim-
ming about fifty yards away, I found great
difficulty in keeping afloat, as I learned after-
wards, through the extreme lightness of the
lake water, For a brief interval it seemed like
drowning, and I then felt that sensation some-
times described of a life crowded into a few
moments. Providentially I reached the boat
safely, and after that always bathed from the
land. This well-known floating island is a
conglomerate mass of vegetable matter strongly
impregnated with gases; and when sufficiently
charged, rises to the surface, until after
constant escapes it again sinks. We often
amused ourselves by piercing the soil with our
walking-sticks, when the gas at once came
puffing out. The island is, I presume, tied to-
the spot with long rootlets,


LADY OF THE LAKE.
We parted from our friends with mutual
regret, and left Keswick on the Windermere
coach, at six o’clock one beautiful summer
morning, having Haydon, the painter, for a
companion, who with an artist’s eye pointed
out to us the beauties of the mountain scenery.
As we passed Rydal Lake, which was smooth
as glass, a young lady was calmly rowing a
small boat, which glided along as if in a fairy
scene. When tired, she just laid her hands on her
lap, and the sculls (which in those quiet waters
are pierced for pivots), lazily swung back
against the gunwale sides. Had it been to-
day we might have brought her back in a
camera; it was only daguerrotype then.
THE PENDULUM.
In the summer of 1845 we engaged rooms
temporarily at Westbury, a pretty suburb be-
yond Clifton Downs. My old tutor, Dr. Day,
who had long retired from teaching, was
living there and in a charming house. There
was a theory afloat just then that if a long
pendulum hung from a great height were care-
fully started by release, so as not to affect the
swing, the earth’s rotation might be shown by
the pendulum’s gradual change of position
with reference to its immediate surroundings.
The centre of the doctor’s house was con-
structed as if for the very purpose of the ex-
periment, as there was a clear open space from
the basement hall to a large dome at the top.
From the centre, therefore, we suspended a.
large pendulum, tying it back carefully (before
the swing) with just as fine a thread as would
bear its weight. We then set light to the
thread and let it go. But alas, and alas, with
one or two exceptions it seemed never to make-
a perfectly straight swing, and when it did,
the hall itself did not alter its position with re-


spect to the pendulum as laid down by the
theorists and as we fondly hoped. The earth
went on after that as usual, hampered with
no further troublesome suggestions. As I
have just now heard, had we marked a chalk
line on the floor the experiment would have
been a perfect success.
ON DUCKS.
We were walking one evening in Westbury-
lane and there met a flock of ducks, when one
of their number suddenly flew up apparently
in a fit of anger, and struck the forehead of a
lady walking by my side. She fell back upon
•her head with such force as to produce tem-
porary concussion, obliging us to summon the
nearest physician to her aid. With a soothing
prescription, however, aud a few days’ rest, she
was happily restored to her normal condition.
But I mentally asked myself was this a retri-
butive act on the part of the duck tribe for an
injury inflicted by myself some time pre-
viously. I was riding at a brisk trot in the
suburbs of Bristol when my horse suddenly
struck with his foot a duck then waddling
-across the road, sending it whizzing along, the
breath ejected from his body, with a prolonged
of “ W-o-o-a!”
A BONELESS GENTLEMAN.
While at Westbury we often saw a gentle-
man assisted into his carriage by his valet, who
laid him down upon the cushioned seat and
very carefully, for he had no bones. They had
never properly formed, and were little more
than hardened cartilage. He was well known
in that neighbourhood, and may, perhaps, be
remembered by our late Engineer-in-Chief,
whose father was then the respected Vicar of
the parish.
REV. wm. JAY.
Mr, Jay, of Bath, was intensely popular as


a man and a preacher, always attracting-
crowded congregations. His sermons, as those of
Rowland Hill, were often pithy and humorous.
I once heard him on “ The Publican and the
Pharisee.” “ I fast twice in the week” —“ Yes,
after a good dinner,” “I pay tithes of all I
possess”—“Yes, after robbing your neigh-
bours.” My wife first met with Mr. Jay after
the close of a missionary meeting at Highbury
Chapel, when on seeing her he asked for an
introduction, and invited himself to breakfast
the next morning.
No. VIII.
PRINCESS VICTORIA.
The spontaneous character of the above in-
troduction reminds me of a royal episode some-
what similar in character. About the year
1828 my wife, then a child of ten, was walking
with her sister at Broadstairs, when the
Duchess of Kent passed by, together with
the Princess Victoria, who at once said,
“Mamma, I want to kiss that little girl.”'
The Duchess replied, “ Well, my dear, if you
do, you must kiss her sister too.” When the
Princess said, “Yes; but I shall kiss her
first,” which she accordingly did.
SIR ROBERT PEEL.
I happened to be in the House of Commons-
in 1846, when Sir Robert Peel was denounced
for his changed views in proposing the aboli-
tion of the corn laws; alienating from himself
nearly all his friends. I heard one member •
say (I think Colquohoun)—“l have known
Sir Robert as a private friend for five and
twenty years, and I here renounce his friend-
ship for ever.” The whole thing was very
touching; all the more so as his denouncers so-
soon woke up to the conviction that Peel was.


right. But he was then beyond the reach of
their acknowledgments, I was in Tunbridge
Wells when the tidings were received of his
death, and so universal was the sorrow that it
seemed that day as if a heavy pall were
hanging over the whole place. His epitaph
was indeed written thus early, and before his
burial, not on stone or marble, but in the
hearts of all the English people, who felt that
a great man in the State had fallen who could
ill be spared.
AT DERBY.
Early in 1848 I was offered an interest in a
large silk business at Derby, my two fellow
partners residing in London. It meant heavy
responsibilities; but as the prospects were
very good, and as my father had long since
retired, I resolved to withdraw from the
Bristol business, and to close with the offer.
Gur new home brought us into the midst of
pleasant associations. Opposite to our house
in the Ashbourne-road lived the H’s, who with
other relatives (three in number) then at
Derby had lived for many years in Russia.
With these four families we remained in the
closest intimacy until we left for London
twelve years later.
RUSSIAN ENVIRONMENTS.
We were soon initiated into Northern sur-
roundings. In the direction of cuisine we
sometimes received game sent direct from
Petersburg capercailzie, shot a month
before, but in perfect order and tasting
strongly of bay-leaf. This, added to the cold
temperature on the journey, no doubt tended
to its preservation. One Russian dish, simple
but very savoury, was frequently seen and was
always acceptable. It was a pie of mutton and
oysters; the mutton, delicate slices from the
leg, layer of mutton and layer of oysters alter*


nately, with an upper crust as usual. Our
friends always carried out the Russian custom
on Easter Day, and we followed it, when each
gives to the other a coloured egg (very hard
boiled and dyed) with the words “Christ is
risen.”
DOCTOR JEPHSON.
Three months after our arrival at Derby I
was attacked with illness, and was recom-
mended to consult the celebrated Leamington
physician, Dr. Jephson. He had a great repu-
tation, and his practice fully kept pace with it.
For eccentricity and abruptness he was often
compared to Abernethy, and very possibly it
held good in the cases of hypping patients;
to me he was always most kind. His two
leading principles were air and exercise, and
a strict dietary, and woe betide the disobedient
patient. He soon put me to the test. He
had prescribed a midday meal and light diet,
and a day or two after, calculating his time he
knocked, was admitted, received up into the
room, went straight to the sideboard, and
lifted the cover of the dish just removed, and
fortunately with a nod of approval, for it was,
or had been, a chicken, I was among the last
of his patients. He was then very ill himself,
left Leamington the next morning, and never
resumed his profession.
AXX LE CHAPELLE.
Accepting the advice of Dr. Jephson, we
went at once to Aix le Chapelle for six weeks,
doing the warm mineral baths and drinking
the waters. We stayed at Nuellen’s Hotel,
and spent a very enjoyable visit. The prin-
cipal points of interest were the surrounding
scenery, which is very good; the daily drill of
the Landwehr, which, in anticipation of some
disturbances, were then called out; the pro-
menades, and especially the Louisberg, a largo


hall, in which weekly choral concerts were held'
by amateurs, tradesmen of the town, who
sang beautifully and with much precision. Wo
returned via Cologne. The view of that
Cathedral, with the setting sun behind its
lovely spires, was very beautiful.
THE SCENTED CITY.
Cologne has ever held the record for its
stenches, which are professedly counteracted
by the innumerable developments of their far-
famed Eau de Cologne! The true scented
water, however, at least at that time, as pur-
chased and used by the crowned heads and foreign
nobility, was made by Vanoli, in a colossal
building with the name on a small brass plat©
on the door, but without any placards, as in
the case of all the Farinas.
No. IX.
CLERICAL.
During our first year’s residence at Derby we
had the privilege of hearing and knowing th©
Rve. Baldwin Brown, until his removal toßrix-
ton. Our house at Ashborne-road was nearly ad-
joining the residence of the Vicar of St. Wer-
burgh’s, whom we soon knew intimately. H©
was then educating Mr. Strutt’s eldest son,
the present Earl of Belper. The Rev. T.
Scott, grandson of the commentator, was also-
Incumbent of St. John’s, close by, whose
curate, Henry Hubbard, was one of my nearest
friends. He went to India soon after as a
missionary, and was one of the first struck
down when outside the walls of Agra. Not
long before this he wrote telling me of his in-
terview with the educated Brahmins, and
their impressions on reading the Bible for th©


first time; and that this made him sometimes
wish that he too could come fresh to the
Scriptures as an adult, without any previous
familiarity with its sacred truths.
■
Mr. Hubbard’s successor was a Mr. Chan-
cellor, who on Mr. Scott’s death shortly after-
wards became the incumbent. He was a
delightful companion and a zealous Churchman
in all his work. One evening he told us that
he went to the morning school with his brown
silk umbrella, fully prepared to give the
children a dissertation on “Silk.” He held up
his umbrella, which was holey and decidedly
the worse for wear, and asked the children
what it was made of, expecting they would say
“silk.” A scholar called out “ rags.”
Some time in 1849 I saw George Hudson,
who presided at a great railway meeting at
Derby, when he asked the Midland share-
holders to take over a particular branch line,
at a cost of either one or two' millions. The
shareholders seemed to hesitate when he said
“ Well, gentlemen, I will take it upon myself
if you don’t.” He carried his point. It was
said that his influence over the shareholders
was so great that in two days he obtained their
consent to Railway Bills involving an expendi-
ture of nearly ten millions. I afterwards saw
him one Sunday morning coming out of
York Cathedral during the year of his
Mayoralty. His subsequent monetary trans-
actions with the railways led to a complete
and inglorious collapse.
CHUECH BRASSES.
A great hobby at this time was in collecting
rubbings from monumental brasses. These
brass plates, from two to six and even seven
feet in length, and of proportionate width, are
engraved in full detail of costume under each


particular class, and are to be found on the-
floors of nearly all the old Cathedrals and
Churches. They are about four hundred in
number, including every variety of costume in
ecclesiastical, military, and municipal figures,,
extending from the twelfth to the beginning of
the eighteenth century. In ecclesiastics there
are Abbots, Bishops, Monks, and also every
kind of academic costume, as seen especially
in the Oxford and Cambridge Churches. The
military brasses begin with the chain-mailed
figures, extending down to the ponderous plate
armour of the seventeenth century. Besides
these are brasses of a “ miscellaneous”
character, such as skeletons, shrouded figures,
and inscriptions, some of them being very
quaint and curious; one especially on a
man named Hill. “Hie mans in valle
jacet” (Here lies a hill in a valley).
The impressions are obtained with heelball on;
white drawing-room lining-paper, which is
laid on the brass and carefully weighted. The
rubbing must be light and rapid, and con-
tinued until you get a steel-black impression.
I used to get three or four rubbings from
nearly every brass I took in hand, and then
exchanged the surplus ones as opportunities
arose with the Oxford and Camden Societies,
as also with Rev. T. Addington, who wrote a
valuable work on the subject. I also corre-
sponded with Dean, afterwards Bishop,
Ellicott, of Gloucester, who addressed me as
Rev. Thomas S. Reed, thinking I was a
clergyman.
I had, on completing the work, a largo col-
lection, more than a hundred and thirty in
number, and subsequently delivered lectures
on the subject at Derby, Nottingham, and
Burton-on-Trent. Upon leaving England in
1866 I sold the collection, together with the


books and my lectures, to a clergyman at
Devonport; and when visiting my cousin, Dr.
Bulteel, at Plymouth, in 1877, I sought to
trace them out with a view of buying them
back, but ineffectually, through the death of
the clergyman some years before.
It was determined at this period to establish
an Institute for the benefit of my people.
There were three factories, and 900 hands, of
which about 150 were adult males, and many
of these intelligent, clever men, well able to
hold their own in any ordinary Debating
Society. I set apart the lower end of a large
commodious room (which was 120 feet long,
and proportionately wide), for the purpose of
this Institute, and announced my intention to
form a library, which at once brought me
kindly donations of books from private
sources, from clergymen, and from the Derby
Mechanics’ Institute.
Plans were then formed for the delivery of
monthly lectures by various gentlemen, and
these became so popular that often a large
number were attracted from outside. Thanks
not only to these friends and lecturers, but to
the zealous co-operation of the men them-
selves, the whole thing was a thorough suc-
cess.
FATHER GAVAZZI.
Early in the next year. Father Gavazzi, the
Barnabite Friar, delivered a lecture at Derby
on his reasons for leaving the Church of Rome.
I went to hear him in company with the rector
of All Saints and his curate, Revs. T. Foley
and C. Lee. Although Gavazzi spoke in
Italian, yet from his distinct articulation and
the vowel character of the language, we could,
from our knowledge of Latin, gather the gist
of the whole lecture, excepting in the more
excited parts, our impressions being fully con-


firmed on reading the Press translation the
next morning. It was a fine oration, and all
the more imposing in effect from the long
ample black robes he wore, which every
now and then he would gather up and throw
around him as he paced backwards and for-
wards on the platform. The Town Hall was
crowded. At the close of the lecture I was
introduced, and spoke to him in the best
French I could muster. He answered me in
English.
FISHING IN THE LOWLANDS.
In the autumn we went on a month’s visit to
a relative at the Craigielands, Dumfriesshire.
The estate is next to that of Miss Lucy Hope
Johnstone, and the house commanded a tine
view of Moffat and the surrounding hills. At
the foot of the grounds before us was a small
water well stocked with trout from Loch
Skene. I remember one morning catching a
fine fish with a sunken fly, just as described
by Kingsley in his “Chalk Streams.” I had
thrown and thrown without a symptom of a
rise, when, resolving upon one last effort, I
lazily let the fly sink to find it suddenly
rushed by a fine trout. After playing him
for two or three minutes I remembered that
the landing-net was fifty yards away. Stand-
ing on a steep bank, it was just a case of lug-
ging him up bodily or losing him altogether.
Most happily, in a quiet moment, I lifted and
landed him safely in the creel. He scaled
li lb.
At another time, while at the Craigielands,
I had some capital fishing for pike and perch
at the Loch of the Lowes. “Jenny’s House,’
at St. Mary’s Loch adjoining, was crowded
out with visitors, and Frank Stone, my com-
panion, and I had to sleep on a large table.
The story is proverbial of two Frenchmen who


once lost their way in these mountain passes
between St. Mary’s Loch and Moffat, and
wandered about for two or three days un-
able to see creature or dwelling. They were
asked on their return to Moffat how they had
lived; they replied “On de wild mouton.”
The Scotch express passes Beattoch about
seven minutes to 8, and is noted for its
punctuality. Often when at dinner our host
would say to his guests “The express will
pass in a minute and a half” or in two
minutes, as the case might be, and he was
rarely out in his reckoning. The story runs
at Beattoch of a gentleman who once asked
the railway porter what time the Glasgow ex-
press came by. The porter replied “ Seven
fifty-two forty-five, sir.”
A DUKE S PALACE.
In the course of this summer I visited Chats-
worth, the seat of the Duke of Devonshire,
with its matchless grounds, fountains, par-
terres, &c.
The principal glass conservatory covers an
acre of land, and has a road running through
it wide enough for a carriage and four. This
conservatory suggested to Paxton the idea so
happily carried out at the Exhibition of 1851,
and subsequently at the Crystal Palace. The
rooms of this ducal mansion are exquisitely
decorated, and contain a fine collection of
paintings from the old masters, together with
the finest works in statuary of Canova, Thor-
waldsen, Chantry, &c.
Apart from all these beauties the sight at
Chatsworth which impressed me most deeply
was the large Devonshire vault in which the
family coffins were ranged in the niches set
apart for each Duke and Duchess. There I
saw the coffin of the “Beautiful Duchess,” as
also one enormous sized square-built coffin.


nearly 3 ft. deep that was brought from Italy.
But the greatest curiosity of all was a coffin
with a glass window at the end, where you
could distinctly see the top of a man’s head
with long black hair, apparently in perfect
preservation. He had, I suppose, been em-
balmed.
No. X.
GBISI AND MAEIO.
I heard Grisi in more than one “ farewell
•concert.” The number of her “ last farewells”
was something proverbial. Mario, her hus-
band, had the loveliest of tenors, and she —
Grisi —seemed to possess the full com-
mand of her voice unto the last.
John Parry generally accompanied them in
their provincial concerts. In one of these
Derby concerts Grisi had just sung a bravura,
ending with one of her wonderful runs; when
Parry followed in a comic song, concluding with
a perfect imitation of the run in falsetto, to
Grisi’s apparent amusement, who stood at the
edge of the screen, laughing. This little
episode was, doubtless, often repeated at their
different entertainments, as it always “ took”
with the audience.
THE GEEAT EXHIBITION.
The palace of glass and iron designed by
Paxton for the Exhibition of 1831, though
small when compared with its successors, will
ever be remembered as a scene of wondrous
beauty. The centre aisle was 600 feet in
length—erected to include two of the large
park trees —and with a transept that always
seemed so to concentrate the sun’s rays as to
reflect a perfect flood of light.
London was so crowded that it was said at
the time that some of the small children had


to sleep in the chests of drawers. You met
men of all nations, Frenchmen especially, en-
quiring at almost every turn for “la voie au
I’Exposition Universelle?” On the transept
floor was the Kohinoor diamond, presented to
Her Majesty by the East India Company.
When you stood close by, it seemed little more
than a large, bright crystal, with facets in pro-
portion ; but when you went up to the corner
■of the transept gallery and looked down upon
it in the sunlight, the wondrous brilliancy of
that sparkling scintillating light was almost
overwhelming. I there exhibited a patent
loom for weaving fringes without shuttles,
substituting in their stead steel arms for carry-
ing the shute. There were fifty-six of
these in a row, and as they moved back-
wards and forwards, looked like a file
of little soldiers giving a horizontal
sword thrust. I received a Council medal for
this loom, which I still possess. Only one
hundred and seventy of these were granted.
“Prize medals” were given to most of the
exhibitors.
MOKE ABOUT JUDGES.
A great centre of interest to me whenever I
had a spare hour, whether in Westminster or
in the provinces, was the Law Courts; and can
well remember hearing at Bristol Sergeant
Bompas, the Buzfuz of Dickens, of excitable
temperament, and in strong contrast to
the urbanity of Crowder our Recorder
about that time. Following these, I
used to hear Huddleston and Pigott
when leading counsel on the Oxford Circuit,
and afterwards on the Bench. Huddleston
was an able lawyer but browbeating as counsel,
and rough-mannered as Judge. Pigott was
the exact opposite, quiet in manner, and as he
listened, calmly with finger and thumb stroked


down his long nose. Brougham’s nose by some
muscular arrangement, known to himself, in all
his speeches was nervously twitching about on
its own account. The calmness of the
one and the excitable changes of position
of the other, gave a perfect definition of the
two temperaments, showing moreover that the
nose is an evident factor in law history.
After these, I often heard Martin and Black-
burn, and Bramwell and Willes. Blackburn,
with his frank good nature, with strong pro*
vincial accent, seemed to me always to be
guided in his judgments far less by legal tech-
nicalities than by the equity and common
sense view of the case. Willes had an immense
practice as counsel, and I always heard
possessed a wonderful memory for precedents,
having for some time after his elevation seldom
cause to refer. He died early.
KENNETH AND ZACHARY MACAULAY.
I was on the Grand Jury in a Derby case,
in which Kenneth Macaulay was counsel; able
as an advocate, and singularly fascinating in
his manner. Soon after this I was introduced
by my friend, Mr. (afterwards Sir) James
Allport, to Zachary Macaulay, in a night jour-
ney to town, who kept us willingly awake by
bright, intellectual converse. Midway between
wo stations the whistle sounded, when the
Manager, Mr. Allport, who, as with
us, had his feet stretched out on the opposite
cushion, at once withdrew them, and let them
hang down as limply as possible. As he
said, “no rigidity; if you fear a collision
sit or lie anyhow.” Happily, it was but
some trifling matter. . . . Once before
this, I sat next to Brunei, on the Great
Western, when, watch in hand, he told me,
“ for the last five minutes we have done at the
rate of 72 miles an hour. ”


CALCKAPT.
About this time I travelled on one of the
North lines with Oalcraft —a stout, elderly
looking man with grey hair. The word ran
up and down the station, * ‘ There is
Calcraft,” as he got into the compartment
on his way to “ send off” some poor unhappy
offender. For the lowest grade of criminal,
on the commission of a crime, and knowing
that he was “in for it,” the gallows at that
time was rather an attraction than a proven-
tive, for the one idea was “to die game
before thousands of his admiring “pals” and
compeers. But in a private execution before
eight or ten witnesses only and within the close
precincts of the prison-walls, all hero-worship
disappears, and (if unforgiven) nothing to take
its place but a cold chill and the workings
of a sin-stricken conscience.
In the course of this visit to town, Mr.
Hanson showed me a very great curiosity. It
was a plaster cast about ten inches high, of a.
small stone statuette of the Deity taken from
a little niche in the ruins of old London Bridge.
The Deity was represented as sitting upon a
kind of throne, and the face was disfigured,
but it yet bore such a manifest expression of
divinity and majesty that at once struck you
with awe. This little cast was given to my
brother-in-law by Tite, the architect, who was.
present at the time the statuette was found.
One of these copies would have been gladly
received by any existing Museum as a much
valued relic.
ANNA SHIPTON, MRS. OLIPHANT.
My partner, Frank Bennock, who lived at
Blackheath, was quite in the literary world,
and a frequent contributor to serials, both in


prose and poetry. At his house I first met the
revered Anna Shipton. It was the commence-
ment of an acquaintance that in after years
ripened into a privileged friendship. The last
letter I received on embarking for this colony
in 1866 was from Anna Shipton, when she sent
me one of her books inscribed with her name.
Among other writers I met at Mr.
Bennock’s were Mr. and Mrs. S. C. Hall,
Mr. Oliphant and his wife, the authoress
of “Margaret Graeme,” “Sunnyside,” “Life
of Irving,” &c., At another time I met
Jordan, then eighty years of age, well known
through his “Autobiography,” which treated
of the days of George IV., Sheridan, Beau
Brummell, Garrick, and a host of other
notables with whom he had been brought into
association.
ARCHEOLOGY,
The Archaeological Association held its
annual meeting at Derby in 1852. Its mem-
bers included many well-known names under
that branch of science, such as Pettigrew,
Blanche, author of “Costumes,” Brough
Smith, Llewellyn, Jewitt, and others. Our
town and county were found to be
rich in material for their inspection,
in the shape of old ruins, barrows, and
Church architecture especially. In the matter
of gargoyles alone, we had two of the most
curious in England, one at St. Alkmund's,
Derby, and the other at a county Church at
Horsley; so that we had some delightful ex-
cursions. I read two papers at one meeting
from some old Derby records —one referring to
King Charles’s visit, “when he borrowed
from the townsfolk £2OO, which he never re-
turned. ” The Association set apart an evening
for my paper on “ Monumental Brasses,” many
of the originals of which they had just inspected


in Derbyshire. The rubbings, in a row of seven
or eight feet in height, covered the walls of
the Derby Town Hall, and would cover ours in
Adelaidebutforthemanynichesanddoors. The
Newark brass itself, Lawrence de St. Maur
(modern version Seymour), was itself seven
feet high. At the close of the meeting a
banquet was held at the Town Hall, when the
grim picture gallery, called ‘ ‘ Mr. Reed’
Black Family,” with its possessor were duly
toasted.
DR. CHARLES MACKAY.
Mr. Bennock put in an unexpected appear-
ance one day at Derby in company with Dr,
Charles Mackay, his son, and Samuel Read,
the artist, then joint and principal proprietors
of the Illustrated News. We made them our
guests for the night, and enjoyed a rich treat
in the recital of their varied experiences. The
next morning, on going down to the factories,
we were all in roars at the sudden discovery of
some funny translations of shopkeepers
names, four in number, as we went along.
Under this head I remember once when on
the top of an omnibus near Bayswater seeing
a draper’s name “ Whatmore. ” On one side
of the name was painted “Fringes” and on the
other “Trimmings,” an evident rendering, as
I remarked to a gentleman next me, of “A
husband remonstrating with his extravagant
wife.” “What, more fringes and trimmings!”
The funniest coincidence I knew in London
names was “Flint & Steel, who were iron-
mongers in Holborn.
SLEIGHING AND SKATING.
A hard frost set in this winter, with heavy
falls of snow. I bought a small basket pony
carriage (to hold four) without wheels, and
bolted on to it two light flat-iron skids turned
up at the ends, put my horse in, and started


away with two ladies on a short sleighing trip..
The roads for some miles from the town had
been “ ploughed”—that is, the snow thrown
up on each side, leaving a nice roadway for
traffic with a hard six-inch foundation, so that
the sleighing was perfect. The crisp, cold air,
the pure bright snow, the chiming bells on the
horse’s nodding head, all combined to produce
an exhilaration that can hardly be conceived.
A week after this I went one afternoon with
Alex. H. to our county member’s seat at
Allestree Park for a little skating. It was
intensely cold, and yet on first sight of the
lake we both said —“ Can it be frozen?” In-
stead of the usual icy opaqueness, the water in
this instance had frozen in perfect stillness,
reflecting every tree and twig as if in water
itself or in a mirror.
I should here say that Wm. H., my friend’s
brother, a Russian merchant, was a splendid
skater, accomplishing feats that few of the
Russian skaters would attempt. One of these
was making a great rush so as to gain a great
speed, at that moment taking a high leap into
the air, and on coming down describing a
figure on the ice. I saw him do this once, and
it seemed to me about as dangerous an experi-
ment as a man could make.
I make this digression for the following
reason: —Mr. E. (our county member) had then
a cousin skating on the lake, a Captain E.,
lately arrived from India, to whom at the
moment I was unknown, but who had heard of
Wm. H.’s feats in skating. When putting on
my skates I noticed that he lingered about,
apparently interested in all I did. He
thought I was the accomplished skater, and
when at length I commenced operations as a.
learner, just able to hold my own, he at once
resumed his skating, perplexed and thought-


ful. We had a hearty laugh over it after-
wards.
No. XII.
A few days after this Alec H. and I went
•over to Sir Robert Wilmot’s, a mile or two
from Derby, where I made a deep impression.
His gardeners had cleared a road through the
snow, about fifty feet wide, all round the lake
in his park, leaving a bank on either side four
or five feet high. The lake was crowded with
skaters, and I had just resumed those initiatory
stages too well remembered by all young be-
ginners, determining at times the relative
hardness of ice and cranium, when my friend
Alec suddenly appeared with—“ Come
.along, Reed; take hold of my coat
behind, and I’ll give you a turn.’
To my earnest entreaty, “You won’t
..go very fast, will you?” he replied, “All
right, keep your skates close together.” I
■did so, grabbed him tightly, and he went off
like the wind, utterly disregarding every
remonstrance, until at last, watching an oppor-
tunity as he fled by a soft inviting bank, I
suddenly let go, plumped down into the snow,
and an impression was made to the well-
known tune of “I know a bank whereon, 5
•&c., &c.
SEBPENTINE EOBBEBIES.
lam here reminded of an eventful night on
the Serpentine in a hard frost some years
after. The lake with its hundreds of torch-
lights wore a weirdlike aspect. It was covered
with skaters, who were supplied in the course
of the evening with two marked sensations.
One of these was the performance of a very
accomplished lady—it was said from Holland
—whose beautiful skating and the perfect ease


with which she went through figure after
figure rivetted the interest of all in her neigh-
bourhood—an interest, however, which was in
a moment transferred to a far more engrossing
object, amidst loud cries of “ Catch him V r
and “After him!” One of the swell mob
was flying through the crowd snatching
watches and purses with impunity, and
skating so swiftly that neither police nor
other men could overtake him. Whether he
was eventually caught Ido not remember. He
had, of course, an immense advantage, for
being a fast skater and of gentlemanly appear-
ance, he could in the middle of a chase suddenly
wheel round into a crowd and then go through
his quiet figurings as if he had been there all
the evening, thus eluding his pursuers and
playing his little game afresh after they had
all gone by.
THE LADY CLAIRVOYANT.
On going to the offices one morning I
heard that our cashbox had been broken open
and the ready money in it at the time stolen —
about £ls. After ineffectual attempts to dis-
cover the culprit, I was entreated by the ac-
countant, a strong believer in spiritualism, to
place the matter in the hands of a Miss Barker,
who as a clairvoyant had just previously made
a revelation which was the talk of the town,
the parties being well known. A lady
had lost a small casket of family jewels,,
and went to Miss Barker to solve the
mystery. But she declined the request as
being likely to lead her into troublous
waters. At length she consented, was mes-
merized, and told the lady that the casket was
at that very time in the hands of her own
brother, who lived six miles from Derby. This
was found to be the fact. But to return. I
called upon Miss Barker in my trouble, and


after considerable reluctance through alleged
ill-health she consented to fix the stance for
the Tuesday following. I wrote to my
partners telling them of the robbery and of the
steps Mr. Gill had induced me to take for its
detection. I may here say that a common-
street saying at that time was, “ Who stole
the donkey? The man with a white hat;” -
and the letter my partners wrote in reply was
a thing to be remembered, beseeching me to
include in my queries to Miss Barker that
all - important question whether the man
who stole the donkey was in veritable
truth the man with the white hat.
To conclude a long story. The seance never
came off, for the lady left Derby for Leamington
on the Monday, manifestly very ill as I
happened to see her on the station platform
when leaving.
We received a visit in 1853 from a young
literary man, Charles Lamb Kenney, a
godson of Charles Lamb, and inheriting
some of his talent and simplicity of character,
too. He had been on the Times, but was now
writing for Temple Bar.
When in London not long afterwards I went
with him to St. James’s Hall. Joachim, Hies,
Neruda, and Piatti were then playing in quar-
tets, varied by an occasional piece from Ara-
bella Goddard on the piano. I sat between
Charley Kenney and some gentleman to whom
I was commenting upon her playing. He
was Davidson, musical critique on the Times,
and engaged to her. In the interval I was
introduced to him, and also to Joachim, who
came and sat with us for a minute or two. To
me Joachim’s playing was simply perfect with
respect to his conception and the depth of ex-
pression in every piece he played. I one
heard Wienawski at the promenade concerts


His playing and execution were wonderful,
■and drew crowds, but it never was so engross-
ing as that of Joachim.
KOSSUTH.
A course of lectures was delivered at Derby
this winter by Kossuth on his Hungarian
troubles. He spoke, and without idiom, the
purest English of any foreigner I ever heard;
and it was said that the only books he ever
read in acquiring our language were the Bible
.and Shakspeare.
In a visit to Newstead Abbey this year, once
the family estate of Lord Byron, I could
just decipher the initials of his daughter,
“A. 8.” that he had cut in the bark of the
celebrated tree. The edges had as nearly as
possible grown together. I also went north-
wards to see the Peak Caves of Derby-
shire-one of especial interest, the Lake
Cavern, in which I laid along the bottom of
the same little canoe in which Lord Byron and
Mary Ann Ohaworth floated through the cave,
my head being a few inches only from the
arch of the low rooks above. Passing through
this narrow passage you come into a spacious
cavern 200 ft. square, and about 100 ft. in
height. On returning to the entrance you
emerge into a rude mountain pass, flanked
with precipices 1,000 ft. high, on the top of
which are perched the remains of Peveril
Castle, immortalized by Sir Walter Scott in
his novel of “Peveril of the Peak.”
A EOYAL FAVOURITE.
I spent two or three weeks this autumn with
a cousin who was Paymaster-General on the
naval station at Dover. I there became
acquainted with Captain Luke Smithett, com-
mander of the Vivid, then, at fifteen knots,
one of the fastest steamers afloat. I often


crossed in her to Calais. From her great-
speed, and the number of small craft about,
four men were always lying across her bows
during the first half-hour, two on either
side, watching with all their eyes. Almost
every minute it was “Sail ahead,” and then
“Port,” “Starboard,” as the case might be.
They were, in fact, on full “qui vive" until safe
in Calais harbour. Captain Smithett was a
great favourite with the Queen. Once, on her
returning to Dover from a Belgian visit, the
royal squadron was enveloped in a thick
fog, and Lord Fitzclarence hesitated a
little as to the course, when the Queen said,
“Send for Captain Smithett,” who was in one of
the steamers astern. He came, accepted the -
responsibility at once, and took them m
straight to the harbour. He was eventually'
knighted.
AN AUTHOR’S LEVEE.
The greatest treat I ever had in the shape of
a performance was in “ Not so Bad as We
Seem,” represented at Derby on behalf of the
Guild of Literature and Art, and in which ap-
peared a perfect galaxy of authors —Charles
Dickens, Wilkie Collins, Douglas Jerrold,
Tenniel, Dudley Costello, Lemon, Frank Stone,
Augustus Egg, and Charles Knight, the
publisher. Dickens took the part of “ Lord
W ilmot, ’’and W ilkie Collins of “ Shadowly Sof t -
head,” son of a rich Cheapside tailor, tolerated
by the impecunious lord on account of his
money. In one part, where they are standing
together. Lord Wilmot says, “Softhead, what
are you doing?” He replies, “Thinking.”
Dickens looks at him for a moment or two
contemplatively and says, “What an effort!”
The Duke of Devonshire was present, and
during part of the interval calmly inspected


the audience through his malacca-cane opera-
. glass.
A TRAPPIST MONASTERY.
In this summer my cousin paid us a
visit from Dover. During his stay we were
invited to spend the day with our friend Mons.
Baillon, of Nottingham, who drove us to the
Trappist Monaste-y, about fourteen miles
distant. On arrival we were introduced by
our Catholic friend to the Rev. Prior, who
instructed the guestmaster to usher us around
and to initiate us into the rules of the Order.
The monks of La Trappe are bound by a vow
of perpetual silence that is never broken,
unless in the services of the Church or in a
case of absolute necessity, the only three
exceptions being the doorkeeper, the guest-
master, who shepherds any visitors, and the
Reverend Prior, who entertains them.
Whenever a monk met another or
ourselves in cloisters or in the grounds the
only recognition was a low courtly bow. The
monks rise every morning at 2, when
they go to matins until 3.30. The rest of
the day is apportioned to manual labour, choral
and devotional services, reading, and medita-
tion. They have two meals, at noon and at 6
p.m., retiring to rest at 8.
We sat down to dinner with the monks,
the Prior conversing very affably, and
during the whole meal one of the
Order read to us from a high pul-
pit a homily upon Christian charity.
They gave us some delicious omelettes, bread
and cheese, and fruit. The monk’s dinner was
a basin of vegetable soup and a substantial
hunch of brown bread and water. This diet is
varied occasionally by fruit. Their bed is a
hard straw mattress. The guestmaster showed
us an open grave in their burial ground, at


•which the monks take it in turn to kneel for an
hour every day that each may meditate upon
his mortality. A monk when dying is laid
on a few handfuls of straw on the hard
ground, thus carrying out to the last their rigid
rule of austerity. The Order dates from La
Trappe, a Cistercian monk in the twelfth
century. We returned to our friend’s hos-
pitable house at Nottingham, where we dined
and spent a pleasant evening with three
Catholic dignitaries, who laughingly expressed
a hope that we would not regard ourselves as
■“ priestridden.”
NO. XIII.
A SIX months’ strike.
It occurred in this way. My London part-
ners had introduced a very pretty half-inch
silk trimming which we called “ Algerine
braid, ” and which had a great run. After some
time the weavers, who were earning excellent
wages, 30s. to 365. a week, and with no delays,
came to me one morning demanding an ad-
vanced rate per piece. To grant it was im-
possible, as it would throw the pattern over,
and I told them so, for in the meanwhile five
•other firms were now making the same trim-
ming, which meant an over-supply and lower
selling rates. But they would not accept the
conclusions, and went out on strike, nearly 500
in number. The first prominent event at
the outset occurred, as it so happened, in
my own factory, compelling me to fight the
battle for myself and the other five houses as
well. But it was a pure matter of prin-
ciple which could not be passed by.
Several weavers had gone out with the rest,
leaving work in their looms unfinished. This
was contrary both to law and to weavers pre-


codent. The case was therefore tried at the
Town Hall, which was crowded to the doors,
and we obtained the verdict. The strike went
on—delegates constantly coming and going
with modified proposals, but all in the direc-
tion of an advance. Happily there was no
personal ill-feeling, but the excitement was in-
tense. One or more men were stationed at
every street corner commanding the six fac-
tories, which were placed under strict espionage
throughout the whole strike. Five months
had now elapsed when, after personal en-
quiries from some Coventry friends, I deter-
mined to get fifteen weavers from that place
at once, and to set them on the work. This
intention was known outside immediately, and
as threats were made of resistance t® the in-
troduction of any non-Unionists I had the
promise of full protection if needed, even to
the military.
The men arrived at the station apparently
rather frightened at the crowds, were brought
under escort to the factory (Siddall’s-lane),
about 300 yards away, were taken to their
looms, and worked for the rest of the day,
taking their meals in the room. In the even-
ing they were followed to their quarters,
reasoned with, frightened, but finally ending
with a perfect and friendly understanding on
both sides. The next morning, on arriving at
the offices, I was told that these men had
been taken to the station by 500 weavers, who
paid their fares and sent them back to
Coventry, and with loud cheers, that were
heard distinctly at the factory.
I replied, “ Well, I will write to our friends
at Coventry, and put on double the number,’
then determining that if necessary at the outset
of their resumed work the fresh weavers
should even board at the factory (as the upper


gimp room opposite would have boarded 200).
Within ten days I had concluded with our
friends, Messrs. R. and S., for thirty weavers,
making every arrangement for their uninter-
rupted work at the factory and under full pro-
tection. All this was known instantly out*
side from the intention to the completed ar-
rangements. The strike had now practically
ended, for the delegates sought further inter-
views, and so modified their demands that
the terms were at once accepted, and at the
last moment the Coventry arrangement was
cancelled.
In the meantime the original dice pattern
which had occupied continuously so many
power looms had died out, new designs had to
be furnished, occupying only two or three
looms each, reducing the earnings through
delays and changes of pattern to from 20s. to
255. a week.
Speaking of a crowded Town Hall at Derby
reminds me of one of the drollest spectacles I
ever saw in my life. An immense mass meet
ing of working men was being held on some
political question, when in the midst of a great
uproar a funny old-fashioned-looking little
man suddenly started up, and began his speech
with violent gesticulations, not a single
syllable being heard by any one in the hall.
The whole crowd was in a moment
alive to the situation, their previous
excitement now diverted to the little
man whose contortions and varied expressions
of face were intensified amid convulsive roars
of laughter that drowned every word, as the
little agitator still went on throwing his arms
out, sometimes one, sometimes both, hammer-
ing the air, laying down the law, insisting on
his ground, with every conceivable change of


gesture, all in perfect dumb show, until at last
he suddenly subsided in a perfect storm of
indignation at being apparently unheard.
Sure I am, there is not a Derby man living,,
then present, who would not bear that
ludicrous sight still in remembrance.
EMPRESS EUGENIE.
At the Paris Exhibition of 1855 I was
examining some art curios, and suddenly
looked up to see the Empress Eugenie and the-
Emperor tarrying for a few minutes inspect-
ing the opposite side of the same glass case at
which I was standing. The Empress looked
very beautiful, although being rather delicate at
the time, she was being drawn round the
building in a chair by a footman, the Emperor
following behind, looking then as he always
did —deep in thought. Whether this was sa
or not no one can tell; for nothing came out of
that long silent life of his, and we looked in
vain for some startling outbursts —once now
and then, at least —as the outcome of
this continuous reticence. At certain
political crises, when surrounding countries
anxiously waited to see what Napoleon would
say, those utterances which were to sway the
national policies never came, or were disap-
pointing to a degree when they did.
The only charitable conclusion is that there
was little or nothing to utter. Without wishing
to draw a parallel, one is yet reminded of
Charles Lamb, who at a small dinner party
was very much struck by the bearing of one of
the guests, who had a fine head, was
intellectual in expression, and thoughtful.
Altogether, Lamb was very much im-
pressed, and anxiously waited for a
manifestation. It came. Soon after this, a
dish of apple dumplings made their appear-


ance; when his eye suddenly lit up, and he
exclaimed “ Them’s the jockies for me.”
Lamb was so overwhelmed with the unex-
pected outburst that he rose from the table
and rushed into the next room to hide his
mingled emotions, and to stifle his laughter.
AN ARREST.
Soon after this view of the French Royalties
I went up into the galleries; and when inno-
cently sketching off a small design I suddenly
heard the words—“ Pardon, Monsieur,”
followed by a heavy hand laid on each
shoulder; and looked round at two
big gensd’armes to find myself under arrest!
The little pocketbook was seized, and they
“ran me in” to the Bureau de Commissionaire,
happily only a few yards away, where I was
received very politely by the Commissionaire,
who inspected the pocketbook, and then
orated. I was able to gather the prominent
words —“ Les Anglaisesa I’Exposition Univer-
selle de 1851, les Fabricateurs Frangaises.’
Then I understood, and at once said —“ Ah,
oui, oui, Monsieur, Reciprocation.” It brought
him up in a moment with the reply—“Pre-
cisement, precisement, Monsieur —Reciproca-
tion.” The pocketbook was returned, and I
was bowed out. No more sketches were taken
in that Exhibition.
While at Paris I heard the Cologne Choral
Union, about sixty in number, led by Franz
Weber. They were divided into two tenors
and two basses, and sang their part songs with
perfect precision. One of these was a trick
piece in a clever imitation of musical instru-
ments.


No. XIV.
NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE.
We spent a fortnight this year at Tunbridge
Wells, and were agreeably surprised by a visit
from Frank Bennoch, who brought Nathaniel
Hawthorne to spend the day with us. He was
naturally very reserved, but we much enjoyed
the little “runs he did make.” I remember
once in conversation expressing a great dislike
to the common pronunciation of the word
■“wind” in poetry, to which he at once agreed,
■considering that in every instance the word
should be pronounced short, as giving the idea
of force and energy, and that the only excep-
tion in favour of the usual poetical rendering
■should be when descriptive of just a gentle
rustling of the leaves.
EASTER EVE.
In a recent allusion to the Russian
■custom at Eastertide (and which we followed
at Derby) of each presenting the other with a
■coloured egg with the words, “ Christ is risen,”
I omitted to mention the source of that custom
as it exists in the Russian Church, which is
intensely interesting and very touching.
They assemble together in the Church, ft
large congregation, waiting for the Easter
morn, the ladies on one side, the men on the
■other, all in evening dress, and each holding a
lighted candle. A coffin is lying there, as if it
•contained the body of the Saviour; when many
get up and walk round it, some shedding tears.
A number of priests then come, lift it
reverently up and bear it away, when at this
moment a plaintive burst of song comes from
the choir —“ They have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they have laid Him”—
this repeated again and again as they walk up
and down the aisle, singing it sadly as they go.
Suddenly, for it is morning, the dirge ceases,


and all the voices burst forth, chanting with
joy, “ The Lord is risen indeed.” The candles
are extinguished; every one falls upon his
neighbour’s neck and kisses him, the glad
anniversary of the Easter morn is ushered in
with rejoicing, and throughout the day, eggs,
coloured blue and purple, are mutually ex-
changed by thousands, the streets resounding
with the sentence “ Christ is risen.”
MANCHESTER LOAN- EXHIBITION.
The finest collection of paintings, as far as
its numbers go, that has ever been seen or
probably ever will be seen, was under view for
two short months at Manchester. “Collec-
tion” is hardly the word; it was rather a
selection, for they were all gems. The idea
was to obtain on loan the chefs d'oeuvres, the
very finest works, of all the best painters;
and it was carried out to the letter by
the ready compliance of every collector,
whether the Queen, nobles, or com-
moners, who had such masterpieces in
possession. These paintings began with the
earliest works known—altarpieces, tryptichs,
dystychs, flat panel-like paintings of Giotto
and others of the thirteenth century up to the
works of to-day, and by painters of whatever
country, and all these arranged in chrono-
logical order round the walls of two very long
rooms. One can only particularize a few
names, such as Giotto, Fra Bartolomeo, Titian,
Rubens, Vandyck, Raphael, Claude, Poussin,
and Watteau, Reynolds, Gainsboro, Hogarth,
Wilkie, Danby, Muller, the Linnells, Millais,
Leighton, Holman Hunt, and Ary Scheffer,
whose “ Dante and Beatrice” was amongst the
latest productions under inspection. Man-
chester was crowded, and a higher school of
training for any lover of the fine art could not
possibly be conceived.


LORD NORMANBT.
When dining one evening afc the Cedars-
with my friend Mr. H., at the outset of the
Crimean War, he said that saltpetre—then a
proscribed article—was being sent into Russia
in large quantities, and as salt. The infor-
mation came from one of his Russian houses,
and was reliable. Mr. H. told me, in reply
to my enquiry, that he had done nothing in
it, having little faith that the Government
would take any notice of the matter, but
laughingly said, “ You can write to-morrow if
you like; I will give you full particulars.” I
wrote the Government the next morning, and
within a day or two received an official letter
from the Marquis of Normanby, thanking me
for the information, and promising that imme-
diate action should be taken. Shortly after,
Mr. H. received advices that through enquiries
instituted by the Government, the “salt”’
exports had been stopped.
A HEARTLESS SUBJECT.
One of our medical men at Derby, Dr. G,,
had a large practice and also took a promi-
nent part in public matters. He was brim-
ming over with humour whether at his own
home or in his speeches outside. He told me-
one evening of a post-mortem case at which a
young medicus gave evidence and diagnosed
the general appearance of “the heart.” Dr,
G. said, “The heart was at that very time in
spirits at my surgery, as I had previously
examined the body,” Dry humour was in the
family generally, for about that time I was at-
a large railway meeting at Derby, when the
cushioning of second-class carriages was
brought under discussion. Dr. G. spoke
on the subject, condemning the hard seats-
and advocating the introduction of cushions,
which was strongly opposed by some present.


Dr, G., who was tall and thin, said with his;
peculiar manner, “It is all very well for
gentlemen to stand out against cushions, to
think cushions are unnecessary —who are well
provided .” And as he seemed mentally to
look himself down, it presented such an evident
self-reflection upon his own impressionable
figure if thus ‘ ‘ bound in boards” that amid loud
laughter he carried the meeting with him. It
was at Dr. G.’s house, alternately with three
others, that we occasionally met, eight in
number for the practice of madrigals and part
songs. Among our members was Mrs. Charles
Allsop, widow of the brewer. She had a
lovely voice, especially as a soloist.
About that time a friend I met at the
Cedars, one of the Newbolds, of Sheffield,
undertook to buy a horse for me at a coming
sale of Earl Fitzwilliam’s stud. He was a fine
bay, nearly thoroughbred, with black points,
and black silky mane; but though with-
out a particle of vice, so excitable and his
f aAourite paces so habitual an arrangement of the
mazurka, that after riding him for six months
we parted company—even then with regret. Ire-
member one day riding home whentheßev. Mr.
Scott, the incumbent of St. John’s, came across
the Friargate to speak to me. He was
short, very lame, and walked with a crutch. I
could not keep the animal still, and the mo-
ment Mr. Scott was at my side, the bay
suddenly described one of his usual figurets.
There was no question whatever as to Mr.
Scott’s infirmity, but the rapidity with which
that reverend gentleman shot across the
Friargate was very remarkable. The sudden
and unexpected always tend more or less to
alter existing conditions, sometimes, indeed,,
to reverse them altogether; as in a case I
once read of, it was one of gout, in which


■a man consulted a doctor who undertook
a cure. The man walked with great diffi-
culty even with two crutches, and the
■doctor placed the man in a small room, devoid
•of furniture, with a plate-iron floor, with
crutches in hand and his feet swathed up in
linen wrappings, leaning up against the wall,
and locked in, A stove was underneath,
■and as the heat increased the patient lifted
up first one foot and then the other, beating
time more and still more rapidly, crying out in
vain for release, until at last the crutches
were thrown down in despair, and he fairly
■danced with pain, but it was said to his ulti-
mate relief. I respectfully commend this
remedy to the faculty.
No. XV.
A SCIENTIST PAERIED.
My friend Charles L., the curate of All
Saints’, had asked me and another lay friend
to dine at his rooms to meet his vicar and a
young clergyman who had recently come to
Derby. A funny episode occurred after dinner
at dessert, when our host, a great scientist,
happened to ask the new arrival “What are
your ideas about meteorology?” The young
•curate looked at him for a moment, and then
in a deliberate, dreamy kind of way just said
‘ ‘ Ya-a-s —ya-a-s”—nothing more! Charles L.
immediately floated another topic, and we
all with the utmost difficulty repressed.
Meteorology is not a subject taken up by
•every one; and oui* new friend —a scholarly
man, too —could have well afforded to say “I
really know nothing whatever about it,” but
he preferred for the moment to adopt the
{esthetic and to let the question glide by.


PRINCE IMPERIAL.
I was in Paris for the Jour de I’Ans,
January 1, of 1857, when the drummers from all
the bands then in the capital, assemble in the
large Court of the Tuilleries to drum in the
New Year. On that occasion the Emperor
and Empress Eugenie appeared on the palace
balcony, the former bringing out the infant
Prince Imperial, whom he held up high in his-
arras amid the acclamations of the populace-
This is the great festival of the year, and the
only day the Parisians say in which the
Gendarme is seen to smile. The Boulevardes
on each side are lired with rows of booths,
crowded with gifts, bonbons, &c., for the
juveniles; and in the evening the great
carnival or masked ball is held. We had the
good fortune in this visit to meet with Dr.
Brewer, the well-known author of so many
educational and scientific works whe was then
writing in some of the French magazines. He
most kindly appointed himself as our guide,
and showed us the best things worth seeing
in each Gallery or Museum, whether in paint*
ings, or statuary, or curios.
ARTHUR SKKTCHLKY,
Early in 1861 I left Derby and came te
reside in Kensington, near London. In the
course of that year I met Rowes, the barrister
(afterwards Arthur Sketchley), at a lady’s
house in Upper Seymour-street. Among the
guests were the late Sir John Mellor and his
son, the present Justice Mellor, and also
Inderwick, leading counsel in the Admiralty
and Divorce Court. At this party Mr. Rowes
gave us his sketch of “ Mrs. Brown at the
Play,” which was so characteristic that
his friends then persuaded him to make
it a public entertainment. We were
subsequently asked, with a number of others


(to ensure a large audience), at his first adver-
tised and experimental evening at the Han-
over-square Rooms. It was a pronounced
■success, and he at once commenced his public
career in “Evening Sketches of Character,”
adding other and varied experiences of Mrs.
Brown. These evenings extended over twenty
years in London and the provinces, culminat-
ing in the entertainments given in these
colonies, for he died soon after reaching Eng-
land.
Arthur Sketchley mentioned a droll incident
of a Frenchman lecturing on Shakspeare, who
said, “You Angleese do not understand
Shakkaspeere; you do not understand what he
write. You say he write, ‘ A rose by any
other name would smell as sweet.’ It is one
graande meestak; it is ‘ A nose by any other
name would smell as sweet.’ ”
DOMBEY BEDIVXVUS.
Reverting to Tunbridge Wells, I was one
day at the station awaiting the arrival of a
train. Close by the station is a tunnel, so that
the public are enjoined not to cross the line,
but to mount a flight of steps and to go across
the bridge. A train was just due when a very
pompous-looking old gentleman of the Dombey
type, head high in the air and arrayed in blue
dresscoat and brass buttons, came hurriedly in
and was about to cross the level, when he was
stopped by the porter who civilly pointed out
the regulation “ Gentlemen not allowed to
cross the line.” The old gentleman, irated both
at the regulation and at the porter when at
this moment the whistle sounded, and he ran
down the platform to get across to his train,
when in a moment the Dombey called after
him in a loud and imperious manner, “Portah,
portah, come back, sah, come back, sah, don’t
you see that regulation ‘ Gentlemen not


allowed to cross the line.’ The porter
turned round in a moment, touched his cap,
and quietly said “If you please, Sir, I’m not
a gentleman, I’m a porter.” The steam was
shut off instantly, but you could see it was
fearfully “high pressure” inside, by the rapid
conveyancing of himself” up and down that
privileged platform, for he was a very costly man.
SIMILIA SXMILIBUS.
I remember many years ago meeting a very
intelligent man and of scientific proclivities,
who, from his peculiar turn of mind, might
have been a friend of Edison, but that he lived
long before his time. One circumstance he
mentioned was distinctly homoeopathic. It
was the case of a man suffering from uncon-
trollable laughter. At times most un-
appropriate, at places most unseem-
ly, he would suddenly break out into
loud fits of laughter that naturally
excited curiosity and unpleasant comment, as
the cause of each outburst remained undis-
closed. He was said to have consulted one
physician after another, but without effect,
until at last a surgeon carefully diagnosed the
general symptoms, and undertook the case.
His theory—very interesting in itself—was
this:—“The globules of human blood are
circular; the globules of a turkey’s blood are
angular. I shall, therefore, make an in-
cision in the nape of the neck, and
I shall introduce the globules of tur-
key’s blood, and shall watch the result.”
(Let it here be understood that the patient
was now in such a state that the attacks were
more pronounced and very frequent.) The re-
sult was just as the doctor anticipated; the
sudden infusion and blending of the angular
with the circular globules produced such
titillation and intense excitement that a second


and equally violent laughter ensued, the one-
counteracting the other, and so astonishing
the whole system that the patient was per-
manently cured.
The other story was equally remarkable.
Some labourers were engaged on a gentle-
man’s property in an excavation, and on very
rocky ground; in the course of which they
came to a number of boulders varying both in
size and shape, the gentleman himself stand-
ing by, overlooking the work with a valuable
pointer by his side. One of these boulders
was brought up to the surface and thrown
on the ground close by, when the dog suddenly
started—tail extended, as is usual —and made a
distinct point. The navvies smiled, treating
it as a case of harmless aberration. Not so the
owner, who said “My dog never yet made
a mistake. There is something there, break
open the stone.” His orders were obeyed, the
stone was broken open with a large sledge
hammer, disclosing a petrified hare! I men-
tion the two circumstances as narrated to me,
but am quite unable to particularise the names-
or the localities, which were not given.
No. XVI.
THE SIXTY-TWO EXHIBITION.
The Exhibition of 1862 will ever hold a
prominent place among all others, occurring as
it did so soon after the death of the lamented
Prince Consort, who had taken the deepest
interest in its initiation, and had purchased
the ground on which it stood, upon his own re-
sponsibility. It was a grand opening. Among
the principal visitors were the Duke of Cam-
bridge, the Dowager Duchess of Cambridge
and the Princess Mary, Crown Prince o


Prussia, Prince Oscar of Sweden, the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury, Bishop of London,
Lord Chancellor, Speaker, Lord Chamberlain,
Earl Derby, D’lsraeli, Gladstone, and Tenny-
son, the Poet Laureate, &c., &c. The Court
dresses, almost covered with rich gold lace,
of the English and foreign Ministers were
simply gorgeous. We had excellent seats close
to the side of the long space kept clear for
their procession to the dais; and as the notables
walked up the avenue, either singly or in
groups, the effect was imposing in the ex-
treme. But an air of sadness pervaded the
whole ceremony. All felt that one who would
have been the chief actor was absent, and yet
thathis spirit was present andhoveringover the
entire surroundings. This feeling was in-
tensified by the exquisite requiem ode com-
posed by Tennyson, set to music by Sterndale
Bennett, and sung just after Meyerbeer’s
opening Grand March. A prayer by the Bishop
of London, the “Hallelujah Chorus,” and the
National Anthem closed the musical part of
the performance, when the Exhibition was
declared open by the Royal Commissioners.
PAINTING AND STATUARY.
The Prince Consort had suggested a new de-
parture in this Exhibition, inasmuch as a
general invitation had been issued for the
inclusion of high art painting and statuary,
the former embracing a period of a hundred
years, so as to ascertain the general progress
made during that period. This invitation was
heartily responded to. A gallery of 800 pic-
tures was formed, and as the result the paint-
ings of 1862 are held in remembrance, and
many of them perpetuated in existing photo-
graphs to this day. In that Exhibition were
“The Christian Martyr,” “A Service in a
Norse Interior,” with its wonderful reflection


of light from the roof, “Luther singing in the
streets of Eisenach,” &c. There were also
leading works of Turner, Wilkie, Hart, Call-
cott, Maclise, Leighton, &c. The foreign gal-
leries represented were French, German, Nor-
wegian, Swedish, and Italian.
The statuary, which was distributed among
the painting galleries, embraced some lovely
specimens. Lalage was in that exhibition—
sitting, the knees crossed, and her hands clasp-
ing one knee —lovely in its pose, although in
an attitude hitherto unattempted in statuary.
She always had crowds of admirers, as also
“ The Reading Girl” sitting on a chair, and
reading a book which lay on her lap. She
was regarded by some as too realistic.
EX-QUEEN AMELIE.
In the Italian compartment there were some
lovely works of art, alto relievos in ivory; one
especially, “ The Descent from the Cross.”
One afternoon I was intently looking at this
art production, as I often had before, when I
suddenly heard a voice close by my side,
“ Magnifique ! magnifique!” and I looked up
to see the ex-Queen of the French with her
suite, and her two sons, the Duke de
Nemours and Duke de Montpensier. She was
a tall dignified woman with silvery hair, and
looking every inch a Queen. I had seen her
sons some years before in the Chapelle Royale
at Brussels, when we sat immediately behind
them.
briggs’s murder case.
A funny circumstance occurred to me, just
after the well-known Briggs murder case, and
evidently arising out of it. It will be remem-
bered by many that a gentleman named Briggs
was returning home by rail one evening, and
was robbed and murdered between Church -
street and Stepney Station, by one Franz


Mliller, a German, who then jumped out
of the train and escaped. The case was much
talked about, and a wholesome caution given
by the Press that no one should travel in a
railway compartment with one person only, if
a. stranger. One evening soon after the trial,
I entered a second-class compartment at
Euston-square, and alone. At the moment
of departure when the bell was ringing, a stout
woman of the “housekeeper” type hurried
across the platform, and was being ushered
into my compartment, when she started back
horrified, and said, “No, not here; there’s
only one man in the carriage.” The porter
understood it in a moment, looked at me with
a knowing smile, and took her at once to a
less dangerous compartment. On my return
I gave account of it to a young artist, who at
■once drew a picture, and sent it to “Judy.”
JOHN LEECH.
In October of 1804 I went with Charles
Kenny to spend an hour with Leech in his
studio at Kensington. It was on one Tuesday
morning, and only four days before his death.
He was then executing a commission for a
series of the Briggs’ sketches, but on a larger
scale than those he had painted heretofore;
and explained to us how it was done in order
to save time and the trouble of taking propor-
tionate measurements. He first drew a fair
outline sketch of the picture, but on an elastic
canvas. This he afterwards stretched out and
fastened to the easel to the extended scale as
ordered. The canvas thus stretched showed a
line here and there, but just enough to enable
him again to fill in a general outline so as to
paint the large-sized picture as ordered. He
complained to us during the interview of the
shattered state of his nerves, and how much he
felt the street noises, especially of the organ-


grinders—his bite noire. His house in the
High-street was double-windowed throughout,
in order to deaden the sounds as much as
possible. He had arranged for a children’s
party on the Saturday evening of the same
week, but died unexpectedly the same after-
noon.
AN ARTISTS EXPERIENCE.
Just before this visit to Leech I saw at a
friend’s house in Kensington some subject-
drawings and etchings by a young lady visitor,
of such merit that I strongly urged her to obtain
commissions from publishers, and promised to
help her in the effort. I took some of her
sketches to Strachan, of Ludgate Hill, then on
Good Words, who at once gave me a block
for a single page illustration of poetry.
Miss I made a lovely study, and Strachan
told me to take it to “Swain,” who said at
once, “It won’t engrave;” but was so taken
with the conception and drawing that he en-
lightened me pretty fully as to the defects so
common to all beginners. Ashe said, “We
can never touch anything of the etching type
with chance fancy lines. In woodcutting
every single line must have its defined parallel,
whether in curves, cross lines, or otherwise.”
The graver can never help the artist, seeing
that in the act of cutting, the block is covered
with a card, leaving just an open two-inch
square, in which, as he remarked, we simply cut
out the spaces that we sea.” These defects
being corrected, I subsequently got a small
book from another Ludgatd Hill publisher
requiring seven illustrations, which, to the
young artist’s great delight, resulted in
a substantial cheque. Good incomes
were then made in drawings for wood,
but it is not all smooth sailing. One
great difficulty is in obtaining the subjects and


getting up the scene appropriate to each
illustration. I remember that in this little
book the pictures embraced a scene in a
churchyard, a charge by a wild bull in a field,
besides house interiors and personages of all
ages; and all these have to be hunted up.
Reverting again to the woodcuts, the demand
at the time now under discussion, especially
for small, minute illustrations, was so great
that publishers often found it difficult to get
their wants supplied, and young artists under
this branch could earn with comparative ease
from £250 to £3OO a year. But things are now
changed. Save in a certain class of books, the
age of wood-engraving is subsiding in favour
of the new and rapid process which in cost of
production is twelve or fifteen times cheaper
than its predecessor. Thus it is in our present
surroundings, whether in science or nature, or
human experience, displacement and the law
of succession is inscribed upon everything.
But it will all be resolved into a perfect and
restful harmony in the future.
BEAUTIFUL SISTERS AND WIVES.
To many artists some subjects are always
near at hand. Tenniel had two beautiful
sisters, and you can trace them in varied
characters all through certain editions of
“ The Arabian Nights.” Dickens’s pretty
wife can be recognised in numberless pictures
in his early editions; and Mrs. De Maurier,
whose painting graced the walls of Leech’s
dining-room, also occupied a prominent posi-
tion in her husband’s sketches. Oneimportant
requisite in every wood engraving that I
often heard discussed was in its colouring. A
perfect woodcut must show up in its lights
and shadows like the colours of painting—if a
bright picture, then it must have dark reliefs;
if a dark background, then bright spots some-


where. There was a small picture, about a
foot square, and dark as night, that I once
saw at the Lille Gallery, which they said:
could not be valued. It was an old man read-
ing the Bible to his wife in a dark
little room by the light of a solitary candle;
the reflection of light, and the general effect of
the picture was certainly marvellous.
LORD BROUGHAM AND CANNES.
I joined my wife in the Christmas season of
this year at Cannes. The climate is lovely
there, and it was a delightful visit. We
formed a close friendship with the resident
clergyman, Mr. Rolfe. He had been over-
worked, and the Rev. Thomas Dyke Acland
was staying at the Rectory as his substitute,
and many a happy hour we spent there. On
each side of the lawn was a fine castor oil
shrub, with its exquisite deep scarlet flower.
The only flowering plant I ever saw in this
colony is at Port Victor. The services at the
Church were earnest and impressive and the
singing perfect, giving us the idea of one large
family worshipping in praise notes together.
We sometimes met the aged Lord Brougham
as he walked to and fro from his Chateau to
the town.
No. XVII.
THE CHILDREN’S CHOIR.
I have been to many gatherings at the
Crystal Palace; to one in particular, when
some 4,000 children assembled to sing sacred
and other chorals. Looking, then, at the vas
concourse of people, and in such a building
listening as they did with breathless atten-
tion, the effect was beyond all description.
And as the clear voices of the children sang
those sweet harmonies, more especially the


grand “Old Hundredth,” there was a hushed
stillness throughout the palace, and many
faces were bathed in tears. The harmony
seemed indeed heavenborn, and the very sur-
roundings bore out the idea. The large
ascending choir seats were surmounted by a
roof painted azure blue. Just underneath
that, on the uppermost semi-circular seat, was
a row of golden harps, and beneath these, four
thousand children, arrayed and separately
grouped, in colours of light blue, white, and
pink. But whatever the effect of such
harmonies as these, of such choruses as the
“Messiah” or the “Elijah,” as heard in the
Palace or in either of the two great London
halls, nothing will ever surpass the thrilling
effect, the perfect fascination of one single
voice, a voice that stands out alone from
all the other great singers, that of Jenny
Lind. Hen wondrous notes —clear, pure,
ringing high notes, whether in the warblings
of the bird song in “ Lo, here the gentle lark,”
in those strange weird-like Swedish melodies,
or last and best of all in a simple ballad, just
came home to the heart of every listener.
She has now received her promotion, but if she
were to come back to us to-day, I would rather
hear her sing such a simple but lovely melody
as “There is a green hill far away” (not then
composed, I think), or another, equally touch-
ing of its kind and which she often sang,
“Jock o’ Hazeldean, ” than anything else she
ever rendered. My own nearest relative,
who spent one winter at Mentone, where
Madame G-oldsmidt was staying, sat in the
seat immediately behind her at the English
Church, and she used to say “ her singing
was so expressive, so beautiful, that my own
voice was hushed to silence, and I could
only just stand there and listen.” But you


were drawn towards Jenny Lind far less by
her wonderful voice than by the charm of her
character. The very first glance impressed
you with a sense of such nobility, such gentle-
ness and goodness, that at once won for her
your deep respect and affection, a goodness,
too, that with plainness of feature made her
beautiful. How often this is so.
Features plain in themselves, in which the
usual role is absent, the Grecian nose, thin
set coral lips, the dimpled chin, the long
silken eyelashes—these all absent, and yet the
face to you is beautiful, and with a beauty
that grows upon you you know not why. We
cannot define it, save that it is a trace of the
Divine element within, shining out in what we
■ call expression, soul, character. Thus it was
with Jenny Lind. Thus it is and ever will be
■with myriads of others. May God bless the
plain faces, giving to them all His own
impress, and thus making them beautiful, yes,
•ever beautiful; for what would it be with us
by-and-bye, if without that, when stripped of
•everything—the belongings, the creed, the
body—nothing left but the soul? If redeemed,
•then beautiful; if lost, ah, then?
BECOLLECTIONS OP EVANGELISTS, PREACHERS,
MEN OP MARK, &C. —ELIZABETH BBAKWELL.
During the last three years’ residence in
England, through certain changed conditions,
I was led into association with many who
were taking a prominent part in evangelistic
work. Among the foremost ranks of these I
would mention Elizabeth Bramwell, a cousin
•of the late Justice Bramwell, and whose name
is still fragrant in the memory of countless
numbers. My first knowledge of her work
extends back to the Crimean War, when she
went over with a band of Florence Nightin-


gale’s lady nurses to tend the wounded in that
campaign. But they had no sooner landed at
Varna than they were told off to far sadder
duties. The black malarial fever had broken
out, carrying off numbers of our poor soldiers,
the disease being so rapid and fatal in its pro-
gress that some of the ladies feared to under-
take the dread offices. The foul, loathsome sur-
roundings, consequentupon this disease, madeit
indeed essentially a man’s work, and to which
many of the healthy soldiers were accordingly
allotted. Miss Bramwell told me that often
a,fter taking a few hours’ necessary rest she
would return to the ward to find that one after
another in that short interval had succumbed
and had been removed for burial.
In these fever cases it was found necessary
to administer at short intervals a spoonful of
Port wine. One of the patients had stead-
fastly refused at the hands of any of the nurses
to take it. It was apparently in this instance
not a case of temperance but of simple contra-
riness, and the nurses accordingly went and
reported it to Miss Bramwell, then at the
other end of the ward. With the reply,
"“Leave him to me; I will try and manage
him,” she went up to his bedside and said,
“William, you will take this wine.” He
looked up at her, set his teeth fast, and with a
defiant look refused. After again persuading
him, she spoke more firmly, and said,
■“lt is for your good; you must take
it.” His teeth having slightly unclosed, she
put the spoon to his lips and poured the
wine in, but he had no sooner taken it than
he deliberately launched the whole contents
into her face and mouth. She told me that in
that short interval the fever had turned what
was Port wine into a foul loathsome black
fluid. The soldier nurses who were devotedly


attached to Miss Bramwell, rushed up to the
bedside with clenched fists, so that Miss Bram-
well had at once to interpose, telling them
that if they did they must strike her first. To-
gfVe her own words:—l just took my handker-
chief, wiped away the stuff, and sent up a
message to my Father above, and He gave me-
the answer at once. 1 re-filled the spoon, re-
turned to the bedside, and said “ William,,
have you a mother?” He looked up at me
with an earnest glance and replied “oh, yesj
give me the wine.” She could do anything
with him after this. Indeed, throughout the
campaign she was beloved by all the men under
her charge, whether healthy or sick, for she
was ever a physician to both soul and body
alike.
MADAME ELXSE.
Miss Bramwell returned to England to find
all London stirred to indignation at the death
of a young woman from rapid consumption,,
induced by long hours of confinement at needle-
work, at the establishment of a fashionable
milliner (Madame Elise) in Regent-street,,
where she had been herded together with a.
number of other girls, and in a room so small
and close that it was called “the Black Hole
of Calcutta.”
An inquest was held, followed by a public
enquiry, eliciting the fact that in numbers of
such establishments, including the large
fashionable drapers, young women were thus
employed during the season from early morn-
ing until late at night. And in the intervals
between one season and another, say from
August to February, when the milliners had
comparatively little or nothing to do, these
poor girls were as a rule left without work of
any kind, the result being either starvation or
something far worse.


Elizabeth Bramwell went into the depths of
these enquiries, and at once determined with
her sister Augusta to take a large house in
Great Marlborough-street, Regent-street, in
the immediate neighbourhood of these estab-
lishments, and set it apart as a Home for all
such cases. This effected, her doors were
thrown open for the reception of any young
women of respectable character thus employed
at the West-End, who were not under the
immediate protection of parents or friends,
her one object being to give to such a Home
and to look after them as her own sisters. She
had a perfect crowd of applicants, and at the
time I first knew her, her family had amounted
to more than ninety in number, obliging her to
rent the adjoining house as well. A com-
munication was then opened between the two
premises, forming practically one house, the
rent for the two buildings being £IBO per
annum. She charged these young sisters a
minimum sum for board — for each meal,
breakfast and for tea, and a proportio-
nately small amount for bed and dinner.
They had thus a reserve fund for necessary ex-
penses when out of work; although from
enquiries Miss Bramwell made she was able
generally to find full employment during
the slack season, not only for the young milli-
ner ladies, but for many other workers received
and retained in the Home during the whole
year. And a Home indeed it was to them in
the highest sense of the word. Every thought
was for their comfort; and they returned it
with the most devoted attachment. Miss
Bramwell regularly met with them for daily
worship, and every Friday evening and Sun-
day afternoon she held a special Bible reading,
which no one sister, unless absolutely pre-
vented, ever omitted to attend. Her know-


ledge of the Bible, even of less familiar pas-
sages in the Prophets, was to me something
wonderful, and none can imagine, but those
who knew her, what she was to these sisters
in those times of communion with her beauti-
ful, holy, loving, gentle face, nor how her
example influenced their lives. I remarked to
her one day how bright and happy they
seemed to be. Yes, she said, nearly all of
them are Christians.
Both the sisters Bramwell had independent
property; but in establishing the Home they
resolved not to divert a penny of their own
money from the usual channels of service, but
to rely upon simple faith in God for the
supply of everything. And this, including
rent, gas, rates, servants, and maintenance
meant a considerable sum; nevertheless, as
with George Muller and a host of others to this
day, God never failed her. On one occasion a
quarter’s rent was due £45, and nothing was
in the Home to meet it. She wrote asking the
landlord to kindly defer the payment until a
certain day (which she named) in the next
week. That day arrived, and there were still
no funds. She told me how during this in-
terval, and on that morning especially, she
had spread her needs before God, asking
Him if any act, any omission of hers in the
shape of unsatisfied claims or otherwise had
hindered His working; for, as she said, “I did
trust Him.” Accordingly she carefully went
through all her accounts and payments, but
without discovering anything that was wrong.
Just after this she was called away on some
business matter into Regent-street, and was
leaving the Home, when one of the young
ladies ran up the stairs and said Dear Miss
Bramwell, here’s a letter for you with an In-
dian postmark.” Miss Bramwell replied, “I


don’t know any one in India just now, but take
it up to my room till I return.” When she came
back the letter contained a cheque for £45
from an army officer in India quite unknown
to her, saying it was laid upon his mind that
she wanted money, and he therefore sent her
this cheque.
No. XVIII.
THE EICHMOND EETEEAT.
The house in Great Marlborough-street had
not long been established before it became
necessary to open a Branch Home in the
midst of fresh country surroundings. Long
hours and close rooms had developed in
more than one instance the germs of con-
sumption, and had otherwise preyed upon
the health of many. Two cottages were
therefore taken at Ham Common, near
Richmond, to which a number of invalided
ones were sent for pure country air and rest,
and placed under the care of a devoted
matron.
My first visit to this Home in company with
a young evangelist, now in the colony, I shall
never forget, its lady inmates, fourteen or
fifteen in number, all in more or less delicate
health. The impression then produced can
only be summed up in one word, spirituelle .
One of these lady residents was a young and
beautiful girl, aristocratic in feature and
bearing, her skin almost transparent, and far
gone in consumption, yet with Heaven’s seal
stamped unmistakeably upon her brow. On
this and in my subsequent visits she would
say, “Now for my favourite hymn; before
you go we must have ‘ Oh, for the robes of


whiteness.’ ” The whole verse reads—
Oh, for the robes of whiteness,
Oh, for the tearless eyes,
Oh, for the glorious brightness
Of the unclouded skies.
And the other verses are just as beautiful. She
soon passed away into the Fatherland; and
there may I and every reader of these lines
meet her.
Miss Bramwell chartered a steamer for all
her numerous family who were able to leave
their respective employments to go up the
Thames from Westminster to spend the day
■on the Common with their invalid sisters, and
on one of these occasions she invited two or
three evangelists and myself to accompany
them.
It was a beautiful summer’s day as we
steamed up the river, some seventy in number.
Arriving at the Home soon after midday, we
found a cold collation prepared for us and for
as many of the invalids as could come out.
This was followed by a bright service in the
afternoon with two or three short addresses,
succeeded by tea, soon after which we returned
home by moonlight, the ladies singing part
songs and hymns and snatchesjall the way down
the river. I remember on that day expressing
my astonishment to Miss Bramwell at the re-
fined ladylike bearing of so many of the sister-
hood. She told me that a large number of
them were ladies by birth and education,
daughters of clergymen, army officers,
one, indeed, a General’s daughter, and
that she had received into the Home
some who were closely connected with
titled families. Such as these were eagerly
sought after by the large establishments as
living lay figures, on whom they could exhibit
to ladies of title and others their choice


•costumes. Miss Bramwell told me that one
of her “children” (as she often called them)
then at a large fashionable mantle shop in
Regent-street, was recognised at once by Lady
— —— as evidently a lady by birth, treating
her as such with every consideration, and that
she called her Lord’s attention (who was stand-
ing by) to the circumstance. He remarked,
“Oh. she is only a block!”
MBS. THISTLETHWAITE.
I once heard Mrs. Thistlewaite, who for a
time gave gospel addresses on Sunday after-
noons at the Polytechnic. The room was
always crammed to the doors. She was one
of the loveliest of women, and it was said that
the men went to hear her, avowedly from ad-
miration of her beauty. If they did, numbers
came away forgetting her beauty and herself
altogether, and remembering only the solemn
truths they had heard. She had rather a
pensive looking face, but with a wonderful
depth of expression, and this brought home
her earnest appeals with a perfect inspiration.
In more than one address she sought and
very naturally to dispel the error which
crept into the Church, and is still perpetuated
in so many of our institutions, respecting the
character of Mary of Magdala; an error based
on mere tradition, and for which there is no
real or Scriptural ground whatever.
At the end of a chapter (Luke 7th) the
history is given of a woman in sin, whose
name is not mentioned, and who is forgiven
and dismissed. Immediately afterwards, in
almost the next verse, begins a history of
another personage whose name is given—
“ Mary called Magdalene out of whom went
seven devils,” an evident form of extreme
lunacy, and placing her under the same
category as the demoniac of G-adara, save that


where the Magdalene had only seven devils,
he had a legion. And while the woman in
sin was dismissed, Mary Magdalene followed
Jesus whithersoever He went. She was the
last at the cross, the first at the tomb, the
first to meet with her risen Lord, and to re-
ceive from Him that grand message to the
Disciples of His resurrection from the dead.
Moreover, last and chiefest of all, how was
she described—this too by inspiration—and
what were her two leading characteristics?
“She was healed of her infirmities, and she
ministered to the Lord of her substance.” To
any fallen woman the first is altogether in-
applicable and without meaning; the second
position is absolutely inadmissible. Let us
then honour her memory and vindicate her
character, as indeed is now done not only by
modern commentators, but also by a large
section of Bible readers in the Churches.
SURREY THEATRE.
I received a letter one day from a Scotch
relative, a clergyman just returned from Bom-
bay, saying that he was coming to town for a
week and wished me “to show him the
sights.” I understood his meaning, and, after
he had put in an appearance, we took our first
excursion together on a certain Sunday even-
ing to the Surrey Theatre. On arrival we were
taken down sundry dark passages, threading
our way by the light of a lantern, and in the
midst of planking and scenic arrangements of
all kinds, to emerge at last and suddenly upon
the stage itself, and close to the side of Richard
Weaver, who was just about to speak
to a closely packed house of about 4,000
people. When we got in, the whole crowd
were singing with all their lungs “Will you
go? Will you go?” to the tune of “Polly
Hopkins.” Being then quite unused to this


kind of tune-setting, my first thought was
“Well, this sounds almost like blasphemy;”
but the moment I looked up and saw the class
of men—thieves and roughs of every kind —
and how heartily they sang, the conviction
came home at once that a slow * 1 Old Hun-
dredth,” or any such tune would be out of
place altogether, and that “ something lively”
was quite indispensable.
At the close of the singing Richard Weaver
knelt down on the stage for a few moments,
and before a hushed and silent mass of on-
lookers. A searching address followed, which
was listened to with deep attention, and thirty-
two came forward, desiring to turn their back
upon sin, and with God’s help to enter upon a
new life. Another hymn was sung, and then
the doxology closed the service.
ME. STEVENSON BLACKWOOD.
The next evening we went together to Mr.
(the late Sir) Stevenson Blackwood’s drawing-
room meeting at Fulham. The room and
entrance hall were crowded, and Mr. Black-
wood had just taken up his position—his beau-
tiful wife, the Dowager Duchess of Man-
chester, (mother of the present Countess of
Kintore) standing just behind him —at the
threshold of the drawing-room door, so that
all the guests might hear, while he gave a
powerful address from Romans v. 1 and 2. He
came up to us at the close and invited us both
to call upon him at the Treasury the next day,
which we did, and spent a few minutes with him
very enjoyably. He was made an instrument
of great blessing to numbers, especially to
those in the higher social strata, and had won-
derful tact in dealing with all who came under
his notice. A gay, reckless, young fellow had
been dared out of pure bravado to go to one of
these Monday meetings. He went, stayed to


the close, listened attentively, and with this
impression that Mr. Blackwood felt all he
spoke about. After it was over, Mr. Black-
wood went up to him aside and said, in his
proverbially kind and polished manner,
“ Young man, you are a stranger here. lam
very glad to see you. Are you a Christian?”
“No,” he replied with a light laugh, “and I
don’t want to be.” Mr. Blackwood just put
his hands on the young man’s shoulders and
said, “How sad!” and then left him. The
young fellow went away; but those two
words clung to him and made him reason that
Christianity must mean a great deal to
call forth words with such a ring of pathos
as that. And these thoughts allowed him no
rest until a month or two afterwards, when he
went to a second Fulham meeting, and told
Mr. Blackwood that he could now answer his
question in the affirmative. This same young
man afterwards became a minister, and about
four years ago was able to testify that he had
admitted into Church Communion five thou-
sand converts.
On the Wednesday evening I went with my
reverend friend to a large tea given to the
“London thieves” by Edward Carter at his
Mission Room on the Surrey side; after which
we heard from him a most stirring address,
which was listened to with marked attention.
And this ended our week of “ sights.”
No. XIX.
GERALDINE HOOPER.
During this summer I was introduced to the
F.’s, of Netting Hill, who were in the very
heart of Christian work, and who threw open
their large house for frequent evangelistic


meetings. There I first met Miss Geraldine
Hooper, a lady by birth, of Bath family, and
descended from Bishop Hooper. She was
a beautiful girl of about two and twenty,
and was to give an address that evening
at a large room Mrs. P. had taken in
Bayswater ex-pressly for evangelistic services •
When we arrived the meeting commenced
with a short prayer service; and this
was my first experience of ladies one
after another offering up prayers fer-
vent and earnest, and with no pauses.
These prayers were followed by an address
from Miss Hooper, simple in language, but ye fc
so earnest that it thrilled every heart, and one
after another of her hearers rose up to give
their first bright testimony to the new birth
within.
Soon after this Miss Hooper was asked by
Mrs. P. to go across to Barnet. An immense
crowd of people had assembled in a large
enclosure to hear addresses from several well-
known evangelists, and for whom an open
wagon, well provided with chairs, had been
provided.
She took her place in this wagon with
the other ladies as a listener only and
with no idea of taking any part in the service.
At the close of one of the addresses Mrs. P.
turned round towards Miss Hooper and said,
“Now do you say a word to them.” Her only
reply was to fall on her knees in silent prayer,
after which she rose up and spoke to an as-
sembly of some thousands, and with great bless-
ing to numbers of them. In her evangelistic
work after this period her hearers counted by
thousands. On one occasion, at Luton, they
had erected a marquee to accommodate 4,000
persons, and it was said that as many more were
listening outside.


REV. J. BAXTER AND NAPOLEON THE THIRD.
Soon after this I went together with Mrs.
P. and Miss Hooper to spend the evening
with the Rev. J. Baxter, Incumbent of West-
minster Chapel of Ease, as a tea was to be given
in the schoolroom that evening to 200 old women.
Miss Hooper addressed them afterwards, and
her earnest words seemed to move nearly
all of them to tears. Mr. Baxter was a devoted
clergyman, but entertained such pronounced
views on the second coming as to fix in his
pamphlets approximate dates for the events
which are prophesied in relation to it;
especially so with regard to the “Antichrist,”
with whom he identified Napoleon the Third,
mainly from the accordance that he worked
out to his own satisfaction between
the name Napoleon in Greek (I think
also in Latin) and the number of the
“Beast” in Revelation xiii. 18, viz., 666;
and in which the numerals apparently support
his theory. I have not seen his pamphlet for
more than thirty years, and, therefore, can
only give from memory his Greek rendering as
follows:—
NAPOLEON T I
50 1 80 70 30 5 70 50 300 10=666.
In this rendering it will be seen that he used
the dative case. Napoleon, it was said, heard
of this inscription and smiled, but said
nothing—as usual.
Mr. Baxter was wrong in his chronology,
and in the belief that he or any one else could
fix it, viz., as to the expiration of the 5,996 J
years of the world’s history, which, as many
believe, will, with the “ time, times and a
half” (three and a half years), usher in the
Millennium. It is not given unto them or
unto us “to know the times and the seasons”


when these things shall be. One thing,
however, is certain, that from my earliest
remembrance a general expectation has pre-
vailed, apart from sect or creed that the Lord’a
Second Advent is very near at hand. Disraeli
himself said, some four years before his death,
that everything betokened the near approach
of a “great crisis and change in the world’a
history.”
Enough for us to bear in remembrance the
injunction—“ Watch, therefore, for ye know
not what hour your Lord shall come.”
THE HEKNHUTH WATCHMAN.
There was a beautiful fulfilment of thia
injunction in the period of old watchman days,
not in England, but in a small German village,
Hernhuth, and by one of a very different class
of watchmen, who in crying out the night
hours spiritualized his calling by analogies of
the Lord’s coming; and which is in its quaint-
ness too beautiful to be omitted: —
Past eight o'clock! O Hernhuth, do thou ponder.
Eight souls in Noah’s Ark were living yonder.
’Tis nine o’clock ! ye brethren hear it striking;
Keep hearts and houses clean to your Saviour’s.
liking.
Now, brethren, hear, the clock is ten and passing.
None rest but such as wait for Christ embracing.
Eleven is past! Still, at this hour of eleven,
The Lord is calling us from earth to heaven.
Ye brethren hear, the midnight clock is humming.
At midnight our Great Bridegroom will be coming..
Past one o’clock ! The day breaks out of darkness
Great morning star, appear and break our
hardness.
’Tis two! On Jesus wait this silent season,
Ye two so near related —Will and Reason.
The clock is three ! The blessed Three doth merit
The best of praise from body, soul, and spirit.
’Tis four o’clock! When three make supplication.
The Lord will make the fourth on that occasion.
Five is the clock ! Five virgins were rewarded,
When five with wedding garments were discarded.
The clock is six, and I go off my station.
Now, brethren, jook yourselves to your salvation.


Reverting again to Miss Hooper, she asked
me soon after this to accompany her to a meet-
ing she was holding that evening at Bays-
water, which was my last privileged association
with her in service, before I left England, and
she died four years later; but we shall meet
again.
MR. TALBOT CROSBY.
Just about this time I was introduced to
Mr. Talbot Crosby, who held frequent Bible-
readings at his town house in Bayswater. At
one of these meetings he gave us an account of
his conversion. His home in Ireland was at
Castle, not far from Cork. He told us
that he was suddenly confronted one Sunday in
his own parish Church by a direct searching
question put to him by the Incumbent aside
and after the service was over as to his own
personal salvation. ‘ ‘lt was a question, he said,
I could neither answer nor dispose of, and
that sent me home to my library. And there
on my knees with my Bible before me I sought
for grace to help me to face the whole ques-
tion, and to give an answer in the affirma-
tive.” His conversion was so thorough that
it was followed by that of his wife, his daugh-
ters, and all the servants at the Castle.
I remember going to one of his Bible
readings when his footman received me at
the door with a bright smile that spoke at once
of his own inner life; fully confirmed after-
wards by Mr. Crosby, who, when speaking
about his footman, said, “Why, —— knows
more about the Bible than I do.” He must
have been a very earnest student if he did, for
as I stood by Mr. Crosby’s side that evening
looking at a passage in his Bible I saw that the
pages were scored, and lined, and written
from the top to the bottom. I could not help
remarking upon this when he turned


round to me, and with a bright smile said,
“My dear brother I care not what I do to my
Bible if it makes Christ more precious to me.”
A sound principle this, for it is not the book or
the binding, but what is inside it. I have
known many a fully occupied Bible since then,
once where a second edition had to be
brought in, not to supersede, but to
act as co-partner with the other. A
wonderful help is a marked Bible—to each
possessor a diary of progress, his own specially
illuminated edition, and all the illumination done
for him. One special feature in these meetings
of Bible reading and evangelistic addresses was
the prominent part taken in them by so many
earnest men from the ranks of the aristocracy.
I remember more than one series of meetings
at which were present Lord .Radstock, Earl of
Cavan, and the late Sir Stephenson Blackwood.
Besides these there were others of equal
nobility of character, though without an
earthly title, such as Duncan Mathieson,
Reginald Radcliffe, W. Diprose, and John
Hambledon, the latter a man of wonderful
power in prayer and in his evangelistic ad-
dresses, and a Boanerges in his denunciations
against sin and every form of evil.
I met John Hambledon on a subsequent occas-
ion at Mr. Henry Reed’s house, Tunbridge
Wells, on one Sunday, where the revered
Anna Shipton was a guest. In the afternoon
he gave a searching gospel address in
a large and crowded room Mr. Reed had
set apart for the purpose at the foot of his
grounds.
I should here say that Mr. Henry Reed had
acquired a large fortune in the wool trade
many years previously at Dunedin, New
Zealand. Hambledon, then a distinguished
rough, had burnt Mr. Reed’s effigy in the


public streets of that city in ridicule of
his Christian character; and at this large
meeting he confessed his sin before them all
praising God for his conversion. Since then
he has been made a spiritual father to
thousands, and to that honoured servant of
God, Colonel Dowdle, among the number, as
he himself told me only a few months since.
Mr. Reed afterwardsremovedfrom Tunbridge
Wells to Launceston, Tasmania, where, as is
well known, he bought and equipped at his
own expense a mission steamer for the Wes-
leyans to open their new mission in New
Britain. Not long after this he passed away,
but his widow still survives him, and the
home at Tasmania, as at Tunbridge Wells, is
always thrown open to any earnest worker in
God’s cause. v
No. XX.
Incidents of Lunacy.
A more touching incident never occurred in
my own personal experience than on one occa-
sion when visiting the Beckham Lunatic
Asylum. I had been piloted through two re-
fractory or violent wards, men’s and women’s,
the latter especially, an enclosed yard con-
taining perhaps forty or fifty patients. But
I will mention a little matter first that
occurred in this ward. It was a very large
yard, and as soon as the head wardsman
brought me inside the door a woman at th
other end caught sight of me, and with a per-
fect yell cried out “Oh! there’s one of my
fa-vo-rites” (the i here pronounced very hard),
rushing across the yard towards me. Happily,
mere uplifted forefinger of the wardsman


arrested her in a moment when within a yard
or two of me; but imagine my feelings in the
interval. Then another woman came up to
me, and in loudest tones, said “How are ye,
Sir?” I said I was very well, but for the
moment felt a little uncertain about it. Now
this was not a very calming preparation for
the next and special incident referred te
above. It was the case of a young powerful-
looking man about thirty years of age who
was in a padded room, and lying on a padded
bed, and I naturally supposed from these
environments that it was a violent
case. (I heard afterwards that he
was there for a wound in his leg
and that he had just a monomania. He had
an intellectual face, his one cry when we
were there being for books. 4 4 Send me books
to read; I want more books.” Then he turned
towards me, put out his hand, and said, 4 4 How
are you, Sir.” I replied as usual, and thank-
ing him, but kept my hand by my side, when
he burst into tears and said, 44 1 held out my
hand and he ref used to take it. ” I threw out
iny hand instantly, and said, 44 1 beg your
pardon; I would not have hurt your feelings,
for a moment” (or something of the kind), and
then clenched his hand and held it fast. Ho
made it up then at once, but the whole scene
has been stereotyped on my memory ever
since.
Before leaving we peeped into a large empty
ward, save one bright-looking little man
walking about, who replied to the wardsman
enquiries, 44 Very well, thank you, that is if the
stars would let me,” and then he said,
44 1 should like to be outside these walls,
that is, if the stars would let me.”
The foregoing incident compels me to take a
rapid flight from the asylum at Beckham to


the asylum on North-terrace, where another
■equally striking “hand” incident occurred,
and in my own experience. I had gone there
•one morning in company with the Hon. Dr.
Garran, of Sydney—only on a visit of inspec-
tion, not as a patient—when Dr. Paterson in
taking us through, brought us to a stern-looking,
middle-aged man sitting in a strong wooden
invalid’s armchair and strapped to it. He had a
distinctly vicious eye, although his advances
were friendly, as he held out his hands to Dr.
Garran and myself. And we both responded,
one hand in each of his, but at the very
moment of contact, his hand seemed so to
close in, that I withdrew mine instantly.
Not so Dr. Garran. For more than ten
minutes the man held his hand like a vice
in the face of persuasions, commands, and
reasonings both from Dr. Paterson and the
wardsmen—Dr. Garran himself standing there,
calmly smiling all the time, until at last,
through force or some ruse, I forget which, a
release was effected. But the one feature of
interest in the whole matter was that the
patient imagined himself to be Jacob, in
•Genesis 32, wrestling, seeing that throughout
the whole scene, with fierce look and a low,
deep growl, he was saying, “I will not let
thee go,” “I will not let thee go.” Poor
fellow, I hope he is now clothed and in his right
mind. I never seem to forget in such sad
scenes the sudden, straight question of the
lunatic to Mrs. Siddons, who, with other
visitors, was just leaving his ward, when
through the keeper’s carelessness he suddenly
shut the door, leaving her with him alone.
Putting his hands on her shoulders, he said,
“ Have you thanked God to-day for giving you
your reason?” On her reply in the affirmative
he released her.


CLASS MEETINGS.
Meetings on behalf of special classes of the
police, cabmen, and others were in vogue
pretty generally some time before I left Eng-
land. I was one day asked by a lady in
Kensington—a Mrs. H.—to help her in a tea
she proposed giving to the police of the neigh-
bourhood. A large number came, and it was
a most enjoyable evening—prayer, bright
singing interspersed with one or two short
addresses ‘ ‘ with illustrations”, by these I
mean personal testimony, telling them what
God has done and is doing for you. You can
thus talk with, not at them, and this means
brotherhood, God’s leverage for blessing. But
where was this meeting held? In a room in
the lane opposite Old Kensington Church,
rented not long before by a band of men who
avowedly met there for periodical outbursts
of blasphemy and ribaldry of the very worst
description, calling themselves “The Hellfire
Club.” Thank God, the room was taken out
of their hands and devoted to higher ends.
I mentioned this police meeting some two
years ago to a lady then in Adelaide, whose
earnest efforts have been so honoured in the
establishment of organizations having for their
■one aim the highest welfare of the many
bands of police all the world over. The
branch then initiated in Adelaide, under the
■devoted effort and loving sympathies of their
lady Secretary, has now so grown and
flourished in its periodical meetings as to
become a valued necessity by every member
■of the staff comprising it.
ROWLAND HILL, HONORARY DETECTIVE.
The mention of “police” brings up an irre-
pressible incident of burglary in connection
with the Rev. Rowland Hill, and it might


contain some suggestions for the benefit of the
“force” in this place. Thieves had broken
in in the dead of night, and were
ransacking his drawing-room, when hear-
ing the noise, he stole down in his
white apparel just as he was, and gently-
opening the door, stalked in. Then, holding
up a candle before him, and with his usual
quiet gravity, said, “Gentlemen, I thought
you might like a light.” It will never be
known whether the burglars even heard what
he said, for at the first sight of the ghostly
intruder they decamped in terror, leaving
their booty behind them.
On another occasion I went to a tea given in
a room of Dr. Raleigh’s, somewhere in Bays-
water, to costermongers and their families,
where I took some monumental brass
rubbings as a pictorial element in the meeting*
which with one or two short bright addresses,
was felt to be universally enjoyable. The happy
faces at all these meetings of the wives and the
children furnish all the evidence needed of
their own personal enjoyment, giving in each
instance to the kindly inaugurators “their
reward” even here.
The cabmen also were not forgotten, and I
used to hear of teas given to them, but they
were more difficult from their occupation to
get together.
Subsequently to this a lady at Netting Hill
asked me to a drawing-room meeting to hear
Mrs. Daniel give an account of her work
among our soldiers at Aldershot. It was a
very large meeting, bright, happy, and full of
interest for us all. Miss Daniel is now carry-
ing on the work, and with much blessing, her
mother (so beloved by every soldier) having
long since passed away.


A “fikst sagged school” incident.
And now I will take yon "back to the first
and in one sense the most interesting “class”
meeting I ever attended. It was a visit to one
of the first “ ragged schools” in England—at
Bristol —when somewhere in the “forties”
one of our leading lawyers, Mr. James Livett,
asked me to accompany him. We went to-
gether into a large room where we saw about
as wild-looking a set of little mudlarks as you
can well imagine, both boys and girls, but yet
evidently managed beautifully. They were
always kept going by military drills and march-
ings to bright song tunes, and although thus
subjected to thorough discipline they seemed
as bright and happy-looking as could be
desired. These military arrangements were
varied here and there by a bright story, so
that their interest was sustained throughout,
and which was evidenced by the very fact of
their daily attendance. But what impressed us
most of all was the wisdom exercised every
day in their dismissals, occupying quite half
an hour, and part of which we witnessed. In
order to avoid the inevitable uproar through the
sudden egress into the streets of about a hun-
dred of these little roughs cn masse, they were
first enjoined to go straight home as soon as they
got out. To ensure this they were all marched
slowly round, singing as they went along, the
boys first, and the master taking his place in
front of them. When the march began, single
file, as the first boy arrived he took a step
forward and the master shook hands cheer-
fully, said “Good-by, my lad,” and out
he went. Second time round, the first
boy again, and so on. When the girls’
turn came there was this difference, that the
mistress lovingly kissed each one as she passed.
And she told us an incident that occurred


just before, so touching that it comes up before
me as if of yesterday. She had on that
occasion in the dismissal march just kissed a
new arrival that morning—a wee little thing,
who looked up in her face and said, “/
never had that done to me before .” My heart
melts while I write it. This poor little child
thus dragged as it were into the iron realities
of life, knowing nothing of that inestimable
boon—a mother’s love; nay, perhaps knowing
nothing but a mother’s curse as being the exist-
ing cause of so many be?r tankards less from
the nearest tavern. God bless that child if yet
alive. One wonders what became of her.
Preachers and Men of Mark.
I have alluded in the early pages to some
few clergymen and ministers I had heard in
former days, with little thought or calculation
of the number of others that have since crowded
into remembrance; and embodying, as I think,
elements of sufficient interest to forbid their
summary dismissal from notice.
I will endeavour, therefore, in these conclud-
ing papers to bring forward such of these
leading men, whether of Church or laity, as
will, I trust, command the interest of the
reader; and adhering as far as possible to
chronological order.
Next in order to Robert Hall, my earliest
recollection is of the Rev. Dr. Bridges, Rector
of St. James’s, and well known by his valued
work on the 119th Psalm. He was universally
beloved and held in high esteem as a clergy-
man ; not less so his curate, the Rev. W. B.
MacKenzie, whose evangelical preaching
always drew crowds to his Sunday afternoon
sermons. Soon after this he was transferred
to a large London parish, where he was
equally acceptable as in Bristol.
A third and very popular evangelical was


he Rev. Mr. Marshall, of St. Mary le
Port, in whose Church formerly preached thn
well-loved Leigh Richmond, of Brading, and
whom my father knew.
I also once heard the aged Dr. Carpenter,
father of the great physiologist, who-
was then a boy of about fifteen. There
was a strong excitement at this
strong excitement at this
time about the renunciation of his native
faith by the “Rajah Ramohun Roy,” then
in Bristol and the guest of Miss Castle at
Stapleton Court; and there seemed to be quite
a struggle amongst the various religious sects
as to which could attract and claim for its own
this rich and noted Indian Prince. He soon
after professed the Unitarian faith.
EAJAH DHULEEP SING.
It was singular that in after days we resided
at Kensington, within about 300 yards of
another Rajah—the Rajah Dhuleep Sing—who
occupied a large mansion in a side lane leading
up to the High-street, I saw the Prince him-
self but once, but when passing his house on
my way to the City I would sometimes see the
ladies of his family standing up at the
windows, all the features effaced by the
Eastern veil, save two large, lustrous black
eyes.
No. XXL
GEORGE MUGLER —REV. JAMES SHERMAN.
I remember George Muller as comparatively
a young man, the initiation of his first
Orphan Home in 1835, and the wonder of the
public at large as to whether and how the
money would come in. He never had a doubt
himself, for he trusted and was guided by God
in everything. My father once asked him tn


breakfast to meet my uncle, Rev. Henry
Bulteel, who had lately seceded from the
Established Church, and with whose aims and
aspirations Mr. Muller was in full sympathy.
He would not promise until he had first
ascertained it to be the Lord’s will; and he was
sincere, for he carried out the faith principle
to the letter all through his life. It was a
beautiful picture, those two men, George
Muller and Henry Craig—David and Jonathan
—beginning their ministry as co-partners—
married also, and at first living in one house
together, until increased numbers alone
compelled separation; working together
in fraternal love for so many years
without a single jar, and amid tests
that, apart from the Christlike element within,
would in ordinary cases have snapped like a
thread. And what were these? 1. They
were supported by free offerings placed in
their respective boxes, by presents of various
kinds sent to each other, and differing
week by week to in extent and value.
2. Absences through illness; once of Mr.
Craig for fourteen months, but borne without
a murmur, and simply alluded to by George
Muller as a fact in his diary. 3. In one
instance a manifest increase of blessing, and
many more converts under Mr. Craig’s
ministry than his own. What was the result
of that—jealousy? He sought upon his knees
the knowledge of his own deficiencies, and for
the same blessing as his brother!
Shall I tell you the secret, reader? It is to be
found in Leviticus xxiv. 2 and 4. Their lamps
were on a pure candlestick, kept filled with
oil olive beaten for the light, causing them to
burn continually before the Lord—beaten,
indeed, by these very tests, and thus daily
applied.


And now one word on his great work, the-
Orphan Home. He began it in faith in April,,
1830, trusting God for all the supplies, and at
the end of 1850 could say, Without any
one having been asked for anything by me
£84,000 has been given to me as the result of
prayer to God.” Of course he made generally
known at the beginning what he intended to
do at two meetings held for the purpose, and
by a statement through the Press. Without
this it could not be known; but, this being
done, he rested on God for all future supplies;
and with such unswerving principle that even
when in utmost need, and without a penny in
the house, he was asked by persons with
funds in their pocket ready to give, whether he
then needed help, he answered them not —bn*
simply left it to them. Another leading
characteristic, and I have done. Mr. Muller
when in Adelaide said he had read through
the Bible consecutively twenty - seven
times; and what so impressed me
was this. He said—“ Whenever I read
the word I wish to do so at all times as
having no ‘ views’ as they are called, but to
read it as being ignorant as knowing nothing
of myself, and with one only desire, to be
taught by the Holy Spirit, and through His
light alone to understand what the word
moans to me, and what it has for me. And
it is ever new—every verse in every chapter
giving me new light, different thoughts, how
often soever I read it.” *• This I am sure is
the experience of many, that the Bible is in
this respect a beautiful kaleidoscope, full of
the loveliest and most varied colourings. Turn
it as often as you will, these colors, as in nature,
will all resolve into one pure glistening white
light, and that is Christ. The one thought
in my own mind when hearing George Mill-


ler’s testimony was this. If every one thus
sat down to the Bible, detaching himself
from all outer environments, all sect-like
‘ brought up in’ views, and just asking for,
therefore obtaining, the Spirit’s teaching,
then how many of the existing 300 sects
would be swept away? As with the colours
they will all resolve into one above. And how
soon?”
I will next name the Rev. James Sherman,
of Surrey Chapel, then in the full tide of
popularity—and deservedly so, for none ever
had the salvation of his hearers more at heart
than he. He had wonderful power in the
pulpit, a rich musical voice, a persuasive
manner, and a heart welling out with sympathy,
•especially towards young men. I can never
forget one sermon on “ Is the young man safe?”
And as he spoke of a possible Absalom then
present, every one seemed touched to the
heart’s core in response to his own deep feel-
ing as the accustomed tear coursed down his
•cheek. And it was genuine and natural to
him, although I once heard a brother minister
say, “ Sherman’s tears are a fortune to him.”
LECTURERS; GOUGH AND FATHER MATHEW.
DRINK—DUELLING.
Among the many lecturers that have come
under my ken are Gough and Father Mathew
on temperance, Vincent on Chartism,
Thackeray on the four Georges, and Dickens
in his readings. Added to these was one who
created some sensation in his day, Mr.
Montesquieu Bellew. Gough, as we all know,
was the great lecturer on the drink question,
and in his time the temperance movement
became an imperative necessity. The law
toolc little cognizance then, as it does now of
the imbibings of the lower social strata, still
less of the higher. In my earlier days a


gentleman was too often described as “a one-
bottle or a two-bottle man. It was, in fact, an
age of excess; health and life were under one
category —a sinking fund, and men too often
took their D.D. degree outside the University
—drinking and duelling—for the one led to the
ether. Any reflection upon honour or charac-
ter—nay, any strong difference of opinion—was
settled, not by explanation or by law, but by
the pistol at ten paces. And it was a
recognised principle. One of our leading
Bristol merchants, Michael Hinton, 0., Esq.,
•once said to me, “ Mr. Reed, I always make
friends of my sons, and I expect my sons to
make a friend of me in return; if my son
Tudor were called out to-morrow I should ex-
pect him to name me as his second.” Putting
all things together, therefore, the social condi-
tions generally were fully ripe for the advent
of these two devoted men, Father Mathew and
John Gough. They were lecturing at one and
the same period, Father Mathew in Ireland,
and Gough in the States and in England.
Father Mathew created such a furore of excite-
ment as has never been known in the case of
any other missioner before or since, resulting
in the signing of the pledge by some millions,
in the consequent arrest of crime, and the
material diminution of committals. Scarcely
less marked was the onward progress of Gough.
At the time I heard him he was about thirty-
five years of age, and his wonderful eloquence
and earnestness, his humour and the intense
pathos of his numberless and varied illustra-
tions, all taken from real life, rivetted the
attention of every listener, as he told of
the awful slavery of drink and the number of
its victims. He lectured for more than forty
years, his great leverage being the pledge,
strengthened by moral suasion. Much has been


donethroughthelawsincethen by his successors
to gradually close in the web of prohibition,
and thus help to stem the evil ,: but while the
evil is one, the proposed remedies are legion,
some gentle and some drastic and aggressive.
One such instance occurred in my early Bristol
days—a remedy that was of its kind certainly
unique. It was the case of a well-known
auctioneer at Bristol, much given to potations.
His friends, whether in the shape of a cure, a
terror, or a joke, on helping him to bed soon
after midnight, fastened a very large monkey,
of the small ouransr outang kind, either to Mr.
P’s foot or to the foot of his bedstead, I forget
which, and then kept watch in the next room
for the result. As the morning dawned the
monkey became restless, and so did the,
sleeper, who, on awaking, saw, as he supposed
Satan himself, and so addressed him, with im-
ploring entreaties —“Oh, Mr. D 1, Mr.
D 1, if you will only go away I will never,
never do it again.” His friends now felt it
was time to come in to release the monkey, and
to restore the poor man in his coming sobriety
to at least the animal’s level, below which he
had so habitually been sinking.
No. XXII.
CHARLES DICKENS—BELLEW.
Charles Dickens I heard in his readings
from the Christmas' stories, and which were
beautifully rendered: I was much struck with
his opening remarks. It had been said that
he disliked loud applause and clapping of
hands as a disturbing element in his readings.
To this Dickens alluded, and in his quiet,
gentlemanly manner said: —“If, however, in
the course of this reading, you are led to


signify your appreciation, I shall not offer any
objection toyourdoing so.” The audience com-
plied willingly, in remembrance of his grace-
ful concession, and because they could not help
it, and it didn’t seem to disagree with him at all.
J. C. Montesquieu Bellew was the clergyman
of Bedford Chapel, Bloomsbury-square, and a
most popular preacher. It was a popularity
evidently kept in studied culture, for every
sentence was carefully thought out and uttered
in measured tones and with a silvery voice.
He afterwards joined the Catholic Church,
when he resigned his incumbency and hence-
forward applied his talents to readings and
public lectures. He was, undoubtedly, a great
elocutionist, and he possessed and applied all
the useful adjuncts, for he was a tall, fine-look-
ing man with a splendid head of hair, Absalom-
like in its profusion, and a commanding
presence. His real name was Higgin, having
assumed his mother’s name for some years
as being more euphonious.
I once heard a capital lecture on “Pecu-
liarities”—a very wide subject, for almost
every man living has a peculiarity, some
especially so. Brougham twitched his nose;
Wilberforce twisted one particular button; one
man will work away at his watch chain,
another at his moustache; one has a convulsive
half-turn of the head, another a chronic blink
of one eye or an intermittent closing of both,
or it may be a rapid pendulum swing of both
arms. This gentleman in question lectured on
peculiarities in persons, personal appearance, in
character, in action, in speaking, whether in
public or private life, and also facial and
physical peculiarities of every kind. But the
funniest thing in this lecture was that while
dwelling upon these facial peculiarities he
himself had a slight twitch of the face, per-


ceptible to many of the audience, but of which
he was evidently unconscious.
PECULIARITIES OF BELIEF —SUPERSTITIOUS —
SPIRITUALISTIC.
On which, being more or less from personal
experiences, may I be my own lecturer for a
few moments? I once saw a man with a large
goitre in his neck, knocking at the door of the
Bristol Gaol just after an execution, under an
existing and very prevalent belief amongst the
country folk that the touch of a dead man’s
hand who had just been hung would effect a
cure. Whether the gaol authorities believed
it or not the man was admitted. My neighbour-
ing counties, Somerset and Devon, were in fact
a very centre of superstitious beliefs and old
customs.
Under the latter head I well remember the
case of a gentleman who had lost his way in
Dartmoor Forest at nightfall, wandering on
until at last he came to a small cottage
and asked for a night’s shelter. The
occupants, an old woman and her
son, although decent sort of people in
appearance, yet aroused the strong snspicions
of the traveller by certain mysterious whisper-
ings, and an apparent unwillingness to admit
him. He was in consequence, on retiring to
rest, very intent on the security of his door
fastenings. On looking his room over, his
attention was arrested by a large case carefully
covered over with various cloths. Some of
these he removed, and just tilted the lid of the
case, to find to his horror and amazement the
body of an old man. A clear case of murder
and concealment, he thought, and so he inti-
mated to the old woman the next morning,
who solved the problem at once. Her husband
had died some time before, and they had put


him in salt, awaiting a first suitable convey-
ance to the nearest, though very distant bury-
ing-place. In olden times this practice was
frequently carried out when people ran short
of aromatics for embalming, with this dif-
ference that the salt was received internally.
But apart from either of these two instances,
it was often the custom in my early days, in
Somersetshire, when the dead was “laid out,”
to place a plate of salt on the chest as an
emblem of eternity, and being such, as effec-
tive in driving away evil spirits.
We have often heard of La Blanchette and
her mystic writings; there are, however, cases
of automatic drawing still more extraordinary.
Ingram, the artist, whom we have known from
his boyhood, told me of a remarkable instance
that had occurred a short time before at a
dinner party in Sydney and in his presence.
The lady hostess, whose name is well known
to us all, had been occasionally led by this
mysterious impulse into these automatic
drawings, and in process of which she was
quite unconscious of the design. Mr. Ingram
had heard of this occult possession, and asked
the hostess if she could oblige him with an
illustration. She replied, “I never can tell
when it may come over me, but I will try.”
Some time, it may have been an hour
after, she suddenly took up a piece
of white cardboard, which she held up
against her left shoulder, and where,
unable even to see the card or what she was
doing, she made a pencil tracing of what ap-
peared to Mr. Ingram—who was standing close
by—to be a series of confused curves and ap-
parently devoid of any design whatever. This
went on for some little time until at last she
stopped and laid down the card, revealing, to
the utter astonishment of all present, a beauti-


fully-draped figure that any artist would have
envied.
We hear comparatively little now of seances,
table-turning, spirit-rappings, &c., which were
at high tide some forty years ago. In the
various experiments I saw in table-turning,
the motive-power appeared to me to lay in the
involuntary pressure through fatigue, of the
muscles of the hand, and always from right to
left, when the rotation at once commenced. I
went one evening at Derby to the rooms of a
young physician with five others (Dr. Albert
Bernaysof the Chemistry chair at St. Thomas’s
was one of them), meeting together purposely
to put this table-turning to a fair test and
with an honest desire to make it turn, but
under a distinct agreement to exert and sus-
tain a vertical pressure during the whole
sitting, which was a long one; but the table
stirred not one inch. The recorded instances,
however, of some erratic table movements are a
wonder. A German gentleman at Derby, a
scientific highly educated man, and not given
to talk nonsense of any kind, once told me
that on one occasion his table, a large one,
spun up on the end leg or legs, and, as he ex-
pressed it, frantically endeavoured to reach
the small bellhandle near the mantlepiece.
And I have read taller stories than this in
scientific books, and well attested. A seance
was held at Sydney nearly twenty years since
among friends, a medium of course being
present. The name of “the spirit” announced
by the medium as being there was “Risdon
Reed, ” m y own son, who had died not long before.
Every one in the company said “we know
no such person, ” But one friend, an Adelaide
lady well-known and esteemed, happened to
be there on a visit, and she at once said, “But
I know him j” and she, be it observed, had


only occasionally met him. Now this was very
extraordinary, occurring as it did among
perfect strangers to our family save one, who,
of course, told us of it on her return; still, it
seems difficult to know what purpose could be
answered.
I heard one of the most saintly persons
living express an opinion more than forty
years since that “spiritualism was diabolism,”
a broad statement and difficult to sustain if
applied to all its ramifications. In cases of
clairvoyance the disclosures have been very
remarkable and undoubted in their integrity,
but in all these I have noticed that the revela-
tions apply alone to existing circumstances.
Whenever the question is put —and it has been
repeatedly, as to the existence of gold in a
certain mine, or as to the winning horse in a
certain race—the result has invariably been
silence or a direct refusal.
No. XXIII.
SPUEGEON —DR. NEWMAN HALL —JAS. PARSONS.
I first heard Spurgeon in his earliest minis-
tries at Park Street Chapel. The sermon simply
abounded in free-and-easy, jocular sayings and
illustrations from beginning to end; and the
look my lady companion gave me from time to
time, refined as she was and utterly unaccus-
tomed to this kind of thing, I shall never
forget. She remarked on leaving—“Oh, I
think I never could hear him again”—a reso-
lution that was afterwards often broken.
Subsequently to this I went with a friend to
hear Mr. Spurgeon at the Surrey Gardens
Music Hall, when a policeman told us there
were 7,500 persons present. Pew jokes were
then uttered, and it was said that after the


scare and consequent loss of life at that
building in one of Spurgeon’s services, it
sobered him down into comparative gravity
for the rest of his life. At the Tabernacle
I heard him repeatedly, both before I left
and after my return to England—that Taber*
nacle in which it was said for twenty-nine
years he had at each Sunday service an average
attendance of 6,000 people.
Although hundreds could analyse, not one
has ever defined the secret of his wonderful
preaching power, except that it was of and
through the Spirit of God. He never took
high flights, he never aimed at oratory—he
passed by all that, going straight to the heart,
the judgment, the life. And this in simple
common-sense language with a strong smatch
of the “old fathers”—who were, as I often
heard, his favourite study—that rivetted the
attention of all his hearers, and he had
numbers in every service from every denomi-
nation. The record of results can hardly have
been approached by any Church in modern
times, in the ever-increasing numbers of con-
verts brought not only on to the members’ roll
but into active service for the Church; and this
apart altogether from a number of institutions,
the Pastors College, Orphan Home, and others,
sustained almost entirely by the faith prin-
ciple. His works do follow him.
Few men have had a longer life ministry and
greater blessing in it, both through his works
and his teachings than Newman Hall. He
preached his first sermon when a boy of about
sixteen in the small town of Maidstone, when
my wife, who knew him well, was present.
Many years after this he became the minister
of Lady Huntington’s Surrey Chapel, succeed-
ing, I think, Mr. Sherman. Newman Hall
was essentially a Gospel preacher, in every


sermon, earnest, persuasive, and pressing
home to every hearer the truth as it is in
Christ, so fully reflected in his own life.
He never preached intellectual composition
sermons, which glide by the conscience
untouched, and attract people rather to
the preacher than to Christ; he preached
Christ for Christ’s sake, his one aim being to
win souls. Newman Hall was a gentleman by
nature and by birth, and looked every inch a
clergyman. So thought a lady of one of our
county families (Derbyshire), who once
travelled in the same compartment with him
when on his way from town to spend a week
with us at Derby. She was so charmed with
his company that she gave him a cordial invi-
tation to their house, Hall, before he re-
turned to London. But afterwards, when it
transpired in course of conversation
that Mr. Hall was not an Episco-
palian, she asked leave to withdraw the
invitation, which he willingly granted. It was
rather like a distinction without a difference,,
seeing that Lady Huntington was an ardent
churchwoman, insisting only, I believe, on her
own appointment of the incumbents, and which
being declined she withdrew, and established a
Church of her own, in which most of the
Church service is read. But there will be no
sect in Heaven; there are more than 300 to-day.
The very name of James Parsons, of York v
sufficed at any time to draw crowds to.
hear him, and in all religious gatherings,
Church anniversaries, or Foreign and Home
Mission meetings, he was an essential
element. He had a weak voice, and
high-toned in key, but clear as a bell —and
this, with a wonderful flow of language and of
metaphor, gave him such a fascination that
these very peculiarities hushed his audience to


silence. And if they did misbehave either by
coughs or rustlings or undue movements of
any kind they were pretty soon made to know
it, as I have seen time after time, sensitive as
he was to the least noise, when he would
suddenly stop and give—such a look at the
offender, and then onwards. His concluding
peroration, “ Parsons’s applications,” as they
were often termed, was an appeal to both
heart and conscience, so forcible as invariably
to rivet the attention of every listener.
REV. BICKERSTETH —DR. STOUGHTON —DR. MUIR.
When staying for some little time in that
town I used to hear the Rev. E. H. Bickers-
teth, of Hampstead Church, now Bishop of
Exeter, and was charmed with his preaching.
It was a pure exposition of the Gospel, very
much in the gentle, persuasive style of the Hon.
Baptist Noel. And every now and then at the
end of a clause he would gently bring home
what he had said in the words, “ Ponder this
truth, my brethren.” I dare say he got
this thought from that other word in
the “Hebrew’s Epistle,” “ Consider,” so beau-
tiful in itself and in its context, “Wherefore,
holy brethren, consider the Apostle and High
Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus. ”
Our house in Kensington was within a few
yards of Dr. Stoughton’s Chapel, and we ever
felt it a privilege to attend his ministry and to
be included among his personal friends —a re-
lationship still maintained even after a long
absence. There was one feature in the Sunday
morning service of that Church that always
struck me as very solemn, very beauti-
ful, and tending to evoke all the devo-
tional element in one’s nature. On taking
his accustomed seat, the rev. doctor, after
a few moments in silent prayer, just stood


up in the pulpit without any word of an-
nouncement, when the whole congregation
quietly rose to their feet and sang “ I will
arise and go unto my Father, and will say
unto Him: Father I have sinned against
Heaven and before Thee, and am no more
worthy to be called Thy son.’ - It struck a
hallowing keynote for the whole service, and
its vibrations were sustained throughout. A
favourite praise aspiration in his prayer was,
“Let us give thanks at the remembrance of
Thy holiness.” And it was a holy worship
throughout, in a thorough earnestness, a deep
spirituality in his prayers and teachings. Dr.
Stoughton was a polished gentleman in bearing
and in expression, and beloved both as pastor
and friend; and, while unbending in his ad-
herence to the principles of Nonconformity,
his enlarged views and broad sympathies
ever brought him into fraternal rela-
tions with his Episcopalian brethren; with
some, indeed, on terms of close intimacy;
especially so with regard to Dean Stanley, at
whose invitation the doctor once lectured in
the nave of the Abbey; had it been permitted
the Dean would have thrown open his pulpit
also. Dr. Stoughton was chosen as one of the
seven pallbearers, together with the Duke of
Westminster, Lord Shaftesbury, and others,
at the funeral of Lady Augusta Stanley, and
afterwards filled the same sad offices at the
burial of the late Dean himself.
I once saw and heard in Glasgow a perfect
personification of one of the old Puritan
fathers, in the aged and reverend Dr. Muir. He
gave us a pure Gospel message from 1 Gorin thians
xiii. 13 “And now abideth faith, hope,
charity—these three; but the greatest of these
is charity.” After just a few words at the out-
set of his sermon, he said, at the end of his


preamble, and in the quaintest possible way—
“We shall therefore speak of the faith of
them, of the hope of them, of the charity of
them.”
DE. BINNEY.
The King’s Weighhouse, London, subse-
quently the Weighhouse Chapel, was in itself
an historical landmark, and Thomas Binney
will ever stand out in full prominence among
all who ever ministered within its walls. He
was in every sense a great man, massive in
build, in stature, and in intellect. He was a
profound thinker, with a clear appreciation of
truth and an equally clear exposition of it to
the vast numbers there assembled. And as
these consisted mainly of city merchants, men
in every branch of business, and of the pro-
fessions, Dr. Binney made a point of taking up
in his sermons all the great leading questions
of the day, telling them how, under the special
circumstances in each instance, they as Chris-
tians ought to live and act. His sermons were
full of spiritual beauty and of clear, prominent
thoughts, that you always took home with you
and remembered, and his manner, whether in
preaching or in his prayers, was characterized
by great solemnity and earnestness. No act
or word of flippancy ever found entrance there
-at any time or in any service. Dr, Binney
was known to a part of my family as an inti-
mate friend from his earliest ministry;
indeed, they were Weighhouse members
■during the ministry of George Clayton.
I only knew him personally from about the
year 1844, subsequently to which he has been
our guest at Derby for days together. He was
delightful company, giving out flashes of in-
tellect or of deeper and grander thought as
occasion suggested. lam at the moment re-
minded of a circumstance that occurred one


■evening among friends. It was of a trivial
character, but too good to be omitted, exciting
as it then occurred, a very general though
suppressed smile. It was on an evening of the
first of a month during the publication of
“ Dombey,” and in which that morning’s
number told of his marriage to the beautiful
Edith. Dr. Binney when in the midst of a
knot of friends happened to remark, “So
Mr. Dombey was married this morning!” An
old gentleman standing by overhearingitcraned
over and said, “Mr, who, Sir?” Dr. Binney re-
plied “Mr. Dombey,” when the old gentleman
with an innocent gravity, observed, “Oh, I
have not the pleasure of knowing that gentle-
man.”
No. XXIV.
CHURCH CHOIRS.
Praise worship was a constituent element in
all the services of the Weighhouse, both in
the selections and in the rendering, the psal-
mody consisting of chants, Gregorian and
otherwise, anthems, and sometimes German
chorales. I cannot here refrain from noticing
one hymn especially of Dr. Binney’s own com-
posing, and which in point of grandeur is cer-
tainly one of the finest hymns ever written.
The whole scheme of redemption is concen-
trated in five verses; the soul’s wonder in the
presence of the Infinite, and at His conde-
scension; the question how can it be; the
response from the eternal; and then the soul’s
triumph. I will give only the first verso:—
Eternal light! eternal light!
How pure the soul must be.
When placed within thy searching sight
It shrinks not, but with calm delight
Can live, and look at Thee.
There are four lines from Sternhold and Hop-
kins’s paraphrase of Psalm xviii. 10, which;


although distinctly opposite in character are
yet of equal grandeur, describing the attributes
of the Deity in storm and tempest—
On cherub and on cherubim
Full royally he rode,
And on the wings of mighty wind
Came flying all abroad.
It was of these four lines that Pope declared
he would have given up all he had ever
written to have claimed them as his own.
Reverting to the Weighhouse, the singing
was both beautiful and congregational a
rare occurrence, for high-class singing gene-
rally is confined to the choir, and the congre-
gation are tempted to become listeners. This
was so formerly to some extent at Devonshire-
square Chapel, and long years ago also at
Broadmead Church, Bristol. At Weigh-
house, however, the congregation comprised
for the most part families of cultivated tastes,
and who were especially musical, fostered,
moreover, by the decided advocacy by Dr,
Binney of psalmody as a necessary element of
true worship in the Church. “The people,”
therefore, as has been truly said, “sing as one
large choir. ” But the singing then was a direct
contrast to what it is now. Reverting to the
Broadmead Church choir, of which Mr. John
Daniel was the leader, and the composer of so-
many and such beautiful hymn tunes (appear-
ing first in the “Bristol Tunebook” and
since then in every other now in use), if —as I
have often thought—he were to rise up from
the grave and listen to the railroad pace at
which his lovely harmonies are so often sung
his heart would be wrung in very anguish. In
many instances I have found it next to im-
possible to get in the words. Drawling one
heartily dislikes, but far worse is gabbling, and
we often come to this. Indeed, in some of


Daniel’s tunes the exquisite conception is
altogether lost, and it is therefore not his com-
position at all.
ADOLPHE MONOD.
In a visit to Paris years ago I went
one Sunday morning to the Oratoire,
and there enjoyed the privilege of hearing
Pastor Monod, the leader of Evangelical
Protestantism, and one of the grandest Chris-
tians of his generation. He preached with an
eloquence and an impressiveness that seemed
to enchain the attention and go straight to the
hearts of his hearers. But the gleanings were
very intermittent, from my imperfect French;
had it been in Italian (as before stated with
Gavazzi) one’s Latin would have helped
materially. I remember on this occasion
arriving at the Oratoire too early—
before the service began, when turn-
ing the door - handle of the school-
room, on entering I was deeply touched at the
sight of a sweet-looking child on her knees
with her class, who at that moment was
lifting up her heart in the Lord’s Prayer
“Notre pere qui est au ciel.” Very precious
is the sight of a young child who has given her
heart to Christ, and thus entering into His
service. It brings to remembrance a
little incident which occurred I think
at Worthing, a sea town in the south of
England. A young child was sitting on a log
or stone at the side of the road reading a
book. I gave her a small tract or leaflet,
when she at once held up the book (a New
Testament) and with a bright smile said
“reading about Him!” Like the pure and
holy Magdalene, there was no need to mention
the name. The “Him” sufficed for them
both.
In this visit to Paris, when in the Palais


Royale, I saw Prince Bonaparte, in profile
closely resembling the first Napoleon. I
once read an extract from The Europe
paper, and, as Captain Cuttle says, “made
a note of”—alluding to the Greek origin
of the Napoleon family, who are said to
have found a refuge in Corsica with
numbers of other Greeks from the Balearic
Isles after the conquest of Candia in 1669.
But the main interest of the paragraph centred
in this, that the name Napoleon forms seven
distinct words by dropping the first letter of
each word in succession—Napoleon—apoleon
—poleon—oleon—leon—eon—on, the whole
forming a phrase which reads thus —Napoleon
on leon eon apoleon poleon oleon, “being the
lion of the people who destroys the cities.”
ANOTHER CLASS MEETING.
I once went to a reception, which was to me
a delightful evening, although the surround-
ings were certainly exceptional. A lady
living near Bayswater had written, asking me
to come on a certain evening “to meet some
respectable Christians.” She did not for a
moment question their Christianity, my
reader. What was known was this—that the
invited ones were living in the very whirl of
pleasures and gaieties, and finding their full
enjoyment in them. “Well, what harm is
there in these?” The harm of this or that
particular pleasure never entered into the
question; it was simply that my friend had
other tastes, other aims, and deeper
enjoyments that she felt to be more
satisfying to the heart’s deep need, not
only in the midst of life’s activities, but
also when closeted alone with one’s own
thoughts; satisfying also at life’s close,
when on the siek-couch, with none there
to share your thoughts or lighten your


burdens. This was her experience, and she
sought to “ pass it on,”to tell it to others; and
to these, culled as they evidently were from
the circles of fashion—“society people” in
every sense of the word. We assembled at
8 o’clock, and for two whole hours there was
•—shall I say absolutely “nothing to fill up
the time” but prayers, singing, and con-
versation conversation mainly, the com-
pany standing about in groups or saunter-
ing through the three drawing-rooms, the
evangelists present mixing among them
and quietly testifying to their own experience,
the one subject of conversation being the
higher spiritual life, its delights, what it gives
here, and what it leads to. “How slow!
What suppressed yawns! How they wished
themselves at home or at another edition of
last night’s ball!” Nothing of the kind.
With these simple ingredients—prayer, sing-
ing, conversation, it was a glorious filling up
of the time, a delightful evening, going off
beautifully without a flaw, and we realized
this fully—that not a single person went away
not having enjoyed it, or without the wish
that they could have enjoyed it more fully.
What was the secret? Jehovah Shammah!
The Lord was there!
No. XXV.
JOHN OFFOED.
For some years before leaving England I
enjoyed the privilege of intimate association
with —as often described—the saintly John
Offord, then ministering at Netting Hill. He
professed baptism by immersion; but always
disowned the cognomen of Baptist, as being


sectarian, preferring to be known simply as a
Christian. In full harmony with this prin-
ciple the worshippers at his Church included
members of various Communions, attracted
by his pure and deep exposition of Gospel truth.
Among these were Lord Cholmondeley,
Lord King, Dr. Gladstone, and sometimes
Lord Congleton, and the Countess of Cashel,
then living temporarily at Sir Henry Have*
lock’s house, Bayswater, and where I remem-
ber once accompanying Mr. Offord to one
among many of her Bible readings. Mr.
Offord’s sermons and his prayers differed from
any I ever heard before or since. His prayers
always impressed you as the direct outcome of
immediate and close communion, never
thought out or prepared beforehand; one felt
convinced of that. There are of course cer-
tain subjects that must come into promi-
nence in every general supplication; but
the prayers that touched the inner
spiritual life, these were absolutely unthought
of beforehand, I mean as to the verbal
clothing; indeed, he has told me so. They
were just the breathings of a soul in closest
fellowship. Of the same order and of equal
earnestness were the prayers of the Rev.
David Thomas, of Highbury, near Bristol;
but in his case they were broken sentences—
some might have even said “ laboured efforts”
—nevertheless, the efforts of a heart wrestling
with God, the prayers and supplications with
strong cryings of Heb. v. 7, prayers that com©
home to the heart of the worshipper, and that
went up to the Throne as “Golden vials full
of odours.”
The one word “ communion” is equally des-
criptive of Mr, Offord’s sermons; they were
the development of the soul’s inner experience ;
his heart was full, and he spoke from the


fullness. They were a perfect expression of
Mr. Albert Spicer’s remark when in Adelaide
that “what we want is teaching and not
preaching;” and he might well have added
“ teaching a pure, simple gospel.” The great
need in this our day is of spirit-taught, spirit-
filled teachers rightly dividing the word of
truth, and not dissecting it, “in the words
that man’s wisdom teacheth.” What is this
“advanced thought” doing? Is it bringing
earnest young converts into the Churches?
or is it fostering doubt and unbelief, “over-
throwing the faith of some” and creating
sceptics? If the latter, then an awful re-
sponsibility will attach to its propounders.
With Mr. Offord it was a sermon in
no sense of the word as sermons generally are.
Heads there were, and branching out in due
order, and the subject adhered to throughout;
but it was emphatically teaching—an expo-
sition of Gospel truth pure and simple in all
its application to the deep experiences of the
spiritual life. At whatever part of the sermon
he went straight into the subject, devoid of all
mere verbiage and interjections and surround-
ings. The only volume of his sermons I
possess embodies these characteristics to the
letter. As a result of this teaching, in a per-
sonal sense, you could always carry away and
remember what he said. In a general sense,
the fruits were manifold in his Church, which
was one of eminent spirituality and of growth,
drawing to his ministry, as I have said, some of
the most earnest and thoughtful men and from
many sects.
Mr. Offord, who was a deep and earnest
Bible student, brought out one Bible-reading
that was very beautiful, and I have felt ever
since, in perfect harmony with the Scripture
teaching. It will be remembered that in the


early resurrection morn, in her interview with
Christ in the garden, Mary Magdalen, at the
mention of her own name, “Mary,” then re-
cognised her Lord, uttering the word “ Rab-
boni” (my Master), and was evidently about
to lay her hands on His arm, when
Jesus said, “ Touch Me not, for lam
not yet ascended to my Father ; but
go to my brethren, and say unto them I ascend
unto my Father and your Father, and to my
God and your God.” Mr. Offord said, lam
led to believe that immediately after this the
Lord on that early morn ascended to the glory,
presenting to the Father the dying thief and
those bodies of the saints which arose and
came out of the graves after his resurrection,
as the first trophies of His victory over death
and of His completed redemption. Then being
able literally to say, “ I have finished the work
which Thou gavest me to do” —and that, hav-
ing thus proclaimed, the Saviour returned to
the earth, discovering Himself to His disciples
(Matthew xxviii. 9), who—and Mary Magda-
ene being certainly with them —were then
allowed to touch Him; for, as we
read, “they came and held Him by the
feet and worshipped Him.” And there is
nothing in the context to weaken this
opinion. With respect to the raised saints,
in Matthew xxvii. 52, the punctuation
is clearly wrong, as the first line “And the
graves were opened” should form part of the
preceding verse, then carrying a full stop;
as it is evident that only the graves
were opened at our Lord’s death —opened
in readiness for the egress of these
raised saints when awakened into the
new life by their risen Lord, He Himself
being the first to rise from the dead. “ Every
man in his own order—Christ the first-fruits,


afterwards they that are Christ’s.” Moreover,
there was ample time in that early morning
interval for the risen saints to go into the
holy city and appear unto many, and fitting
that they should do so, in order to furnish
incontrovertible evidence of their own resur.
rection.
One word more on another reading in which
Mr. Offord brought out the wondrous beauty
of the “Talitha Cumi” in Mark v., the depth
of which is altogether lost in our English
translation, as it embodies the loving words of
endearment uttered by the Syrian mother in
waking up her child from sleep, “Rise up*
awake my lamb, my loved one,” telling us that
just as the last sound this little daughter
heard when she fell asleep in death were a
mother’s loving words, so on waking, on
being restored to life again, the very first
greetings she heard were the same familiar
words, only now uttered by Him whose love
far exceeded that of the mother. It is indeed
all love throughout this our present and New
Testament dispensation, a law of love far
more binding than the Jewish law, for that
had to do with actions, but this with motives.
MR. HENRY VAHLEY.
At a Bible-reading held by Mr. Offord in
Bayswater-road I first met Henry A arley,
then a young man of twenty-two, engaged
in business as a butcher. Dining on that
evening with a friend at Netting Hill, a young
Russian merchant, I told him of this previous
engagement with Mr. Offord, when he ex-
pressed a desire to accompany me. As it
happened, he sat between Mr. Offord and
Henry Yarley, who shared with him his own
Bible. It was an animated reading, with
frequent and earnest queries from Mr. Yarley,
all this being quite a new experience to my


friend (an Episcopalian), who, when we
returned home, told his wife that he enjoyed
the meeting, but, to use his own words —“I
sat between two fires —the clergyman and Mr.
Varley, our butcher.” Not long after this
Henry Yarley retired from business, and built
a free-seat Tabernacle in St. John’s-square to
hold 1,200 people, henceforward devoting his
energies entirely to evangelistic work. He has
since been made useful to thousands, both
through his writings and public ministrations.
REV. WM. HASLAM.
I had frequent opportunities of meeting the
Rev. W. Haslam, now so well known by his
writings. The recital of his conversion and
varied evangelistic work led many Christian
people to open their large houses and to hold
drawing-room meetings, where Mr. Haslam
was invited to make known his experiences
and to give Gospel addresses to numbers who
had never hitherto met him. I have heard
him frequently at meetings held by Mrs.
Perstone, Bayswater, by the Fuller Maitlands,
Kensington, and others. One of these, a large
and representative meeting, was held by the
late Mr. George Moore, the Cheapside mer-
chant, at his mansion at Kensington Palace
Gardens. There I met the late venerable and
saintly Archdeacon Sinclair, whose face bore
out the cognomen as the impress of his inner
life. Mr. Haslam’s account, given at many of
his meetings, of the three dreams of a young
woman whom he (or a brother clergyman)
visited, and who died after this thrice-given
warning, was the most solemn recital I ever
heard. It has been instrumental in the con-
version of untold numbers.


No. XXVI.
AN ANTWERP SERMON —OBSERVANCES—
CATHOLIC—FUNERAL—SOCIAL.
For great apparent fluency and impassioned
earnestness a perfect illustration was found in
a sermon I once heard from a friar in Antwerp
Cathedral. As he leaned over that beauti-
ful carved oak pulpit, throwing out his arms
with gesticulations of every possible kind, his
intense feeling seemed to carry every one with
him, not excepting his two cowled brethren,
•one on each side of him in the pulpit, and who
were listening to him as intently as any of the
audience. In the musical part of the service
which preceded there were upwards of forty
instruments, and the mass music they ren-
dered was so engrossing that I had instinc-
tively worked round my cane chair so as
almost to face the choir, and with my back to
the altar. It was an apparent but unwitting
act of irreverence, but which was soon brought
home to me by a smart tap on the shoulder
from the staff of the nearly 7-ft. Austrian
beadle, only to be seen in the Continental
Churches. I have often thought that under
the head of reverence we have something to
learn from the Catholic Church. Of course
the inner motives and promptings of every
worshipper are known to his own heart and to
God, but I mean as to its outward manifesta-
tion. Do we not in our acts of worship in the
Church, whether in prayer or praise, for the
most part repress the reverential look, the
look of adoration before others around us,
lest it should be thought canting and peculiar?
You see it in Catholic services and you see it
in Army meetings, but in any of our Churches
very rarely. Then, again, in those countries
you invariably notice the uplifted hat and the
■stoppage of horse or vehicle at the passing of


the funeral bier as an act of respect for the-
dead; but with us the first you never see andi
very rarely the second. Indeed in this colony
but little respect is shown for the living, as
evidenced so often at the close of meet*
ings or concerts, when, instead of a
clear path of exit for “the Queen” by her re-
presentative, the aisle is thronged by an un-
mannerly crowd. It is the bounden duty of
any assembly to rise to their feet at every
entrance of the Governor as the Queen’s repre-
sentative, and to remain standing until he is
seated; equally so at his exit and until he has
left the room. And the same consideration,
should be paid to Her Excellency also.
Reverting to funerals, the existing surround-
ings are evidently repellent in character..
Death, the sin penalty—in itself only a.
moment in duration—is the entrance into the
eternal life of the future. Then why the
dismal black carriage? The inside occupants
are, indeed, mourners, but let them not bo
dragged downwards by the gloom of material
surroundings to the six feet of earth and what
it contains. There is nothing there but the-
husk. The dust is indeed sacred, for “thy
brother shall rise again,”and in aglorifiedbody.
N ever theless it is now but the dust of corruption.
The spirit has gone onwards and upwards, and 1
upwards we must look also. Well I remember
a privileged call with Mr. Offord upon the
saintly T. C., just after the death of his wife.
Devotedly attached as they were, he yet
received us with a calm happy smile, and with,
an upward glance, telling us that the loved one-
had passed through the portal door in uninter-
rupted consciousness into peace and rest.
. . . Why then those dismal black surround-
ings? The present open bier, it is true, is one
step in the right direction; but hence with.


these dark environments; we are not on the
heathen side of the Catacombs, where the
inscriptions are all gloom and uncertainty.
Ours are all on the other side—hope and peaco
and joy; nay, one inscription shall crown
them all —Mors janua vita —“ Death is the
gate of life.” Then change the character
and the colour, and let the carriages and their
furniture, instead of black, be changed
to a lighter, softer, and more soothing
tinge, as being far more appropriate, thus
pointing even in the material environments to
hope and brightness, and to the certainty of
reunion. The same element of gloom is
fostered in the melancholy “Dead March” in
“Saul,” so often played at the funeral of the
promoted ones, and that thus in its context
grates on the ear. It might have been appro-
priate in my young days, when you never
knew that the body of the loved one would
lie safely in the grave for a night. At that
time a man absolutely worthless in his life
was at his death worth two guineas a limb
for the knife of the dissector. One of my
earliest recollections is the going with my
father at midnight to the cemetery, where
one of his men watched, night after night,
well armed, with lantern in hand, at the grave
of my sister. . . Better then, beautiful as is
the “Dead March,” better then the “Wed-
ding March” than that, or at least the lovely
harmony “Blessed are the departed.”
One thing more can we learn from Conti-
nental countries, and that is the open
Churches. Why not here as there can we not
have every Church and every Chapel opened
and kept open at all times of the day for any
person of whatever creed to enter in at any
time when so inclined for a few moments of
rest and thought and worship?


ADIEU.
Prior to our departure from England we had
gone down to Plymouth to await the arrival of
the vessel. The Orient had come down the
Channel in a fearful gale, causing great de-
vastation among the shipping generally; and
when at length she arrived, some days over-
due, the gale still continued, precluding all
idea of sailing for many days.
In the midst of this delay I received a letter
from the revered Anna Shipton, telling me
she had prayed the vessel might be detained a
week, so that her letter might reach me. She
mentions this in one of her books as an
answered prayer. It might, indeed, have ex-
tended to a fortnight, for although we set sail
at the end of the week by owners’ orders, six
days after that we were not eighty miles from
the Sound, and still blowing hard, with a
dead head wind. Mrs. Shipton wrote me a
beautiful letter, sending a last word from
Revelations xxi. 6, and a parting present of
one of her books, “The Valley of Blessing,”
the inscription on which from such an
honoured disciple I cannot withhold :—“ With
the writer’s affectionate remembrances to her
brother in Christ. Lam. iii. 26, 33. Grant,
Lord, that there may be an echo in this
‘Valley of Blessing’ to make glad the heart of
the reader and refresh the soul that is weary.
Amen.” A consolation much needed, and so
soon after, when in the dusk of that Saturday
evening we gave a last parting look at the
shores of the dear old home. Remembering,
as we did then, all we were leaving
behind, kinships and friends and happy
associations, and with longing yearnings
to see them again; so now can we look
back upon life with its many possibilities, its
many lost opportunities, longing to get it


back once again, with all those past experiences
as a guiding beacon into the higher, holier life
that might have been. But it cannot be; to
each is there one life, one golden opportunity ;
with each is there the full responsibility of
failures; for all through, the heavenly pilot has
been standing close by, ready to take the helm
if we would let Him, ready to steer the frail
bark in safety through adverse currents, by
rocks and shoals, and into smooth waters.
How beautiful then the fulfilment, “ And so He
bringeth them into their desired haven.”
Too generally we think of death as coming,
of lite as passing away. A near relative on
her deathbed just reversed the usual order,
and said “I die, come life, come life.” That
was, indeed, in God’s true and blessed order,
and intended to apply not to one, but to all.
For if the long account in God’s ledger
against every one of us be balanced
off by that one costly red line the
precious blood of Christ, then it is in .very
deed the life that is coming, for the past is
blotted out. “ Eternal Life.” Reader, have you
got it? I put the question to myself as to you,
and it must be answered, and on this side,
for death works no changes, no transforma-
tions. What we are here we shall be there,
only the better or the worse, for we go through
that portal taking with us the same tendencies,
the same tastes, the same aspirations. “He
that is holy let him be holy still; he that is
filthy”—that is unholy, indifferent—“shall be
unholy still.” Believe this, that what we have
to give up, to forsake, is nothing to what we
get, and it is for ever. Do not believe for
one moment, what one often hears, that
“ Heaven must be unspeakably dull and mono-
tonous, and nothing but psalm-singing.’
Heaven, always described as a city, will have


its glorious activities, its numberless missions,
entrusted to one and to another, according to
capacities and attainments and faithfulness
here —matured and glorified there. One star
shall differ from another star in glory.
Some shall be rulers over few cities,
and some over many. Psalm-singing there
will be, but who shall tell what
will be those wondrous harmonies of heaven’s
music thrilling the great choir through and
through, and because it is the “new song,”
“the song of Moses and the lamb.” Shall I
tell you how it begins? “Now unto Him
that loved us.” Can you sing it? for the new
song must be learned here, and what it means
for you and for me, a glorious inheritance
and a full contrast to this present life. Thus
while in early youth we looked onwards to
air-built castles and a flowery future, which,
like the will-o’-the-wisp, were ever in the
dim distance; now the conditions are all
reversed, for should we at the last, in a
moment of fear and unbelief, ask, “Watch-
man, what of the night?” if the heart be
right “the watchman saith the morning
cometh.” The portal must be passed, earth’s
curtain must fall, but not in darkness,
for in that same moment heaven’s curtain
shall be lifted, that the soul may enter in
through the rent veil into the haven of rest,
into the Eternal Light, to be “for ever with
the Lord.”


fe C vLjrp \_y <8?
K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Streei
ws oJm
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.


3nf,
fbveuo
fl A . £ 4
U vsfj




