

RECtaiOuS PAMP.
Box . 6
AN ADDRESS
ON THE
NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE OF
CHURCH SUPPORT;
REV. WILLIAM LAW.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
}
LAUNCESTON, V. D. LAND :
PRINTED BY J. S. WADDELL, PATTERSON STREET.
1855.




The following Address teas delivered at the assembly
of the Van Diemen’s Land Congregational Union, held
in Hobart Town during the month of December, 1854.
It is now published, in accordance with the reguest of the
ministers and delegates then present, in the hope that it
may serve in some measure the cause of Christian truth.
The notes have been added by the author since the delivery
of the address, and for them he alone is responsible.
Launceston, 1 §th January, 1855.




THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE OF
CHURCH SUPPORT.
The subject for our consideration is the New Testament
doctrine of Church Support, with especial reference to
the voluntary support of the Christian ministry. The
term voluntary is not altogether free from objection.
“ It means simply that the thing done is not performed
under immediate compulsionwe, however, intend to
use it as signifying cheerful willingness, since we know
that what is given to the cause of Christ to possess any
real value must be given willingly, as the “ Lord loveth
a cheerful giver,” and only such should give. We have
to inquire whether the Divine founder of the Christian
religion left His church to the fostering care of earthly
kings or kingdoms, or whether it was left a helpless
orphan without rights, claims, or friends, to lead a life
of cheerless poverty in a cold and inhospitable world ; or
whether its proper support and propagation were left to
the freewill offerings of those, who in various countries
and among the generations of men should yield obedience
to its claims, participate in its privileges here below, and
share in another world the glory and blessedness it offers
to all who are. faithful unto death. In this inquiry we
have to elicit, *unfold, and enforce, what we conceive to
be the New Testament doctrine of Church Support.
One of our distinguishing principles as Independents is


the alone headship of Christ to His church. We not
only maintain that Christ is the supreme Head of His
church, but that He is the only one. We have ever
preserved inviolate, and still guard with jealous care, the
“ Crown Rights of the Redeemer.” We further maintain,
that He who thus sits enthroned as a King in Zion in-
vested with all power and all rule lias made known his
will. The Bible we regard as the only statute book of
Christ’s kingdom. When disputes arise amongst us,
whether as regards doctrine or discipline, our only
source of appeal is to the Bible. We can cite no
authoritative acts of council, be they Greek or Latin; we
can accept the decisions of no synod or assembly of
divines; we have no moderator but Christ; we acknow-
ledge no minutes of conference save those of the one
held in Jerusalem by inspired men. We have no
musty parchments amongst us of venerable antiquity
and authority save certain parchments written by holy
men of old under the special guidance of the Holy Spirit,
now collected in one book, the Bible, and committed to
“ the immortal custody of the press,” that copies may
be multiplied. We do not profess any deep veneration
for the so called fathers of antiquity, or the doctors of
the middle ages. When we are told to “ Seek unto
them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that
peep and that mutter,” our unvarying reply is, “ Should
not a people seek unto their God ?” “To the law and
the testimony.” We believe that scripture is full and
complete, self explaining, its own commentator, of Divine
authority, and to be read and studied by every in-
dividual for the great purposes of purification and


instruction. Setting aside then all human authorities
as vanities, and divesting ourselves of all pre-conceived
opinions, whether for or against the doctrine of the
voluntary support of the Christian religion, let us en-
deavor to investigate and ascertain the New Testament
doctrine of Church Support. Our subject has a twofold
reference, one relating to the erection and support of
church edifices and outward observances, the other
relating to the support of the ministers of religion.
It is evident from the gospel histories that when
Jesus Christ exercised His ministry upon earth he
availed himself of any opportunity that offered, whether
in the synagogues or the temple, the mountain top or
the road to Emmaus, the Pharisee’s house or the deck
of a ship; wherever men were found willing to be
taught, there Jesus made known His Pather’s will.
This mode would manifestly require no fixed place of
assembly, and would involve but little expense. When
Christ left the earth, His representatives, the apostles and
evangelists, closely followed His example ; they “ went
everywhere preaching the word.” The prisoners’ dock or
Mars Hill, the prison at Philippi, or “ the river side
where prayer was wont to be made” was equally good.
When, however, their word was successful, those who
believed were drawn together by Christian instincts, and
appointed a place where they could meet together.
These were generally upper rooms occupied probably by
some Christian family, or by an apostle, and would pre-
sent a mixture of cloaks and unfinished tents, of books
and parchments—the workshop, the study, and the place
for Christian fellowship. There one by one, “ for fear


of the Jews” or Roman soldiers, would they congregate
together “ to sing hymns unto Christ,” and encourage
each other to he faithful unto death. Probably their
poverty, and certainly the persecutions to which they
were exposed, would not permit them to build meeting
houses; privacy was then an object, and doubtless in
selecting a place it was a matter of importance to have
one where Scribes and Pharisees, Roman soldiers or
spies, would be least likely to come. The expenses
connected with these meetings would be trivial, and
might, perhaps, be defrayed by the individual or family
who furnished the accommodation, or by the con-
tributions of the assembly. Paul, we know, “ dwelt
two whole years in his own hired house,” receiving all
who came in unto him, and teaching with all confidence
the Christian religion, no man forbidding him; but
assuredly he was not assisted by the then reigning
powers ; they simply tolerated him as a teacher, “ re-
specting one Jesus who was dead, but whom Paul
affirmed to be alive.” Certainly in the times of the
apostles, whatever it may have been since, the civil
power was not on the side of Christianity. Kings of
the earth took counsel of what they deemed prudence,
and sought to extinguish the Church of God. Jesus
Christ fearlessly proclaimed that He was a King, and a
kingdom He sought to establish, and the natural inference
of the unregenerate man was that “ whoso made himself
a Kino: was no friend to Caesar.” True our Lord dis-
tinctly taught that His kingdom was not of this world;
and from that statement of our King we infer that His
kingdom is essentially distinct from, and in some cases


directly opposed to earthly kingdoms. His kingdom is
in the world, but how unlike it is to earthly kingdoms a
few sentences will show. The kingdom of Christ is
essentially spiritual in its nature, “ Tor the kingdom of
God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost.” Earthly kingdoms relate
to and govern the outer man; the domain of Christ is
the inner man—the soul. Earthly kingdoms and autho-
rities are obtained by “ conquest, compact, or delegation;”
their state is outward and visible, they admit of and
require assistance, subordinate rulers, tried counsellors.
But the kingdom of Christ is invisible, “ it cometh not
with observation :” Christ rules alone; is in every part
of His dominion “ pervading immensity by His presence
as He does eternity by His existence,” is all wise and all
powerful. Earthly kingdoms are supported by the
sword; and the roar of cannon, or the rattle of musketry, is
their method of reason and ultimate mode of conviction;
ofttimes rapid and decisive in drawing an inference or
enforcing an argument. But the weapons employed by
Christ are not carnal; love is the great weapon, the
sword of the spirit is the word. His victories are those
of grace, His enemies He transforms into friends, He does
not destroy life but saves; His standard is not stained
with any blood save His own, is not wet with any tears
save those He weeps over lost souls, is the emblem of
peace and righteousness, the gathering point of the
nations. Peter in his day of darkness, before he fully
understood the nature of his master’s kingdom, with
over hasty zeal “ drew his sword and struck a servant of
the high priest and smote off his ear.” “ Then said


Jesus unto him, put up again thy sword into his place
for all they that take the sword shall perish with the
sword.” A most significant rebuke and important truth
fully illustrated by the history of the Hussites in
Bohemia, Zwingle in Switzerland, and the Huguenots in
France; to say nothing of the half religious and Half
knight-errant wars of the Crusades, and yet to receive
fresh illustrations from those who put their trust in an
arm of flesh. If the Saviour’s kingdom depended for its
support upon the civil power and the sword, then would
His servants fight, but as it is a kingdom of peace and
love, it is wrong by a species of spiritual forage to force
men to contribute to its support. God “ hates robbery
for a burnt offering.” His word does not sanction
“ distraint for church rates.” If “ the beautiful parish
church” is fast hastening to decay, and if it’s “ lofty spire
which has so long pointed heavenwards” is becoming
giddy with its elevation, why let those who worship in
the “ church” willingly offer their silver and gold to repair
“ the waste places of many generations.” Send not men
with swords and staves to commit a legalised robbery
and “ all for the good of souls and the glory of God,”
and the salvation of your own pockets. Truly men will
do marvellously wicked things to support a cause which *
above all others is the friend of justice and freedom.
This is evil doing on a large scale that good may come.*
* This allusion may require a little elucidation to those, who, born in the
colony, are not familiar with the doings of the church as by law established in
England. \\ hen, then, money is required to repair the church, a meeting of
parishioners is called, and should a majority so decide, a rate is levied upon the
rental of houses, &c., of 3d. or 4d. to the pound, more or less, as the case may
require, or the meeting decide This rate is levied upon all householders in the
parish, be they Jews or Greeks, infidels or Mohammadans. dissenters or
churchmen. If they refuse to pay, the church has power to take their goods


It is pleasant, however, to see signs ot improvement.
The injustice of taxing men of all religions and no
religion in order to please a favored sect, to support
churches in which few worship, is becoming so obvious
that veteran opponents of religious liberty and equality
now confess that “it is time to place church-rates on a
different footing” —a thing not to be gainsaid; for the
present feet are part of iron and part of clay, utterly
devoid of chemical affinity, and tenacious power; and if
the change is not speedily made, the great state image
which so many have worshipped will fall, like Dagon,
before the ark of justice and truth. We argue, then,
and chattels and dispose of them to the highest bidder, until the required sum,
and that of contingent expenses, be obtained. The church has also the “power
of the keys,” if she chooses to exercise it, and can hale refractory dissenters and
put them into prison, as was done in the case of the Hants laborers, the following
notice of which recently appeared in a London paper : —“ Church Rate
Tyranny.”—A petition presented by Mr Bright, the other day, has been printed
with the votes of the House of Commons. The two petitioners, parishioners of
Ringwood, Hants, laborers, earning less than 9s. 6d. a week each, and each
having a wife and two children entirely dependent on him for support, were
arrested on the 24th of April, handcuffed together, though offering no resistance,
and, after being kept in hold till next day, conveyed to Winchester gaol. There
they were treated as felons—stripped, washed, clothed in the prison dress,
allowed no communication with their friends even by letter, and kept in con-
tinual confinement in a cell measuring about nine feet by five, with the exception
of about an hour daily for exercise, during which they were compelled to wear
a mask. They state that they were subjected to this degradation because they
were utterly unable to pay the church-rates demanded of them—
Is. 9d. and Is. 10Jd. They are now at liberty, in consequence of
a public subscription having been set on foot to procure their release.”
A church-rate was levied a few years ago in Bradford ; the officers of justice !
entered the house of a well-known Dissenter to take away his property to pay
the rate. He offered himself but they took instead a pair of globes !! “ a singular
preference of the terrestrial to the celestial.” And strange to say this Church
has been pronounced by an oracle in N. S. Wales, not one hundred miles from
Pitt Town, to be the “ Bulwark of Liberty, the glory of Christendom, and the
beloved of Christ! !!” What next ?
Dissenters, as they are called, object to the Church as a system. Churchmen
believe many truths in common with dissenters. We esteem and love many of
them as pious, well-meaning persons. We know that they object to church-rates,
to all and every form of persecution : they are better than their system. “We
distinguish between the constitution of a church, and the members who compose
it, and venerate the last for acting up to the best of their knowledge, while wo
reprobate the first as unscriptural in its frame, unsociable and violent in its
temper, and unfriendly to the growth of religious knowledge, primitive morality
a chaste faith, and universal love.”


from the nature of Christ’s kingdom, from his own
example and that of the apostles and early Christians, and
from the admitted injustice of all taxation to uphold
religion, that the support which religion requires in a
pecuniary way is to be furnished by its professors : that
they and they alone are responsible that its services and
its temples be decent and in order.
Let us now search the scriptures in relation to the
great question of ministerial support. And here we
need not waste much time in showing that the Christian
ministry is of Divine institution. There have been
people, and there are some still, who deny this. But
those with whom we have to do fully believe that “ He,
Christ, gave some apostles, and some prophets; and
some evangelists; and some pastors and teachers, for
the perfecting of the saints for the work of the ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ.” And the truths
which they had learned were by them to be “ committed
unto faithful men who should be able to teach others
alsoso that succeeding generations might have teachers
who should not shun to declare unto them “ the whole
counsel of God—men who unmoved by obloquy or
danger should give themselves to “ the ministry of the
word and prayer,” and teach “ publicly and from house
to house” the great saving truths of the gospel: men
who should not count their lives dear unto them “so
that they might finish their course with joy, and the
ministry they had received of the Lord to fulfil it.” In
accordance with these principles and injunctions, and
this common sense view of things, there has been
generally a succession of teachers in the Christian church


exclusively devoted to the work ol teaching and preach-
ing the word of life. We do not regard the Christian
ministry as a priesthood, a trade, or a profession; but as
an office instituted by Christ for a specified purpose.
We believe and teach that it should not be entered unless
a man is specially moved thereunto by the Holy Ghost.
There should be a union of gifts and graces, and a
Divine inward call, as satisfactory to the individual mind
as when the Spirit said, “ Separate me Barnabas and
Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.”
There should be a concurrence of providential circum-
stances opening a way whereby the individual can enter
the work and devote all his powers to the sublime duty
of winning souls to Christ. Now the question is, by
whom is the minister, thus called and qualified, to be
supported ? Is he to look for and claim support from
earthly kingdoms ? Is it the duty of Caesar to build
palaces for and pay a certain stipend to the ambassadors
of another kingdom ? Or is it the duty of those who
embrace religion to support the teacher ? and thus leave
the state to attend to its own affairs unfettered by the
conflicting claims of various sects to appropriate for their
own emolument and gratification public lands or public
money. And if it be found in the course of our invest-
igation that the former plan is unscriptural, and the
latter one that sanctioned by the command of Christ,
the example of early Christians, and the dictates of
natural justice, we shall then know where the responsi-
bility rests, and how far it can be neglected with safety.
To make our ground secure as we proceed, we may
adduce evidence to show that a minister of the gospel


has a right to be supported as such, and then point out
the proper parties to furnish the necessary support to the
preacher of the gospel exclusively devoted to his work of
preaching Christ. The question is argued in the First
Epistle to the Corinthians, 9th chapter, from the 3rd to
the 14th verses, “ Mine answer to them that do examine
me is this. Have we not power to eat and to drink ?
Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as
well as other apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord,
and Cephas ? Or I only and Barnabas have we not power
to forbear working ? Who goeth a warfare anytime at
his own charges ? Who planteth a vineyard and eateth
not of the fruit thereof ? or who feedeth a flock, and
eateth not of the milk of the flock ? Say I these things
as a man ? or saith not the law the same also ? For it
is written in the law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle
the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth
God take care for oxen ? or saith he it altogether for
our sakes ? For our sakes no doubt this is written : that
he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that
thresheth in hope should be a partaker of his hope. If we
have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing
if we shall reap your carnal things? If others be
partakers of this power over you, are not we rather ?
Nevertheless we have not used this power; but suffer all
things, lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ. Do
ye not know that they which minister about holy things
live by the things ot the temple ? and they which wait
at the altar are partakers with the altar ? Even so hath
the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel
should live of the gospel.” Paid in the first two verses


of this chapter asserts his authority as an apostle, saying
that the proofs of his apostleship in the usefulness of his
ministry were to be seen among them, lie then asserts
his right to subsist by his ministry. This he shows to
be reasonable from common custom and the nature of
his work. Those who give themselves up exclusively
to any business or profession expect to live thereby.
“ Who goeth a warfare at any time at his own charges ?’’
The soldier who devotes himself to the profession of arms,
who offers if need be his life to uphold the glory and
liberty of his country, has a right to expect a mainten-
ance from it, a recompense for his toil and danger. So
the Christian minister who is “ set for the defence of the
gospel” has a right to live thereby. Instances of true
heroism are not wanting in the history of Christian
ministers. They were furnished by Paul and his brave
compeers ; they have been furnished more or less in all
ages; they are furnished now by the history of modern
missions ; there are vanguards of the Christain army led
on by their ministers who are storming the citadel of
superstition and sin; their post is in the thick of the
battle, in the fierce onslaught, in the first rank of what
seems the forlorn hope. Surely the Christian general
who leads on “ the sacramental host of God’s elect” to
conflict and to victory has as much right to live by his
profession of arms as the soldier whose right is unques-
tionable ; such at least was the idea of an inspired
apostle. The husbandman who plants a vineyard
expects to eat *of the fruit thereof. He exposes himself
to summer heat and the cold of winter that he may have
the fruit of the vineyard for his sustenance and joy. Even


so tlie spiritual husbandman who devotes himself to the
work of sowing broadcast the seeds of divine truth, has
a right to expect that his vineyard, the immediate soil
which receives the seed will furnish bread to the sower.
r lhe shepherd who feedeth the flock expects to eat of the
produce thereof, and to obtain all needful clothing
therefrom. So the under-shepherds of the fold of Christ
expect to receive from the relation they sustain, and the
work they perform, food to eat, and raiment to put on.
On the same principle that a medical man, who attends
to your bodily ailments, has a right to live by his labors,
even so has the Christian minister a natural right, from
the reason of the thing, to live by his ministry.
“ Say I these things as a man,” asks the apostle,
“ or saith not the law the same also.” Examples and
positive injunctions are now to be considered. Eor it
is written in the law of Moses, “ Thou shalt not muzzle
the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn.” It is
ordained by this statute, that the ox engaged in treading
out corn for the food of man should not be muzzled, but
allowed to partake of the corn as his necessities required.
The equity and justice of this arrangement must be
manifest. “ Doth God take care for oxen?” This was
not said, says the apostle, for oxen merely, but to
enunciate a principle that those who labor in any de-
partment of human effort have a right to share a part of
the produce, to live by their labors. The illustration is,
however, adduced specially “for our sakes,” that he
who ploweth or thresheth in the spiritual husbandry
should have given to him all that is necessary for the
supply of his wants. The apostle then shows that those


who ministered in holy things under the old dispensation
lived of the things of the temple; and those who waited
upon the services of the altar were “ partakers with the
altar.” In nearly all the sacrifices offered under the
Mosaic dispensation, one part was, by the express com-
mand of God, reserved for the officiating priest and the
servants connected with the temple. The priests and
levites claimed, and received, all needful support. There
has been, it is true, a change of dispensation, but the
principle of just recompense for services rendered remains
the same. Tor, “ Even so hath the Lord ordained that
they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel.”
Here, then, is the great charter by which a minister of
the gospel can claim proper support. Let him devote
his time, his talents, his all to the great work of preaching
the glorious gospel, and his answer to all who examine
him respecting his right to receive a needful maintenance
is this; “ The Lord hath ordained that they who
preach the gospel should live of the gospel.” Let those
who quarrel with the ordinance carry their quarrel to
Him who made it, and He is well qualified to sustain and
enforce His own commands. Not only does the apostle
thus claim all needful support for the Christian minister,
but argues likewise, that it shall be of such a character
as shall enable the minister to support those to whom
he sustains the more immediate relations of social life.
“ Have we not power,” he asks, “to lead about a sister,
a wife, as weljr as other apostles, and as the brethren of
the Lord and Cephas ?” We not only infer from this
that many of the apostles and early Christian ministers
were married, but that they were accustomed to take


their wives with them, and to expect and receive a
maintenance for them. Many directions given to the
Christian bishop in the New Testament manifestly
assume that he will live as other men, have a wife and
children, a house, and servants. And the apostle here
asserts this right against some, who ignorant of human
nature, would favor clerical celibacy to save their pockets.
The freedom, then, of a minister to marry a sister in the
Lord is a guaranteed right, and the minister of the
gospel may reasonably expect that his support will be of
such a character as to enable him to sustain those of his
own house, lest he should seem to “ deny the faith and
be worse than an infidela sin to be answered for by
those, who having abundance of this world’s good, keep
back the hire of the spiritual husbandman who has
toiled in their fields. Me argue, then, from the nature
of the work, from the examples and illustrations adduced,
and from the positive ordination of our lawgiver, that
“ those who preach the gospel should live of the gospel.”
The minister of the gospel has a right, then, to receive
support as such, and yet circumstances may arise which
may lead him to waive his rightful claim. A man by
inheritance, gift, or labor, may acquire the means of self-
support before his entrance upon the ministry, and
devoting himself to the work of an Evangelist refuse
support. Such cases, however, are rare, and experience
shows that as a general thing there should be a necessity
of receiving, as there is an unquestionable duty of
furnishing needful support; the command of Christ
obviously assumes that this would generally be the case.
Paul, who received support from other churches, appears


to have waived this right at Corinth, apparently from
the fact, that the validity of his claim to the apostleship
had by that particular church, or by certain parties in
it, been questioned. A passage in II Corinthians, 11th
chapter, 7th to the 12th verse, will throw much light upon
this point. The apostle asks, “ Have I committed an
offence in abasing myself that ye might be exalted,
because I preached unto you the gospel of God freely ?
I robbed other churches, taking wages of them, to do
you service. And when I was present with you, and
wanted, I was chargeable to no man: for that which
was lacking to me the brethren which came from
Macedonia supplied: and in all things I have kept
myself from being burdensome unto you, and so will I
keep myself. Wherefore ? because I love you not ?
God knoweth; but what I do, that I will do, that I may
cut off occasion from them which desire occasion; that
wherein they glory, they may be found even as we.”
The right, then, to receive support is distinctly asserted
by Paul, even when he saw fit to waive his claim.
It now remains to consider upon whom this claim
can be justly made. It is evident that the apostle in
the illustrations we have considered implies, or assumes,
that the parties who attend upon and profit by the
teaching of the Christian minister are responsible for his
support, and they alone. The nation that sends forth the
soldier is responsible for his maintenance; the ground
which is is to give the fruit; the flock which is
tended, to furnish food and clothing. Hence the apostle
says, “ If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it
a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things.”


And surely it is but reasonable that the imparter of
spiritual good should be furnished with temporal things
by those who profit from his labors. To such, these
arguments and illustrations are obviously addressed.
The epistle was written “to the church at Corinth,”
not to the state. The church, as a church, was the re-
sponsible party, Paul put forth no claims to support
from the government at Corinth, the services he rendered
were so obviously his duty as a good citizen, or so
indirect, having never written a political party pamphlet
to uphold the doctrine of “ the divine right of kings to
govern wrong,” or the duty of unlimited submission to
“ the powers that be,” that he felt he had no claim upon
it for a palace and a stipend, because of services ren-
dered.* The only time he seems to have been in
contact with the state at Corinth, was, when he was
taken by the Jews before Gallic. The narrative is
foundin Acts, 18thchapter,from the 12th to the 16th verse.
“ And when Gallic was the deputy of Achaia, the Jews
made insurrection with one accord against Paul, and
brought him to the judgment seat, saying, This fellow
pursuadeth men to worship God contrary to the law.
And when Paul was now about to open his mouth,
* “Formerly the government, to suit their own political views, found it
necessary to fill the benches of Bishops with persons holding high prerogative
opinions. In more recent times the selection for a similar purpose has been too
often made from latitudinarians, while during the whole period of time, she has had
within her own pale a numerous party who receive her pay, and eat her bread,
but refuse to do her bidding or to teach her doctrines. Deprived of her con-
vocation. she has been powerless to preserve uniformity, defend herself, or
enforce her discipline ; and, above all, to exert her voice in demanding her
ancient right of electing her own prelates. Hence the soundness of one diocese
contrasts strangely with the license and disorder of another, and the anomalous
appeals in matters of belief to a lay court evince less unity than Rome, and less
independence than dissent.” —The Tasmanian Church Chronicle, January I,
1855. The foregoing extract was written by the whimsical author of Sam
Slick. If a dissenter had written it, it would have been deemed an effusion
of bigotry.


Gallio said unto the Jews ; If it were a matter of wrong
or wicked lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would that I
should bear with you. But if it be a question of words
and names, and of your law, look ye to it; for I will be
no judge of such matters, and he drave them from the
judgment seat.” His worship at Corinth seems to have
been a man of shrewdness as well as carelessness, he had
cognizance of overt acts, “ wrong and wicked lewdness;”
but when they troubled him with disputes about their
dogmas and doctrines, he wisely “ drave them from the
judgment seat.” And if modern magistrates were to
act as Gallio, it would relieve them from “ questions of
words and names” respecting baptismal regeneration
and rights of convocation, which materially obstruct the
proper duties of their office—judgment in “ matters of
wrong and wicked lewdness.” It is evident that Gallio
was willing to protect the preacher of the gospel from harm
so long as he did “no wrong or wicked lewdness,” but
he was as careless about his support as he was about the
orthodox interpretation of the Jewish law. He cared
for none of these things, they were out of his province,
beyond his power. “ Unto the Church of God (then) at
Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus,
called to be saints, with all that in every place call upon
the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours,”
were these commands and illustrations addressed, as the
parties responsible to God for the proper support of the
Christian ministry. Again, in the Epistle to the Gala-
tians, 6th chapter and the Gth verse, we find it written,
“ Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto
him that tcacheth in all good things.” Here the appeal


is manifestly to those who are taught, and it is their
duty as it is the joy and privilege of many to communi-
cate liberally of their good things to the support of their
teacher. Scattered throughout the New Testament may
be found many allusions to the duty of Christian people
to support the ministers of the gospel, but not one
allusion to this as the duty of the State.* Whatever
the State has done since, it did nothing toward the
support or diffusion of Christianity in apostolic days
* We have lately read a pamphlet professing to expose voluntaryism, and
justify civil establishments of religion. The pamphlet is chiefly made up of
extracts loosely strung together. “He (the writer), seems to have been at a
great feast of languages and stolen the scraps.” The book will soon sink in the
gulf of oblivion, with its leaden weight of falsities and misrepresentations.
There is, however, one point we shall notice, as it is generally misunderstood by
Churchmen who wish to take a calm and dispassionate view of things as they
are. The point briefly put is this, —The voluntary system makes the ministers
too much dependent upon the caprice of their congregations, inasmuch as the
ministers to secure their position must adapt themselves to the social and political
whims of their hearers, and must ascertain these by dancing attendance in a
series of private interviews, &c. To a casual observer, we grant that the system
of ministerial support as practised by the voluntaries would seem to lead to this.
But then our churches are not what the objection tacitly assumes them to be.
They have nothing, whatever, to do as churches, with the social and political
views of their constituent members. We never inquire respecting the politics
or wealth of an applicant for fellowship ; admission or rejection is simply a
test of character—of spiritual fitness. Our churches are not in any sense political
institutions ; there may be, and often is, great diversity of political views
amongst the members of voluntary churches ; it is not, however, seen in the
church, but in the arena of active life and party strife. It must be remembered,
then, that those who elect the minister, and contribute to his support, are
supposed to be men in love with truth, acting under the influence of Christian
principle, capable of exercising a cool and impartial judgment upon the various
matters brought before them as an associate body of Christian men, and ready
on all occasions, and at all hazards, to obey the commands of Christ. Such
churches generally value ministers in proportion to their faithfulness, and never
“prefer a little sound abuse of the church” to an exhortation to lead “a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.” Moreover, a church minister
may be tempted to wink at certain sins to secure the goodwill of a patron, as a
dissenting minister to accommodate himself to his supporters. The fact is,
that, temptations to ministerial unfaithfulness are to be met with everywhere,
and in all sections of the Christian church. The question after all resolves'
itself into one of personal piety, for in proportion as a minister is imbued with
the spirit of his master, and preserves a constant sense of the magnitude of his
work, in that proportion will he be less liable to swerve from the clearly defined
path of ministerial duty. It is far from being true that the voluntary clergy
depend for the acceptance of their public efforts upon a series of private
attentions; there is no part of pastoral duty more neglected bv the voluntary
clergy than that of pastoral visitation: we regard the Church and Roman
Catholic clergy as most exemplary in that respect.


save in the way of scattering abroad its professors by
persecution. The apostles certainly had no State pay;
their immediate successors were equally guiltless : and
the device to render ministers independent of the grati-
tude, attachment, and freewill offerings of their flock, is
of “ doubtful antiquity,” though Constantine found it
a politic measure. We know it as an indisputable truth
that in the earliest ages of the Christian Church, when
her success was most brilliant, her ministers most pure
and useful, she was not caressed by the State, seldom
were her bishops seen in the courts of justice, or in the
legislative hall, but as prisoners for the testimony of the
Lord Jesus. We honestly aver that throughout the
pages of the New Testament we do not know of a single
passage that authorises, or in any way allows, the
unholy union of the bride of Christ with the kings and
rulers of this world, or directs his ministers to the
Chancellor of the National Exchequer as the proper
party to furnish bread to the sower, or permits them to
ask the magistracy to settle matters of disputed doctrine.
We know that the advocates of a church as by law
established, “ which derives its support from the state,
and owes its existence to acts of parliament,” do not
profess to prove the propriety of their conduct by appeal
to scripture warrant, but rest their defence upon
expediency and the assumed inefficacy of the voluntary
principle. Now it is doubtless very expedient to certain
parties to havq; a salary guaranteed by the state, nor do
we undervalue The security of the plan, no risk, no fear.
Nor do we rail against them on the principle that “ the
grapes aro sour,” because in these colonies we could


become recipients of state pay did not our firm con-
victions of its injustice, and its want of accordance with
the whole spirit and genius of Christianity, present an
insuperable obstacle.* The supposed inefficiency of the
voluntary system is merely assumed: it supports more
ministers, builds more places of worship, teaches more
children, and supports more philanthropic institutions,
than the state can or will. We argue, then, from the
nature of the case, from the command of Christ, from
the practice and teachings of the apostles and early
Christian bishops, and from the ascertained efficiency of
the voluntary principle, that the parties responsible for
the due support of the Christian ministry are those who
profit by its teachings : upon them this duty rests, upon
them all its responsibility presses, and from it they
cannot escape. The command of Christ is as clear and
positive upon this point as upon any in the range of
Christian duty. They may neglect it, and like the
priests and levites of old we cannot visit them with
pains and penalties, and would not if we could, but
there is One who will. When we speak of the voluntary
support of the Christian ministry, we do not mean, then,
that it is optional with the church member whether he
contributes or not to the support of his minister. The
* Supposing it right for the state to assist religion, then for the various colonial
legislatures to pay all sects who apply is just and proper—a step in the right
direction. Where all sects are taxed, let all share the spoil—if they wish. We
approve it as a system of even-handed justice. Some, however, think they ought
to have it all, as they constitute the true church ; and the state they teach is
bound to find out the true church ! Wise, however, in their generation, they
grumble and take their share, and charitably hope “ that our gracious God will
forgive the error, if it be an error” “of upholding and promoting erroneous
systems ’ “ fundamentally opposed to each other.” See the Melbourne Church
of England Messenger, January, 1853 ; the tone and temper of the leading
article are excellent, and the writer seems in earnest, but his reasoning is incorrect
on many points.


command is positive, the ordinance of universal perpetual
obligation upon all, who, associated in bonds of
Christian fellowship, have one over them as pastor and
watchman. They cannot escape from this duty by any
species of delegation; theirs is the duty. It is voluntary
support, inasmuch as they are not compelled to support
a religion they do not approve; it is voluntary as to the
amount they shall offer ; we have not a fixed sum, we
expect all to give as the Lord has prospered them,
and as prompted by gratitude to Christ, love to his
ordinances, and respect to his ministers. But to sup-
pose that it is voluntary, in the sense of a Christian
man being at liberty to contribute or not just as he
pleases, is wrong: it is not what we mean; not what the
scriptures teach. Such is the testimony of scripture in
relation to the right of gospel preachers to receive a
maintenance from those who profit by their labors, A
Christian minister has a right, then, to a proper
maintenance ; such maintenance being regulated by the
circumstances in which he is placed, and the people
among whom he labors. He ought not to wear seedy
coats, or be dependent upon casual charity for a new
one; yet he ought not to expect jewelled robes or baronial
vestments. He ought not to feel “ for the purposes of
purification and unearthliness” the pinchings of penniless
poverty; yet he must not expect a kingly income.* He
* Our attention has been called to a leading article in the Cornwall Chronicle,
which article appeal to be intended as a kind of critique upon certain state-
ments made in this address, especially upon the passage above. The article is
singularly feeble and illogical; no hope that this will find a place in a series of
literary articles which may be reprinted from the Chronicle. The writer cannot
have read with anything like attention the address he so feebly assails. “At
Hobart Town (says the writer) the meeting of the Congregational Missionary
Society afford ! an occasion for advocating the views of that denomination.” It


ought not in this age of stage coaches and railways,
steamships and telegraphs, to walk on foot if called
upon to exercise his ministry in places far remote from
each other; yet he must not expect liveried attendants
was not the meeting of the C. M. S. which afforded the occasion, but the meeting
of the Congregational Union of V. D. Land. The writer asserts that “it is still
an open question as to what the New Testament teaches respecting church
establishments. We assert on the contrary, and the address proves it, that it is
not an open question : it is a closed one, and the verdict is against church estab-
lishments as being unchristian, useless, and earthly. Regarding it as an open
question the writer “ refers to experience for the practical conclusions he adopts
respecting it.” Experience, however, is signally against him. The sum of
church history since Christianity was by law established goes to prove that it has
been one of the most prolific causes of the corruption of Christianity. Mosheim,
Waddington, Neander, D’Aubigne, being witnesses. “ The union is condemned
by history. Hon. Baptist Noel, The writer then in a lengthy sentence remarks
upon the statement that the Bible is the statute book of Independents, observing
that ‘‘if it be intended to convey anything against the Church of England it fails.”
It is intended to convey something, and it does not fail. The canons, creeds, and
rubric of the Episcopal Church (vainly called the Church of England) are exalted
above the Bible, In any dispute concerning theological dogmas between
bishops and their subordinates the appeal is made to catechisms and creeds,
confessions and articles. In the recent trial concerning Mr. Gorham’s orthodoxy
the teachings of the Bible were all but ignored, and catechisms unduly exalted.
The writer further refers to the address as teaching, apparently, that it is an
indifferent thing what kind of places are adopted for religious worship, or
whether the open air be not as advantageous as any edifice, and takes occasion
to protest against “ a lurking” sentiment which undervalues the decoration of the
house of prayer. The address does not contain any opinions upon these points.
It simply refers to the fact that Christ and his apostles were indifferent as to
where they preached. The sermon on the mount was an open air exercise, and
circumstances may be conceived where even the writer could not object to open
air preaching. We do not by any means undervalue the decoration of the house
of prayer, but we do not think it to he at all essential. It is a question
which like a thousand others depends very much upon wealth, labour,
taste, &c. ; convenience is the great requisite. We would, however, take
occasion to protest against a lurking sentiment, more particularly identified with
the Episcopal Church, that it is necessary that a building should be consecrated
by a Bishop before it is a proper place in which to celebrate the public worship
of God. Is not the world one vast temple, consecrated by the overshadowing
presence of the Infinite One, in which all men ought to worship ? Has not
this earth been consecrated by the presence and burial of the adorable
Saviour ? We can understand a dedication, a setting apart by prayer any
building for the public worship of God, but consecration by a Bishop savours
of impiety, it is already done by Christ himself. “ Wherever two or three meet
together in my nane, there am I in the midst of them.” The writer next
italicises the statement that a minister ought not to wear a seedy coat, &c. The
sentence was suggested chiefly by the reports we had just read in the Sydney
papers of the great poverty of the working ministers of the Episcopal Church in
New South Wales, coupled with a vivid recollection of what we had seen in
England. On the one hand a Bishop with a kingly income of £12,000 a-year,
living in a palace ; on the other hand a pious, hardworking curate living in a
wretched house, with a large family, “and passing rich with forty pounds a-
year,” The seedy-coats do not belong exclusively to any section of the clergy,
but the pre-eminence belongs to the overworked, ill-paid, and abused curates


nor ape the great man to support the dignity of the
Christian pastor. The scale of ministerial income upon
the voluntary system will, as a matter of course, from
the necessities and circumstances of our social state, vary
in different places and at different times. Much will
depend upon the wealth of the church, much upon the
possession of popular talents by the minister, much
will depend upon the method adopted for taking up the
offerings of the church—upon tact, regularity, business
management; more upon the tone and temper of the
Christian spirit. In proportion as the gospel is loved
and valued, and its servant “ esteemed very highly in
love for his works’ sake,” in that proportion, generally,
will a minister have an abundant supply of carnal things.
It is often astonishing to see what by vigorous effort
and management, a small and poor church, united
earnest and loving, will raise for its minister. And we
fully believe, and heartily endorse the statement, that a
small salary cheerfully raised by an affectionate and
willing people, is infinitely more valuable than thousands
of gold and silver wrung from the pockets of the
unwilling amidst imprecations and bitterness. We
hesitate not to say that the insatiable selfishness and
grasping rapacity of men, who called themselves
Christian ministers, have done more to obstruct the
of the Episcopal Church, many of whom are dependent upon casual charity for
a new coat, or far worse, a castaway. The writer appears to have read some
things written by the Archbishop of Dublin; we commend him to a closer study
ofThe great prelate’s writings ;it will be an improving exercise. We are not
without hope that th<( Archbishop will yet become a voluntary.
We join the writer in hearty admiration of Bishop Nixon’s eloquent address
recently delivered in Launceston, The good Bishop has our best wishes for his
success in disciplining the members of the Episcopal Church to give more
liberally. Notwithstanding his protest the Bishop is a voluntary in prospect.
Let him not fear, there is yet vitality in Christian principle.


progress of true Christianity than the open efforts of
avowed disbelievers. The worldly spirit of Christian
ministers who have ever been hunting after rich livings,
has damaged religion to an extent which only the
disclosures of the judgment day will fully make known.
And if no other argument against a state paid ministry
could be found, the manifest evil effects produced upon
the ministers so sustained, would lead us to regard the
system as being, at once, dangerous and unwise.* No
superior plan will be found to that taught by Christ,
and practised by the apostles ; “ a reciprocity of teaching
and giving.” To “ men who cannot teach and will not
learn,” a system which offers to relieve them of their
part of the responsibility will doubtless prove acceptable.
But such men should never enter the Christian ministry.
It is as much the duty of the Church to seek out her
“faithful men who shall be able to teach others also,” as
it is, when found, to sustain them in a spirit of generous
delicacy. It is the wisdom and safety of the Church to
follow with undeviating constancy the teachings of
Christ. To attempt any alteration or emendation of
His plans for the government of His church, the support
of His ministers or ordinances, is sure to end in evil.
The New Testament idea of a Christian church is simple
and beautiful. An assembly of faithful men, who
believing upon Christ, associate together for the purposes
of Christian fellowship, purposes of mutual edification,
and the diffusion of divine truth, with deacons to attend
to tables and temporalities; a minister or ministers of
* See a most remarkable extract written by a Churchman, and rented as an
appendix to this address.


their choice to expound the written word, ordinances
duly dispensed, purity of life and doctrine alike in-
culcated, zealous in all good works—her bridal garments,
waiting for her Lord. Brethren, we profess to belong
to such churches, let our “ conversation be as becometh
the gospel of Christ.” Let a holy zeal fire our souls
that the truth we have may be widely diffused. Let us
employ all our talents to the glory of our Divine Master.
Let the ministers be patterns of zeal, purity, and pru-
dence ; be “ instant in season and out of season,” ever
ready to do good. Let us preach “ the truth as it is in
Jesus,” with the fervour and affection of loving, grateful
hearts. Let us seek to gather around us, in one willing
audience, the young and the old. Let our sermons be
characterised by manly strength, and ever bear the
marks of affectionate reverence to God’s word, and a
desire to put our hearers in possession of all its truths.
Let our characters be of Christ-like consistency, ex-
pounders and enforcers of the truths we teach. Let
the members of our churches and congregations give
unto their ministers reverence, love and trust. Let
them contribute cheerfully to their support, “ not
grudgingly or of necessity,” but as in the discharge of
an imperative and pleasant duty rendered doubly sweet
as done to Christ, through “a beloved brother and
faithful minister.” Let men of wealth especially
remember that they are called upon by Christ, and
expected by his church, to take the lead in this important
matter; and poorer Christians must not suppose that
they are free from the duty. Let, then, the rich man
bring his offerings of gold and silver, the poor man his


pence, the widow her mites—offerings, varying in amount,
but alike precious in the eyes of God as expressive of
the same impelling motive, evincing the same spirit of
obedience, and manifesting the same heartfelt gratitude.
Let it be seen that whilst you protest against all forced
contributions and dissent from the system of taxing all
men to support the religion of a few, it is not because
you feel no interest in religion or are unwilling to con-
tribute to its support. Show the world, and other
sections of the church, that voluntaryism is the duty of
yiviny cheerfully all you can. That while you dread no
earthly court of appeal, you recognise, in all its majesty
and lasting obligation, the great duty of supporting
liberally that section of the church to which you belong,
in whatever form such support may be needed. To you
there is a command as imperative as that to “watch
and pray.” “ Upon the first day of the week, let every
one of you lay by him in store as God hath prospered
him.” If the duty thus inculcated be systematically
discharged, all needful church support will be abundantly
furnished. There will be ever ready a store for church
support, and church extension; the habit of giving will
become a necessity, and entirely supersede those
spasmodic efforts which previous steady, conscientous
liberality would have obviated. The amount of each
individual’s contribution must be left to his own con-
science ; but, in former days men dedicated a tenth of
their gains to the service of God. And surely no
Christian ought to do less; some we rejoice to know do
much more, and if all were to do so, we could build
chapels for the colonies and obtain ministers; we could


send bibles to China, missionaries to India, native
teachers to the islands of Western Polynesia, meet every
claim, and be ready for any emergency. As a
denomination, we have taken our stand upon last
principles; we require no new platform of doctrine or
discipline: but we Avant more faith in our principles,
more zeal in the discharge of all and every Christian
duty; more intense devotion to the service of our
Master; more anxiety for the welfare of our fellow men.
Let it be seen that with the primitive form of church
government, and the primitive manner of church
support, A\ r e have likewise the primitive spirit; that Ave
are the true successors of the apostles. Let the ministers
be ever ready, as Paul, to preach the gospel —the
churches contribute as did those in Macedonia, and with
the blessing of God Ave Avill yet offer a ransomed world
at the foot of the cross, as the tribute of Christian
gratitude and love to him “ whose right it is to reign.”
Lc-Do q® oQij


APPENDIX.
“Provision for the Clergy in Van Diemen’s Land.
—The principle of the Church Act, by which the majority
of the clergy of the colony (Van Diemen’s Land) are at
present supported, is this:—Wherever a certain number
of persons make a requisition, to the effect that they are
professed members of a particular church, and that they
desire to have a minister settled among them, there the
Government authorises a payment, thenceforward, of
£2OO per annum, as stipend for such a minister. The
plan has its advantages. Not being forbidden in Scrip-
ture, it is evidently a lawful state of things for Christians
to live under (whatever our Independent friends may
say to the contrary),* —in the infancy of new settlements,
it has provided for religious ordinances where, without
it, there would probably have been none; and it is
allowed on all hands to be convenient and unobtrusive.
The payment, being derived from the general revenue,
is not sensibly felt by any one. In this consists its con-
♦ We must protest firmly against the principle that whatever is not positively
forbidden in the Scriptures is therefore lawful. The principle is scouted by all
sound expositors. It is rife with untold evils. Slavery is not in so many words
forbidden in the Scripture, therefore, according to the writer, it is lawful. Arson
is not in so many words forbidden in Scripture, therefore it is right or lawful
according to the writer to set fire to your neighbor’s property. The Bible
supplies principles capable of general application ; we are not to look for, or
expect, minute directions how to act on every point, and in all circumstances.
And it is evil reasoning to suppose that everything not distinctly forbidden is
therefore lawful. It would open wide the floodgates of iniquity. 1/ lanjul to
receive state aid, it is not expedient as the extract shows. The Independents
are right again, as is generally the case. The extract is made to show that
Churchmen regard the aid of the state as inexpedient, and are wisely preparing
for its withdrawal.


venience as far as the people are concerned. It is also
a fixed payment, made at regular intervals. In this
consists its convenience to the clergyman who is its
recipient. He knows what he has to receive, and
receives it without further anxiety.
“ But the objections to this plan are as weighty (if not
as palpable) as its advantages. There is, first, the
objection, that (though not unlawful in itself) it practi-
cally excludes a far higher principle. The rule of the
Gospel undoubtedly is, “ Let him that is taught in the
word communicate unto him that teacheth; and it
would be very hard to shew that this rule was not
designed to be of perpetual obligation. It supposes that
Pastors shall live by the willing and direct contributions
of the Church, not by an indirect taxation, levied upon
Christian and infidel alike. And this is not the only
objection to the State payment. It is open to great
practical abuse, and cannot really secure the ends which
it contemplates. The payment is for work done; yet
the workman is not subject (or but very remotely) to
the supervision of the paymaster. Utter neglect would
no doubt be visited with a stoppage of the stipend ; but
there is such a thing as a minimum of duty. There is
nothing to prevent an indolent clergyman from perform-
ing perfunctorily the merest routine of lifeless services.
Once a week he must read a certain appointed service
and a couple of sermons (which need not cost any great
trouble to prepare); he must administer the sacraments
when required, be in his place for funerals and weddings,
and when he is sent for (which will be very rarely) visit
the sick. For the rest, his time is his own. Now many


Avill think that such an amount of work as this is over-
paid by £2OO a year and allowances. Many will be
disposed to say downright, that the mere carcase of
religion is not worth keeping above-ground at such a
price,—that it offends the nostrils, and had better be
buried at once. And the objection holds, though there
be not a single clergyman in the colony upon whom
this guilty indolence can be charged. We will gladly
assume that there is not one. Still the fact remains,
that there might easily be many; and that, if there
were, the present arrangement of the temporalities of
religion would provide no check upon such an abuse.
The whole body of laborers might be most culpably
lazy, yet they would still consider themselves worthy of
their hire, and would receive it.
“ It would be ridiculous to suppose that legislators,
any more than other men, could be blind to these very
evident considerations, or that, perceiving them, they
would be disinclined to act upon them. We shall
therefore do well to consider betimes how we mean to
act, when the day comes for a rough handling of the
machinery of State payments. Is the English Church
in this colony (for with this, of course, we are more
immediately concerned) prepared to fall back upon the
Gospel rule ? It would seem to have no other resource.
And it is remarkable that our church has ever since the
lleformation recognised this rule, not now and then, or
by fits and starts, but solemnly and perpetually. We
refer to the sentences of Scripture that are read from
her altars at the offertory. A large portion of those
sentences refers to the Christian duty of giving alms to


the poor; but another large portion has a different
scope. Here are specimens : —“ Who feedeth a flock,
and eateth not of the milk of the flock ?” “If we have
sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if
we shall reap your worldly things ?” “ The Lord hath
ordained, that they who preach the Gospel should live
of the Gospel.” “ Let him that is taught in the Word
minister unto him that teacheth, in all good things.”
What is done with these sentences ? Practically, they
are passed over in the reading. The custom of the
church has made them obsolete and unreal. But there
they are notwithstanding, condemning us by the very
fact that we are afraid to touch them. And there they
are, providentially preserved to us, as a summary of
evangelical principles, to which, when we shall be afraid
no longer, we may turn for guidance in difficulty. It
will perhaps be a dark day when that necessity shall
come upon us: dark, and yet brightening with the calm
light of hope. It will be a day when the faith of pro-
fessing Christians will be tested—when the members of
the church will have to prove (what as yet they have
hardly been called to prove) whether they value their
religion as much as their domestic comforts, their
wardrobe, and their dinner-table, —a trial, under which
many no doubt will be found to fail ; a day too, when
the clergy will see with a new clearness, that if they
hope to live of the Gospel, when there is no other way
of living, they must preach the Gospel; and when
candidates for the sacred ministry will come forward
with temptations to mixed motives greatly lessened,
fairly counting the cost, and resolving whether, if need


be, they are prepared to endure earthly poverty for the
sake of a calling that is better than riches.
“Let it not be said that this is the mere dream of
enthusiasm. It is a dream if the Gospel of Christ is a
dream; not otherwise. It is a fact that men had faith
and courage to act upon these principles eighteen
hundred years ago. Have faith and courage since that
day died out from the church? If so, the sooner the
church dies too, the better. —The Tasmanian Church
Chronicle .
Printed by J. S. Waddell, Patterson-street, Launceston.
