

FROM THE WESLEYAN PULPIT
TO THE SECULARIST PLATFORM:
OR,
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF MY RELIGION.
BY
JOSEPH SYMES
(Editor of “ The Liberator").
“ When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child,
I thought as a child: but when I became a nan, I put away childish
things.”— 1 COR. xiii., 11.
Melbourne:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE “LIBERATOR”
PRINTING AND PUBLISHING COMPANY.
1884.
PRICE-1s.




ERRATA .
Page 4—lnsert 6. before the last paragraph.
Page 20—Line 17 strike an “ n” out of “ overwhelming.”
Page 23—Supply chapel, after college, in line 9th.
Page 63 (note) —Cowan should be Cowen.
Page 61 —Line Bth, “ everv death” should be every dearth.
And in line 19tli, read “evil” fruit.


THE
LIFE AND DEATH OF MY RELIGION.
By JOSEPH SYMES.
The following account of my religious and anti-religious
experiences was written about six years ago. Horace bids
an author keep his manuscript by him for nine years before
publishing it. I have kept this one two-thirds of that time ;
and I am pleased to see that in the interval I have not ceased
to advance in freethought and independence. The developing
process which lifted me out of Christianity into a higher and
purer sphere is still progressing.
Many who read this “ Confession ” of mine will be disap-
pointed at the lack of startling incidents. I have not in my
life had any wild escapades, and only a few “ hair-breadth
’scapes.” My life, apart from the main subject herein related,
has been somewhat hum-drum ; and people who are fond of
wild sensations will put aside the story in despair, or fall
asleep as they try to peruse it.
With this short introduction, I here present my story,
merely asking the reader, for his own sake, to criticise it
honestly, however severe he may be. I am not perfect, nor
is this record ; but it is honest:—
1. If this should fall into the hands of one who never in
the least doubted the correctness of the opinions in which
he was brought up, he may as well put it aside ; for though
he should read he cannot understand it. I trust, however,
that there are few persons in the present generation who have
never doubted ; most have ventured a little beyond their
tether, and even the most orthodox of to-day are exceedingly
weak in faith as compared with former generations of
believers. This being my opinion, I write with the confident


expectation that what I have to relate will be appreciated by
a large class of my countrymen ; for I feel certain there
must be many thousands whose experience accords in the
main with my own. Not to weary the reader with pre-
liminaries, I will plunge at once into the work before me,
merely premising that I shall give no more of my own
autobiography than is necessary for the full exposition
of the change of mind through which I have passed.
2. I was born on January 29th, 1841. My parents were
Methodists long before that date, and so I may say I was
born a follower of Wesley. Father and mother were as honest
a couple as ever I have known ; they were not immaculate,
I dare say, but I never heard either of them tell a lie or act
a lie. Nor do I remember ever to have observed in either
of them the slightest approach to cant ; they never put on
religious airs, and never pretended to more “ divine unction”
than they really possessed. More sincere followers Christ and
Wesley never had ; hut they were not fanatical, for common
sense ruled their actions much more than religion. My
father had no ambition in his nature ; he was neither forward
nor shy ; he never sought and never occupied any prominent
place in the church, but was known as an unostentatious and
consistent member who did his own duty and grumbled very
little indeed about the doings of others. Both my parents
must have early learnt to mind their own business and keep
their tongues from evil speaking. We were taught from
childhood, more by example than precept, never to mention
family matters out of doors, nor to bring home tales about
our neighbours. And the only scandal I ever heard in my
father’s house was told by neighbours who casually dropped
in, but who received little encouragement to open their
budgets. I could say much more, but it might look like
self-praise under a mask.
8. Those who know what Methodist doctrines and practices
were more than a generation ago will well understand how I
was brought up as regards religion. Of course, I was taught
to say my prayers night and morning, to read good (?) books,
and to attend regularly to the Sunday school and the chapel.
The Sabbath was to be kept rigorously holy. Herein my
parents were Puritanical, I must confess. We were not per


mitted to walk in the fields on Sunday, no matter how
charming they and the weather might be ; while to have gone
to bathe in the sea on that day would have been a deadly
sin. To stroll in the garden on Sunday or to visit neighbors
(except in cases of sickness) was also decidedly wrong. The
religion in which I was trained was one of fear rather than of
p fi’ i j l6 Methodists was very similar to him
of the older Puritans—a being that never laughed, and smiled
but very moderately, whose chief duty was to keep his stern
eye fixed upon everybody in the world without even blinking
lhere he sat day and night, like death at a wedding, frown-
ing down or freezing the most innocent amusements, and
giving an approving smile, if such it can be called, only to
those who mortified themselves. What a frightful god my
poor little trembling soul* was taught to worship. And
to my childish fancy he was as real as my own father
i saw him. everywhere—now lashing the sea into fury
and raging m the terrible storms ; liis dreadful voice
1 heard m the thunder, and shuddered ; I saw the flash
of his eyes in the lightning, and cowered beneath his glance ;
at home I read of him in the bible, and saw his terrible frown
on every pagein the chapel and the Sunday-school he used
o appear in his most frightful guise, always in a tempest of
wrath with the living, and laughing at the “ calamity'’ of the
clamned, and (e mocking” their “fear!”
4. Those days of childhood were dreadful days for me, and
had my parents been in their nature as orthodox as in their
creed, life had been to me unbearable. But with them nature
oiten got the upper hand, and they could frequently laugh and
enjoy themselves, though I doubt not they always repented of
then, levity afterwards in secret. As for me, I was a weak
elicate child, of a melancholic turn of mind, sensitive beyond
expression, and so shy and timid that a look completely cowed
me. Fancy then, my reader, what effect Methodist theology
hiust have had upon me. I was taught that there
neaven tor the righteous, that is, the “ converteda hell of
everlasting fire and brimstone for the wicked, that is, all who
led Unconverted.” I was given to understand that by
SOUI £ ° r ° f a betto ,' not in any


nature I was full of sin, “ that every imagination of the
thoughts of the heart was evil, and only evil, and that con-
tinually that Christ had died for sinners ; that
“ Nothing was worth a thought beneath,
But how I may escape the death
That never, never dies.”
The one great end of life was to repent, believe in Christ,
obtain pardon, be reconciled to god, and live a holy life
thereafter. These things were taught me by my parents in
part, partly in the Sunday school, but chiefly from the
pulpit.
5. The sermons were sermons in those days. From thirty
to forty years ago Methodist preachers believed nearly all
they taught. Among the mass of them the age of criticism had
not dawned, science was unknown, and profane literature was
not considered edifying. Those men used to pray with the
force and solemnity of a tempest, and preach with the energy
of a whirlwind. iNo doubt or difficulty ever crossed their
minds. Five or six leading ideas possessed and intoxicated
them. These were, the utter sinfulness of man, the universality
of the atonement, the reality of hell, and the imperative
duty of repentance and faith. These were their stock-in-trade ;
the everlasting reiteration of them failed to weary themselves
or their hearers. That race of preachers was dying out as I
emerged from childhood, and the last remnant, I believe, was
dead before I myself began to preach. The same doctrines
are preached even now; but faith is not what it was ;
formerly it was spontaneous, it caught hold of its object by a
sudden grip, and electrified and robbed the hand of its power
to let go. Not so to day. Faith is now diluted with more
or less of reason, even in the breast of the most perfect
believer. It would have been well for me had I been born a
generation later; then possibly the iron of theology would
never have entered my soul, at least, it might nevejr have
corroded there.
The effects of the kind of teaching I have alluded to may
be more easily imagined then described ; the reader has no
cause to bewail himself if he cannot fully appreciate the
experience of my* early years. How often I tried to span
eternity past and to come! Thrown back baffled and


shuddering, the young mind went out to the hopeless task
again and again. The great problems of existence, the
whence and how of the creator, were never long absent from
my childish thought ; they fascinated while they mocked me.
In waking dreams (never in those of sleep) I saw hell, with
its billows and storms of fire, its devils and lost souls of men.
Vivid panoramas ! how they glided through the mind ! how
they filled the inner sky of my existence ! Generally I was
more a spectator than a sufferer, though occasionally the
pictures scorched me with their intensity, and the fires of
perdition at times fused the mind to the whitest heat of
agony. Were I a poet of the Dante type, there were enough
in my early experience to furnish forth another Divina
Comedia , at least, an “ Inferno.”
7. In early days my religious susceptibilities were very keen;
conscience was most abnormally developed, and every step
from the prescribed path resulted in bitter pain. The indul-
gence of an innocent pleasure was afterwards magnified in my
mind to a dreadful crime. I remember the only time I ran
away from Sunday school. It happened thus: The school
was about a mile and a quarter from home. On the way to it
we used to pass some of the most romantic scenery in the
country, near which was a tract of waste land, rather, a
wilderness of rocks, interspersed with patches of verdure. In
this wild region, which ran for a mile or two along the sea
shore, grew quantities of brambles and bushes of various
descriptions. One Sunday, as we were on the way to school,
two or three of the elder boys made up their minds to go
“ blackberrying,” and pressed my brother (about 3 years older
than I) to go with them. He consented, and they induced
me also to go. I was but five years old or so ; the wilderness
was entirely new to me, except as seen from a distance, and it
was no light task to follow the bigger boys over the rough
roads and along the precipioes. The scenery might have de-
lighted me, but my companions had come not for scenery but
blackberries, and hurried on from one place to another
in quest of them. But with any amount of leisure I could
no more hare enjoyed the scenery than Milton’s Satan
could Paradise, and for similar reasons. I carried hell
within me. My vengeful god was terribly enraged, and


seemed almost bursting with wrath the whole time I was
away, and it was some days before he seemed pacified. Play-
ing truant was no pleasure to me. Whether I got a whipping
from my father I cannot remember ; the internal punishment
I recollect well. The same experience was mine when I first
ventured, in company with the above-mentioned brother and
a few less-scrupulous boys, to bathe in the sea on a Sunday,
though at that period I must have been ten or twelve years
of age.
8. Whatever faults, religiously speaking, may have char-
acterised my early years, there never was a time during that
period when I was not deeply reverential and impressed with
the persuasion that I ought to repent and “ give my heart to
god.” This impression was at times so intense as to be
positive agony, and my life for weeks together was often
almost unbearable. Not to weary the reader, however, I will
simply relate my “ conversion,” which took place when about
17 years of age. Perhaps many into whose hands this may
fall may not understand the Methodist notions of conversion,
and therefore I will give a brief explanation. The Method-
ists believe (or formerly did) that when a sinner repents of
his sins, and truly and sincerely believes in Christ, by a faith
that accepts Christ as his own personal Saviour, he is
pardoned. Pardon, they say, is a change rather in the mind
of god than in the penitent sinner himself, and this change
the sinner could never receive the knowledge of, unless the
deity in some way revealed it to him. This he does by giving
the penitent the spirit of adoption”—in other words, the
holy ghost is given to every penitent believer to make known
to him by an inward impression that he has just been adopted
by god, this adoption implying forgiveness. Everyone, there-
fore, among the Methodists, is encouraged to seek and expect
to realise a “ knowledge of his acceptance with god and
thousands of the most sincere people among them are firmly
persuaded that they bear about in their hearts the indwelling
spirit, who bears witness with their spirits that they are
the children of god.
9. This doctrine is very metaphysical and exceedingly
fascinating as a subject of study to a young theologian. There
is a two-fold testimony in the case—the witness of the spirit


of god, and the witness of the subject’s own spirit. It has
been thus explained : —When god pardons a sinner, he sends
his spirit into that sinner’s heart crying, “ Abba ! father!”
or witnessing to the believer that he is adopted, and may hence-
forth confidently call god his father. But what is the witness
of the subject’s own spirit ? This : —When the spirit comes
into his heart, he renews it, or produces the change called the
“ new birth,” of which change the penitent becomes conscious ;
and this consciousness is the witness of the sinner’s own
spirit. Whether the Methodists preach this much now-a-
days I cannot say ; the substance of it was more or less
insisted on in every sermon almost in former days, though it
was not often clearly explained.
10. Well, when about 17, I repented very sincerely, of sins
in general and sins in detail, even bewailing some things
that later experience taught were no sins at all. After doing
my best to believe in Christ I was conscious of a change,
the old feeling of fear had given place to confidence ; and in-
stead of the old sense of shame and reluctance respecting any
religious duty I now found that my heart was in it. In a
word, there was now a feeling of satisfaction, of hope, and of
earnest zeal in “ divine things.”
11. Here, perhaps, the Christian may ask, “ Does not
your own confession prove the truth of Christianity, since
you realised what it promises to those who repent and
believe ?” At first sight it almost appears as if that were so;
but a little reflection will dispel the illusion, though that
illusion possessed me during many years. Let us survey the
field calmly. The Methodists call upon their hearers to
repent, and on the authority of the new testament they pro-
mise that those who do repent and believe shall thereupon
receive from god “ peace and joy in the holy ghost,” or an
assurance more or less strong and clear that they are now
the children of god. A man accordingly repents and
believes, and at once feels a “ peace and joy.” Is he,
therefore, warranted to conclude that what he feels is
miraculous, or the direct gift of the deity ? Certainly not.
It is not philosophical to ascribe anything to supernatural
agency which may be equally well accounted for on purely
natural principles. And no one can demonstrate, Ist, that


this “ peace and joy ” are unique in their character ; nor 2nd,
that they are divine in their origin.
12. Let us see. A young lad lias read and heard a great
deal about London and its sights, and longs to go and see.
He dreams over it, feels for the time that a visit to the
metropolis would be the great event of bis life, the crown of
his happiness. By-and-bye he sets out for the greatest of
cities, and with what emotion he enters it! The great dream
of his life is realised ! For a time his feelings are too strong
for him, and he is too subdued to enjoy the new world he
enters. What a “ new birth ”is this ! Why not call it
divine, if we call anything so ? Just conceive now that this
boy had been trained to regard his visit to London in a
religious light, as pilgrims do their journeys to sacred shrines
and cities ; he has been taught, say, the evangelical doctrines
of sin, repentance, and faith, and been assured that on visiting
London he will perform the most important duty of his life,
and will then feel that his sins are pardoned, and he become
an adopted child of god. In such a case the purely natural
emotions he feels would be taken by him as positive evidenoe
of the truth of his religion, and henceforth he would be likely
to ascribe to direct divine agency what was as natural as
anything in the world.
13. The example just given will serve to show how
fallacious all personal emotions must be in matters of religion.
Many more illustrations might be supplied if necessary, but
this may suffice. FTo person capable of genuine emotion
could possibly perform a great duty (real or supposed) with-
out deep and appropriate feelings. Such was my case. In
repenting and believing, according to what I had all my life
been taught, I performed what I then considered the most
important duty that could possibly fall to one’s lot in time or
eternity ; it was done in the deepest solemnity, and with
a full-hearted earnestness; ' and, deceived by the pre-
judices in which I had brought up, I mistook the purely
natural emotions that accompanied the action for the direct
work of god. Having repented, I could not but feel a satis-
faction at the voluntary discharge of a long-standing and im-
perative duty ; the thought that now Christ was become my
actual saviour could create in me nought but joy : and the


zeal with which I entered upon the new life was well calculated to
perpetuate the original mistake, by leading me to regard the
ever-present enthusiasm of my nature, now fairly roused to
the appreciation of great duties and privileges, as the the
abiding witness of the holy spirit.
14. The above is an honest explanation of my own ex-
perience so far as regards “ conversion.” Let me say that I
do not for a moment expect Christians to agree with me. On
such questions there must be difference of opinion as long as
superstition retains its hold upon humanity.
15. After being converted, I attended very regularly upon
all the “ means of grace,” private and public. The “ class-
meeting,” the sine qua non of older Methodism, I was never
absent from for years in succession. The “ class-meeting!” I
fancy I hear an uinitiated reader exclaim, “ What is that ?”
Well, imagine twelve men met together at the weekly meeting,
one of whom is a sort of chief, a primus inter pares , in fact,
and all the rest on the same level. The leader rises and gives
out a hymn, two lines at a time. The following is a good
specimen :
“ And are we yet alive,
And see each other’s face ?
Glory and praise to Jesus give,
For his redeeming grace !
Preserved by power divine,
To full salvation here,
Again in Jesu’s praise we join,
And in his sight appear.
What troubles have we seen,
What conflicts have we past,
Fightings without, and fears within,
Since we assembled last 1
But out of all the lord
Hath brought us by his love ;
And still he doth his help afford,
And hides our life above.
Then let us make our boast
Of his redeeming power,
Which saves us to the uttermost,
Till we can sin no more.
Let us take up the cross,
Till we the crown obtain ;
And gladly reckon all things loss,
So we may Jesus gain.”


After singing this the leader engages in prayer, always
closing his own petition by repeating the u lord’s prayer.”
In 1 ising from their knees, the members sit a few moments in
sdence, and then the leader relates his “ experience,” that is,
tells his own private feelings, hopes, aspiration, conflicts with
the devil, intercourse with god, failings, triumphs, &c., during
the week. This takes three or four minutes ; and then the
leader turns to one of the members, saying, “ Brother , will
you tell us the state of your mind this evening ?” or “ will you
teH us the dealings of the lord with your soul for the past
week ? or some similar question. Brother ,in reply,
states the viscissitudes of his spiritual experience during the
week ; after which the whole twelve are questioned in like
manner, and then the meeting closes with the collection of the
wee sly pennies and with more singing, prayer, and the
benediction.
16. In former days the “ class meetings ” were very lively
™ s when glowing with the enthusiasm of the early
Methodists. But they soon degenerated. In course of time
they became formal, the same “ experience ” being retailed
agam and again, from years’end to years’ end. The more
thoughtful always kept back their most private thoughts and
eelmgs, and only the. really vulgar or the young mustered
com age to exhibit their naked interior. I never saw anything
approaching the confessional at the class meeting. Supposing
religion to be the divine thing it pretends, those meetings
might be made of real service ; but such they rarely are. The
great fault is the habit of introspection they encourage, which
m time often becomes morbid. The feelings are elevated into
principles and their fluctuations are the register of the progress
of the soul, as well as of the feelings of god towards the
individual. Is the Christian joyous ! then god is smiling
upon Ins soul. Is he depressed ? then god wears a frown,
lhe state of the subject’s health is never taken into account;
and people are encouraged to believe that what are nothing
but dyspeptic clouds or bilious depressions have a spiritual
meaning of vital importance. It is true, that nowadays
common sense has abolished many of the evils of “ class
meetings and soon it will annihilate the meetings them-
selves. The growing intelligence and worldly-mindedness of


Methodism have condemned all meetings of a purely spiritual
character. The u class ” is well calculated to foster and
perpetuate what has been called fictitious experience ; for it
supplies a strong temptation to the members to prepare an
“ experience,” the relation of which will place them well in
the esteem of the leader and others present. Often they are
dry and drowsy enough ; and anything more uncritical or
better fitted to keep the mind in a state of childhood cannot
perhaps be mentioned.
17. However, I must not spend more time in criticism just
here, but proceed with my story. I was no sooner “ con-
verted ” than I began to work for “ the glory of god ” and the
good of his church. I will mention a few sorts of work T
attempted to do. In the first place I formed a large class in
the Sunday school, consisting for the most part of men whose
ages ranged from 20 to 40 years. Young as I was, we got
on very well together. In addition to this, I began to dis-
tribute religious tracts, whereby I circulated much paltry
literature mixed with a good amount of falsehood. “ But I
did it ignorantly in unbelief ” —unbelief of the true elements
of human welfare, and in a credulous faith in the fables of
Christianity. I also used to venture, sometimes with much
nervousness, to reprove persons for breaking the sabbath.
For this impertinence I was often very properly snubbed. The
way I used to spend my Sundays will give the reader an idea
of how thoroughly the religious spirit possessed me :—Up in
the morning soon enough to go to the seven o’clock prayer
meeting—this I did every Sunday for a number of years ;
and in winter often shivered with cold all the time I was
there. At half-past eight I took breakfast very rapidly ; and
then after family prayer visited 20 to 30 houses with tracts,
taking the one left the previous Sunday, and leaving another
in its stead. At half-past nine I went to the Sunday school,
where we usually spent three hours. The afternoon public
service in the chapel began sometimes at two, at other times
half an hour later. These I always attended. At 6 o’clock
or 6.30 I went to the regular Sunday night preaching, and
always stayed to the prayer meeting, which wound up the
business of the day. Thus eight or nine hours every Sunday
were spent in u religious exercises,” and the brief intervals


filled up with reading books more or less “ sacred,” and in
meditation and prayer.
18. I had not been many months a bona fide member of
the Wesleyan body when the superintendent of the Sunday-
school called upon me to address the children. This was a
terrible task for a shy, nervous lad such as I then was,
possessing neither presence of mind nor readiness of utterance ;
and nothing short of the most imperative sense of duty could
have induced me to attempt it. However, I tried, and in a
few months found myself frequently called upon for this kind
of duty. In a short time my friends (not my relatives) began
to hint or suggest that I ought to preach. This subject had
occupied a good deal of my own thought, and many hundreds
of times I had prayed earnestly about it, beseeching the deity to
direct me to what was right. By-and-bye the eventful period
arrived, and before my nineteenth birthday I had preached
my first sermon, or rather the rude apology for one.* The
work of preaching was a dreadful strain upon my nervous
system, but zeal and enthusiasm carried me through.
19. After I had been a “local preacher” for several years
the possibility of becoming an “ Itinerant preacher” or travell-
ing minister arose in my mind, though I scarcely admitted it
even to myself, much less did I mention it to others. I
should explain for the sake of the uninitiated that amongst the
Methodists there are two kinds, classes, or species of
preachers. The first are called travelling or itinerant preachers,
though the latter designation is almost entirely superseded
now by the term minister. The others are called “local
preachers ; those are laymen who preach gratuitously in the
district where they reside. If you ask what is the essential
■difference between these two species, I cannot tell, for I know
none, except it be this, that the “ local” does all his preaching
without any pay, the minister “ lives by the gospel” he
preaches ; the one preaches as an occasional thing or as an
amateur, the other makes it his chief business.
20. In the course of a few years, I say, the idea of giving
myself up to the work of a minister presented itself to my
mind. I really cannot now remember whether I ever thought
of it before it was mentioned to me or not, nor is that of any
*See Appendix.


importance. I well remember one of tlie first times, if not
the very first, anyone ever spoke to me on the subject. This
was a young minister with whom I had become intimate, and
who took no small interest in my advancement. One day when
together he told me he thought I ought to keep my eye upon
the work of the ministry, and urged me to study with a
special view to it, as he deemed that to be my piovidential
sphere in life. One remark that fell from him at the time I
shall never forget. He asked me what commentators I used
in studying the bible. I mentioned one or two, and then
said, “ I often study the bible without any comment at all.”
He seemed very much surprised, and earnestly entreated me
to give up the practice. “ Don’t do it!” he said. “It is not
safe ! It is fatal!” He further mentioned the names of two
or three leading Wesleyan ministers who, he said he felt sure,
would strongly condemn my conduct.
21. My friend was several years my senior ; he had had
advantages that I could not boast of ; lie also had had two
or three'years of experience as a minister. I naturally,
therefore' felt that he must be in the right, though I could
not see how I was wrong. The bible, in my esteem, was the
word of god, a divine revelation sent down from heaven to be
our one guide in religion and morals. How then, thought I,
can it be dangerous to read it without comment ? I was well
aware that commentators did not agree, and that in many
cases they looked bible difficulties in the face and passed on.
Might it not be just possible, I mused, that a man might
read the bible with an unbiassed mind, depending upon the
guidance of the holy ghost, and be led to correct views of
what the book really taught ? For a time, however, my
friend’s admonition restrained me, and I used comments more
than I had been accustomed to do. But gradually the former
practice revived ; and in the course of years I found out to
my astonishment that my friend’s words had more in them
than either he or I suspected—it is fatal to lead the bible
and study it without a commentator to guide you. I know
it from experience ; for if I owe my present unbelief to any
one thing more than to another, it is to the fact that I read
the bible independently, with no more aid from comments
than was absolutely necessary.


22. Bring intelligent men face to face with the bible
Without the biassing influence of orthodox expounders, and
my belief is that m nine cases out of ten they will become
sceptical. Therefore, I am pleased with the action of the
British and Foreign Bible Society in spreading the bible
wholesale among the nations ; for in so doing they are
scattering the elements of freethought. I never yet heard or
read of a well authenticated case of conversion to Christianity
pioc uced by merely reading the bible. Selected portions of
the book may have produced that effect, but the whole
b { o< J’ \ ® l } ou . ld tllink > never did, nor ever can. The circulation
ot the bible. is one thing, the propagation of Christianity is,
1 think, quite another.
23. In the course of time, namely in the year 1863, I
offered myself as a candidate for the Wesleyan Ministry,
llus I did after months of deepest anxiety and most constant
piajei. I vas not accepted. I lie District Meeting recom-
mended me to study and exercise myself for another year, and
then apply again, telling me I was sure to be successful next
time. But this failure placed me in a dilemma. Before going
to the District Meeting I was in dreadful doubt as to whether
my providential path lay in that direction or not : on the one
S'de I was urged forward by an overpowering sense of duty
which would not let me rest; on the other a dreadful fear, lest
1 should assume an office god never designed me for, haunted
and tormented me. For a very long time I was tossed from
horn to horn of this dilemma. In those days and for long
after I believed m the efficacy of prayer, and had no doubt
that direct answers were often vouchsafed. I therefore
preyed earnestly and constantly about this matter, and asked
and entreated, the deity to decide it for me—to crown my offer
with success, if that was according to his will, but to prevent
success, if the path was the wrong one. When therefore the
District Meeting put me off another year, I looked upon their
act as an answer to my prayer, and quietly accepted the failure
as a divine blessing.
24. Pei haps the reader will smile at my credulity ; so he
may- Ido so myself now ; but in those days the fables of
religion were to me living realities, which directed and domi-
nated the whole of my inner and outer life. And as I started


this record with the intention of telling the unvarnished
truth, I must give both sides of my experience faithfully.
25. Now, after the failure above related, I should have
settled down quietly at home and never have made the
second attempt; but people who ought to have known better
than I urged me by all means to try again the following year.
I told them my difficulty, but they tried to reason me out of
it. I looked upon the result, I said, as an answer to prayer.
They argued that of this I could not be sure. “ The meet-
ing,” said an elderly minister, “ was unanimously in your
favour ; but thought you would be none the worse for another
year’s experience. Besides, the ministers of your circuit did
not do their duty. I Had the meeting really declined your
offer you might have regarded it as a direct and unmistakable
answer to prayer and an indication that the ministry was not
your place. But, you see, they have not rejected you ; they
merely asked you to go home for a year and then come
again next year. And so you must and shall.”
26. This reasoning, coming as it did from one of my best
friends, the new superintendent of the circuit, threw me
once more back upon the old dilemma, on the horns of which
I spent another year of keen, unmitigated, and incessant
torture. Once more the old difficulty returned with redoubled
perplexity and pain—“ Is it my duty to live and die a layman
or to become a minister ?” For a whole year this question
was consciously and painfully in the very forefront of all my
thoughts. I believe it never retired for all that long period.
Waking or sleeping, in toil or rest, alone and in the crowd,
by night or by day, in hours of jubilation and hours of des-
pondency—that perplexing doubt never left me. I use very
strong language, Reader, but I am not conscious of ex-
aggeration.
27. One thing I am sure I am not mistaken in, and that
is, I thought the Christian ministry so holy a calling and so
sacred, that I would rather have been burnt at the stake
than have entered it without a divine commission. In those
days my religious impressions were deep and all pervading,
•j-The Superintendent suddenly lost his wife (almost a mother to
me) a few days before the meeting, and his duties devolved upon a
timid and inexperienced young man.


and my conscience was morbidly tender. For when I em-
braced religion it was with the persuasion that it was all-
portant. Therefore, I must have no half-measures ; for this
everything must bend or break ; conscience must be kept
awake and must be implicitly obeyed, no matter what the
consequence. My rule of life, inner and outer, was the bible,
or, more correctly, the bible as expounded by the Wesleys!
It was only in subsequent years that I learnt the impossi-
bility, and later, the undesirability of perfectly exemplifying
the Christian religion in every day life. Christianity is not
fit for this world, and no persons, except perhaps the Shakers
and Peculiar People, in the present day attempt to carry out
its requirements.
28. My twelve months of pain and doubt at length terminated,
and in May, 1864,1 offered myself before the District Meeting
once more. This time I was fully successful, and the manner
m which I was received, gave me every reason to be satisfied.
I should here explain that the District Meeting has not the
power of finally accepting a young man for the ministry ; its
action is only preliminary. After successfully passing the District
Meetings, which are. held in May all over the country, the
candidates for the ministry have to go to London in June or
the beginning of July, where they undergo a written and an
oral examination and preach a trial sermon, besides submitting
a written sermon* to the inspection of a committee appointed
tor the purpose. The young men who successfully pass the
July examinations are recommended to the ensuing Conference
the great annual meeting of the legislative and executive body
of the church. This body assembles in the latter part of
July and the beginning of August, and by them the candi-
dates are finally disposed of. Having passed all preliminary
examinations, I was sent in September, 1864, with a batch of
nearly thirty others of similar standing, to the Wesleyan
College at Richmond, in Surrey. At that time there were
about seventy students in the college. There I studied for
three years. We all lived in the same building, and were
thrown as much together as the members of a large family
*See appendix where I insert one or two of my old sermons, just to
snow the reader the state of superstition I was formerly in.


would have been. The three years passed sweetly by, for the
most part ; and I hope not without real profit. The religious
fervour we carried in soon evaporated ; but we persuaded
ourselves that what had been lost that way was more than com-
pensated for by increased knowledge and deepened convictions,
though I have since seen the utter fallacy of that persuasion.
I have long since come to the conclusion that faith can never
come in contact with knowledge without injury to itself.
They belong to two different worlds; where knowledge is faith
is unnecessary and impossible ; faith always I mean religious
faith—gropes after the unknown, or, in other words, exer-
cises itself where knowledge cannot reach. The presence of
the one always implies the absence of the other. The ground
which faith persistently occupies, cannot be intruded upon
by knowledge ; and where knowledge once covers an area,
faith is no longer possible, since, to use an orthodox phrase,
“ it is swallowed up in sight.”
29. I do not intend to take up the reader’s time with un-
necessary details and incidents ; all I wish to do is to give
him adequate materials for forming his own conclusions. To
do this I must mention the fact that, though I never sus-
pected it, I must have been from the very beginning of my
theological career, on undeveloped rationalist. I began
to study the bible and works on theology it was without the
remotest suspicion : I deemed them so sound that they would
endure the most profound, impartial, and critical investiga-
tion. Had there been any real suspicion I should not have
entered upon the study. But being. very zealous, and
thoroughly imbued with the religious spirit, and withal of a
critical turn of mind, I entered upon the study of theology
with enthusiasm, and persevered till all the prime doctrines of
Methodism were at my fingers’ ends. And this study of mine
was real honest work. I took every doctrine to pieces for
the purpose of examining its elements, and reconstructed it
in my own way. I was glad to get hold of what Wesley,
Watson, or other theologians said ; but I was very much
better satisfied when I could work independently.
80. Of course, I met with difficulties. To satisfy me,
©very doctrine must be clear, well supported, self-consistent,
and consistent with all other ascertained truth. How, there
B


were some doctrines that very early gave me trouble. 1 will
mention one as an example. I cannot say that death ever
seemed to me worse than to most other people, but I never
did like it. I very early thought that an infinitely good god
might —very likely in my heart I said ought to—have made
and governed the world without introducing this monster at
all. I read what theologians said in explanation of death’s
existence ; I read Paul’s explanation—By one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin ; and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned ” (Rom. v., 12).
This satisfied me, theologically speaking : here was an ex-
planation ; death was not an original item of creation, but a
punishment inflicted npon all for the. sin of the first pair.
Alas ! what loads of learned lumber have been written upon
this subject! Alas ! for the folly and shortsightedness of
man, to keep poring over an old book in the hope of finding
there a solution which could be found nowhere but in Nature!
“ Death is the punishment of sin ’’—this wretched dogma has
dominated Christendom for so many ages, while Nature all
the time was protesting against the stupid lie, though her
voice was not heard.
31. Even at the early date to which I am referring I found
the theological doctrine of death beset with difficulties. First,
I could never see very clearly the justice of inflicting death
upon all mankind for the sin of their first parents; but
though I could not understand, I had grace enough or
prejudice enough to acquiesce. Secondly, the case of the
animals gave me much greater difficulty. I could not
comprehend how justice could punish them for Adam’s sin.
I read and admired the perverse ingenuity of divines in their
bold and earnest efforts to clear up the mystery. By the
I must say that to my mind there is not a more
deplorable waste of intellectual energy to be found anywhere
than in the ponderous tomes of the theologians ; nor can we
find in human history so much disingenuousness and per-
version of truth, except perhaps in history as written by
flattering courtiers and sycophants. The case of the animals,
I say, caused me much anxiety ; and this was increased a
when I read that geologists had discovered
evidence of the existence of death long before man was created.


Common sense told me that if the geologists were correct the
animals at least, must be excluded from the effects of Adam’s
sin, and that we must look elsewhere for an explanation of
their death. I could see no solution of the mystery but to
suppose that their death, at least, was natural, that is, was
part of the original plan of creation.
32. But this reflection gave rise to two more important
difficulties. In the first place, I could not reconcile
natural or non-punitive death with infinite goodness. I
persuaded myself that death as a punishment was not in-
consistent with that goodness ; but to form sentient beings
with the purpose of removing th«m, generation after generation,
by means of death seemed to me heartrending, and I shuddered
at the bare thought of its being so. And yet I saw no escape
from the difficulty, provided geology could prove her assertions.
Then, secondly, I began to ask myself whether, if death
should turn out to be natural in the case of animals, it
might not be the same as regards man ; and if so, would not
such a discovery upset the doctrine of original sin and
ultimately the atonement ? These perplexities beset me for
some time ; and I at length escaped, or partially escaped
from them by a method frequently followed in former times
by divines—l thought the geologists had made a mistake, or
that possibly they were infidels inspired by the devil to
throw discredit upon the word of god. By thus sincerely
abusing a set of very deserving scientific men, I once more
brought a temporary peace to my mind.
33. There were other doctrines as well that had created some
difficulty, though th© reader will please to understand that
the idea of doubting any orthodox dootrine in those days
would have filled me with agony. I felt the difficulties ; but
instead of suspecting the doctrines, I suspected myself ; and
I felt no doubt that increased knowledge, a wider range of
experience, and more leisure would ultimately enable me to
clear up all difficulties to my perfect satisfaction. But, like
many other youthful visions, the hope of theological rest
and satisfaction was at length rudely dispelled by the very
means I had hoped would establish my faith upon a firm and
lasting basis.
34. I cannot say how long I had been at college when the


following incident occurred, but I remember it was haymak-
ing time, and a number of us were amusing ourselves and
getting recreation in the little meadow near the college.
The hay had been cut and was lying dry, and when we were
tired of tossing it and burying each other, we lay down, and
almost at once fell into a discussion respecting the entrance
of death into the world. I took the orthodox side, and did
my utmost to defend it; and a fellow-student, who is, and
long has been, a Wesleyan minister, took up the geological
argument. He, I soon found, was much better acquainted
with geology than I ; and in a few minutes I was completely
silenced. He showed such good reasons for opposing the
belief that animals suffered death as a consequence of Adam’s
sin, that I was quickly hors de combat. The defeat was pain-
ful in the extreme, though I felt no wounded vanity or perso-
nal chagrin ; or, if these did exist, they were completely obli-
viated by considerations of the most overwhelmning importance.
Had my friend been heterodox, I could still have hoped. But
here was a man in all respects my equal, in some my supe-
rior ; a man as truly Christian as myself ; as deeply attached
to Methodism ; as earnest to propagate the gospel; as eager
to defend it—and yet, he took sides with geology, on one
point at least, against divinity.
35. From this blow my faith never perfectly recovered,,
though it did become convalescent, and I hoped that care and
delicate attention might soon render it once more robust.
After long consideration, I felt that the geological view of
the case was too well founded to be successfully assailed ; and
I reflected that if animals died naturally and not as a
punishment for the sin of their “ federal head,” as Adam has
been senselessly designated, then possibly the death of man
might turn out to be perfectly natural as well; and in that
case the whole gospel would fall to the ground. Prior to
these speculations my faith in all orthodox doctrines had
been to a very great extent spontaneous ; henceforth, I found,
it required an effort to receive the doctrine of original sin and
the death penalty attached thereto. As long as faith is
spontaneous it is safe, and the mind is “ possessed ”by it;
when however one has to put forth effort to believe, faith soon
becomes a burden. When this is the case the intelligent and


earnest man finds one of two things inevitable : —Either he
must go through life carrying a load heavier than that of
Atlas, or he must fling down the burden as “ one too great to
be borne ” and become a sceptic. Spontaneous faith in
theology nowadays, if I rightly judge, is never found except
in those of no experience, little real education, or of very
emotional natures.
36. Although the difficulties just related may appear to
some to be trivial, yet they produced their effect and had their
influence in leading me out of Methodism. My system of theology
was so complete, and the various doctrines were, in my esteem,
so interdependent that no one of them could receive injury
without damaging the whole. Other difficulties also arose.
I began to study the bible more fully and profoundly than
ever, being persuaded that it was god’s word, and as such
deserving all the care and attention I could give to it. No
sooner was I able to use a Greek grammar and lexicon than
I began to read the Greek testament. In the new testament
were many difficult texts, respecting which the ordinary flock
of commentators said nothing at all, or nothing to the pur-
pose. Upon those texts I pounced with avidity, and in some
-cases gained satisfaction ; in others I found the Greek as
obscure as the English. The same remarks will apply to the
■old testament. As soon as I got a smattering of Hebrew I
began to use it for the elucidation of the curiosities and per-
plexities of the Jewish scriptures. To mention a case :—I
had been unconsciously led, by the sermons I had heard, the
-comments I had read, and the general tone and temper of the
religion in which I was brought up, to take for granted that
the ancient Jewish saints had possessed the knowledge of a
Future Life with its final rewards and punishments. I was
not then acquainted with Warburton’s “Divine Legation,”
nor had I read any speculations on the subject. I examined
the case with the hope that I should find at least the elements
of the doctrine of a Future Life in the old testament. After
weeks of hard work and the most profound investigation I
Was capable of, I was reluctantly driven to the conclusion
that the old testament did not contain anything better than
dark hints and obscure possible allusions to the doctrine in
•question ; and of one thing I felt confident, viz., that from


Genesis to Malaclii there was neither promise nor threat re-
lating to the separate state of the soul, nor anything said to
raise definite hope or fear respecting the condition of man
after death.
37. This conviction was very perplexing; and I found it
impossible to account for the omission on any orthodox
principles. The Future State is, in the estimation of
Christians, so vastly important that all the highest concerns
of time are as nothing in comparison; and this view of the
case is supported by the teachings of the new testament. If
this doctrine is so important to us, it could not have been less
so to the ancient Jews. Whatever arguments would suffice
to show that the ancients did not require the doctrine of the
Future Life, would also show that the moderns could do with-
out it. The result of my examination was that a lurking-
suspicion, indistinct and indefinite but very real, was
implanted in my mind that the old testament had been
written by Sadducees, or men of the same views, and that that
sect was authorised by their own scriptures in rejecting the
doctrine of a Future Life.
38. Such was one side of my experience at that period, and
but for the counteracting influence of the new testament I
should, I suppose, have at once been driven to scepticism.
But I reflected that Jesus and his apostles had distinctly and
unequivocally given adherence and sanction to the old testa-
ment; and this reflection assured me for the time that it must
be all right, even though I could not resolve the mystery of the
divine dispensations. I was more particularly assured by Christ’s
reply to the Sadducees —“ He is not the god of the dead, but of
the living ” (Mark xii, 26-27). This reply of the great teacher
to his opponents seemed at that time to set the matter at
rest; and for two or three years I had little or no trouble
respecting it. But as time rolled on, and common sense made
inroads upon faith, and as genuine light from experience and
science began to reveal the glaring defects and faults of the
bible, I was once more driven to the regions of doubt ; and
then I saw that Christ’s answer to the Sadducees, was no
proper answer at all. I read again the context and pondered
the whole passage, and rose with the conviction that the reply
was a mere quibble, an ad captandum, a trick, bold and


audacious enough for a Beaconsfield, resorted to for the pur-
pose of a temporary triumph over his opponents. The
momentary triumph was won, it appears, the crowd applauded,
and Jesus bore the palm for the time; but the victory, not-
withstanding, lay with the Sadducees, who rightly regarded
Moses as negatively favouring their principles.
39. While at Richmond an event happened which was
destined in after time to produce its effects. Two young
students were ordained in the college for work in the mission
field. If I rightly remember they were John Otley Rhodes
and Joseph Gibson, whose destination was some part of
India—but I cannot speak with confidence. This was the
first ordination I had witnessed, and the effect was the con-
trary of what might have been anticipated. The chief
speaker on the occasion was Dr. Osborn, a well-known Wes-
leyan leader. To my blank astonishment, Dr. Osborn in his
charge to the candidates for ordination told them two or three
times over that this was the most important or momentous
event of their lives! To this view of the case I
could not at all agree, nor will Methodist theology bear the
doctor out in his statement. This bold and unfounded
assertion startled and led me even during the service to
review the Methodist teachings that bore at all on the sub-
ject. I reflected that Methodism taught that conversion was
the greatest crisis in the life history of any individual. These
young men had experienced that change; and therefore this
could not be the most important event in their history.
Again, the Wesleyans teach that no man has a right to
preach the gospel except he first receive a divine inward call
to that work. These candidates were supposed to have
received that call long before. Therefore, this was not the
most important event of their life. Instead of occupying the
first position, it could not claim higher rank than the third
event of their lives, even if entitled to that. The order
really is this, if Methodism is correct:—l. Conversion, or
that change which makes a man a son of god and renews
his fallen nature. 2. The inward call to the ministry, which
gives a man the highest right he can ever have to “ preach
the word.” 3. (But far below the other two) Ordination,
which is a mere recognition by the church of the candidate as


a minister. But if Dr. Osborn is correct, the mere “ laying
on of hands ” eclipsed in importance both the conversion of
the soul and the call direct from god. This was too much
for my common sense, and my respect for Methodism impelled
me to reject the doctrine. I mentioned the matter to one or
two fellow-students when the ceremony was over; though I
really forgot now what was said on the other side. The
incident itself came up again a year or two later with a force
never anticipated.
40. Another incident of college life was connected with the
quarterly fast. This was observed with some strictness, though
it was not a genuine fast. For breakfast we had tea and
bread ; for dinner currant pudding tolerably dry ; at tea we
went on as usual. No meat was eaten, except such as some
of the students, I have reason to believe, managed to smuggle
in, I never knew how. The chief event of the fast day was the
Sacrament ; and this was celebrated with an amount of pomp,
parade, and ritualistic extravagance that rather disgusted and
alarmed me. I had been accustomed to see it administered
in a very simple, though decent and reverent manner, and
never supposed that Methodists could desire anything farther
in that direction. In truth, the sacraments of baptism and
the lord’s supper had always, in my esteem, occupied a sub-
ordinate rank indeed. An earnest prayer meeting or a good
sermon always seemed to me immensely more important.
The governor and chaplain of the college, the Rev. Alfred
Barret, was a good sincere man, whom we all liked for his
heart, if we had not the very highest opinion of his intellect;
but he was what might be well termed a Methodist Ritualist. In
his hands the eucharist partook, for me at least, far too
much of the Romish mass. I remember one celebration
very distinctly. It was fast day, and we were all
assembled in the Lecture Hall, the Governor’s family being
present also. If I rightly remember, there had been a death
just recently in the circle of Mr. Barret’s friends ; and this
gave additional solemnity to the occasion. Four ministers
took part in the service, viz., the Governor, the Rev. John
Lomas, a man with a beautiful face crowned with silver locks,
whose person and character I hold still in the greatest
esteem ; the Rev. Benjamin Hellier, a plain, good, true


hearted man, with solid though common-place abilities and
no sign of pretence ; and the Rev. William Fiddian Moulton,
M.A.., a thorough scholar, translator and enlarger of Yiner’s
grammar of the new testament, and since then one of the revisers
of the new testament, on whom Edinburgh University bestowed
a well-merited D.D. some ten years ago. Well, all these took
part in the administration of the lord’s supper on this
occasion. They did it almost entirely after the model of the
Church of England ; and the whole service was elaborated
do an extent I had not before witnessed. The performance
was sufficiently uninteresting to me all through ; but the
repetition of the Litany fairly disgusted me. The humilia-
tion of the celebrants, the pious wail again and again
repeated, “ Christ, have mercy upon us,” &c., seemed to me
nothing short of doing penance ; and my nature revolted
from it. “ What!” said Ito myself, “ does god, does Christ,
need to be implored in this fashion ? Does the deity require
•of us this humiliation, in which no manhood, no self, no
individuality is left or can exist ?” My answer was “No J”
And if he had demanded them, I never could have worshipped
him again. I did my best under the circumstances to profit
by the service; though, I doubt not, indignation and disgust
were my most prominent feelings. And never did I suffi-
ciently recover to go with thorough heartiness to the supper
after that.
Besides, I reflected that the eucharist as now administered
had no existence amongst the apostles: they never
administered it, as far as I was able to gather from the new
testament. The probability is that it was in those early times
nothing but a meal in the church, whereat all met as in one
family. The administration was invented by the priesthood
to enhance their own importance. This incident, too, and
the reflections it produced were destined to influence my future
life, as will be seen.
41. It would be impossible to recall all the discussions in
which I took part in the college, nor is it requisite. Suffice
it to say that after a three years’ residence I was sent out to
the active work of a Wesleyan minister. The circuit I was
sent to was in many respects peculiar, and being in Scotland,
I found Methodism in that country slightly different from


what I had been accustomed to. I had not long been at
work when I was requested to baptize a child. Now it must
be here explained for the benefit of the uninitiated that among
the Wesleyans a minister is not made in a day. Though
accepted by the conference, and set to work hard enough, a
young man s ordination or full status as a minister is not
reached till after four years of probation. During the proba-
tion he can do all the work devolving upon a full minister,
except the performance of the ceremony of baptism and the
administration of the lord’s supper—these, except in extra-
ordinary cases, he must not do. A breach of this custom
would be looked upon by the clerically-minded portion of the
ministers as a very grave fault indeed, if not as a positive sin.
Well, when I was asked to baptize I begged off, and told the
applicant to wait until the superintendent should visit that
part of the circuit. “Oh ! no,” said the mother, 11 you are
our minister, not the Superintendent, and of course you must
baptize the children.” 1 wrote to the Superintendent for his
diiection in this difficulty, who sent me a dispensation to
baptize, with a caution not to do too much of it, nor to yield
to solicitations of that nature, except there was something in
the case to justify the action. To this caution I very readily
attended ; for I cannot say that I ever could regard baptism
as anything more than a mere rite, the value of which was abso-
lutely nil; and I could always echo the sentiment of Paul—
lf For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel.’
(1 Cor. i., 17). V
42. But this baptism incident, though it gave me no trouble
in itself, set me a-thinking. I beg to remind the reader that
I entered upon the work of preaching the gospel under the
solemn and abiding persuasion that god himself had called
me to do so ; and without this persuasion no conceivable con-
sideration would have prevailed upon me to undertake it.
This incident, then, led to the following reflections :—“ The
Methodist Conference have sent me here to preach the
to represent Methodism, and through it, Christianity. Now
preaching the gospel must be transcendantly the most impor-
tant work a man can ever undertake; while baptising infants
or adults must be a most insignificant act in comparison with
it. Then why do they send me to perform the greatest work


ever entrusted to man, and yet refuse me permission to per-
form sucli a mere rite as baptism ? Then as to the lord’s
supper, surely to hand bread and wine to the communicants
must be a very trivial affair indeed, compared with preaching
the gospel. And here again I am sent to do the greatest
work and not permitted to do the least !”
43. I feel sure that no man who is free from Popish or
Ritualistic prejudices will question the justness of my
reasoning. It seemed to me at that period that Methodism,,
in common with some other sects, had made a mistake and
inverted the natural order of things, sending men to do the
most important work first and then the least important after-
wards, whereas the reverse of this ought to have been
followed. It requires neither talent nor grace to baptize and
administer the lord’s supper; both are (or are thought to be)
requisite for preaching. The veriest sliallow-pate might
administer any number of sacraments with becoming decorum
and unction, but only a man of intelligence and heart can
preach a really good and useful sermon.
44. Regarding things in this light, I was forced a step
further onward. “I am not to administer the sacraments,”
reasoned I, “ until I am ordained ! What, then, is ordina-
tion, and what its value ? Without the divine call, god’s own
ordination, all human ordination must be useless, and only a
mockery ; but having been ordained by god, how can one need
that of man ? Besides, is it not an impertinence, almost a
blasphemy, for a man to come after god, and put his puny
polluted hand upon a head already consecrated by the imposi-
tion of the hand of deity ?’’ Those were solemn hours in my
history. After due thought and prayer, I concluded that it
"would be a sin and an insult to god to submit to any other
ordination after l’eceiving his; and I further thought I
recognised in this human ordination the cloven hoof of priest-
craft—a thing I have always detested. Naturally I thought
again upon the incident above related and the words of Dr.
Osborn ; and I began to regret that the Methodists had not
followed out Wesley’s direction and abstained from this mum-
mery of ordination altogether. At all events, I told myself,,
that come what might, I could never submit to ordination.
My conscience as well as my common sense, yea my whole


nature, revolted from it, as from a solemn farce. And I
resolved that no priestly hand should ever be laid upon my head.
45. The reader may perhaps wonder what I intended to do
after resolving never to be ordained, seeing that the
Methodists do ordain all their young men after they have
satisfactorily passed their probation. Well, this was a difficulty
which greatly perplexed me. But at the time of my resolve
there were above two years of my probation still to run, and I
hoped that in the course of that period some solution
of the difficulty might be found. As yet I had no
thought of severing my connection with Methodism, nor
would it then have been possible to do so, had the idea
occurred to me. A man with any feelings cannot sever old
ties at a stroke. Methodism had grown into my nature and
become part of my mental and moral being ; its ties and
entanglements went through me, forming a weft upon the
warp of my being. Sudden severance would have torn me to
tatters and threads. This is figurative language, but not a
whit too strong. At the time to which I refer the immediate
future was plain enough ; and I resolved to go on working to
to the best of my powers for Methodism, and for the good of
those for whom I was responsible. The duty of doing this was
perfectly clear ; and I left the future in the hands of providence.
46. I went to my first circuit in September, 1867, and during
the ensuing winter another incident occurred that tended to
sever my connection with orthodoxy. In going along the
street one day I saw placards announcing that two gentlemen
of the New Jerusalem Church, I think it was, were going to
speak in a certain hall on the subject of the Trinity in Unity.
They were Unitarians, and invited discussion. Said I to
myself, “ I will go and oppose them.” With this object in
view I began to re-study the doctrine of the Trinity,
making especial use of the new testament, which I care-
fully examined both in the English and in the Greek.
Judge of my surprise, when I found that the orthodox
doctrine of the Trinity in Unity was not taught in the
new testament. Before this, so deep had been my former
prejudice, I could have staked my life that the doctrine
in question was clearly enough taught in the new testament
to render the Unitarian entirely without excuse. Of course,


I was aware that it was not taught directly , though I thought
its indirect teaching amounted altogether to an overwhelming
evidence of its truth. Having to prepare, however, to meet
those gentlemen in public debate, I was possibly more careful
than I had been before; and the result of my re-investigation
was a most unwilling and reluctant conviction that the new
testament did not contain the doctrine. That there are hints
of it in the book, I admit; but there is not sufficient to
warrant the orthodox belief. And it is to the eternal credit
of the new testament writers, whoever they were, that their
works do not contain this crowning absurdity of orthodoxy.
47. Well, after a most impartial examination, I resolved
not to meet those gentlemen, forasmuch as I had nothing
but quicksand to stand upon; and I felt that they must be
totally unworthy of debating with if they could not make
very short work indeed of an orthodox opponent. So strong
was my prejudice, however, that for a year or two after this
I continued to yield a lifeless assent to the doctrine of the
trinity, though the course of time rendered that assent
weaker and weaker till at last it altogether ceased.
48. At a later period I met a very intelligent person, who
had been brought up in the strictest Methodist orthodoxy,
though all his life he had felt most distressing doubts on some
of the vital doctrines of Christianity. A better patient,
theologically, I could not have lighted on ; and I entered
upon the serious attempt at a radical cure with enthusiasm, at
the same time using all the caution I could command. On
most points I produced some effect, for I took more pains
with this patient than anyone had ever before done. As no
person in my position had ever previously made any effort to
meet candidly his difficulties and doubts, and as I entered
upon the work with the most perfect frankness and unreserve,
I need not inform the reader that my success was such as to
give me almost unqualified satisfaction. But, as I later found,
I had answered and removed doubts that affected only the
superstructure of Christianity ; the foundations were still as
doubtful to my friend as ever. Here my arguments produced
respectful silence ; but I was wise enough to perceive that no
conviction had been wrought. I however encouraged my
friend to persevere in the investigation, and held out the


•confident hope that satisfaction would by-and-bye be found.
In course of time my friend’s heart was subdued, but I am
sure the intellect was never satisfied.
49. In the meantime I was engaged writing an exposition
.of the ninth chapter of Paul’s epistle to the Romans, an
exposition specially directed against the Westminister Con
fession and Calvinistic doctrines generally. As I wrote
section after section I read them to my friend and
asked him to criticise, which he did very candidly. One
night as I read my exposition of god’s hardening
Pharaoh’s heart, and was referring with something like
triumph, I dare say, to the long struggle between god and
the impious king, my friend asked if it did not strike me as a
very unequal contest, where an infinite god and a poor blind
heathen king were the combatants ? The exact words I cannot
now recall, but I have given the substance. What a blinding
thing is faith ! My friend’s question was very simple ; but
like a vivid flash of lighting it gave me just a momentary
glimpse of the real landscape of the Bible ; and during that
moment the dim outline of grotesque and ugly shapes started
up—as instantly to disappear. The seed sown by my friend’s
hand appeared lost in a little while, but it fell into honest
ground, and in later days yielded a thousand-fold. As time
passed I read the bible with less prejudice and more real in-
vestigation ; and every day dimmed its former fictitious light
•and showed me spot after spot upon its face. But I must not
forestall.
50. The year 1870 will be long remembered as one of
important European events. Two things in it stand out pro-
minently—The Vatican Council,* and the great Frano-
German war. These produced their effects upon me. In the
first place, I had greatly neglected the newspapers and public
events for 10 or 12 years, except on great occasions. I first
took to newspaper reading during the progress of the Crimean
War, every step of which, boy as I was, I followed with
the deepest interest. Two of my brothers were engaged in
the struggle, one in the Crimea itself, the other in the
Baltic. This fact and others not worth naming aroused
* Opened December Bth, 1869.


my enthusiasm, and the horrors of war were to me, as
to many older fools, set off with the most brilliant colors.
I own, before the wretched contest was over I began to reflect,
and my feelings and thoughts took the turn of “ Jeanot and
Jeanette”—that quarrelsome kings and rulers should be the
only parties to fight. Henceforth I was in heart a Republican,
though I did not know it. All my sympathies were on the
side of the people, as distinguished from rulers, and specially
did I deplore the wretched condition of the South of England
agricultural laborers. Never after did I feel any real respect
for born rulers, though my light was nothing better than the
first hovering of the dawn. But when I became a “ convert ”
(in 1858) all my thought and care took a theological turn,
and newspapers, politics, and liberty fell into the background;
and my interest in public events was only galvanised into life
again by the great struggle in America. Here, too, I was
more than a mere spectator, a third brother of mine having
volunteered into the Federal army shortly after the outbreak
of the war. From the close of this great struggle to the
disestablishment of the Irish church, I once more fell into a
state of comparative apathy respecting public events, thinking
I was bound to spend my time in the study of the bible and
the divine science of theology. But the Vatican Council and
the F 'ranco-German war roused me to a pitch of whiteheat
excitement, especially the latter. The former was more
amusing than otherwise; but the war shook me like a chronic
earthquake.
51. During the sittings of the council the eyes of
most theologians, old and young, were turned towards
Rome. For a time I followed suit, but in a. while began to
draw comparisons and contrasts between Popery and Protes-
tantism. The Pope might profess his Infallibility, but were
the Protestants practically any better ? This question arose
and I followed its leading. Popery, almost ever since it
became Popery, had boldly laid claim to infallibility ; and in
pronouncing the Pope to be free from error they certainly
were consistent, though they could not have taken a more
effective way of proclaiming their own folly. The two
grimmest jokes ever perpetrated since the world began are the
declaration that “ god is love ” and the promulgation of the


Pope’s Infallibility. At present I am concerned only with the
latter, which the Protestants regard as sheer blasphemy. I
am not going to defend the Pope or his church : the former
is a very silly old man,* the latter a system of pretence and
wrong supported and defended by the ignorance of mankind.
But the Protestants should not complain of Papal pretensions
till they have renounced their own creeds and confessions.
The Protestants pretend to regard the bible as the word of
god, as the rule of faith, and the all-sufficient guide to
heaven. Then why do they set up creeds and standards of
their own manufacture ? Every creed and theological standard
in Christendom is an insult to the bible whose place and
authority it usurps ; for if the bible is what Protestants
declare, the other standards cannot be needed ; but if
the other standards are required, then the bible is
not what it should be the book of god is not sufficient
for its ostensible purpose. Herein lies the glaring
inconsistency of Protestants—they profess to receive the
bible as divine, as accomplishing for man, what man could
never have done for himself; and yet they set up their own
manufactured documents as the real guides of their life, and
the ultimate standards of appeal in all matters of doubt and
difficulty. No Protestant sect appeals directly to the bible in
cases of heresy; nay, if a heretic can prove from the bible
that he is right, and the sect wrong, the sect, notwithstanding,
will subdue or expel him.
52. Reflections such as these led me early in the year
1870 to look upon all creeds as usurpers of the place and
office of the bible; and I could not hide from myself the
manifest fact that Protestants, as well as Papists, were
following mere human doctrine in admitting the leadership of
creeds. By so doing they were ignoring the bible, and
wandering in that very darkness the word of god was given
to dispel. This view of the case did not tie me tighter to
Methodism; on the contrary, it made me sigh for the
“ glorious liberty of the children of god.” Henceforth creeds
counted for worse than nought with me, and I felt it was the
duty of Protestants to burn all their standards as so many
* This was written during Pius IX.’s. Pontificate.


idols, and to go back to the new testament, take it for
their sole guide, and follow its teaching as best they could.
The creeds I regarded as so many instruments of tyranny and
torture, which took captive a young mind and perverted the
most liberal and enlightened victim into a bigot and a partisan.
Of course, I was awake to the fact that many men were vastly
superior to their creeds, to which they could never be entirely
subjugated ; but this in itself was sufficient to throw the
utmost discredit upon those revered documents, for what worse
could be said of any system than that a man is generous and
good, in spite of it ? Methodism receives the doctrines taught
m John Wesley’s sermons, and in his « Notes upon the new
testament.” The study of the “Notes” I rather enjoyed
trom my first acquaintance with them, though their critical
ability is at a low ebb. The sermons I always considered
a bore, though I approved of their teaching ; and I never
knew a young Methodist preacher who did not regard the
work of “ getting up ” for examination on those sermons as a
downright drudgery. When I re-examined the matter I was
struck, as I never had been before, with the reflection that it
would be far wiser to make new creeds for ourselves than to
adopt those of men long dead ; and that in this we should be
roiiowmg the example of many of them. All religious
reformers have either made entirely new standards, or else
adapted older ones to their own purposes. This is wise : but
Wh y should they deny to others the right they themselves
wcemsed ? why should Wesley, for instance, bind all the
. etbodists of future ages to abide rigidly by his views ? It
is to be regretted that all religious reformers have been
consummate tyrants ; and it is yet more to be regretted that
wieir followers should so willingly wear the chains their
eaders put upon them, and even make their boast of the abject
slavery in which they live.
to 53 ’ reader will rea( % perceive that in my opposition
creeds and standards I was unconsciously fighting against
iristianity. The fact is, all the conflicting creeds of
dnstendom have risen as much from the conflicting and
icertain teachings of the new testament as from all other
-uses put together. That book is an undigested jumble of
erogeneous sentiments and crude conceptions. Hence it
c


lias produced a world of confusion, and lias roused more
bitter passions than any other book ever written. Nobody
really understands it ; hence every one stubbornly maintains
his views to be the only correct ones, and he feels authorised
to damn all who do not agree with him. The history of the
church is the most impartial comment ever written upon the
new testament—the fruit is always the best comment upon the
value of the tree. The book could not have had any other
effect than it lias, except among different races and under
different circumstances : antagonistic creeds, opposition sects,
dogmatic teaching, and bitter and unrelenting persecution
are all the inevitable outcome of new testament teaching.
And to find fault with creeds and sects is to find fault with
the oracle they all profess to follow. Therefore my revolt
against the creeds involved, as I learnt afterwards, an equal
revolt against the bible.
54. But no man’s religion is broken up all at once : honest
persuasions are long a-forming; they are also long-lived
when they are formed. Hence I had thoroughly parted with
the creeds before I suspected even that the bible must be
treated in the same way. As many a man has learnt and
felt before me, I next saw unmistakably that if the bible was
an infallible guide, an equally infallible exposition was
required to make it of any practical value to man. No matter
what the qualities of a book may be, unless we understand it
we cannot trust to its guidance. The infallibility of the book
must be transferred to our understanding before the guide
•can be trustworthy ; else what is intended to guide us East
may lead us West, what should guide to heaven may conduct
to hell. So before I had done of this creed question
I found that my faith in the very bible itself was also
destroyed ,• for I could find nowhere an infallible explanation,
and for aught I could see all expositions ever attempted
might be entirely wrong; and if it had never yet been
•expounded aright, what hope was there that any one now
would be able to accomplish what 18 centuries had left
undone !
55. The great war between Germany and France shook me
terribly. In my innocence I had thought for several years
that the foremost nations of the earth were growing too wise


recklessly to plunge into war. Alas! for my faith in
humanity ! The time came when my soul was almost bursting
with agony, to see a few villains and fools inciting hundreds
of thousands to fly at each other’s throats. I would fain hope
that no poor wretch on the battle-field suffered greater agony
than I endured at home. The blind folly of the led, and the
criminality of the leaders drove me almost to madness.
France, crucified between two thieves—Bismarck and Napoleon
—seemed to me the most appalling spectacle I had ever
seen or read of; and the sight completed the work of dis-
illusion, and showed me the hollowness of all hereditary and
monarchcial rule. Ever since then my Republicanism has
been of the most pronounced type, and of the most uncom-
promising spirit.
56. Before the great war I had a firm and childlike faith in
divine providence. This faith recognised the power of deity
in all things. His hand rolled the sun on its axis, and
stirred its surface up to incandescence, sending out floods of
heat-and-light-vibrations in all directions. The same hand
furnished and directed all the force or forces of the universe—
not a motion anywhere but was due to him. The revolution
of the planets, the roll of the waves, the shocks of the earth-
quake, the flash of the lightning, the growth of plants and
animals ; even the motions of art and machinery, good and
bad, useful and injurious, the stroke of the artist’s hammer
and the thrust of the assassin’s steel—all these were the
direct acts of god. This was both my faith and my philosophy.
Matter, I held, was dead and essentially inert, and all its forces
there and then sprang, each where and as it was wanted, from
the hand of the deity. In spite of this, I held too the free-
will of man, the theatre and measure of which was the region
of his own knowledge—he was responsible for knowingly
setting in action any of the forces in and around him. Un-
tenable as this hypothesis is, no believer in deity can escape
it, if he will only push his reasonings to their legitimate end.
If god is almighty, all conceivable power must be his and
there can be no other power ; immediately he must do what-
ever is done. Man uses means, that is, he overpowers or
directs one natural force by the aid of another ; but god
cannot do this, since all forces are his own and his only.


57. As I believed in an almighty god and regarded the
bible as his revelation, I endeavoured to act consistently, and
implicitly trusted in a personal as well as a general providence.
This trust had become habitual and I sometimes thought
nothing could _ ever shake it. But during the war my
faith in providence was sorely put to the test. A
friend told me one day that she had just heard a popular
minister preach a fine sermon on the war, in the course of
which he clearly pointed out the finger of god in the events of
the conflict. France had been very wicked; she had rejected
the glorious reformation; she had slaughtered the Protestants
on St. Bartholomew’s day; the Huguenots she had dragooned
and exiled; and even now she refused to accept of Protes-
tantism and was supporting the Pope, the man of sin. For
all these crimes god had sent the Germans upon her,
trampling down her fields and drenching her soil with the
blood of her sons.
This view of the case, though correct enough according to
the principles I then held, shocked me. I reflected that if
the tide of victory should roll northward to-morrow, that same
preacher would very likely preach a second sermon, in
which he would point out with equal clearness that provi-
dence was afflicting Germany for her Rationalism, and for
covering Europe with her sceptical literature. The result of
my cogitations commenced a revolution in my sentiments, and
I began to suspect that the vain attempts to trace and
explain the course of providence were mere quackery. Such
a thing as providential government might exist, I still
thought, but henceforth I had no faith in any pretended
explanations of it. Two or three years later my faith in
divine providence, even as a possible existence, “ slept with
its fathers,” and a faith in Nature reigned in its stead.
58. No preacher, I presume, was ever more evangelical than
I. My chief topic for years was “ Christ and him crucified ”
as an atoning sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. This
doctrine I studied profoundly, and often brought it before the
people in a style they were not accustomed to ; but here also
my deep study at length produced a reaction, and thoughts
I never anticipated rose out of the subject. The ordinary
pulpit claptrap about the never failing interest of the cross of


Christ I never indulged in. The poet has well expressed the
popular sentiment :
“ Endless scenes of wonder rise
From that mysterious tree !”
“ Tree ”is merely another name for the cross. I had read
and heard this kind of empty sound ad nauseam; and heartily
detested all vague generalities that might mean anything or
nothing. To me the cross was nothing further than I could
understand its meaning ; and when I heard people indulging
in the pious fallacy that “ all sermons were vain that had not
Christ (that is, the marrow of evangelical teaching) in them,”
I instinctively thought of Christ’s own sermons, which were
entirely destitute of this doctrine. This reflection led to
others, and I began to wonder why Jesus had not preached
the doctrine of the atonement himself, seeing it was so
momentous. The day of Pentecost gave me greater trouble
still. In the report of Peter’s speech on that day there is
no word of the fall of man and original sin, no word about
the atoning sacrifice or “ the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus.”
59. Henceforth my discourses became less evangelical and
more moral, though the sacrificial death was still prominently
put forward.' Later on I reflected that, since the end is
always presumably greater than the means , the atoning death
of Christ must be looked upon as subordinate. It was not in
itself an end or final cause, but rather a means employed for
another final cause, namely the strict morality of his followers
here and their endless happiness hereafter. And this view of
the case is thoroughly scriptural, for Paul says, Christ “ gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.”
(Titus 11, 14.). Therefore the atoning death of Christ was
subordinate to equity, purity, and zeal, the ends aimed at when
it was endured. This view of the doctrine stript the atone-
ment of all its unnatural colours and transcendental graces,
and from that period I began to look upon the moral qualities
of individuals as of far greater importance than the atonement.
The gory exhibitions of the crucifixion I never but once or
twice attempted, and that when very young. Sermons of that
class always seemed to me brutal and brutalising. They rouse


the rude sympathies of the crowd, but refinement cannot away
with them ; besides, they never fail to excite hatred towards
the murderers. And however becoming hatred of wrong may
be, the less frequently it is excited in its coarser forms the
better—since hate should be a principle and not a passion.
60. In September, 1869, I removed from Kilmarnock to
Montrose, much against my will. In the former town I had
met both with success and disappointment. Methodism, in
truth, was not needed there ; although I was too prejudiced
to see that. There was no society beyond about six or seven
members, and I had been sent to work up the “ cause.” For
two years I laboured incessantly for that object, in Kilmar-
nock, Galston, Cross-House, Hurlford, &c. At the end of
that time things were improved and a basis laid for further
action. And I did my best to induce the authorities to give
me another year there. They were obdurate. I offered to
stay at a reduced salary. They were still obdurate. I offered
to give up my salary entirely and depend upon the income I
could raise there, if they would let me stay. In vain. They
thought the work would not succeed ; I thought it would ;
they outvoted me, and I had to go.
61. Another reason strongly influenced me to remain. In
Stewarton, about five miles from Kilmarnock, there had
existed for many years an Independent Church of more
Arminian views than Presbyterians entertained. Just at the
time I was in the neigbourliood there was a split in this
church owing to some action on the part of the old minister,
and nearly 100 members seceded. For some time they
scarcely knew what to do. They appealed to the Wesleyan
Quarterly Meeting to be allowed to join that body, but the
chairman gave them no encouragement. After the meeting,
however, he consented that I might visit them- in an informal
way to take the lie of the ground, and see what might be
done. I went and gave them a sermon, according to arrange-
ment ; and in a few days I had formed them into a Wesleyan
society or church ; and a few months later they had a
young minister appointed to look over them. I frequently
visited them after, and formed friendships that have lasted till
now.
One pleasant incident I may relate. Mr. Alexander Picken


was the precentor of the new church ; and I always stayed at
his house when I visited Stewarton, and was just as welcome
there as at home. He had a large family, and there was an
increase just at the time I refer to. This little baby boy I
baptized. Years rolled by, and I became a sceptic, a Free-
thought lecturer. And a few years ago I lectured in that
capacity in Kilmarnock. Mr. and Mrs. Picken were present,
heart-broken nearly over my most mysterious change. But
they invited me to visit them, and assured me of as hearty a
welcome as ever. Next day I called and had a long and
pleasant chat. They brought the whole family into the sitting
room to meet me. They were all grown now, the eldest son
had just passed his curriculum and taken a medical degree.
“ Ye ’ll ken this ane !” said Mr. Picken, putting his hand
upon a big boy of 10 or 11. “No !” said I. “ Ay, man !”
said he, “Ye baptized him !” Of course, the little fellow had
changed in the interval—and so had I. We had both grown
—out of infancy ;he physically, I mentally and morally.
And I felt I was no more responsible for my growth than the
boy was for his. Mr. Picken conducted me to the station
(new since my former visits), and I asked him what his
neighbours would say if they saw him in my company. “ I’m
no carin’,” replied he ; “I hae been till the station wi’ mony
a waur man.”
62. Well, the incidents named will show the reader that I
had strong reasons, though not of a pecuniary kind, for
staying in Kilmarnock. The wish to reap some fruits of my
hard work there and to consolidate what had begun so well in
Stewarton was intensely strong : and it tortured me beyond
expression to have to go away. This was all the worse from
the fact that I was then fully persuaded that god designed me
to stay. And I reflected that it seemed so curious, so incon-
sistent, to have the conviction that I ought to stay because
god wished it, and yet to be compelled to leave because
man decided I should. I submitted ; but it did not tie me
any tighter to Methodism.
63. And now came the tug of war. I had but another
year to run before going to Conference to be ordained. What
was to be done ? I had resolved absolutely never to submit
to that ceremony. I had asked my superintendent what I


could do Whether I could still continue in my present post
without ordination ? He said, “Ho; Methodist laws make
no provision for that class of men.” In fact no such case
had ever occurred. He advised me by all means to dismiss
those scruples from my mind, and do as others had done.
This was impossible. It had become a matter of conscience,
and all the world could not induce me to act contrary to
conscience. On that point I was in those days a bit fanatical:
conscience I regarded as the voice of god, or its echo; a most
dangerous opinion, as I learnt afterwards. A man with a
conscience, and fully persuaded that god speaks by that con-
science, has an oracle within him; and if he does not mind
will become infallible in his own esteem—a stubborn fool in
the opinion of others. However, what was to be done ? To
go out of Methodism was impossible. My parents were of
that body, all my family and best friends; my youngest
brother and one or two old companions were amongst its
ministers; all my life flowed in the same direction; it was
the church of my choice, which I had defended again and
again; and, above all, I was fully persuaded that god had
called me to its Ministry! The last four months of 1869
were deeply anxious ones for me. At last I cut the knot I
could not untie by getting married !
64. “ How ?” the reader may ask. Thus: When a young-
minister marries before his four years’ probation is ended, the
Wesleyans keep him two years longer on probation, if he is
worth preserving; if not, they send him about his business. I
had sufficient conceit to suppose—to feel certain, in fact
that they would not dismiss me, but make the probation two
years longer. The advantage to me lay in this:—Had I not
got married, I should have had but eight months in which to
decide whether to go forward to ordination, to leave Method-
ism, or to remain in the body in some not clearly defined
capacity ; whereas getting married, I knew, would add 24
months to the time left to me for final decision. I married in
January, 1870; when my probation had but 7 months to
run. The event was as I calculated. The District Meeting
met in Aberdeen, in the month of May. I preached a sermon
there which brought me many congratulations from the
ministers. The meeting considered my case and added two


more years to my probation, as I expected. Here was a re-
lief. Now I could work out quietly the problems that
demanded solution, and decide upon my future course. In
Montrose I had a rather erratic superintendant, who years ago
left the Wesleyans; though I know not what has become of him.
So I removed, at the end of one year, to Amble, a small sea
port in Northumberland, the centre of a large coal-mining
population, and belonging to the Methodist Circuit of
Alnwick.
65. While in Montrose I read “ Ecce Homo,” and was
deeply impressed with it. The death of Charles Dickens also
occurred the same year ; and I very much “ exercised ” some
of the extra pious of my congregation by passing a eulogy
upon him in one of my sermons. This was far more than I
could have done a few years earlier ; for I had inherited the
Methodist antipathy to novel reading, never having ventured,
after my conversion, to read any fiction except Wesley’s
abridgment of Brooke’s “ Fool of Quality.” In my new
circuit I found plenty to exercise all my “ gifts and grace.”
There was Amble itself, with a nice little chapel, and plenty
of people to fill it. There were also two large colliery villages,
an agricultural village seven miles off, and a fishing village
about a mile away. Occasionally I took a turn at Alnwick,
Benvick-on-Tweed and Alnmouth; and life passed in a reason-
ably pleasant style during the time I lived there, though much
of it was filled up with the problems of the future, which
gradually revealed themselves as time went on. One of my
early acts was to deliver a series of scientific lectures, on the
Brain, Senses, &c., to raise money for a warming
apparatus for the chapel. This was a great success every way.
And the first time the apparatus was used I gave them a
sermon on “Be ye warmed ” (James ii. 16). It was in this
circuit I first began to use regularly an astronomical tele-
scope; and to advocate the absolute “ Nationalisation of the
land,” the latter theme bringing me plenty of abuse at times.
Many of my public speeches, about this time, were Re-
publican, and the Queen and royal family came in for no
compliments. It was in the same circuit I first practically learnt
that scientific subjects could be treated in an interesting and
instructive way so as to please and profit the working classes.


Scores of times did I lecture to them on Magnetism, Light,
the Atmosphere, Astronomy, the Rainbow, etc., using
diagrams to illustrate, or the black-board, when better diagrams
could not be made. Those lectures were well received by all
parties, and were rather run after. But on one subject I fell
into an unhappy blunder. I intended to lecture on the history
of the bible, and to show the people exactly how we came by
it. But as I put my materials together, I soon perceived that
I should open up questions of the gravest difficulty; and I
feared to show the people what a mere rope of sand the evi-
dences of Christianity were. So I had to decline, the people
often wondering why I did not give the lectures I had
announced. I was not advanced enough myself to perceive
the full weakness of the case; and I thought then that what-
ever weakened the faith of the people in the bible must result
in mischief. There was one thing, however, I did do. I
delivered a lecture on “ Hell,” in which I openly and earnestly
repudiated the fire-tlieory of eternal punishment. This gave
great offence to some, though the many were favorably
impressed.
66. Many things that occurred during my residence in Nor-
thumberland must be passed over in silence for want of space,
and as having no connection with my subject. The time soon
ran away, and I had to face the crisis of my life. The first
year I prepared for the several examinations to be passed at
the District Meeting; the next year, being deeply immersed in
scientific studies, I neglected them. My superintendent
remonstrated in vain, telling me they would expel me if I
did not prepare for the examinations. The chairman
of the district was thrown into consternation ; and
he consulted the President of the Conference, who advised
him to pass it over in silence. Then a rumour got afloat that
I was going to retire from the Ministry. Everybody said,
Don’t. Strong expostulation, entreaties, warnings were tried.
The Chairman of the district sent an old companion of mine,
still a Wesleyan minister, to spend the day with me, partly to
ascertain my real intentions, but chiefly to use his influence to
keep me in the right path, as he considered it. Not proving
very successful, the Chairman himself, a really good, honest
man, came ; and tried to influence me through my wife,


urging her to urge me to remain. “We don’t want to lose
him,” said he, “ and his present difficulties may vanish away
in a short time. We have all had our doubts and difficulties;
but we have outlived them.” This was while I was out for a
walk. The old gentleman left with the hope that he had
made a deep impression ; and he was not deceived. He did
impress me emotionally, but the intellect was untouched.
There was a struggle, long and painful, between emotion and
thought ; but conscience said, “ you must go.” The District
Meeting was held in Sunderland, about the middle of May,
1872. There were about 50 ministers present, all heartily
glad to see me, except one. That was my Superintendent,
who had grown jealous because his young man had received
more attention than himself. He preferred against me at the
District Meeting a complicated “charge,” consisting of 16
items, the worst which was that for months past I had not
used the lord’s prayer after my own at the evening services !
This was perfectly true, for I thought it absurd to ask “ this
day for our daily bread,” at the very close of the day. I was
called upon to reply, and disposed of my accuser in a few
minutes. I pointed out how he had known most of what he
had laid before the meeting for over a year; that he would
have made a “ charge ” against me last year, but had been
threatened with removal from the circuit if he did; that, in
the meantime it had been resolved to get rid of him whether
or not, and that now, having nothing to fear, he had mustered
courage sufficient to accuse me. This was telling, for it was
undeniably true. He had charged me with retranslating a text
before preaching on it, and with quoting in the sermon certain
Words of “an old divine ” in favor of dancing, hunting, theatre-
going, etc. This was received with profound gravity by the
meeting, and my case for a moment looked overcast. My
reply was, “ All I ever quoted on the subjects named was
taken from John Wesley’s sermons!” There was one
Moment’s pause, a pause of astonishment —and then such a
roar of laughter as I have rarely heard. Ihe accuser was
absolutely silenced, to the infinite delight of the meeting.
The chairman, ignoring the rest of the charges as too
trumpery to be noticed, merely asked me to conform to
general practice respecting the lord’s prayer, and the incident


closed. The chairman then announced that he had a com-
munication from the President absolving me from the ordinary
written examination; and ultimately when my case was voted
upon every hand went up in my favor, except that of the
superintendent upon whom I had sat.
67. The thorough kindness and good nature of the District
.Meeting staggered me. I had gone to that meeting fully
intending to resign there and then. But everybody was so
good, so genial, and so disposed to make things smooth for
me, and spoke so hopefully of my future prospects, that I felt
completely unmanned. I left the meeting resolved to do my
utmost to retain my position, and for a time it seemed just
possible that this resolution would carry the day. This was
the last struggle, and it was the most severe of all. At last
victory remained with the intellect, and emotions had to yield.
68. Many of the Methodist doctrines, though not positively
rejected, had lost all influence over me, and I could not preach
them ; even those I still believed had, so to speak, changed
both in colour and shape, and inceptive doubts were beginning
to arise respecting the whole fabric of religion. It was impos-
sible to go on in the old track with these new feelings. I had
not. sought them. Sceptical ideas and emotions came
unbidden, and for a long time I tried to drive them away, as
Abram did the fowls from his sacrifice. In course of ( time the
inevitable overpowered me, and then I felt that I must
change my outward life to keep it in harmony with the
inner. All my friends entreated me not to leave the ministry ;
some pointed to what they considered the sin of doing so ;
others asked what I should do to live, and pointed out to me
a life of poverty ; others appealed to my feelings, and asked
if I would not make an effort to save my mother and other
relatives from the bitter pain and disappointment they must
endure if I persisted in my resolution ? But conscience spoke
again, and insisted that I must retire, let the consequences be
what they might.
69. The following letter which I sent to the Rev. W.
Andrews, chairman of the Newcastle-on-Tyne District, will
explain itself :


“ Amble,
July Ist;, 1872.
Rev. Sir, —
I daresay yoii will be somewhat surprised at the communi-
cation lam just about to make to you. I feel obliged to
resign my connection with the Wesleyan Methodist Confer-
ence. For this act I assign the following reasons :
1. I feel the want of more liberty, both of thought and
action, than Methodist standards and usages permit.
2. In doctrines, whatever I approve or disapprove of, I
cannot longer submit to the dictation or sway of any system
of theology ; for every man should derive his theological
views from divine standards only ; using the opinions of
others as helps, but not as authorities. It is a serious ques-
tion with me if a man can submit to the authority of any
human creed, or system of doctrine, and at the same time
pay that thorough deference to the bible, which, in the
estimation of all Christians, it demands. Besides, every man
who is really qualified to preach the gospel will preach and
teach, from that gospel alone, all that is necessary for morality
and salvation, without being led or ruled by any human
system or authority whatever.
8. Whatever system of church polity I follow, I cannot
longer submit to be questioned officially, and, as it seems to
me, somewhat inquisitorially, year after year, respecting it. I
am of opinion that one declaration of approval should suffice,
Until there is known cause for further inquiry.
4. Ido not approve, of course, and never shall, of the rule
that has affected me during the past two years. I do not
think the Conference should assume any jurisdiction whatever
m such matters. But, it se< ms to me it is most reprehensible
to treat a man as a criminal for marrying just when he thinks
fit, where there is no moral or legal sin connected with it.
Hence I have always felt that the Conference disgraced, not
me, but themselves, in the punishment I have borne.
5. In politics lam Republican. This, I believe, is contrary
to Methodist views. And it would be likely to bring me into
disagreeable antagonism with ministers and others ; for my
Politics are earnest and active.
6. On the last morning of the District Meeting I saw clearly


what I had more than suspected before, viz., that Methodism
is out of harmony with the times, specially with the uprising
and emancipation of the masses. You will remember what
was said about Trades Unions, strikes, &c.,&c., in connection
with the decrease in the district. I don’t think a church
that stands in the way of the onward progress of the
working man will get much of his support in future.
7. I don’t like the way in which Methodism smothers free
discussion. I cannot help feeling that the spirit that silenced
Mr. Hughes* is identical with that which endeavoured to silence
Martin Luther and to smother the Reformation. It is the
same spirit that vetoed the Press for so many ages : the same
mistaken spirit that has, perhaps from the best of motives,
persecuted advancing men in all generations.
I should have given notice of resignation at the District
Meeting, but for the thorough and unexpected kindness of
yourself and your brethren It staggered my resolution, and
made me pause till now. And, I assure you, lam very sorry
to disappoint those who were so kind to me. I would have
mentioned it when you were here ; but I did not wish to
spoil your holiday, for one thing, I was scarcely decided , for
another.
I cannot close without thanking you for your uniform kind-
ness. lam very sorry to disappoint it.
By-the-way, it just occurs to me that you may not like the
disagreeable work of carryingthis resignation to the Conference.
If you prefer that, I will send it direct to the President.
I remain,
Rev. sir,
Yours truly,
Rev. W. Andrews. Jos. Symes.”
Mr. Andrews replied as follows, the envelope bearing this
address : —“ The Revd. Joseph Symes, Wesleyan Minister,
Amble.” The letter is :
* The Rev. T. Hugh&s, who, at the previous Conference, was sus-
pended for speaking against the Class Meeting. I forget the details
—J. Symes, September, 1884.


“ Newcastle-on-Tyne,
July 2nd, 1872.
My Dear Mr. Symes,—
The letter I received from you this morning very much
surprised me, for I hoped that after the District Meeting all
would be right, and that henceforth you would be useful and
happy among us as a Methodist preacher.
The step you have taken is a serious one; but I feel sure
you have weighed it well and looked at all the consequences
likely to arise from it. And as your mind is so fully made
up, and that after deliberation so careful and protracted, it
would avail nothing to enter into argument on the points you
raise.
With your talents there ought to be for you a wide sphere
of usefulness somewhere, and I trust there will be. I for one
shall always feel interested in your welfare, and rejoice at
your successes.
I will make known your resignation to the President, and
request Mr. Badger to do the best he can till Conference with
your appointments in the circuit.
I have no doubt but Mrs. Symes thoroughly agrees with
you in this resolution, and that she will continue to be your
helper and comforter wherever your lot may be cast.
Wishing you and yours a life of happy usefulness on earth,
and then the joys of heaven,
I am,
My dear sir,
Yours affectionately,
The Rev. J. Symes. W. Andrews.*
* In the Autumn of 1878, a Wesleyan Minister at Barrow-in-
Furness, incensed by a lecture I had delivered there, informed his
audience that I had been expelled from the Wesleyan connection. I
wrote to Mr. Andrews to ask his permission to publish his letter as the
most complete reply to the slander. Mr. Andrews said, as so many
years had passed, he should like to see the letter ere I made it public.
I sent it; and he returned it immediately with a written permission
to use it in my self-defence. I have had very little trouble with
Wesleyan Ministers on this question, though they have been written
"to over and over bj r ious defenders of the faith to see if they could
not rake up some scandal against me. Thus, the Rev. Marmaduke
<2. Osborn was appealed to by two of my opponents in debate in 1880;


Sucli is the correspondence. Mr. Andrews is still alive, and
may be appealed to. I wrote again immediately to say that I
would fulfil all my engagements up to the end of August,
the close of the Methodist year, as I had no wish to put the
circuit to one penny of expense. He at once accepted my
offer.
70. My experience of the Wesleyan Ministers, both when
amongst them and since I left, has been for the most part
pleasant. I have no quarrel with them (nor any other body
of men) as men. My battle is not with individuals, but with
opinion and systems. If my theological opinions had not
changed, I should have found no difficulty in spending my
life among them. I don’t wish to insinuate that they are
perfect; they are human. Most of their faults they owe to
the influence of their religion. But I did not leave them for any
faults of theirs, nor for any fault of my own ; my sole reason
for coming out from amongst them was that I no longer felt
in harmony with their doctrines and discipline.
and replying to one he said I had “failed,” to the other “disappeared.” I
demanded an explanation, and he hesitated ; I pressed and hinted at
legal proceedings. Then he sent this :
“ Wesleyan Mission. House,
Bishopsgate Street, Within,
London, October 15, 1880.
Mr. Symes,—
I did not reply to your last, because I had nothing to add to my
former communication. Nor have I now, except to say that I did
not use the words ‘ disappeared ’ and ‘ failed ’ in any offensive sense,
but simply to describe the facts so far as I was able to trace them.
From the letter of Mr. Andrews it appears that you withdrew
voluntarily and honourably; and, if it will be any satisfaction to
you, I have no objection to withdraw the words in question. Although
I have no knowledge of you, I should be sorry inadvertently to do
you any injustice.
Having said so much, I must decline any further correspondence,
I am, sir,
45 Bristol Street, Yours truly,
Birmingham.” M. C. Osborn.
The temper of this may be contrasted with the letter of Mr.
Andrews. I wrote in reply, pointing out that as he had compelled
me in self-defence to enter into corrospondence with him, it was not
in his power to decline all further, &c.


71. The last sermon I preached in a Wesleyan pulpit wag-
delivered at Berwick-on-Tweed, on the last Sunday in
August, 1872. From that time I was free; theology had
lost its bonds, and I never after felt an obligation to believe.
Therein lies the absurdity of creeds and other standards you
are bound to believe, just as if faith were a matter of mere-
volition; and if you cannot continue to believe as you once-
did, you are treated as a heretic, and punished as if you were
an evil-doer. Even the churches must at some time awake
to the absurdity of this. When I left the \V esleyans I was
still orthodox in many respects, and had there been open tor
me a pulpit where I could have preached in my own style,,
and been under no obligation to a creed or a ceremonial, 1
daresay I should, for a time, have entered it. But every
month made me more sceptical, and in a short period all
thought of returning to the pulpit disappeared. ”
72. I may just here mention that for several years before-
forsaking the pulpit I had indulged a natural taste for
scientific studies, and for an amateur amassed considerable-
information respecting several of the physical sciences Even,
in early life I had a great fondness for nature, _ and dabbled
especially in astronomy. It is probable that science had fai
* When I left the pulpit I knew not what to do for a living. For
four months I did not earn £5. Several times I preached in the
pulpits of different churches, and delivered scientific lectures here and
there. In January, 1873, I got employment as Agent and Lecture!
to the “ Northern Union of Mechanics Institutes, and travelled
through the principal towns of Northumberland and Durham,
lecturing to the Institutes and better organising them. From thence
I passed to the office of the Newcastle Weekly Chronicle , of which
I was for a year sub-editor, and for six months a writer on Science,.
&c. The proprietor of that paper is a pretended Radical, though
in reality a disguised Tory of the worst type. . . ,
During my employment in his office, the agricultural laborers,
were pushing ahead with their unions, and I became acquainted with
one of their agents in Newcastle-on-Tyne, whither I had removed my
residence in March, 1873. I had ceased to attend church and chapel,
and having nothing to do on Sunday, I often felt time hanging heavily
on hand. One Sunday I went to the place where an open-air meeting
was being held in favour of the agricultural laborers, then locked
out, in the eastern counties. I was a perfect stranger there, but I
asked the secretary if I might address the meeting. He readily
consented, and I gave them a speech, most heartly approving ot


more influence than anything else in changing my opinions.
When T resumed my studies in science, as I did about 1867,
I gradually became imbued with its spirit, which operated
in the most destructive manner upon my faith, at first
insidiously, and then in a more open manner. As science
consists of ascertained facts, and faith merely believes certain
alleged facts which are all probably fictions, I could not, in
the long run, help contrasting the certainty and precision of
science with the vague uncertainties of the creeds. Of course,
science cannot possibly suffer from such comparisons; but a
bold spontaneous faith is impossible where the scientific spirit
reigns. It is not so much the facts of science that will
destroy theology, it is the scientific spirit. Few people
except students could give any clear reason for rejecting the
stories of modern miracles, stories of witchcraft or spiritualism,
and few could clearly say why they receive the Copernican
system of astronomy rather than any preceding system. But
science has gradually weaned the public mind from attention
to the supernatural, and by its example and teaching substi-
tuted critical and regular thought for the unrestrained dreams
and imaginings of our forefathers. There is still much
their action, and strongly advocating the claims of the locked-out
men. “Ay ! Mister,” said one of the officials as I descended, “ that’s
not the first time you’ve addressed a meetin’. Will you come again
and give us your help ?” After that I regularly assisted them in"the
same manner every Sunday for many months, often travelling many
miles to attend meetings held in their behalf. No “ respectable ”
persons engaged in this good work, my companions being all working
men. “ Respectability ” shook its head and hinted that I was going
to the bad. My employer, the newspaper proprietor, the celebrated
Mr. Joseph Cowan, took a huff and discharged me, although he pre-
tended to be heart and purse in favour of the laborers ! I did
myself no good by the action I have described, but altogether we
raised about £l7O for the agricultural laborers ; and that was some-
thing.
A year and two months after leaving the pulpit, my friends in
Amble and the district invited me to a public meeting, and presented
me with a very nice microscope in recognition of my former services
to them.
Since May 1876, I have been a regular contributor to Mr. Brad-
laugh’s paper, the National Reformer , and from December of the
same year I have been incessantly employed as a Secularist
lecturer. After nearly eight years’ experience, lam as fully resolved
as ever to go on with it.


ignorance to dispel, but people have learnt to trust in science
more than in religion, and in its teachers more than in the
priesthood. Science courts investigation and does its best to
rouse it; religion forbids investigation, though she permits a
species of “ blind man’s buff ” which passes under the same
name; that is, she first blindfolds her victim and then bids
him see for himself. The believer is required to take his
whole religion on trust; with this proviso, he may study
science, though his allegiance to his religion leads him to
warp what scientific facts he can, so as to favor his creed, and
the stubborn facts that cannot be so turned he rejects as
dangerous.
In my case the final conflict in the mental revolution con-
sisted of a long battle between science and faith. My history
is but a repetition of the history of Europe. For many cen-
turies all were believers, but there were differences of belief.
These differences occupied public thought and employed the
keenest intellects for generation after generation. During
the past twenty or thirty years, however, mutual differences
between believers have fallen into the background, and the
fight has been transferred to another region, where you see
believers fighting in desperation, and with the most
frenzied energy in defence of their very citadel, against the
incessant, cool, and successful attacks of science. In this
contest it was impossible for me to be an idle looker on—the
interests at stake were in my esteem the most momentous;
and I defended religion as long as possible. But when I
perceived that it was no longer defensible, I retired from the
fight.
73. I may here remark that I had been prejudiced against
scientific men at an early age, and had it impressed upon my
mind that even such science as was allowable was chiefly
valuable as “ a hand-maid to piety.’’ Men of science in those
days were persistently and of set purpose misrepresented,
especially those of them who dared express their honest con-
victions. But in process of time I was compelled to admit
that those men were much better characters in many respects
than their opponents, and that in point of fairness and
candour immeasurably their superiors. I farther saw that
there were among the orthodox themselves no men of purer


lives and more healthy thought and broader sympathies than
those of them who had some scientific attainments. These
observations made their impression.
But it was only when I so far forgot my prejudices as to
look with candour upon the contending parties, and to weigh
impartially their respective merits, that I clearly understood
the vast importance of science and the inutility and the very
doubtful claims of religion. I could not hide from myself the
following facts: —1. That all our knowledge of nature had
been won by scientific investigation, not by faith. 2. That
science took the pains to discover, to demonstrate, and to publish
facts that no enlightened man could doubt, whereas all the
facts of religion were of the past, incapable of demonstration,
and in their very nature suggestive of the strongest possible
doubts to an inquiring mind. 3. I could not forget that
religion had once been far more extensive than now, and that
Science had won from her many wide realms: that pestilence
and famine, earthquake and storm, eclipse and comet, with
many other natural events had been classed with the super-
natural till science made good her claim to them. Indeed, it
was plain that from the moment of her birth science had
begun to occupy the territories of superstition. From the
first natural fact ascertained and expounded until now r
science has been incessantly narrowing up the regions of faith
and extending her own. The certainty is that in the long
run religion will entirely disappear before the march of
science, as many savage tribes have done before the progress
of civilisation. Such tribes, it appears, cannot change their
habits, and therefore perish in new and uncongenial circum-
stances. Religion is essentially a thing of faith, and faith
dies when “ lost in sight.” Religion cannot change its
essential nature; thei’efore it must perish. 4. I could not be
oblivious to the fact that history recorded no triumph of
religion over science, except the triumphs of persecutors, though
the records were numerous of the victories science had won.
The “ foundations ” and “ pillars ” of the earth, and the solid
vault of heaven with its “ windows ” and treasures of water,,
“hail” and “snow,” have disappeared, though their “ fossils ,r
still remain in the bible and later theology—melancholy
records of human ignorance and presumption. The sick used


to be cured by miracle—so at least religion tells us; and
insane people, who were thought to be possessed by devils,
were restored to their normal condition by exorcising the
fiends. Science knows nothing of this mummery, nor will
even an ordinary believer contend for miracles now, though he
believes in their former existence—just as some believe there
were formerly giants. 5. Before science existed religion was
irresponsible and completely reckless. Miracles were more
common than grasshoppers, and the supernatural was breaking
in upon the order of nature with the most astounding
frequency —miracles were the rule, natural events the excep-
tion. People in those days could believe in miracles much easier
than in natural events. Science has changed all that, and
now the story of a miracle provokes our pity or contempt.
6. Then as to prayer; it was formerly believed that “prayer
could move the arm that moves the world.” Science has demon-
strated that in all parts of nature, so far as she has been able
to investigate, events succeed each other in a way that can be
formulated as a law, nor are any exceptions ever known.
People still pray for weather and health and digestion, for
long life, and preservation from war, pestilence, famine,
sudden death, etc., but these are mere forms now, and no
scientific man can engage in such petitions except for form or
fashion’s sake. 7. So wide-spread is the spirit of science and
scepticism that, were there no old religions existing, none
would now be possible. The present state of things, in
civilised countries, could not possibly give birth to a religion;
even the old ones are dying.
74. Further ; I could not be blind to the fact that the
great revolutions of history were all produced more or less in
antagonism to religion and always resulted in diminishing
the sum total of the world’s faith. 1. Christianity at first
was essentially a rebellion against too much religion ; and
though the movement was decidedly despotic, yet it broke
chains it could never replace. 2. Constantine the great and
his coadjutors diluted religion with a large admixture of
earthly water ; and by bringing the head of the church down
from heaven to earth diminished vastly the world’s faith in
“ things above.” The Protestant Reformation was essentially
a Secular revolution, arising from Secular principles, and all


that was good in it was accomplished by purely Secular means,
and it ended in the subjugation of the spiritual to the Secular
power. When religion reigns man counts for nothing—he is
altogether subordinate. But the Reformation, though dread-
fully imperfect, elevated man at the expense of religion. The
same is true of the great Puritan movement, and also of the
Methodist Revival—they were rebellions against the tyranny
of religion ; and though they abnormally developed some
religious principles, yet they both left man with less faith
in the aggregate than he had before. 3. The great
movement of the present century has been all anti-
religious. This movement is many-sided, but it has
no side favourable to religion. In politics, in litera-
ture, in art, in science, in education, the movement has
been essentially sceptical. Whatever exalts and emancipates
man damages his faith and makes him less religious. 4th. At
home (in its old seats) religion has been on the wane for
centuries ; what has it done abroad ? Missionaries have been
sent to every clime, and millions of money have been sub-
scribed to support them in their work. The world, notwith-
standing, is yet almost untouched ; the heathens are not
converted to Christianity, nor are they likely to be. Glowing
speeches are often made at Missionary Meetings by men who
have tried the effect of their superstition upon the supersti-
tions of other countries—but nearly all the glow takes the
prophetic form ; they dwell rather upon what the bible pro-
mises than upon what has been done. And missionaries often
express hopes and confidence when before an enthusiastic
audience, such as they never feel in their actual work. The
zeal and good intentions of some of those men are beyond
praise ; but they are attempting an impossible task, and
might as well, as Hood suggests, attempt to wash all the
world’s inhabitants white as try to convert them to Chris-
tianity. The old religions of India and other lands are
undoubtedly breaking up ; but Christianity reaps no benefit;
she herself is doing the same. The churches have lost nearly
all their divine faith. They believe in the universal god
money, they believe in the showy theatricals called worship ;
but the old god of Christianity is now an unknown quantity ;
they have extinguished the fires of perdition, and no longer feel


any attraction towards a heaven whose day is unclouded and
never followed by night. The want of a solid foundation of
fact for Christianity to repose upon renders her powerless in
an enlightened and inquiring age; and it is worthy of remark
that THE NATIONS OP CHRISTENDOM ARE MANY DEGREES
MORE SCEPTICAL THAN ANY OTHER NATIONS IN THE WORLD.
How can Christianity conquer the earth while her foremost
votaries are often troubled with grave doubts respecting tho
foundations of their faith ? Pure faith is an ardent spiritual
beverage which thoroughly intoxicates the mind; but faith
diluted with water —that is, faith-and-water —while not
disagreeable to most religious palates, can never rouse enthu-
siasm; and at present the best beverage supplied by any of
the churches is merely Secular water with the least suspicion
of faith just to modify the taste. sth. The intellect of to-day
is in open rebellion against religion. Ninety per cent., I dare
say, of our foremost writers, scientists, and statesmen are
outside of orthodoxy. In the Middle ages the church was a
huge Bastille, which forcibly held in bondage all the intellect
of Europe. All that has been changed, and now that the
intellect is free, the old prison-house is shunned. The best
minds once gravitated towards the church as the only opening
for their thought, speculation, and life-long work; now they
go anywhere rather than to the pulpit. Even in the church
itself those who are intellectual are in rebellion; and there is
not, I believe, a popular preacher or theological writer in the
world who is not more or less heterodox.
75. The revolt of the intellect shows undoubtedly that Chris-
tianity, like all other religions, is out of harmony with human
civilisation. The two forces are unequal and antagonistic,
and the one must overcome the other. Divines have made
most strenuous efforts to adapt religion to its altered circum-
stances ; much of its grosser and more revolting parts have
been cut away or kept as much as possible out of sight. The
absurdities and contradictions, and shocking immoralities of
the bible have been ignored, softened, explained, wrested, and
otherwise treated to make them palatable to modern tastes.
But all those efforts are in vain, and must in the long run
cover their authors with confusion and ridicule. It is
proverbial that no class of men are so uncandid as divines,


and the reason is obvious. To be candid is, for them, to admit
defeat.
76. During the period to which I refer, I could no longer
he oblivious to the fact that believers were themselves very
sceptical compared with their ancestors, and what for a time
surprised me was that they were much better for their unbelief.
W hen a man thinks his own creed all-important, he cannot
feel much sympathy with persons of other creeds. The history of
the church fully and terribly shows how dreadfully unsocial and
<livisive religion has been. When religion was the chief
subject of thought and the one great interest men followed,
then the world was full of jealousy, bickerings, evil speaking,
hatred, variance, wrath, strife,” and every evil thing. But
in proportion as men have diminished their religion, so have
they become more social, and mutual jealousies have given
place to confidence and respect. The improved tone of
religious polemics is not due to religion; but to social
forces operating against religion ; and when a man
-consents to treat affably another of different belief, that man
■must have lost some of his faith and become imbued with
•other and better principles. If the church is not militant she
is nothing ; at present she is making terms with the enemy,
•courting the friendship of the world, even submitting to be
taught by Science, and rapidly developing Anti-christ in her
very midst. All this is due to Secular influences, which
in process of time must break up all belief in supernatural
things.
77. Another feature in human history impressed me power-
fully. I had been so long accustomed to regard the bible as
the fount of all good, spiritual and temporal, that for years
I unquestioningly believed what fanatics asserted, to the
•effect that England owed her greatness to that book. But
when my eyes were opened I saw that all this was the veriest
clap-trap, and in fact, diametrically opposed to the facts of the
case. I reflected that the bible gave no encouragement to
earthly pursuits, but rather condemned them as antagonistic
to religion. It is not difficult to realise Christ’s ideal of the
perfect man, he himself and his disciples being the authorised
examples. He forsook, as John Baptist had done, all worldly
•employment, and called his disciples away from theirs ; he


.-and they adopted a life of poverty and separation from the
world ; he had “ not where to lay his head,” nor does he seem
•to have valued the comforts of home. When he sent out his
disciples he bade them carry nothing with them—no purse, no
scrip (wallet), but one coat, and eschewing the luxury of
shoes, to be content with sandals. They were to depend upon
the charity of those to whom they ministered for all their
necessities. In his preaching he told his hearers to seek
religion and leave earthly concerns to the fatherly care of
•providence 5 instead of taking the least thought for clothes,
they were bidden to read in the beauty of the lilies the
assurance that god would do even more for them than for the
flowers ; and as to food, the fowls were to be their exemplars
instead of care and toil, they were to trust implicity in
providence. In proof of what I say, consult the sermon on
the Mount ; and if more should be required, read the parable
■of the Rich Man and Lazarus, where the one is sent to hell
simply because he was rich and enjoyed his wealth, and the
other goes to heaven because lie was sick and had no riches to
•enjoy." It is beyond dispute that Jesus, if reported correctly
in' the gospels, taught the duty of poverty, and also the
■certainty that all who had wealth would be damned, except
in rare cases where the special grace of god interfered to
prevent it.
I reflected that most of human miseries spring from
poverty, while wealth (that is all life’s necessaries and the
simpler luxuries) were the only things that made life bearable,
■and were, in fact, necessary for the development of a true and
manly character. Had Christ’s teaching been followed, there
had been no science, no art, no ships, no vehicles, no railways,
no telegraphs, no printing press, no book —even the churches
rand temples reared in his own honor, have been raised by the
very forces he condemned. Where are the fruits of religion ?
Art can point to the stupendous works of modern engineering,
to factories, to agriculture, to deserts turned to fruitful fields
but what has religion done ? Religion left the world wotse
than she found it. When Christianity started the world
possessed numerous arts, a good foundation for science,, a
high class philosophy, and a splendid literature. Christianity
-conquered the Roman empire, and reigned for 1,000 years,


and that millenium was marked by denser darkness, and
more general stagnation of all that could elevate man, than
any other period within the range of history. Science and
philosophy and all the useful arts were in a worse state at the
end of the Middle Ages than in the days of the apostles, and
literature had descended for the most part to a state of
barbarism. I could not, in reviewing the case, find one single
useful art or invention or discovery that could be honestly
ascribed to Christianity; and I could not remain longer blind
to the fact that whatever good the church did, in the way of
caring for the sick, building hospitals, etc., she did by the
use of purely secular means, and by that very wealth Christ
warned his followers to shun. Had the teachings of Christ
been fully carried out, the whole of Christendom must have
gone back to barbarism; for without wealth man is little
better than the brute.
When I considered all this, I felt I could no longer retain
a religion so entirely useless, and at the same time so
essentially destructive to all that is valuable in human
society, that its most ardent votaries dare not consistently
act out its teachings.
78. When I first began to utter my objections, I was told
to look at the refined feelings Christianity fostered, and the
splendid hopes she held out to man. True, I replied, she
does cherish some very fine feelings, but there are others that
are injurious, for example, humility. This feeling is con-
temptible. Modesty and humility must not be confounded.
Modesty is good and should be cherished by the most gifted - r
but humility is sheer weakness. Many a strong mind has
longed to experience this prime grace of Christianity, thinking
it a duty to do so ; but a mind essentially strong and healthy
never did feel it. The strong man may sink into the physical
weakness of a baby, but not while his health lasts ; so may a
strong mind degenerate to humility when reft of its health
and power—not till then. Humility is not desirable, it is not
useful—it “bruises the reed” till it is ready to fall asunder
it smothers the native fire of the mind till naught but the
smouldering embers remain. I have often suspected that the
promulgation of the duty of humility and its almost universal
practice (for superstition bends the loftiest minds) during the


early ages must have done more than almost anything else to-
make the Roman empire a prey to the barbarians. By the
time of the conquest, Christianity had done its baneful work
and left the people of the empire destitute of that manly spirit
which inspires heroism and prompts to self-defence. It can-
not be doubted that Christian teaching—non-resistance of
injuries, and the most profound humility—was admirably well
calculated to prepare the way for the barbarian conquest.
The Goths and others were strong and self-reliant, the Romans,,
as far as religion could accomplish it, were the very reverse.
Besides, it should not be forgotten that all the fine-
emotions attributed to Christianity are really part and parcel
of human nature, existing incipiently in the savage, and more
or less developed and refined in the civilised man. All human
things have been falsely ascribed to the gods ; so of the finer
emotions of our nature ; but they are no more supernatural
than our limbs. Christianity has coloured and perverted our
feelings, but she never created or improved them.
79. Religion undoubtedly awakens hope, but it is hope
deferred. It awakens no hope, but rather despair respecting
this world, and teaches its votaries to hope for a reward in
the skies. A hope of this kind is no better than a mere
dream, parallel in all respects to the whimsical hopes of many
insane persons. But Christianity teaches the existence of a
hell—a lake of fire and brimstone —where the worm never
dies and the fire is never quenched—where “ torture without
end still urges, and a fiery deluge fed with ever-burning
sulphur unconsumed.” Into this dungeon all who do not
believe will be cast at the end of the world, and there they
will burn and suffer most excruciating pain for ever and ever.
If Christianity is true, the whole world should go into-
mourning to bewail its horrible fate, and man should be
draped with funeral weeds to the end of time; for most will
be damned, while only the elect—not remarkable for anything
good, mere favourites of their god—will enjoy the glories
of heaven. The Christian heaven is vague and hazy; its hell
is frightfully vivid; and it is the most horrible feature found
in any religion that ever existed. So frightful a doctrine
could have sprung from none but essentially brutal souls, and
is an insult to our common sense and our common humanity-


Those who preach up the benefits of Christianity, calmly
ignore this side of the subject, and point only to the obVerse
of their medal.
80. Think next of the frightful tortures Christianity has
inflicted upon man. I speak not now of martyrdoms and
penances; I speak of the horrible fears she has excited in the
popular mind. I once read an anecdote in some missionary
publication respecting a dying Chinese. The reader will
doubtless be aware that in China the priests teach the trans-
migration of souls—human souls after death often enter the
bodies of dogs, horses, and other animals. Well, a poor
Chinese lay a-dying, and the priest told him he would trans-
migrate into one of the emperor’s horses. The man had often
seen those horses frightfully lashed with the whip, and ever
and anon as he sank down, down to to the verge of dissolu-
tion, he convulsively started and violently shivered, as in
fancy he felt the cruel whip wind round his sides. The writer
of the story does not forget to reflect upon the wickedness of
the priests who teach their victims such torturing doctrines.
But what is transmigration compared with the new testament
hell ! The merest trifle, certainty. And yet they who con-
demn the horrors of the doctrine of transmigration, will,
nevertheless, teach even to children the transcendantly more
appalling horrors of hell-fire. This is a foul blot upon
Christianity; and the miseries entailed upon man as the
result of such teaching almost realise the hell of which they
speak. Those terrific doctrines are (or were) solemnly
inculcated in early life; their substance becomes embedded in
the nervous centres, never in many cases to be entirely with-
drawn. Many a sensitive child endures hell-torments as a
result; and many of the purest people in the world are haunted
for life with a vague fear of perdition; while death-beds are
often scenes of the most terrific tortures.
81. Think again of the judgment day and the panics the
doctrine lias produced. It is unnecessary to enter into par-
ticulars. Suffice it to say, the new testament foretels a
day when all the dead shall rise and be judged at the bar of
god ; when the heavens shall be on fire and the earth and all
in it shall be burnt up ; when the stars (the writers were
entirely ignorant of astronomy, remember) should fall from


heaven, the moon be turned into blood, and the sun cease to
shine ; when, in short, the whole visible universe will be des-
troyed. A shipwreck is terrible enough ; but what would be
a thousand shipwrecks to the “ wreck of matter and the crush
of worlds !” The new testament teaching on this point possessed
and haunted the imagination of Europe for sixteen or seven-
teen centuries. Every eclipse, every comet, every pestilence,
every death, every irregularity of the seasons, produced a
panic and entailed upon men the most tremendous sufferings.
Jesus, his apostles and successors are entirely to blame for
those dreadful panics ; and we cannot doubt that they would
have gone on in their almost chronic repetition as long as the
church held sway, so long as there was neither Science nor
common-sense to counteract the baneful effects of religious
teaching. , , T
82. To bring my work to a close, I may sum up what I
thought of Christianity in few words. I applied to herself her
own standard of judgment“ A good tree cannot bring forth
good fruit; therefore by their fruits ye shall know them.
When I speak of Christianity I refer first to the bible as a
whole and secondly to the church in its widest sense. What
fruit has the tree borne ? There have been mutual jealousies
and bickerings from the first, the disciples falling out during
their lives and leaving their disagreements, in one case at
least as a legacy to the church (compare Paul s doctrine of
faith* with James’s doctrine of works.) The indefinite and
contradictory teachings of the bible very soon gave rise to a
whole multitude of antagonistic sects, between whom there
ever burned the most bitter mutual hatred. If there is one
feature more characteristic of the church than any other it is
that of persecution. There never has existed a Christian sect
that did not manifest this spirit more or less ; and the only
thino- that has withheld any sect from putting its bitter spirit
into practice has been the want of political or physical power.
See the persecuting spirit of the ancient Jews against the
Canaanites; read the fierce denunciations Jesus hurled against
the Pharisees and the terrific threats against all who did not
believe in him. There is the undiluted spirit of persecution,
and we cannot doubt that if he had had the power, the
Pharisees would have been annihilated. When therefore the


sects in later times proceeded to persecute they were fully
■exemplifying the spirit and teachings of Jesus.
Another fruit which the same tree has naturally and plentifully
borne is that of destroying witches. The bible fully commits
itself to the belief in witches and witchcraft ; no doctrine is
more plainly and unequivocally taught in it. (See Lev. xix.,
•31, xx., 6, 27. Ex. xxii., 18. Deut. xviii., 10,11. 1 Sam.
xxviii., 6, 9. Mark iii., 11, vi., 7. Acts v., 16. John x.,
20. Acts xvi., 14. 1 Tim. iv., 1. Rev. xvi., 13, 14, and
Ex. vi., 11, 12, vii., 7, 18). The book also commands the
destruction of witches ; and when the church about the period
of the Reformation undertook to rid Europe of witches, she
did what the bible enjoined, yea ! imitated the conduct of the
first king of Israel during his most obedient and orthodox
days. During the 17th century 40,000 poor creatures were
destroyed in England alone, and in the most frightful ways,
for the crime of witchcraft. For this the bible and the
church are entirely to blame. Christian writers of to-day
deplore the occurrences, and condemn the blindness that gave
r'se to those horrors ; but they never mention the chief
offender. The church, I presume, would never have done
it if the bible had not given the unequivocal command.
The bible also authorises slavery in some of its worst forms,
nor does it anywhere forbid the crime. And to make matters
worse, it teaches in the plainest manner the “ Divine Right ”
of rulers to reign, and denounces in the strongest terms anv
resistance to their authority. Thus the book chains tlie great
mass of mankind down to abject submission to priest and
king, and threatens all opponents, all Reformers, with a worse
doom than befell Korah, Dathan, and Abiram who rebelled
against Moses and Aaron (Romans xiii., 1,6).
83. I might fill pages in the same strain, writing nothing
but sober truth easily demonstrated by the very words of the
bible, but I must not prolong the work. I will merely speak
of the boasted morality of the bible. This is a motley subject.
The book contains some of the worst morality ever known; it
also gives us some that is very good. A perfect moral code
or even its elements, it does not contain; and where it fills
chapter after chapter with trivial details of man-millinery and
ritual, all its best utterances on Morality may be comprised in


a page or two. As regards marriage, Jesus and his apostles
never suspected that "there could be any better or higher
feelings involved than such as a beast eould appreciate; the
noble and purifying fire of genuine love they never felt, nor
knew that such a flame existed. Into this holiest of all
temples they never entered. Their best conception of chastity
took the form abstinence; and by precept and example
they threw discredit upon the only relationship of life where
human nature can be properly developed and purified. With
them the woman, instead of being an individual, was a con-
venience. As to Morality in general, Christianity is essen-
tially barbaric. The highest motives the barbarian knows are
Rewards and Punishments; this is so also in Christianity.
Jesus had so little faith in his own teaching, and in his own
person and character, that instead of leaving them to impress
man by their own intrinsic worth, be held out the most
glowing promises, on the one hand, and hurled the most
terrific threats, on the other, as inducements to men to flock to
his standard. Such a view of Morality is essentially low; and
it shows that the teacher himself had no confidence in his
own principles, nor does he really repose upon himself. Jt
is fear that prompts to threatening; and fear arises more
from one’s own consciousness than from circumstances; the
essentially strong man rarely threatens; and honest principles
are content to make their way without the barbarous apparatus
of “ Rewards and Punishments.” We often hear of the
disinterested love of Jesus; but there is no record of it in the
new testament. He, “ who for the joy that was set before
him, endured the cross, despised the shame, and (in reward for
so doing) is set down at the right hand of throne of god,”
cannot be called benevolent: he wrought and suffered for a
personal reward.
84. Lastly. The above considerations will enable the reader
to understand why I have rejected Christianity. I might
have elaborated them more, and added to their number, as
well ; but I have perhaps said sufficient; though a word
may be added on the negative side. I have yet to learn that
Christianity, as such, has done any good in the world. The
evils thereof are apparent and manifold ; all the real good
she is supposed to have done has been effected by purely


secular means and principles, though in the name of Chris-
tianity. This is my opinion formed after years of thought
and investigation. I may add thereto a feeling that has
been in my heart for many years, namely, that if my first
acquaintance with Christianity had been gained directly
through the bible or ecclesiastical history, I should most cer-
tainly have turned from it with loathing. But I was born
into it and breathed its atmosphere from my earlist moments,-
and mind and heart were warped in its favour long before any
judgment or choice of my own was possible ; and the unholy
twist of those early days may perhaps be never completely
undone This is one of the most dreadful facts of our semi-
civilisation : the young mind is “ bandaged ” and perforce
shaped to suit the prejudice of the parents. Just as some
savage tribes bandge the infant skull to bring it to the
‘‘fashionable” type. The effect of this savage prejudice
is a trifle compared with the fruits of religious prejudice
among civilised peoples. Alas ! when will parents learn to'
value the liberty and individuality of their children ! Is it
not enough to stamp their shape and complexion upon their
bodies, their idiosyncrasies upon their minds, that they should
try so to bias their offspring in favour of their own base
superstititions, and thus render a free choice in most cases
impossible! As the result of parental superstition, most
people must of necessity be as they are ; they cannot change
their religion, however desirable it might be to do so. Most
parents would be shocked at the thought of mutilating the
bodies of their children ; and yet they mutilate their minds to
the utmost extent of their power, under the wild impression
that they are doing their god service. In religious matters,,
as in all other branches of education, the mind should be
trained , not strapped for life to a board ; it should be taught
independence, not a cringing fear of gods and priests and
devils ; to look into everything with fearless gaze, not to
shun certain sacred spots as the haunts of supernatural powers.
The reader may be curious to know how I feel
respecting the existence of a god. Well, for his gratification,
I will tell him. I do not deny such an existence, nor do I
♦Here I omit an essay on “ Substitutes for Religion,” written at
the same time with the narrative.


believe in It. I know nothing of any existence except Mature.
I am not blind to Nature’s mysteries ; to me they seem
infinite ; but I decline to solve them by the hypothesis of a
god. That is unphilosophical ; because I must at once meet
the same insoluble mystery in that hypothesis; I can as
easily account for the existence of a butterfly without suppos-
ing a creator as I can the existence of a god without such a
creator. An infinite being is no more self-existent than a
finite one. As far as I am able to see, the term god is
merely the label put upon human ignorance ; all that men do
not know, that they cannot account for, they refer to the
action of a god whonx they invent for the purpose of solving
the difficulty. Ido not see what they gam by this, nor do I
think their conduct at all logical or scientific.
So far as the sentiments go, if anyone can demonstrate to
me the existence of an infinitely good being, my heart will
thrill with ecstasy, and rise towards him in profoundest
worship; but in the meantime, I have no reason whatever foi
believing in such a being, while there are many reasons why I
should fot believe. I must decline to follow the
worshipping the creatures of their own fancy; foi, it I mistake
not, ev P e?y man’s god is merely himself, his own sum-total of
imaginary excellence, elevated to a throne and decked with the
em Thus* reader^ told the story of my escape from
superstition, given my reasons for disavowing Christianity.
I beg you to observe that I have not attempted to exhaust the
subject; to do so would require a large volume I have aimed at
giving enough to enable the reader to form his own pidgme .
I doffit expect to be tenderly dealt with by any orthodox
critic, nor 1 shall I shall ask such a favor—let every critic
deal with me in his own fashion. . T
85 F'nally; if it be demanded why I preach Secularism
reply—ln my esteem Secularism in theory embraces all the
elements of human welfare; Secularism m earnest, honest
practice amounts to making the best possible ot life and all its
capabilities. I use this language in its most le «*“ a ‘ e
widest meaning. And for these reasons I try to spread
Secularism.—The best of everything, and human civilisation.
■ Note-f had intended to add an appendix containing an old
sermon or two of mine, just to show my former eond.tion , but 1
have made my story too long as it is.






BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
Hospitals and Dispensaries Not of
Christian Origin. Second Edition. Id.
Philosophic Atheism. 4d.
Man’s Place in Nature. 4d.
Who will be Damned, if Christianity be
True ? 2d.
Christianity and Slavery. 3d.
Christianity Essentially a Persecuting
Religion. 2d.
Is Atheism or Theism the More Rational ?
A Discussion with Mr. G. St. Clair. Is.
The Methodist Conference and Eternal
Punishment. 3d.
