

OftFp
Bio
) Ss"
CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF ST. ANDREW
SYDNEY
Artier of H>erbice
in iWemorp of
Cf)e Hate
Eigfjt 3|on. Joint Curtin
Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia
JPribap, 6t{) Julp, 1945
Conducted by the Most Reverend the Archbishop of Sydney


Order of Service
PROCESSIONAL HYMN
Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom
Lead Thou me on.
The night is dark, and I am far from home;
Lead Thou me on.
Keep Thou my feet; I do not ask to see
The distant scene; one step enough for me.
I was not ever thus, nor pray’d that Thou
Shouldst lead me on.
I loved to choose and see my path; but now
Lead Thou me on.
I loved! the garish day, and spite of fears
Pride ruled my will; remember not past years.
So long Thy power hath blest me, sure it still
Will lead me on
O’er moor and fen, o’er crag and torrent, till
The night is gone.
And with the morn those angel faces smile
Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile.
Amen
SENTENCES
LESSON
i CORINTHIANS XV 20 to 58


PSALM 23
i The Lord is my shepherd; therefore can I lack nothing.
2 He shall feed me in a green pasture: and lead me forth beside the
waters of comfort.
3 He shall convert my soul: and bring me forth in the paths of
righteousness, for his Name’s sake.
4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy stall;
comfort me.
5 Thou shalt prepare a table before me against them that trouble me;
thou has anointed my head with oil, and my cup shall be full.
6 But thy loving kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of
my life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.
ADDRESS
The Right Rev. W, G. Hilliard, m.a., Bishop Coadjutor.
HYMN
i Fight the good fight with all thy might,
Christ is thy strength, and Christ thy right
Lay hold on life, and it shall be
Thy joy and crown eternally.
2 Run the straight race through God’s good grace,
Lift up thine eyes, and seek His face;
Life with its way before us lies,
Christ is the path, and Christ the prize.
3 Cast care aside, lean on thy Guide;
His boundless mercy will provide;
Lean, and the trusting soul shall prove,
Christ is its life, and Christ its love.
4 Faint not, nor fear, His arms are near,
He changeth not, and thou art dear;
Only believe, and thou shalt see
That Christ is all in all to thee. Amen.


PRAYERS
DEAD MARCH
RECESSIONAL HYMN
i Abide with me: fast falls the eventide;
The darkness deepens; Lord, with me abide:
When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
Help of the helpless, oh, abide with me.
2 Swift to its close ebbs out life’s little day;
Earth’s joys grow dim, its glories pass away;
Change and decay in all around I see;
O Thou, who changest not, abide with me.
3 Come not in terrors, as the King of kings;
But kind and good, with healing in Thy wings;
Tears for all woes, a heart for every plea;
Come, Friend of sinners, thus abide with me.
4 I need Thy presence every passing hour:
What but Thy grace can foil the tempter’s power?
Who like Thyself my guide and stay can be?
Through cloud and sunshine, oh, abide with me.
5 I fear no foe, with Thee at hand to bless;
Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness:
Where is death’s sting? where, grace, thy victory?
I triumph still, if Thou abide with me.
6 Hold Thou Thy cross before my closing eyes;
Shine through the gloom, and point me-to the skies;
Heaven’s morning breaks, and earth’s vain shadows flee
In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me. Amen.
Edgar Bragg & Sons, 4-6 Barker Street, Sydney.
