

V{2\V( PPvm
•?, n c \
NOTE S
EITMG.IOOS PAHS, j
Boa (m I
ON Tint
LOST SECRET OF CHRISTIANITY.
DAYID BLAIR.
‘ ‘ The, kingdom of Heaven is like unto treasure hid in a Held; the which, when
a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath
and huyeth that field. 1 ’ — Christ,
“ The kingdom of God is not in Word, but in Power.”—St. Paul.
“ TUB GENUINE SECRET IS THAT WHICH LIES
POE EVER UNSEEN BEFORE ALL MEN’S EYES.”
MELBOURNE:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, ELIZABETH STREET.
1860.


PREFACE.
The following pages contain the Notes, slightly expanded, of a
Lecture recently delivered before the Melbourne Christian-Young Men’s
Society. No attempt has been made to throw them into the form of
a continuous essay. Brevity and conciseness have alone been aimed
at; —the sole object of the Lecture, and of this pamphlet, being to
attract attention to what the writer deems a subject of paramount
interest and importance. If he is not greatly mistaken, these Notes
present the outline of a mighty argument, which, at some day not
distant, will take precedence of all other great questions. But never-
theless the writer may frankly express his full conviction that he will
not succeed in winning attention to the subject here. Lor this he
was prepared from the first. Still, the argument will find its appro-
priate audience in due time.
A word of apology is, perhaps, required, for the insertion of
a few passing personal references at the close of the Notes. They
are necessary on the first announcement of the subject ; but will, of
course, be expunged when the local circumstances attending it shall
have passed away.
Melbourne, November 21st, 18G0.




NOTES ON THE
LOST SECRET OF CHRISTIANITY.
1.-NOTES PRELIMINARY.
There are three classes of persons to whom the argument respect-
ing the Lost Secret of Christianity does not address itself.
Firstly, those who are unbelievers in Christianity. This class in-
cludes all who deny the divine origin of the Christian system, the
divine character of its Pounder, or the divine inspiration of the New
Testament. For such persons Christianity has no truths, and no
mysteries. They must regard it as a manifest human imposture,
like Mohammedanism or Mormonism.
Secondly, those who, affecting a real belief in Christianity, are in-
different about all questions bearing on its relations to themselves
individually, or to the world at large.
Thirdly, those who deny, or doubt, that the design of Christianity
is to subjugate and redeem the world. For, if Christianity be merely
a partial system designed to accomplish a very limited end, there is,
of course, nothing surprising in its slow progress. The wonder would
be, in that case, how it has ever advanced at all.
Yet this view seems to be the one generally held by professed
Christians. On the other hand, there is a conviction quite as
prevalent that Christianity will, at some distant time, conquer and
redeem the world. But this belief explodes the former. It is self-
contradictory to hold that Christianity will accomplish what it never
was designed to accomplish. No person who entertains partial views


of the scope of Christianity can reasonably believe that there will
ever come a Millennium.
To these three classes of persons may be added those who, when
they hear the present argument announced, begin to depreciate the
motives of the proposer. This is no question of personal motives.
The problem itself is everything. It is of no consequence, for the
present purpose, whether this or that man is sincere ; but it is of the
last importance to determine whether Christianity can, or can not,
work out the salvation of the human race within definite limits of
time.
If Christianity be not a cunningly-devised fable, it can and will do
this : for such is its own explicit statement of its own object and de-
sign. But then arises the inquiry, by what means ? The only reply
is;—by the reinstitution of the Lost Power of Christianity. But the
Lost Power is the Lost Secret.
11.-THE SUBJECT DEFINED.
1. What is Christianity ?
Historically considered, it is a mundane system, claiming to have
had a divine and supernatural origin, and to be miraculously sus-
tained in existence by a divine power for a divine ulterior end. Or,
it is a divine system working through a divine agency—a Plan and
a Power. But the Power claims to be nothing less than omnipotent,
and omnipotent for the very end for which it was instituted, and to-
wards which it works.
If Christianity be less than this, it is a purely human system, and
is doomed to extinction with the other purely human systems that
surround it.
But it is in fact a system which no wisdom less than God’s could
have originated; which no lesser agent than the Son of God himself
could have established on earth ; and which could not have been es-
tablished by any means less than divine and miraculous. More than


this ; by no merely human agencies could it have been subsequently
maintained in existence.
It is with Christianity considered under these high and exclusive
aspects that the present argument deals. With the special scheme
of truths embraced in it we have no present concern.
The definition may be briefly stated thus ; —Christianity is an
Omnipotent Spiritual Force designed to work out a pre-ordained Plan
2. But what Plan ?
The reply is : —The conquest and regeneration of the whole hu-
man race. The absolute subjugation of the whole world to the
power of Christianity, and its redemption through its subjugation.
That this is the design of Christ’s system the New Testament
everywhere asserts. No other interpretation, not designedly false,
can be given to Christ’s own plain declarations. Thus :—“ For God
sent not His Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world through Him might he saved." And again ; —“ And I, if Ibe
lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto Me.” There are
numerous passages in the New Testament to the same effect. The
force of Christ’s statements on this point is incapable of being mis-
apprehended by any candid reader of that Book.
To the same purpose are all the corresponding statements of the
Apostle Paul and the other inspired writers. The scope and tenor of
the Pauline Epistles cannot be so much as apprehended upon any
other assumption. Their grand theme, and that of the other Epistles, is
the conquest of the world by Christianity, the universal establishment
of Christ’s Kingdom on earth, and the institution of the “ now heavens
and the new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness.”
The Apocalypse of St. John, if this be not its sole purport, is a
series of meaningless scenic representations. But read with this
Key, and by the light of the Lost Secret, that mystical book becomes
as plain as any other book in the New Testament.
The Plan of Christianity, like its Framer, is eternal and unchange-
able. “ Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My Words shall not
pass away.”
3. Towards the accomplishment of this Plan Christianity—the


Christians
... 225,000,000
Mohammedans
... 155,000,000
Jews
...
4,500,000
Pagan Idolaters
...
... 665,000,000
Total
...
... 1,050,000,000
Omnipotent Spiritual Force, —has been working now for eighteen
centuries. And it is in this form alone that Christianity enters as an
element into mundane history. It is seen in history as a divine and
spiritual (and thence omnipotent) Force, perpetually working out a
grand pre-determined design. All other views of Christianity are
unhistorical and false, and reduce it to the level of a purely human
system, like that of Mohammed. “ Whatever,” says Dr. Arnold,
“ there is of greatness in the final cause of all human thought and
action, —God’s glory and man’s perfection,—that is the measure of
the greatness of history.” And that also, it should be added, is the
measure of the greatness of the Christian element in history.
111-THE FAILURE OF CHRISTIANITY.
The next inquiry is:—With what success has Christianity, for so far,
pursued its design ? And the reply is :—With such partial success
that its failure, up till this point, is an undeniable fact.
Let us adduce some proofs of the failure. And first, take the
actual statistics of the existing- religious systems, as given by the latest
and best authorities.
There are in the world at present
The Christians are just one-fifth of the whole, a little in excess of
the Mohammedans, and one-third of the Pagan idolaters. At this
rate of progress, Christianity would conquer the world in about
10,000 years.
2. But of the nominal Christians how many are real Christians ?
This inquiry sadly diminishes the numbers. The millions shrink


into thousands. Try the point exhaustively, and the result becomes
almost appalling. Within a given area of nominal Christians —say,
for example, in pre-eminently Christian England —how many are open
and avowed unbelievers ; how many are totally ignorant of every-
thing relating to Christianity ; how many are utterly reckless of its
moral obligations ; how many are perfectly indifferent to its sublime
truths ; how many of those who maintain an outward respect for its
institutions are hypocrites, formalists, and worldly-minded in the
truest sense; how many, even of the apparently sincere, are Christ-
ians from traditional associations or from habit, not from genuine
conviction formed upon careful personal examination ? Viewing the
question in this aspect, one is almost compelled to exclaim in the
language of Emerson’s covert taunt : —“ Amongst the stoics every
man was a stoic, but in Christendom where is the Christian ?”
3. Look again at the powerlessncss of Christianity in the presence
of the vast systems of Paganism that reign in India and China.
Look at the small results of the missionary enterprise, and at its
recent origin. Look at the issue of the recent disastrous conflict be-
tween British Christianity and Paganism in India, where the former
has been in existence for a whole century. Look, lastly, at the in-
ternal state of Christendom itself, torn by contending factions, rival
churches, conflicts of creeds, and dominated by the odium theologicum.
Here, surely, are proofs sufficient of failure, —or let us rather say, of
only partial success.
4. Next, let us adduce a few testimonies to the failure.
Dr. Arnold, a true Christian and a great historian, says : —“ The
gates of Hell have long maintained an advantageous conflict with the
Church.” “ The spread of Christianity has been but partial, and its
real moral effects still more partial.” “ The perfect work of the
Gospel has been seen only in individuals. Christ has Laid his hand
on a few sick folk and healed them; but He has done no mighty
work of spiritual healing on a whole Church.” “Christianity has
failed, because its Church has been greatly corrupted.”
Carlyle, in his “ Life of Sterling,” openly teaches that Christianity
is defunct .•—fivcrl Whwnvci anv more ; the old spiritual high-


ways and recognised paths to the Eternal are all torn up, and flung in
heaps, submerged in unutterable boiling mud-oceans of hypocrisy and
unbelieveability, of brutal living atheism, and damnable, dead,
putrescent cant,”
Bunsen declares his belief that the speedy dissolution of the elements
of society in Europe is inevitable, if Christianity be not thoroughly
reformed from within. “ The ancient world perished by the birth-
throes of Christianity ; ours, if not reformed, will perish by convul-
sions attending its decay.”
Milman, in concluding his “History of Latin Christianity,”
testifies to the same effect. But his faith is fixed in the unalterable
and eternal force of the words of Christ,
The Westminster Review systematically treats Christianity as an ex-
ploded superstition, and ridicules the Bible as a collection of clumsily
fabricated fables. And this is the view insisted on by all modern un-
believers.
The conviction is universal amongst all genuine believers in Christ-
ianity, that its great work still remains to be done. How, indeed,
can such a conviction be evaded by any man who compares the actual
condition of the world with the claims and promises of Christianity
itself 1
For so far, then, it has undeniably failed in its design; that is to
say, has fallen so immeasurably short of its accomplishment, that the
only adequate expression for the discrepancy is failure.
IY.-THE NEW PROBLEM
Whence, then, comes the failure 1
If Christianity be really an omnipotent Force, it might have
achieved its own purpose centuries ago. Why has it not done so ? This
is the new problem of the ages,—the sphinx-riddle which the world
must solve or perish.
1. It is not because the design is impossible: for “with God


all things are possible.” Nor is it because of the Divine purpose:
for that is to save the world through Christ, and so complete the de-
sign. Nor, again, is the failure due to any secret purpose or reserved
decree of God: for God, who is Truth, cannot have two mutually
contradictory purposes. Nor, lastly, is it because delay is a part of
the purpose; for, “ Now is the accepted time, and now is the day of
salvation.” And God “ will have all men to be saved, and to come
unto the knowledge of the truth,”
2. But there was a period when Christianity proved itself to be an
omnipotent force. The Pentecostal times and early ages showed a
miraculous aggressive advance of Christianity. Tracing the course of
its history downwards we come to a time when the omnipotent force
was stayed. It is, therefore, in the history of Christianity that we
are to find the secret of the failure.
3. “No scholar,” says Thomas De Quincey, “not even the
wariest, has ever read with adequate care those records which we still
possess of primitive Christianity. He should approach the subject
with a vexatious scrutiny. He should lie in ambush for discoveries.”
The same writer, in his essay on “ Christianity as an Organ of
Political Movement,” evinces infinitely truer insight than most other
writers on that subject. He all but propounds the occult cause of the
failure.
Gibbon, in the celebrated fifteenth and sixteenth chapters of his
“ History,” attempts to specify the causes of the early rapid spread of
Christianity. But he misses, after all, the potential cause. For none
but a Christian could know it, and Gibbon was not a Christian.
4. In significant silence and purposed obscurity uprose upon the
midnight darkness of this World the dawn of the glorious Sun of
Righteousness. An obscure Jewish peasant, in an obscure province
of a small and despised nation, fast hastening to its fall, stands forth
amongst his own fellow-townsmen as the Son of God and the Moral
Renovator of the World. In three brief years he finished his earthly
course; and so entirely unknown to the world was his life and
its wondrous attendant circumstances, that not one single word of
mention of Him passed into contemporary history. Not for years


afterwards, until his followers had become unaccountably numerous 1
in all parts of the Eoman empire, did the historians of those days
even hear the name of Him who had done such world-shaking deeds, 1
and spoken such world-shaking words, in the villages of Gallilee and
in the streets of Jerusalem. So absolutely unnoted was the entrance
of Christianity into the domain of mundane history ! Yet this new
element, thus silently introduced, was destined to revolutionise and
to absorb all the rest.
: 5. But history is, for the most part, misunderstood and wrongly
read by men. They look at the surface-movements alone, record
these, and call it “ History.” Such a record is not History, in any
allowable sense of the word. It is but a school-room manual of
dates and names, —a dry catalogue of worthless facts,—an “ old
almanac,” as Lord Plunket rightly affirmed. The surface-move-
ments, —the rise and fall of’ thrones and dynasties and nations,
revolutions and counter-revolutions, battles and civil commotions,
and all the other events which the so-called historians recount, —
these are merely the transient effects of .deeply underlying causes.
And it is the determination of these causes which constitutes the
true function of the historian. It is not the actions of a man merely,
but the motives which produce them, that reveal the man : so, it is
not the surface-facts of history, but the remote causes which have
originated them, that reveal the true life of the human race. “From
of old,” says Carlyle, in his eloquent and profound Essay on “History,”
“ it was too often to be reproachfully observed of the historian that
he dwelt with disproportionate fondness in Senate Houses, in Battle,
fields, nay even in King’s ante-chambers; forgetting that far away
from such scenes the mighty tide of Thought and Action was still
.rolling on its wondrous course, in gloom and brightness; and in its
thousand remote valleys a whole world of Existence, with or without
an earthly sun' of happiness to warm it, with or without a heavenly
sun of holiness to purify and sanctify it, was blossoming and fadingi
whether the famous, victory was won or lost.”
Now, Christianity is, of all the underlying forces in mundane
history, at once the most subtle, the deepest, and the most potent.


The historical cause of its failure has. remained undiscovered, simply
because this great fact has been overlooked. The writers of what is
miscalled “ Church History” have not sought for the Secret where
alone it can be found. “Of the ecclesiastical historian,” says
Carlyle again, “as of his political fellow-craftsman, we have to
complain that his inquiries turn rather on the outward mechanism,
the mere hulls and superficial accidents of the object, than on the
object itself. As if the Church lay in Bishops’ chapter-houses, and
Ecumenic council-halls, and Cardinals’ conclaves, and not far more
in the hearts of believing men ; in whose walk and conversation, as
influenced thereby, its chief manifestations were to be looked for,
and its progress or decline ascertained. The history of the Church
is a history of the Invisible as well as of the Visible church, —which
latter, if disjoined from the former, is but a vacant edifice, —gilded
it may be, and overhung with old votive gifts, yet useless, nay
pestilentially unclean, —to write whose history is less important than
to forward its downfall.”
But the writer who, of all that have ever attempted to trace out
the workings of Christianity in mundane history, evinces the truest
and most penetrating insight is Neander. “It is,” he says, “the
aim and end of history that Christianity shall more and more become
the world-governing principle,—and shall establish itself at length as
a perfect world-dominion of Christ, a world purified and transformed
to become the seat of His universal empire.” And again, “Christianity
can only be explained as a supernatural principle, destined to impart
to history a new tendency and direction.” And once more :—“ As
for history itself, when it does not refer to Christianity and the
Kingdom of God as the object of all human progress, it appears but
as a lawless play of forces moving hither and thither, rising and
falling, without aim and without unity. Christianity alone shews us
that it has both.”
6. The failure, then, lies somewhere ih the occult historical deve-
lopment of Christianity. But there is a given point in the history
at which the decline of the omnipotent spiritual Force can be clearly
seen. The Lost Secret is, therefore, discoverable. The problem


may be solved. “ The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto treasure hid
in a field and “ the field is the world.”
7. And this problem is the final and all-comprehending one for
the world now. It is the form in which all previous grand problems
present themselves, for the last time, for solution. The Origin of
Evil, the conflict between Divine Omnipotence and Human Free
Will, the Destinies of Mankind, the method of Eestoration for the
Fallen Eace, —all are included in the one question, Why has not
Christianity fulfilled its own design ? For, all these questions
would be practically answered for ever, —all problems would be
solved, —in the complete conquest and salvation of the world by
Christ.
V.-THE LOST SECRET.
The occult historical cause of the Failure, then, is the Lost Secret.
But it is a simple fact, not a mystical doctrine, nor a transcendental
theological truth. It has nothing necessarily mysterious in it, yet is
a profound mystery. It is not found, only because it is not sought.
It is like the atmosphere, palpable but invisible j and it lies on
the very threshold of the early Christian records. It is the great
“ open secret,” as Schiller, the German poet, says of the Secret
of Nature.
1. But if so, then the secret must be of the very essence of
Christianity considered in its relations to the world : that is to say,
the central fact of Christianity considered as a mundane system.
And this it is.
2. Then, also, there will be frequent allusions to it in the New
Testament: and there are. It is written on every page of that
book; it underlies every statement of Christ’s, and all the writings
of Paul; it is the key to most of the parables —the sole key to the
Apocalypse—the latent meaning everywhere pervading the Bible.
3. That there may be a# yet undiscovered, or at least undeveloped,


truths in the New Testament, is testified by Bishop Butler. “It is
owned,” he says in the “ Analogy,” that “the whole scheme of
Scripture is not yet understood; so, if it ever comes to be understood
before the restitution of all things, and without miraculous inter-
positions, it must be in the same way that natural knowledge is come
at—by the continuance and progress of learning and liberty ; and by
particular persons attending to, comparing, and pursuing intimations
scattered up and down it, which are overlooked and disregarded by
the generality of the world. For this is the way in which all im-
provements are made ; by thoughtful men’s tracing on obscure hints,
—as it were, dropped us by nature accidentally, or which seem to
come into our minds by chance. Nor is it at all incredible that a
book, which has been so long in the possession of mankind, should
contain many truths as yet undiscovered.”
To the same effect testifies Dean Milman, in the closing passage
of his “ History of Latin Christianity —“ As it is my own confi-
dent belief that the words of Christ, and His words alone, —the
primal, indefeasible truths of Christianity,—shall not pass away ; so
I cannot presume to say that men may not attain to a clearer, and
at the same time more full and comprehensive and balanced, sense of
those words than has as yet been generally received in the Christian
world.” —“ Christianity may yet have to exercise a far wider, even
if more silent and untraceable influence, through its primary, all-
penetrating, all-pervading principles, on the civilisation of mankind.”
4. But the New Testament is not sufficiently studied, and is very
irrationally read. There are whole worlds of unsuspected meaning
in it yet, especially in Christ’s statements —which are inexhaustible.
All commentaries are merely human guesses.
No commentator has ever yet fully brought out the force of
Christ’s remarkable statement :—“I am come to send fire on the
earth, and what will lifit be already kindled 1” Not one has given
a rational, coherent, and exhaustive interpretation of the parables of
the Mustard Seed, the Leaven, the Pearl of Great Price, the Hidden
Treasure, and the silently-germinating Seed. Nor has any comment-
ator yet fully elucidated the stupendous significance of the Three


Temptations in the Wilderness. And where shall a thoughtful reader
of the New Testament look for a clear and exhaustive exposition of
the relations between Paul’s written epistles and Christ’s spoken
discourses 1
On the other hand, the popular commentaries are full of sectarian
perversions of Christian truth, of ignorant misconceptions of facts
and doctrines, and of gross misinterpretations of the allegoric teach-
ings of Christ. Take Baenbs’s work, by way of illustration, —the
book most generally in use amongst Sunday-school teachers, and the
one which furnishes the materials for at least nine-tenths of the
sermons one hears. Opening it almost at random, we find that
Barnes’s interpretation of the Parable of the Hidden Treasure runs
thus : —“ With a view of obtaining the treasure, he says that a man
would go and sell his property and buy the field. The conduct of
the man would be dishonest.” (The italics are in Barnes.) By this
interpretation, then, Our Lord is made to teach that the Kingdom
of Heaven is like a swindler! And this preposterous nonsense passes
current as genuine Christian teaching 1
Take another specimen. On the marvellously significant state-
ment of Christ, “ I am come to send fire on the earth,” &c., Barnes
comments thus :—“ Christ does not mean that he came for that
purpose, but that such was the state of the human heart, such
the opposition of men to the truth, that that would be the effect of
his coming.” (The italics are in Barnes.) Here, Our Lord makes
a simple statement of the most direct kind, and the commentator
warns his reader that the statement means precisely the very opposite
of what the words themselves assert! Perversion could not be more
flagrant than this, even if it were designed.
And so it is throughout. The popular commentator is systemati-
cally wrong, and only right casually and accidentally. His function
is to mystify and darken, not to elucidate, the teachings of Christ.
He is a “blind leader of the blind.” No marvel that those who
follow him fall so far short of the Truth itself.
The whole system of popular exposition proceeds on a false prin-
ciple. Christ’s words are divine words, whose fullness of meaning


can only be discerned by tbe living light that shines from them and
through them. Better, a million times, than all the commentaries
that ever were written, and all the sermons that ever were preached,
is the simple reading of, and continuous deep thought upon, the dis-
courses of Christ and the letters of Paul. These need no human
aids to the man who has a divine commentator. Christ is His own
interpreter, “and He will make it plain.” And “he that believeth
hath the witness in himself.”
VI.-THE MYSTERY OF THE SECRET.
But why, it is next to be asked, cannot the Secret be now found ?
1. The prompt answer is, Because it is not sought. The New
Testament is not read, even by those who aifect to accept it as the
very “ words of eternal life.” Or, if read, it is read only in a
desultory, piecemeal way, alike profitless and irrational. The
mere division into chapters and verses, —which is a barbarous
and cruel mutilation of Christ’s truth, —prevents thousands of readers
from ever forming clear ideas of the consecutive and harmonious
design and import of the Book. Then, as was shewn above, the
popular commentators do infinite mischief. Even from the pulpit
there come continually innumerable proofs to thoughtful hearers that
the preachers know very much more of the popular commentaries than
of the New Testament. But the Lost Secret of Christianity is not
to be found in Barnes, nor in Adam Clarke, nor in Matthew Henry,
nor in Tholuck, Olshausen, Stier : it is only to be found in the state-
ments of Christ. One clear-sighted and profoundly Christian intellect
seems to have caught clear gleams of it, —Neander. His “ Life of
Christ” alone is worth all the other commentaries on the Gospel
history that ever were written.
2. The Lost Secret is not found, morevoer, because in the minds
of by far the greater majority of nominal Christians, the pure and
undefiled truths of Christianity are overlaid by traditionary opinions,


by sectarian dogmas, or by unreasoning prejudices. But neither is
the Lost Secret of Christianity to be found in Anglicanism, Presby-
terianism, Wesleyanism, Eoman Catholicism, or in any other partial
and exclusive human system. No man who views Christianity from
the sectarian stand-point can so much as form a conception of the
Secret. For it is the measure of the entire distance between Sect-
arianism and Christianity.
3. Earnest and simple-minded seekers after truth who really do
read the New Testament fail to find the Secret, because they start
with pre-conceived ideas of the design of Christianity. Even of this
select class there is not one in a thousand but entertains a lurking
conviction either that Christianity never was designed to subjugate
and redeem the world, or that God, for high reasons of His own,
purposely delays the accomplishment of His own Plan. Both con-
victions are fatal to a clear apprehension of the central truth of
Christianity considered as a mundane system. God wills the imme-
diate and complete salvation of the world. No other purpose is
compatible with His infinite benevolence, or with His wisdom as
revealed through Christ. If Christians generally were to accept this
infallible truth, and to make it a practical principle, the salvation of
the world would not be far off.
4. The Lost Secret is in its very nature revolutionising. It
finds a man (as Coleridge would have said) rather than that he finds
it. But once found, it revolutionises the whole of a man’s ideas re
specting Christianity. He sees the entire system under a new aspect,
and from a totally different point. The discovery is to him, in fact,
a new spiritual creation. So Christ affirmed : —“ Except a man be
born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God.” The Secret is in.
comprehensible to him who has not sought for it, found it, and been
intellectually and spiritually transformed by the discovery. Once
possessed by a man, it is simply impossible for him evermore to dis-
believe or doubt, or to misconceive, the truth or purpose of the divine
system, founded by Christ on earth. “ Old things are passed away,
and all things have become new.” He is, for evermore, a Christian.
This is that Wisdom of God in a Secret, —that Hidden Wisdom


which when once revealed shames and extinguishes all the human
philosophies,—that Secret which has been reserved for ages and
generations in the inscrutable councils of Heaven, —that Mystery
which never was known, and never can be known, to the Leaders of
this World, —in which the Apostle Paul made his exulting boast,
This is that Eire which Christ came to kindle on earth. This is that
Hidden Treasure “ the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and
forjoy thereof goeth and sellethall that he hath and buyeth that field”—
in which it lies concealed from worldly eyes. And this is that Mystery
of the Kingdom of Heaven which even Christ himself steadfastly re-
fused to reveal to the gainsaying and prejudiced multitude. It is, ip
one word, the Lost Secret of Christianity.
VII-REASONS FOR RESERVE.
But if the Lost Secret be a fact of such transcendent interest, why
does he who knows it resolutely hold it in reserve ?
This is the answer ;
1. Because the fact is, in its very nature, a secret, non-revealable
from without, and self-revealing. A secret is something to be kept,
not to be imparted.
2. Because this Secret is only truth for the man who finds it. To
the man who, merely from curiosity or other slight transitory feeling,
asks for a verbal statement, it is not truth. To such a man the
Problem of the Universe itself is just a play upon words, like a child’s
conundrum. How, the Lost Secret of Christianity is by no means a
play upon words. It is a fact which solves the one grand problem
for every man who finds it. But,
3. It is a fact which forms the very corner-stone of a stupendous
system. It is a fact of which the radiating forces are literally illimit-
able. A whole world of truth is condensed into the single fact.
But no man, excepting he who by gradual advances has come to the
perception and comprehension of that system, could have the least
idea of what the bare words which state the fact imply.


Does this sound too transcendentally ? Let us illustrate tlie
meaning by a very simple case.
Dr. John Henry Newman has written a very remarkable book, in
which he propounds a perfectly new theory of the Christian system.
The theory is co-extensive with the system. It reaches back-
ward to the first ages, and traverses the entire field of mun-
dane history during the last eighteen centuries. Now, this
theory of Dr. Newman’s (true or false as it may be, we say nothing
at all about that) is so far-reaching in its compass, and so truly pro-
found in its method of evolution, that none but minds accustomed to
continuous abstract thought would ever be likely to master it fully.
But the theory may be expressed in a single word, —the word
“Development.” But what a world of difference there is in the
meaning of that word, so applied, for the man who knows Dr. New-
man’s theory and the man who does not ? What knowledge would
be conveyed to the mind of a man who never heard of Dr. Newman
or his book by the bare phrase “ Development 1”
Precisely in the same case is the man who has never traced out in
the New Testament that stupendous series of truths, of which the
Lost Secret of Christianity is at once the index and the expression.
What imaginable benefit would the bare words convey to him ? They
are but dead words after all, and they are utterly forgotten a few
minutes afterwards.
The one all-sufficing reason why the Lost Secret is not found is
because the New Testament is not searched for it. What can a man
who, for example, has never in his life read one of St. Paul’s epistles
consecutively through, know of the scope and intimate purpose of the
Pauline writings ? What guess can a man who has never read the
Apocalypse right through at a sitting, make as to the scope and
design of that mystical book 1 And so universally. Before any man
can possess himself of the results of diligent study he must be a
diligent student.
But to every man the path of investigation is open. Who-
ever chooses to do so, may start from the right point, and reach
the right conclusion. Any man capable of intelligently reading


the New Testament may find, if he will, the Lost Secret of
Christianity.
And it is no exclusive possession of any man’s. It is no peculiar
theory, fancy, crotchet, novel scheme of interpretation, or ingenious
paradox dressed up in a scientific garb. It is a simple historical
fact, —as simple, as easily expressed, and as apprehensible as. the
fact that Julius Caesar lived. It is to he found just as a man finds
a lump of gold on the diggings,—by persistent vigilant searching.
The only mystery is, how a fact lying so closely within every think-
ing man’s reach, can escape discovery. But even that mystery is
none to the man who knows the Lost Secret of Christianity.
Lastly, he who finds the Secret will never divulge it in terms.
For “ the Kindom of Heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field, the
which, when a man hath found, he hideth.”
The Secret never reveals itself to idle guessing, or to thoughtless
c uriosity, or to mere curiosity. Probable guesses are certain to be
wrong. He who has eyes to see may see it, if he will. But it is
precisely the last idea that would occur to the mind of the superficial
or uninstructed guesser.
VIII.—SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION.
Such, then, is the high argument involved in the question of the
Lost Secret. It is capable of being condensed into the briefest
formula :
1. There is but one question to be answered :—Why has not the
Omnipotent Force accomplished its own design in eighteen cen-
turies ?
2. And there is but one answer ; —Because Christianity has lost
its Secret.
3. But the reinstitution of the Secret will be the restoration of the
Lost Force.
4. And the restoration of the Lost Force will be the immediate
accomplishment of the Design,—the complete conquest and salvation
of the world by Christ.


It is impossible to over-estimate the importance of this subject.
The time will come, and come soon, —within the living generation,
indeed, —.when all the other questions that agitate the minds of
Christians will be absorbed in the supreme inquiry;—What is the
Lost Secret of Christianity 1
And if the Lost Secret be not actually sought and found the decay
of Christianity, and the ruin through internal convulsions of modern
Society, are infallibly certain. As Bunsen rightly declares, there is
no other sign given to this generation.
The power of the Lost Secret is literally illimitable. It is the in-
strument, and the only instrument, by which the final success of
Christianity can be achieved. Compared with it, all the cumbrous
and costly machinery of church establishments, missionary societies,
Bible societies, and the like, are but exhibitions of human weakness.
Preaching, itself, as it is commonly practised, is but a bare
“ rhapsody of words.” But this is that “ Sword of the Spirit,”
which, rightly wielded, is invincible in its operation. It is in the
spiritual world what the principal of attraction is in the physical
universe. “ For the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in
POWER.”
But now, in conclusion, I may be asked, how I can reconcile it to
my feeling of personal responsibility to hold back a truth of such
paramount value as I allege the Lost Secret to be ? This is my
reply
1. None but myself can be the judge of the nature or extent of my
personal responsibility in this regard.
2. In any case, the Lost Secret is announced when its existence is
publicly asserted, and when the domain in which it lies is plainly
indicated.
3. But chiefly, few even of those who ask the question are genuinely
interested in the subject. Nothing is more common than a spurious
affectation of interest in the success of Christianity and the salvation
of the world j and nothing is rarer than a genuine and heartfelt de-
sire to see this divine and glorious end accomplished. To the former
state of mind there is no appeal made by Christianity, or by the Lost


Secret. A hundred persons will be found ready at any time to coup
tribute money for, or to make speeches about, the diffusion of the
New Testament, for one person who will take the trouble of simply
reading it carefully and thoughtfully. But it is only these solitary
exceptions to the general rule who are really concerned about the
success of Christianity.
4. The secret is not mine. For every man, as for me, there lies for
ever open the one all-comprehensive problem of life. On every human
heart, as on mine, weighs “the burthen of the mystery, the
heavy and the weary weight of all this unintelligible world,” A
whole lifetime spent in—superficial and desultory, I grant, but still
sincere and earnest —thought, reading, and inquiry, has led me to a
solution of the great problem which satisfies every one of its con-
ditions, clears away every difficulty, and dissipates every doubt.
5. I have no objection—none in the world—to aid others in dis-
covering the Lost Secret. lam even willing and ready to do so
But the simple condition I have to prescribe,—namely, that I shall
be allowed to state the thesis in my own way,—is usually rejected
with contempt. So, I wait. Under different conditions of time and
place I may yet get a hearing for this supreme question.
6. Lastly, when I ventured upon stating my thesis to the Young
Men’s Society, I had made up my mind to encounter any amount of
misinterpretation, raillery, positive contradictions, and even personal
hostility. lam not now, therefore, surprised to find myself charged
by some persons with manifest imposture, by others with arrogant
assumption of superior enlightenment, and by others with blank in-
fidelity and a covert design to overthrow Christianity. I have smiled
at these charges, and can afford to smile, because I am invulnerable
to them now. Nothing in the shape of external influences can, as to
this subject, “touch me further.” For I know the Lost Secret of
Christianity, and that knowledge is at once absolute certainty and
perfect freedom. “Ye shall Know the Thuth, and the Truth
SHALL MAKE YOU FREE.”
William Goodhugh and Co., Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.
