

Democracy, or Government by and for the People,
the ordinance of God, and the best security for
the welfare and advancement of society :
DISCOURSE,
DELIVERED
IN THE SCOTS CHURCH,
IN THE
EVENING OF SABBATH, THE 3rd OF ABRIL, 1859,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF THE
HONORABLE ROBERT CAMPBELL, ESQ., M.P.
COLONIAL TREASURER OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY JOHN DUNMORE LANG, DJD.
SENIOR MINISTER OP THE SCOTS CHURCH, SYDNEY,
Honorary Member of the African Institute of France, of the American
Oriental Society, and of the Literary Institute of Olinda, in the
Brazils.
SYDNEY;
Printed and Published by F. Mason & Co., 105, York Street.


ADVERTISEMENT.
The reader will observe that the following discourse does not
profess to be a Funeral Sermon, properly so called, or to set
forth the priv ;te life of the lamented deceased, and the con-
sistency of his “ walk and conversation” with his Christian
profession. This will fall to be done with greater propriety
by those who enjoyed his intimacy more than the Author,
and especially by members of that particular section of the
Christian Church to which be belonged. But the ■public
character of the deceased—as a citizen, a legislator, and a
Minister of the town—is public property; and as the
deceased experienced, both in Parliament and from a portion
of the Press, the most unrelenting opposition and persecution,
and was ever and anon held up to the ridicule and the scorn
of the community, for the principles which he advocated and
supported in that capacity, as if these principles were not
only everything that was bad in themselves, but destructive
of the best and dearest interests of society, the Author con-
ceived that he would not only be vindicating the character of
a highly deserving member of this community, whose friend-
ship as a public man he had the honour of enjoying, but
doing at the same time a real service to the cause of good
government in his adopted country, if he could shew, as
he trusts he has done, to the satisfaction of all intelligent
and candid persons in the following discourse, that the prin-
ciples in question are in perfect accordance with the word of '
God and the genius and spirit of the Christian religion. But
the fact is, that the Bible—as not only a perfect rule of life,
but a repertory of the wisest political maxims for the guid-
ance of States and Governments—is in great measure a sealed •
book to legislators generally, as well as to the great majority
even of those who make the most flaming profession of reli-
gion ; and it is humiliating to think that the principles
unquestionably established and enforced in the word of God
are the very principles which human wisdom characterizes
and reprobates as those of the wildest democracy. But
God’s thoughts are not as our thoughts—that is the whole
secret.


DISCOURSE, & c.
Amos 1f1. — 6. Shall a trumpet be blown in the city and the
people not be afraid ? Shall there be evil in a city and the
Lord hath not done it ?
In the earlier days of the Presbyterian Church of tha
Scottish Reformation, when that Church was in all the
vigour and the energy of youth, it w T as the practice, all
over Scotland, to hold what were called Presbyterial
visitations; in the course of which, and in the absence
of the particular minister whose Church and parish
were under examination, a searching enquiry was made
into the life and doctrine of the minister, to ascertain
whether he was discharging his duty to his Church and
people. One of the questions that were usually put on
such occasions was, “ Does he preach to the times ?”
that is, “ If any remarkable event should occur in the
Providence of God, of paramount interest either to the par-
ticular locality, or to the country at large, does he make
it his business to direct the attention of his people to
the subject, and to deduce from it, for their general
edification, the lessons of wisdom which it is fitted to
teach ?”
Now, I conceive that this is jnst one of those occa-
sions on which it is the duty of a minister of religion,
wdio has the welfare, not only of his own congregation,
but of the country generally, at heart, to preach to the
times. During the past week a prominent and univer-
sally respected member of this community—a native-
born citizen of this city—who had been repeatedly
elected by his fellow-citizens as one of their representa-
tives in our Colonial Legislature, and who had after-


wards been placed, with their concurrence and approval,
in the Government of the country as one of the Minis-
ters of the Crown, has been stricken down by the hand
of-Death in the midst of his days, leaving his numerous
family and friends in mourning and lamentation, and
engaging on their behalf the deep and unfeigned sym-
pathies of the whole community.
Trumpet-voiced although this dispensation is to us
all, it is not my intention to deduce from it the obvious
and common-place lessons of the shortness of time, the
uncertainty of life, and the necessity for immediate and
effectual preparation for death, for judgment, and for
eternity. For you are all, doubtless, aware that
Life is the season God hath given,
To fly from hell and rise to heaven ;
That day of grace fleets fast away,
And none its rapid course can stay.
* * * * =!<
Then what thy thoughts design to do,
Still let thy hands with might pursue ;
Since no device nor work is found,
Nor wisdom underneath the ground.
In the cold grave to which we haste,
There are no acts of pardon past:
But fixed the doom of all remains,
And everlasting silence reigns.
Neither is it my intention to preach what would be
called a Funeral Sermon in honour of the lamented de-
ceased, to exhibit in detail the more remarkable points
of his history, or to enumerate and dilate upon the
virtues of his character, and especially of his character
as a professed Christian man. All this I shall wil-
lingly leave to those whose more intimate acquaintance
with him in private life renders them much fitter for
the task than I can profess to be, and especially to the
members, whether ministers or laymen, of that parti-
cular section of the Christian Church to which he
belonged. All I propose to do is simply to ascertain
what were the peculiar principles which the lamented
deceased endeavoured—l believe with perfect sincerity,


and to the best of his ability—to advocate and support,
as a citizen, as a Legislator, and as a Minister of the
Crown; and whether .these principles were warranted by
the word of God, and in accordance with the genius
and spirit of our common Christianity.
I may be told indeed that it is an unheard-of thing to
test men’s political principles by their conformity to the
word of God and the requirements of the Christian reli -
gion. But there is no other test applicable to the case,
my brethren. Politics are unquestionably a branch of
morals, and must, in every instance, be tried by the
moral law, that is, the law of the Ten Commandments.
The rule in in regard to politics, as well as in regard to
every other branch of ethics, or human duty, is “To the
Law and to the Testimony : if they speak not according
to this word, it is because there is no light,” or moral
truth, in them.” Let us ascertain therefore what were
the principles which our deceased representative advo-
cated and supported since he came forth upon the
public arena of the colony as a citizen, a legislator, and
a minister of the Crown; for we are not concerned with
any previous portion of his history, when, in all likeli-
hood, his opinions were yet unformed, and he had not
yet deliberately chosen the path whjch he afterwards
pursued with all the energy of his nature until the close
of his earthly career.
I have no hesitation then in expressing it as my
opinion that the principles which our deceased friend
advocated and supported, and the course which he uni-
formly pursued, as a citizen of this great city, as a re-
presentative of the people of this colony, and as a
Minister of the Crown, may be indicated and described
in one expressive word—a hateful word doubtless in
certain quarters, but whether it deserves to be so we
shall see in the sequel—l mean Democracy, that is
Government by and for the people. This was unques-
tionably the principle which was put forth—and main-
tained. J may add, with no small measure of success—by
the political party to which the deceased legislator had
attached himself, and to which he continued attached,
with unfaltering fidelity, to the last. And I have no
hesitation in expressing my own belief and conviction


that, as the principal seat of the disease that terminated
his life was that mysterious corporeal organ of the im-
mortal mind, the brain, that disease, operating as it did
on a peculiarly sensitive nature, was greatly aggravated,
and its fatal termination ensured and hastened, by the
long-protracted, ungenerous, unmanly and fierce oppo-
sition which himself and his colleagues experienced
within the walls of Parliament, aggravated and intensi-
fied as it was by the unprincipled procedure of a por-
tion of the Colonial press—men systematically disguis-
ing with the hypocritical profession of religion their
own personal malignities and their determined hostility
to the liberties of the people and the rights of men.
Yes ! I repeat it, I have no hesitation in expressing my
own belief and conviction, that our deceased friend was,
in consequence solely of his strenuous and consistent ad-
vocacy of those principles of democracy which were put
forth by the political party with which he was identi-
fied, virtually hounded to death by an ungenerous and
unmanly Parliamentary opposition on the one hand and
an unprincipled press on the other.
Taking it for gi’anted, therefore, as a matter of general
notoriety, that the principles put forth by the political
party with which our deceased representative was iden-
tified in his public and political character, were those
indicated in the word “ Democracy,” that is, “ govern-
ment by and for the people,” let us now endeavour
to ascertain whether these principles are at all war-
ranted by the Word of God, or in accordance with the
genius and spirit of our common Christianity.
I observe then, that about three thousand years ago,
the children of Israel, after having spent four hundred
years and upwards in slavery in Egypt, were at length
led forth from that house of their national bondage by
the Lord God himself, with a high hand and an out-
stretched arm. With such training, with such ante-
cedents, who, in his senses, in this present day of
superior enlightenment and of advanced civilization,
would ever think of giving such people—a nation of
slaves, forsooth, almost from time immemorial—a poli-
tical constitution for their civil government in all future
time, based upon the recognition of complete political


equality and the rights of men ? And yet, my
brethren, strange and unaccountable as it may appear,
this was precisely the thing which the Lord God him-
self gave the children of Israel in the desert of Sinai
—a constitution of entire political freedom to a nation
of slaves ! “ For my thoughts are not your thoughts,
neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For
as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my
ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than
your thoughts.”—lsaiah lv., 8, 9.
In proof of what I have stated, permit me to read to
you the following remarkable passage of Scripture
history, referring to the time when the whole congrega-
tion of Israel were assembled on the plains of Moab,
previous to their crossing the river Jordan, and their
entrance into the promised land.“ And it came to pass
after the plague, that the Lord spake unto Moses, and
unto Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saying,
‘ Take the sum of all the congregation of the children
of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, through-
out their fathers’ house, all that are able to go to war
in Israel.’ And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, spake
with them in the plains of Moab by Jordan, near
Jericho, saying, ‘ Take the sum of the people from
twenty years old and upward, as the Lord commanded
Moses and the children of Israel, which went forth out
of the land of Egypt.’ * * * * These were the
numbered of the children of Israel, six hundred thou-
sand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty. And
the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, ‘ Unto these the
land shall be divided for an inheritance, according to the
number of names. To many thou shalt give the more
inheritance, and to few thou shalt give the less inheri-
tance ; to every one shall his inheritance be given,
according to those that were numbered of him.’—Num-
bers XXVI, 1-4, 51-54.
There were, thus, in a nation of not more, at the
very utmost, than three millions of people altogether—
men, women, and children—not fewer than 001,730
proprietors of land; to whom, as we shall see presently,
the political franchise was thus divinely conceded—a


proportion far higher than is found in any European
country in the present day.*
And to maintain this principle of political and
social equality unimpaired to the latest posterity, there
was superadded, to this equal division of the national
domain among the whole Hebrew people, a beautiful
provision for the recovery of their patrimonial inheri-
tances at the end of every fiftieth year, in any case in
which they had been alienated during the interval
through misfortune or misconduct. The provision I
allude to appears on the great Statute Book of the
ancient Hebrews as follows : —“ And thou shalt number
seven Sabbaths of years unto thee, seven times seven
years; and the space of seven sabbaths of years shall
be unto thee forty and nine years. Then shalt thou
cause the trumpet of the jubilee to sound on the tenth
day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement
shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your
land. And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and pro-
claim liberty throughout all the land unto all the inha-
bitants thereof: it shall be a jubilee unto you ; and ye
shall return every man unto his possession, and ye shall
return every man unto his family. Leviticus xxv,
B—lo.
Nay, we learn from other passages of Holy Scripture,
that, under this divinely constituted political system of
ancient Israel, the appoiuments to offices of trust and
emolument, whether civil or judicial, including the Sur-
vey Department, were made by popular election. “I spake
to you at that time,” says Moses, in his farewell address
to the people of Israel, “ saying, I am not able to bea r
you myself alone : the Lord your God hath multiplied
you, and. behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven
for multitude. How can I myself alone bear your
cumbrance, and your burdens, and your strife ? Take
you wise men, and understanding, and known among your
* In Great Britain and Ireland, under a constitution which,
we are told, is the most glorious and happy that was ever
established upon earth, there are, according to Mr. D’lsraoli,
the present Chancellor of the Exchequer, not more than
nronrietors of land for 28 millions of people. Ilinc
illae lachrymae !


tribes, and I will make them rulers over you. And ye
answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast
spoken is good for us to do.”—Deuteronomy, i. 9-14. In
regard also to the popular appointment of the person to
be charged with the survey of the Holy Land, we have
the express testimony of Holy Scripture on the subject
to the following effect. “ And Joshua said unto the
children of Israel, How long are ye slack to go to pos-
sess the land, which the Lord God of your fathers hath
given you ? Give out from among you three men for
each tribe: and I -will send them, and they shall rise,
and go through the land, and describe it according to
the inheritance of them.”—Joshua xviii. 3-4,
Here then were the great principles of popular Govern-
ment, or what is called democracy—equal political rights
and popular election, with a Land System evidently
designed to maintain and perpetuate these principles to
all time coming—established by God himself in the
great Hebrew Commonwealth three thousand years ago.
No doubt the Hebrews in after ages declined and fell
from the high rank which had thus been divinely
assigned them among the nations. They fell again and
again into the idolatries of the Heathen, and God gave
them over into the hands of worthless tyrants, both
native and foreign. But in reviewing the whole period
of their history, we have the testimony of an inspired
prophet to prove that the high and palmy state of
ancient Israel, the period during which they were the
most distinguished for their national virtue and holiness,
was neither in the days of David, nor in the days of
Solomon, nor in the days of Hezekiah, but in those
far earlier days of the Hebrew Commonwealth when the
principles of popular government w 7 hich God himself had
established among them were maintained and prevailed.
“ Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem,” saith the Lord
by his prophet Jeremiah, “saying, Thus saith the Lord;
I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of
thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the
wilderness, in a land that was not sown. Israel w 7 as
holiness unto the Lord, and the first fruits of his increase.”
—Jerem. 11., 2-3. And in like manner the prophet
Malachi, when anticipating a period of future blessed-


ness under the reign of Messiah, looks hack with
enthusiasm to the earlier days of the Jewish State when
the popular principles on which it was established were
maintained unimpaired. “ Then shall the offering of
Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in
the days of old, and as informer years ” —Mai. 111. 4.
But if such are the popular principles of Govern-
ment divinely established under the Old Testament
dispensation, what, I ask, are those indicated in the
New ? And can we hesitate about an answer to this
question when we reflect that this golden maxim was
uttered by the Lord Christ himself, “ Whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto
them ?” Democracy asks nothing for itself but the
realization of this maxim in the laws and governments,
the principles and the practice of men. It demands
nothing for itself but what it most willingly accords to
others. “ Honor all men” is alike the precept of
Christianity and of Democracy; and if such principles,
and the practice which they enjoin, could only be made
to prevail among men, wars and fightings would imme-
diately cease there would be no voice heard
louder than the voice of peace from pole to pole,
the earth would become a Paradise again and there
would be nothing left to hurt or to defile in all God’s
holy mountain.
But lest any person should suppose that I am put-
ting a construction on the Word of God which it was
never intended to bear, listen to the testimony of men
of the highest character and standing, both in the
literary and in the political world. “ The Gospel,”
says Lamartine, "is democratic.” “ The Christian
religion,” says Novalis, an eminent German philo-
sopher, “is the root of all Democracy, the highest
fact in the rights of man.” “ Christianity,” says
Gustave de Beaumont, an eminent French writer who
was sent forth by the Government of the late Louis
Philippe of France, as a Commissioner of Inquiry both
to Great Britain and to America, “ Christianity is
democratic in its essence ; it is the great source of the
equality perpetually flowing and deluging the world,
Christianity does not cease to be democratic, except
where it is directed from its natural course.”


The advocate of popular principles of government,
therefore, or, in other words, of Democracy, has no
reason to feel ashamed of these principles. They are
those alike of the Old Testament and the New. They
were established in the ancient Hebrew Commonwealth,
by Moses, the divinely commissioned Legislator of
Israel. They were republished so to speak, in a new
and improved edition, for the benefit of all mankind, by
the Lord Christ Himself, the Eternal Son of God. And
so conducive are these principles to the welfare and ad-
vancement of human society, that it is in those coun-
tries exclusively in which they have been received and
maintained, that the greatest achievements of humanity
have hitherto been realized. Among the Sovereign
and Independent States of Ancient Greece, Athens w T as
preeminently the stronghold of popular principles ot
government, or democracy; and it is in that
State, almost exclusively, that all the glories of
the Grecian name are found concentrated.
Her historians and philosophers, her orators and poets
are the admiration of mankind, and the magnificent
remains of her sculpture and architecture, even after
exposure to the elemeuts for upwards of Two thousand
years, are still the wonder of the world. She was the
great colonizing power, the Great Britain of antiquity ;
and so fully had she imbued her offspring with her own
enterprising spirit, that one of her colonies; the city and
State of Miletus, where the Apostle Paul preached, in
Asia Minor, was itself the mother of not fewer than
eighty other colonies in the ancient seas, while the
Greek language became through their instrumentality
the language of the civilized world, and the principal
channel for the diffusion and propagation of apostolic
Christianity.
But as I have already observed, “ God’s thoughts are
not our thoughts, neither are his ways our ways.” In
the present constitution of things it is uniformly the
case that man hates and opposes the very things which
God commends and enjoins. Hence it is that instead of
human governments being founded on those divine
principles which are unquestionably characteristic both
of the Old Testament and of the New, and the esta-


blishxnent of which would produce universal peace upon
earth, and good will among men, we find them, for the
most part, (and even Great Britain herself has seldom
been an exception to the general rule,) an armed con-
spiracy against the rights of men. Hence the system-
atic opposition, both at home and abroad, to everything
of the character of democracy, that is government by
and for the people. Hence the baseless and incessant
calumnies that are put forth upon the subject by the
sworn enemies of popular freedom and of the rights of
men. Our deceased friend and representative expe-
rienced much of this calumny and hatred for the part
which he took in securing the inestimable benefit of free
institutions, embodying somewhat at least of the spirit of
Moses and of Christ, in our land. But I might almost
say of him in this respect what one British patriot once
said of another—
“ Let slaves utter their slander, and bark at glory
which is conferred by the people—his name will stand;
and when their clay shall be gathered to the dirt to
which they belong, his monument, whether in marble
or in the hearts of his countrymen, shall be resorted to
as a subject of sorrow, and an excitation to virtue.” *
With neither brilliancy of talent, nor superior ora-
torical powers, our deceased representative and friend
was, nevertheless, through his mere force of character
and his universally acknowledged integrity, a real and
salutary power in the State. It is a sentiment of
the late Br. Chalmers, of the propriety of which the
lamented deceased was a practical illustration, although
I cannot recollect the precise words in which that
sentiment was expressed—“ The moral power which
our rulers are capable of exerting through the mere
force of their character and the general recognition of
their personal integrity, is far more efficacious for
ensuring the stability and the permanence of States
than the most brilliant achievements either of elo-
quence or of arms.” To use the language of an
eminent living author respecting the father of Fred-
• Henry Grattan’s Reply to Lord Clare’s Pamphlet against
the Earl of Charlemont.


erick the Great of Prussia, “ The man was in earnest,
in that earnest time—a man of sterling probity for one
thing, which, indeed, is the first requisite in the
noble art of governing men. If you will have
your laws obeyed, see well that they be pieces
of God Almighty’s law; otherwise all the artil-
lery in the world will not keep down mutiny.” Our
deceased representative was doubtless conscious all
along that, in the great and successful effort of last
Session of Parliament, he was securing a piece of God
Almighty’s Law for the people of this colony.
I observed in the outset that the lamented decease o f
our late representative was a trumpet-voiced call to a
minister of religion to preach to the times. We are at
this moment on the eve of a new era of our Colonial
history. We are about to witness the result
of the partial realization of those principles
of government that were of old divinely embodied
in the Constitution of the famous Hebrew Common-
wealth, and that constitute the law of Christ for
all kindreds and nations of men. Let no man beguile us,
therefore, of our birthright in the impending struggle.
Let us bear in mind that those principles of popular
government which our deceased representative laboured
to establish for his native country, however calumniated
and reviled they may be by the enemies of popular
freedom and the rights of men, are clearlv established as
the Law of God to man, both in the Old Testament and
in the New. And let us be followers of those who
through faith and patience have inherited the promises,
as I trust has been the happy case with our deceased
friend and representative, and entered into that rest
which remaineth for the people of God.






