

LECTURES OB THE GOSPELS.
DELIVERED IN
‘tlhr Australian (Eltmrch,
MELBOURNE,
REV. W. E. ADDIS, M. A.,
Assistant Minister.
Ilfclkrwm:
MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
12 St. James’s Buildings, Little Collins Street West.


I. The Earliest Biography oe Jesus
11. The Word made Flesh
111. Jesus the Light oe the World
IV. The Woman of Samaria
CONTENTS.


PREFACE.
Of the following Lectures the first was delivered early in
1889, the two following at the beginning of the present
year, the fourth a few months later. Thus they were not
intended to form a connected series, much less were they
written with any idea of publication. They are now
printed by the kindness of a friend, who hoped that they
might stimulate the intelligent study of the New Testa-
ment in our own congregation.
To those among us who feel (and surely every Christian
ought to feel) an interest in the subject, I would earnestly
recommend a little book by Dr. Abbott and Mr. Rushbrooke,
entitled, The Common Tradition of the Synoptic Gospels,
and, still more earnestly, Mr. Estlin Carpenter’s compen-
dious and lucid treatise on The Synoptic Gospels.
W. E. A.
Melbourne, June 27th, 1891.




LECTURES ON THE GOSPELS.
I.—THE EARLIEST BIOGRAPHY OF JESUS,
“ The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ .” —Mark i. 1.
“It is a great art,” says the author of the Imitation of
Christ, “to know Jesus.” He means that it is difficult to
acquire that pqrity and simplicity of heart, that habit of
communion with God which will enable us to enter into
the mind of Christ. There is, however, aijother sense
which we may give to the words of Thomas a Kempis, and
in which they are only too true, in which, indeed, they fall
far short of the truth. It is not only hard, it is impossible,
to construct any complete life of Jesus. To begin with,
we have in the New Testament no account whatever of
that long interval which intervened between his birth and
his entrance upon his public ministry. There is but one
exception, a story of great beauty but of doubtful value
from an historical point of view, which the third evangelist
tells us of Jesus in his boyhood. We do not even know how
long the public teaching of Jesus lasted. The fourth
gospel extends it to three, the other gospels limit it to one
year, and though the latter, no doubt, are the only trust-
worthy authorities, it is not wholly unlikely that their


statement arose from their recollection of “ that acceptable
year of the Lord” which the second Isaiah described,
rather than from any sure knowledge of their own.
Further, when we proceed to compare our records with
each other, we find startling discrepancies. The picture
presented by the fourth gospel differs so constantly, and on
such vital points, from that of the first three that we are
forced to choose between them, since any serious attempt
to reconcile them is impossible. Yet, even if we put aside
the testimony of the fourth gospel (and this, as shall here-
after be shown, is the only reasonable course), great
difficulties remain, for even the first three gospels abound
in startling discrepancies. Indeed there are few questions
in the whole domain of criticism so perplexing as the origin
and relations of these synoptic gospels. They often agree
in the most marvellous manner, word for word and particle
for particle; but their divergences from each other are not
less surprising. Nor is the reason of this far to seek. We
know a great deal about Paul. Why? Because Paul’s
undoubted epistles are still in our hands, and in these he
exhibits his teaching, and opens his whole heart and tells
us something about the chief events in his history. Jesus,
on the contrary, has left no writing of his own behind.
Moreover, the earliest writings of the New Testament tell
us little of him. Paul has much to say about the effect of
Christ’s death; he keeps an all but unbroken silence on
Christ’s life. This is not unnatural, for he had never
known Jesus; but surely it is singularly unfortunate. It
is admitted by all competent to judge that the earliest
gospels we have were written after Paul’s death, and no
one of them is the work of an eye-witness. They began
to be written as the generation which knew the Lord was
dying out, and there was a danger that the memory of the
things Jesus had said and done would perish also. Even
then it was not an actual companion of Jesus in his public
life who took pen in hand. Had such a man arisen, he
would have controlled the accounts of his successors; and
the contradictions which now exist and occasion so many
problems unsolved and perhaps insoluble, would never
have perplexed us. Again, an eye-witness is definite in his


accounts of place and time, whereas all our evangelists are
vague in these respects. They tell us that words were
spoken or events occurred “in a certain place or time,”
“at another place or time.” Clearly they did so because
they had not more certain information to give. We cannot
wonder if even thoughtful men have been driven into
extreme scepticism, and have been inclined to give up the
whole inquiry in despair. They have an additional excuse
for their attitude in the ever-varying theories on the origin
of the gospels, theories which have replaced each other in
rapid succession.
Still, I believe that the chaotic confusion of theories is
to some extent over, and that patient investigation has
thrown sure light on the life of Jesus. On one matter,
at least, there is an approach to unanimity, and there is no
longer any doubt that Mark’s gospel is the earliest and the
most trustworthy. So much is maintained by men of the
most opposite schools, by men who are at one on little else.
The arguments have convinced orthodox divines, such as
Meyer, and the still more orthodox Westcott; while those
who most nearly represent the Tubingen critics—men like
Pfleiderer and Holtzmann—admit the priority of Mark, and
abandon the conclusions of Baur, and even of Hilgenfeld. It
may be objected that this new theory also will have its day,
and is but the newest fashion; and certainly it would be
unwise to take an hypothesis for granted because great
names from the orthodox and from the liberal side can be
quoted in its favour. But we shall see, I think, that the
discovery rests on grounds so clear and certain that we
cannot help wondering that it was not seen from the first;
and if this much be ascertained, a flood of light is thrown
on the life of Jesus. The earliest traditions speak of Mark
as of one who accompanied Paul on his travels, and
listened to Peter, and who, from the fact that he lived at
Jerusalem, came into contact with the disciples of Jesus.
All inquiry tends to confirm the accuracy of the report.
True, we must not expect too much. Mark speaks at
second hand: he derived his knowledge, moreover, from
those who in early days were too much occupied in proving
that Jesus was the risen and glorified Messiah to have


much time for the narration of his earthly life. This
accounts for much vagueness and inaccuracy in his bio-
graphy of Jesus. We must remember, too, that in his
time men had little idea of physical law, and were prone to
believe in the miraculous. One instance may serve to
show what a gulf separated the notions of his time from
ours. Herod Antipas (so Mark, as well as the first and third
gospels relate) had beheaded John, and knew, or might have
known, that John’s body had been taken away and buried
by his disciples. In spite of this, the king was ready, and
that apparently without the least examination, to believe
that John, whom he had known well, had risen from the
dead, and was preaching in his own realm. But, after all
abatements made, we may well be thankful for the knowledge
Mark gives us. The pre-eminent greatness of Jesus would
lead us to expect that much of his life and teaching-
remained indelibly impressed on the memory of the men
with whom Mark conversed. This expectation is not
disappointed.
Here it may be well to say a word or two on the kind of
argument which is used to establish the priority of Mark.
First, it is plain that Mark’s gospel, which is much shorter
than the others, is not, as was long supposed, a mere
abbreviation of Matthew and Luke. On the contrary,
Mark abounds in vivid details which are wholly wanting
in Matthew and Luke, and which are just the points which
might well linger in the memory of the eye-witnesses from
whom Mark derived his story. Next, Mark’s narration is
far more consistent with itself than those of Matthew and
Luke, and he enables us to understand the consecution of
events where they fail to do so. This might, of course, be
the result of historical skill, but in a writer so simple and
artless as Mark such an explanation would be absurd ; and
we are driven to the inference that his narration is more
intelligible because he had better means of knowing and
lived nearer the events. .Thirdly, Mark’s story is less
supernatural. Yet he has no aversion to a belief in
the miraculous, as every page of his gospel shows. If
then, there is more of the miraculous in Matthew and
Luke, yet more in the fourth gospel, more still in the


apocryphal gospels of succeeding ages, we may be sure that
Mark represents an early stage of the belief in Christ’s
miracles, a time when it had not attained its full propor-
tions. Hence, Mark’s gospel has this inestimable advan-
tage, that from it more easily than from any other we can
rediscover the genuine Christ, the man Christ Jesus.
These peculiarities will appear as we go on, and they
receive a striking illustration at the very opening of Mark’s
gospel. Matthew and Luke begin with stories of a miracu-
lous birth. Mark ignores them altogether. It may be
said that he left them out for the sake of brevity, but such
an explanation will not hold. For, evidently, there was no
primitive tradition on this subject. If there had been,
Matthew and Luke would have followed it and would have
been in substantial harmony on the point. As the case
stands, Matthew and Luke differ on every detail in the story
of the infancy. Each gives a different genealogy of Jesus.
Luke places the home of Joseph and Mary at Nazareth,
and accounts for their presence at Bethlehem by the need
of presenting themselves there for the census. Matthew
implies that their home was at Bethlehem, where they had
a house, and states that they went to live at Nazareth after
the birth of Jesus because they feared the persecution of
Archelaus. Besides contradicting each other, Matthew and
Luke contradict history, and contradict common sense :
nay, each contradicts himself, for while they assert the
birth of Jesus by the agency of the Holy Spirit, they
borrow from older sources and trace his genealogy to
Joseph. This is not all. Mark does not only omit any
mention of the miraculous birth : we can see that he had
never heard of it. He tells us in his third chapter how the
family of Jesus felt when his fame as a teacher began. No
choir of angels at his birth, no visit of magi from the far
east, had prepared them for the glory that was to be. Far
from it. It was quite natural, in their eyes, that Jesus
should work as a carpenter, but most strange that he wdio
had no rabbinical training, should court publicity as a
teacher. Therefore, they thought—as Mark, and only Mark,
records—that he was out of his mind (Mark hi. 21). Jesus
himself was prepared for this. He began to teach at


Capernaum, to which his first disciples belonged, and not,
as Luke erroneously states, at Nazareth. When at a later
time he did teach in his own city, where he had been born
and bred, he declared that “a prophet is not without honour
save in his own country and among his own kin and in his
own house” (Mark vi. 4) — i.e., in his own immediate family.
Besides, the mother and brethren of Jesus were not content
to disbelieve in Jesus ; they would fain have withdrawn him
from his work. First of all, Mark says, they supposed he
“ was beside himself,” and then he adds that they stood
without the synagogue and “ sent unto him calling him”
(Mark hi. 31). In that hour Jesus felt his loneliness. The
Pharisees, whom he had been taught to reverence, had
already manifested their suspicion and distrust, and Jesus
knew that even his nearest and dearest could not under-
stand him. The cup of bitterness was already at his lips,
but he drank it willingly. He went where the Spirit led:
he entered into those new relationships to which God called
him. “Looking round on them which sat roundabout
him, he saith, Behold, my mother and my brethren. For
whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother
and sister and mother.” These words are retained in
Matthew and Luke, but in them they are absolutely revolt-
ing. They conceal, they could hardly help concealing, the
motives which led the family of Jesus to the door of
the synagogue, and so leave the apparent harshness of the
words of Jesus unexplained. Truly, God’s ways are best;
or, in other words, the truth is best. It is a gain to
surrender the stories of the infancy, beautiful as they are.
When they are gone, we understand Jesus better. The
least touch of harshness vanishes. We know him in his
loneliness, in his tenderness, in his lofty spirit of devotion,
and, knowing him, we love him.
So, also, a new light breaks on the consecration of Jesus
at his baptism. It was long ere the early church lost all
sense of its supreme importance. In primitive times there
were sects who looked on the baptism by John as the
moment when the higher Spirit descended on Jesus, and
the Catholic Church kept the feast of Christ’s baptism long-
before it set apart any day for the commemoration of his


birth. But among the evangelists Mark alone gives the
baptism its proper significance. It had a depth of meaning
to him which it could not have to Luke, who makes Jesus
the Son of God because he was bom by the miraculous
agency of God’s Spirit. Observe, too,howmuch closer Mark
keeps to the reality of fact. “ The heavens were opened,”
says Matthew (iii. 16) ; “ the Holy Spirit descended in
a bodily form,” says Luke. In Mark we can trace the
inner experience, the subjective vision out of which the
legend arose. It is Jesus, and Jesus only, so far as Mark’s
Gospel goes, who sees “the heavens rent asunder and the
Spirit as a dove descending upon him.” The heavenly
voice assured him that he was God’s beloved son. The
long years of waiting were over, and he might begin to
preach the glad news and tell men that they too had a
Father in heaven. This contrast becomes even more
striking when we turn to the temptation. All three
evangelists are at one on the main fact; but Mark’s words
are pre-eminent in their simplicity, “ Straightway the
Spirit driveth him forth into the wilderness ; and he was
in the wilderness forty days tempted of Satan, and he was
with the wild beasts, and the angels ministered unto him.”
Here, indeed, mythical elements are not wanting. Pro-
bably the period of forty days in the wilderness is borrowed
from the history of Israel, and the wild beasts may typify
the suggestions of evil. But where are the miraculous fast
of forty days, the literal colloquy with the devil, the
challenge to make stones bread, the transportation by
Satan’s hands to the pinnacle of the temple and the
temptation to cast himself down and trust his safety to the
angels’ charge, the prospect of all the kingdoms of the
world and the offer of them to Jesus if he would adore the
evil spirit ? It is not in this gross way that man is tried
and proved. It is the subtlety of temptation which makes
it dangerous to pure and lofty souls. Thus it is not enough
to deny the literal truth of the legend as given by Matthew
and Luke. It is false to the idea as well as to the fact.
We pass next to the miracles of Jesus, though that
subject can be treated here only in a very brief and cursory
manner. There were real wonders which Jesus wrought


over and above that work of his to which, and to which
alone, permanent value belongs, that work which consisted
in opening the eyes and ears of those who were blind and
deaf in spirit, the raising of those who were dead in sin,
the preaching of the Gospel to the poor. These marvels
to which I refer, and which are altogether inferior in
character and interest to the work of Jesus as the preacher
of good news, were wrought upon the possessed. In those
days, epileptic and hysterical persons, and lunatics—those
whom we should now consign to the hospital or the asylum
for the insane—were all accounted the victims of Satanic
agency. We may well believe that Jesus had an extra-
ordinary power over such persons, a power which has been
often exercised, though never, perhaps, in the same degree,
by those who were calm, and gentle, and pure, and strong,
and firm. Mark has preserved the genuine recollection,
absent in the other evangelists, of the circumstances in
which the fame of Jesus, as a wonder-worker, began. He
had been preaching, he had called his first disciples, and
he was preaching once more, in the synagogue at Caper-
naum. There a “ man with an unclean spirit” interrupted
him with his cries. For a moment the poor man was
torn and rent by the violence of the fit. Then he was
silent, and men were astonished at the power which the
new Teacher had over the spirits. But Jesus himself set
no store by this kind of reputation. He commanded the
man with the unclean spirit to hold his peace. AYhen
asked for a miraculous attestation of his authority, his
answer given by Mark in its original simplicity, and after-
wards sadly marred by Matthew, ran—“ Why doth this
generation seek a sign ? There shall be no sign given unto
this generation” (viii. 11). Further, Mark alone notes
that in his own city Jesus could do “ no mighty work, save
that he laid his hands on a few sick folk and healed
them.” It cannot be denied that Mark himself betrays a
love of the marvellous which is alien to the spirit of Jesus.
In him also we can trace the gradual intrusion of legendary
elements, but in him the process has not advanced so far
as in the other gospels. Do Matthew and Luke say that
Jesus healed all the sick who were brought to him (Matt.


vii. 16, Luke iv. 40, 41) ? Mark is content with the more
modest assertion that Jesus healed many sick. Unlike
them, he assigns something to natural means ; he mentions
only one case in which Jesus raised a dead person to life,
and there he leaves room first of all for the supposition
that the girl was not really dead, and adds that Jesus told
the attendants to give her food when she woke from her
stupor (v. 43). * Very instructive is Mark’s account of the
power given to the twelve when Jesus sent them forth.
They were to have authority over unclean spirits, but Mark
omits all mention of the power to heal diseases attributed
to them by the other evangelists. On the other hand,
Mark observes that they did cure disease by oil, the natural
remedy familiar at the time, concerning which Matthew
and Luke are significantly silent. The sober truth which
lies concealed beneath the veil must always be a mystery
to us. We can but darkly conjecture the precise methods
in which genuine, historical memories have been exagge-
rated, and the poetry of metaphor transmuted into prosaic
fact. But Mark lets us into some part of the secret, and
for so much it becomes us to be thankful.
This is by no means all, for Mark, better than any other
writer, preserves the teaching of Jesus in its pristine
purity. See how naturally Jesus begins. According to
Matthew, he ascends the mountain like another Moses,
and teaches the sublimest thoughts. We need not doubt
that Matthew gives us much of the great Master’s authentic
teaching, but it cannot have been uttered after this fashion.
The hearers of Jesus could not have understood him had
he begun at this early step to speak of himself as the Judge
of the living and the dead (Matt. vii. 22). The picture is
grand and impressive, but it is not natural, for it would have
been impossible to follow so many deep lessons, had they
been imparted at once. The picture, on the other hand,
which Mark draws is so natural that it must be true in the
main. Jesus advances step and step ; as his fame grows
he gathers the little band of his disciples round him.
Then he discloses the nature of the Kingdom of God in
* Luke also preserves this trait.


parables of beautiful simplicity, delivered before the crowd
and then expounded privately to the disciples. “ With
many such parables spake he the word unto them as they
were able to hear it” (Mark iv. 33). Surely that is a
worthier reason than the theory advanced elsewhere that
Jesus chose the parabolic form with the express purpose of
preventing his hearers from understanding him. “ There-
fore speak I to them in parables, because seeing they see
not and hearing they hear not, . . . lest haply they
should . . . turn again and I should heal them”
(Matt. xiii. IS).*
What has been urged is, I hope, sufficient to create a
strong prejudgment in favour of Mark’s accuracy, and, if
so, we shall be inclined to accept the account Mark gives
of the attitude which Jesus assumes to the Jewish law. It
has been supposed by some that Jesus never consciously
abandoned Judaism, and that Christianity as such is the
creation of Paul. Mark, if we trust him, supplies the
complete refutation of this theory. Its refutation does not
rest on Mark’s authority, for Mark is confirmed by Matthew
to a large extent. According to each evangelist, Jesus
denied that any kind of meat could defile a man (Mark vii. 18,
Matt. xv. 11), and thereby impugned a cardinal point in the
Jewish law. However, the early Jewish Christians soon
became incapable of understanding the spirituality of their
master, and Matthew has mixed the pure gold of Christ’s
teaching with the dross of Judaism. Moreover, Matthew
has sinned by omission as well as by addition. Take one
striking illustration. The disciples were plucking the ears
of corn on the Sabbath, and it is thus, as Mark tells us,
that Jesus repelled the charge. He appealed to the
example of David, who had eaten the shew-bread in his
necessity. Next, he enunciated this great principle which
makes an end of all religion except such as is founded on
the nature of God and man—“ The Sabbath is made for
man, and not man for the Sabbath.” That is to say, all
external observances are good so far, and only so far, as
they promote man’s highest welfare. Matthew passes this
*So Luke viii. 10, and also Mark iv. 12. But my point is that Mark alone gives
the true reason.


answer by, and substitutes a casuistical argument that the
priests were allowed to break the Sabbath in the temple
service, and that a greater than the temple was there. The
argument is a bad one, for the disciples do not appear to
have been engaged in any sacred service. But apart from
this, it was not thus that Jesus asserted himself; it was
not thus that he sank to the level of rabbinical dispute.
I have referred to the self-assertion of Jesus, and this
leads naturally to the light Mark throws on this subject in
its more general aspect. In Matthew, Jesus, towards the
close of his life, put this question to the disciples—“ Whom
say ye that I am?” “Thou art the Christ,” Peter
answered, “the Son of the living God.” Thereupon Jesus
pronounced him blessed, because he had received this revela-
tion from the Father. Nothing can be more puzzling, even
if we recall the moment of desolation in which it was
spoken. How could Peter need this special revelation?
Prom the outset Jesus had taken for granted that men
would call him Lord. He had claimed for himself the
office of judge at the last day: he had spoken of blasphemy
against the Son as a crime second only to blasphemy against
the Divine Spirit? Strangest of all, he had invited the
twelve to take up their cross and follow him (x. 88), and
so assumed a perfect familiarity with the precise mode of
his death on the part of his disciples. In Mark all these
elements of confusion are wanting. Never once had Jesus
claimed to be the Messiah, except so far as that dignity may
be supposed to lurk under the enigmatical title, “ Son of
Man,” never had he spoken of his cross or of faith in
himself. He had not preached himself, but God and the
good news from God, and the kingdom of God. But now
the time w 7 as short. For the first time Jesus was driven
beyond the territory of Israel. Antipas sought his life, the
Pharisees were more than ever in deadly opposition, the
Galilean crowd was weary of him, at any moment death
might come. Jesus knew that belief in his own divine call
could not be separated from the acceptance of that kingdom
which he proclaimed. Had all been in vain ? Would one
grain of mustard seed be left when he himself was seen on
earth no more? Very gradually he prepares the minds of


his disciples. First he asks, “Who do men say that I am?”
and the answer comes readily from all. Then, “Who say
ye that I am?” and Peter alone answers, “Thou art the
Messiah.” All authority was against Jesus. The unani-
mous opinion of the little world which Peter knew con-
demned him. All Peter’s prejudices were against him.
Yet to Peter, Jesus after God was all in all—one who had
raised him to a new life and brought God near. It must be
good to believe in him, to hold fast to him. Therefore he
said, “ Thou art the Christ.” Jesus, in the history Mark
gives, received the confession in solemn silence. He made
no promises that he would set Peter over his Church, or
give him the keys of heaven. But Jesus must have known
then that his work had not been in vain. We shall do best
to imitate the silence of the evangelist, and meditate on
that hour in awful silence.
lI—THE WOEI) MADE FLESH,
“ The Word became flesh and tabernacled among us.”
John i. 14.
Gibbon tells us, with characteristic sarcasm, that the doctrine
of the Divine Word was taught in the schools of Alexandria
800 b.c., and revealed by St. John 97 a.d. This statement
is not altogether accurate. On the one hand Gibbon places
the Alexandrian philosophy at an earlier date than the
evidence warrants. On the other hand, he has accepted
too readily the traditional account of the date and origin
of the fourth gospel. Were Gibbon living now, he would
undoubtedly range himself on the side of the critics who
deny that the fourth gospel was written by St. John, and
place its origin, not at the end of the first, but towards the


middle of tlie second century of the Christian era. Never-
theless, in spite of a certain inaccuracy which was no fault
of his, Gibbon has put his finger on the great mark of
distinction between the three first gospels and that ascribed
to St. John. All the gospels place the events which they
relate within the boundaries of Palestine. Now, we feel
at once that the first three gospels do so naturally and
consistently. In them the thoughts no less than the
scenery belong to the land of the Jews. Jesus develops
his own thoughts from the sacred books of the Hebrews—
from the law, and still more from the prophets. The
whole controversy between himself and the Jewish teachers
and rulers, whetlaer Pharisees or Sadducees, turns upon
questions of religion and theology which occupied the
Jewish mind. It is to the practical duties of Jewish life,
the wants and miseries of Jewish society in his own age,
that Jesus directly addresses himself. It is because he
claimed, or was supposed to claim, the position of the
Jewish Messiah that Jesus was put to death. There is
nothing to suggest the ideas of the heathen world beyond
the confines of the Holy Land. True, we hear a good deal
of the Piomans, but only because they hold dominion over
God’s chosen people. The figure of the publican is
familiar in the first three gospels, and the publican appears
in such prominence because he represents the detested
power of the Roman oppressor. We can understand the
first three gospels without the least knowledge of Greek
philosophy. It is the Hebrew Scriptures, the teaching of
the Rabbis, with their legal casuistry, their Messianic
hopes, their belief in immortality, their expectation of a
heavenly kingdom which was to be set up visibly in Pales-
tine, that supply all the commentary we need. But pass
from the first three gospels to the fourth and you know at
once that you are breathing different air. Here is a history
which does not begin in Palestine. Jesus is the son of
Joseph and Mary, according to Mark. He is the son of
Mary according to Matthew and Luke ; but according to
John he was with the Father, in active personal communi-
cation with the Father from the beginning. His birth
belongs to no point of time. He existed before all time,


while as yet the earth was not made. His appearance in
Palestine is but a brief episode in a life which has no
beginning and no end. He tabernacled, he pitched his
tent for a little space among the Jews, hut his energy is
everlasting. Through him all things were made, and he
returns to the glory which he had with the Father ere the
world was. In the three first gospels, as well as in the
fourth, Jesus is entitled the Son of God. In the fourth
gospel, however, the words receive a wholly different
meaning. In the mouth of Jesus the words “ Son of
God” have an ethical signification. The merciful, for
example, the peacemakers, those, in short, who try to
make their lives divine, are the sons of God. To the first
three evangelists the title “Son of God” has an official
import. Jesus is the Son of God because he is the
Messiah, just as Israel collectively, and the king, as Israel’s
representative, receive that title in the Old Testament.
Luke also connects the title with the fact that Jesus was
miraculously born by the agency of the Divine Spirit. In
St. John the meaning of the title is not purely and simply
moral. It is not merely official. It is not physical. For
St. John refers to no human birth, whether natural or
supernatural. No; it is metaphysical. Jesus is the
Son because he is a god or divine being, one with the
Father in the eternity of his existence, in omniscience, in
omnipotence, in the honour which is his by right. In
short, he is the Word, and the Word was God, and was
with God in the beginning. Whence did this new philo-
sophy come ?
It is due to that fusion of Hebrew and Greek thought
which took place among the Jews of the dispersion. Jews
born and bred in a city such as Alexandria moved in a
world altogether different from that of their brethren in
Palestine. This new world repelled a pious Jew by its
sensual idolatry, and yet it might well attract him by the
refinement of its civilisation, by the wisdom of its poets
and orators, its historians and philosophers. There was,
indeed, a marked contrast between the wisdom of the
Greeks and of the Hebrews. The Greek philosophers,
notably Plato, drew a sharp distinction between the


material and the spiritual, between the eternal idea and its
transitory reflection in the visible world. Plato identified
God with the supreme idea of good, and Greek philosophy
laboured for the reform of religion, had its theories on the
reform of society, and often exhibited a noble ideal of life.
The weak point of Greek philosophy was that, though in a
fashion it taught the unity of God, its God was little better
than an abstraction, incapable of awakening the fear and
love which are the emotions essential to religion. The
Hebrew was narrow, national, exclusive, where the Greek
was liberal and human ; but the strength of the Hebrew
lay in this, that he believed in a personal God who really
did govern the world and direct it to moral ends, and who,
moreover, had actually by the prophets revealed him-
self to the Jews, his chosen people. Again, the Greek
looked up to a world above ; the Hebrew looked on to a
kingdom of Heaven which was to be realised on earth. In
Philo the two streams of Greek and Hebrew thought flow
into one. Born rather more than twenty years before
Christ, he was deeply and widely read in Greek literature.
He welcomed all philosophy except the irreligious system
of the Epicureans. He accepted the Greek distinction
between the spiritual and the material, and acknowledged
the difficulty of bringing God into immediate contact with
material things. Hence, developing an idea of Plato, and
adopting the terminology of the Stoics, he spoke of a
second God, the son of the supreme God; he called this
son the Aoyos, i.e., the Eeason and the Word of God.
Through this Word all things were made. He redeems
spiritual beings from the corrupt material world in which
they are placed. He is the light of the world. It was he
who appeared to the Patriarchs. It is he to whom the Old
Testament refers when it speaks of God as making things
by his Word or Wisdom. Not only so, but all the wisdom
of the Heathen world is derived from him. Long ago this
philosophy of Philo would have perished save from the
memory of the learned. It is John’s Gospel which clothed
it with undying interest. How ? By identifying this pre-
existent and creative Word with Jesus. “The Word,” he
says, “ became flesh. We have seen his glory, the glory
as of the only-begotten from the Father.”


It has been asked whether it was possible for a Galilean
fisherman to adopt ideas so different from all he had known
in his youth ; whether the son of thunder, who ranged
himself in middle life on the side of Jewish exclusiveness
against the freer gospel of St. Paul, could have passed in
old age to a philosophic conception of Christianity, incom-
parably less Jewish than the teaching of St. Paul himself.
That is an interesting question, but it is not the most
interesting or the most important. And to-night Ido not
ask when was the fourth gospel written, or by whom, or
where ; our question to-night is—What is the value of the
fourth gospel? I think you will be able to answer it
intelligently if you note the following points.
1. The Jesus of the three first gospels never, either
directly or by implication, asserts his pre-existence. In
the fourth gospel he is never done asserting it, because all
the speeches of Jesus are now coloured by the theology of
the Word. “No man,” says Jesus, “ has ascended into
heaven but he that descended out of heaven, even the Son
of Man who is in heaven.” “ Before Abraham was, I am.”
“ Glorify me with Thine own self, with the glory which I
had with Thee before the world was.” The Jesus of the first
three gospels speaks constantly of belief in God, scarcely
ever of belief in himself. The Jesus of the fourth gospel
insists habitually on belief in himself, scarcely ever on
belief in God. This is quite natural. The new Jesus
declares that he and the Father are one, he who has seen
him has seen the Father. All duties are merged in this
supreme and comprehensive duty of faith in the Son, The
parables, the short and incisive sayings, the beautiful and
homely lessons on duty are gone. They have given place
to a mystical theology. Contrast the reasons given by
Jesus for breaking the Sabbath. According to Mark Jesus
justified himself on purely human grounds. “ The
Sabbath was made for man', and not man for the Sabbath.”
According to John, Jesus adopts the language of Philo, and
sets himself above the Sabbath, because he has ever
sustained the world which he made, so that rest in his case
is impossible. “ The Father worketh hitherto, and I
work.”


2. Hence Jesus foresees the future. He knows from the
beginning who are to believe in him and who are to betray
him. He knows all men; he sees Nathanael when he is
alone and at a distance. He knows the previous history of
the Samaritan woman. And his disciples confess that he
knows all things. He has no need to pray, and only does
so for the sake of the crowd. Most significantly the fourth
gospel passes by in absolute silence the temptation, the agony
in the garden, the anguish of the Son of Man on the cross.
When the soldiers come to take him Jesus has only to say “ I
am he,” and they fall prostrate on the ground. He “ bears
his own cross,” having no need of help. If he thirsts as
he hangs on the cross, it is only that the Scripture may be
fulfilled. At the last he utters no cry of despair as in
Matthew and Mark, he does not even commend his soul to
the Father. He simply waits till the Scripture is com-
pletely fulfilled. Then he cries—“ It is finished,” and
“ gives up his spirit.”
Such is the Jesus of the fourth gospel, surely a Jesus
very different from that of the Synoptics. That the earlier
writers should have ignored these claims of Jesus had they
known them, that they should have so utterly obscured
his divine origin and power, is simply inconceivable. We
may imagine as we will that Jesus had two styles and
manners, but apart from the fact that any such theory is
emphatically negatived by the Synoptics, it does not remove
the difficulty. Not only Jesus but all the characters in the
drama have undergone a radical change. In the Synoptics
Jesus begins to teach only when the Baptist is in prison ;
and it is from his prison that the Baptist asks doubtfully
whether Jesus may not be the Messiah. In the fourth
gospel, the Baptist’s disciples, while he is still teaching,
leave him for Jesus. The Baptist declares that he must
decrease and Jesus increase. He points at once to Jesus as
the Lamb of God. As if he too had learned the new
theology, he asserts the pre-existence of Jesus. “He that
cometh after me, is become before me, for he was before
me.” “No man hath seen God at any time; the only-
begotten who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath
declared him.” In short, Jesus, the Baptist, and the


evangelist all utter the same ideas in the same style, so that
the best commentators are unable to say for certain where
the words of Jesus or the Baptist end, and the words of
the evangelist begin. Once more the story of the Synoptics
culminates in Peter’s great confession—“ Thou art the
Christ.” Whereupon Jesus, according to the Synoptics,
charged them that they should tell no man of him.
According to John, Nathanael at the very outset confesses
that Jesus is the Son of God, the King of Israel. Jesus
tells the woman of Samaria in plain words that he is the
Messiah, and this gospel culminates in Thomas’ confession
—“ My Lord and my God.”
This is not history but a theological idea, and the
theology has passed away. For observe that the Word of
the fourth gospel, is not God the Son co-equal with the
Father. On the contrary, the Father is greater than he.
Jesus can do nothing of himself. His glory is a gift which
he receives from the Father. The Father is the absolute
God, who is invisible. The Son is a God, he is our God,
because he manifests the Father to us. Nor is Jesus man.
He becomes not man, but “flesh.” That is, his nature is
the nature of a God, and he clothes himself with flesh that
we may behold his glory.
Nevertheless the world is deeply indebted to the author
of the fourth gospel. The evangelist, for all his theology,
could not wholly obliterate the human features in the life of
Jesus. Even in the fourth gospel, Jesus groans and is troubled
in spirit, and weeps at the grave of his friend, and com-
mends his mother from the cross to the disciple whom he
loves. We may well have done with the philosophy of a
personal pre-existing Word. It has served its time. Yet
beneath this outworn philosophy lies the imperishable truth
that Jesus is the best gift, the truest likeness of the eternal
love, that He, whose intellect overarches us in the vault of
stars, whose “ beauty rests on the surface of the land and
sea, embodied His affections and His will in the person of
the Son of Man.”


lII—JESUS THE LIGHT OE THE WORLD.
“ I am the light of the world." — John yiii. 12.
We saw last Sunday night that the fourth gospel is not an
historical but a theological life of Jesus. No doubt even
in the earliest biographies of Jesus there is a large admixture
of legendary matter. Still, in spite of the miraculous
element, which is conspicuous even in Mark, in spite of
the miraculous birth, on which St, Matthew and St. Luke
dilate at length, we can discover the history of a true man,
and we can trace that development under temptation and
opposition which made the Jesus in whom the Father is
well pleased, and who has been ever since the ideal of
faithful souls. In the fourth gospel all such development
is excluded.
In the beginning the Word was with God and was a God.
Through him all things were made. When he came to the
world which was his by right, he did not come that he
might learn obedience and be made perfect by suffering.
On the contrary, he was incapable of imperfection, and he
did but tabernacle in the flesh that he might manifest the
truth which he had heard and known when he was in the
bosom of the Father, before the world was made. We saw
further that we have only to understand the theology of the
gospel in order to perceive that it has ceased to be. It is not,
of course, the theology of the Unitarians, for it asserts that
Jesus is a divine being who existed from the beginning and
was the active instrument of creation. Nor, on the other
hand, is the Christ of the fourth gospel the Christ of
Catholic theology. He is not God and man in two natures
and one person. He is the Divine Word which became
flesh. He had, indeed, the outward form of man, but the
functions of the human mind were replaced by the indwell-
ing Word. Nor again was he co-equal with the Father.


He is the visible image of the Supreme, so that all which
mortal man can see or know of God is seen and known in
him. But, at the same time, he is inferior to the Father,
and his power is entirely delegated, so that he “ can do
nothing of himself.”
To-night we shall look at the gospel from another point
of view. We shall dismiss the person of Jesus from our
consideration, and ask what account the fourth gospel gives
of his work. Here, too, we shall find that the fourth
gospel never differs from the synoptics, except to the detri-
ment of historical truth. Yet I address myself to this side
of the subject with peculiar pleasure. This, I think, will
be made plain, that even when the exactness of historical
truth is forfeited, truth of a higher kind, even truth which
may in a real sense be called historical, remains. We shall
trace the lines of the picture which the evangelist has
drawn. We shall cease to w r onder that this spiritual and
mystical gospel was and is so dear to the heart of Christen-
dom. To put it briefly, the evangelist antedates the work
of Jesus. Yet better, in some respects, than any man who
ever lived, he saw the work which the Spirit of Jesus did
and is ever doing.
What was the work of Jesus for the world at large?
Directly, and during his earthly life, he did not address
himself to the world at all. He left no writings. He spoke
a dialect which was not understood except in a corner of
the Roman empire, and which the cultivated people of his
day neither knew nor cared to know. His education was
wholly Jewish. Hence, he had no mission at the time save
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. True, his religion
had ceased to be Jewish, and had become the religion of
God and of humanity. But he never preached in a heathen
city or broke openly and decidedly with the Jewish law.
It cost Paul many a long and hard struggle to gain tolera-
tion from the older disciples when he preached a gospel
which broke down the partition wall between Jew and
Gentile. Slowly and painfully the good news spread from
Jew to Samaritan, from Samaritan to heathen.
Now contrast the way in which the fourth gospel
represents the whole work of Jesus as complete, at least in


plan, from the beginning. The evangelist stands alto-
gether outside the pale of Judaism. In the Synoptics, the
word Jew rarely occurs. In the gospel of Luke, for
example, which is considerably longer than John’s, we meet
with it only five times, and three out of five times it is
used quite naturally by Pilate and the Roman soldiers.
In St. John’s gospel we meet with the word Jew 70 times.
Not only so: John habitually speaks of the “ passover of the
Jews,” “a feast of the Jews,” the “purification of the Jews,”
as if all these things were strange and foreign to him.
The Synoptics do not need to make any express mention of
Jews, because when they wrote, the fact that Jesus and the
first disciples were Jews was one which needed no explan-
ation. We may, if we please, explain this by supposing
that John wrote his gospel in extreme old age, when the
connection of himself and his master and the early disciples
with the Jewish nationality had receded into the dim past.
This theory, however, will not explain the language
attributed to Jesus himself. Twice, and twice only, the
Jesus of the fourth gospel speaks of the Mosaic law. On
each occasion he calls it “your law.” “It is written in
your law that the witness of two is true.” “It is written
in your law, I have said ye are Gods.” Evidently the Jesus
and the Christianity of the fourth gospel have travelled
long and far beyond all national limits. The Jews are not
so much a nation, as a hostile religion, arrayed against the
church. The Word made flesh is not a Jewish but a uni-
versal Christ.
Let us look a little closer. Something has been said in
a previous lecture on the real preaching of the Baptist.
He looked forward to a Messiah, but according to Matthew
and Luke it was only when he was in prison and his work
was over and the end near, that he asked doubtfully
whether the Messiah might not have come already, whether
Jesus might not be he. But further, we have in the Acts
of the Apostles a valuable and interesting notice of the
Baptist’s disciples. We read in the nineteenth chapter of
the Acts of the Apostles that St. Paul met some of these
disciples at Ephesus, at a late period of his apostolic career,
and more than twenty years after the death of Jesus.


These disciples, we are told, had never heard of the Holy
Spirit. They were still apparently looking forward to a
future Messiah. Accordingly St. Paul persuaded them that
the Messiah had actually come, and that Jesus was he.
And then, of course for the first time, they were baptised
into the name of Jesus. There is not the slightest allusion
to any definite testimony which the Baptist had given to
Jesus, We may be quite sure that neither St. Paul nor the
author of the Acts of the Apostles could have failed to quote
the testimony had they been acquainted with it. There is
therefore no escape from the conclusion that the Baptist
did not, as the fourth gospel states, assert the pre-existence
of Jesus, and hail him twice over as the Lamb of God, and
look on with joy while all men left his baptism and flocked
to the baptism of Jesus.
The Acts of the Apostles has also something to say
about the Samaritans. Philip, the deacon, is said to have
been driven from Jerusalem by the persecution which pre-
vailed there. He took refuge in Samaria, preached the
Gospel in that district, and converted a number of the
people. Afterwards the Apostles heard that Samaria had
received the word of God, and Peter and John went down
to finish the work. There must be some exaggeration in
this account, for the Samaritans, as a whole, never became
Christians, and hold their own religion at this day. Still
the story in the Acts is at least credible so far as this, that
it does not contradict the evidence of the Synoptics that
the ministry of Jesus was confined to the Jews. On the
other hand, the beautiful story of the Samaritan woman,
related by the fourth evangelist, is in flagrant contradiction
to history. Jesus tells the woman plainly that he is the
Messiah. She and many of her countrymen believe. Nay,
more. Jesus raises her to a point of view far above the
disputes of Jews and Samaritans. “ Salvation,” he says,
“is from the Jews,” but a new dispensation is coming, or
rather is already come, in which all local distinctions are
to vanish. Everywhere spiritual worship is to be offered to
God, who is a spirit, and Mount Sion is of no more account
than Mount Gerizim. The exquisite pathos, the sublime
spirituality of the story should not keep us from asking


how it was, if the story be true, that Matthew represents
Jesus as expressly forbidding his disciples to enter any
city of the Samaritans, how it was that fierce disputes on
the obligation of the law agitated the Apostolic age, neither
side making any appeal to the Master’s conduct or to his
great saying on the spirituality of religion.
Once more, the fourth gospel brings Jesus into direct
contact with the Greeks. The Jews themselves think it
possible that Jesus means to go and teach the Greeks. A
few days before his death Greeks desire to see him. He
feels that a crisis in his life has come. He prays that his
name may be glorified, and a heavenly voice answers, “ I
have both glorified it and will glorify it again.” The hour
is drawing near of which Jesus had already spoken,
“Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also
must I bring, that there may be one flock and one shep-
herd.” In a little he would be raised from the earth, and
would draw all men to himself. This is not the true
history of what Jesus said and did in the flesh. But it is
the history of the work which the Spirit of Jesus did. When
the evangelist -wrote the Jewish Christians were few, and
had little influence. The conflict between Paul and the
older apostles had been forgotten. The Gospel had stripped
off the grave-clothes of Judaism ; it claimed the allegiance
of the world.
Herein is the undying merit of the great evangelist.
More fully and clearly than his predecessors, more fully
and clearly, even than St. Paul, he saw that Jesus was no
mere Jewish Messiah, but the light of the world. All
light that ever visited the sons of men came from him—
all that was good and noble in heathen life or in Greek
philosophy, no less than all that was good and noble in
Hebrew prophecy. An early father of the Church, who
adopted the same identification of Jesus with the Word of
God, boldly speaks of Socrates as a martyr and a Christian.
This lofty teaching is independent of any belief in a per-
sonal Word or a secondary God; enough to hold that what-
soever is true and noble descends from above, from that
same divine power which dwelt in Jesus, reconciling the
world to itself. The scattered lights which had burnt


in prophet and sage were focussed in Jesus. He is at once
the image of the Father’s glory and the light of the world.
The evangelist does not always consider the sonship of
Jesus as a prerogative peculiar and apart. He calls him
the only-begotten, but he adds, “ As many as received, to
them gave he power to become the children of God.”
The evangelist also inaugurates a nobler view of the
atonement. St. Paul thought of Jesus as a sin offering,
an expiation for the sins of the world; with his Jewish
training, he could not do otherwise. St. John, with
deeper insight, describes him as the Lamb who taketh away
the sins of the world. St. Paul set faith and works in an
opposition which was safe for him, but liable to misunder-
standing and abuse. To St. John faith is itself a work; it
implies a loving and self-sacrificing sympathy with the
grace and truth which shone forth in Jesus. It is one
with that love which manifests itself in the keeping of the
commandments, and, above all, in the observance of the
new commandment—that we love one another. The
theology of Paul fixed his attention on the death of Christ,
and he scarcely ever alludes to his words or actions. To
John, the life, the death, the words, the deeds of the
incarnate Word were all alike divine.
Once more, the Jewish Christians, and St. Paul also,
were waiting for the speedy coming of the Son of Man
and the end of the world. To St. John, it seems that
Jesus is ever coming, and manifesting himself to the soul
that loves him. He comes in every crisis of human history,
convincing the world of sin, judging it in one sense, saving
it in another. A long vista opens out before the evan-
gelist. Eternal life is the believer’s portion already, and
the many mansions which Jesus has gone to prepare are
but the continuation of the life that now is. Jesus is
gone ; but the Spirit has taken his place, and although the
revelation in the incarnate Word is complete, yet, as new
needs arise, as we know more of the miseries of society,
and have new means of redressing them, the Spirit takes
of the things which are Christ’s, and manifests them to us.
The commandment of love has been from the beginning ;
Jesus gave it in its fulness eighteen hundred years ago, but


the wisest and the best do not understand it yet. To the
end of time the Spirit which dwelt in Jesus will call us to
new applications of that perfect rule.
I feel that the historical Jesus—the Jesus of Mark, the
Jesus of the parables—is greater than any ideal Christ.
He is greater, because he is the Christ that God gave.
And yet what a flood of light this fourth gospel throws on
the work of Jesus, on the revealing and attractive power of
him who was and is the light of the world! There are
times when I find myself saying, with Clement, “ This is
the spiritual gospel,” or, with Luther, “This is the true,
the tender gospel. This is the crown of all the gospels.”
TV—THE WOMAN OE SAMARIA.
“ The hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth, for such
doth the Father seek to he His worshippers. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in
spirit and in truth.” — John iv. 23, 24.
It will be best to begin by pointing out that the beautiful
story from which my text is taken has no claim to rank as
a real incident in the life of Jesus. Indeed, its completely
unhistorical character betrays itself at each point of the
narrative, at each turn in the discourse attributed to Jesus.
We may well ask how the evangelist could have known the
words which Jesus spoke to the woman by the well, seeing
that Jesus and the woman were by themselves and without
a witness. We need not, however, urge this difficulty, or
examine the attempts of apologists to evade it. It is


enough if we confine ourselves to positive evidence, and
contrast assured facts, as we learn them from earlier
records, with the bold idealism of this chapter. It is but
slowly and gradually that the real Jesus, as portrayed in
the synoptic gospels, breaks away from the restraints of
Judaism and reaches the freedom of a completely spiritual
religion. In particular, it is not till the last week of his
earthly life that Jesus contemplates the destruction of the
temple at Jerusalem. Then, and, so far as we know, not
till then, he had a presentiment of the struggle with the
Romans, which would be provoked by the religious fanati-
cism of the Jews, and foretold its final issue. “As he went
out of the temple, one of his disciples saith to him, Master,
behold what manner of stones and what manner of build-
ings! Jesus said to him, Seest thou these great buildings ?
There shall not be left here one stone upon another which
shall not be pulled down.” Very different is the represen-
tation of the chapter before us. Here, at an early date in
his ministry, Jesus speaks of the cessation of the temple
worship, and mentions it, almost incidentally, to a
Samaritan woman. Again, the real Jesus was wholly
silent about his position as the Messiah till his life
was all but over. When, just before the final crisis,
Peter acknowledged his master as the Christ, Jesus
“charged them that they should tell no man of him.”
Here it is Jesus who openly asserts his right to the
Messianic title, and the Samaritan inhabitants of the
village accept him, not only as the Messiah, but also as
the Saviour of the World. These things become more
strange when we remember that the Jesus of Mark and
Matthew confined his ministry to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, and never came into connection with the
Samaritans at all, while even Luke, who does make Jesus
pass through Samaria on that last journey which ended in
his death, expressly says that the Samaritans refused to
receive the disciples of Jesus, or to give them the least
hospitality. Add to all this, that the disciples, those very
men who long after the death of Jesus could not bring
themselves to eat with Gentiles, here partake of Samaritan
food and lodge in a Samaritan house without the faintest


scruple. We cannnot treat a story so improbable, or
rather, impossible, as sober history.
It is time, however, to pass from critical discussion to the
exquisite poetry of the scene. See how the consummate
skill of the artist chooses every detail to suit the purpose of
the whole. It is the evening hour, and the woman has
come to draw water from the well beyond the scene of the
busy village. There by the well sits one waiting for her,
and he alone can convey that gift of God of which the
water deep down in the well is the symbol, the living water
leaping up to life eternal. The stranger seems to be a Jew,
and she is one of the Samaritans, that hated race with
whom the Jews have no dealings. What matters it ? If
that mysterious stranger seems to be a Jew, while he
tabernacles in the flesh, he' is in reality raised by nature
far above all distinctions of race. He is the Saviour
of the World, the Word through whom all things
were made, and the woman of whom he asks water
owes the light of life to him. But Jesus begins quite
simply. His disciples have left him, taking with
them the can and the cord which eastern travellers
carry. “Give me,” he says, “to drink.” The woman
expresses her astonishment that he, a Jew, should ask
water from her, a Samaritan. Jesus tells her, in reply,
that there is something marvellous in his request, far more
marvellous than she dreams. Did she but know who he
was, did she but know the gift of God, then their relations
would be reversed. She would ask of Jesus and he would
have given her living water. The woman asks what he
means. He had nothing wherewith to draw, and the well
is deep, 75 feet deep, if the traditional Jacob’s well be the
same as that of which the evangelist speaks. And if Jesus
had access to some other source of living water, what
better water could there be than that which had been
given the Samaritans by Jacob the Patriarch, to whom the
Samaritans proudly traced their descent. Jesus went on to
describe the water which was his gift, not Jacob’s. He who
drinks of the water from Jacob’s well thirsts again. He who
drinks of the living water thirsts no more for ever. Earthly
water springs from the earth and in an instant falls back to


the earth. The water which Jesus gives rises in the heart
and springs up to life eternal. The woman is not overawed
as yet. Half mockingly, perhaps with some suspicion that
Jesus was a magical wonder-worker, she begs him to give
her this water and save her the trouble of any more
journeys to the well. Accordingly, Jesus having failed to
reach her understanding, addresses her conscience. He who
knew what was in man, who knows all things, bids her
fetch her husband. He has touched her to the quick. She
confesses that she has no husband, and Jesus tells her she
speaks the truth, for she has had five husbands, and he
whom she now has is not her husband. She is affrighted
and ashamed. She perceives that she has been speaking
to a prophet. But she makes a desperate effort to turn the
conversation from her own sins to the more pleasant field of
controversial theology. Alas! how easily we can enter into
her motives! How gladly we attack our orthodox brethren!
How eager we are to forget that those who differ from us
in theoretical belief put us to shame by their holy lives.
We will think of anything rather than of our own state
before God. But to return to the story. There was bitter
strife between Jews and Samaritans about the place where
sacrifice should be offered. At Jerusalem, said the Jews,
appealing, and rightly, to every page in the book of Deuter-
onomy. At Gerizim, said the Samaritans, and much blood
had been shed in the quarrel. Jesus answers, but his
answer transcends the religion both of Samaritans and
Jews. He admits, indeed, that salvation has begun from
the Jews. The Samaritans do not know the God they
worship; the Jews, thanks to their prophets, do know him,
or at least can. Yet Judaism itself is but a stage in the
evolution of that perfect worship which is coming, or rather
has already come. It transcends all local limits. It is
offered everywhere to the Father, who is a spirit, in spirit
and in truth. The woman does not dare to defend her
national prejudices, nor, on the other hand, is she ready to
abandon them. Enough to wait till the Christ comes and
declares all things. “Jesus saith unto her, lam he.”
As the dialogue was ending, his disciples came and
wondered to see him in conversation with a woman, for the


rabbis held it disgraceful for a learned man to salute even
his wife in public. Meantime, the woman had gone, and
the disciples besought him to eat of the food they had
brought from the village. He would not. He had meat
to eat which they knew not of: he was upheld by the joy
of doing God’s will, by the joy of seeing the Lord’s work
prosper in his hands. In the conversion of the Samaritans,
which was to follow immediately, he saw the first-fruits of
the Gentile world which he had come from heaven to save.
The green corn was sprouting all around them in the fruit-
ful soil of central Palestine. Yet four months must pass
before harvest began. In the spiritual order it was other-
wise. Even now the Word made flesh had scattered the
seed, and see, already, the fields were white to the harvest.
Into these white harvest fields Jesus sends his disciples.
The labour of sowing was not theirs. But they
are to partake in the joy of the harvest. They are to
gather fruit unto life eternal, that he that sowed and they
that reap may rejoice together.
Lastly, let us try to understand the text, in which the
teaching of the story reaches its highest point. The true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth.
God is a spirit, and they that worship Him must worship
Him in spirit and in truth. Like knows like. It is only in
virtue of our spiritual nature that we can apprehend God,
who is a spirit. We know Him as our Father. In other
words, all that is good and holy, all that is spiritual in us,
is a reflex of the Divine nature. And when our worship
overleaps all boundaries of time and space, when it is
purged from all gross material and unworthy thoughts of
God, then our worship is “in the spirit.” It is true
worship. It is the worship which the Father seeks.
Listen to St. Augustine’s comment on the text. “ Our
Lord teaches the woman—Woman, believe me, for unless
ye believe, ye cannot understand. Not on that mountain,
not in the temple, but in spirit and in truth. If God
were material, there might be reason for worshipping him
on a mountain, for a mountain is material—or in a temple,
for a temple is material. We had wandered without, we
are sent back within. 0 that I could find, you said, a high


and lonely mount—for I believe God is on high, he will
hear me better, if I mount high. The Lord is near. To
whom? To the lofty? Nay, but to those that are of a
lowly spirit. The thing is strange. He dwells on high
and he draws near to the humble : he has respect to the
lowly. Did you seek for a mountain ? Go down that you
may reach him. Transact all within. Do you seek some
lofty place, some holy place ? then make your heart the
temple of God.”
The true text, says a learned German, for the reforma-
tion of the Church. The true text, I add, for the reforma-
tion of ourselves.


MASON, FIRTH AND M‘CUTCHEON, PRINTERS,
12 st. james’s buildings,
LITTLE COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.


