

<39
£ #


ftu [du-
«Pf tWuAjtk'
A- i jhu*


.
*•/
. I




A HOME IN THE BUSH




.
■
.


/ - •
It was the groan of some human being that they heard.
p.
Home in the Bush .


A HOME IN THE
BUSH
H. L. BEDFORD
AUTHOR OF
“Barbara’s heroes,” “under one standard,” etc.
LONDON:
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C. ; 43, QUEEN VICTORIA ST., E.C.
BRIGHTON : 129, NORTH STREET
NEW YORK : E. S. GORHAM


PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE TRACT COMMITTEE.]


PAGE
7
18
30
40
50
60
- 70
80
- 91
101
A 7 I £>loo3
CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I. THE ARRIVAL 7
11. THE NEW HOME l 8
111. A NEEDFUL DISCIPLINE 3°
IV. THE PI-ANEERS 4°
V. FOR KING AND COUNTRY 5°
VI. CORONATION DAY 6o
VII. LOVED AND LOST 7°
VIII. AN ADVENTURE 8o
IX, GOOD NEWS FROM HOME - - QI
X. god’s LAMB ioi
XL THE ANGEL'S SONG - - - 111


ILLUSTRATED BOOKS
THE SAME AUTHOR
Barbara’s Heroes : Ancient and Modern. Large crown
Bvo. Cloth boards, is. 6 d.
Drusilla the Second. Large crown Bvo. Cloth boards,
is. 6 i.
Her Only Son Isaac. Large crown Bvo. Cloth boards,
is. 6 d.
Mr. Punch and Party. Large crown Bvo. Cloth boards,
is. 6 d.
Under One Standard ; or, The Touch that makes us Kin.
A Story of the Time of the Maori War. Large crown Bvo.
Cloth boards, is. 6 d.
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
London : Northumberland Avenue, W.C.


A HOME IN THE
BUSH
CHAPTER I
The Arrival
44 This must be the end of our journey.”
Bruce Farrar swung himself to the ground
from the top of the crazy coach which had
brought him and his little sister at headlong
speed up hill and down dale from Yarnsley
railway station to the little township of Wara-
tah, some eight miles distant.
He turned as he spoke to give a helping
hand to Prudence, but, despising his assistance
she put her foot on the wheel and sprang to his
side, whilst the coachman with scant ceremony
banged down the various trunks which


contained the children’s possessions on the gra-
velled walk which bordered the long, straggling
street on either side, and prepared to drive
his smoking team to their stable.
It was a strange world the children looked
upon, this island of Tasmania, of whose exist-
ence they had been scarcely aware more than
six months ago, and now it was to be their
home. The long voyage on the big ship
which had brought them from England to
Melbourne was behind them with its delight-
ful store of memories.
A strange gentleman had fathered them in
the short trip across Bass’s Straits; and from
Burnie, the little seaport where they had
landed, they had travelled under care of the
guard, rather to Bruce’s annoyance. At
twelve years of age he felt quite capable of
taking care of himself and his sister on land if
not on sea.
Now it must be owned he felt himself
stranded as he stood amongst his boxes, and
wondered what was going to happen next, for
no one was there to meet them.
“ Where are you kiddies bound for ? ” said


the coachman, looking down from his box-
seat.
“ For Mr. George Farrar, our uncle,” Bruce
explained. “He lives close here somewhere,
and promised to be here to meet us.”
“ Not so very close neither,” the man
answered. “ His place is twelve miles from
here if it’s an inch. However, someone belong-
ing to him is coming up this way now.” A
sound of wheels approaching rapidly fell on
the children’s ears, and they turned to see a
light carriage, mounted on four very high
wheels and drawn by two rough-looking
horses, coming towards them.
The driver, a bronzed young fellow of about
one-and-twenty, clad in rough tweed and tan
gaiters, drew up with a jerk, put his whip
through the reins, and jumped to the ground.
“ One boy, one girl, and enough luggage for
a score of you,” he said, with a good-humoured
laugh. “ Bruce and Prudence Farrar, eh ?
I’m your Cousin Fred. Now look sharp and
bundle in.” Before they could answer, Pru-
dence was hoisted into the front of the buggy
whilst Bruce scrambled in behind.


“ There’s not much room for the boxes,”
said Prudence, shyly.
“No fear ! They will come along on the
bullock wagon yonder.” He nodded toward
the side of the road where a rough, open wagon
stood waiting, the patient bullocks moving
their heavy heads from side to side as if
remonstrating at carrying any further burden,
for the dray was already heavily weighted with
produce.
" Oh, but can’t we ride on the wagon ? It
would be such fun. They don’t drive bullocks
at home,” cried Bruce.
“ You’d be pretty jolly tired before you got
to the end of the journey. Bullocks take their
time, but they are splendid for draught work
in hilly country like this. Hello, Jem ! ”
signing to the lad in charge of the team.
“ Just see to the kiddies' boxes, will
you ? ”
Jem, a splendidly built young fellow of
about eighteen, came leisurely towards the
buggy, and shook each child genially by the
hand.
“ So you are the little new chums ? I dare


say you think us a queer lot at first, but you’ll
like us all right when you’re used to us,” he
said, his kindly blue eyes sweeping the new-
comers from head to foot.
Prue returned his gaze unflinchingly, won-
dering who this big boy dressed in a tan-linen
suit with trousers tied under the knee, and a
slouch hat pulled over his head, might be.
She a little resented his familiarity.
“ Why does he talk to us like that ? I
don’t know him,” she said, sedately, as Fred
whipped up the horses, and they started off
at a brisk trot.
“ For the same reason that I talk to you,”
Fred answered, with a hearty laugh. “ He’s
my brother, and your Cousin Jem. I dare
say you didn’t guess who he was in his working
clothes.”
“ No, I didn’t,” said Prue, frankly ; “ but
he’s got nice blue eyes.”
“ Yes, he’s all right. Come up, Lightfoot;
steady, Tim,” as the horses shied at the huge
trunk of a tree that lay alongside the road.
“ You won’t be afraid if the horses play up a
bit ? ” with a glance at the little girl at his


side ; but her lips were parted in a half-smile,
her dark eyes big with excitement.
“ But I love it, I love it all. I didn’t
know it would be like this. It’s like —it’s
like ”
“ What’s it like ? ” asked Fred, smiling at
the child’s delight.
“ What they taught us at school, ‘ The
purple-headed mountain, the river running by,'
isn’t it, Bruce ? We are driving straight
towards the mountain, and there’s the river
that we’re coming to.”
Bruce stood up to command a better
view.
“ We’re going through it, aren’t we ? ”
“ Yes ; it’s only a creek now; but some-
times after the winter rains the water
sweeps into the buggy. We call it the
Dasher.”
“ And the mountain, what is its name ? ”
asked Bruce.
“ Lion —Mount Lion. A fine old fellow,
isn’t he ? We’re sideways on to him here,
and you see his grand old body all seamed and
scored with the action of centuries of rough


weather, and there’s his head at the end.
Some folks think it’s more like a nigger’s head ;
but, like most things, it’s just the way you
look at it.”
“ Such great big cracks ! ” said Prue.
“ They look as if they’d hurt the lion if they
came all at once.”
" It’s silly to talk as if he were alive,” said
Bruce, contemptuously. “ I want to climb
up it.”
“ We may do it some day, in the summer,
perhaps ; but it’s a rough climb for kiddies
like you.”
" We’re strong; Prue’s as strong as
a boy, although she’s only ten years
old.” *
” Right stuff for the colonies, then.”
Other ranges of mountains sloped away into
the far distance ; wherever the children looked
they saw nothing but hills, many of them
clothed in native bush, untouched at present
by man’s hand ; but round the homesteads
they passed there were many large clearings,
and more land prepared for it, where the trees,
ringed ready for burning first and felling later


when the fire had done its work, had died
where they stood, and looked to the un-
accustomed eyes of the children, who gazed
at them for the first time, like a forest of
ghosts with their silvered trunks clearly
defined against the blue sky.
“ Why do you skin the trees ? ” Prue
asked. " They look so cold and dreary.”
“ The first thing we have to do if we take
up land out here is to clear it. It’s the
thickest, tallest bush in the Commonwealth.
Many of those gum trees are more than a
hundred feet high ; so we cut broad rings of
bark off them somewhere near the bottom,
and that kills them, you see. Then at the
end of the summer, when the wood is dry, we
set fire to them, and sometimes you can see a
dozen bush fires burning at once.”
“ But it might burn the houses, too,” said
Bruce.
“ It would, if one were not careful to have
a good big clearing round the house. No one
in his senses starts a bush fire near his home-
stead, but sometimes a contrary wind carries
it too near to be comfortable.”


THERE," SAID FRED,


“ Has the fire ever come too near you ? **
cried Prue, eagerly.
“ Only once, and that was years ago ; we
fear neither wind nor fire.”
“ But wind ! Why should you be afraid of
wind ? ” Bruce asked.
“ A winter gale comes roaring through the
bush, and you lie snug in bed, and hear the
crash of falling timber like thunder all about
you ; but we’ve burned and felled the tall trees
near our house, so we know that our roof is
safe.”
“ It’s frightfully exciting and interesting.”
said Prue, laying a hand on Fred’s sleeve.
“ It’s like a boy’s story-book. Tell us some
more, please.”
Fred, well pleased with his eager listeners,
did tell more, so that the twelve miles’ drive,
most of it a steady ascent towards the heart
of the hills, seemed all too short.
The sun was setting as they took the final
turn, which brought them almost face to face
with the lion’s head, and showed them another
lower mountain nestling against him.
“ There,” said Fred, pointing with his whip.


“ Do you see the house standing back in that
clearing ? That’s our place, and mother and
father are standing at the gate waiting to
welcome you.”


CHAPTER II
The New Home
Mr. and Mrs. Farrar stood, bareheaded and
smiling, at the open gate of the paddock
across which an ill-defined cart-track led to
the house, and Fred drew rein, bidding the
children alight and greet their uncle and aunt.
Bruce obeyed readily enough, jumping to the
ground, and lifting his cap with a pretty
grace, put his hands into those so kindly
outstretched to him. But he stiffened a little
to avoid his aunt’s embrace.
She laughed good-humouredl} 7 .
“ Too old to be kissed, eh ? Before long
I hope you’ll love me well enough to like me
to kiss you, as my boys do. Kisses are for
girls, so come along, little one.”
She held out open, hungry arms for Prue
to take refuge in ; but Prue’s happy excitement


had died away in a sense of strangeness
in her new surroundings, a certain homesick-
ness which she could not understand nor
explain, and she hid her face in Fred’s sleeve,
and burst into tears.
“ Oh, come, this will never do," said her
uncle, taking her in his arms, and putting her
on to her feet. “ Here’s Aunt Mary been
talking of nothing else all day but the little
girl who was coming to be our own little
daughter."
There was comfort in the clasp of the
strong, motherly arms, and rest for Prue’s
tired head on Mrs. Farrar’s shoulders. Gulp-
ing back her tears, the child hastened to
explain that she was not " sorry really," only
tired and very hungry, and might she get
down, please, and hold Aunt Mary’s hand,
which request was promptly granted. By the
time she reached the house Prue was smiling
through her tears like sunshine after rain.
Oh, Bruce, look ! It’s a weeny wooden
house ; so pretty, with all the roses growing
over it," she exclaimed.
Bruce stood, with his hands thrust deep in


his trousers pockets, regarding it thought-
fully.
“ There’s no upstairs, is there ? ” he said.
“ No,” said Mr. Farrar. "We build all our
houses bungalow fashion. It’s cheaper, and
more convenient.”
“ And we shall sleep downstairs! How
funny that will be ! ” said Prue.
“ Yes, your uncle has built on two new
rooms in readiness for your coming,’ said
Mrs. Farrar. " Come along and take off your
things, whilst uncle makes the tea.”
She led the way through the tiny hall to
the kitchen at the back, out of which a newly
made door at the side led into a room very
simply furnished, but that smelt fresh and
clean, and was pretty in its very simplicity.
“ There’s everything you’ll want, dear;
and nothing to cumber up the place. And
soon you’ll be woman enough to keep it all
yourself, won’t you ? ” said Aunt Mary,
glancing round her with housekeeperly pride.
“ And Bruce’s room, next door, is the fellow
of this, just as if you were twins. I thought
you would like to be close together.”


“ Yes, we shall/' said Prue, gratefully.
It was May, and the nights were beginning
to be chilly, and the large log hre in the one
big room of the house, which served the
double purpose of dining and sitting-room,
gave a sense of comfort and good cheer as
Prue entered. Bruce stood in front of the
fire spreading out his hands to the blaze, but
both he and Prue were glad enough to draw
their chairs to the table. Prue, as a matter
of fact, folded her hands and said her grace
aloud, and Mr. and Mrs. Farrar glanced at
each other with a little smile. Saying grace
was an old custom that had almost fallen
into disuse in the stress of daily life. It was
good that the child should remind them of it.
Ihe meal was indeed one to be thankful for,
and the children, who had not broken their
fast since a hurried early breakfast, did more
than justice to it.
Prue’s eyes were heavy with sleep before
the end, and Aunt Mary carried her off to
bed directly it was over, although the bullock
wagon with the children's luggage had not
yet arrived.


“ I’ll find something to wrap you in, and
you’ll lie as warm and snug as in your own,”
said Aunt Mary.
The fun of wearing “ grown-up ” clothes
instead of her own took away any sense of
loneliness, and Prue dropped into sound sleep
almost as soon as her head touched the pillow.
Fred, meanwhile, wandered off to the farm,
in readiness to give a hand to the unyoking
of the bullocks when Jem came home, leaving
Bruce with his uncle and aunt, who drew
from him by gentle questioning the story of
the father’s last illness and death, which had
left the children without a near relation save
the uncle who, as a boy, had sailed away to
the colony to make his fortune. The fortune
had never come, but strenuous hard work
had kept him from want, and in much happi-
ness and comfort since he had married Mary
Barton, a neighbouring farmer’s daughter ;
and now that two grown-up sons worked
side by side with the father on the farm
the work of earlier years began to bear fruit,
and a nice sum for a rainy day was laid
by in the bank. So it had been possible


’ ~’ . y
WEARING GROWN-UP CLOTHES INSTEAD OF HER OWN.


to offer to adopt the nephew and niece from
England.
" The boy will be worth his salt very soon,
and the girl will fill the place of the one we’ve
lost, please God,” said Mr. Farrar, when they
had talked the matter over.
Mrs. Farrar had held her peace, knowing,
as only a mother could, that no child, how-
ever sweet and winsome, could fill the place
of the one she had loved and lost.
But to-night, when she finally carried off
Bruce to his room, she softly turned the
handle of Prue’s door, and, entering, stood
for a moment by the little bed, shading the
light with her hand, and looked tenderly down
at the pretty, flushed face.
“ It’s not like one’s very own ; but she’ll
be very dear to me as the years go by,” she
said, half aloud, as she bent to kiss the sleep-
ing child.
Next morning Prue was awake with the
dawn, and hurried into her clothes with the
feeling that she out for a long holiday
in a delightful country where all sorts of
things might happen “adventure kind


of things ” that you could not look for at
home.
“ Bruce, Bruce dear, hurry up ! ” she said,
thrusting her curly head inside his door.
“ We are really here, you know, and it’s all
so wonderful! ”
Then the sound of milk splashing into a
pail sent her flying into the yard before Bruce
gave her an answer.
There, in the centre of the yard, sat Jem
of the blue eyes, milking a gentle cow who
turned and rubbed her nose on him as he
whistled over his work. Jem glanced at Prue
with a friendly nod.
" It’s the early bird catches the worm.
Trot into the kitchen and ask mother for a
cup, and you shall have some new milk.”
“ Do you do all the milking ? ” asked Prue,
when she returned with her cup.
“ Yes; nine cows night and morning.
Bruce will be helping me before he’s much
older.”
” He’ll love it. Am I not big enough ? ”
said Prue, looking thoughtfully at her little
hands.


Jem chuckled to himself.
“ Not yet awhile, but there will be plenty
for you to do in the house helping mother/'
“ But I like out of doors best,” said Prue,
wistfully, turning towards the mountain
which loomed big and blue in the morning
sunshine.
Close about her lay miles and miles of bush.
Near at hand much of it had been felled, and
giant trees lay in the half-cleared paddocks
near the house, the white boles of those
still standing looking less dreary with the
morning sunshine on them. They glistened
almost like silver.
" What a lot of milk you must drink,” she
said, returning suddenly to the subject in
hand, and Jem laughed loud and long.
“ So you think we put away the milk of
nine cows every do you ? This mountain
air makes you peckish ; but we’re not up to
that ! We put it in big cans, and Fred piles
them into a low cart, and drives them to one
of those shelters you passed on the road.”
“ Like an open shed on stilts ? ” asked
Bruce, who had come up behind. “ I saw


them, and wondered what on earth they were
for.”
“To stow away your milk-cans,” Jem an-
swered. “ Fred leaves them there, and once
a day a man from the factory, ever so far
away, drives round and clears the lot.”
“ What does he do with it ? ” asked the
children together.
“ Makes it into butter, of course ; and it’s
put on a bullock wagon and carried off to the
nearest railway station and sent to Launces-
ton.”
“ Oh, I want to drive the cart, and learn
to milk, and chop wood, and do lots of things,”
said Bruce, fired with the joy of the free life
that opened before him.
“ All in good time, chappie. To-day you
will have your first bush experience in seeing
two young steers broken-in.”
“Oh, how lovely ! ” said Prue, clapping
her hands. “ Like elephants that I read about
in stories ? ”
“ Yes ; I expect it’s something like that,
though not having helped to break-in ele-
phants, I can’t exactly say. Now father’s


blowing the horn, which means breakfast is
ready, so come along, young ones, and give
my tongue a little rest. I’ve not talked so
much for a month of Sundays.”
But all through breakfast Prue could only
talk of the ” little bullocks ” she was to see
broken-in to-day.
“ Steers ! ” corrected Bruce each time,
anxious to air his superior knowledge.
” Right, boy ! ” said his uncle, tapping
him on the shoulder. “ You’ll be an old
chum before the year is out.”


T ■ . y-• ' A i
aX- ;- ■ *fes« 7 r.;£St
egpiSfe •■ Y-- 4WH
■■■■' / ; • -i
"y\ v
‘.. y - ■
GETTING THE ROPE OVER THE NECKS OF THE YOUNG
STEERS.


CHAPTER 111
A Needful Discipline
Penned into an enclosure formed of log
fences the two young steers stood, scenting
danger in the air and determined to resist it.
Outside, in the open yard, there waited a
beautiful team of four red Devons yoked
together in pairs, who turned their heads
slowly towards Jem as he passed and spoke
to them in strange, half-caressing fashion, a
language he and they equally understood,
quite ready at his bidding to take their part
in the training of their wild young brothers.
Bruce and Prue, from a wood heap some
distance behind, watched the process with
delight, and held their breath as they saw
Jem and Fred lift down a log and step inside
the enclosure, carefully closing the gap before
they began their work. It was necessary


first to get the yoke over the necks of the
young steers ; no easy matter, for any en-
deavour to approach them was followed by
a wild dash for the opposite side of the enclo-
sure, and it required all the skill and agility
of their cousins to save themselves from being
trodden under foot in the wild stampede.
“ They’ve got ’em ! No, they’ve not —
they are off again ! ” cried Bruce, excitedly.
“ But isn’t Jem clever ? They are not
angry with him, only frightened,” Prue
answered. Indeed Jem’s handling of the
terrified animals was wonderful to see, and
his patience inexhaustible. It was evident,
as Prue said, that, whilst resenting the new
experiment, the steers still recognised him as
a friend, and it was his reassuring voice,
combined with a firm decision, that finally
persuaded the steers to bow their beautiful
heads to the unaccustomed yoke.
Then terror conquered for awhile, and the
pair scampered round the enclosure, pulling
madly away from each other, trying with all
their might to break the clumsy yoke which
held them together, a useless effort which


only exhausted their strength. They stood
still for a moment shaking from head to foot,
and then came Jem’s opportunity. He held
in his hand a couple of stout ropes which were
already fastened to the hindmost pair of
bullocks of the team outside, and whilst Fred
made an opening in the fence, Jem, with
extraordinary deftness, secured the ropes to
the steers’ yoke. They plunged head fore-
most into the open yard, and at the same
moment Jem shouted to his well-trained team
to move forward to the paddock beyond, so
the steers were obliged to move with them.
They could not resist the force of four full-
grown bullocks, but they did their best !
“Just look at ’em playing up ! ’’ cried
Bruce, clapping his hands ; but Prue’s sym-
pathy was with the steers.
“ They’ll hurt themselves if they go on like
that,’’ she said.
Indeed it seemed as if in their wild fight
for freedom they might do themselves some
harm. They rushed at the pair in front of
them, who received the shock of impact with
the steadiness of a rock and still moved


onward. Then the steers held back, placing
their hoofs together ; but even so they found
themselves forced along like naughty boys
dragged to school. They plunged from side
to side ; but Mr. Farrar, riding on horseback
behind them, brought them back to line. It
was discipline, and hard discipline ; but in
half an hour the steers were beginning to
understand that submission was the wiser
policy, and presently the children saw Jem
unfasten them from the team, remove the
hateful yoke, stroking their foam-flecked heads
as he did so, and assuring them that it was
not so bad after all.
" That's lesson number one ; number two
will come easier," he said.
" It's just splendid! ” said Bruce, drawing
a long breath. “ Who taught you how to
do it ? ”
“ I don't know; it’s nature, I suppose,"
said Jem, indifferently.
“ Yes; it’s born in a fellow," interposed
Fred, with a proud glance at his brother.
" I’ve no hand with bullocks, whilst Jem is
the best driver in all the country round. He


and his team take the cake wherever they
go”
“ It’s nothing to blow about,” said Jem,
simply. “ It’s just a way with them. They
know me from the minute they are born, and
they soon find out that I’m fond of them,
and they love me just because I study them
a bit. They work hard, but I never overwork
them, and they know pretty well I’d kill
anyone who ill-treated ’em.” And the blue
eyes that generally smiled were stern.
Later Fred told Bruce that a man whom
Jem had found persecuting the bullocks had
received a thrashing he was not likely to
forget.
" He's so big and strong, he could do it,”
said Bruce. ” I’d want to, but I couldn’t.”
Fred laughed.
” You’re ambitious, nipper. Just a half-
grown kid ! But by the time you’re his age
you may be as big as he is.”
All that day Bruce’s head was full of the
things he would learn and do, now he had his
chance. Books were dull, horrid things ;he
was glad to be done with them. This was


the life for him. Jem was an awfully decent
chap, and he would keep his eyes open, and
watch what he did, and how he did it; and in
a few years’ time—only six years—he would
be just as fine and strong a fellow as his
cousin.
So Bruce dreamed all that day and night;
but the following day he had a rude awakening.
" Bruce," said Prue, slipping her hand in
his as he sauntered up towards the paddock
to see how the steers fared after their yester-
day’s experience ; " Bruce, dear, what’s a
date school ? "
"A what?" said Bruce, stopping short in
his walk, and staring at his little sister.
A date school," repeated Prue, firmly.
“ I want to know what kind of school it is.”
“ There’s no such thing. You’re talking
silly."
“ But there is," persisted Prue, on the verge
of tears. “ I heard Uncle Tom talking about
it to Aunt Mary. He said, ‘ I must call in
to-day at the date school, and tell the master
that I shall be sending the children along
presently.’ "


Bruce’s forehead contracted into a frown,
and he planted his feet together more firmly
on the ground, his outward action showing
his inward thought, which, like that of the
young steers, was to resist his fate.
“ It’s State school he must have said. All
the schools here are run by Government, and
are called State schools, but I’ll just talk to
Uncle Tom, and tell him I don’t mean to go
to school any more. I know quite enough
already. I mean to work on the farm.”
Prue looked rather awe-struck.
“ But if he says you must, Bruce ! ”
“He won’t ! When he knows I’ve been
quite regularly to school all my life. You
don’t want Latin and Greek out here. You
want to grow strong and big, like Jem, and
you do that by living in the open air. Of
course, you will have to go to school a bit
longer.”
Prue accepted Bruce’s decision without
question, as she always did, but her heart
sank at the thought of facing strangers alone.
That evening after supper Mr. Farrar told
the children that he had been down to the


school, about three miles away, and they
were to begin lessons in a week’s time.
“ I’ve finished lessons,” said Bruce, redden-
ing a little; “but I could see Prue safely
there until she gets used to the road.”
Uncle Tom eyed him with whimsical
humour.
“ Who said you had done with lessons,
boy ? ”
“ I know plenty for out here,” said Bruce,
a little taken aback by his uncle’s question.
“ That’s for me to decide, isn’t it ? I know
more of life out here than you do, and a boy
wants as quick brains out here as a boy at
home. My boys went to the State school
every day until they were fourteen, and I
mean you to do the same.”
Bruce’s glance was distinctly mutinous.
“ But —but must we go to the common
State school where all the other children
go ? ” he stammered. “ It’s not what we’d
do at home.”
“So it’s your pride that’s wounded, is
it ? ” said his uncle, not unkindly. “ The
first thing you’ve got to learn out here is


that ways and customs are very different
from what they are at home. You’ve got to
take the chance of education that offers, and
make the best of it, and you can learn a great
deal at our State schools if you care to ; and
as for other children, you see little enough of
them out of school hours. Directly lessons
are over you’ll mount your pony, and bring
Prue off home. It’s what you are, not whom
you meet, that matters.”
Bruce lifted his head, a ray of hope in his
eyes.
“ A pony ! Shall we have a pony ? ” he
said.
“ Well, yes ; we’d hardly expect either you
or Prue to walk six miles every day in all
weathers. I’ve an old one that can be trusted,
and for the first few weeks you can have Prue
in front of you. She’s a plucky little maid,
and will hold on tight.”
“Yes, I will,” cried Prue with a delighted
laugh.
“ And later, when I can find one to suit,
you shall hand over the sober one to Prue,
and have one of your own perhaps.”


So Bruce’s final opposition fell before the
promise of that pony.
“ Poor lad ! I had to gild the pill,” said
Uncle Tom, when Bruce had gone to bed.
“ The young things, steers or boys, are all
alike. They have to undergo their needful
discipline.”


CHAPTER IV
The Pi-aneers
“ It’s rather like Alice in Wonderland; it’s
all topsy-turvy." Pme sat on the wood-heap
watching Bruce saddle the quiet pony,
Sniggle on to his back, and trot him round
the yard.
“ A good thing if you don't go topsy-turvy
on our first ride to school," laughed Bruce.
" It’s all I can do to stick on myself at present.
I don’t know what will happen to you in
front of me."
“ Aunt Mary says we'd better drive at
present. We’re to go in the pony cart. I
said you could drive all right, but I was not
sure that you could put pony in and take
him out again."
" Stuff and nonsense ! I can learn, I sup-
pose ? "


PRUE WATCHING BRUCE TROT THE PONY ROUND THE YARD*


“ And I'll learn too. Girls do the same as
boys out here, you know. That’s another of
the topsy-turvy things, but I shall love it.
I’ve always wanted to do the same things as
you do, and now I may.”
“ You won’t drive bullocks,” said Bruce,
a little jealous at the prospect of losing his
masculine privileges.
“ I don’t want to ; they go so slow,” Prue
retorted, with spirit. “ Oh, Bruce, don’t go
away,” as he off-saddled the pony and prepared
to carry the saddle into the shed. “ I want
to talk. It’s jolly fun living out here, isn’t
it ? Just like playing a game all day long.
You never know what’s going to happen.”
“ The game’s up on Monday, when we go
to school,” said Bruce, a little gloomily.
“ Oh, no ; because we drive in a cart of
our own, and take our dinners with us, like
a picnic,” replied Prue, who generally looked
at the cheerful side of things.
The next day was Sunday—church Sunday,
Uncle Tom announced at breakfast time,
adding that the boys must hurry up so that
all the family might go.


“ What does he mean ? It's always
church Sunday at home," asked Prue of
Aunt Mary.
" You’re better off there than here," said
her aunt. " Clergymen out here have to look
after four or five places at once, and our turn
for service comes only twice a month ; morn-
ing service on the first Sunday of every month,
and afternoon service on the third."
“ How horrid ! " said Prue ; but Bruce
kept silent, pondering in his heart whether
church once a fortnight, instead of twice
every Sunday, was not rather a change for
the better than for the worse.
The morning was their own to do as they
liked with, and they wandered across the
half-cleared paddocks, where the cattle grazed,
towards the bush, which had scarcely begun
to be reclaimed. The bush, with its tangle
of undergrowth of fern and shrub, and the
trees so close together that the sunshine could
hardly penetrate, possessed a fascination
for the children, and they stood peering
into its shadowed depths with wondering
eyes.


44 A HOME IN THE BUSH
" The pioneers had hard work to clear all
this stuff away," Bruce said.
" What’s pi-aneers ? " Prue asked, ignorant
of grammar.
Bruce frowned, wondering how to explain
the term.
" It's the chaps who come first and clear
the way for others."
Prue clapped her hands delightedly. “ I've
thought of such a game! We’ll play pi-
aneers," she said. " We’ll make a path all
our own, won’t we. Bruce ? And we'll tell
no one about it till it’s ever so long. We’ll
do it bit by bit as we get time."
The notion caught on, scenting as it did of
adventure, but Bruce did not give too ready
an assent, as the suggestion w r as Prue’s.
“ It would be very easy to get lost," he
said; " but I could mark the trees with a
cross as we went along, so that we should
know our way back again. We might
begin here, where there’s a bit of a path
already."
They spent their morning at it, Prue tearing
up with her hands some of the undergrowth,


and Bruce cutting good-sized crosses on the
trunks of the trees. He soon decided that a
cross here and there must be enough, “ for if
I marked every tree it would take about a
year to do a mile,” he said ; but they had
penetrated quite a respectable little distance
into the bush when they heard the horn
summoning them to dinner.
“Now then, Prue, see how we do it. Here’s
a marked tree ; count twelve from it to the
right and you'll see another. No, silly, now
you’re turning too much, and you’ll get lost ; ”
and so with much laughter and fun the chil-
dren retraced their steps and got out into the
open.
“ Where have you been to make yourselves
in such a mess ? ” asked Aunt Mary, glanc-
ing at Prue’s grubby fingers and stained
frock.
“ Grubbing about the place,” said Bruce,
briefly, with a warning look at Prue to betray
nothing further.
Washed and dressed in Sunday best, Bruce
and Prue stood waiting for the buggy at
three that afternoon. Bruce and Prue got in


behind, Aunt Mary in the front, whilst Uncle
Tom took the reins, and the pair of horses,
after plunging and rearing a bit, consented
to move forward to the gate of the paddock,
which Fred held open.
" We’ll be after you in a brace of shakes,”
he said.
“ This is the road you’ll go along to-morrow,
so take notice,” said Uncle Tom to Bruce.
" You can’t well go wrong, but the hills
will be sharper than you’re accustomed to,
so you’ll keep a steady hand on the
reins.”
Bruce nodded with a growing sense of im-
portance. It was a little over three miles to
the school where service was held, and several
buggies were already hitched to the school
fence when they arrived. Uncle Tom dis-
mounted, helped out Aunt Mary, and offered
to lift Prue down.
“ I’d rather jump, thank you,” she said,
politely. “ Why do we stop here ? Why
can’t we drive to the church ? ”
Uncle Tom laughed. “ This serves as
church for want of a better one. Some day,


when our ship comes home, we hope to build
9 9
one.
Sunday service had become a sort of meet-
ing for the neighbourhood, and a group of
farmers with their families stood outside the
school house chatting together, until the clergy-
man came up on a fast trotting pony.
" Sorry to be late,” he said, cheerily, shak-
ing hands with one and another. “ Pony
cast a shoe, and I had to knock up a black-
smith and get him to put it on for me.”
He quickly noted the two new members of
his congregation and held out his hand with
a smile.
“Two new chums, eh ? One can tell it
by the cut of them. I wonder how you like
the new country ? ”
“ Very much, sir,” said Bruce.
" Except church in school,” said Prue
frankly. “ That seems very queer.”
Mr. Horton’s face grew grave. “ You’re
about right there, little one ; but God for-
gives what we’re too poor to help ; some day
we look to get a church of our own, don’t we,
Mr. Farrar ? ”


Then he moved forward into the school,
and his little congregation followed him
leisurely. The words were familiar enough,
but the surroundings were so strange that the
children scarcely followed the service at all.
They were coming there to-morrow to do
lessons, and that would seem much more
natural. They counted all the children, and
wondered how many of them would be their
schoolmates.
They related the result of their observations
to their uncle on the way home.
" Seems to me you were thinking of any-
thing but your prayers and what the clergy-
man said/’ he replied, gently.
“ You can’t think of prayers in a common
schoolhouse,” Bruce retorted, colouring a
little.
" I don’t deny that a church is better, but
we’d be badly off out here if we waited for
that. We have to try and put some life into
a service when and where two or three of us
are met together.”
“ And God does seem in the midst of us
sometimes,” said Aunt Mary.


Bruce was silenced but unconvinced, and
Prue wondered how Aunt Mary knew when
God was present in the midst of them. Did
she see Him ? For if so, she would like to
see Him too.


CHAPTER V
For King and Country
Quite a number of children gathered round
the pony-cart as Bruce drew up at the school-
house next day. All were filled with curiosity
about the English children, and most of
those who had caught a glimpse of them on
the previous day at the service were prepared
to pronounce them “ toffy,” that is, too soft
to be any good. So boys with hands in
pockets and shoulders resting against the
fence watched Bruce’s rather clumsy efforts
to take out the pony with ill-concealed amuse-
ment and delight. They burst with laughter
when he let the shafts fall with a jerk that
made even the quiet pony swerve aside. But
when it was free Bruce could tell what to do
with his pony.
The school was not the centre of a nest of


FOR KING AND COUNTRY 51
houses as in England, but stood by itself at the
meeting of four tracks, having been purposely
built in the most central situation for the sur-
rounding district. Very few of the scholars
lived close at hand, and many of them had
farther to come than the Farrar children.
But none of the parents were sufficiently
well-to-do to allow their children the use of a
pony-cart. A rough pony or two were turned
out by the wayside, and a good many bicycles
rested against the fence.
Bruce glanced round a little helplessly,
wondering what to do with cart and harness,
too proud to ask advice of any of the boys
whose laughter he resented.
“ Looking for your groom, eh ? " said one.
" This way to the coachhouse and stables,"
said another, moving towards the corner;
and in all good faith Bruce prepared to follow
him, arrested only by the burst of laughter
that greeted him. He reddened with vexa-
tion.
“ You’re greening me ! You might tell a
chap what to do, anyhow."
The free admission that he was a new chum


softened the attitude of one of the bigger boys,
who came forward leisurely, and in uncere-
monious fashion took off the pony’s harness,
threw it into the cart, and then drew the cart
itself on to the waste ground at the side of
the road, and turned the pony into a paddock
hard by. Bruce thanked him a little curtly,
and marched into school with his head up,
feeling himself a great deal too good for his
company.
" Children, I’ve something to say to you,”
said the master, before lessons began.
“ Thursday, June 22nd, when the King and
Queen wall be crowned, will be a great day
throughout the Empire, and we all want to
pay due honour to its observance. It is
thought best that the whole countryside
should meet at Waratah in a common rejoic-
ing, in which you children, the future subjects
of the King and Queen, wall play an important
part. There wall be a service in the open air,
and games and sports, in which I wish you all
to play your parts properly ; so, although
it is still some weeks till the day, it is not too
early to begin to get ready for it. I want


FOR KING AND COUNTRY 53
you all to enjoy one of the happiest days of
your lives, one you will always remember ;
but its chief object is to teach you boys and
girls in this comer of the empire to grow up
faithful subjects of the King, to be ready
at any time to fight for King and country
if need be. We must practise all the hymns
and songs that are to be sung on that day,
and I shall be glad to coach you for the
sports on half-holidays. To-day we’ll begin
school by singing ‘ God Save the King.’ ”
Most of the children joined in heartily
enough, but Bruce saw the boy who had
chaffed him leaning against the wall with
his mouth shut, and a sneer on his face.
“ Little cad; he won’t sing it 1 ” he
thought, wrathfully.
The morning’s lesson taught him much,
for he found that Colonial boys knew as much
or more than himself—in three R’s, at any
rate. Dinner was at twelve, and the two
children carried theirs out of doors, for though
the wind from the mountains blew cold, the
sun was bright. Then hearing their school-
mates discussing the Coronation, they drew


near to listen to what was said. All seemed
pleased at the prospect of the day’s excursion.
There was but one dissentient voice, and that
was Joe Billing’s, the boy who had kept silent
during the singing of the National Anthem
He stood on a tree-stump, slightly raised
above the others, and, standing on the out-
side of the circle gathered round him, the
children heard every word he spoke.
“ I call it a rotten show ! Nothing will drag
me there. Who cares a button for King
George ? I tell you this much, that if he
came by this very next minute, I’d neither
budge nor take off my cap to him.”
There was a hurried rush from the outside
circle, and Bruce, scarlet with passion, made
for the speaker, snatched his cap from his
head, and threw it far away into the scrub.
“ You shall take it off for him now then,
this very minute,” he panted.
The quickness of the retort caused a general
laugh, and somebody raised a cheer. Public
feeling was with Bruce.
Joe jumped from his stump and caught
Bruce by the collar.


J * _ j V ~ 1 w
THE EIGHT IN THE SCHOOX.YAEB.


“You cocky little toad! You think be-
cause you’re fresh from England you can
behave as if we were the dirt under your feet,
but I’ll soon show you better. You’re pre-
pared, of course, to fight for your King and
country.’’
Quick as thought Bruce tossed off his hat
and coat, rolled up his shirt-sleeves, and
stood with distended nostrils waiting for his
challenger. The circle grew wider, making
room for the combatants. No one noticed
Prue standing behind, white as a sheet, but
proud beyond words of Bruce, choking with
her longing to be a boy and take her part in
the fray. Not for worlds would she have
lifted a finger to stop the fight. Yet tears
welled into her eyes as she watched, peering
through the crowd in front of her and seeing
her brother often worsted in the fight. But
if knocked down, he was alw r ays up again, still
ready for the fray ; and presently from the
shouts in front of her she gathered that he
was getting the best of it.
“New chum, new chum! Go it, little
one! ’’ for Joe had stumbled, and Bruce


FOR KING AND COUNTRY 57
had sprung upon him and brought him to the
ground, and was on top of him pummelling him
with all his might and main.
At this juncture the master, puzzled by
the noise, came unexpectedly upon the scene,
separated the combatants, and marched them
off into school to learn what the quarrel was
about. But the boys were staunch ; neither
of them would tell.
" Very well, I shall give you both a caning,
which may prevent your fighting again,” said
the master.
" It won't if he says it again,” said Bruce ;
then repented of his rash speech, which had so
nearly let the cat out of the bag.
“ And I'm not a sneak. He shan’t think
I tell tales,” he thought.
The master, scanning the boy’s black eyes
and swollen face, decided that he had suffered
punishment enough for one day, and that the
caning should be left to a more convenient
season.
“ A new chum buys his experience, but
the next time you fight, my boy, I shall not
let you off so easily.”


Prue’s expression of sympathy was her
own little wet handkerchief, which she thrust
into Bruce’s pocket as she passed.
“ Your nose is still bleeding a little, Bruce
dear, but oh 1 you’re quite splendid ! " she
whispered, proudly.
After school a very queer thing happened.
Joe Billing stood outside, ready, Prue feared
to pick another quarrel, and even Prue's
brave spirit quailed at the thought of a second
fight. Bruce was pretty well used up.
“ Shake hands, new chum; you fancy
yourself a toff, but you’re a plucky one, and
you aren’t a sneak ; and as for your conceit,
you’ll soon get it knocked out of you and find
boys out here as good as those at home.
Where’s that blessed moke of yours ? I’ll
catch him for you if you like, and lend a hand
in putting him in.”
So Bruce’s fight for King and country on his
first day at school in the colony established his
future popularity on a firm basis. Arrived at
home, Aunt Mary bathed his face and hands
in hot water, and Uncle Tom listened to the
story with evident enjoyment.


" Licked him, did you, boy ? Licked him
into shape ? Good lad \ I am afraid I d
have done the same myself when I was a
boy.


CHAPTER VI
Coronation Day
Through the drenching days of winter the
game of pioneering was not permitted for the
time, and even if on a fine Saturday the
children tried to push their exploring a little
farther, they returned home outwardly wet
and muddy, and inwardly a little disheartened.
“ It’s rather poor fun ; we'll wait until days
are drier. Besides, we’re full up now until
this Coronation business is over,” said Bruce.
“ Oh, dear,” answered Prue, “ I do hope
the weather will clear up for that. Just
think what a drive we shall have with all the
others to Waratah if only the sun will shine ! ”
Shine it did with all its glory when Corona-
tion Day dawned. The children watched its
rising with glad triumph, and were off directly
after breakfast to join their companions at


the school, which was the centre from which
the start was to be made.
The rest of the Farrar family were to come
on a little later.
Dozens of happy, excited children greeted
Bruce and Pme as they trotted gaily up,
amongst them Joe Billing, looking a trifle
sheepish. Bruce acknowledged his presence
by a playful dig in the ribs.
“ So you’ve come after all, old chap ! "
“ It’s rather a spree, and everyone else is
going," said Joe ; and Bruce pushed the joke
no farther.
Now the children were packed thick as
herrings in a barrel into vehicles of every sort
and kind that could be mustered from the
surrounding farms. They started on their
way, singing school songs, cheering lustily as
they passed each other. Each moment of
the day was pure joy ; the long drive in the
bright air, the arrival at Waratah, where
crowds of other children waited, the march
through the town, headed by mounted scouts
in khaki, to the strains of one or two bands
who had offered their services for the occasion.


The spectacle was a very pretty one as the
procession filed slowly into the piece of
ground where the service was to be held,
which from this day forward was to be digni-
fied by the name of King George's Park. The
hundreds of happy children, each carrying a
bright-coloured flag, gave a dancing effect of
colour, enhanced by the brilliance of the sun-
shine and the azure sky overhead.
The children filed in orderly fashion round
the grand stand, and behind was a large body
of grown-up people who stood bare-headed
for the prayers which were presently offered
for the King and Queen, and the hymns were
sung with prevailing heartiness.
Then representative men from far and near
made speeches different in form but alike in
their expression of loyalty to the King and
Queen who were crowned that day in West-
minster Abbey. The function closed, of
course, with the singing of the National
Anthem, and directly it was over Prue broke
from the ranks and made a dash for Aunt
Mary, standing in the crowd behind.
“ Wasn't it glorious ? Didn’t they sing


loud ? But I said ' God save the King and
Queen/ It didn’t seem kind to leave her
out when she’s crowned just the same as
King George, isn’t she, Aunt Mary ? ”
“ Yes, and deserves our love as much as
he does. She’s a good kind woman by what
I hear of her. I hope she’ll feel to-day that
we’re loving her just as much on this side of
the world as they do at home.”
The children were feasted in relays at the
Town Hall, and the sports that followed, in
which old and young took part, filled in the
afternoon with excitement and delight.
Bruce was the winner of the hundred yards
race for boys under thirteen, and bore his
honours with modesty.
Not so Prue, whose initial remark to anyone
she spoke to was : ”My brother Bruce has
won a race, you know I ”
The day, alas 1 came too soon to a close,
and Uncle Tom wandered amongst the crowd
looking about for his family.
“ Bruce, Prue, come along 1 You’d best
come back with your aunt and me in the
buggy ; it will be quicker than the wagons.”


“Not wait for the fireworks ? ” said the
pair, rather blankly.
“ No, no ; we’ve a long way to go, and we
wouldn’t be home till midnight—too late hours
for young ones like you and old ones like
your aunt and me. Fred and Jem can stay,
for I’ve promised to look to the beasts when
I get home, and Bruce will give me a hand.’’
“ Yes,” said Bruce, cheering up at the
prospect of being his uncle’s right-hand man.
“ So you stay here by the gate whilst I go
and find your aunt and put the horses in the
trap.”
Prue sank upon a log close to the gate,
realising for the first time that her little feet
w T ere almost too tired to carry her another
step, and Bruce joined a knot of boys near
at hand, discussing the various events of the
day, the winners of the sports, and the fair-
ness, or unfairness, of the various aw r ards.
Seated at the far end of the log winch Prue
had chosen for a resting-place was an old
woman, “ hundreds of years old,” Prue said
to herself, as she glanced at her brown,
wrinkled face.


'// v fi r y j ’ // j ’1 - 4^—
' '
SEATED WITH HER ELBOWS ON HER KNEES,


She was seated with her elbows supported
on her knees and her chin resting in the
hollow of her hands, and she was gazing at
the busy scene before her as if wholly absorbed
by it. She drew her eyes from it reluctantly
at last and rose to her feet with a little sigh,
a tall, gaunt woman, her shoulders a little
bowed with the weight of her many years.
“ Well, it’s time I was moving home or
the dark will overtake me," she said, aloud ;
" but it’s something to think of for the rest
of my days. Til never forget Coronation Day
while I’m above ground.’’
She was talking to herself, and True knew
it, but the words so exactly fitted into her
own thoughts that she sprang to the old
woman’s side and placed a small hand in her
roughened one.
“ Oh, and I shan’t forget it, either ; never
in all my life,” she said.
The old woman’s keen eyes shone kindly
from beneath her shaggy overhanging eye-
brows.
“ And you’ll have longer days in which to
remember it; and yet I’ve enjoyed it as


much my way as you have in yours. It’s
worth all the tiredness ; it’s worth the long
tramp home.”
Is it a long tramp ? Haven’t you a
buggy, or anything ? ” stammered Prue, won-
dering if the question were ill timed.
“ Well, you see, my old man didn’t care
to stop. He said such gay doings were not
for the likes of him. He’s taken no interest
m Kings or Queens since Queen Victoria died.
Well never see her likes again,’ he says.
But I tells him we must move with the times,
and so he brought me to the township in the
cart this morning, and I’ve been here the
livelong day, saw the little children march—
God bless ’em ! and heard the fine words
that was spoke about the new King and
Queen, watched the races and games, and
it s made my heart young again ; but I sent
my man back, and now I’ve got to tramp it.
The day’s over, but not its memory.”
I wonder if you live anywhere near us,
for I could go back in one of the wagons with
the other children, and I know Uncle Tom
would give you my seat in the buggy.”


“ But you’ve left me to guess where you
live.”
“ We live beyond Penshanger-on-the-Hill.”
"Ah, it’s many a mile from me, and all
the bush between,” said the woman. "I’ve
heard tell of it, but never been there, nor
likely to go, either. We’re not people for
moving about much, my old man and me.
No, I’ll get home some time, never fear.
But thank you for the thought, all the same,
dear ; ” and rather to Prue’s dismay the old
woman bent and kissed her.
It was a relief from embarrassment that
at that moment her uncle came driving up
in the buggy and signed to her to come.
" Bruce, we must run; Uncle Tom is
waiting,” she said. “ Good-bye,” with a nod
to the old woman. " I hope you’ll get home
all right.”
“ Fresh from the old country by the sound
of her tongue,” crooned the old dame to
herself. " Now what child does she mind me
of — or is it a trick of my fancy ? I have it! ”
striking her hands together. " Her eyes have
the same look in ’em as those of the little


maid we found in the bush, and her hair is
of the same colour and curl.” And, still
mumbling to herself, the old woman set off
on her homeward tramp.
“ Who was talking to you, Prue ? ” asked
Aunt Mary.
“ A very, very old woman who has to walk
all the way home. She lives ever so far away,
with all the bush between. That’s what she
said.”


CHAPTER VII
Loved and Lost
Spring came slowly up the windy heights of
Penshanger-on-the-Hill, but brought with it
many a new delight to the children in their
wanderings in the bush. The absence of the
spring flowers they knew so well at home was
scarcely noticed in the wonder of the wattles,
trees clothed from head to foot in a glory of
golden blossom, in the crimson flowers of the
Waratah, in the sweet fragrance of the flower-
ing laurels, and the berries of varying hues of
blue and purple. Prue, with her passion for
flowers, made Bruce pick her handfuls of each
and all of them, and, carrying them in her
pinafore back to the house one Saturday
morning, seated herself on the floor of the
kitchen, opening out her treasures with
a deep sigh of content. Aunt Mary was


busy at the table, her back turned towards
Prue.
“ Look, Aunt Mary, look what Eve found !
I want to know the names of every one of
them. Oh, how I love the bush ! ”
Aunt Mary turned with a startled look in
her eyes, her face very white.
“ The bush, child! Love the bush! I
think I almost hate it!
She brought out the words as if they hurt
her. Then with a quick effort to regain self-
control she tried to smile, but Prue looked
distressed and troubled.
“ You’re not angry with me, are you, for
gathering things ? ” But Aunt Mary was
quickly turning over in her brain how she
could convey a word of warning to her little
niece without destroying the child’s utter
fearlessness.
“ Why, of course not,” she said, trying to
steady her voice. " Anyone is free to gather
what they like in the bush, but I don’t want
you to go wandering there alone, without
Bruce or one of my boys, you know. Tou
are too small for that yet.”


“ But there’s nothing that would hurt me,
nothing I’m afraid of,” pleaded Prue. “ There
are lovely little lizards that I’d like to tame,
and Fred says that even snakes do you no
harm if you leave them alone and don’t
happen to trample on them.”
“ Well, you’d better take care that you
don’t lose your way.”
" Oh, but we can’t,” cried Prue. “We have
a plan, Bruce and I, that I must not tell you
just yet, because it’s our secret. But, of
course, I’ll never go alone there if you don’t
wish it ; and Prue’s arms were flung round
Aunt Mary’s neck.
“ There, child, that will do,” said Aunt
Mary, smiling again. “Now call Bruce, for
you and he can carry your cousins’ dinner
and your own, if you like, to the other
side of the paddocks. They are busy,
and don’t want to come home for their
meal.”
“ What fun ! We’ll catch the pony and
he’ll carry us and the dinners too ! ” Pres-
ently Aunt Mary watched the two start ;
Prue, seated in front carefully guarding the


basket, and Bruce guiding the pony from
behind his sister.
“ I wonder if I ought to forbid the children
to wander about the bush ? ” said Aunt
Mary to her husband that day when he came
in to dinner.
“You might as well forbid lambs to skip,”
he answered.
“ But if harm should happen to
them ? ”
“ Bruce is a quick-witted boy, quite capable
of looking after little Prue. Ah, wife, don’t
go back on the sad tale of years ago. It’s
not likely to happen twice over.’’
Tears dropped down his wife’s face, for even
now, after six years had passed, she could
bear no reference to the great trouble of her
life. Her only little girl of four had wandered
into the bush and never been heard of again
from that day to this.
That story the children heard to-day for
the first time, and this was how they came
to hear it :
Prue, in huge content, sat between her two
cousins munching her dinner. Bruce, a little


way off, was kindling a fire with chips of wood
to boil the billy for tea.
Said Prue, suddenly looking up into Fred’s
face :
“ Why does Aunt Mary hate the bush so ? ”
There was a rather odd look on Fred’s face.
“ Who told you she hated it ? ”
“ She said so herself ; I said I loved it
because of the flowers, and the ferns, and the
birds, and the lizards, and all the lovely
things ; and she seemed almost angry, and
said she hated it.”
Bruce came near with smoking hot cups of
tea and stood waiting for Fred’s answer.
“ Shall we tell ’em, Jem ? They may as
well know first as last.”
Jem nodded. Well, then, kiddies, mother
has good reason to hate the bush. She lost
a little child there.”
“ Lost it ! How ? ” asked Bruce and Prue
together.
“ That’s the worst part of it. None of us
know how. It was our little sister May, born
many years after us, the only girl mother
had, and just four years old. Mother was


WiM
1
BRUCE WAS KINDLING k FIRR,


busy in the house and May was playing, as
she thought, just outside. A neighbour came
in with a sick child that she wanted mother
to look after. The child had been burned,
and mother helped to dress the burns. It
took longer than she expected, and when at
last she went to tell little May to come in she
was gone. We were all far away this side of
the farm, and first of all mother began to look
for May by herself. She traced her as far as
the bush, for the ribbon that tied up her hair
was just on the ground near it, and she
searched everywhere, calling for her all the
time, and it was that call we heard. I never
shall forget it. We set off running as fast as
we could, for we knew by the sound of it
something was wrong.”
Fred paused for a minute as if something
stuck in his throat.
“ What did you do ? ” Prue asked, tears
trembling in her eyes.
“ We joined in the search, of course. I
think we tramped miles and miles of bush
between us, but the night fell, and she was
nowhere to be found. Then we fetched some


of the neighbours, and continued the search
in different directions with lanterns. It’s no
good talking about it. From that day to this
we never heard of her again. We advertised
in the papers, but it was all no use.”
“ Poor Aunt Mary ! ” said Bruce.
“ Yes, poor, indeed ! She has never been
quite the same woman since. She had a bad
illness, and when she got better she had that
white band of hair you see across her head.”
“ And I thought it so lovely,” gasped Prue ;
“ I thought striped hair so lovely, and won-
dered how it came so.”
“ There was nothing for it but to try and
go on as if it had not happened,” went on
Fred. “You see, if May had died like any
other little child I think mother would not
have fretted so dreadfully. But it’s the un-
certainty that was so hard to bear. That’s
why we’re ever so glad that you’ve come,”
and he smiled on Prue. “ I don’t mean we’re
not glad to have Bruce as well, but we feel
that when mother grows old she’ll have some-
thing very like a daughter of her own.”
Prue said nothing, but sat with her hands


A HOME IN THE BUSH ■
folded on her lap, thinking, thinking, very
deeply.
“ And you see,” said Jem, slowly, “ I dare
say other fellows have mothers they’re proud
of ; but there’s one thing jolly certain : There
never was, there never will be, a mother just
like ours. She’s just —a oner ! ”
" We never had a mother —not to remem-
ber,” said Bruce.
“ You’ll have one in her all right.”
Still Prue sat and pondered.
“ I wish we had not told her,” said Fred,
uneasily, as she moved away to wash up
the plates and cups. “ She’s fretting over
it, or something. She’s scarcely spoken
since.”
But Prue was not fretting ; she was plan-
ning with all her childish mind.
” Bruce, walk very, very slow, please,” she
said when they started on their home journey.
“ We’ve got to do something ; we’ve got to
find little May.”
Bruce nearly fell from the pony in his
surprise.
“ What rot are you thinking of now ? ”he


said, almost crossly. “Find May! Why,
she’s been dead and lost years ago.”
“ Lost,’’ said Pme, nodding her head, " but
not dead. Nobody knows she’s dead.”
“ She can’t live like beasts grazing in the
bush. You must not be silly, Prue, and get
notions. She’s dead, poor mite, and we must
be ever so good to Aunt Mary. That’s all
we can do.”
“ No, it isn’t,” Prue answered. " I shall
look for her, look for her always in the bush,
and some day I shall know where she is.”


CHAPTER VIII
An Adventure
From fear of ridicule Prue did not mention
again her hope of finding her little cousin,
but still held fast to it in her innermost heart.
Bruce's sympathy with his aunt’s trouble took
the practical form of rendering her countless
little services.
“ Can’t think what has come over the boy !
He’s as gentle and handy as a girl,” said Aunt
Mary ; and Bruce earned his reward in win-
ning much of the mother love for which he
hungered.
It was the 21st of December, the longest day
and the first of the Christmas holidays ; in-
deed, it might almost be called the first day of
summer, for hot weather may not be counted
upon in Tasmania until Christmas - time
comes.


Prue pleaded that this first holiday should
be all their own, and that Bruce and she should
go picnicking in the bush ; and Aunt Mary
as she packed up their food, sounded a note
of warning.
" You’ll not stay out too late, or you’ll
give me an anxious heart,” she said.
Bruce lifted his face for the kiss he had
learned to prize.
“No fear ! I’ll take care of her,” he said,
interpreting his aunt’s fear.
Bush paths were fairly familiar to the chil-
dren by now, and several miles were covered
before Bruce called a halt for dinner.
“It is such a good one,” he said, as they
seated themselves. “ Aunt Mary gave us
credit for good appetites.”
However, very little of the food was left
when their hunger was satisfied. Then came
the question what to do next, and Prue begged
to go farther, to do real " sploring ” ; so they
plunged through the virgin bush for some
little distance, till, hot and breathless, they
struck a path wdiich someone had cleared
before.


“ Now it’s easier going. That was a tough
job ! It's no wonder a child should get lost
in scrub as thick as that! ” said Bruce, looking
back on the way they had come.
Prue nodded, but did not confess that she
had been peering eagerly through the under-
growth, half-expecting to see some sign of the
little May who had wandered away years ago.
Bruce would think her too silly, and perhaps
she was. Their way was fairly easy for
the next mile, then Bruce looked at his
watch.
“ Why, how the time has flown ! We must
go back at once. It’s three o’clock, and it s
slow going. We shan’t get home till five.
But Prue held back, lifting her finger to
command silence.
“ I hear something so queer," she said.
“ It’s like —someone moaning."
“ What rotten nonsense ! It’s some bird,
or ’’ But as they listened there was no
mistaking the sound. It was the groan of
some human being that they heard, and Bruce,
fully convinced that Prue was right, dashed
forward in the direction of the sound. Prue


following more slowly in his steps, caught
a glimpse of something bright-coloured, like
part of a woman’s dress, shining through the
scrub.
Her heart beat loud in her ears, her eyes
grew dim. She did not stop to reason or
think ; her little heart was just full of one
great hope, and she believed herself on the
verge of its fulfilment. She had found Cousin
May. Great was her surprise and still deeper
her disappointment when she found Bruce on
his knees by the side of the very, very old
woman to whom she had spoken on the day
of the Coronation.
“ Thank God, thank God ! ” was all the
poor old creature kept reiterating; “ and
the little girl, too ! Seemes like a Provi-
dence ! "
“ But how did you get here ? ” Bruce
asked. “ What’s the matter with you ? ”
“ Lost my way, children, like the poor old
fool I am. Been wandering in the bush best
part of two nights and two days, and sat me
down to die, for I’m so worn out I can go no
further. And now you’ll go back to wherever


you’ve come from and send for a doctor to go
to my old man. He may be dead by now
for want of one.”
Her voice was so thin and weak that it
was all the children could do to catch her
words, and their meaning was quite beyond
them.
“ Your old man. Who is he ? Where does
he live ? ” Bruce asked.
“ Four miles beyond Spring Vale ; a back
block in the Bush, but it ain’t so hard to find
if you stick to the high-road first and then take
the track which the signpost tells you to take.
I’d have done my best to stick to it, but my
man was mortal bad, and there was a short
cut through the bush which cuts off more
than four miles ’twixt us and the township,
and I took it, and the night came on and I lost
my way. Don’t mind me.’ And in her
piteous entreaty her voice sounded reedy and
shrill like a choked organ-pipe. " Get you
home, for God’s sake, and send off for the
doctor to my old man. Noah Walton that s
his name.”
Bruce’s brain was working quickly. “ Prue,


are you frightened ? Will you stay with her
whilst I go home and get help ? ”
“ Help for my old man ? Bless the boy ! ”
said the old woman, a look of relief in her
tired eyes.
" Help for him and you too,” said
Bruce.
“ Shall Igo ? Do you mind staying here ? ”
asked Bruce again of Prue.
Prue minded dreadfully, but was far too
staunch to say so. She would quite fearlessly
have retraced her steps to the farm and would
have found her way without much difficulty,
but to sit here by the side of this old woman
who talked so strangely and seemed almost
at death's door was a much more difficult
matter.
“ PH stay,” she said, setting her teeth ;
" but be as quick as you can. You'll send
someone before dark ? ”
“Of course, long before, I hope. It’s light
now till eight o’clock.” So saying, Bruce
dashed off at a headlong pace.
How bravely the boy battled through the
bush, regardless of the branches and briars


that impeded his course, or the tree-stumps
over which he stumbled, running whenever
the way was clear enough, but getting through
somehow at almost incredible speed, covering
the distance, for which he had allowed two
hours for himself and his sister, in little over
the hour. Aunt Mary, at work in the kitchen,
looked up and saw him coming, running to-
wards the house with torn clothes, bespattered
with mud, and with scratched hands and face ;
and her heart died within her, and every drop
of blood left her face, as she hurried to meet
him.
“ No, no, it’s not Prue ! Prue’s all right ! ”
gasped Bruce, reading the fear his aunt was
unable to speak ; “ but we’ve found an old
woman in the bush. She’s lost her way, and
she’s too weak to walk home, and we’re not
strong enough to help her. I’ve come for help
and I’ve promised to go for a doctor and send
him to her old man.”
Aunt Mary drew the boy into the kitchen,
set food before him, and blew the horn loudly
to call in men from the farm, whilst she pieced
together Bruce’s rather incoherent story.


“ And you left Prue there ? ” she said, a
catch in her throat.
“ Yes. I couldn’t help it. It would have
been so beastly to leave her alone —the old
woman, I mean. Prue won’t hurt, Aunt
Mary. We’ll be back, some of us, long before
it’s dark.”
“ Fred unfortunately has gone off to fetch
some cattle home, and it will take two men
to bring the old lady here ; I don’t know
who can ride in for the doctor.”
“ I can, when I’ve shown ’em which way to
go,” said Bruce. “ I’ll ride one of the horses.
I can manage ’em right enough now.”
So it was settled when Uncle Tom and Jem
came in. The quiet pony was put in the cart
and led across the paddocks and taken up the
rough track, into the bush as far as wheels
could travel, then hitched up and left there
whilst the two men pursued their way in
the direction which Bruce very clearly indi-
cated.
“ You’ll find the trees marked as you get
farther on,” he said ; “ and now perhaps I’d
better turn back and be off for the doctor.”


“ The boy has his head screwed on all right."
said Uncle Tom. “ Once get the old lady as
far as the cart and our trouble will be at an
end.”
To Prue the hours of waiting had seemed
like days, and never was sound more grateful
to any ears than the crackling of the bush
under the men’s approaching footsteps. She
sprang to her feet with a joyful little cry.
“ Uncle Tom, are you there ? ” she
shouted. “ Oh, hurry, I almost think she’s
dead ! ”
The next moment Uncle Tom knelt down
by the poor woman’s side.
“Not dead ; her heart is beating. Jem,
hand me the brandy. That will revive her,
and between us we will carry her to the
cart.”
Very gently they bore her between them.
Rough as their life in the bush was, these
big-hearted colonists were tender as women
when dealing with the feeble, the sick, or the
aged ; as all true “ gentlefolk ” must ever
be.
“ Fold your coat under her head,” said


NOT DEAD ; HER HEART IS BEATING.


Uncle Tom ; and Jem did as his father bade
him ; then slowly, so as not to shake the poor
woman, the pony was led homeward, the two
men walking by its side.


CHAPTER IX
Good News from Home
An hour or two later Bruce stood ringing an
impetuous peal on the doctor’s door-bell. It
was the doctor himself who opened it, a red-
faced, coarse-featured man, blunt of speech,
but one whose reputation for cleverness and
kindness made him a universal favourite in
the neighbourhood.
“ How now, youngster ? What’s the
trouble —anybody dead, or dying ? ”
“ That’s what none ol us know.” And
forthwith Bruce told his story.
“ Right you are ; go back home and tell
Mrs. Walton I’ll look her husband up in the
morning. I’ve been out all day, and only
just come in to my meal.”
“ Then she’ll be dead, too,” said Bruce,
simply. “ She’ll die of disappointment. She


did not think of herself at all; she only
talked on about her old man and the
doctor."
“ Humph ! So I’m to go off in red-hot
haste twenty miles away to a back block on
what is probably a fool’s errand to satisfy
an old woman’s whim. Is that what you
expect ? "
“ I hoped it, sir. I said I’d do my best."
“ Ever been m a motor-car, boy ? Would
you like to come with me and take the old
lady news of her old man ? "
Bruce’s eyes sparkled. " Often at home,
but never out here. I’ve not set eyes on one
out here."
"It’s a new institution with me, but in-
valuable to a bush doctor. It covers the
distances he has to go."
" Can you get it along the cart tracks ?
" It has to go, often sorely against the
grain; I’ve been bogged more than once,
but we’ll try it to-night as the case is urgent.
The first fourteen miles is high road, and the
last eight we’ll tackle somehow.” And tackle
it they did, to within about a mile of their


GOOD NEWS FROM HOME 93
destination. There the car struck work, and
the doctor descended with a little laugh.
“ WeTe beat; I can get back but not
forward. I must leave you here with the car
and walk on. I’ll take one lamp and leave
the other with you. Hand me my bag and
make yourself comfy till I come back.” And
away strode the doctor into the darkness.
It was rather a weird position Bruce found
himself in, curled up in the silent car, around
him the velvet darkness of the bush, which
the acetylene lamp of the car seemed to
deepen rather than lighten, and silence so
profound that even the dropping of a twig
set his pulses beating ; but presently he forgot
the strangeness of his surroundings in an
overpowering fatigue. He drew the motor
rug round him and dropped off into a pro-
found sleep.
Meanwhile the doctor pushed on to the
shanty, pausing a moment at the broken-
down gate of the yard which surrounded it
to see if any light shone from the window ;
but all was dark and silent.
Death he felt sure awaited him inside the


house ; but as he fumbled at the door-latch,
to his great surprise he heard a voice speak-
ing, a hoarse, quavering voice, but the words
were absolutely clear.
“ I haven’t worried Thee, Lord; Thee
knows I haven’t asked much of Thee in life,
but of Thy mercy bring the old girl home.”
“ Dotty ! ” said the doctor to himself as
he pushed the door open, and there in the
far corner of the room, on a bed which looked
as if it had not been made for weeks, lay
Noah Walton, his eyes shining like fire out
of his sunken face ; but if his body was weak
and wasted his mind was clear.
“ Can you give me news of my wife ? ” he
said.
“ Yes,” said the doctor, setting down his
lamp and pulling off his gloves. “ She lost
her way, and is safe at a farm on the other
side of the bush. I expect she will get back
to you to-morrow. I’ll bring her if she’s fit
to come. Now let’s see what’s the matter
with you.” But the man was crying, crying
as he had not cried since babyhood.
When he grew calmer his story was soon


'''
— ' — ■ i. ■ ■ - —i— ■■■ , . — - ■ i , i. 111 .mi a
" CAN YOU GIVE ME NEWS OF MY WIFE ? ”


told : How he had come in from work with
a giddiness in his head and a singing in his
ears, and then a pain had seized him, some-
where about his heart, a pain so awful that
the perspiration had run off him like rain ;
and how his wife at last, in sheer desperation,
had gone off for the doctor. That was one
day, two days, ago ; he couldn’t rightly say ;
and by degrees the pain had abated, “ wore
itself out, like," and he had dragged himself
once or twice out of bed and made himself
a cup of tea and soaked a little bread in
milk ; and so he kept life in him ; “ but he
wouldn't take the trouble to do it no more ”
if his old girl had passed away before
him.
The doctor listened, his hand on the old
man’s pulse, which steadied considerably with
the medicine he gave him. Then he kindled
a fire, brought out his brandy-flask, whipped
up an egg, which he found in the cupboard,
in a cup with some brandy, and put it by the
bedside.
"You can sip some of it in the night," he
said, " and in the morning I’ll get somebody


GOOD NEWS FROM HOME 97
from the township to come and look after
you. You’re not going to die this
time.”
" Bring my old girl; she knows my ways
best.”
“ All in good time. But you’ll both need
someone younger to look after you. And
now good-night.”
Bruce hardly knew where he was when he
felt the doctor’s hand on his shoulder, and
waked up with a start.
“ Good lad, I’m glad you slept. I was
longer than I expected, for the old fellow had
no one with him. It’s wonderful what some
people can pull through ; but he’s going to
live for the present. Directly he’s able he
must get rid of his bit of land and get into
the township. He’s wholly unfit for work,
and a second attack like this will probably
finish him off.”
“ But not now,” said Bruce, eagerly.
“ No, now he’s turned the corner; and
that is the news you can carry home to-night.
I think it’s your persistence that may have
saved his life. I doubt his living through


another night without some assistance,
although he’s astonishingly wiry.”
Bruce was awake enough now, alive with
happiness, and although, once back on the
high road, the car flew along at reckless speed,
it was all too slow for his impatience ; he so
longed to be galloping with the good news
home. But the doctor insisted on his taking
a few mouthfuls of food before he rode off.
“ You’ll be able to see your road ; a late
moon’s getting up ; but are you sure you
know it ? ”
" Yes, up Denny hill, then turn sharp to
the left and follow my nose all the way ; and
please,” a little shyly, " will you give me a
mount ? Once on Bob’s back I can stick on
all right, but he’s fidgety to mount.” The
doctor laughed and held Bob’s head, and the
next minute Bruce was trotting gaily out of
the township.
It must be owned that when Bob shied at
mysterious shadows cast by the moonlight,
Bruce’s hands occasionally grasped the mane,
but all sense of fear was lost in his anxiety
to make a quick journey home, which he


GOOD NEWS FROM HOME 99
reached in the small hours of the morning.
The lights in the windows showed that some-
one was awake, and before the boy was across
the paddock Uncle Tom met him.
“ All safe, Bruce —no harm befallen you ? ”
he asked, as he began to unsaddle the horse.
“ Quite right, and I’ve been with the doctor
to the old man, and have brought back good
news for his wife. He’s going to live.”
They drew near to the house, and Aunt
Mary stood at the open door, her figure
framed in the doorway.
“ I was frightened about you, boy ; thought
the horse must have thrown you,” she said,
more anxious about Bruce than to hear the
news he brought.
Not a bit of it,” said Bruce, proudly.
,f And yet I kept him at a spanking pace all
the w r ay. But ” he came to a sudden
stop, his eyes arrested by the pathetic figure
of the old woman bolstered up in a chair by
the fire, a look of vacancy on her face.
He crossed the room on tip-toe and stood
before her.
” Look here,” he said, “ I’ve jolly good


news for you. I took the doctor to see your
old man, as I promised I would, and he's
going to get better, you know, and you’re to
go back to him.”
The gaunt figure rose to its feet, a be-
wildered, dawning intelligence waked in the
dimmed eyes.
“ Good lad ! Dear lad ! ” she said. "My
old man better and wants me. I’ll go back
to him directly.” But she sank back in her
chair as she spoke, and Aunt Mary hurried
forward to put her strong arms round her.
“ To-morrow, to-morrow, my dear, you
shall go back to your husband, but to-night
you must rest.”
She drew her husband aside. “ She must
have our room for to-night. Give me a hand
to help her to bed.”


CHAPTER X
God’s Lamb
When Mrs. Walton had been tucked com-
fortably into bed it struck Aunt Mary that
through the agitation of the evening she had
not taken her customary glance at Prue, so
she went gently into her room creeping on
tip-toe to the bedside. But Prue was not
lying, as usual, in a child’s pretty, flushed
abandonment of sleep. The bedclothes were
pulled over her head, and from beneath them
Aunt Mary caught the unmistakable sound
of intermittent sobs. She set down her light,
pulled away the clothes, and revealed a
tear-stained face.
“ What is it, Prue ? Over-tired, I expect,
and waked up with nightmare ? Why didn’t
you call Aunt Mary ? ”
“ I have not been asleep at all. I


couldn’t sleep. I’m too miserable and dis-
appointed.”
“ But why ? ” lifting the little nightgowned
figure on to her lap. “ You should have been
happy to-night. You’ve been a brave and
helpful little girl. You and Bruce between
you have saved a poor old woman’s life. If
you hadn’t found her she might have died
before the morning.”
“ But, but I did not want to find her ; at
least, I wanted to find May, Cousin May, ever
so much more, and bring her back to you.”
The arms that held the child trembled.
“ Darling, you’ve been dreaming. Who told
you about May, and how could you hope to find
her when she’s been lost over six years and none
but God knows even where she lies ? ” and
Aunt Mary’s voice died away in a little sob.
“ Fred told me ; ’cause I asked him why
you hated the bush, and I thought that
someone might have found her and taken
care of her, and I w r as sure that if I looked
long enough I’d find her and make you glad.”
Aunt Mary’s tears fell fast upon Prue’s
upturned face, but they were tears of healing.


" God bless you for the thought, my dar-
ling, but it’s one that can never come true.
I’ll find my lamb again before the throne of
God, and I think she will know me. Now
I’m going to put you back into bed and kneel
down by you, and we’ll say the Lord’s Prayer
together,” and Aunt Mary’s voice was clear
as she said, “ Thy will be done,” for a child’s
sympathy had brought with it a sense of
resignation which she had never fully had
before.
The long night’s rest worked wonders for
Mrs. Walton and she was struggling to dress
when Mrs. Farrar appeared at a very early
hour with her breakfast.
“ Oh, I’m better, a lot better, thank you.
I felt I must be up and away to my old
man.”
” She’s scarcely fit for the journey,” said
Aunt Mary to her husband, “ but I believe
the only thing to do with her is to put in the
horses and get you to drive us to Waratah ;
then if we are lucky enough to find the doctor
he would take us on in his motor. I don’t
feel my task is faithfully accomplished until


I land her with her old man, and I own I
should love to see the meeting."
“ It’s early yet ; if I were quick about it
I believe we might catch the doctor before
he’s off on his rounds. I can’t spare the day
myself, but I’ll send Jem along with you
and he can wait in Waratah until you return
and bring you back, for I can’t spare my wife,
any better than the other old man on the far
side of the bush." And so it was settled.
It fell out as Mr. Farrar prophesied ; the
doctor’s motor stood outside his door and he
agreed readily enough to take on Mrs. Walton
and Mrs. Farrar with her.
" But I shall have to leave you there a bit,
for I’m going farther, and if you could manage
to meet me on the high road so much the
better. It would save a good many miles
of bad going."
" We’re losing time by your talk," said Mrs,
Walton. "My old man will think I’m never
coming."
The doctor humoured the old lady’s im-
patience, and soon they sped along the road
traversed the night before. At any other


time Mrs. Walton would have thought her
last moment had come from this unwonted
mode of progression, but fear and astonish-
ment could find no place in a heart filled with
one absorbing love.
Arrived at the spot where the motor could
go no further she would have got out un-
assisted if Mrs. Farrar’s hand had not stopped
her.
" Walk ! Why, of course, we can walk ! ”
she said, almost angrily. “ I walked from
the township not so long ago on Coronation
Day. My limbs are only stiff from sleeping
in the bush," and with the doctor’s arm on
one side and Mrs. Farrar’s on the other, she
really accomplished the remaining distance
wonderfully, but at the door Mrs. Farrar's
purpose of watching, the meeting faded away.
" You take her in," she said to the doctor.
" I'll come in a little later."
Two words she heard before the door closed
upon her.
“ Wifey ? " A moment’s pause, and the
answer came :
"Yes, old man," and Mrs. Farrar moved


farther away. The utter desolution of her
surroundings was the first thing that struck
her; there was no attempt at a garden,
except a patch of ground at the side with a
broken-down fence about it where vegetables
and weeds fought together for existence.
Lean fowls pecked about, and in a tumble-down
shed were piled some bags of potatoes. The
whole place told the tale of a hard fight for
a living. It gave her quite a start amidst
the general squalor to notice one tiny piece
of ground quite close to the bush fenced in
and bright with flowers, and she moved nearer
to look at the one bed of flowers. A low white
paling surrounded it, recently freshly painted,
and across a broad piece of board nailed to
the top was written in capital letters of
varying size two words, “GOD'S LAMB."
Mrs. Farrar’s eyes filled with tears, for she
felt the little bed of flowers told its own tale.
There in the silence of the bush was laid to
rest a little child, their little child, very likely
the only one they had ever had, and they had
been too poor to send it away for burial. Then
the doctor came to summon her to the house.


*
T~r c ;7\ \ ,
y iy ®iBS #■ / v -, ~- - " a
sj£ Wr A
' W If mW§\ |^^
ii®l)W Wf§M^KPSB-
|«fl ipwp,
1 (1 (i\ /jW
i \ V #
|J ||P^
j. . jr . s
x"
mrs. farrar’s eyes filled with tears.


“ You'll have your work cut out in tidying
them up a bit. I could not get anyone to
come out to look after them, but love will
carry the old creatures through. It’s really
pathetic. Can you meet me again in about
three hours’ time ? ”
“ Yes," said Mrs. Farrar, and went off to
the house determined to work with a will,
and the old man from the corner watched her
movements with pleased content. Later in
the morning when she and Mrs. \\ alton sat
down to a fairly tidy meal, Mrs. Farrar dared
to make reference to the little grave outside.
"It touched me very much. Your only
child, perhaps ? ’’ she said.
“ No, it were none of ours. I wish it had
been. God denied us the gift of children of
our own. He brought it home one night !
—with a sidew'ays nod at the bed —" when I
was ill abed ; a little girl he found lying in
the^bush."
Mrs. Farrar’s face was ashen grey, her
tongue clicked against the roof of her mouth.
“ Dead ?’’ she asked. " Was the child
dead ? ”


" No, but her mind wandered. I dragged
myself out of bed and had her in my arms
all night, and fed her with drops of milk and
such, but bless you ! she could not swallow.
She kept opening her pretty eyes and called
me ' mother,’ and once she spoke of daddy
and Fred. She died when the morning came,
and my old man did the best he could by her.
I was too ill to leave, so he made her a coffin
and buried her just where you see, and he
laid her there, and because there was no gettin’
at a parson he folded his hands together —
didn’t you, Noah ? —and said, ' Our Father
and ‘ Suffer the little children to come unto
me.’ He knew them words by heart.”
" And how long ago was it ? ” asked Mis.
Farrar, still keeping back her tears.
" Six years last 30th of March. I mind
the date quite well.”
“ Two days after she strayed away,”
thought her listener.
Mrs. Walton had risen and, going to her
chest of drawers, brought out a little bundle
of clothes with a chain of red coral wrapped
by itself in a bit of silver paper.


“ Those were the little clothes she came in.
I treasure them ever so much.”
Mrs. Farrar’s hands clutched them convul-
sively, and she pressed them close to her
heart.
“ And you never tried to find out the
mother who had lost her,” she said, breaking
into weeping. “ Did not think of the pain
she suffered ? ”
” Bless you ! I was ill abed a month or
so, and when my old man went next into
the township he spoke to one and another,
but no one seemed to know about her, so
we called her ‘ God’s lamb.’ ”


CHAPTER XI
The Angel’s Song
Mr. Farrar was puzzled by his wife’s face
and manner when she got home that night.
Her face was pathetic, and yet there was a
certain radiance on it, her manner was infi-
nitely gentle.
" You’re tired, wife ? ”
" Yes, tired but at peace,” was her answer.
She took her place at the table as usual
and poured out the tea, but she did not join
in the general talk, nor give them any details
of the day’s doings, except that Mrs. Walton
had reached home quite comfortably, and
that the old man was better, but when supper
was ended she bade them all wait a minute,
for she had something to tell them, and she
began bravely with a steady voice.
“You know all about our sorrow and how


I’ve fretted overmuch, perhaps. If so, may
God forgive me, but to-night He’s taken
away the sting of it. I know how my little
girl died, and where she lies buried.”
Then, very simply and shortly, she told
the story, almost as if she were telling a
dream.
“ Are you sure, wife ? There does not
seem any proof that she was ours,” said her
husband, huskily, and then very slowly his
wife untied the little parcel that lay at her
side about which no questions had been asked,
as all the family believed mother had been
buying Christmas presents in the township.
Fiom it she took the little frock, the under-
clothes, the muddy brown shoes and the
corals.
" A mother knows the clothes she made
herself,” she said, bending down to kiss them.
The silence was broken by a little cry from
Prue.
” Oh, I’m so disappointed. I wanted to
find her and bring her home ! ”
Nobody but Aunt Mary rightly understood,
but her smile was truly beautiful.


" And so you have, darling, you and Bruce
together. You’ve given me back my little
girl. I know what’s become of her. I have
the very clothes she wore, unutterably
precious. I’ll miss her all my days, but the
sore feeling will go. God called her as He
has called many another little child before,
but He has given me of His goodness two
other children to love and care for, Bruce
and my little daughter, Prue.”
Bruce caught his aunt’s hand and squeezed
it, but Prue crept into her arms. Fred and Jem
glanced at each other and left the room together.
“ Couldn’t stand any more of it,” said Fred,
drawing a long breath. “ I should have
blubbered like any baby.”
“ Isn’t mother a oner ? ” said Jem, falling
back on his highest term of praise. “ Any
other woman would have had hysterics. She’s
great, isn’t she ? ”
To Mr. Farrar, later in the evening, Mrs.
Farrar gave a few more details.
” Would you like her moved and brought
down to the cemetery ? ” he asked, but Mrs.
Farrar shook her head.


“ Ah, no, she’s been taken such care of
where she is, so loved and tended.”
“ And it won’t mean a fresh trouble for
you, Mary ? ”
“No, it will be a happier Christmas than
any since I lost her. We did not know, did
we, when the children came, what blessings
in disguise they would be to us ? We won't
have their Christmas clouded, Tom. We’ll
go to service in the morning, and then we’ll
have a picnic up the mountain. We could
carry our dinner to the foot of it, and then
the younger ones could climb it if they wished,
whilst you and I rested. It must be a happy
Christmas for us all.”
“ Service,” said her husband, " service at
Waratah ? There’s none here, you know.”
“ I think we can manage it by planning
beforehand, and it's not very far from there
to the foot of the mountain. The days are
long and it would be such a treat for the
children. I do believe the biggest treat for
little Prue will be to go to a real church again.
She’s never been reconciled to ' church ' in
the school-house.”


/ 1 m-?^|^^
" IF I LIVE, PLEASE GOD, IT SHALL BE DONE."


“ It’s something to save and work for,”
said her husband, bringing down his hand
upon the table. “ We’ve something in hand
already. Well try and make it more.”
“ Towards what ? ” asked his wife.
“ A church; a little wooden church, in
memory of Mary. It may be in the far
future, but if I live, please God, it shall be
done.”
Surely never was quite such a lovely day
as Christmas Day, and the whole family was
astir almost with the dawn. They might
have been going into camp for a week, Uncle
Tom declared, from the bustle of preparation.
“ Christmas comes but once a year, said
Aunt Mary, lifting a heated face from the
hamper she was packing.
It was a little cavalcade that set off for
Waratah soon after nine o clock ; first came
Uncle Tom and Aunt Mary and Prue in the
two-horse buggy ; then Bruce with the pony-
cart and the provisions for the day’s outing ;
and finally two outriders in the persons of
Fred and Jem on bicycles.
Waratah Church was only a pretty little


wooden building, but adorned as it was this
Christmas Day with a wealth of Madonna
lilies and other white flowers, it seemed to
Prue as beautiful as any cathedral, A sugges-
tion of topsy-turveyness still dwelt in her
mind in singing the Christmas hymns amongst
such summerlike surroundings, but her atten-
tion was arrested by the look on Aunt Mary’s
face as her sweet voice joined in the world-
wide “ Hark the herald-angels sing.”
“ I expect she’s thinking Cousin Mary is
joining in it, too,” and then she lifted her
own little voice and chimed in with such
heartiness that Jem turned round and smiled
at her.
When service was over, and all good wishes
spoken to the neighbours outside the church,
and they started off for the mountains, Prue
announced that this was quite the nicest
Christmas Day she’d ever had, for Father
Christmas was all pretence, and she too old
to believe in him any longer, but this was all
real, and she was so happy she didn’t know
what to do !
When they arrived at their destination


what an unpacking there was to be sure !
Nothing was forgotten, thanks to Aunt Mary’s
forethought, even to a mysterious little packet
laid on each person’s plate; a neckpin for
Fred, a tobacco pouch for Jem, a two-bladed
knife for Bruce, and a pen and pencil all in
one for Uncle Tom ; and for Prue—just a
string of red coral.
She gave a quick glance at Aunt Mary,
who nodded at her with a tender smile, and
Prue slipped them round her neck and thanked
her aunt just as if those beads had been
bought for her yesterday, but she knew very
well that they really had belonged to Cousin
Mary, and she felt that they were another
link with the angels.
The great day ended with a gorgeous climb
up the mountain, such a long and wonderful
climb, two miles of it, and some of it so steep
that Prue had to be carried up alternately
on Fred or Jem’s back, but she liked best to
be on her own feet, to do just “ as the other
boys did,” she said, frankly putting herself
amongst their number.
Seated at the foot of the high mountain


Uncle Tom and Aunt Mary waited for their
family to rejoin them, and lived over again
in their talk some of the many Christmases
that lay behind them.
" I wonder how old Mr. and Mrs. W alton
will spend their day,” said Mr. Farrar. “ Not
much good cheer for them, poor old bodies.”
" Except that they are together,” said his
wife, *' and for once will have a good meal.’
“ You thought of that amongst other things,
did you, wife ? ”
" I was bound to. We owe them a big
debt of gratitude. They did what they could
for our Mary. The doctor is urging them to
move into the township, but he does not
know that he will be successful. They say
they would rather die in their old home.
“ And if they move, or if they die, what
about God’s Lamb ? Are you content to
leave her there, Mary, alone in the bush ? ”
His wife's answer was long in coming.
“ I think so, Tom. I think it's easier than
raking up an old grief which God has laid
His hand upon and soothed to rest and com-
fort. After all, we could go over once or


twice a year and put her grave tidy, and
when you and I pass away and meet her face
to face, will it greatly matter, since we leave
her body, and ours, in God’s safe keeping ?
Hark ! I hear voices from the mountain. We
should be going ; it’s getting late."
The End
Wyman # Sons Lid., Printer? London and Reading.


PUBLICATIONS
®ljr for promoting
Christian Enohilr&gr.
G. MANVILLE FENN.
Large Crown Bto. Illustrated. Cloth Boards.
A LIFE’S ECLIPSE. 25.
CHING THE CHINAMAN, AND HIS MIDDY FRIENDS.
55-
JACK AT SEA ; or, All Work and no Play make him a
Dull Boy. 55.
MASS’ GEORGE ; or, A Boy’s Adventures in the Old
Savannahs. 3s. 6 d.
NED LEGER : The Adventures of a Middy. ss.
NEPHEW JACK : His Cruise for His Uncle’s Craze. 55.
PLANTER JACK ; or, The Cinnamon Garden. ss.
SAIL HO ! or, A Boy at Sea. 3s. 6 d.
THE OCEAN CAT’S-PAW: The Story of a Strange
Cruise. ss.
THE PERIL FINDERS. ss.
THE SILVER SALVORS. ss.
THE VAST ABYSS. Being the Story of Tom Blount,
his Uncles, and his Cousin Sam. ss.
TO THE WEST. 3s. 6 d.
UNCLE BARI: The Tale of a Tyrant. ss.


STIRRING ADVENTURE SERIES
Illustrated Stories of Stirring
Adventure Ashore and Afloat.
l/o. Crown Bvo. 160 pages.
ADVENTURES OF MARSHALL VAVASOUR, MID-
SHIPMAN, By S. W. Sadler, R.N.
BEARER OF DESPATCHES, A. A Story of the Siege
of Lynn, 1643. By Emil Loch.
CHRONICLES OF DURNFORD, THE. A Public School
Story, By John Cartwright.
HIS LEVEL BEST. By F. B. Forester.
MATE OF THE “ LILY,” THE. By W. H. G.
Kingston.
TWO SHIPMATES, THE. By W. H. G. Kingston.
1/6, Large Crown Bvo. 224 pages.
ATHABASCA BILL. A Tale of the Far West. By
Bessie Marchant (Mrs. J. A. Comfort).
CRUISE OF THE “DAINTY,” THE. By W. H. G.
Kingston.
FRANK WARLEGH’S HOLIDAY. By Achilles
Daunt.
“FROM GREENLAND’S ICY MOUNTAINS.” By
Gordon Stables.
QUEEN OF THE EXTINCT VOLCANO, THE. By C.
Dudley Dampen.
UNDER THE BLUE FLAG. By M. E. Palgrave.
2/=. Large Crown Bvo. 256 pages.
FROZEN TREASURE, THE. By C. Dudley Dampen.
HARTER’S RANCH. By F. B. Forester.
MIRANGO THE MAN - EATER. By C. Dudley
Dampen.
NED GARTH. By W. H. G. Kingston.
ROCKED IN THE CRADLE OF THE DEEP. By
Gordon Stables.
SIR PHELIM’S TREASURE. By H. A. Hinkson


By W. C. METCALFE*
Large Crown Bvo. With Coloured Illustrations.
Cloth Boards.
BLOWN OUT TO SEA. 3s. 6 d.
DICK TRAWLE, SECOND MATE. 3s. 6i.
FRANK AND FEARLESS ; or, Adventures amongst
Cannibals. 3s. 6 d.
GRIT AND PLUCK ; or, The Young Commander. 3s. 6 d.
ICE-GRIPPED ; or, The Tomboy of Boston. 2 s. 6d.
OCEAN CHUMS. 25. 6 d.
YOUNG SALTS. 3s. 6 d.
GERTRUDE HOLLIS.
Illustrated. Crown Bvo. Cloth Boards.
BETWEEN TWO CRUSADES. A Tale of 1187. 25. 6d.
DOLPHIN OF THE SEPULCHRE, A Tale of the Times
of Becket. 25. 6 d.
HIS OWN INTERPRETER, is. 6 d.
HUGH THE MESSENGER. A Tale of the Siege of
Calais. 2S.
IN A ROYAL NURSERY. 2S. 6 i.
IN THE DAYS OF S. ANSELM. 2S.
JENKYN CLYFFE, BEDESMAN. 2S. 6 d.
LEO OF MEDIOLANUM. A Tale of the Fourth Century.
25. 6 d.
PHILIP OKEOVER’S PAGEHOOD. A Story of the
Peasants' Rising. 25. 6 d.
SPURS AND BRIDE : How they were Won. A Tale of
Magna Charta. 25.
THE KING WHO WAS NEVER CROWNED. IS. 6 d.
THE LOST EXILE. A Tale of Siberia. 25.
THE SON OF AiLLA. A Story of the Conveision of
Northumbria, is. 6 i.


By F. FRANKFORT MOORE.
Crown Bvo. Illustrated, Cloth Boards.
CORAL AND COCOANUT. The Cruise of the Yacht
“ Firefly ” to Samoa. 3s.
FIREFLIES AND MOSQUITOES. 3s. 6 d.
FROM THE BUSH TO THE BREAKERS. 35.
THE FATE OF THE “ BLACK SWAN.” A Tale of New
Guinea. 2s. 6 d.
THE “ GREAT ORION.” 2s. 6 d.
THE TWO CLIPPERS. 35. 6 d.
IRE, POL AND PEN. 2s. 6 d.
WILL’S VOYAGES. 2s. 6 d.
B. MARCHANT.
Crown Bvo. Illustrated. Cloth Boards.
A BRAVE LITTLE COUSIN. 2S.
ATHABASCA BILL. A Tale of the Far West. is. 6d.
DARLING OF SANDY POINT. 25.
HIS GREAT SURRENDER, is. 6 d.
REDWOOD RANCH. 2s. 6 d.
ROLF THE REBEL. 2S.
THE DEPUTY BOSS. A Tale of British Honduras.
is 6 d.
THE GHOST OF ROCK GRANGE, is.
THE HOUSE AT BRAMBLING MINSTER, is. C d.
THE MYSTERIOUS CITY. 2S.
THE WESTERN SCOUT. 2s.
YEW TREE FARM. 3s. 6i.


By FREDERICK HARRISON,
Large Crown Bvo. Illustrated. Cloth Boards.
BY PLUCK AND LUCK. A Story of Adventure. 3s. 6 d.
DE MONTFORT’S SQUIRE. A Story of the Battle of
Lewes. 35. 6d.
“ENGLAND EXPECTS.” A Story of the Last Days of
Nelson. 3s. 6 d.
“ 1779.” A Story of Old Shoreham. ss.
FROM PLAYGROUND TO BATTLEFIELD. 3s. 6 d.
RUPERT DUDLEIGH. 3s. 6 d.
THE BOYS OF SPARTAN HOUSE SCHOOL. 3s. 6 d.
WITHIN A YEAR. A Story of the Siege of Acre. 3s. 6 d.
EDITH COWPER.
Illustrated. Cloth Boards.
ANDREW GARNETT’S WILL. 2s.
BESSIE, is. 6 d.
CALDER CREEK. A Story of Smuggling. 2S.
LADY FABIA. A Story of Adventure on the South Coast
in 1805. 2S.
MISADVENTURE OF I. M. P., THE. A Story for Little
Girls. 6d.
RED, WHITE, AND BLUE ; or, Dick’s Enemy. 6 d.
THEKLA JANSEN. The Story of a Lonely Girl. 6 d.
THE “ BROWN BIRD,” AND HER OWNERS. A Story
of Adventure off the South Coast. 2s.
THE CAPTAIN OF THE WATERGUARD. 2S. 6 d.
THE DISAPPEARANCE OF DAVID PENDARVE. 2S. 6 d.
THE HOUSE WITH DRAGON GATES. A Story of Old
Chiswick in 1745. 2s. 6 d.
THE INVADERS OF FAIRFORD. 2S. 6 d.
THE ISLAND OF RUSHES. The Strange Story of a
Holiday Mystery. 2S. 6 d.
THE MOONRAKERS. A Story of Smugglers. 2S. 6d.
THE WITCHES OF WESTOVER COMBE. 2S.


EMILY PEARSON FINNEMORE.
Crown Bvo. Illustrated. Cloth Boards.
DAHLIA PEPLOE’S REAPING. 25.
JOHN BOBBY’S BETTER NATURE. 2s.
MARY LOUISA QUAYNE. A Belated Love Story. 2S. 6 d.
MEG’S FORTUNE. 25.
MRS. GROOM’S LEGACY. 2S
SEPTIMA. 25. 6 d.
THE MARK OF CAIN. 25. 6 d.
THE ORDEAL OF SUSANNAH VANTHAM. 3s. 6 d.
THE POSTWOMAN. 35. 6 d.
UNCLE ISAAC’S MONEY. 3s. 6d.
By W. H. G. KINGSTON.
Crown Bro, Illustrated. Cloth Boards.
MICHAEL PENGUYNE. 15.
NED GARTH ; or, Made Prisoner in Africa. A Tale of
the Slave Trade. 25.
OWEN HARTLEY ; or, Ups and Downs. 25.
SUNSHINE BILL. is.
THE CRUISE OF THE “ DAINTY.” is. 6 i.
THE FRONTIER FORT ; or, Stirring Times in the
North-West Territory of British America. 15. 6 d.
THE GILPINS AND THEIR FORTUNES. A Tale of
Australia, is.
THE LOG HOUSE BY THE LAKE. A Talc of Canada.
THE MATE OF THE “ LILY.” is.
THE SETTLERS. A Tale of Virginia. 25.
THE TWO SHIPMATES, is.
THE TWO WHALERS, is.


By the late
REV. J. M. NEALE, D.D.
Crown Bvo. Illustrated. Cloth Boards.
AGNES DE TRACY ; A Tale of the Times of S. Thomas
of Canterbury, is. 6 d.
DEEDS OF FAITH. Stories for Children from Church
History, is.
DUCHENIER ; or, The Revolt of La Vendee. 3s. 6 d.
EVENINGS AT SACKVILLE COLLEGE. Legends for
Children, is.
HERBERT TRESHAM. A Tale of the Great Rebellion,
is.
LENT LEGENDS. Stories for Children from Church
History, is. 6 d.
SHEPPERTON MANOR. 2S. 6 d.
STORIES FROM HEATHEN MYTHOLOGY AND GREEK
HISTORY. For the use of Christian Children.
is. 6 d.
STORIES OF THE CRUSADES : I. De Hellingley ; 11.
The Crusade of St. Louis. 3s. 6 d.
TALES ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE APOSTLES’ CREED.
2S.
TALES OF CHRISTIAN ENDURANCE, is.
TALES OF CHRISTIAN HEROISM, is. 6 d.
THEODORA PHRANZA ; or, The Fall of Constantinople.
3s. 6 d.
THE EGYPTIAN WANDERERS. A Story of the Great
Tenth Persecution. 2S.
THE FARM OF APTONGA. A Story for Children of the
Times of S. Cyprian. 2S.
THE FOLLOWERS OF THE LORD. Stories for Children
from Church History, is.
VICTORIES OF THE SAINTS, is. 6 d.


FOR CHILDREN.
THE LITTLE ONE’S WOOD BOOK. An indestructible
Picture Book for Infants. Net 2s. 6 d.
LA FONTAINE’S FABLES. Selected Fables with
movable coloured pictures. Paper boards, net 2s.
SELECT FABLES FROM LA FONTAINE. Illustrated
by M. B. de Monvel. Cloth, 6s: '
FIVE MINUTES’ STORIES. By Mrs. Moleswortii.
Coloured Illustrations. 4to, cloth boards, 2s.
FRIENDS WITHOUT FACES. A Fairy’s Rebuke to
Vanity. Written and Illustrated by Harry
Furniss. Sm 4to, paper boards, is. 6 d. ; cloth, 2s. 6 d.
GRIMM’S HOUSEHOLD STORIES. Illustrated by
Dorothy Furniss. Fcap. 4to, paper boards, is.
LEAVES FROM A BABY’S LOG BOOK. Illustrated by
Blanche Handler. 4to, paper boards, is.
NURSERY RHYMES. Being Mother Goose’s Melodies
arranged by Charles Welsh. Cloth, is.
NURSERY RHYMES AND FABLES. Sixty Illus-
trations by W. J. Morgan. Paper boards, is. 6 d.
PICTORIAL RHYMES AND VERSES. With Drawings
by M. Edwards. 4to, paper boards, 6 d.
PICTURE BOOK OF ANIMALS. By the late Rev. C. A
Johns. Small, 4to, cloth, is. 6 d.
THE BELLS OF LONDON TOWN. Coloured Illustra-
tions by Gordon Browne. 410, paper boards, 2 s.
THE HOUSE THAT JACK BUILT. Coloured Illustra
tions. By M. Edwards. Paper boards, 6 d.
THE LUCKY DUCKS. By Mrs. Molesworth. Coloured
Illustrations. Small 4to, cloth boards, 2s.
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
LONDON: NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C,




y
$2 3.1/Z
'S HU her
{f V
*
■




