

GRAND UNITED
ORDER OF ODDFELLOWS
NEW SOUTH WALES
Ritual
Publish by the
Committee of Management for the Use
of Brand and District Officers
and embracing the
Rituals of Adult Branches,
Juvenile Branches, Council Master's
Chapter District, Brand Long, Lertures
and Lertures of the
Three Degrees
1935
A


Index
Page
ADULT BRANCH RITUAL 5-42
Amendmetits 33
Annual General Meeting Opening 89
Arrangement of Lodge Room 6
BRANCH RITUAL 5-42
By-Laws of Council Masters’ Chapter 75-78
Chairman—Right to Speak 34
Conduct and Obedience 35
Council Masters’ Chapter By-Laws 75-78
Council Masters’ Chapter Lecture 69-71
COUNCIL MASTERS’ CHAPTER RITUAL . . 57-78
DEDICATION—AduIt Branch 7-8
Council Masters’ Chapter . . . 61-63
Juvenile Branch 45
DEGREE LECTURES 109-129
Dissent from Chairman’s Ruling 35
District Officers’ Installation 81-85
DISTRICT RITUAL 79-85
Election of Branch Officers 38
FUNERAL CEREMONY 40-42
GRAND LODGE RITUAL 87-96
Grand Officers’ Installation 91-96
Honours of the Order 17
INITIATION CEREMONY—
Adult Branch 22-30
Council Masters’ Chapter 66-68
Juvenile Branch 53-55
INSTALLATION OF OFFICERS—
Adult Branch 9-15
Council Masters’ Chapter 72-74
District 81-85
Grand Lodge 91-96
Juvenile Branch 46-49


Page
Instructions re Branch Business 16-18
Instructions to Presiding Officers 32-38
JUVENILE BRANCH RITUAL 43-55
Key to Pass Words 130
LECTURE—CounciI Masters’ Chapter 69-71
LECTURES—P.N.G 97-108
LECTURES OF THE THREE DEGREES . . . 109-129
Moving Motions 32
ORDER OF BUSINESS—
Adult Branch 20
Council Masters’ Chapter 64
Juvenile Branch 51
Pass Words—Key to 130
P.N.G. LECTURES 97-108
Points for Presiding Officer 32
Points of Order 35
PRAYER—
Annual District Meeting 81
Annual General Meeting 89
PRESIDING OFFICERS Instructions and
Advice to 32-38
“Question Be Put” 36
Receiving Officers 37
Recommitting a Motion 36
Rescinding a Motion 36
REGALIA REGULATIONS 31
RITUAL COMPETITIONS 38-39
Standing Orders 32
Text Books 38
Time Limit for Speeches 34
Voting 34
Jn&*x—nmtnmp&


The Ritual
The Ritual is designed to set out in concise and dig-
nified language the principles and tenets of Oddfellow-
ship, exemplifying the underlying motto of “Friendship,
Love, and Truth,” the Society’s basis of the Golden
Rule, “Do unto others as ye would that others should
do unto you.” Moreover, it is designed to impress upon
each candidate for admission the splendid aims and
objects of the Society, and its usefulness to all mankind.
In order that these teachings and instructions may
bear fruit, it is essential that those officers to whom
falls the privilege and duty of interpreting the Ritual,
shall ever bear in mind that they have an obligation to
ensure that attention is given during the delivery of
their respective charges, and that such charges are
given with dignity and solemnity accompanied by clear
and impressive speech.
Officers and members should realise first impres-
sions are lasting, and may determine the future atti-
tude of the candidate towards the Society; consequently
good order should be maintained during the whole of
the ceremonies.


Branch Ritual


Arrangement of the Lodge Room
(To be carried out where practicable)
1. Noble Grand.
2. Supporters Noble Grand.
3. Vice-Grand.
4. Supporters Vice-Grand.
5. Past Noble Grand.
6. Secretary.
7. Treasurer.
8. Warden.
9. Inside Guardian.
10. Outside Guardian.
11. Recording Secretary,
12. Seats for Members.


From of Opening, Constituting and
Dedicating a New Lodge
The order of business in connection with the open-
ing of a new Branch shall be as follows:
(a) Open occasional District Lodge.
(b) Initiation of members.
(c) Name of new Branch.
(d) Reading of Dispensation.
(e) Dedication.
(f) Election of Officers.
(g) Election of Three Trustees.
(h) Installation of Officers.
The District Master and Officers being assembled at
the place at which it is proposed to hold the new Lodge,
the D.M. shall open an occasional District Lodge. The
candidates for membership in the new Lodge must then
be initiated.
(Initiation of Candidates.)
(Naming of Branch.)
District Master. —l now require the District Secre-
tary to read the Dispensation of the Grand Master and
the Committee of Management of the Order for open-
ing this Lodge.
District Secretary reads the Dispensation and the
District Master then declares as follows:
By authority of this Dispensation, and in virtue of
my prerogative, I do hereby declare this a true and
lawful Lodge of the Grand United Order of Oddfellows.
(The District Master here stands before the altar,
and the Officers and Members surround him when he
dedicates the Lodge as follows, being previously sup-
plied with a quantity of Com, Water, and Earth.)
Dedication.
District Master. —l solemnly dedicate this Lodge
unto Friendship, Love and Truth; may it protect the
widow and the orphan, be a home for the stranger, a


refuge for the oppressed, a resting-place for the weary;
may every virtue flourish here, and every vice be far
removed—may it be the sanctuary of Friendship, Love
and Truth, and may this our work endure, and plenty
bless the brethren, in hope whereof we strew the fruits
of the soil, corn the sustainer, and water the refresher,
and this earth, from whence we were taken and unto
which we must return, we scatter in remembrance of
our mortality—and I name this Lodge
(Here he pronounces the name of the Lodge.)
District Master. —Brethren, let us now proceed to
open this newly-made and dedicated Lodge of Friend-
ship, Love, and Truth in due form.
(The Lodge is here opened in the usual form and
business proceeded with as per order of business on
page 20.)


Installation of Officers
Instructions
After the election, a Past Noble Grand, assisted by
two Conductors, shall install the new Officers into their
respective positions. (It is usual to request a Grand
Officer or a District Officer or a Council Master, if pre-
sent, to install the Officers.)
The space between Officers’ Chairs shall be kept
clear for the installation of Officers.
The Installing Master shall take his position in the
N.G.’s Chair, the Chair of the V.G. to be brought for-
ward to allow the Officers to be seated behind it. Six
Senior Officers to be in the front row, seven Junior
Officers behind them. Arranged in this manner, the
Senior Officers are seated, while the Junior Officers are
standing behind them in the address before the instal-
lation. The voice of the Installing Master is heard
clearly because of the distance, and this induces atten-
tion among the spectators. In this portion of the cere-
mony, the conductors are stationed on either side of the
Installing Master, and they move down for the sup-
porters to the V.G. Taking them to their stations
brings the Conductors with the Officers, where they
remain on either side thereafter, to bring the Officers
to the Installing Master. They take up the positions
beside him, after conducting the P.N.G. to his station,
the Installing Master waiting until they are in these
positions before he says: “This concludes the cere-
mony,” etc.
Order of Officers for Installation Ceremony.
T VG NG PNG FS RS
LSVG LSNG IG OG W RSNG RSVG


To introduce to the Installing Officer the Conduc-
tors shall first bring Officers immediately before the
V.G. Chair and thence to the Installing Officer.
The Conductors shall alternately present Officers
as follows: —“Worthy Installing Officer, I present to you
the elect for Installation.” The
Conductor on the right (facing the Installing Officer)
to commence.
Upon the completion of his charge, the Installing
Officer shall congratulate each Officer and direct the
Conductors to “Escort the
to his station, etc.”
Ceremony of Installation
Installing Officer. —The newly-elected Officers will
please be standing. Will you promise to be regular
and punctual in your attendance, to discharge the duties
of your respective offices in a constitutional way, accord-
ing to the ceremonies and customs as established, and
to enforce a due observance of the laws of the
Order?
Answer.—We will.
The Right and Left Supporters to the Vice-Grand,
Right and Left Supporters to the Noble Grand, Warden,
Inside Guardian, Outside Guardian, will remain stand-
ing. The Senior Officers will please be seated.
Address to Junior Officers.
Worthy and Respected Members.—There is a pecu-
liar pleasure arises from the conviction that our con-
duct in Society has been such as to merit attention
and secure approbation. Such must now be the charac-
ter of your feelings, having been made the object of the
esteem and confidence of your Lodge.
On the arms of the Order you are represented by
the Stars. You are as necessary to the harmonious
working of our system as they are in adding to the
beauty and harmony of creation. the Sun and
Moon to diffuse light over the edrth, so you, in your
stations, are to take part with your Senior Officers in
carrying on the noble work of Oddfellowship.


In assisting those Senior Officers, you will become
conversant with the general arrangement of a Lodge,
and acquire proficiency in the administration of our
rules. You will also gain the esteem of your fellow-
members, and ultimately obtain as a reward the grati-
fication of your laudable wishes for a higher distinction.
It is required that during your term of office you
will be regular and punctual in your attendance at the
Lodge, which is imperfect without its full complement
of Officers. I trust that you will all perform your
duties conscientiously, and that at the expiration of
your service the members may feel that they were
right in their choice.
Be seated, Brethren.
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You will present the Right
and Left Supporters to the Vice-Grand elect.
Brethren. —l clothe you with the Regalia of Sup-
porters of the Vice-Grand. Your office does not call
for the exercise of any specific duties, but you will be
enabled by a strict attention to the working of the
Lodge to qualify for higher office.
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You will present the
Right and Left Supporters to the Noble Grand elect.
Brethren. —l clothe you with the Regalia of Sup-
porters of the Noble Grand. Upon you is the respon-
sibility of properly conducting a candidate during the
initiation. As the Right Supporter, you Bro. (A. 8.)
will assist in the opening of the Lodge, whilst as Left
Supporter, you Bro. (C.D.) will be required to assist
in the closing.
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You will present the
Warden elect.
Bro./Sister Warden. —I clothe you with the Regalia
of your office. The comfort of the brethren, together
with the arrangement of the meeting room and the
care of the property of the Lodge, is in your direct
charge. A proper performance of your duties will
ensure the harmony of our assemblies.
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You will present the Out-
side Guardian elect.
Bro./Sister Guardian. —I clothe you with the
Regalia of your office. I would impress upon you the


importance of your duties. You will guard against the
intrusion of strangers and ensure that only those who
prove themselves members shall obtain admission to
our meetings.
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You will present the
Inside Guardian elect.
Bro./Sister Inside Guardian. —I clothe you with the
Regalia of your office. You will obtain the inner pass-
word and the consent of the N.G. before admitting
those who seek entry to the Lodge, and assist the Out-
side Guardian in the discharge of his duties.
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You will present the Sick
Visitors elect.
Worthy and Respected Members. —You have been
elected to perform a most serious and responsible duty,
and it is essential that I should inform you somewhat
of its nature and responsibilities.
You will have to visit those of your fellow-mem-
bers who are unable to follow their occupations in con-
sequence of accident or illness, and offer to each such
consolation and sympathy as may be at your command.
Gifts from the hand are silver and gold, but the heart
gives that which neither silver nor gold can buy.
Whilst the foregoing applies to each and every case
of genuine illness, it will be your care to see that no
injustice is done to the Lodge, that no imposition or
violation of the Rules is unreported; in fact, it is your
essential duty to hold the Scales of Justice equally be-
tween the sick member and the Lodge. Never wilfully
seek to deprive a member of those benefits to which
he is entitled, nor yet permit an unworthy member to
trespass upon the funds which have been accumulated
for the relief of the members. I hope that you will dis-
charge your duties with strict integrity.
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You will present the
Recording Secretary elect.
Bro./Sister Recording Secretary. —l clothe you
with the Regalia of your office. From your efforts the
Lodge will expect an accurate and complete record of
its proceedings; your minute book will often be used
as an authentic reference. The proper discharge of
your duties will be to the mutual benefit of the Lodge


and yourself. Be vigilant and faithful that your record
may remain without blot or blemish.
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You will present the
Treasurer elect.
Bro./Sister Treasurer. —l clothe you with the
Regalia of your office. In confiding to you the treasure
of the Lodge, the members confide in the treasure of
your honour. I feel assured that the reliance placed in
you will always be maintained, and that when a suc-
cessor is appointed, you will hand over the position,
pure and unsullied. Let the selection of you by the
members be fully justified by your integrity.
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You will present the
Financial Secretary elect.
Bro./Sister Financial Secretary. —l clothe you with
the Regalia of your office. You have been called, by the
voice of those who place confidence in your honour and
ability, to an administrative position calling for the
exercise of tact, enthusiasm and care. On the arms of
the Order are the Scales of Justice; when you look upon
them may they impress you with a sense of your duty.
Let me direct your attention to the importance of your
position. It is essential that the accounts of the Branch
be carefully kept, and that such returns and informa-
tion as may be required of you shall be promptly fur-
nished. Upon your attention depends, to a large
extent, the success of your Lodge and the contentment
of the members.
Honesty and integrity are your special provinces.
I trust that your acceptance of so important an office
indicates your appreciation of its duties.
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You will present the
Vice-Grand elect.
Bro./Sister Vice-Grand. —l clothe you with the
Regalia of your office, and hail your elevation to the
dignity of Vice-Grand. Your duties are typified on the
aims of the Order by a representation of the Moon, the
Queen of Night. As that luminary, in the absence of
the Sun, supplies the earth with light, so you are to
take part with the Noble Grand in diffusing through-
out your Lodge the light of our constitution and laws.
As a Vice-Grand you are to be an example to


your fellow-members; for, if the fruits of our principles
be not gathered from your ministrations, it would be
vain to expect unanimity and concord amongst those
who have not arrived at the eminent position you
occupy. Where the roots are withered, the branches
will be blighted. So in a Lodge, if those who are the
depositors of order and justice prove unfit for their
stations, the Lodge partakes more or less of the effects
of their inefficiency—the ardour of the others is
checked, and progress seriously retarded.
In assisting to preserve order, you will divest your-
self of anything like ill-temper or partiality. Preserve
an evenness of temper, and display, even in your remon-
strances, an urbane and courteous disposition.
Having just won the confidence of the members, I
trust you will not disappoint their hopes, nor dishonour
the office you have accepted.
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You will pi'esent the
Noble Grand elect.
Bro./Sister Noble Grand. —l clothe you with the
Regalia of your office. In accepting the office of Noble
Grand you are taking upon yourself a serious respon-
sibility which I hope you are determined to discharge
without prejudice or partiality. You are entrusted with
the well-being and moral reputation of the Lodge. Your
emblem is the Sun. You are to take the same part in
your Lodge in creating and diffusing good order, har-
mony, and true fellowship as the Sun does in dispen-
sing light over the creation.
Your qualifications should be of the highest order,
One who holds your office should have an affable and
temperate disposition; be able to look with composure
upon a moral tempest, unruffled by its rage, contem-
plating only how to repress its violence and produce a
calm. Whilst strict, be gentle; whilst firm, untainted by
severity; and in wielding the instrument of justice,
always aim at the spot where springs reflection and
moral consciousness.
You should also have a thorough knowledge of
the laws by which, as Oddfellows, we are governed. It
would be well, therefore, if you would rigidly examine
yourself in this respect, so that if deficient you may
vigilantly apply yourself to study. An intelligent pre


siding officer is enabled, by his reasoning and correct
application of the rules, to subdue any disposition to
discord which may arise.
Be punctual in your attendance at the Lodge, and
in your attention to all the duties that devolve upon
you; and shrink not from the path of rectitude and integ-
rity. You will thus win and wear your laurels with
becoming dignity.
Brethren, you will be upstanding (Gavel, Once )
and proclaim your Noble Grand with the honours of
the Order, taking your time from me.
(Honours of the Order.)
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You will present the
Past Noble Grand for the ensuing term.
Bro,/Sister. —I invest you with the regalia of Past
Noble Grand, and have much pleasure in congratulat-
ing you upon your elevation to so dignified an office.
In doing so, I remind you that you must ever have in
mind the fact that to you, more than to any other Offi-
cer in the Branch, by reason of your experience, the
Officers and members shall look for precept and
example. Instruction in the teachings of our Order
must receive your particular attention, it being your
care to see that the members under your charge are
given every opportunity to acquire such proficiency
and knowledge as may be within the reach of your at-
tainments. Upon attaining the degree of Past Noble
Grand, you are eligible for admission to the Patriarchal
Order of the Council Masters’ Chapter.
I thank you on behalf of the Committee of Manage-
ment for the services you have rendered during your
graduation through the various offices in the Lodge.
Bro./Sister Conductors. —You shall kindly escort
the Past Noble Grand to his station.
This concludes the ceremony of installation, and it
is with extreme pleasure that I declare the various
Officers duly installed for the ensuing six months. (The
Installing Officer should then congratulate the N.G. and
his Officers, and offer them every good wish for a happy
and successful term.)
Bro./Sister Noble Grand. —I now hand the Lodge
over to your control.


Branch Business
Instrurtions
General.
The adult ritual only shall be used in Adult Lodges.
All Ritual ceremonial should be done from memory.
The various charges are neither lengthy nor difficult
to learn, and, therefore, should readily be memorised.
The Noble Grand shall only stand during the whole
of the Opening or Closing ceremonies, and when ad-
dressing a candidate during the Initiation ceremony.
Pass Words should be used by members seeking
entry while the Lodge is in session.
On entering or retiring from a Lodge the Noble
Grand only is to be saluted.
The gavel must always be used when it is desired
that the Lodge shall be upstanding.
Where applicable, the provisions of General Rule 7
govern the business procedure of a Lodge meeting.
Opening and Closing the Lodge.
The Warden having placed the regalia in the
proper place for each officer, the Noble Grand, at the
time appointed for the opening of the Branch Meeting,
shall take his place, clothe himself with regalia and
say:
“Officers” (strike the gavel once, then pause until
all are standing, and continue) “take your stations.”
No further instructions are to be issued until all are
in their places, have put on their regalia, and, in re-
sponse to a single tap of the gavel, are seated.
The P.N.G. shall be the officer from whom the cue
shall be taken in putting on regalia.
At the command: “Guardian, close the door,” that
Officer shall carry out the order so that the closing shall
be heard distinctly.
When required to report if there are any strangers
present, the Warden shall reply: “Brother Noble
Grand, those present are members of the Order.” This
response shall only be given when the Warden is satis


fied that all are members. Should there be any doubt,
the circumstance thereof shall be reported to the Noble
Grand, upon whom is the responsibility of proving any
stranger to be a member.
When calling upon the officers to state their duty,
the N.G. shall first name them; for instance, he shall
say: “Vice Grand” (pause until that officer is stand-
ing and then say), “state your duty,” allowing the V.G.
to be seated before calling upon another Officer, and
so on.
The Opening, Initiation, and Closing Odes shall be
sung.
The word “holy” in the last line of the opening ode
may be omitted in order that the rhythm may be
preserved.
When closing the Lodge, he shall say, “Officers and
members, be standing” (pause until this is done, and
then say) “and assist me and my Left Supporter, etc.”
When authority is given for admission, the Inside
Guardian shall knock three times and open the door.
When a member seeks admission and his entry is
delayed, the Inside Guardian shall knock once.
When an Officer is late, he shall not take up his
position until invited to do so by the Noble Grand.
Honours of the Order.
The correct method of giving the Honours of the
Order, as approved by the Committee of Management,
is as follows:
Friendship —A silent grip of the hand .
Love —Right hand over heart.
Truth —Right hand raised, palm outward, fore-arm
bent at right angles.
Questions of Business.
The Noble Grand shall be always addressed as
“Brother Noble Grand.”
After announcing each item of “Questions of Busi-
ness,” the Noble Grand shall say: “I declare this ques-
tion open.” After business under this heading has
been dealt with, the Noble Grand shall “declare this
question closed.” The next question shall be intro-
duced until the business sheet has been exhausted.


Before Correspondence is read, a resolution should
be carried that “Correspondence be received and dealt
with.”
All correspondence shall be read by the Secretary;
on no account must it be read by the Noble Grand.
The response to the inquiry regarding the bank-
ing of monies shall be made by the Treasurer.
Opening of Lodge
Noble Grand. —Officers, take your stations
Guardian, close the door Warden, report to me
if there be any strangers present.
Noble Grand. —Brother Past Noble Grand, Officers
and Members, —I trust that you will be attentive to
the business of the evening. I shall act according to
rule, and judge impartially of every transaction. I
hope that we shall be candid and prudent, as on these
principles depend our success.
Officers and members, be standing (Gavel, Once )
and assist me and my Right Supporter to open the
Lodge.
R.S.N.G.—I declare this Lodge ready to be opened,
for the relief of sick members, transaction of business,
instruction in the principles of the Order, and the
enjoyment of harmony.
Noble Grand. —Attention (Gavel, Once).
(Honours of the Order.)
OPENING ODE.
Tune, “Auld Lang Syne.”
When Friendship, Love and Truth abound
Among a band of Brothers,
The cup of joy goes gaily round,
Each shares the bliss of others.
Sweet roses grace the thorny way
Along the vale of sorrow;
The flowers that shed their leaves to-day
Shall bloom again to-morrow!
How grand in age, how fair in youth
Are holy Friendship, Love and Truth.


Noble Grand. —l declare this Lodge duly
opened (Gavel, Once).
Be seated, Brethren.
Outside Guardian, state your duty.
Outside Guardian. —To guard the door against
strangers, to obtain the outer pass-word from each
member, or your consent for admission, and to prevent
anyone from listening to what is going on in the Lodge.
Noble Grand. —Outside Guardian, take your station
Right Supporter, state your duty.
R.S.N.G. —To assist in opening the Lodge, and act
with the Left Supporter as a conductor for the initia-
tion of candidates.
Noble Grand. —Left Supporter, state your duty.
L.S.N.G. —To assist in closing the Lodge, and act
with the Right Supporter at initiation.
Noble Grand. —Warden, state your duty.
Warden. —To arrange everything necessary for
opening the Lodge, to keep it comfortable and in order,
to see that all things are put away at the closing and
report to you any loss or damage to Lodge property.
Noble Grand. —lnside Guardian, state your duty.
Inside Guardian. —To assist the Outside Guardian
in the discharge of his duty, to announce each member,
and obtain your consent and the inner password be-
fore admission.
Noble Grand. —Recording Secretary, state your
duty.
Recording Secretary. —My duty is to keep fair and
impartial minutes of the meetings of the Lodge, and
record the attendance of Officers.
Noble Grand. —Financial Secretary, explain your
duty.
Financial Secretary. —My duty is to receive and
enter correctly all monies belonging to this Branch,
conduct all correspondence, balance accounts and sup-
ply all returns as required by the rules of the Society,
and at the close of each meeting hand over to the
Treasurer all monies received.
Noble Grand. —Treasurer, state your duty.


Treasurer. —My duty is to receive the money from
the Secretary and deposit it as provided by rule.
Noble Grand. —Vice-Grand, state your duty.
Vice-Grand. —My duty is to act in conjunction
with you, to assist you in enforcing the rules during
Lodge hours, officiate in your absence, and assist in the
initiation of candidates.
Noble Grand. —Worthy Past Noble Grand, what is
your duty?
Past Noble Grand. —My duty is to superintend the
working of the Branch, to act in an advisory capacity
to you, and convey instruction to members.
Noble Grand. —Brother Recording Secretary, I
shall thank you to read the minutes of the last Lodge
Meeting.
(If the minutes are regarded by those present as
a true record, the only motion necessary is one of
Confirmation.)
Noble Grand. —Have the monies received last
meeting been duly banked in accordance with rule?
(Reply of the Treasurer.)
Order of Business
INITIATION.
SICKNESS AND DISTRESS.
Noble Grand. —Worthy Secretary, you will kindly
present certificates of sick members and report those
who are entitled to sick pay.
Sick Visitors’ Report.
Passing of Sick Accounts.
GENERAL BUSINESS.
Correspondence.
General Reports.
Accounts.
Any other general business.
PROPOSITIONS.
Noble Grand. —Has any Officer or member a friend
to propose as a member of this Lodge?


Closing of Lodge
Noble Grand. —Officers and Members, —It being
now time to close this Lodge, I thank you for your at-
tendance, and hope that we shall receive a continuance
of your visits.
Officers and members be standing (Gavel, Once)
and assist me and my Left Supporter in closing the
Lodge.
L.S.N.G. —I declare this Lodge ready to be closed.
Noble Grand. —Attention (Gavel, Once).
(Honours of the Order.)
CLOSING SONG.
Tune, “God Save the King.”
Brethren, ere we part,
Let us join hand and heart,
In this our cause!
May our next meeting be
Blessed with sweet charity,
Honour and secrecy,
Oddfellows all;
United hand in hand,
Long may our friendly band
Deserve applause;
May all Oddfellows be
Famed for sincerity,
Still may prosperity
Attend our cause.
Noble Grand. —I declare this Lodge duly closed.
(Gavel, Three Times.)


Initiation of Candidate
Instructions
Wherever in a charge the masculine gender is
used, Officers shall use discretion to alter suitably if
female candidates or both male and female are being
initiated, e.g., “He who would become a brother must
prove his moral fitness,” may be “She who Would be-
come a sister, etc.,” and “They who would become
members, etc.,” respectively.
The term “Brethren” may reasonably be considered
in the broad sense to apply to both sexes and needs no
correction.
At Initiation a candidate shall be placed between
the R.S.N.G. and L.S.N.G., who must be careful to re-
tain their places on either side, the R.S.N.G. on the
right-hand side of the candidate, and add dignity to
the ceremony by keeping in regular step, starting off
with the left foot when change of positions is necessary.
During the initiation ceremony the Supporters shall
retain their respective positions as Right and Left
Supporters.
On leaving the room, the Conductors shall salute
the N.G., and on entering, the R.S. shall lead, followed
by the candidate and the L.S. to a position allow-
ing for the door to be closed behind him. They
shall then turn to face the N.G., take the candi-
date by the hand, and shall remain in this position
until the I.G. has given them the N.G.’s instruc-
tions, and has returned to his station. They shall then
advance straight up the room, pivot and advance to
V.G., pivot again to face him. When the address is
concluded they shall face about, the candidate being
the pivot, and advance to the N.G. Upon being re-
quired to conduct the candidate to the Financial or
Recording Secretary, the Conductors and candidates
shall face about in the same manner to a position oppo-
site the Financial or Recording Secretary, pivot and ad-
vance to a position opposite him. The same procedure
shall be adopted throughout the ceremony wherever


required. Thereafter the centre of the room shall be
used as a base for turning, until the candidate is finally
seated.
The distance from an addressing Officer at which
a candidate is to be placed is approximately four feet,
and the candidate is to be the centre of turn in each
case, the pivot to be either right or left, as the occasion
demands.
All members shall stand during the obligation, the
signal to rise being given by the Noble Grand after his
opening address to the candidate, by striking the gavel
after the word “mine.”
When the L.S.N.G. is directed to demonstrate the
mode of entry, the R.S.N.G. shall place the candidate
to the right of the P.N.G.’s chair, the L.S.N.G. mean-
time retaining his position.
The R.S.N.G. shall remain with the candidate—the
L.S.N.G., saluting and retiring, etc. When demonstra-
tion is complete, the L.S.N.G. shall move across to his
side of the candidate, and remain there.
The Conductor shall use the pass words, and shall
be announced by the I.G. as “Bro with pass
words.”
In congratulating a candidate, the Past Noble
Grand shall move from his chair from the left-hand
side, continue right round, and resume it from the right-
hand side.
The candidate, to receive his “welcome with
honours,” shall keep his position between the supporters
until the singing of the Initiation Ode is completed.
From this position, the candidate shall, on the
command of the N.G., be conducted to his seat. The
correct place for a candidate is beside the Financial
Secretary, in order that he may pay his dues and
obtain any information or advice as the opportunity
offers.
When the newly-initiated member is seated, the
L.S. shall shake hands with him, and say, “I congratu-
late you,” the same procedure to be followed by the
R.S.


The supporters shall then advance to a position in
the centre of the floor, pivot, advance to their places, and
turn about. It is required that the other Officers and
members shall have been standing since the singing of
the Initiation Ode, and all shall be seated when the
N.G. strikes the gavel once.
The supporters shall not salute the N.G. when re-
suming their places.
Initiation Ceremony
Noble Grand. —Bro./Sister Supporters, you will
retire and conduct the candidate (when the supporters
have retired the Noble Grand will say) (Gavel, Once).
Brethren, we are about to initiate a candidate. Dur-
ing the ceremony you will kindly the silent, and refrain
from smoking.
(When the Conductors are ready with candidate
the Outside Guardian will give the alarm.)
Inside Guardian (Knocks once on door). —Bro./Sis-
ter Noble Grand, there is an alarm.
Noble Grand. —You will attend to the alarm, Bro./
Sister Inner Guardian.
Inside Guardian. —The Conductors await entry
with a candidate.
Noble Grand. —Admit and direct the Conductors to
escort the candidate to the Vice-Grand.
(Inside Guardian knocks three times and admits.)
Inside Guardian. —Bro./Sister Conductors, it is the
desire of the Noble Grand that the candidate be escorted
to the Vice-Grand.
R.S.N.G. —Bro. Vice-Grand, this candidate desires
to join the family of Oddfellows.
Vice-Grand. —Worthy candidate! On the recom-
mendation of your friends, you have been accepted for
initiation. In seeking to avail yourself of the privi-
leges and advantages of the Order, you have acted as
a wise and considerate person; in co-operating with
your fellow members you are discharging a great social


duty, the fruits of which, whilst benefiting others, will
be to your own advantage.
You are required to render a cheerful and ready
obedience to the Officers and rules of the Order. These
Officers are the free choice of the members, and they
who neglect to render unto them those honours which
their respective positions demand, degrade themselves,
dishonour the fraternity and attest that they are un-
worthy to bear in their own persons the dignity they
fail to respect in others. It is hoped you will not enter
this Order for the purpose of paying your contributions
and receiving its pecuniary benefits, without so far as
possible aiding in the arduous labours of conducting
the business of the Branch. You will prove by your
service if you are worthy of the Order, and may you
become one of the noblest pillars in the Temple of
Friendship.
You will now be conducted to the Noble Grand, to
take the necessary obligation of an Oddfellow.
R.S.N.G. —Bro. Noble Grand, this candidate is in
progress of initiation into our honourable Order.
Noble Grand. —My friend! Will you promise to be
faithful to this Lodge, promote the general good there-
of and avoid and discourage trivial disputes and
quarrels?
Answer: 1 will.
Noble Grand. —Lay your right hand upon your
heart, and repeat after me the following solemn obli-
gation, substituting your name for mine (Gavel, Once ).
I A.B standing before the
altar of Friendship—solemnly promise—that I will not—
either directly or indirectly—reveal anything which in
confidence—may from time to time—be entrusted to
my keeping. That I will always protect—by every
means in my power—the interests of this Lodge—and
the Order—and the privileges of my fellow members.
I will—to the utmost of my ability—help any of
my Brethren—who may be in distress—and offer con-
solation—to those who may be sick.
I will obey the Officers and rules—and learn, prac-
tice, and teach—the principles—rites—and ceremonies
of the Order.


I finally promise—that I will endeavour—to attend
regularly—the meetings of the Lodge.
Noble Grand. — {Gavel, Once.) You, my Brethren,
are witnesses of this solemn obligation.
All Answer; We are.
Be seated, Brethren. (Gavel, Once.)
Noble Grand. —You have laid your right hand
upon your heart, and in a solemn manner promised be-
fore the Altar of Friendship that the means necessary
for the well-being of our Society, which shall be en-
trusted to you, shall be held sacred. Think well of the
promise you have made, and of the wound it would
give the principles which bind together the members
in this Society, if they were betrayed. Amongst the
virtues of social life, that of faithfulness is the greatest.
Anyone who betrays a friend, commits the greatest
crime, and anyone who intrudes into any Order to dis-
turb its peace and break the bond which renders it
social and happy, is a character whom all good men
despise. In whatever rank or station a man is placed,
from the prince to the peasant, he who fulfils the rela-
tive duties of sociability and humanity is truly an Odd-
fellow. You are now become accountable to the mem-
bers for your conduct; I enjoin you to look well to it
lest you bring disgrace upon yourself and the Order,
and the World point the finger of scorn and say, “Such
are Oddfellows.” Let your future life be an example
to your fellow-members, that we may have cause to re-
joice that we accepted you as a member of the Order.
You will now be required to copy my example in
symbolising the principles of our Order, Friendship,
Love, and Truth, which are used at the opening and
closing of the Lodge and are given thus:
(Honours of the Order given slowly and copied by
the candidate.)
It is necessary that I place you in possession of the
passwords which are always obtained from the Noble
Grand. The outer password which is given to the Out-
side Guardian is and the inner pass-
word to be given to the Inside Guardian is


Being now in possession of the passwords, you are
entitled to enter all meetings of this Lodge or any other
Branch of the Order.
Conduct the candidate to the Financial/Recording
Secretary.
R.S.N.G. —Bro. Secretary, I present this candidate
to you for further instruction.
Financial/Recording Secretary. —My Friend, —
You have promised to pay respect to our Officers
and rules. How honourable is that promise which
binds us to do that which is creditable to ourselves and
pleasant to the members! In supporting the rules, you
become a pillar in society and an honour to the Order;
in relieving the Brethren, you do an act of charity con-
sistent with the dignity of the Order. Let the charges
delivered to you sink deep into your mind, and you
will find that you have promised to do that which will
make you beloved and honourable. I would impress
upon you the desirability of attending regularly the
meetings of your Lodge for two important reasons:
Firstly, for the protection of our common interests, and
secondly, for giving practical assistance to the social
features of the Society. In everything which may from
time to time be brought before your Lodge, you will
have, with the rest of your Brethren, an equal interest.
You should, therefore, be always present when con-
venient, so that you may unite your intelligence to that
of others, and prevent, as far as possible, the adoption
of injurious measures. Attendance at Lodge promotes
social feelings; the members become better acquainted
with each other and a good understanding is culti-
vated. It is desired that you should make the event of
your initiation a time for strict self-examination, and
if you find anything in your conduct to amend, I
solemnly urge you to set about that duty immediately.
In your Lodge you will have duties to perform which
you cannot honestly neglect. You have promised to
learn, practise and teach the principles, rights and cere-
monies of the Order. This promise you may only fulfil
by studying its rites and general practices. Its aims
extend far higher than relieving the distressed and
meeting from time to time for social enjoyment. Whilst


it embraces these objects in their fullest extent, it
further seeks to teach the principles and practices of
wisdom and virtue under the most ancient and vener-
able forms of instruction.
Conduct the candidate to the Past Noble Grand.
R.S.N.G. —Bro. Past Noble Grand, —The candidate
is now entitled to receive the final charge and his wel-
come into the Order.
P.N.G. —Respected Member, —Since you have passed
the altar of Friendship you are welcome to the family
of Oddfellows. Before your initiation is complete, I
have a few instructions and explanations to give that
you may be qualified to enjoy the social and friendly
pleasures Oddfellowship bestows. The object of the
Grand United Order is the advancement of our com-
mon humanity in wisdom, virtue and happiness. A
leading feature of this institution is the firm hope in
the future which all its teachings and ceremonies in-
spire—a hope founded on the progressive nature of
man—looking forward to the time when love and not
fear shall rule the human breast, when all who exist
shall hail their fellow-men as brethren, however widely
they may be separated in country, manners or opinions.
The Government of the Order is composed of three
distinct bodies, united for one purpose—the various
Lodges of the Order, the Districts and the Committee
of Management. Power without responsibility the
Order will not permit, and office without ability and
integrity it does not tolerate. These principles are no
less enforced in its individual Lodges than in its supreme
government. Although your station in the Lodge will
at first be humble, yet from the same station every
officer in this Order has risen by his own labours. One
of the noblest precepts of the fraternity is that they
who would rule must prove their qualifications by serv-
ing; they who would teach must learn; they who would
command must know how to obey.
At the door of every Lodge Room stands an Out-
side Guardian, whose duty it is to admit members in
possession of the password, or if not in possession there-
of to admit only on the authority of the Noble Grand.


If, therefore, you desire admission to a Lodge at any
time, you must inform the Outside Guardian of your
intention, and, at the same time, give him the outside
password. The Outside Guardian will give three dis-
tinct knocks which will be answered by the Inside
Guardian, with one knock. When the Lodge is ready
to admit you, he will give three similar knocks. Upon
entry to the Lodge room, you give the second portion
of the password to the Inside Guardian, in an under-
tone, and then advance to the centre of the Lodge
Room, lay your right hand upon your heart, and bow
to the Noble Grand in acknowledgment of his autho-
rity as the presiding officer of the Lodge. You then
take your seat in any portion of the Lodge Room not
reserved for officers.
If you desire to take part in the business before
the Lodge at any time, you will rise and address the
Noble Grand as “Brother Noble Grand,” and on re-
ceiving the call from him you will have the right to
address the meeting. In Lodges of the Grand United,
the order of debate is laid down in our rules and ritual,
and every member must conform thereto.
I now hand to you a book of our rules. It is ex-
pected that you shall study them, and as a result, be-
come thoroughly conversant with the laws which
govern our affairs.
Our Brother the L.S.N.G. will now demonstrate
the method of entry.
(L.S.N.G. salutes the chair, retires, and enters
Lodge in regular manner.)
(P.N.G. coming to the front of his Altar and shak-
ing hands with the candidate) says:
The ceremony of your initiation is now concluded
and I congratulate you upon your entry into the Order.
The P.N.G. then resumes his seat.
Nohle Grand. —Brethren, you will be upstanding
{Gavel, Once) and welcome our newly initiated mem-
ber with the honours of the Order taking your time
from me.
(Honours of the Order.)


INITIATION ODE.
Tune, “God Save the King.”
Hail! worthy Member, hail!
Welcome within the pale
Of Friendship’s bonds.
Here we in love unite,
With justice, truth, and right,
While we still keep in sight
The Golden Law.
Let our united voice
Proclaim whilst we rejoice
(O welcome sweet).
May you with health be crowned,
In peace, and joy abound.
Let the loud cry resound,
Hail! member, hail!
Noble Grand. —Bro./Sister Supporters,—Kindly
conduct the member to his seat. (Gavel, Once.)


Regulations for Wearing of Regalia
The Committee of Management of New South
Wales has adopted the following regulations to be ob-
served throughout the Society in respect of the wear-
ing of regalia:
GENERAL.
Regalia must not be worn in public without appro-
val of the Grand Executive, except that in respect of
a social function Lodge members have the right of
wearing during the continuance of such function, the
regalia of the office they may at the time occupy or
any Past Officers’ regalia to which they are entitled.
Also, in respect of attendance at funerals, regalia may
be worn by the members in accordance with the ritual
under the heading of “Proceedings at Funerals” and
“Funeral Address.” Regalia may be worn during any
portion of the funeral procession as provided in the
ritual.
Whether worn with or without the approval of the
Grand Executive, regalia shall not be worn over any
overcoat or topcoat of either male or female members.
AT LODGE MEETINGS.
At the meetings of Lodges the Officers shall wear
the regalia of the offices they respectively occupy, and
Past Officers may wear their regalia; but regalia shall
not be worn after the closing of a Lodge unless per-
mission has been granted by the Grand Executive or
the Lodge has adjourned to a social function at which
it is suitable for regalia to be worn.
AT DISTRICT DELEGATE MEETINGS.
At the delegate meetings of Districts, delegates may
wear the regalia of the office they occupy or of any past
office they have attained.
AT THE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING.
Representatives to the Annual General Meeting
may wear the regalia of any office they occupy, or have
occupied, either in Branch, District or Grand Lodge,
but where a member has been both a Branch and Dis-
trict Officer, he shall, if possible, give precedence to
District Regalia. Similarly, Grand Lodge regalia shall
have precedence over all other regalia.


Instruction and Advice to
Presiding Officers
District Masters and Noble Grands.
STANDING ORDERS.
Procedure at all meetings of the G.U.0.0.F. is laid
down in Rule 7, Standing Orders and Order of Busi-
ness. Primarily, this rule was designed to govern the
Annual General Meeting, but it provides that it is also
applicable to Branch and District meetings.
POINTS FOR A PRESIDING OFFICER.
(1) The District Master or the Noble Grand is in
charge of the meeting. He should, therefore, be com-
petent to control the assembly, and his guide and autho-
rity are the Standing Orders, a thorough knowledge of
which is essential.
(2) Although exercising authority, the District Mas-
ter or Noble Grand must be thoroughly impartial and
even-tempered, realising that in his care is the har-
mony and success of the meeting.
THE MOVING OF MOTIONS.
All business at District or Branch meetings is
transacted by the moving and seconding of motions and
subsequent debate thereon. Any member qualified to
attend a District or Branch meeting has the right to
move or to second a motion. In order to do so, he
must rise to his feet and address the chairman as
Worthy District Master or Brother Noble Grand, as the
case may be. The District Master or the Noble Grand
then calls the member who has first addressed him, but
the member has not the right to speak until so named
by the chairman.
Until a motion is moved and seconded, the subject
matter thereof may not be discussed at all, but when
it has been moved and seconded, there must be no
other discussion until the chairman has stated the
motion to the meeting in order that everybody may
understand it. After the mover and seconder and the
motion has been placed before the meeting (unless it


be a motion to receive and/or adopt a report, an ad-
dress or a balance sheet, or a motion to extend con-
gratulation or sympathy, or to recognise service), a
definite order of debate is laid down in clause b of
Rule 7, and provides for alternate speakers against and
for a resolution. If there is no speaker against the re-
solution after it has been seconded, then the debate is
finished and the chairman must take a vote. If there
is an opposition speaker, the next speaker must be one
who indicates his intention of speaking for the motion,
and so on, alternately.
AMENDMENTS.
A Chairman must be careful to distinguish between
an amendment and a direct negative to a motion. An
amendment is usually submitted to produce a modifica-
tion of a motion or to traverse the principle expressed
by a motion or the course of action it recommends. A
negative, on the other hand, is direct opposition to a
motion, and the correct way to express it is not by
an amendment, but by a vote against the motion. A
person is only entitled to speak once on a subject be-
fore a meeting, and, therefore, an amendment may only
be moved by somebody who has not previously spoken.
The amendment cannot be spoken to by anybody who
has previously spoken. Only one amendment may be
moved at a time, and there must never be more than
the one amendment and the motion before the meet-
ing. It is competent, however, for sombody who has
not previously spoken, to give notice of a further
amendment, and it is usual and desirable that when
giving such notice he should forecast just what the
further amendment is.
When the debate has concluded on the first amend-
ment, the mover of the motion has the right of reply,
and after he has replied, the chairman must put the
amendment to the meeting. If it is carried, it becomes
the motion and any member who has given notice of
a further amendment may then move his amendment.
The first amendment is now the motion; the further
amendment becomes the amendment.
If the first amendment is lost, the motion still stands
and the further amendment may then be moved as an


amendment to the original motion. This procedure is
adopted no matter how many amendments there may
be. Precedence is given the further amendments in the
order in which they are stated to the chairman.
VOTING.
After a motion and its amendments have been
thoroughly discussed, as laid down herein, the vote is
taken. Rule 14 of the General Rules of the Society
provides that votes shall be taken either on the voices
or by a show of hands or by a ballot. If five members
demand a ballot, such must be the method of voting.
Usually, it is sufficient for the Presiding Officer to ask
all in favour to say “aye” as against those in opposi-
tion who are asked to say “No.” If the chairman is
unable to distinguish from the voices, the fate of a
motion or an amendment, he should then ask, “All in
favour please hold up the right hand.” These should
be counted and then a similar procedure adopted for
those against and the question decided. If a ballot is
decided upon, the meeting must appoint scrutineers to
count the ballot, and the scrutineers must supply ballot
papers for the voters, each of which should be initialled
by the scrutineer prior to being issued to the voter.
TIME LIMIT FOR SPEECHES.
Clause (d) of Rule 7 provides a time limit for
speeches. The mover of a motion is limited to fifteen
minutes, and any other speaker to ten minutes, the
mover being allowed ten minutes to reply, but a meet-
ing may grant an extension of time to any speaker.
RIGHT OF THE CHAIRMAN TO SPEAK.
It is a generally accepted principle that a chair-
man should speak as little as possible, in order to pre-
serve strict impartiality. A District Master or Noble
Grand, however, has the right to speak on any matter
before the meeting, but he must obtain the consent of
the meeting to do so, and having obtained that consent,
he must vacate his chair for the time being, and it shall
be taken by the Deputy District Master or the Vice-
Grand, as the case may be.


POINTS OF ORDER AND MISBEHAVIOUR.
It is competent for any member of a meeting to
raise a point of order against a speaker. It may be
that a speaker has deviated from the matter before the
meeting, and is rambling on to something altogether
different. A point of order may be taken that the
speaker is not discussing the subject before the
meeting. The Noble Grand must impartially decide
whether the point is rightly taken or not. Immediately
a point of order is taken, the member speaking must
resume his seat, the chairman deciding the point of
order before the debate is resumed. If the point is as
to the relevance of the remarks of the speaker, he is
quite entitled to resume his speech after the point has
been decided, but the chairman must be careful to see
that he keeps to his subject. If the point of order be
that the speaker has no right to be speaking at all, and
the point is decided against the speaker, he may not,
of course, resume his remarks.
DISSENT FROM A CHAIRMAN’S RULING.
Although the Chairman is in charge of a meeting,
the meeting has charge of him inasmuch as his rulings
may be dissented from, and it is quite competent for a
majority of members to vote for a motion dissenting
from the Chairman’s ruling, but there must be at least
five members support such a motion before it can be
accepted. It is claimed by some that the carrying of a
motion of dissent means that the Chairman must
vacate the chair for the remainder of the meeting. On
this point a ruling of the Clerk of the Legislative As-
sembly of New South Wales was obtained in March,
1935, as follows;
If a meeting is satisfied that, in giving his ruling, the
Chairman acted in all good faith and to the best of his
judgment, there would not appear to he any good reason
why he should vacate the Chair.
CONDUCT AND OBEDIENCE.
The Chairman may quell any disturbance by re-
questing a member misbehaving himself, to “Act with
decorum,” and also “To resume his seat,” if he is not
acting in conformity with the principles of debate, and
if a member refuses to obey the Chairman when called


to order, he may be fined, as laid down in the rules,
and if he persists in his disobedience, the meeting may
carry a resolution that he withdraw. This extreme step
is very rarely required, but indicates the necessity of
a Chairman being firm should the assembly become in
any way unruly. Unseemly behaviour and undignified
posture should not be permitted, neither should mem-
bers be allowed to move about the room unnecessarily,
nor to converse with one another or indulge in cross-
firing during the conduct of business. A Chairman
should be careful to reprove a member in a tactful and
courteous manner.
THE QUESTION BE PUT.
Under Clause (o) of Rule 7 a member has the right
to move, “That the question be now put.” This is
known as the closure, or, colloquially, the “gag,” and
is designed to stifle further discussion. It may be used
because the mover of “That the question be now put”
is of opinion the debate has gone on long enough, and
nothing further is being added to it by its continuance.
Immediately the motion, “That the question be put,”
has been moved and seconded and carried, there may
be no further discussion except that the mover replies.
RECOMMITTING A MOTION.
Sometimes it happens that there has been a mis-
understanding in regard to some motion which has been
carried, and a member may feel it should again come
before the meeting. This may only be done by the
member moving “That the matter be recommitted,” and
if a majority of the members feel it should be again
considered, they will vote for the recommittal. The
carrying of the recommittal motion automatically nulli-
fies the decision previously reached, and the way is
open for a member to move along the lines he desires,
and amendments may also be moved in accordance with
the rules of debate.
RESCINDING A MOTION.
This must not be confused with the recommittal of
a motion. To rescind a motion means to eliminate it
altogether, and may only be done in one way, that is
by giving a notice of motion which must be in writ


ing and must be discussed at some subsequent meeting.
A notice of motion may also be given to discuss some
matter or to move some resolution at a specified future
meeting.
RECEIVING OFFICERS.
This paragraph is inserted particularly for the
benefit of Noble Grands as a guide to the proper mode
of receiving visiting Grand or District Officers. Grand
and District Officers are announced in the usual way by
the Inside Guardian, and on the Noble Grand request-
ing the Inside Guardian to admit the visiting officers,
they enter the room. Immediately they come through
the door, the Noble Grand should strike his gavel once
on the table as a signal for the members to rise. The
members remain standing, and the visiting officers ad-
vance to the centre of the Lodge room, and give the
customary salute to the Noble Grand. Immediately this
has been done, the visiting officers remain standing in
the centre of the room and the Noble Grand, address-
ing his members, says;
“Brethren, you will welcome the visiting Grand
Officers (or District Officers, as the case may be), with
the Honours of the Order, taking your time from me.”
When the Honours have been given, the visiting
officers advance and shake hands with the Noble Grand,
and then take their seats; the Lodge members should
not be seated until the visiting officers have taken their
seats, when the Noble Grand gavels once and says, “Be
seated, Brethren.”
Visiting officers should be seated on the right hand
side of the Noble Grand, next to the Right Supporter
to the Noble Grand. If both Grand and District Officers
are visiting at the same time, the Grand Officers are
seated to the right of the Noble Grand and the District
Officers to the left, unless there is room on the right
hand side of the Noble Grand for all visiting officers,
in which case the Grand Officers sit nearest to the Noble
Grand with the District Officers on their right side.
Apart from any motion, when visiting officers are
seated, the Noble Grand should, in a few well-chosen
words, extend them a welcome. Votes of thanks to
visiting officers should be moved separately, i.e., if
Grand and District Officers are present together with


Council Masters’ Chapter representatives and represen-
tatives of other Branches, separate votes of thanks
should be moved, the first should be to the Grand Offi-
cers, second to the District Officers, third to the Council
Masters’ Chapter representatives, and fourth to repre-
sentatives of other Branches.
Visiting Grand and District Officers may suit their
own convenience as to when they address the meeting
or desire their business discussed.
ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
The election of Branch Officers is governed by
Rules 29 to 32. In Rule 21 a Branch has the right to
decide the method of electing its officers: if the pre-
ferential system is adopted, it must be in accordance
with Rules 15 to 20 inclusive, but the Lodge may, if it
desires, adopt either an exhaustive system or one
whereby the candidate securing the highest number of
votes cast may be declared elected. Candidates for
Branch office should be nominated, as provided by the
rules, and elected at a summoned meeting of the Branch.
Offices are filled in the order laid down in the ritual.
TEXT BOOKS.
Presiding Officers desiring further details of the
Laws of Debate are recommended to “The Chairman’s
Guide and Secretary’s Companion,” by Henry Frith, or
Sir Reginald Palgrave’s “Chairman’s Handbook,” which
briefly and concisely deal with this important subject.
More involved books of reference are May’s “Parlia-
mentary Procedure” and Lucy’s “Handbook of Parlia-
mentary Procedure.”
Ritual Competitions
Inter-Branch Ritual Competitions are conducted
usually by District Councils who are free to fix their
own conditions. The following regulations, extracted
from those issued by the Illawarra District in 1935, are
published only as a guide:
The Adjudicators, whose decision shall be final, to
be appointed by the District Council.
Provided that any team is composed of members


of the same Lodge, it will not be necessary for them to
be the sitting Officers.
The maximum number of points will be:—Elocu-
tion 50, Deportment 50, Ritual 100.
For every word omitted, introduced, or misplaced,
one point shall be lost in Ritual, and one point where
a prompt is required.
The opening, initiation, and closing odes, must be
sung by all members of a team. Giving the “Honours
of the Order” when singing the last line of the opening
ode will be penalised.
When the recording secretary is asked to read the
minutes of the last meeting, he will say, “Bro. Noble
Grand, as this is a Ritual Competition, I have no
minutes to place before the meeting.”
When asked if the monies have been banked, the
Treasurer will respond, “Bro. Noble Grand, they have.”
The Financial Secretary, when asked for certificates of
sick members, shall say, “Bro. Noble Grand, as this is
a Ritual Competition, I have no certificates for the
meeting.” He shall say, under the item Correspon-
dence, “Bro. Noble Grand, I have no correspondence
for this meeting,” and shall respond, under item Ac-
counts, “Bro. Noble Grand, I have no accounts.”
The ritual wording must be strictly adhered to, for
instance: The Noble Grand will say “Initiation,” not
“Are there any candidates for initiation?”
At the command “Initiation,” the Financial Secre-
tary shall produce a form, and read the candidate’s
name, age, address, the scale under which he is join-
ing, the name of the proposer and seconder, and then
say: “The whole of the questions are answered satis-
factorily, and the medical certificate, signed by Doctor
is in order. The report of the Inves-
tigation Committee is favourable.”
The proposer shall say, “Bro. Noble Grand, I recom-
mend Mr as a fit and proper person to
become a member of this Lodge, and I move that he be
initiated into the Order.” The seconder shall say,
“Bro. Noble Grand, I second the motion.”
In all other respects, the competition should be
strictly in accordance with the ritual book, and the
regulations shown therein, as approved by the Com-
mittee of Management.


Proa ceeding at Funerals and
Funeral Address
At the funerals of deceased members of our own
or other Societies, or of members’ wives, regalia shall
be draped with a crepe bar across the sash, or if a col-
lar is worn a crepe bar across the left side of the collar,
and a bar diagonally across the apron from left to
right. If a member of the Branch, the Lodge Officers
shall wear draped regalia on the Lodge night next after
the funeral of the deceased member.
At all funeral processions the members shall form
according to their rank in Order, walking two abreast,
juniors going before, followed by the Junior Officers;
the Noble Grand and Past Officers bringing up the rear,
followed by District and Grand Lodge Officers accord-
ing to seniority.
When the funeral arrives at the Crematorium or
burial place, the brethren should open out and allow
the deceased to be taken through their ranks, followed
by the Grand Lodge, District, Senior Officers, and
Juniors, in order. In every case where the members
attend the funeral of a deceased brother, the funeral
service of the Order may be read (unless the officiat-
ing minister objects) by a member appointed for the
purpose by the members of the Lodge present. Such
officiating member should deliver a suitable address at
the close of the ceremony on the life and work of the
deceased brother. If a burial, after the service is read
and address finished, the Officers and members should
divide and pass on each side of the grave to throw in
sprigs of evergreen in token of esteem, and pass in good
order some distance from the grave before dispersing.
In the event of a cremation, during the conduct of
the Order’s service in the Crematorium Chapel, the
members shall remain with other members of the con-
gregation and disperse with them at the conclusion of
the service.
FUNERAL CEREMONY.
Brethren. —The solemn occasion on which we are
now assembled affords a melancholy proof of the insta


bility and transitory nature of all human enjoyments;
it clearly evinces that even life and health, which, next
to the Divine favour, we prize above all other posses-
sions, are held on such a frail tenure that we cannot
assure ourselves of their continuance for a moment.
Let it then operate upon our minds as a loud and solemn
warning to prepare for that state of being to which it
has pleased God to remove our dear departed member,
and to which we are all rapidly hastening.
For what is your life? It is even as a vapour, that
appeareth for a time, and then vanisheth away. For
all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the
flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the flower
thereof falleth away.
You, my young members, whom life’s gay sunshine
warms with health and vigour, and seems to promise
you a length of years, trust not to appearances;
suffer not this call to pass unheeded. For our days on
earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding.
But yield your young and susceptible hearts to Him
Who hath said, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life.
And you, my elder Brethren, I solemnly entreat
you, by all you hold in life most precious, to listen to
this timely warning of your approaching dissolution;
seek for happiness in piety alone, with hearts devoted
to duty and to God. So may we all be enabled to await
the inevitable summons with resignation and composure.
Having performed our last sad duty to the mortal
remains of our deceased Bro./Sister, let us charitably
consign to oblivion all his/her faults; but let us cherish
the remembrances of his/her virtues, and strive to imi-
tate whatever was praiseworthy in his/her character
and conduct.
PRAYER.
May the surviving members of this beneficent Order
be indissolubly united in the bonds of Friendship, Love
and Truth.
May we exert all our powers to promote the wel-
fare of mankind; and may all our laudable and virtuous
pursuits be finally crowned with success. Amen.
What man is he that liveth and shall not see death?


The Lord giveth and the Lord hath taken away.
(Let all the members answer), “Blessed be the name
of the Lord.”
LET US PRAY.
Almighty and Eternal God, in whose hands are the
issues of life and death, grant, we beseech Thee, that
the solemn duty we have now performed may make a
serious and lasting impression on our minds. Grant, we
most humbly entreat Thee, that the dissolution of this,
our dear Bro./Sister, may awaken us, whom Thou hast
graciously spared a little longer, to a due sense of our
responsibilities; make us sensible that the time of our
dissolution draweth near, and wean our affections from
the fleeting enjoyments of this transitory world; fill
our hearts, gracious God, with love to Thee, and to each
other; guard us in every danger, soothe us in every
sorrow, and bless us in every laudable undertaking.
And after a course of extensive unity, unite us all in
Thy Eternal Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
HYMN.
(May be sung at the Close of the Funeral
Ceremony.)
(Tune, “Old Hundredth.”)
Sovereign of Life before Thine eye,
Lo, mortal men by thousands die.
One glance from Thee at once brings down
The proudest brow that wears a cr&vn.
Banished at once from human sight,
To the dark grave’s unchanging might;
Imprisoned in that dusty bed
We hide our solitary head.
The friendly band no more shall greet,
Accents familiar once, and sweet,
No more the well-known features trace,
No more renew the fond embrace.
Yet, if my Father’s faithful hand,
Conduct me through this gloomy land;
My soul with pleasure shall obey
And follow where He leads the way.


Juuenile Ritual
Suggestions for Guidance of
Superintendents
1. Encourage the Juveniles to conduct the business of meet-
ing themselves in order that they may become thoroughly con-
versant with the general working of a Lodge which should be
the same in every particular as that of a parent Branch.
2. It is very necessary to observe the strictest discipline in
the conduct of the meetings, and, unless the Lodge is adjourned
for harmony, any tendency towards levity should be at once
suppressed. Much depends upon observance of this rule, for
a Lodge can never hope to attain any degree of merit where
the Officers in charge of it are unable to strictly enforce their
authority. Urge the Members to strictly behave themselves, and
see that they pay proper respect not only to the Committee
appointed by the Parent Lodge, but also to the Juvenile Officers
elected by themselves. Neatness also should be encouraged.
Any member misbehaving himself should be dealt with at once
by the Superintendent.
3. The children should be entertained by readings, recita-
tions, songs and other things, which would tend to improve and
develop them. Occasionally one interested in the training of
children should be induced to give a short lecture. The Super-
intendent could give a series of readings, taking such works as
the lives of great men, who, by their own perseverance, have
made their names historical in either the political world or as
explorers, travellers, preachers, scholars, etc. In quite a num-
ber of the subjects taken up lively interest could be given even
to the members of the parent Branch. Often a member of the
parent Branch could be induced to give a book or other suit-
able article to be competed for as a prize for regular attendance,
good conduct, essay writing, reciting, singing, or other sub-
jects which may suggest themselves. To these competitions the
parents of the children, members of the parent Branch, or even
the outside public, should be invited. This would tend to bring
the objects of the Branch more prominently before parents.
4. The offer of prizes for those who introduce the largest
number of candidates within a given time would tend to create
a deeper interest in the membership of the Branch.
5. The Committee should always keep the subject of the
Juvenile Branch under notice of the parent Branch, as one of
the best means of obtaining members.




From of Operning and Dedcating
a Juvenile Branch
The order of business in connection with the Open-
ing and Dedicating of a new Juvenile Branch shall be
as follows:
(a) Open Occasional Juvenile Lodge.
(b) Initiation of Members.
(c) Dedication.
(d) Election of Officers.
(e) Installation of Officers.
DEDICATION.
The attention of those present having been called
to the objects of the Juvenile Branch the Superinten-
dent (or Officer in charge of opening arrangements)
will then state:
I now require Bro to
read the dispensation of the Grand Officers and Com-
mittee of Management of the Order for opening this
Juvenile Lodge.
The member requested reads the dispensation and
the Superintendent then declares as follows:
By authority of this dispensation and by virtue of
my prerogative, I do hereby declare this a true and
lawful Juvenile Branch of the Grand United Order
of Oddfellows, and I name this Lodge (here pronounce
the name and number of the Lodge).
The Lodge is here opened in the usual form and
business proceeded with as per Order of Business on
Page 15.
OFFICERS.
The Officers of the Lodge shall be the same as those
of a Parent Branch, with the exception that the Superin-
tendent, Financial Secretary, and Treasurer shall be
chosen by the Committee appointed by the Parent
Branch, from the members of such Committee.
The Opening, Installation, Closing and Initiation
Ceremony should be committed to memory by the
Officers officiating.


Installtion of Officers
After the election of Officers, the Superintendent, as-
sisted by two conductors, shall instal the new Officers
into their respective positions. (It is usual to request
a Grand or District Officer or a Council Master, if pre-
sent, to instal the Officers.)
Instrurtions
The Installing Officer shall have an understanding
with the two Conductors that the ceremony shall be
carried out in a dignified manner. In the first place,
the chairs of the sitting Officers must be vacated, and
the collars of Office arranged in the order of Installa-
tion commencing with the Supporters of the Vice-
Grand.
The Conductors in bringing candidates before the
Installing Officer, shall stand, one on either side, and
bring the Officers to be installed, as far as possible,
from the end of the room opposite the Installing
Officer.
Great care shall be exercised also, in seeing that
each Officer is conducted to his station in the Lodge,
after the charge applicable to his office. This portion
of the ceremony must be as dignified as possible.
Installation Ceremony
Installing Officer. —The newly-elected Officers will
please be standing.
Will you promise to attend regularly and punctually
the meetings of the Lodge, carry out your duties in a
proper manner, and assist the Superintendent in the
control and management of the Branch?
Answer. —We will.
Installing Officer. —Be seated, please.
Bro. Conductors, you will present the Right and
Left Supporters to the Vice-Grand elect.
Brethren, you will be required to sit on either side
of the Vice-Grand and pay attention to the working of
the Lodge, in order that you may qualify for higher
office. I clothe you with the regalia of your office.


Bro. Conductors, you will present the Right and
Left Supporters to the Noble Grand elect.
Brethren, you will be required to conduct the can-
didates during initiation, and you, Bro
as Right Supporter, will assist in opening, whilst you,
Bro as Left Supporter, will assist in clos-
ing the Lodge. I clothe you with the regalia of your
office.
Bro. Conductors, you will present the Warden elect.
Bro. Warden, you will be required to attend early,
arrange the regalia and furniture of the Lodge, and also
to see that everything is put carefully away at the con-
clusion of the meeting. I clothe you with the regalia
of your office.
Bro. Conductors, you will present the Inside and
Outside Guardians elect.
Brethren, you will require to be punctual in your
attendance.
Bro. Outside Guardian, you will guard the door
against strangers and receive the outer password from
members before admitting them to the Lodge Room.
Bro. Inside Guardian, you will receive the Inner
Password and announce to the Noble Grand any mem-
ber or visitor seeking entry, and admit on receipt of
his consent. I clothe you with the regalia of your
office.
Bro. Conductors, you will present the Recording
Secretary elect.
Bro. Recording Secretary, in your charge will be
the Minute Book of the Branch. In it you will care-
fully record the business transacted. Do not fail to
attend regularly and punctually. I clothe you with the
regalia of your office.
Bro. Conductors, you will present the Treasurer
elect.
Bro. Treasurer, it will be your duty to deposit the
monies of the Branch as required by rule, and to per-
form such other duties as may be given you by the
Superintendent. I clothe you with the regalia of your
office.


Bro. Conductor, you will present the Financial Sec-
retary elect.
Bro. Financial Secretary, you have been called by
the voice of the Lodge, to an administrative position
of great importance, and it must ever be your care that
you prove worthy of the confidence reposed in you.
Your office requires tact, enthusiasm and care. May
the choice of the members be fully justified. I clothe
you with the regalia of your office.
Bro. Conductors, you will present the Vice-Grand
elect.
Bro. Vice-Grand, you will be required to assist
the Noble Grand in maintaining good order and con-
duct, officiate in his absence. Carefully study, also,
the working of the Lodge, that in the fullness of time
you may be qualified for higher office. I clothe you
with the regalia of your office.
Bro. Conductors, you will present the Noble Grand
elect.
Bro. Noble Grand, I trust that you will be sen-
sible of the honour of the position of Noble Grand,
which carries with it important duties. You are en-
trusted with the well-being of the Lodge. An intelli-
gent presiding officer is enabled, by his reasoning and
correct application of the rules, to restrain the mem-
bers, so that the meetings shall be ord iy. Be punc-
tual and regular in your attendance, and give to the
Superintendent all the help in your power, as upon
your united efforts, will depend, to a large extent, the
success of this Lodge.
I have much pleasure in clothing you with regalia
and conducting you to your position.
Officers and members, be upstanding and proclaim
your Noble Grand with the Honours of the Order,
taking your time from me.
(Honours of the Order.)
Bro. Conductors, you will present the Past Noble
Grand for Installation.
Bro. Past Noble Grand, “I have much pleasure in
congratulating you upon attaining the position of
P.N.G., and would impress upon you that the dignity
of your office must always be maintained.


“You will assist the N.G. in the initiation of candi-
dates, and give the officers and members every oppor-
tunity of acquiring the knowledge you have gained
during your progress through the chairs of the Lodge.”
Bro. Conductors, you shall kindly escort the Past
Noble Grand to his Station.
This concludes the ceremony of Installation, and it
is with extreme pleasure that I declare the various offi-
cers duly installed for the ensuing six months.
Bro. Noble Grand, I now hand the Lodge over to
your control.
Opning Chapter
Noble Grand. —Officers, take your stations. Guar-
dian, close the door. Warden, report to me if there be
any strangers present.
Outside Guardian, state your duty.
Answer. —To guard the door against strangers, to
obtain the o^ + er password from each member or your
consent for arakission, and prevent anyone from listen-
ing to what is going on in the Lodge.
Outside Guardian, take your station.
Right Supporter, state your duty.
Answer. —To assist in opening the Lodge, and act
with the Left Supporter, as a Conductor for the initia-
tion of candidates.
Left Supporter, state your duty.
Answer. —To assist in closing the Lodge, and act
with the Right Supporter at initiations.
Warden, state your duty.
Answer. —To arrange everything necessary for
opening the Lodge, to keep it comfortable and in order,
to see that all things are put away at the closing, and
report to you any loss or damage to property.


Inside Guardian, state your duty.
Answer. —To assist the Outside Guardian in the
discharge of his duty, to announce each member, and
obtain your consent and the inner password before
admission.
Recording Secretary, state your duty.
Answer. —My duty is to keep fair and impartial
minutes of the meetings of the Lodge, and record the
attendances of Officers.
Financial Secretary, explain your duty.
Answer. —My duty is to receive and enter cor-
rectly, and in a clear and intelligible manner, all monies
belonging to this Branch, conduct all correspondence,
and balance the accounts when required by the rules.
Treasurer, state your duty.
Answer. —My duty is to receive the money from
the Secretary and dispose of it as provided by rule.
Vice-Grand, state your duty.
Answer. —My duty is to act in conjunction with you,
to assist in enforcing the rules during Lodge hours,
and officiate in your absence.
Bro. Past Noble Grand, what is your duty?
Answer. —My duty is to assist you, and act in con-
junction with you in the initiation of candidates.
Bro. Superintendent, what is your duty?
Answer. —My duty is to superintend the working of
the Branch, to act in an advisory capacity to you, and
convey instructions to members.
Noble Grand. —Bro. Superintendent, Officers, and
members, I trust that you will be attentive to the busi-
ness of the evening. I shall act according to rule, and
judge impartially of every transaction. I hope that we
shall be candid and prudent, as on these principles
depends our success.
Officers and members, be upstanding and assist me
and my Right Supporter to open the Lodge.
Right Supporter. —l declare this Lodge ready to be
opened for the relief of sick members, transaction of


business, instruction in the principles of the Order, and
the enjoyment of harmony.
Noble Grand. —Attention! (Honours of the
Order.)
OPENING SONG.
(Tune: “Auld Lang Syne.”)
When Friendship, Love and Truth abound,
Among a band of Brothers,
The cup of joy goes gaily round,
Each shares the bliss of others.
Sweet roses grace the thorny way
Along the vale of sorrow;
The flowers that shed their leaves to-day
Shall bloom again to-morrow.
How grand in age, how fair in youth
Are holy Friendship, Love and Truth.
Noble Grand. —I declare this Lodge duly opened.
Bro. Recording Secretary, I shall thank you to
read the minutes of the last Lodge meeting.
Order of Business
Branch business shall be transacted in order as
per ritual, and each question shall be dealt with be-
fore the next is brought forward.
1. Noble Grand. —Have the monies received last
meeting been duly banked in accordance with rule?
2. Initiation of Candidates.
3. Sickness and Distress.
Noble Grand. —Bro. Secretary, will you kindly
present certificates of sick members, and report those
who are entitled to sick pay?
Sick visitor’s report.
Passing sick accounts.


4. General business.
Correspondence.
General reports.
Accounts.
Any other general business.
5. Propositions.
Noble Grand. —Has any Officer or member a friend
to propose as a member of this Lodge?
CLOSING OF LODGE.
Noble Grand. —Officers and members, it being now
time to close this Lodge, I thank you for your atten-
dance, and hope that we shall receive a continuance of
your visits.
Officers and members, be upstanding, and assist
me and my Left Supporter in closing the Lodge.
Left Supporter. —l declare this Lodge ready to be
closed.
Noble Grand. —Attention! (Honours of the
Order.)
CLOSING SONG.
(Tune: “God Save the King.”)
Brethren, ere we part,
Let us join hand and heart,
In this our cause.
May our next meeting be,
Blessed with sweet Charity,
Honour and Secrecy,
Oddfellows all.
United hand in hand,
Long may our friendly band
Deserve applause.
May all Oddfellows be
Famed for sincerity,
Still may prosperity
Attend our cause. . . .
Noble Grand. —I declare this Lodge duly closed.


Initiation Ceremony
Noble Grand. —Bro. Supporters, you will retire
and conduct the candidate for initiation.
Brethren, we are about to initiate a candidate.
During the ceremony you will please be silent.
Inside Guardian. —Bro. Noble Grand, there is an
alarm.
Noble Grand. —You will attend to the alarm, Bro.
Inside Guardian.
Inside Guardian. —The Conductors await entry with
a candidate.
Noble Grand. —Admit, and direct the Conductors
to place the candidate before the Vice-Grand.
Inside Guardian (addressing Conductors). —It is
the desire of the Noble Grand that the candidate be
presented to the Vice-Grand.
Right Supporter. —Bro. Vice-Grand, I present to
you this candidate, who desires to join our honourable
Order.
Vice-Grand. —You have been recommended by
your friends, as a candidate for this Lodge. Their re-
commendation is necessary to your introduction into
the Order, and we accept their assurance that your
character is good and that you are joining this Lodge
in order to be of benefit to your fellows. Are we right
in thinking so?
Answer. —You are.
You will now be conducted to the Noble Grand to
take the obligation of a Juvenile Oddfellow.
Right Supporter. —Bro. Noble Grand, this candidate
is in progress of initiation into our honourable Order.
Noble Grand. —You will place your right hand
upon your heart, and substituting your own name for
mine, repeat after me the following obligation:
I solemnly promise that I
will not reveal anything in connection with the business
transacted in this Lodge or any part of the Society into
which I may be admitted. I also promise to attend the
regular meetings of the Lodge as often as possible, to


do what I can to advance its interests, to obey the Offi-
cers in authority, and the rules of the Society, and of
the Juvenile Branch.
You, my friends, are witnesses of this obligation.
(Response).—We are.
Conduct the candidate to the Past Noble Grand.
Right Supporter. —Bro. Past Noble Grand: I pre-
sent this candidate to you for further instruction.
Past Noble Grand. —Consider well the promises you
have just made, and you will find that you have under-
taken to do that which will make you beloved and
honourable; a credit to your parents, and to this
Juvenile Branch. In the first place let me impress
upon you the duty you owe to your parents. For you
they have made many sacrifices, and your well-being
is very dear to them. Some of their kindness you may
repay, by strict obedience to their wishes in all things.
A child who honours his parents, lays the foundation
of goodness and nobility in after life.
Next I would direct your attention to the virtue
of Truth; for none have a better claim to the respect
of the world, than they who have established a reputa-
tion for honesty and truthfulness.
Further, I would ask you to be ever watchful of
the opportunity of doing a good and kindly action, al-
ways having in mind Life’s golden rule, “Do unto
others, as you would that they should do unto you.”
To those younger and weaker than yourself, be al-
ways kind, gentle and chivalrous, remembering that it
is the duty and privilege of the strong to aid the weak.
In your Lodge, give every heed to the call of
duty, and of your best in helping it to advance in ac-
cordance with its best traditions. Bring into its fold
new members, being careful to select those whose char-
acter you know to be good. Aspire to Office, for the
various chairs of the Lodge are open to you. At the
age of sixteen, you are eligible to transfer to the Adult
Lodge, where the experience gained as a juvenile mem-
ber will prove valuable.
You have your whole life before you, and your
future is in your own hands. You, fortunately, live in
a country where the highest positions are within reach
of all; many great and noble men have risen by their


own perseverance, and the members of the Grand
United Order of Oddfellows look to its juveniles to dis-
tinguish themselves.
Conduct the candidate to the Noble Grand.
Right Supporter. —Bro. Noble Grand, the candidate
is now entitled to receive the passwords, and his intro-
duction to the members.
Noble Grand. —Before introducing you to your fel-
low-members, it is necessary that I place you in pos-
session of the Passwords, which are always obtained
from the Noble Grand, and must be kept a close secret.
The outer password, which is given to the Outside
Guardian, is and the inner password,
to be given to the Inside Guardian, is
For your instruction, our Bro., the Left Supporter to
the Noble Grand, will show you the proper mode of
retiring from and obtaining admission to the Lodge.
(Left Supporter salutes, retires, and re-enters the
Lodge.)
You will now be required to copy my example in
symbolising the honours of the Order, Friendship,
Love and Truth used at the opening and closing of the
Lodge, and which are given thus:
(Honours of the Order, given slowly, and copied
by the candidate.)
This concludes your initiation. Allow me to con-
gratulate you upon the steps you have taken, and to
welcome you into the Lodge. You may now take your
place among your fellow-members.




Ritual
OF THE
PATRIARCHAL ORDER
OR
COUNCIL MASTER’S DEGREE




Constitution of Council
Master's Chapter
MEMBERS.
A Council Masters’ Chapter shall be composed of
members holding the degree of Past Noble Grand in an
adult Branch, and who have been initiated as Coun-
cil Masters.
OFFICERS.
The Officers of a Council Masters’ Chapter shall be:
Worthy Council Master, Deputy Council Master, Coun-
cil Secretary, Council Treasurer, Council Warden, Coun-
cil Guardian, and three Council Trustees. The duties of
the Officers shall be as laid down in the By-Laws for
the Government of the Council Masters’ Chapter.




Form of Opening, Constituting and Dedirating
a Council Masters’ Chapter.
At the opening of a new Council Masters’ Chapter
the Order of Business shall be:
Opening of Occasional Chapter.
Initiation of Candidates.
Naming of Chapter.
Reading of Dispensation.
Constitutional Lecture.
Dedication.
Election and Installation of Officers.
General Business.
Acting under the authority of the Committee of
Management, the Worthy Council Master of the Occa-
sional Chapter shall appoint a Deputy Council Master,
a Council Secretary, a Council Warden, and a Council
Guardian who, with other accredited Council Masters
present, shall constitute such Occasional Council Mas-
ters’ Chapter, which shall be opened in due form.
The Initiation of Candidates and the Naming of the
Chapter having been completed, the Constitution and
Dedication of the Chapter shall proceed as follows:
W.C.M. —I now require the Council Secretary to
read the Dispensation of the Grand Master and the
Committee of Management for opening this Council
Masters’ Chapter.
Council Secretary reads the Dispensation, and the
W.C.M. delivers the Constitutional Lecture.
Constitutional Lecture.
Brethren, —The guiding virtues of Oddfellowship
are distinctively expressed in our motto, “Friendship,
Love, and Truth,” and are illustrated in all our cere-
monies. At his initiation into the Order, a candidate
accepts an obligation to maintain and strengthen the
principle of mutual friendship, which can alone bind


the members together, and is taught at the Altar of
Friendship the Golden Rule:
“Do unto others as ye would that they do unto you.”
The Council Masters’ Degree may only be acquired by
perseverance, exemplary conduct, zeal, and rectitude in
the Lodge. From the office of Past Noble Grand, the
pinnacle of that sphere, the members of the Council
Masters’ Chapter are chosen, and even then only by the
recommendation of the Branch. A Council Masters’
Chapter is, therefore, composed of selected members, who
are, by proven merit, worthy of higher honour. It is
magnificent to contemplate that our Order, comprising
as it does all classes, parties, and sects, is unceasingly
labouring with the laudable objective of elevating man-
kind and alleviating the pain or sorrow of our fellows.
To this end we inculcate the principles of purity and
benevolence, which so sweeten the earthly existence of
man. The most competent guides to these higher pre-
cepts are those who have been tested by experience, and
whose fidelity has earned for them the Council Masters’
Degree.
Strict morality is enjoined from the moment of ad-
mission to the Order; the initiation ceremony demands
it, our lectures teach and impress it. The moral quali-
ties of our members must be jealously defended lest the
admission of the unworthy degrade the fraternity.
Benevolence is one of our fundamental principles.
In Faith and Hope the world may disagree, but Bene-
volence is the concern of all mankind. To extend frater-
nal charity to a brother bruised by adversity brings to
him Hope; where Hope comes, Peace and Rest may dwell.
Dedication.
Now, by the prerogative bestowed upon me by the
Worthy Grand Master, I solemnly dedicate this (name
oj Chapter) Council Masters’ Chapter unto Friendship,
Love, and Truth. May it zealously guard its ceremonies,
its privileges, and its laws, conferring its teachings upon
the faithful and diligent. May its meetings be for the
promotion of happiness and tranquility, and for the dis-
semination of such knowledge and wisdom as will profit
its members and advance our beloved Order. May every


Council Master stand as a living exemplification of the
inspiring principles of Oddfellowship.
May you whose privilege it is to be the foundation
members of this Council Masters’ Chapter, absorb and
retain its governing laws of conduct and its comprehen-
sive doctrines and, in your turn, communicate them to
your successors. May Friendship, Love and Truth ever
govern the members in their intercourse, each with the
other, and with their fellow men.
I declare the (name) Council Masters’ Chap-
ter a true and lawful Council Masters’ Chapter of the
Grand United Order of Oddfellows of New South Wales.
(The W.C.M. resumes his seat and proceeds with
the Election and Installation of Officers, after which the
incoming W.C.M. takes charge of the meeting.)


Order of Business
(To be observed by all Council Masters’ Chapters in
New South Wales.)
Opening.
Roll Call.
Minutes.
Initiation of Candidates.
Correspondence.
Reports.
Accounts.
Payment of Dues.
General Business.
Closing.
Opening
The Worthy Council Master shall rise, give three
knocks on the table, and proceed as follows:
W.C.M. —Officers, take your stations. Members,
clothe yourselves with your Regalia. Guardian, close
the door, and allow no one entrance during the ceremony
of opening. Warden, see that all the Brethren are clothed
in Regalia, and report to me if there be any present
who are not Council Masters.
C.W. —Worthy Council Master, the Brethren present
are properly clothed, and all are Council Masters.
W.C.M. —Officers and Brethren, please stand whilst
I open this Chapter.
Deputy Council Master, you will assist me in the
preservation of order by calling my attention to any
violation of the rules which regulate our meetings.
Brethren, the institution of the Council Master’s
Degree has established a common ground upon which
Past Noble Grands of all religious creeds and political
opinions can meet together in harmony, for the wisest
and noblest purposes for which mankind can unite —the
enjoyment of rational society, and the promotion of each
other’s welfare and happiness. Let each, therefore, ob


serve a conduct void of offence towards his neighbour;
let our motto be “Peace and goodwill,” and may our
ambition be to secure the permanent prosperity of our
noble Institution.
Deputy Council Master, Officers and Brethren, I
declare this lawful Chapter of the Patriarchal Order
duly opened, and request the Sign from each Councillor.
Be seated, Brethren!
Guardian, admit all members who seek admission.
Secretary, I will thank you to call the Officers’
names, and read the minutes of the last meeting.
The meeting is then proceeded with, according to
the Order of Btisiness (see page 6).
Closing
W.C.M. —Brethren, rise whilst I close the Council.
Deputy Council Master, will you explain the Council
Signs?
D.C.M. —I place my fingers upon my lips as a sign
that the business of the Council shall not be revealed to
the world, and I bow in obedience to my superiors in
office.
W.C.M. —Brethren, I declare this Council closed
until our next meeting, which, according to Rule,
will take place at on at the hour
of
(Knock three times.)


Initiation
W.C.M. —Are there any qualified candidates to initi-
ate as members of this Chapter?
(Investigation Committee Reports.)
W.C.M. —Council Warden, you will please retire and
inspect the credentials of the candidate.
(C.W. retires, inspects credentials, returns and reports to
W.C.M. If all in order the Initiation is proceeded with in
accordance with following ceremony.)
W.C.M. —Council Warden, you will admit the can-
didate, and conduct him/her to the Deputy Council
Master.
Council Warden. —Deputy Council Master, Bro.
/Sister A. 8., P.N.G. of Lodge, desires to be
initiated into this Chapter.
(C.W. hands credentials of Candidate to D.C.M.)
D.C.M. —Are you a Past Noble Grand of the Grand
United Order of Oddfellows?
Candidate. —I am.
D.C.M. —Are you the Bro./Sister named
in the certificate?
Candidate. —I am.
D.C.M. —Are you desirous that the title of Council
Master shall be conferred upon you?
Candidate. —I am.
D.C.M. —Are you willing to conform to the Rules by
which the Chapters in this Order are governed?
Candidate. —I am.
D.C.M. —Are you prepared to enter into a solemn
obligation to keep the secrets of the Chapter?
Candidate. —l am.
D.C.M. —Council Warden, please conduct the candi-
date to the Worthy Council Master, to take the neces-
sary obligation of a Councillor.
C.W.—Worthy Council Master, I present this candi-
date to take the obligation of a Councillor.


W.C.M. —Lay your left hand on this book, and your
right hand on your heart, and repeat after me:
I ( Candidate’s name), Past Noble Grand, of
Lodge of the Grand United Order of Oddfellows, of my
own free will and accord, in the presence of the assem-
bled brethren, do hereby and hereon, most solemnly
affirm and promise upon my honour, that I will not
reveal the secrets of a Councillor to a Past Noble Grand,
nor to any one of lesser degree, except when sitting as
a Councillor in a lawful assemblage of the Patriarchal
Order, convened for the purpose of initiating Members
into that honourable fraternity, and then to such only
as are duly qualified according to the laws of Oddfellow-
ship, and properly recommended by their respective
Lodges; nor under any circumstances unless five Coun-
cillors be present. All this I most solemnly affirm and
promise upon my honour, with an honest determination
to fulfil the same to the best of my ability.
The W.C.M. descends from the dais and, coming to
the front of his 'pedestal, places a Council Masters’ Collar
upon the candidate, and returns, without turning his back
upon the candidate, to his position.
W.C.M. —Be seated, Brethren.
Worthy and accepted Brother, you have not, it is
earnestly hoped, entered this Chapter for the simple
purpose of discovering any novelty which you may have
been led to suppose was attached to our ceremonies, or
of gratifying curiosity.
This degree is instituted for a very wise purpose, as
well as to disseminate the benevolent principles of the
Order. Before the objects of this Chapter are fulfilled,
each Councillor must stand as a living exemplification
of the principles of Oddfellowship, and as a guide and
instructor to those who hold a less eminent position in
the Order. You are here to learn, and to assist in teach-
ing others, the principles of our honourable Order, and
the wisest and most effectual plans for carrying them in-
to practical operation. To this end you will mingle here
with brethren, who, from having attained high honours
of Oddfellowship, are naturally supposed to have gathered
much experience, and who will at all times be ready to
impart to you the knowledge they possess, at the same
time anticipating that you also will bring the fruits of


your experience into the common store, that all may be
benefited thereby. Here, as in your Lodge, you will be
bound to observe the strictest decorum, and on no ac-
count will you be permitted to disturb the general har-
mony by introducing for conversation any of those ques-
tions which divide mankind, whether they be political
or religious. We here recognise no sect, nor give pre-
eminence to any party, but look upon all as brethren,
having equal and indisputable rights to their opinions.
Whilst you are thus so far mindful not to infringe
upon the peace of the Chapter, you will restrain yourself
from engaging in any quarrel, or treating your brethren
with any other than that respect upon which they have
a claim as honourable members of the same fraternity.
With respect to attending here as becomes a worthy
Councillor, the experience you have had in your mother
Lodge must have taught you the necessity; therefore, I
have only to express a hope that you will faithfully
perform all your duties, and prove an acquisition to the
degree you have entered upon, and that you will live
long to enjoy the harmony of our fraternity, in Peace,
Happiness, and Prosperity.
Brethren, I call upon you to proclaim this worthy
brother a member of the Patriarchal Order.
(The Council shall here rise and repeat aloud the welcome.)
“We hail you as a Councillor of the
Council Masters’ Chapter.”
W.C.M. —Accepted Councillor, you have now attained
the first degree which a Chapter can bestow, and to one
of the highest honours of Oddfellowship: I most heartily
congratulate you on your preferment. I now hand you
the Arms or Emblems of the Order, which will be ex-
plained in the course of the Lecture.
Council Warden, you will please instruct the can-
didate in the use of the pass-words, and demonstrate
the mode of entering and retiring whilst the Council is
in session.
W.C.M. —The pass words are
Council Warden, kindly seat the Candidate before
the Emblem.
(The Lecture is now given.)


Lecture
D.C.M. —Worthy Council Master, will you now give
the member the Lecture you promised at his Initiation.
W.C.M. —Most willingly, and I desire the Past
Worthy Council Master to trace the emblem.
(The P.W.C.M. stands beside the emblem, and traces the various
Symbols with a pointer as the W.C.M. proceeds with the
following Lecture.)'
W.C.M. —An emblem is a symbolical representation
of an invisible thing or a visible sign which produces in
the mind a conception of the object signified. The Em-
blem of the Council Masters’ degree, in common with
the Emblem of the Order, is surmounted by the All-
Seeing Eye, which teaches us that the Creator of the
Universe observes all our doings, and expects us to so
regulate our lives that when our earthly labours have
finished, we shall ascend to that Grand Council above
where eternal peace reigns. The next emblematic figure
is that of Time. It is represented by an aged man on the
central pedestal, implying that none may overlook time
which once passed is gone for ever. The figure is winged,
to show the rapidity of his flight, and is armed with a
Scythe, symbolising the sweeping character of his ac-
tions. The Hour Glass is also an emblem of Time. It
was used by the ancients to measure the hours, and de-
notes that human life is short, and should, therefore, be
well spent. The World, represented by a globe, will,
like man, ultimately perish. This appeals to us to pro-
vide whilst opportunity exists for the contingencies
consequent upon old age. Time is indeed the great
leveller, before whom all human institutions must fall
away and finally perish, and reminds us that when each
has rim his earthly course, death shall reduce us all to
the same state.
The female figure on the left represents Truth. In
her left hand she holds the Torch in which burns the un-
quenchable fire of Truth, giving forth the light of that
great and glorious principle. A Serpent is entwined
around the stem of the torch, and, as the serpent is an
emblem of immortality and wisdom, conveys to us that
Truth, being founded in wisdom, is indestructible. The
Mirror in her right hand reflects the rays of divine light,


indicating the character of those who practise wisdom and
truth. The figure on the right is the personification of
Justice. In her left hand she holds a pair of balanced
Scales, and in her right hand a Sword, signifying that
her judgments will be impartial, and she will only punish
those who are clearly convicted of guilt. Truth and Jus-
tice, therefore, must be practised in order that Council
Masters shall be accepted as the perfection of honesty
and rectitude, whose integrity may be questioned by
none.
The Coiled Serpent enclosing the United Hands and
the Shepherd’s Crook or Staff laid across the Word of
God is an emblem of great antiquity, and an apt Symbol
of Eternity. Friendship is represented by the United
Hands, Faith by the Shepherd’s Crook or Staff, and
Truth by the Word of God, reminding us that our friend-
ships will be everlasting if we have faith in each other,
and fashion our lives, as laid down in the Word of God.
The Ark represents the Council meeting room, and
the Dove with the Olive Branch is the emblem of inno-
cence and peace. These emblems teach us that the
Chapter should be a place of Harmony, the abode of
tranquility and joy, that Councillors may five in peace
and by humility, kindness and courtesy prove that peace
and friendship exists in our Councils.
The Sun is emblematic of the Worthy Council Mas-
ter. As the sun opens and rules the day, so should the
Worthy Council Master open and rule his Chapter.
The Moon represents the Deputy Council Master.
As the moon assists the sun to illuminate the face of
the earth, so the Deputy Council Master assists the
Worthy Council Master to dispense the light of the
Council Masters’ Chapter. The Stars symbolise the
other officers, whose duties and stations are as essen-
tial to the working of the Chapter as are the stars in
the Solar System. The Union of the Heart and Hand
is emblematic of Sincerity, the clasp of the hand evidenc-
ing the heart’s sentiment. The Emblems of Mortality
indicated by the Skull and Cross Bones, invite us to con-
template our destiny, and teach us to perform our allotted
tasks while it is yet day.
The Lion and the Lamb lying together in peace,
depict the wondrous power of our principles in bringing


together in Harmony those of our Brethren of diverse
creeds and opinions, and enforce an admiration of the
principles which have consummated this blessing.
At the base of the emblem are the Horns of Plenty,
implying that Councillors have many gifts and wide
knowledge they may distribute to those who have not
attained their eminent rank. It is their duty to see that
such knowledge is made known to those who need their
assistance, so that our Order may continue to prosper
and gather beneath its banners the peoples of all nations.
The Motto: “Cor unum, via una” — “One heart, one
•way” —means that being one, or united in heart, we
pursue by the same means the same praiseworthy ob-
ject, viz., the promotion of each other’s welfare and
happiness.
“Nihil nisi clavis deest” means “Nothing hut the
key or explanation is wanting.” This alludes to the
ignorance of those who, being uninitiated into our mys-
teries, can neither understand nor appreciate the sym-
bolical language in which our duties are taught. The
explanation I have given of our emblematic devices will,
I trust, have opened to your minds the importance of
earnest attention to the performance of the duties
inculcated.
D.C.M. —Is there any sign or password for a Coun-
cillor?
W.C.M. —There are both, and if any one should ask
you for it, appear as though you had forgotten it, then
place your right hand on your forehead, in a thoughtful
attitude, and say, “Let me consider.”
D.C.M. —“Shall I assist your memory?”
W.C.M.—“Pray do.”
D.C.M.—“To be good—”
W.C.M. —“Is to be happy.”
D.C.M. —Will you give us the Councillors’ Toast?
W.C.M. —I will; and let every one present repeat
it as I give it. I stand up, take the vessel in my right
hand, hold it opposite my left breast, and give the toast —
“Peace and Goodwill to All.”
W.C.M. —Council Warden, please conduct our mem-
ber to his seat.


Installation
To be used at the Installation of a Council Master (or a change
of Officers), by the retiring, W.C.M., or someone whom he
may appoint.
Worthy Council Master, —In resigning the insignia
of the Worthy Council Master’s office into your custody,
I feel assured that I may take your past conduct as an
earnest of continued exertion for the welfare of our
beloved Institution. I remind you that the duties now
devolving upon you are more arduous and important in
their nature than any hitherto required at your hands.
By a firm and impartial administration of the laws re-
gulating the moral and social conduct of the Brethren,
you will best secure to the Council the blessings of peace
and prosperity, establish its character in the world, and
obtain for yourself the countenance and support of
every deserving member. In cases of extraordinary dis-
tress, be active in securing and prompt in the applica-
tion of such extra relief as the benevolence of your
Brethren may place at your disposal.
It is my pleasing duty to relinquish this trust and
this Sceptre, symbolic of the Royalty of your present
office, to your care, and I request an acknowledgment
of your acceptance thereof.
(The W.C.M., upstanding and laying hands on the Regalia
shall say:—)
Brethren, I accept the trust delegated to me, and
will, to the best of my ability and knowledge, faithfully
perform the duties of my office.
I thank you for the honour conferred and confidence
reposed in me, and request your cordial co-operation in
the furtherance of our united interests.
(The retiring Master shall clothe the Worthy Council Master
with Regalia, and present to him the Sceptre; the Council
shall rise, and repeat the welcome.)
“We hail you as our Worthy Council Master.”
(The W.C.M. shall install, or appoint a P.W.C.M. to install the
other officers in the following form.)
DEPUTY COUNCIL MASTER:
Your elevation to so distinguished an office in the
Council as that of Deputy Council Master, indicates that


you have merited the esteem and confidence of the
Officers and Councillors. In order to have obtained this,
it is evident that you have exhibited a commendable
zeal in the furtherance of the interests of this Council
and the exalted office to which you have now been ap-
pointed, will furnish you with even greater opportunities
to exercise your enthusiasm.
I would impress upon you the necessity of making
yourself in every way capable to act for your senior the
Worthy Council Master, should that Officer, from any
circumstance, be unable to attend and preside over the
Council.
I have confidence that your term of office will be
in every way successful.
COUNCIL SECRETARY:
Bro. Council Secretary,
Our beloved Order has always realised the power
for good which an able and capable Secretary has exerted
on its welfare; the Council Masters’ Chapter, equally
with every other Branch of the Order’s activities, is
dependent upon its Secretary for much of its well-being
and progress. Punctuality in the discharge of your
duties will materially increase your value to the
Council.
COUNCIL TREASURER;
Being elected to the important office of Council
Treasurer, you will faithfully record and account for
any moneys paid into your hands, and expend it in such
manner as the Chapter may direct at a regular meeting.
The confidence of the Brethren in your uprightness has
placed you in an office which must be entirely free of
any suggestion of corrupting influence or practice.
COUNCIL WARDEN:
It would indeed be idle to assume that any assem-
bly of the Council may be harmonious and happy unless
the comfort of the members receives every consideration.
This is an important duty of your office.
Into your charge we also give the regalia and pro-
perty of the Council, confident that you will carefully
and capably guard your trust.


COUNCIL GUARDIAN;
Realizing that the intrusion of strangers into our
meetings will exercise a disturbing influence, it will be
your duty to prove each applicant for admission to be
a duly credited Councillor.
I declare the Officers of this Council for the ensuing
term to be duly installed.
The toast “The Health of Our Worthy Council Mas-
ter” shall be proposed by the Immediate P.W.C.M.


By-Laws
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
Council Masters' Chapter
(OR PATRIARCHAL ORDER)
OF THE
Grand United Order of Oddfellows
IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
I—NAME.
Council Masters’ Chapters (or Patriarchal Order) of the
Grand United Order of Oddfellows, in New South Wales.
2.—CONSTITUTION.
Council Masters’ Chapters shall be under the jurisdiction of
the Committee of Management, and shall be composed of mem-
bers holding the Degree of Past Noble Grand in an Adult Branch.
3.—OBJECTS.
The Council Masters’ Degree shall be conferred and Chapters
established
(a) As a reward of merit to PN.G.’s.
(b) For the promotion of Social harmony.
(c) For the discussion of any question relative to the inter-
ests of the Order in General.
(d) Visiting the Sick.
(e) Relieving Distress.
(f) Visitations of lodges with the object of imparting in-
struction, Installing Officers, and delivering of lectures
and degrees, provided the consent of the District Council
has been obtained.
4. MODE OF ADMISSION.
A P.N.G. shall not be proposed for admission unless recom-
mended by his Lodge at a regular or special meeting, and a
certificate given by the presiding Officer to that effect, with the
Lodge seal attached, be forwarded to the Council. If a majority
present vote in his favour, he shall be admitted upon payment
of such fee as the Council may decide.
5. EXECUTIVE OFFICERS.
The Executive shall consist of six Officers, viz.:—Worthy
Council Master, Deputy Council Master, Council Secretary, Coun-
cil Treasurer, Council Guardian, and Council Warden, all of whom
shall hold office for twelve months, and be eligible for re-election.


6.—ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
All Officers shall be elected (as per General Rule 21) from
members of the Council, the election to take place at the Annual
Meeting.
7—REGULAR MEETINGS.
The meetings of the Council shall take place quarterly, or
more frequently if desired by any individual Council, but the
W.C.M. shall have power to call a special meeting at any time
he may think necessary on the written requisition of not less
than five members. Five members shall constitute a quorum.
B.—CONTRIBUTIONS.
The contributions to the funds of the Council shall be such
as the Council may decide.
9.—DUTIES OF OFFICERS.
Worthy Council Master; The W.C.M. shall preside over all
meetings of the Chapter, all correspondence, reports and other
documents issued by the Secretary shall be under his supervision
and direction; and he shall see that the instructions of the Coun-
cil are faithfully carried out; and give the lecture at the initia-
tion of the candidates.
Deputy Council Master: The Deputy Council Master shall as-
sist the W.C.M. in the discharge of his duties, and in his absence
conduct the business of the Chapter.
Council Secretary: The Secretary shall summon all council-
lors to the ordinary, special and annual meetings (giving three
clear days’ notice); keep a correct account of all moneys received
and expended; deposit or pay over to the Council Treasurer all
moneys received within seven days, and pay accounts as directed
by the Council. He shall furnish the W.C.M. the names of all
councillors who may be out of compliance with Rule 10 at the
close of each meeting, and shall place all fines against each coun-
cillor according to rule, and furnish an Annual Balance Sheet,
duly signed by the Auditor, for the Annual Meeting to be held
each year.
Council Treasurer: The Council Treasurer shall receive
moneys from the Secretary, keep such accounts, and deposit and
expend moneys as the Chapter may direct, and shall not fail to
deposit money within seven days of having received it.
Council Guardian: The Council Guardian shall guard the
door against the intrusion of strangers and receive the password
from members.
Council Warden: The Council Warden shall prepare the room
for Council meetings, see that the members are properly clothed,
and that the furniture of the Degree is safely put away at the
close of the Council, and report to the W.C.M. any loss or damage
that may be sustained. He shall conduct candidates at initiation.
Auditor: The Auditor shall be elected annually at the meet-
ing previous to the Annual Council Meeting; he shall examine all


books, accounts, vouchers, etc., belonging to the Council at least
once a year, and at such times as the Council may appoint and
direct.
Trustees: Three Trustees shall be elected who shall open an
account, in conjunction with the Council Secretary, with one of
the banks in the name and on behalf of the Council.
10.—FINANCIAL MEMBERS.
All councillors shall be considered financial until they are
in arrears to the amount of one year’s contributions, fines, and
other charges included. And if a councillor remains unfinancial
at the next Council meeting, after being duly notified by the
Secretary that his arrears exceed one year, his name shall be
erased from the books.
11—MISCONDUCT.
Any councillor conducting himself in such a manner as to
interrupt the business of the Council, and refusing to be called
to order by the W.C.M., shall be fined One Shilling for the first
offence, Two Shillings and Sixpence for the second, and, if he
persist in his misconduct, he shall be dealt with as a majority of
the councillors present may decide.
12—BREACH OF RULES.
Any councillor committing a breach of any of these By-laws
shall, on being found guilty by a majority of councillors present,
be dealt with under such rules, provided the councillor against
whom the charge is laid has been duly summoned to attend.
13—ADMISSION BY CLEARANCE.
A member of any Council desiring to join another Council
may do so on the production of a clearance from the Council
he is leaving, stating that all dues and demands have been paid
up to date of such clearance. The clearance to be signed by the
W.C.M. and Secretary, with the seal of the Council attached. A
member desiring to join another Council and still retain his mem-
bership in his present Council shall furnish a statement that he
is financial in such Council.
14—RESIGNATION OF A COUNCILLOR.
Any councillor tendering his resignation in writing and having
paid all arrears to date of resignation, shall be given a clearance
which he may present to any Council at any future time, and be
admitted on the payment of the entrance fee of such Council.
15—INITIATION OF CANDIDATES.
Initiations may take place at any meeting of the Chapter.
Branches may nominate candidates who are Past Noble Grands.
Branches nominating candidates must have such nominations in
the hands of the Secretary of the Chapter prior to the Chapter
meeting.


16.—REGALIA AND SALUTE.
All councillors shall appear in approved regalia at the meet-
ings of the Council, and on entering and retiring shall respectfully
salute the W.C.M. Any councillor addressing the Council must
rise to do so.
17—OFFICERS BEING ABSENT.
Any Officer being absent on three consecutive meeting nights,
his seat may be declared vacant by resolution of the Chapter.
18—DISTRESS GIFTS.
Distress gifts shall not be given unless by resolution of a
majority of the councillors present. A second gift shall not be
made without a notice to that effect being placed on the business
paper. Distress gifts may be utilised for the paying of mem-
bers’ contributions.
19—ASSURANCE.
Councils may, at their option, arrange to insure members
of the Chapter under the provisions of Table “C.M.,” Assurance
Department rules, which for a contribution per quarter provides
for a £5 donation at death; the payments to be made quarterly,
and any member more than one quarter in arrears at death shall
have forfeited the right to donation at death.
20—RULES OF DEBATE.
That the standing orders and rules of debate as laid down
for the guidance of subordinate lodges shall be adopted by the
Council.
21—NEW BY-LAWS.
Any members wishing to make a new by-law, amend or re-
peal any existing by-law, shall give notice at meeting previous
to the Annual Meeting. Such proposed new By-laws, amend-
ment or repeal shall be laid on the table for perusal, and if
adopted by the Council at their Annual Meeting and approved
by the Committee of Management, the alterations shall be made.


District Ritual
Annual District
Meetings




Prayer
(To be used at the opening of an Annual District Meeting.)
A LMIGHTY and Everlasting God, Who doth up-
hold and govern all things by the word of Thy
power, the same yesterday, to-day, and forever, be
present, we beseech Thee, with us, Thy servants, in
our fellowship one with another, and in all that we
undertake to Thy glory and the benefit of mankind.
Grand us that measure of wisdom, power, and love
which we need for the service to which we are called.
Overrule for good the deliberations and actions of our
Order. Deliver us from all strife and ill-will, and
enable us to work loyally together in the common
cause to which we have pledged ourselves. Quicken
in us the spirit of Friendship, Love, and Truth, and
grant us Thy peace through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
Installation of District
Offices
DISTRICT TRUSTEES.
Installing Officer. —Brethren, as Trustees of your
District, apart from preserving its interests financially,
you will be called upon to sustain, with your colleagues,
the responsibility of advancing the interests of our
Order, by educating the members of the Branches
under the control of your Council, to a proper know-
ledge of the rules by which they are governed.
To do this, you must be in a position to advise and
instruct correctly, thus instilling in the minds of others,
a confidence and respect which will make your visi-
tations helpful and useful.
Maintain at all times a genial and tactful attitude,
ever ready to assist and cheer unfortunate brethren, and
always strive to maintain harmony and good fellowship
in the Branches.


Should the occasion arise for drastic action, be firm,
and strictly impartial, mindful only that it is your duty
to uphold the principles of our Order.
Be loyal to your District Master, ready and will-
ing to obey his commands, so that if the choice of the
brethren falls upon you for still higher honours, you
will be worthy of their confidence.
I now invest you, Bro (full name) ... .Bro
and Bro with regalia, and instal you as Trustees
of District, and authorise you to enter upon
your duties.
The Worthy Conductors will escort you to your
stations.
DISTRICT TREASURER.
Installing Officer. —The knowledge of your honour
and integrity has been a recommendation to the Dele-
gates in their election of you to the Office of District
Treasurer.
As sincerity is the surest road to confidence, it is
expected that you will maintain the reliance placed
upon you by steadfast attention to your duties, in the
protection of the District Finances.
Assist, so far as your attainments permit, in the
legislative duties of your position by an intelligent
interest in the discussions associated with the adminis-
tration of the Council.
May your reputation be enhanced by your wisdom
and perseverance in the interests of the Society.
I invest you with regalia and instal you ns Dis-
trict Treasurer of the District, and authorise you
to enter upon your duties.
PAST DISTRICT MASTER.
Installing Officer. —In appreciation of the value of
your services as a member of the District Council, you
have been returned thereto in the honourable office of
Past District Master. The value of such an office is
that it enables wisdom, bom of experience, to be ap-
plied to the administration of the business of the
Council.


Experience is the result of Thought, and Thought
arises from Action. So may we deem that your career
has been characterised by deeds, upholding the prestige
of the District, and thoughts applied to its stable
government and efficient administration. A continu-
ance of those desirable objectives during your present
term may be considered a worthy climax to your
labours for this District.
Whilst co-operating in every degree with your col-
leagues, give freely of the profound knowledge of Odd-
fellowship, you should now possess, and let no oppor-
tunity pass of propagating among mankind those be-
loved precepts of our Order—Friendship, Love, and
Truth.
I invest you with regalia, and instal you as Past
District Master of the District, and authorise
you to enter upon your duties.
DISTRICT SECRETARY.
Installing Officer. —Brother (full name)
the constitution of the Grand United Order of Oddfel-
lows, providing as it does for the grouping of the
Lodges into Districts, demands the services of upright,
zealous, and conscientious members for the very impor-
tant office of District Secretary. To such position you
have been called by the voice of the Brethren. Promp-
titude and courtesy with you must be unfailing. The
administration of your jurisdiction will largely fall to
you, and your colleagues will regularly seek your coun-
sel, the office of District Secretary being conferred upon
brethren of recognised experience and ability.
It is within your power to establish a record which
will not only earn the approbation of your fellow mem-
bers, but, what is of far higher importance, the approval
of your own conscience.
Seek the sympathetic co-operation of the Secre-
taries and Officers of the Lodges, and by precept and
example practically exhibit the value of efficiency and
punctuality in those to whom responsibilities have been
entrusted.
Give to new Lodges and to the weaker and less
experienced Branches, that advise and fraternal aid


which you are able to impart by.reason of your more
experienced knowledge of the Order.
I invest you with regalia, and instal you as District
Secretary of the District, and authorise you to
enter upon your duties.
DEPUTY DISTRICT MASTER.
Installing Officer. —Bro (full name)
the delegates have elected you to an office which car-
ries with it an obligation to assist the Master of the
District in the important duties of his position. Be
careful, therefore, to carry out your duties with dig-
nity at all times setting an example others will be
proud to emulate.
In the absence of the District Master, you will be
called upon to act in his stead. It is hoped you will
labour assiduously, and cheerfully discharge the obli-
gations entrusted to your keeping, so that when called
upon you will be ready to assume the mantle of
authority.
Upon completion of your term, it is hoped you will
attain the pinnacle of distinction in the District—the
office of District Master. It is necessary, therefore,
that you prove your qualifications by serving faith-
fully and creating a spirit of confidence in your fellow-
members, thereby meriting their esteem.
With the hope that you will worthily fulfil the
duties of your office, I invest you with your regalia,
and instal you as Deputy District Master of the
District of the Grand United Order of Oddfellows, and
authorise you to enter upon your duties.
DISTRICT MASTER.
Installing Officer. —Worthy Brother, your elevation
to the office of District Master has placed you in the
highest position the District can bestow. Whilst you
are naturally proud of the attainment, be ever heedful
of the responsibilities attached to the position. Your
District will expect from you loyal and faithful ser-
vice in the discharge of your duties. Endeavour,
therefore, to rule with dignity, being firm though tem


perate, and strictly impartial in all your actions, up-
holding justice and always acting according to our
laws. Be ever courteous and ready to impart your
store of knowledge to those not so experienced as
yourself. Be thoroughly loyal and obedient to the
Grand Executive and the Committee of Management, for
by learning to obey you will know how to command.
Bestow upon the least of your duties the same atten-
tion and care that you would bestow upon the greatest,
and success will follow your efforts.
You will instruct your officers as to their duties,
and preside at all meetings of your District.
With a full knowledge of your responsibilities and
of the duties attaching to your office, do you, Brother
(full name) solemnly promise, in the pre-
sence of your brethren, that you will loyally discharge
the duties devolving upon you during your occupancy
of the position? If so, answer “I do.”
Installing Officer leaves Chair and stands in front
of District Master elect, and continues —
With the hope that your labours may bring pros-
perity to the District under your jurisdiction, I invest
you with the Collar and Apron of District Master, not
doubting your zeal and ability to fulfil your obligations.
The Installing Officer now •places the District Master
in his Station and continues —
I instal you, Brother (full name) as
Master of the District of the Grand United
Order of Oddfellows, and authorise you to enter upon
your duties.
Brethren! Be upstanding!!! (gavel) and salute
your District Master with the Honours of the Order,
taking your time from me.
Be seated, Brethren.
Worthy District Master, I now hand to you the
gavel and the control of the meeting, and congratulate
you on the honour you have attained.




Grand Lodge
Ritual
The Annual General
Meeting




Opening
At the Opening Session of the Annual General
Meeting, the Grand Officers (except the Grand Execu-
tive) shall be in their places at the time set down in the
Standing Orders, the Chair being taken by the Imme-
diate Past Grand Master, who shall call the Session
to Order.
The Tyler shall announce the Grand Executive
upon their entry, the Immediate Past Grand Master
shall gavel, and the Grand Officers and Representatives
shall stand whilst the Grand Executive are received
with the Honours of the Order.
The meeting shall remain standing until the Grand
Executive have taken their places and the I.P.G.M.
has handed the gavel to the Grand Master. The gavel
to be seated shall be given by the Grand Master; the
meeting will then proceed in accordance with the
Standing Orders.
Prayer
This prayer is delivered, according to custom, by the Deputy-
Grand Master. The members stand with heads bowed during
the Prayer.
A GOD, our Heavenly Father, Thou who art the
Creator and Ruler of the Universe, we desire to
approach Thee at this our opening Session, to offer
unto Thee our humble thanks for the blessings which
Thou hast vouchsafed unto us during the past year.
We give Thee thanks for the help we have been en-
abled to dispense to our distressed Brethren for the
amelioration of the burdens that have in any way op-
pressed those with whom we are associated, and for
temporal relief discharged by us. Help us, we pray
Thee, to hold fast, and revere our sacred motto of
“Friendship, Love and Truth.” May we remember
it in all our dealings with each other, and may our
Order be a blessing to all its Members. Help us in
our deliberations during these Sessions. And may
all we do be for the advancement of our Society and
the uplifting of our Fellow Men. Amen.




Installation of Grand
GRAND DIRECTORS.
Installing Officer. —Bro. Conductors, you will
kindly present the Grand Directors elect.
Conductors. —Brother Installing Officer, we present
to you Bro (full name) Bro Bro
Bro Bro Bro the Grand Directors
Elect, for the ceremony of installation.
Installing Officer. —Brethren, your election to the
dignified position of Grand Director is attributable to
the energy and enthusiasm you have shown in your
labours for the advancement of the Order, and your
elevation is naturally a source of pride.
I must impress upon you, however, that the wider
sphere in which you will be required to devote your
activities, demands even greater service.
It will be your duty to decide upon numerous mat-
ters vitally affecting the welfare of the Society and its
members; such decisions must be actuated by earnest
and sincere motives, combined with justice and purity
of thought.
I direct your attention to the necessity of loyalty
to your superior officers, and to the Society, thereby
proving your worth as members of the Committee of
Management, and offering to those with similar aspira-
tions the force of excellent example.
Are you, Brethren, prepared to carry out your
duties in their entirety and to loyally abide by our
Constitution? If so, answer “I am.”
Believing you accept office with a full knowledge
of its responsibilities, I clothe you with regalia and
install you Bro (full name) Bro
Bro Bro Bro Bro as Grand Direc-
tors of the Grand United Order of Oddfellows, and re-
quest the Conductors to escort you to your stations.


GRAND TRUSTEES.
Installing Officer. —Brethren, your election to the
office of Grand Trustee is an acknowledgment by the
members, of their confidence in your honour and ability,
and an expectation of your future integrity in dealing
with the finances and funds of the Society with which
you are to be entrusted. Whilst our Society is founded
and exists for the purpose of conferring relief to its
members, it is equally necessary that prudence and
care be at all times exercised in the investment of its
funds, and a diligent and benevolent administration of
its finances.
Your office is one of responsibility and needs care-
ful and regular attention; only by the fulfilment of
those duties can you merit confidence and prove your-
selves worthy of the trust now reposed in you.
Realising the responsibilities of your office, are you,
Brother Bro and Bro , prepared to
accept that responsibility and discharge those duties to
the best of your ability, without fear or favour? If
so, answer “I am.”
I now clothe you with regalia and instal you as
Grand Trustees of the Grand United Order of Oddfel-
lows, and authorise you to enter upon your duties.
GRAND SECRETARY.
(Note. —The Grand Secretary is only installed upon appoint-
ment and not at each Annual General Meeting.)
Installing Officer. —In offering congratulation to
you as the chosen Grand Secretary of our Society.
Bro , I would impress that the manner of your
discharge of the many and responsible duties of that
important office will largely determine the prosperity
of the Order.
As the medium of communication between the
Committee of Management and the other sections of
the Order, be prompt and courteous, at all times sen-
sible of the value of the co-operation of those with
whom you are required to correspond.
As an administrator Officer clothed with much
authority, approach each question as it may from time


to time arise, with fairness, and strictly dispense jus-
tice without fear or favour. Court not the popular
favour if it mean a departure from the path of recti-
tude, and listen always to the summoning drums of
duty, upholding the Friendly Societies’ Statutes and the
Constitution of our own Society.
Apply all your knowledge and ability to a care-
ful scrutiny of the results of such innovations and
changes as the Annual General Meetings may deter-
mine, and report faithfully and accurately to the Com-
mittee of Management the result of your findings, and
guide and advise your Grand Lodge colleagues accord-
ing to the experience you must gain in the office of
Grand Secretary.
Know well, and faithfully assess the helpful ser-
vice the many loyal workers in this Society will give
you, and march ever onward through the years with
one objective—the extension of the Grand United
Order of Oddfellows’ services to mankind.
Fully realizing the responsibilities you are assum-
ing, do you promise to faithfully carry out the duties
of your office? If so, answer “I do.”
Answer: “I do.”
Installing Officer. —I clothe you with regalia and
instal you, Brother.... (full name).... as Grand Sec-
retary of the Grand United Order of Oddfellows of
New South Wales, and authorise you to enter upon
your duties.
DEPUTY GRAND MASTER.
Installing Officer. —My Brother, the exalted rank
of Deputy Grand Master has been conferred upon you,
the merit of your past service having deservedly earned
you preferment; to add fresh lustre to so dignified a
position must be your constant endeavour.
I charge you, therefore, worthily to do your part;
worth makes the man and may be achieved by dili-
gence and energy; on the other hand, inactivity is the
foe of all good works. Create in your fellow members
a spirit of confidence, for great deeds are achieved by
mutual trust and mutual dependence.


The members of the Society look to those selected
to govern for unbiassed and careful judgment. Culti-
vate moral courage and fearlessly take your part in all
deliberations. Your actions must be influenced by a
strict sense of justice, for, where justice reigns, truth
is exemplified by obedience, and where justice and
obedience walk hand in hand, the ultimate result must
be success and good fortune. Have no fear of action,
and stand firm upon the vantage ground of truth. He
who has sincerity and truth in his heart, needs no per-
suasion on his tongue.
When you have fulfilled your term as Deputy
Grand Master, your record will be reviewed. May hope
of higher reward illumine the days to come even as your
past career is a golden memory.
With the earnest wish that you who have been
chosen to rule and advise will act and speak with wis-
dom and sincerity, and with every confidence that you
will worthily fulfil the duties of your important office,
I clothe you with regalia and instal you, Brother
(full name) as Deputy Grand Master of the
Grand United Order of Oddfellows, and authorise you
to enter upon your duties.
GRAND MASTER.
Installing Officer. —Most Worthy Brother, the Past
Officers, who have represented the Districts at this
Annual General Meeting, have expressed their prefer-
ence for you, and placed you in the office of Grand
Master, the highest pinnacle of Oddfellowship. As you
stand before us, we are conscious of the natural pride
every worthy member must feel upon the realization of
so notable a distinction. Your sense of dignity, how-
ever, must be leavened with humility when you gravely
and thoughtfully consider the responsibilities of your
exalted station.
The office of Grand Master in our Order is not
easy of attainment. Every aspiring member must
patiently bide his time —not in listless idleness, but in
constant, steady, cheerful endeavour, always willing to
fulfil and accomplish his task, that, when the call comes,
he is qualified to wear the insignia of supreme authority.


This happy state, we believe, you have attained as
a zealous disciple of our basic precepts, Friendship,
Love, and Truth—attributes and ideals divinely be-
stowed upon mankind.
Friendship can smooth the front of rude despair.
Love is goodness and honour and peace and pure liv-
ing, it is the greatest thing in the world and longest
survives. Truth is the highest thing that man may
keep, it is great and mighty above all things, and as
impossible of pollution by outward touch as is the
sunbeam.
With these illustrious principles ever before you,
remember also you are to our fellow members an
example worthy of emulation, and they will expect from
you, as from a fountain, a flow of all those bright and
good qualities which make the Order so resplendent
in its moral beauties. Strive therefore to rule with
dignity, tempered with humility, ever mindful that your
earnestness, zeal and ability have raised you to an
exalted office, but your efforts at all times must be
subservient to the greatness of the Order you both rule
and serve.
There is much philosophy required in the ad-
ministration of your duties, and much moral courage
to judge and act according to the law. Search dili-
gently for Wisdom, Knowledge, and Reason. A wise
man is strong; a man of Knowledge and Reason in-
creases his strength. Wisdom is the principal thing,
therefore seek Wisdom and seek it with understanding.
It is great Wisdom not to be rash in thy doings, nor
to stand stiffly in thine own conceits. The more humble
a man is in himself, the more subject unto God, the
more wise and peaceful shall he be in all things.
For Knowledge you must toil, indolence offers no
healing balm to a conscience disturbed by neglected
opportunity to acquire learning.
Reason is the property of him who can entertain
it and adequately place it. Reason is the life of the
law, the law is the perfection of reason.
With courtesy, care, zeal, and vigilance, you will
preside over your brethren, and I enjoin you to be-
stow upon the very least of your duties the same atten-
tion and care as you bestow upon the greatest.


With a full conception and realisation of the duties
and responsibilities devolving upon you, do you,
Brother.... (full name).... solemnly promise and
swear in the presence of this august assembly, to faith-
fully discharge your duties during your term of office?
If so, answer “Most solemnly and sincerely, I do.”
Here the Installing Officer leaves the Chair, and
standing in front of the Grand Master Elect, continues
the ceremony.
Pleased with your affirmation, I now invest you
with the collar of Grand Master—the symbol of autho-
rity; and with this apron—the badge of service.
In the hope that you will make perseverance your
bosom friend, experience your wise counsellor, caution
your elder brother, and hope your guardian genius, I
install you, Brother (full name)
At this stage the 1.0. places the Grand Master, sit-
ting, in his station, as Grand Master of the Grand
United Order of Oddfellows of New South Wales, and
you are from this moment authorised to enter upon
your duties. May the blessings of a Divine Providence
rest upon you and our beloved Order.
Brethren, be upstanding, and proclaim your Grand
Master with the Honours of the Order, taking your
time from me.
After the Grand Master has been proclaimed, the
Installing Officer will hand to him the gavel with the
words —
Worthy Grand Master, I now hand to you the
gavel and the control of the meeting.


Lectures
For the Especial Use and Instruction
of the Brethren
(P.N.G. Lectures)
RULES.
1. —That no member shall be entitled to receive
the First Lecture until he has been a mem-
ber three months.
2. That no member shall be allowed to sit as
a Junior Officer until he has received the
First Lecture, unless at the opening of a
new Lodge.
3. —That no Officer for whom there is a Lecture
shall be allowed to sit until he has received
the same, unless at the opening of a new
Lodge.
G




First Lecture
Respected Brother, —
Your presence in this assembly indicates, I hope, that you
have come here with a desire to be introduced more fully to
the philanthropic mysteries of Oddfellowship. Preparatory, how-
ever, to this being done, it is necessary that we should receive
from you an assurance that the promises you made at your
initiation into the Order are yet held sacred and unbroken. Are
you still willing and determined to keep concealed from the
world the secrets of this Order?
Answer. —I am.
Question. —Do you promise to assist the distressed brethren
of the Order and never either to wrong a brother or see him
wronged?
Answer. —I do.
Question. —Do you still feel disposed to support your Mother
Lodge, and to labour with all diligence for her honour and
prosperity?
Answer. —I do.
Question. —Do you feel the importance of maintaining a good
moral character, so that the outward world may not have occa-
sion to scoff or point the finger of scorn at Oddfellowship?
Answer. —l do.
Respected Brother, since the promises you made at your
initiation have been observed with fidelity, you become entitled
to advance one step in the path of promotion; it becomes our
duty to initiate you still further into these philanthropic virtues
which bedeck the institution of Oddfellowship, with so much
that is beauteous and good. Many persons have manifested a
degree of perplexity as to our reasons for the adoption of
secrets, and have, in some instances, imagined that we use them
merely as a charm, wherewith to captivate the credulous mind
and lure it into an admiration of our institution. Such a view
as this, however, will, we doubt not, have been proved to you
by experience to be altogether fallacious. The purport of our
secrets is not to gratify any fanciful or capricious desire; they
are intended for a higher purpose —for a purpose of protection.
Our Order professes to claim brotherhood with every individual
who avails himself of the privileges and duties of membership,
and to befriend every worthy brother when suffering from the
scourges of sickness and distress. That we may at all times be
assured who are our brethren, even though perfect strangers
to us in person, signs, and secret words afford a very great
facility; they endow us with a language so simple and yet so
forcible and effective, that we can, withou: fear of imposture,
recognise our brethren in any part of the globe, and with a
pleasing confidence extend to the distressed that charity, which,
as members of the same fraternity, is their just inheritance.


They are, indeed, our strongest shield against the artifices of
designing men, and prevent the unworthy from abusing our
benevolence. Hence arises their special utility. The Sign and
Password for the degree you are now taking are as follows:
Clasp your fingers, place your hands upon your heart, and
repeat the words —
WYOPTIWOD WC SD CVWPXM.
By this sign and password you will be enabled to gain ad-
mission into any of our lecture meetings at the proper time,
and be better qualified to prove yourself a worthy brother
should chance ever place you in a position that your identity
may be doubted. To discover when you are in company with
one of the brethren, one or other of three modes may be prac-
tised, as may be most convenient. The one we designate the
“Grip,” a peculiar mode of evincing fellowship by the shaking
of hands. It is thus; (give the Grip). The second is called the
“Recognition Sign,” and may be used in any company where
you may be desirous of discovering whether any of the breth-
ren are present without risking offence by intruding any verbal
question. It is as follows: (.give the Recognition Sign). The
third method is in conversational form. Our Societies’ head-
quarters being in Manchester, we make that the basis of con-
versation. The question is put as follows; (give question), to
which the following reply will be given by any Oddfellow pre-
sent: (quote reply). Then would follow the grip or recognition
sign, as may be most convenient.
Having thus instructed you in the signs and passwords, I
shall proceed to point out to you the duties which devolve upon
Oddfellows moving in your particular sphere. There is a duty
which is held in common by all members of the Order, whether
they be honoured with the dignities of office, or are merely
the untitled portion of the great whole. That duty is “to do
unto all men as ye would they should do unto you.” This is
the golden precept of Oddfellowship, and by it are all true
Oddfellows to be tested. The observance of this precept is the
very soul of charity—the essence of that small but deep-mean-
ing motto which is emblazoned upon the arms of the Order.
Friendship, Love, and Truth, all derive their being from the
practice of this precept, and without it they become but as
mere words, having no reality but upon the scroll on which
they are written. By the observance of this precept they are
indelibly pressed upon the heart—they become mixed up with
our being, and manifest themselves in every action. This sub-
lime precept not only enforces itself upon our admiration by
the beauty and purity of its character in a moral point of view,
but it appeals to our very love of existence and to our desire
for happiness. The man who would experience the goodwill
of his neighbour must extend to him the same boon; the indi-
vidual who expects support from his fellow-man in time of need
must not withhold his own benevolence when it is in his power
to bestow it. Human beings are so constituted as to require a
reciprocal performance of all social and philanthropic duties;


and it would be very unreasonable to expect greater indul-
gences at the hands of others than we ourselves are willing to
impart to them.
In the particular sphere in which you move, one great fea-
ture" of your conduct should be an unvarying observance of the
laws, and a respectful recognition of the prerogatives of those
who have been promoted to the seats and honours of office.
For the sake of good order, and to insure the harmonious work-
ing of our benevolent system, you are necessarily bound to
honour the laws, and make practicable the functions appertain-
ing to each office. It will also form part of your duty to deter
others from breaking the laws, or from putting them to pur-
poses for which they were never intended. But in doing this
you must studiously avoid anything like factious or malicious
opposition. Never let your discretion be overruled by your
zeal; but taking prudence by the hand, endeavour always to
prosecute your duties with mild determination, with due cau-
tion, and an unswerving desire to make yourself respected and
the Order prosperous. The Lodge-room should be regarded as
a temple dedicated to Friendship, Love, and Truth, where the
harsher passions of our nature are repressed by the feelings of
true brotherhood, and where the potency of union holds supreme
sway. As a brother of this Order you are expected to mailn-
tain a high moral deportment in society, so that when you are
induced to propound the principles of the Union, your charac-
ter may not give a practical contradiction to the sincerity of
your teachings.
In conclusion, let me impress upon you the necessity of still
remaining strong in the bonds which first united you to this
Order. Keep constantly in view the performance of all your
engagements, and never tarnish the glories of our noble insti-
tution by your departure from the path of rectitude. Our sta-
bility mainly depends upon the character of the brethren; the
brightest ornaments of our Order are the moral qualities of its
supporters, and without them we should become but as a shat-
tered remnant of fading greatness.
By a regular attendance at your Lodge you will acquire
further instruction, and by perseverance and general good con-
duct you will reap your reward in the good-will and esteem
of your brethren, and in the full enjoyment of all the privileges
and immunities of Oddfellowshlp.
Second Lecture
JUNIOR OFFICERS.
Worthy and Respected Members, —
There is a peculiar pleasure arises from the conviction that
our conduct in society has been such as to merit attention, and


secure a mark of approbation. Such pleasurable feeling, it is
presumed, must now be your portion, having been made the
objects of special esteem and confidence by those who honour
your Lodge with the titles and dignities of senior office. Al-
though in the estimation of the lukewarm and thoughtless, the
position of a Junior Officer is unimportant, and by far more
irksome than honourable, such is by no means the case. It is
presumed that a brother who accepts a junior office is desiring
to emulate the virtues of those who have worn the badges of
honour and distinction before him.
On the arms of the Order you will find that you are repre-
sented by the stars. You are as essentially necessary in the
harmonious working of our system as are the stars in assist-
ing to carry out the designs and objects of creation. As the
stars assist the sun and moon to diffuse light over the earth,
so you, in your situations, are to take part with your senior
officers in carrying on the business of Oddfellowship.
No doubt you contemplate at some future period to merit
a higher distinction. It is necessary, therefore, that you should
first become acquainted with the duties of the important office
to which you aspire, and this you will not acquire by any
means so successfully as by a strict attention to the duties of
the office you now hold. In assisting your senior officers you
will become conversant with the general arrangements of a
Lodge, and acquire a practical proficiency in the administration
of our laws. You will also gain the esteem of your brethren
for your assiduity, and ultimately obtain, as a reward, the con-
summation of your aspirations.
It is in the position of a Junior Officer that your merits for
higher distinction will best be elicited; you have an opportunity
of manifesting your mental capabilities, and also of proving your
moral attainments. Let me, therefore, whust proving to you
that a Junior Officer occupies no mean position, urge upon you
the necessity of discharging your duties in a faithful and up-
right manner. Keep a vigilant eye upon the proceedings of
your Lodge and the conduct of its members, and assist to en-
force by every means consistent with your situation, the pre-
servation of harmony and peace. Thus you will keep your
honour unsullied, and meet the double gratification of having
the good-will and respect of all your brethren, and of possess-
ing a consciousness that you have been virtuous enough to
merit them.
The Sign and Password peculiar to your degree are as
follow;
Clasp together the two little fingers, and repeat the word —
GSUI.
There is one point upon which I have seriously to advise
you. I expect, and your brethren have a right to require, that
during your term of office you will be regular and punctual in
your attendance at the Lodge, or, in the event of unavoidable
absence, that you will provide a proper substitute. The Lodge


is imperfect without its full complement of officers; and it is
a breach of honour to abuse the confidence and respect shown
towards you by those who have elevated you to your position.
I trust, therefore, that you will all perform your duties well,
and that at the expiration of your servitude the brethren may
have occasion to say to each of you, “Well done, thou good
and faithful servant!”
Third Lecture
SECRETARY.
Worthy Brother, —
Are you fully imbued with a due sense of the importance
of your situation?
Answer. —I am.
Question. —Do you know that it is your especial province to
be honest and faithful?
Answer. —I do.
Question. —Do you here, in the presence of this assembly,
solemnly declare that you will render a strict and just account
of all moneys paid into your hands; that you will never know-
ingly defraud a brother, nor yet be governed by partiality or
prejudice.
Answer. —I do.
It then becomes my duty, with the approbation of your
Lodge, to confer upon you the honour of the Secretary’s degree.
The Sign and Password for that degree are as follow;
Close your two hands and make a curve with each of your
forefingers, and placing the tips together, repeat the word —
BFCOWNWG.
Respected Brother, since you appear perfectly sensible of
the importance, trustworthiness, and responsibility of the situa-
tion to which you have been called by the voice of those who
place confidence in your honour and ability, it is our most fer-
vent hope that you will swerve not from the path which duty
points out as the one which you should now pursue. May you
fulfil, to the very letter, the promise which you have here
solemnly made. On the arms of the Order you will find the
Scales of Justice: these are your emblem. When you look upon
them, may they impress you with a sense of your duty, and re-
call to your mind the vow you have here recorded.


Fourth Lecture
VICE-GRAND.
Worthy and Respected Brother, —
It must afford you gratifying reflections when you contem-
plate the success which has crowned your exertions in the cause
of Oddfellowship. Believing that honours are only conferred
where merit proves the title, we are proud to hall your eleva-
tion to the dignity of a Vice-Grand. In that capacity you will
meet with many duties, the faithful performance of which neces-
sarily devolves upon you. These duties are typified on the
arms of the Order by a representation of the Moon, the Queen
of Night. As that luminary, in the absence of the Sun, supplies
the earth with light, so you are to take part with the Noble
Grand in diffusing throughout your Lodge the light of our con-
stitution and laws, and in preserving friendship, harmony, order,
social communion, and never-ending cordiality and union.
To effect this, there are certain mental and moral qualifica-
tions indispensably essential, which are not found in every indi-
vidual. In the first place, it is necessary that you should be
conversant with the general business and requirements of a
Lodge. To acquire this you should pay particular attention to
the various transactions of the Lodge and the Order which
come within the scope of your observation, and make yourself
acquainted with the true meaning and intent of the laws by
which we are governed, and which you will always find to be
your best guide. By acquiring this knowledge, you will not
only qualify yourself to fulfil with credit your present duties,
but you will be preparing yourself for the more important duties
of higher and more responsible office.
It is almost unnecessary to point out to you the consequences
resulting from inattention to the laws and usages of the Order.
As a Vice-Grand you are regarded as one of the examples of
good Oddfellowship; and, if the genuine fruits of our benign
principles are not to be gathered from your ministrations, it
would be vain to expect unanimity and concord amongst those
who have not aspired to the eminent position you occupy.
Where the principal roots are withered, a blight is inevitably
cast upon the branches—the whole tree sickens, droops and dies.
So in a Lodge, if those who are elevated as the depositors of
order, justice and fellowship prove themselves to be unfit for
their station, the whole Lodge partakes more or less of the effects
of their inefficiency, the ardour of almost every member is
checked, and the progress of the Lodge very often seriously
retarded.
In assisting to preserve order it would be well to divest
yourself of anything like ill-temper or partiality. Do not give
those whom you are rebuking any reason to allege that you
yourself are deserving of chastisement. Preserve an evenness
of temper, and display, even in your most severe remonstrances,
an urbane and courteous disposition. Should you, in the exer


cise of your powers, exhibit a reckless regard for these virtues,
you will only kindle, instead of suppress, the flame of angry
feeling, and produce that state of confusion which it should be
one of your principal efforts to prevent.
As a Vice-Grand you will have to visit those of your breth-
ren who may be afflicted with disease, not only as a safeguard
against fraud, but to offer such consolation to the unfortunate
individuals as may be at your command. In discharging this
part of your duty, you must, to the utmost of your power, hold
the scales of justice evenly between the sick brother and his
Lodge. Never wilfully seek to deprive a brother of those bene-
fits to which he is fairly entitled, nor yet permit an unworthy
brother to trespass upon those funds which have been accu-
mulated for the relief of the needy and honourable of your
brethren. Be governed alone by the purest justice in all your;
transactions, turning neither to the right nor to the left.
As an individual selected from the rest of your brethren
to ornament the Lodge in the capacity of Vice-Grand, you have
no doubt given evidence of your fitness to discharge the duties
of that office. You have been preferred because your breth-
ren could see in you what to them appeared essential qualities;
and have also laboured with a cheerful zeal to elevate youfi
Lodge in the scale of honour and prosperity, and to give a zest
to that felicitous spirit of harmony which is always manifest
in the sincere disciple of Friendship, Love and Truth. Having
thus won the confidence of your brethren, I trust you will, on
no occasion, disappoint their hopes by dishonouring the office
you have accepted. Persevere in a regular and praiseworthy
course of conduct, dispensing justice without partiality, protect-
ing the peace and prosperity of your Lodge, cultivating and
encouraging the spread of our benign objects, and punctually
discharging those duties which are now entrusted to your care.
Thus you will maintain, unsullied, your reputation, and secure
the friendship and respect of all.
I have now great pleasure in putting you in possession of
the Sign and Password peculiar to the office of Vice-Grand.
Place the tips of your forefingers and thumbs together so as
to form a triangle, and repeat the word —
ZPICPAPIGYNP.
Fifth Lecture
NOBLE GRAND.
Question. —In taking upon you the duties of Noble Grand,
do you not feel that you are subjecting yourself to a serious
responsibility?
Answer. —I do.


Question. —At the same time, do you feel willing and deter-
mined to discharge your respective duties with faithfulness, and
without prejudice or partiality to anyone?
Answer. —l do.
With this assurance, then, I have great pleasure in proclaim-
ing you to be a legally elected Noble Grand, and duly entitled
to all the honours of that degree.
You are now elevated almost to the very pinnacle of honour,
having entrusted to your care the well-being and moral repu-
tation of your Lodge. Your emblem is the Sun. You are sup-
posed to take the same part in your Lodge in creating and
diffusing good order, harmony and true fellowship, as the Sun
does in dispensing light over the creation. It is your duty to
conduct the whole of your Lodge business, and, therefore, your
qualifications should be of the highest order. In the first place,
you should have a thorough knowledge of the laws by which,,
as Oddfellows, we are governed. It would be well, therefore,
if you would rigidly examine yourself in this respect, so that,
if deficient, you may vigilantly apply yourself to study. Noth-
ing presents a more unseemly appearance than an individual
vainly striving to administer laws which he himself does not
understand; he is liable to mistakes of an endless variety, and
instead of securing respect, only incurs ridicule. Besides, it is
impossible that a Lodge can be efficiently governed by officers
who are ignorant of the laws of the Order; the whole busi-
ness is done in a confused and disjointed manner, and tends to
create an infinity of disputes, angry discussions, and quarrels.
On the contrary, an intelligent presiding officer is enabled, by
his reasoning and his exposition and correct application of the
law, to subdue any disposition for discord which may arise, and
to work out his prerogatives with efficiency and ease.
One who holds your office should also command an affable
and temperate disposition; he should be an individual who can
look with composure upon a moral tempest, unruffled by its
rage, contemplating only how he may repress its violence and
produce a calm. Whilst he is strict, he should be gentle; whilst
firm of purpose, yet untainted by severity; and in wielding the
instrument of justice, he should always aim at that spot
whence spring reflection and moral consciousness. He should
never unruffle the passion—never sever in twain the bridle
which restrains the violence of extreme excitement. There is
much philosophy rquired in the administration of your duties,
much moral power required to control your judgment and your
actions, and I would here enjoin you to pay particular atten-
tion to this fact, that your career may be one of usefulness, and
its results redound to your own honour, and to the glory of
our noble institution.
Without an efficient Noble Grand, a Lodge is but crippled
in its progress. Upon that officer rests more responsibility than
upon any other. The younger brethren invariably look up to
him as an example which they are invited to imitate; and
expect from him, as from a fountain, to flow all those bright
qualities which make a society so dazzling in its moral beauties.


It is, therefore, highly desirable that you should strive to make
yourself an honourable and efficient officer, and all your efforts
subservient to the moral greatness of the Order. Be punctual
in your attendance at the Lodge, and in your attention to all
the duties that devolve upon you; and shrink not from the path
of rectitude and integrity. You will thus win a laurel of honour,
and wear it with becoming dignity.
The Sign and Password for your office are as follow:
Rest your right elbow upon your left hand, and placing the
tips of your right fingers upon your forehead, repeat the words —
AWYNWO APIWOGC.
(The Latin phrase for “Oifov Nuyefpie.’’)
Sixth Lecture
PAST NOBLE GRAND.
Worthy and Respected Brother, —
The Degree of Past Noble Grand is of a character at once
honourable and is dignified with a title of very comprehensive
signification, pertaining to the well-being of your Lodge and the
common interests of the Order.
The title is suggestive of not a few pleasing considerations.
It is not a mere idle name —a designation of unmeaning import
—but it is perculiarly indicative of those virtues which ought
to constitute the only legitimate claim of an individual to the
title of Past Noble Grand.
The term “Noble” is a comprehensive word, expressive of
all those virtues which, scorning the base and petty feelings
that find gratification in mere private advantage and personal
pre-eminence, as well as the prompting of all those vicious pro-
pensities which lure their victims to the commission of moral
offences, display themselves in the uniform and consistent prac-
tice of good works, the pure and disinterested devotion of the
individual to the promotion of those objects which compass the
multiplication of human happiness; the absence of all motives
of a sordid or mercenary character; the most unreserved and
unwavering adherence to the performance of every social duty;
and the manifestation of that Samaritan spirit which “suffereth
long and is kind,” which seeks the consolation of the despair-
ing and sorrowful, the healing of the broken spirit and wounded
mind, the administration of efficacious relief to the sick, the
amelioration of the privations of the distressed, and the willing- 1
ness to discharge every kind office demanded by the generous
principles of humanity.


A member upon whom the Past Noble Grand degree is con-
ferred should be in a sense the fraternal guardian of others,
and, as such, an individual who tends them with affection and
anxious interest, who watches their growth, superintends and
guards all their movements, contributes to their nourishment,
endeavours to direct their steps in the path which, bespangled
on all sides by the rich-tinted flowers of virtue and goodness,
leads to prosperity and happiness, and who is ever ready to
impart to them such counsel and advice as his larger expe-
rience peculiarly fits him to command.
To be a Past Noble Grand, then, is to possess in combina-
tion, the whole of these virtues. Regarding the Brothers of
your Lodge as your children, you are to superintendent them
with due parental care; to keep a vigilant eye upon every pro-
ceeding, and to tactfully administer such instruction to both
officers and brethren as may appear to you necessary for the
good government and permanent prosperity of the Lodge. In
advising those committed to your charge, you will best mani-
fest the true nobility of your office by seasoning your admoni-
tions with gentleness and charity, your judgments with impar-
tiality, and your commands with justice. In your future career
as an Oddfellow so regulate your conduct and zeal as to exhibit
an example worthy of emulation. May your association with
the Order be distinguished by the increased welfare of the
Lodge, the enlargement of your own honour and reputation as
an Oddfellow, and the multiplication of blessings to all; and
may you meet as your reward the goodwill and esteem of all
your brethren, and win a name that shall have an enduring resi-
dence in their purest and best affections.
The Sign and Password for this degree are as follow:
Place your right elbow against your side, close your hand,
and extend your forefinger, as if in the act of giving admonition,
and repeat the words —
VUYUFI OVD RGOVPI.


Lectures
OF THE
Three Dedgrees
Written for the Especial Use of the Order
BY
P.G.M. JAS. T. STATON,
of the Bolton District
AND REVISED BY THE COMMITTEE OF
management of new south wales,
1909.




First Degree
INTRODUCTION.
Conductor. —Worthy District Lecturer, Brother , of
Lodge , waits at the door, and is desirous of receiving
further instruction in the principles of Oddfellowship, and of be-
ing initiated into the First Degree.
District Lecturer. —Is he in possession of a good and sufficient
warrant from his Lodge?
Conductor. —l have made all the necessary enquiries on this
head, and I find that he is duly authorised.
(Here the Certificate must be placed by the Conductor, in
the hands of the D.L., who shall read the same.)
District Lecturer. —By virtue of the certificate I have received,
worthy Conductor, you have my permission to admit him.
(The Conductor must here open the door, and lead in the
Brother who is in waiting, who must then give the Sign and
Password of the First Lecture.)
District Lecturer. —By the certificate you have produced, it
appears to be your desire that we should confer upon you the
honours of the First Degree. Will you please to inform me your-
self whether such is the fact?
Answer. —It is.
District Lecturer. —Will you then inform me whether your
desire to be instructed in the principles of Oddfellowship is
sincere?
Answer. —lt is.
District Lecturer. —And are you disposed to apply the good
you may derive therefrom to the promotion of the interests of
this Order?
Answer. —I am.
District Lecturer. —You will please to lay your right hand
upon your heart and repeat, after me, the following obligation:
“I in the presence of all the Brethren now assembled,
do honestly affirm that I have been a member of Lodge,
No. , of the Grand United Order of Oddfellows, for a
period of months, and that up to the present moment
I have not, either directly or indirectly, by any word, sign, or
other medium of communication, revealed the secrets with which
I have been entrusted, to any person or persons whomsoever;
and now I promise, upon my honour, that I will henceforth
observe the same fidelity, and that I will never divulge the
secrets I already possess, nor any of those with which I may be
put in future possession, but that I will treasure them up in my
heart, and use them only for the lawful purposes of Oddfellow-
ship, making them known only to those Brothers who are duly


entitled to receive them, and when invested with legal authority
to do so, and only in a lawful assembly of the Grand United
Order. I also faithfully promise to use my best exertions, when-
ever opportunity serves, to make the knowledge I have to re-
ceive on this and all future occasions subservient to the general
good of this Order. All this I honestly and sincerely affirm and
promise, and call upon this honourable assembly to bear witness
to this my earnest obligation.”
District Lecturer. —Brethren, you are all witnesses of the
solemn promises which have just been made, and I hope that this
worthy Brother will truly and honestly fulfil them. Brethren,
you will now be seated, and I shall proceed to give the Lecture
of the First Degree.
Lecture
District Lecturer. —At your introduction into this Order you
were given to understand that you would receive a further
initiation into the moral science of Oddfellowship. This was
conditional upon your paying a proper attention to the interests
of the Lodge and endeavouring to prove yourself a worthy dis-
ciple of the fraternity into which you had been admitted. I
take it for granted that you have purchased your title to further
instruction in Oddfellowship from the fact that you come here
by permission of your Lodge, and that it is not a principle of
any Lodge to confer this favour upon those who, by their un-
faithfulness, have proved themselves unworthy to receive it. I
will explain what particular course of conduct constitutes a ful-
filment of your promises. One of the conditions was that you
should pay proper attention to the interests of your Lodge.
First, by your attending, as far as circumstances would allow,
to the interests of your Lodge; secondly, by performing such
duties as were required of you, consistent with your abilities;
thirdly, by assisting the various officers to maintain the authority
of the laws; fourthly, by refraining from all quarrels with the
Brethren, and from any other breach of propriety which would
endanger the continuance of mutual goodwill; and, fifthly, by
adopting such a line of moral conduct in all your worldly deal-
ings as should command the respect of all mankind for our
noble institution. The other condition is a general one. The
only way to prove yourself worthy of the fraternity into which
you have been admitted, is to imbibe its pure and humanizing
spirit; to let the brightness of that spirit beam forth in all your
actions; to become a promoter, as well as a partaker, of that
moral harmony which is designed to hold sway in every temple
of Oddfellowship; and to manifest that spirit of philanthropy,
which, while it professes to be a stranger to unworthiness, will
never leave the faithful and deserving to want. It is natural that
you should wish to hear a full definition of the term Oddfellow.
We are called Oddfellows, not because we possess any eccen-
tricity of habit, as the strict literal and commonly accepted


meaning of the term odd would imply. The title was, however,
no doubt first adopted on this account. The early Oddfellows
had very strange and eccentric ceremonies, and it was from this
circumstance that the prefix “odd” was attached to their title.
The first great distinctive feature of our Order is its ceremonies
of initiation, opening, closing and the general mode of transact-
ing the business of a Lodge; secondly, the philanthropic spirit
with which it contemplates to imbue every member; thirdly, the
principle of harmonious Brotherhood which it seeks to establish
among mankind; and, fourthly, the means which it adopts to
enable every Brother to recognise a member of the same fra-
ternity in any part of the globe. This plan did not originate
with Oddfellows, but is of very ancient origin, and its founda-
tion is somewhat enveloped in mystery. The commonly received
opinion is that it was first established amongst the Roman sol-
diers in the days of Nero, about fifty-four years after the birth
of Christ; but history traces its origin to some period anterior
to the Christian era. There were two bodies of men reputed to
have practised it, one at Eleusis, a small town of Attica, in
Greece, and another which was incorporated at Teos, Asia Minor,
by the kings of Pergamos. The members of the former were
initiated into what were called the Eleusinian Mysteries, and of
the latter into what were called the Dionysian Mysteries. There
was a very close analogy to the Secret Societies of modern times
in some of the features of their system. They were bound, by
the most solemn engagements, to conceal the instructions they
received and the ceremonies that were performed; and the plan
of having secret words was adopted by them for the same pur-
pose as it is adopted by Oddfellows—that they might distinguish
those who had become members of their fraternity. It is not
clearly known at what period or by whom the rule of using
secret words originated, but the deduction I draw is this, that
as ignorance of the fact neither benefits nor injures our fra-
ternity, it is of no consequence that we do not possess it. There
is also one feature about it which is more than an equivalent
to any satisfaction we might derive from an acquisition of cor-
rect knowledge as to the origin of using secret words, and that
is the contentment and pleasure we gain from the circumstance
of this rule having been observed throughout so long a period
of time; for it is only reasonable to infer therefrom that it is
a means well proportioned to the end for which it was designed,
and that it is so far perfect as not to have been superseded by
any other scheme yet devised for the same purpose. Our objects
are precisely the same as those of the generality of Secret
Orders. The only difference is, that it compasses those objects
by different means. They are such as the united wisdom and
experience of the leading minds of the Order have devised as
the most adapted, in their estimation, to realise the end contem-
plated; and we may conclude that they are considered the best
by the members from the fact of their giving them a preference
to all others. Our ceremony of Initiation, our Lectures, our Signs,
our Secret Words, and the Patriarchal Order or Council Mas-
ters’ Degree, are essentially our own. The Patriarchal Order, or
Council Masters’ Chapter, is the highest Degree that Oddfellow


ship holds out to its members. It can only be gained by per-
severance and good conduct, and until a Brother has passed
through all the graduations of office in his Lodge, and only then
by permission of his fellow-members. The privilege to enter this
Degree is granted, as signifying the approval of the Lodge of the
applicant’s character, and as a mark of respect and reward for
his attention to the various duties which have been confided to
his care. It has its own ceremonies of Opening, Closing, and
Initiation; it has also its own Lecture; and there are connected
with it many benefits, which, added to its moral worth, stamp it
with a character sufficient to attract the most aspiring. You may
possibly have heard of the mysteries of Oddfellowship. Accord-
ing to the strict literal sense of the word, there are no mysteries
connected with Oddfellowship. The word mystery means some-
thing that is inscrutable —not to be comprehended—beyond the
grasp of a finite mind; but as it is in common use amongst man-
kind, there is a presumption that it bears a double meaning.
When it is used in matters relating to Oddfellowship, it is to be
taken in its modified sense. We are not to suppose the mysteries
of Oddfellowship are of so incomprehensible a character as to
defy the grasp of our understanding, but that they are not to be
comprehended by those who have not been initiated into our
fraternity. After all, it is perhaps not strictly correct to use
the word mystery in connection with Oddfellowship; but it has
been so generally adopted by Secret Societies, in all ages, that
the privilege to use it, in the sense I have just explained, is
fully conceded to us by precedent. I especially wish to empha-
sise the duties of Oddfellowship. It is an Oddfellow’s first—
I should say his golden duty—to do unto others as he would
they should do unto him. This is the fundamental principle of
all good moral action, and has commanded the admiration and
observance of the wise and good in all ages of civilisation. By
carrying this spirit into all our dealings, we are sure never to
err; we secure also to ourselves the friendship and good-will of
all with whom we associate. As a natural sequence, love begets
love, justice begets justice, and we cannot practise this great
duty towards our fellow-men without reproducing the same
course of conduct towards ourselves. It might be said that it is
impossible to observe this duty on all occasions and under all
circumstances. This I am ready to grant. There are moments
in every man’s life when the tempest of a disquieted mind can-
not be prevented from rising, and on such occasions, in the heat
of transitory forgetfulness, he may lose the reins of control over
his passions and commit himself to conduct not consistent with
the great principle which I have just laid down. But by having
become a professed disciple of this principle, his duty soon re-
curs to his memory; and warns him of the evil into which he
has fallen; and if the spirit of this principle has infused itself
into his character, he is soon able to subdue and place under
subjection all disposition to be unkind or uncharitable. It is
also the duty of an Oddfellow to be faithful, or in other words,
to keep the secrets of the Order with a virtuous fidelity, and to
remain true to those promises which were solemnly recorded in
the presence of his Brethren at the period of his initiation. It


is the duty of an Oddfellow to be honest, and to become a guar-
dian of the interests of his Lodge, and of the Order. It is his
duty to respect the laws, and to be assiduous in carrying them
into useful practice. It is his duty to hold in proper respect
the various officers of the Order and of his Lodge, and to assist
in the removal of all obstruction to the free exercise of their
just prerogatives. It is also his duty to be sober, and to con-
duct himself with such moral deportment as will leave the
world no alternative than to say that the influence of Oddfel-
lowship is good and much to be sought after. Oddfellowship
does not propound any tenets upon which the world is divided
in opinion, and for this plain reason, that it is one of its lead-
ing principles to preserve unanimity and concord among its
members; and if it were to dictate any principle, the correct-
ness of which admits of dispute, it would act inconsistently with
its first principles. It certainly contemplates sobriety, but the
general broad principle of temperance does not admit of dis-
pute; it is one of the cardinal virtues, and even the most in-
veterate drunkard will not question the fact that sobriety is one
of the most brilliant embellishments of the human character,
whilst intemperance is one of its darkest disfigurements. Odd-
fellowship in no sense interferes with a Brother’s religion or his
politics. It dictates to no man in what way he shall worship
God, or under what banner of politics he shall enrol himself.
He is perfectly free to follow the dictates of his own conscience
in these matters, and to cherish those principles which he sin-
cerely believes are best calculated to promote his own happi-
ness. It would indeed be a frail bond of union which proposed
to interfere with the private opinions of a Brother on theologi-
cal or political subjects—a bond that would soon break, and
involve the Society in ruin. Oddfellowship proposes only to re-
gulate the moral conduct of its members, keeping clear of all
those rocks and shoals upon which men have split in opinion,
and which tend to disunite the members of each particular
class. The ground of Oddfellowship is strictly neutral; men of
all shades of opinion, men of all countries, where the fight of
civilisation has illumined the soul of humanity, can enter its
common bond, and unite to carry out its great design. I will
now communicate to you the Password and Sign of this degree.
They will serve to prove that you have attained this Degree,
and, along with the regular Password, will obtain your admis-
sion into our assembly during any future delivery of this
Lecture.
(Gives the Password and Sign.)
PASSWORD.
District Lecturer. — Riwpymcvwz.
Conductor.—Tuum and oifp.
District Lecturer. — Fywopc.
Conductor. —Kuou sp and duf.
SIGN.
Nxgcz together the Rwytpic and niucc the ohu Ovfskc.


District Lecturer. —Worthy Conductor, you will please to
pass these round the room, beginning with the Brother on your
left.
(The Sign and Password must here be repeated by each
Brother in the room.)
District Lecturer. —Before I dismiss you, worthy Brethren,
allow me to tender a few concluding remarks. The great object
of this lecture has been to convey to your minds a correct idea
of the peculiarities of Oddfellowship, to inform you rightly of
its objects and its designs, to point out your duties, and the
good arising from their faithful performance. May I hope that
you have given your best attention, and that our time has not
been mis-spent; that some of, if not all, the seed which has now
been sown has fallen upon good ground, and that it will bring
forth fruit an hundred-fold. My sincere desire is that all
should have been made better Oddfellows, and that your future
conduct will reflect the good which has been here gathered; that
you will become zealous in our great and good cause, and endea-
vour to the utmost of your power to practise those virtues which
add such lustre to the true character of an Oddfellow, and indi-
cate the sterling value of our honourable institution.
Health and wealth
To each and all;
May sweetest peace
Our joys increase,
And all that harms us
Or alarms us
Down to deep oblivion fall.
In love and truth may all agree,
And profit by our First Degree.
Second Degree
INTRODUCTION.
District Lecturer. —Conductor, examine every Brother in
the room, and ascertain whether all are duly entitled to sit in
our assembly during the delivery of the Lecture of the Second
Degree.
(The Conductor must examine the room, and report the
result.)
District Lecturer. —-Worthy Conductor, have you any candi-
dates in waiting for the Second Degree?
Conductor. —I have.
District Lecturer. —Have you ascertained whether they are
all in possession of a certificate from their respective Lodges?
Conductor. —I have, and am prepared to introduce those only
who are duly qualified.


District Lecturer. —l am now ready to receive them.
(The Conductor shall here introduce the candidates, who
must individually answer the following questions:—)
District Lecturer. —What is your name?
Answer.
District Lecturer. —To what Lodge do you belong?
Answer.
District Lecturer. —How long have you been a member of
that Lodge?
Answer.
District Lecturer. —Have you held any Office?
Answer.
District Lecturer. —Name the office or offices you have held.
Answer.
District Lecturer. —Have you taken the first Degree?
Answer.
District Lecturer. —Give me the Password of that Degree?
Answer. (Gives the Password.)
District Lecturer. —Give me the sign of that Degree.
Answer. (Gives the Sign.)
District Lecturer. —Are you desirous of receiving further
instruction in Oddfellowship?
Answer. —l am.
District Lecturer. —And are you disposed to put that instruc-
tion to a good and honourable purpose?
Answer. —l am.
District Lecturer. —You are then at liberty to take your
seat, and prepare yourself to give your best attention to the
Lecture about to be delivered.
Lecture
District Lecturer. —Brethren, at our last Lecture an endea-
vour was made to point out to you the duties of Oddfellows,
and to instruct you in several particulars relating to the moral
construction of the Order. I trust that such instruction was
not given in vain; that it did not fall upon the ear of heed-
lessness or indifference; that you all stored up the knowledge
you then received as a treasure; and that it has influenced mate-
rially your subsequent conduct. In the present Lecture I shall
endeavour to explain the emblems of the Order, and to instruct
you in the moral attached to each. I shall begin by explain-
ing that an emblem is a visible sign or symbolical representa-
tion of an invisible thing, and serves to produce in the mind


an association of ideas connected with the object so signified.
In ancient times, before the invention of printing, signs or sym-
bols were greatly in use, but as science progressed these
symbols gradually fell into disuse, and are now only adopted
in the civilised world for peculiar purposes. Amongst Odd-
fellows, they stand as silent but expressive monitors, and are
so blended together as to form a happy indication of the pecu-
liar character of the Order, the relative position of the vari-
ous officers, and the moral and social duties of the Breth-
ren. On the emblematical pictures of our Order the female
figure to the right of the shield represents the personification
of Truth. Beside her is a torch, which gives forth the light of
the principle she represents. Around the stem of the torch a
serpent is entwined. By the ancient Egyptians the serpent was
held as an emblem of immortality, but is chiefly recognised as
the emblem of wisdom. Under either interpretation, however,
it is beautifully expressive; for we may understand from it the
two great attributes of truth—namely, its immortality and its
wisdom, truth being both founded in wisdom and indestruc-
tible in its nature. In her right hand she holds a mirror,
through which the rays of divine light are illuminating the
whole of the emblems, indicating that the foundations of Odd-
fellowship are conceived in wisdom and redolent with the
divinity of goodness. The figure in the centre is the personifi-
cation of Justice. In her right hand she holds a pair of scales
equally balanced, and in her left hand a sword; signifying that
she will not be partial in her judgments, but that the merits
of all must be fairly weighed, and that she is ready to correct
those only who are clearly convicted of guilt. To the officers
of the Order this typical representation of Justice particularly
addresses itself. In the discharge of their duties it is required
of them to do that which is honest and just, to discard all par-
tiality, to be blind to all those circumstances which bias the
mind in favour of one individual and excite their prejudice
against another, and to fairly weigh in the scales of their judg-
ment the merits of all who are charged with a breach of law
or propriety. In their hands the laws are to be impartially
administered; they are not to harass or oppress one party to
the advantage of another; they are not to misinterpret or mis-
construe the laws to shield one Brother and punish another;
but in every action Justice must show itself triumphant; and
breathe through every sentence that proceeds from their lips in
the delivery of their decisions. This is the silent teaching of
the inanimate monitor—the Goddess of Justice. May every
Brother become inspired with a determination to swerve not
from the lesson thus taught. The figure to the left represents
Love. In her hands she holds an infant child, whose outstretched
arms and happy countenance signify the perfect trust in one
so gentle, kind, and charitable. This emblem reminds us as
Oddfellows of the duty we owe to each other. As the little
child places the trust in the loving one who is watching over
him, so should Oddfellows place their trust in one another and
exhibit towards the helpless a charitable spirit; never withhold-
ing benevolence when it is in one’s power to bestow it. A feel


ing of mutual sympathy and good-will should be cultivated, at
all times exhibiting a brotherly kindness towards mankind gene-
rally and the members of the fraternity in particular. By the
observance of these virtues they will be indelibly impressed
upon the heart and become distinguishing features in Oddfel-
lows seeking to acquire strength and excellence of character.
The emblem of Love is therefore placed on the arms of the
Order in order to remind us of our duty to our Brethren and
the distinguishing features which should characterise the Breth-
ren, amongst which stand prominently admiration, regard,
mutual sympathy and good-will, friendship, brotherly kindness,
benevolence and charity. The Sun, Moon, and Stars are emble-
matic of the degrees of rank and station in the Lodge. The
Sim, the principal luminary, is the type of the Noble Grand.
Like that brilliant orb, which illuminates the earth, he is ex-
pected to diffuse the light of Oddfellowship throughout his
Lodge. As it produces heat, so he is expected to foster and
encourage the warmth of true benevolence in every Brother’s
heart; and as from the action of its rays upon the earth, in
conjunction with other agencies, the germ of vegetation is
developed and brought to a vigorous maturity, so by the action
of his counsel and example upon the minds and feelings of the
Brethren, he is expected to excite and assist in developing
those kindred feelings which link the Brethren together in the
golden chain of social union. The Moon is the type of the Vice-
Grand, and is peculiarly expressive of his duties; for as the
Moon assists the Sun to shed light upon the face of the earth,
so the Vice-Grand assists the Noble Grand in conducting the
affairs of the Lodge. The Stars are types of the Inferior Officers,
who combine with the Superior Officers to form a system
harmonious and perfect, like the solar system, by which they
are represented. Shining in the heavens, as they do, less re-
splendent than the Sun and Moon, so in the Lodge-room, the
Inferior Officers take a less prominent part in the diffusion of
the light of Oddfellowship. The Union of the Heart and Hand
is the emblem of sincerity. When an Oddfellow extends the
hand of friendship, this emblem teaches that it is not to be con-
sidered as mere outward show or frigid formality, but that the
embrace of the hand is to be a correct evidence of the feel-
ing of the heart. Sincerity is one of the cardinal virtues of
Oddfellowship; the structure of our society rests principally
upon the mutual confidence and good-will which is generated
and diffused amongst us by the unaffected regard we entertain
for each other, and which leads us to perform those many of-
fices of kindness and benevolence that so eminently distinguish
the genuine Oddfellow. The Dove with the Olive Branch in its
mouth is the emblem of innocence, and was venerated by the
ancients as the emblem of peace. It may be regarded in this
double character by Oddfellows, suggesting as it does two of
the attributes of Oddfellowship and two of the ruling prin-
ciples by which all good Oddfellows should be actuated. In
bis intercourse with his Brethren an Oddfellow should invari-
ably manifest a spirit of innocency; that is, he should not dis-
play any haughtiness or pride; not be too assuming, but gentle


and kind, frank, open, bland and courteous; otherwise the
principle of fraternal Brotherhood would be deprived of its es-
sence and exist only in name. It is also, as this emblem teaches,
the duty of an Oddfellow to be at peace with all mankind, and,
like the dove, to be the herald of peace and joy to others.
Upon the arms of the Grand United Order the dove stands as
an evidence to the world that within our dominions there is
peace and friendship; it holds the olive branch in its mouth as
an earnest that none need be afraid to enrol themselves beneath
our banner, for that we are removed and protected from all
those vicious influences which counteract the harmony and
peace of general society; that within our Lodge-rooms they may
be protected from those storms and tempests of misfortune
which overtake men in sickness and other afflictions. The
Hour Glass is the emblem of Time. The descending grains of
sand denote the rapid speed at which days and years fleet
away; and we are warned by it that human life is but short,
and that therefore it ought to be well spent, that it may come
to an honourable termination. This emblem suggests matter
for our most serious reflection. It leads us to contemplate the
transitory nature of human existence, the brief space which is
allotted to mortality, and how circumscribed is the length of
days in which man has to realise the sum of good which is re-
quired at his hands. Time once gone can never be recalled;
it fleets away whether we do good or whether we do evil.
Therefore, we are reminded that our duties should not be neg-
lected, but we should at all times and at all seasons be mind-
ful of our moral and social engagements. The emblem of Time,
then, is placed upon the arms of the Order that it may over-
rule the frailty of our common nature, and remind us that it is
no part of good Oddfellowship to allow a moment of time to
be wasted that should be devoted to the performance of a good
act or social duty. The Ark is emblematic of the Lodge-
room. In Sacred History we read of the Ark being the place
of refuge to which Noah and his family were directed to betake
themselves, in order to escape the awful death which was about
to be inflicted upon all animated existences. We also read
that Noah and his family, with two of every species of the ani-
mal and other kinds, acted in accordance with the divine com-
mand, entered the ark, and were thus preserved from the fury
of the waters which raged in angry deluge around them. The
Ark was a place of refuge against physical evil; the Lodge-room
is a place of refuge against moral evil. A Lodge-room is a
place of refuge against the evils of a most luring and dangerous
character which oft-times beset our fellow-creatures by being
cast amongst wicked company; a Brother, by attending his Lodge,
and making associates of his fellow-members, may escape this
moral deluge, and save his character from the polluting influence
of vicious and ill-disposed company. Oddfellows are supposed
to be men of good character, men who can walk erect through
life, unashamed to meet the searching glance of the honest eye;
and it is their duty so to act and react, each upon the other,
both by precept and. example, as to make them invulnerable to
the shafts and arrows of wickedness. When the Brethren meet


together in their Lodge-room they are in the temple of har-
mony, the abode of peace and joy; they are met in their moral
sanctuary, to pay their tribute at the altar of Friendship, Love,
and Truth; thus establishing the connection between the Ark
and the Lodge-room. The Lion and the Lamb represent that
blissful state of being in which all the evil passions of man
are subdued by the soothing and humanising influence of Love
and Peace. The Lion and the Lamb, it is well known, are of
entirely opposite natures; the one is ferocious and cruel, the
other gentle and harmless. The Lion would delight in preying
upon and destroying the Lamb; it is in possession of certain
natural propensities which prompt it strongly to feed upon the
weaker animals; it is governed by an instinctive love of prey.
To represent, then, a Lion and a Lamb lying in peace together
is to depict in beautiful imagery, the wondrous power of cer-
tain principles in subduing the evil passions of men, and in
bringing to a state of harmonious Brotherhod those who were
once separated by barriers that might almost have been deemed
insuperable. It is a striking evidence of the power of Oddfellow-
ship in improving the moral character of its members, and in
bringing the vicious to such a state of purity as will enable
them to associate in harmony with those who are just and good.
This emblem is one which induces, perhaps of all others, the
most pleasing reflections. We are led at once to contemplate
the splendours and glories of our invaluable institution; we
enter immediately into the presence chamber of the great spirit
which inspires with beauty and loveliness the cause of Oddfel-
lowship; and we see, as in a vision, a state of human existence
which no poet can find language to describe, or artist colours
rich enough to portray. When we see a beautiful piece of
elaborate mechanism, we naturally wonder at the ingenuity
which suggested all its intricate and delicate springs and
motions; we are led to suppose that the power of thought and
perception must have been great in the individual who was its
inventor; but when we contemplate a state of human existence
where the vicious shall be so cleansed of their impurities as to
unite in peace and love with the philanthropic, die wise, and
the virtuous, how much more are we led to wonder at and
admire the principles through whose agency this blessing has
been realised. Such are the principles of Oddfellowship. I
will give you, with the assistance of the Worthy Conductor,
the Password and Sign of this Degree.
PASSWORD.
District Lecturer. —All coitorp.
Conductor. —With jc is agwy.
District Lecturer. —Let Zpgnp.
Conductor. —Oiwfszvgyo ipwty.
SIGN.
Place the ufocwmp of the xpro owfsk gniucc the xwzc.


District Lecturer. —Worthy Brethren, I must now congratu-
late you upon the attention which you have bestowed upon the
remarks which I have made in the course of this Lecture. I
hope that you have all been made wiser than you were, and
that an improved state of feeling has been created, and per-
manently lodged in every heart. I hope you will carry home
with you the ideas which have been spread before you, and
that your reflection will be awakened, so as to lead you into
a further understanding and appreciation of our principles.
May all that we have heard to-night,
Increase our zeal and moral might;
May every virtue, shadow’d forth
In emblematic form and worth,
Inspire with love each Brother’s heart,
That he may act a Brother’s part.
Third Degree
INTRODUCTION.
Conductor. —Worthy Lecturer, a Brother of the
Lodge, No. , is in waiting, and desires to know whether
you will confer upon him the honours of the Third Degree.
District Lecturer. —I shall be very happy to do so, on his
producing a certificate, regularly signed, from his Lodge, and
complying with other conditions, which will be explained to
him on his entering the room. Will you please ascertain whether
he is in possession of such certificate?
(The Conductor shall here interview the Candidate, procure
his Certificate, and bring it to the District Lecturer.)
District Lecturer. —Worthy Conductor, the Certificate you
have brought me is amply sufficient, and therefore you may
admit this worthy Brother into the room.
(The Conductor must here retire and bring in the
Candidate.)
District Lecturer. —Worthy Brother, will you please to inform
me and the rest of this assembly whether your desire to receive
the honours of the Third Degree is sincere?
Answer. —lt is.
District Lecturer. —And what is it you seek to gather from
the Lecture of the Third Degree.
Answ er. —lnstruction.
District Lecturer. —Have you received the Lectures of the
First and Second Degree?
Answer. —l have.


District Lecturer. —Will you give me the password of the
Second Degree?
Answer. (Gives the Password.)
District Lecturer. —And now give me the Sign.
Answer. (Gives the Sign.)
District Lecturer. —Having received these two Lectures, may
I ask whether you consider yourself to have derived any good
from them?
Answer. —I have.
District Lecturer. —And do you now, in the presence of this
honourable assembly, freely, and with honesty and sincerity,
renew the pledge you made before receiving the honours of
the First Degree, to make the good you have, and may derive,
subservient to the general advantage of the Grand United
Order?
Answer. —I do.
District Lecturer. —And do you also renew the pledge you
made to preserve inviolate, wholly and for ever, the secrets with
which you have been entrusted, and all with which you may
in future be put in possession?
Answer. —I do.
District Lecturer. —And all this you promise upon your
honour faithfully to observe, and call upon this honourable as-
sembly to bear witness to the renewal of your solemn obligation?
Answer. —I do.
District Lecturer. —You may now be seated, and we will pro-
ceed to confer upon you the honours of the Third Degree.
Lerture
District Lecturer. —Worthy and respected Brethren, you are
assembled on the present occasion to take the Third Degree of
Oddfellowship. You have already been instructed in the designs
and objects of the Order; you have had your duties as Oddfel-
lows pointed out; you have had an explanation of the emblems;
and you have received other information regarding the pecu-
liarities which distinguish us from the rest of Secret Societies;
and I hope that the whole has tended to benefit you, both in
a moral and intellectual point of view. Instruction and moral
culture is the great aim of these Lectures. We seek the good
of every member by distributing knowledge and enlightenment.
We cannot sow a grain of knowledge that will not germinate,
and produce a ten-fold equivalent of moral good. This good
may sometimes grow up imperceptibly—its existence may not
be visible to some minds; but it may, nevertheless, be depended
on. We know, from the law of cause and effect, that as cer-
tain as knowledge spreads, so good must succeed. Moral good
is the offspring of knowledge. On this ground, therefore, T


now enjoin you, Brethren, to treasure up the knowledge you
have received from the two lectures previously delivered, and
to devote your earnest attention to the instruction which I have
the pleasure to impart on the present occasion. It is my duty
now to explain to you the motto of the Order—which inter-
preted means Friendship, Love, and Truth. The nature of
Friendship is perhaps better understood by those who have ex-
perienced it than can be described in mere words. It is one
of those attendants upon human existence which appear in
many forms, and develops itself in various ways. But it is,
nevertheless, always of one nature, its essence always of one
peculiar character. It belongs to what may be called the moral
class—the feeling of friendship is purely a moral feeling.
Friendship, in fact, is only one of the effects of a superior
development of the feelings of man’s moral nature. If you pos-
sess a feeling of regard or respect for a person, and that per-
son does not reciprocate it, there can be no friendship between
you. It is necessary, to constitute friendship, that the feeling
should be mutual. When it is not so, it is merely what is called
personal respect or personal regard. Friendship is the feeling
of respect, the desire to secure mutual happiness, which is en-
gendered between two individuals; and this leads them to seek
each other’s company, and to delight in each other’s conver-
sation. Friendship springs involuntarily into being. We meet
with a person, or with a number of persons, whose habits, minds,
and general dispositions are congenial with our own. These
we of necessity admire, and we feel attracted towards the indi-
viduals possessing them by a power that we cannot resist, and
which imperceptibly steals upon us. We feel that to be in their
company is a pleasure, to converse with them is a source of
the purest delight, and to do them service a gratification of
the warmest and most heart-cheering kind. If the feeling be
mutual, if they in return delight in our conversation, and seek
our company as a source of happiness, then friendship is es-
tablished between us, and we become united by one of the
strongest bonds which can knit together the hearts of men. It
is of very great importance to Oddfellowship. Too great a price
cannot, by any possibility, be set upon its value. At the initia-
tion of a Brother into the Order, it is one of the first things
that is impressed upon his mind, and it is at the Altar of Friend-
ship that he pledges himself to become a true and worthy mem-
ber, and devotes himself to the cause of phibmthvopy and bene-
volence. The seat of the Noble Grand is denominated the Altar
of Friendship, because it is there that a Brother casts away
all his antipathies, and becomes united in Friendship, Love, and
Truth, with the whole of the fraternity. We could not exist as
a Society without the cementing power of friendship; we could
not willingly and cheerfully co-operate to carry out all our
benevolent projects, unless we had friendly feelings towards
each other; nor should we delight in meeting together to pro-
mote each other’s pleasures, and gild our social hours with
sweetest harmony, unless we took pleasure in associating with
each other, unless we felt the resistless power of friendship at-
tracting and binding us together. With our friends we can share


all our joys, and find them increased by the distribution. The
more we strive to pour gladness into the hearts of those who
are united to us by friendship, the greater is the gladness of
our own hearts; we feel our moral nature elevated and improved
and the spirit of goodness animating and inspiring us with all
the attributes of humanity in its most pure and lovely state.
And, on the other hand, to our friends we can unbosom all our
sorrows; we can satisfy that strong desire which is implanted
in human nature to seek relief and consolation by the unfold-
ing of our griefs and misfortunes; and a true friend will soothe,
and by every means in his power endeavour to soften those
sorrows or to chase them entirely away, and bring back com-
fort and joy. Friendship also encourages sincerity. Should a
Brother be seized with a desire to do anything which would
render him unfaithful to the trust which has been reposed in
him, he finds himself held in check by the idea that he can
only do so by sacrificing at the same time the friendship of
those in whose company he has spent so many happy hours. He
knows that they place confidence in him never to prove a
traitor to the cause in which he is enlisted; and that to destroy
that confidence would be to snap the golden chain which has
hitherto united them. The second word of the motto—Love—
approximates so closely to Friendship, that the one is very often
mistaken for the other. There is, however, this difference be-
tween them—Friendship can only exist where the feeling is
mutual, but Love can exist without the feeling being returned.
A person may love another, whilst the object loved may actually
return the passion with hate; but, as I have already explained,
there can be no friendship unless two or more individuals enter-
tain for each other feelings of respect and regard. The feel-
ing of love may be, and undoubtedly is, similar to that of
friendship, and arises in the same way. We see an object that
is pleasing to us, and which harmonises with our feelings and
sentiments, and our affections are immediately placed upon it;
but the feeling is generally of a more metaphysical and spiritual
character than that of friendship; it is not so soon destroyed,
but will often retain its intensity after the object loved has
given cause to make itself repulsive. Love in Oddfellowship
has not so much reference to individuals as to principles. As
Brothers we are united together'by the purest feelings of friend-
ship, and as Oddfellows we are united by love to the principles
of the Order. We can see in them the grandeur of benevo-
lence, the dignity of justice, and the sublimity of truth. We can
see that they are designed to give comfort to the disconsolate,
joy to the sorrowful, relief to the unfortunate, balm to the af-
flicted, and to cultivate honour and respect for the dead. Many
are the domestic hearths where sorrow had been brooding, that
have been cheered by the benign influence of our principles,
which have carried consolation to the bosom of every member
of the domestic circle, and raised their hearts to thankfulness
and joy. Many are the unfortunate victims of the caprice of
fortune who have been rescued from want or saved from the
degradation of pauperism, by the benevolent spirit of our prin-
ciples exciting the sympathy of the Brethren, and prompting


them to the most noble acts of charity. Many a man, too, has
been rescued from the snares which beset human life, and
instead of becoming a despised and disgraceful member of so-
ciety, has, through the powerful agency of our principles, been
made into an affectionate husband, a kind and endeared father
and an honourable and respected citizen. In fact, the prin-
ciples of Oddfellowship operate only for good, however they
may at times be made to serve the wicked purposes of evil men.
Possessing, then, these noble characteristics, they command our
love, and unite us to them by one of the purest and best feel-
ings that Providence has vouchsafed to the human race. The
last word of the motto — Truth —is a principle necessarily op-
posed to every thing that is false; the one is a negative to the
other. Truth is always consistent with itself; it agrees in every
part. That which does not totally agree is not pure truth, but
a mixture of truth and error, though often for a time, mistaken
for the genuine principle. It is one of the attributes of truth
that it cannot be destroyed; it is immortal, unchanging, and the
very best foundation that a society can have for its principles.
It is the same to-day, yesterday, and for ever. But falsehood
is always changing. It is arrayed in one garb to-day, and an-
other to-morrow. When men become weary of looking at it
in one shape, it changes to another, and is decked out with a
thousand artificial charms that its real appearance may not be
detected. The charms of truth are real, and always appear to
the human eye in the same majestic simplicity. If they appear
at any time different, it is only because we have become better
acquainted with them, and can see a greater display of those
virtues which they are capable of producing. The principles of
Oddfellowship rest upon this great and noble foundation—a foun-
dation which no human hand can destroy, and which the blasts
of error can never injure. We are united to these principles by
love, bound together by friendship, and in the spirit of the
whole, ought to work together for each other’s good. It is un-
doubtedly the duty of an Oddfellow to speak the truth. No
good Oddfellow will be an habitual dealer in lies, for there is
nothing degrades a man more than to be accounted by society
a character on whose statements no credit can be placed. We
never find a liar who is not also a deceiver, for the very act
of lying is practical deceit; and a deceiver is not such a man
as is recognised by the constitution of Oddfellowship as a fit
person to bind himself to secrecy, and to the faithful discharge
of offices of trust. It is, then, very desirable that we who have
advanced in our knowledge and understanding of Oddfellow-
ship should cultivate and encourage amongst our Brethren the
practice of this virtue, for if those who are thus advanced do
not encourage and promote the practice not only of this but
every other virtue connected with, and flowing from, Oddfel-
lowship, how is it to be expected that it will be regarded by
those who are as yet only novices in the philosophy of our
Order? The elder branches of our fraternity are recognised as
parties whose incumbent duty it is to lead forward, by a vir-
tuous example, as well as by the spread of good precept, those
whose slight acquaintance with the true character of our prin


ciples render them objects of care. As they grow in years, and
increase in knowledge, it is expected that they will grow in
usefulness, and, like wise and affectionate parents, lead forward
the younger branches of the Order to the possession of know-
ledge, to the observance of our principles, and to the practice
of every virtue which distinguishes the genuine Oddfellow from
the spurious one, and manifests to society the worth of so
noble an institution. May all here tread in this path; may they
seek the improvement of all within the reach of their influence;
may every virtue flowing from Oddfellowship shine in their
daily practices, and be held up as a beacon to those who have
not yet emerged from the darkness of the world; may peace
and love, and joy, and prosperity, spring forth as the result;
and may the Grand United Order flourish in proud majesty over
the ruins of all the ignorance and the moral evil which the
zealous labours of its members have vanquished and cast down.
With the assistance of the worthy Conductor I will now com-
municate to you the Sign and Password of the Third Degree.
PASSWORD.
District Lecturer. —To the huixm.
Conduct,or. —We’ll ziunxgws.
District Lecturer. — Ummrpxxuhcvwz’c.
Conductor. —Great ygsp.
SIGN.
Zxgnp the Runco and Cpnuym Rwytpic of the Iwtvo Vgym
gniucc those of the Xpro so as to nuapi the Runco Buwyoc.
District Lecturer. —Worthy Brothers, I have now to apprise
you that our course of instruction is completed. You have been
led through all the avenues of Oddfellowship, and had its beauties
pointed out as you passed; and I have endeavoured to impress
upon your minds the great importance of walking through the
world in the light of its principles, doing justice, loving mercy,
courting friendship, promoting love, disseminating knowledge,
and cultivating peace and joy. By doing these things you will
prove yourselves worthy of the high calling to which you have
aspired. You have now become accountable to the Order for
the manner in which you discharge your moral duties, and for
the improvement of those who are placed within the limits of
your influence. You are now no longer regarded as objects com-
manding our care and instruction, but you are elevated to the
position of instructors. Wherever you see a wild waste, it is
your duty to improve the soil, to scatter the seeds of know-
ledge and goodness, to watch carefully their growth, and to
assist in the development of their strength and beauty. Wher-
ever you see weeds springing and rankling in the moral soil,
you are to pluck them out, and with all diligence supplant them
with that which is wholesome and good. You are now become
guardians of the morals of those who are not initiated into
the Degrees which you have just completed; and as worthy Odd


fellows, as Brothers who are anxious to see the Grand United
Order move majestically in its onward progress, it is hoped that
you will labour with assiduity and cheerfulness to discharge all
those duties and obligations which you have voluntarily sought,
and which we, with confidence, have confided to your keep-
ing. If you love the Order, and believe that its principles are
calculated to increase the sum of human happiness, what a pleas-
ing task it must be to assist in diffusing their light through-
out the world; and towards the close of your labours, what a
glowing consolation will animate your hearts when you look
back and reflect upon the thousands whom you have been in-
strumental in making wise, good and happy. We are engaged
in a noble cause, and I trust we shall never swerve from our
duty until we have firmly planted the good old tree of Oddfel-
lowship in every land, and till its noble arms shoot forth and
gather beneath its foliage the whole race of man.
May all our hearts with Friendship’s chain
Be bound together strong;
May Love inspire each Brother’s breast,
And Truth guide every tongue;
May each and all the noble path
Of honesty pursue,
And ever keep our motto bright
Exultingly in view.


Rules and Regulations under which the
Foregoing Lertures are in
be delivered.
I. —That no member shall be allowed to take the First Degree
until he has been in the Order six months, and received the
Introductory Lecture; the Second until he has been a member
twelve months; and the Third until he has been a member
eighteen months.
11. —That no member shall be allowed to take any of the
Degrees without a certificate from his Lodge.
111. —That these Lectures shall be delivered as District Lec-
tures by officers duly appointed for that purpose. Lodges stand-
ing at an inconvenient distance from the centre of their District
have alone the privilege of exemption from this rule.
IV. —The Lecture-book to be kept in possession of the District
Lecturer, who shall be held responsible for its safety, and shall
be subject to the same penalty for exposing its contents to any
person not eligible to read them or hear them read, as is pro-
vided by Grand Law, for divulging the secrets of the Order.
V. —That it shall be optional for Districts to provide regalia
for the officers appointed to deliver these Lectures. Such re-
galia, if provided, to consist of black gowns, trimmed with scar-
let, and as a distinction the District Lecturer to wear in addi-
tion a scarlet sash. Caps may also be worn of the same colours,
a distinction being made between the D.L. and Conductor.
VI. —That these Lectures be delivered quarterly.


ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
GKNMPRTVWBQXSYUZEICOFAHL DJ
KEY TO THE PASSWORDS.


Epworth Press, 218 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.
