

PtSTH fftvn
Furs
fe3>
MAEEIAGrE WITH
K.^iC.o os <Sahs .
v r ‘ -■.
Box
DECEASED'WIFE’S SISTER.
i' v
IIDltorm:
MASON, FIRTH, & I‘CUTCHEON, PRINTERS,
51 and 53 Flinders Lane West.
MDCCCLXXII.


It is impossible to treat a matter concerning the relations of the
sexes without allusions which are highly indelicate. This makes
the subject a painful one, but to allow iniquity to proceed unwarned,
because it is too horrible to be mentioned, would be to sacrifice
principle to a false sensibility.
I have received, with sincere thankfulness, an admirable tract
drawn up by ministers of the Presbyterian denominations in
Britain. My object has been to write something shorter and more
suited for lay readers. I hoped when I sat down to write to
have been more concise, but I have been unable to state the
Scriptural argument more briefly. For the critical, social, and
moral aspects of the question, I refer to the publication I have
mentioned.
H. B. MACARTNEY.


MARRIAGE WITH
DECEASED WIFE’S SISTER.
It is almost universally admitted that there is such a sin as incest,
and that it is one of the. most loathsome, most revolting, of
crimes, but different opinions have been held as to what acts
should come under that designation. And the grand question of
the day is this, is marriage with the sister of a deceased wife in-
cestuous or not 1 The church has announced distinctly that it is,
but the church’s authority is now set at nought, and her decisions
sought to be reversed, so that it is vain to appeal to that. The
voice of reason tells us that if man and wife be one, as God asserts
(and the whole structure of Anglican society is built on the as-
sumption of the truth of this assertion), the relations of the wife
become the relations of the husband, and her sister is his sister.
This view of the subject has, however, been so fully treated that I
shall not enlarge on it. We are also referred to the voice of
nature as a sure guide, and we are told that nature shrinks from
sexual connection with certain blood relations, but does not shrink
from those formed by marriage. Before we can enter on this
inquiry we must know what we mean by nature or natural feeling.
In the lower animals nature acts with comparative uniformity. It
is natural to the lion to be faithful to the lioness, with the horse
or the ox the connection is momentary. Nature teaches the dog
to turn away from leguminous food, and the ox to seek vegetable
food exclusively, but man knows no such restriction. We call
that unnatural which society has taught us from our infancy to


look on as not only wrong, but revolting, producing in us not
only abhorrence, but disgust. Thus murder, adultery, robbery,
drunkenness, we look on as wicked, but only too much in accord-
ance with the instincts of fallen humanity; fratricide, incest, &c.,
we regard as unnatural. If nature were a sufficient guide, all
nations, irrespective of race or religion, would be of one mind, and
all individuals would alike shrink from that which was contrary
to their nature. The apostle, writing to the Corinthians, says,
“Doth not even nature itself teach you that if a man have long
hair it is a shame unto him T Would he have said this writing to
the Lacedemonians 1 Does nature teach the New Zealand savage
or the pious Hindoo that he may not hasten the end of his aged or
sickly parent 1 What did the civilised Greeks and Homans think
of the crimes which, above all others, we stigmatise as unnatural 1
Let the line, whose concords are so puzzling to the schoolboy,
answer the question—
“Formosum paster Corydon ardebit Alexim;'
or the gay mockery of Horace—
“ Mille pnerorum flammse, mille pnellaramd
What did nature teach the kings of Persia and Egypt on the
very subject before us 1 That their sisters were the wives most
suited to their dignity. Did nature teach the kings of Spain
and Portugal to abstain from marriage with their nieces and
aunts, or did it teach the holy conclave to refuse the Homan
Church’s blessing on such unions 1 Or, horrible to write, does
nature uniformly teach the English peasants to revere the purity of
their own daughters 1 Have we not instances sufficient to show
that in such cases nature imposes no bar 1 and does not the case
of Jocasta, and of Ninon de L’Enclos, show that nature does not
prohibit unions yet more horrible 1 Nature, then, is no sufficient
guide. We shrink instinctively from what we have been taught to
regard as revolting and loathsome, and we call the echo of our
early training the voice of nature. This is a harmless delusion
so long as it merely keeps us from the very thought of things
abominable, but when we go to erect the corrupt nature of fallen
man into a goddess, and make her the arbiter of right and wrong,
it is necessary to see how utterly unfit she is to assume that
office.^
If nature then fails to tell us what is incestuous, if reason has
not decided the question, and the Church is not to be heard, what
* My argument is not that there is no such thing as unnatural crime, but
that, as the moral sense becomes depraved and deadened by immoral
actions, we have no sure guide, without the aid of revelation, that will
enable us to distinguish sins that are natural from sins that are contrary to
nature. I maintain, not that there is no such distinction, but that we are
incapacitated from drawing the line.


is to guide us 1 Surely every Christian (and Ido not write for
others) will answer, the Book of Revelation. To its testimony,
then, let us look. Now, except in the condemnation of a man
taking his father’s wife, the New Testament says nothing whatso-
ever on the subject; but we are not therefore left without a guide.
It is true the law of Moses is abrogated as law, but, as exhibiting
the mind of God on general principles, and on the nature of sin, it
remains, and is continually appealed to by our Lord and His
apostles as a certain rule. Thus while the command, “ Thou shaft
not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn,” is no longer binding,
and the husbandman is at liberty to feed his cattle according to the
best of his judgment, the very apostle who warns us not to be
entangled in the legal yoke of bondage appeals to this command
as illustrating and enforcing the principle that the labourer is
worthy of his hire. In the same manner the New Testament
writers name the murderer as distinguished from the man-slayer,
but they never give us the slightest hint as to what is the distinction,
not because it is unimportant, but because the distinction has been
already defined in the Old Testament. The New Testament was
written for those who had received the Old, and who were familiar
with its definitions, its warnings, and its promises, and it does not
repeat what has been already laid down. It is remarkable that,
except in the repetition of the sixth commandment, and in refer-
ence to it as a recognised law, the New Testament contains no
prohibition to murder. The fifth chapter of Ist Corinthians con-
tains no command against incest, it refers to the case as a violation
of an existing law. The abhorrence in which the connection was
held by civilised heathens is referred to as enhancing the shame of
complicity with the crime, but, if heathen opinion stood by itself,
the whole tenor of Scripture teaches us to despise it. What law,
then, did that person violate % No law enunciated in the New
Testament. It was the law recorded in the book of Leviticus, and
to that law we are referred; unless it be argued that the Church at
Corinth was rebuked merely for offending against the customs and
opinions of the heathen around them, or for disobeying a thought in
the divine mind never revealed to man. We turn then to Lev. xviii.
to inquire how has God defined this horrible crime. When, how-
ever, we appeal to this scripture we are told that the command in
verse 18 furnishes evidence that connection with a wife’s sister is
unlawful only during the wife’s lifetime. To this I answer, first,
granting the utmost supposed to be implied by the limited prohibi-
tion, the equality of the sexes was not recognised until the full
revelation of the mind of God given in the gospel; and it is within
the range of possibility that the insult offered to a brother’s memory
(verse 16) by connection with his wife, might be overlooked in the
case of the subject sex. But we have no subject sex under the
gospel, and the distinction consequently falls to the ground. But,


secondly, I would ask, does the promulgation of a limited command
necessarily imply the abrogation of a general law 1 When it is
said—Thou shaft not make to thyself any graven image,” will
any one say that law is abrogated, because in Dent, xxvii. 15 the
curse is limited to him that “ putteth it in a secret place The
condemnation of the grosser crime of intercourse during the wife’s
lifetime, does not do away with the prohibition of the less gross
sin which has been already uttered. But has this prohibition been
uttered 1 It is quite true that we do not find, in so many words,
a command not to marry the sister of a deceased wife ; but neither
do we find a command not to marry a daughter, except that
implied in v. 17. The prohibitions are given on one side, and
that carries the other side; thus the prohibition to marry a mother
necessarily involves the prohibition to marry a daughter, and the
prohibition to marry a granddaughter involves the prohibition to
marry a grandmother. The command therefore, v. 16, repeated
Lev. xx. 21, not to have connection with a brother’s widow,
involves a similar restriction with regard to a sister’s widower.
If the one connection be incestuous, so is the other.*
It has been argued, however, that the command in Dent. xxv. 5-
10, makes void the prohibition thus solemnly recorded. I answer,
first—that an exception to a command does not render it void.
In Ex. xx. 3, we read—“ Thou shalt not kill,” and throughout the
law, in instances too numerous for reference, directions are given'
to put such-and-such offenders to death; and in the 10th verse is
a command not to do any work on the Sabbath-day, followed by a
direction (Exodus xxix. 38) for the priests, as our Lord remarks,
to “ profane the Sabbath,” by killing, flaying, cutting up, and
burning two lambs every day without exception; but no one has
ever thought of arguing that the sixth or the fourth commandment
were made void by the directions which teach men, in some cases,
to kill, and, in some cases, to work on the Sabbath. Secondly,
the command is given to the brother, not because he is so distant
that he may cohabit with the widow as with any other woman,
but because he is so near that he is identified with the deceased, and
his firstborn is reckoned the child of the dead man. So it
is said (v. 6)— 1 “ That the firstborn which she beareth shall
succeed in the name of his brother which is dead, that his
name he not put out of Israel .” So far from this being a
license to incestuous love, it was a tribute to the dead, en-
forced, as regards a recalcitrant brother, by disgraceful penalties
(see v. 9, 10), and a duty, the fulfilment of which, as regards a
* The meaning of the words, “ uncover their nakedness,” is plain enough
in v. 6, &c.; but we cannot say accurately what is meant by the words, v. 16,
“It is thy brother’s nakedness,” and so in verses 8 and 10. The general
meaning is however obvious, that it is to offer to the relations mentioned, or
to one’s own body, the grossest possible insult.


more distant relative, was considered highly meritorious in both
parties (see Ruth iii. 10, 11, iv. 10-12), and involved serious
inconvenience (Ruth iv. 6). No one has yet recommended that a
father should marry his son’s widow, but if this law is to be
regarded a law of license, it will carry us that length; for when
Tamar was about to be put to death for her supposed intercourse
with a stranger, on her proving that the child she was carrying
was the child of her late husband’s father, Judah’s indignation was
changed into admiration, and he cried, “ She hath been more
righteous than I, because I gave her not to Shiloh, my son” (Gen.
xxxviii. 26). The whole institution is doubtless a mysterious one,
into the reasons of which we need not now enter, but it shows
emphatically that God regards the children of the same parent as
in an important sense one, and that intermixture for personal
gratification, with one another, or with those to whom either has
been sexually united, bears on it the same character of abomina-
tion that belongs to the intermixture, of the same sex.
It has been said that the prohibitions in Lev. xviii., xx., Dent,
xxvii., Amos ii. 7, &c., are addressed only to the Jews, and are
binding only on them. If so, what is the meaning of the words,
Lev. xviii. 24, 25—“ In all these the nations are defiled, which
I cast out before you, and the land is defiled, therefore I do visit
the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land vomiteth out her
inhabitants” 1 And again, v. 27 —“These abominations have the
men of the land done, which were before you, and the land is
defiledand is said, v. 28, to have “ spued out the nations.”
Those nations were the Amorites, the Hittites, the Hivites, &c.
These intermarriages then were not only forbidden to the Jews,
but were among the chief causes why the Canaanites were
destroyed, though they had no part whatsoever in the Jewish
covenant, and were not amenable to Jewish laws.
I have shown—lst. That the law of nature is no sufficient guide.
2nd. That, except in one instance, the New Testament throws no
light on the subject. 3rd. That this reticence is no solitary
instance, for that the New Testament gives itself to propounding
new truths, and uniformly refers to as settled, or altogether passes
over, what has been stated with sufficient clearness and fulness in
the Old. 4th. That Lev. xviii. furnishes a full and sufficient rule.
5 th. That that rule states the connections only on one side, similar
connections being of necessity included. 6th. That the exception
does not invalidate the rule. 7th. That the particular exception
referred to actually adds force to the rule. Bth. That the
mixtures forbidden were not merely forbidden to the Jews, but
were mentioned among the chief abominations for which the
heathen were cast out.
We are asked to sanction the marriage of a widower with his


'-Vs;.
W V.V* } x ■■ ... ■>• -V
. • '
wife’s sister; grant it, and of course the widow may marry her
husband’s brother, and if his brother, his nephew or uncle. Let
the fraternal name exist without any sacred relationship ; let the
sister-in-law be as any other woman, and how loiig will the name
or character of sister be sacred 1 The first step is an easy one; the
gulf to which it leads is unfathomable.
..t'K •, > ■ ■■ ’J
;. jfi'i
Mason, Firth, &r M‘Cutcheoti, Printers, J 7 Flinders Lane West, Melbourne.
