





RECORDS AND DOCUMENTS
RELATING TO THE
CONSECRATION
OF A
MISSIONARY BISHOP,
FOR THE WESTERN ISLANDS OF THE
$
SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN.
Printed by authority of the Bishop of New Zealand.
MELANESIAN MISSION PRESS*
AUCKLAND.
18 6 1-


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
1. Despatch from His Grace the Duke of Newcastle.
2. Opinion of the Honorable Frederic Whitaker, Attorney-
General of New Zealand.
3. Record of Election of Missionary Bishop. I
4. Record of Consecration of Missionary Bishop. |
5. Consecration Sermon.
6. Sermon by Bishop Patteson.
7. Report of Melanesian Mission.


1 Copy of Despatch from His Grace the Duke of Newcastle
to Governor Gore Browne, C. B.
38, Downing Street,
g- r 26th June, 1860.
1 have received your Despatch of 20th January
iast, enclosing a Letter addressed to me by the Bishop of New
Zealand, m which he requests to be informed in what manner
Der Majesty s Government can sanction the creation of a
Missionary Bishop for the Melanesian Islands. He proposes
tour, or rather perhaps 1 should sty, three modes of effecting
tins object. &
„ \ r ßy - a J! ot . tin S t 0 new Bisho P a small Diocese within
itish Jurisdiction on the understanding that the principal
sphere of his labours is to be elsewhere,
2 ‘ erectin g a Diocese avowedly beyond British Juris-
S. il T? 1 P ° Wer ~ or rather such appearance of power—
Ln h r l!p ya i L ? tters L latent are capable of conferring on an
English 1 relate m a Foreign Country ; or,
, <w 3 - > eavi "g ‘he Metropolitan and other Bishops of
IT Zealand to exercise their inherent power of consecrating
a Bishop for places out of Her Majesty’s dominions.”
t ? ie - Se alternatives the first two are liable to objections
on which it is not necessary to dwell, but which in my opinion
are conclusive. Ihe legality of the third was brought under
the consideration of my predecessor in this office in connection
pr ° P ° Sa t 0 found a Missionary Bishopric in South
Hie then Law Officers of the Crown to whom the question
was referred were of opinion that the Bishop of Cape Town and
his Suffragans might legally consecrate a Bishop out of Her
Majesty s dominions to confine his- ministrations to places
beyond the limits of those dominions.
It was added, however, that the Bishop when consecrated
would have no jurisdiction or authority within the Queen’s
Dominions, and that Her Majesty’s Government could not be
advised to interfere or take any part whatever in the scheme
proposed the responsibility and results of which ought in the
opinion of the Law Officers to rest entirely with its promoters.
In a subsequent reference the attention of the Law Officers
was drawn to the circumstance that British law, as such, does
not prevail in the Cape Colony, and on this occasion they gavt


it as their opinion that the consecration of a Missionary Bishop
for South Africa might properly take place in the Cathedral of
Cape Town.
I concur in thinking that Her Majesty’s Government
should assume no responsibility, and exercise no interference
whatever, in respect of an enterprise which, however noble and
interesting, is to be carried on in Countries beyond Her juris-
diction, and may issue in controversies in which it is not desirable
that representatives of British authority should intervene.
But I infer from the opinion of the Law Advisers of the
Crown that the Bishops of New Zealand are at liberty without
invasion of the Royal Prerogative or infringement of the Law
of England, to exercise what Bishop Selwyn describes as their
inherent power of consecrating Mr Pattison or any other person
to take Episcopal charge of the Melanesian Island?, provided
that the consecration should take place beyond British Territory.
To this course therefore Her Majesty’s Government can
have no objection, and I am inclined to believe that the
independence of action which the new Bishop will thus possess
will be more than an equivalent for any advantages he might
gain from a closer connection with the civil power.
I will only add that I, like yourself, am fully conscious of
Mr Pattison’s high qualifications for the task to be committed
to him, and that I shall watch with deep interest the progress
of.his labours.
You will be good enough to communicate this Despatch to
the Bishop of New Zealand as an answer to his letter.
I have the honor to be
Sir, r
Your most obedient
humble servant,
(Signed) Newcastle.
✓
Governor Gore Browne, C. B.
&c., &c, &c.


11. Opinion of the Attorney-General
of New Zealand.
Auckland,
26 Nov. iB6O.
My dear Lord,
I have given some attention to the question you
proposed to me as to the Bishops of New Zealand performing
the act of Consecration in New Zealand, but I am really unable
to see my way clearly in the matter.
Admitting however, as the Duke of Newcastle does, the
inherent power of consecrating a Bishop for places out of Her
Majesty’s dominions, J know of nothing which renders such act
of consecration in New Zealand illegal.
I remain,
Yours very truly,
Fuedk. Whitaker,
Bight Rcvd,
Lord Bishop of New Zealand.
Fredk. Whitaker.


111. Record of Election of Missionary Bishop.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, one God, blessed for ever. Amen.
i :—
Inasmuch as it hath pleased ALMIGHTY GOD to open
an effectual door for the Propagation of the Faith in His dear Son
JESUS CHRIST among the Heathen Inhabitants of the West-
ern Isles of the South Pacific, and has by His Good Providence
committed that blessed work to the Branch of His Church which
hath been planted in New Zealand, We, being Bishops of the
Church aforesaid, have with the full consent of the other
Suffragan Bishops of this Ecclesiastical Province, and after
solemn Prayer with celebration of Holy Communion in the
Church of Saint Mary, within the Metropolitan City of
Auckland, elected the Reverend JOHN COLERIDGE
PATTESON, M. A., Fellow of Merton College, Oxford, to
the Office of Missionary Bishop among the Islands aforesaid,
being fully satisfied of his piety, learning, and morals, and of
his other qualifications for this special ministry in which he
hath already laboured as Priest in the Church of God; and we
hereby declare our intention to proceed to consecrate him to
the aforesaid sacred Office of a Bishop.
In token whereof we do set our hands and seals hereto, on
this sixteenth day of February, in the year of Grace
One Thousand Eight Hundred and Sixty-one.
G. A. New Zealand,
Metropolitan of New Zealand,
C. J. Wellington,
Suffragan Bishop.
Edmund Nelson,
Suffragan Bishop.






SERMON
PREACHED AT THE
CONSECRATION
OF THE
REV. JOHN COLERIDGE PATTESON, M.A.
FELLOW OF MERTON COLLEGE,
TO ACT AS
MISSIONARY BISHOP
AMONG THE WESTERN ISLANDS
OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC.
ON THE
FESTIVAL OF ST. MATTHIAS,
Feb. 2+, 1861.
BY GEORGE AUGUSTUS,
BISHOP OF NEW ZEALAND, AND METROPOLITAN.
AUCKLAND:
PRINTED AT THE MELANESIAN PRESS.
186 1.




RECORD OF CONSECRATION
or THE
REV. JOHN COLERIDGE PATTESON, M.A.
FELLOW OF MERTON COLLEGE, OXFORD,
TO ACT AS MISSIONARY BISHOP
AMONG THE WESTERN ISLANDS OF THE
SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN.
To ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME.
WE, GEORGE AUGUSTUS, by Divine Providence,
Bishop and Metropolitan of New Zealand, send greeting.
WHEREAS in a Valedictory Letter written by the late
William, by Divine Providence, Lord Archbishop of Canter-
bury, on the part of the Committee of Bishops appointed to
manage the Funds for the Endowment of Bishoprics in the
Colonies, and bearing date on the thirtieth day of November,
one thousand eight hundred and forty-one, We were directed
not to confine our views within the limits of the New Zealand
Islands, but to regard the See of New Zealand as the central
point of a system extending its influence in all directions over
the Islands and Coasts of the Pacific ;
And W t hereas Divers of the Western Islands of the South
Pacific Ocean have been visited by us, and for some years past
certain young people of the Aboriginal Inhabitants have been
brought away to the Islands of New Zealand for Education,
whereby the Christian Faith is beginning to be known among
them:
And Wthereas Lands have been bought in these Islands,
by means of Funds contributed in England, for the Endowment
of the MELANESIAN MISSION, and a School-house and


other requisite Buildings have been erected in the Neighbour*
hood of Auckland:
Know All Men by These Presents that we the said
George Augustus, Bishop and Metropolitan, by and with the
Advice of our Suffragans, judging it expedient for the more
effectual prosecution of the aforesaid Mission, that it should be
placed under the charge of a BISHOP specially appointed to
this work , l and having ascertained, that no Licence or Mandate
of our Gracious Sovereign would be needed for the Consecration
of a Bishop for the spiritual oversight of Countries out of Her
Majesty’s dominions, did admit on Sunday, February 24th, 1861,
our beloved in Christ JOHN COLERIDGE PATTESON,
Clerk, Master of Arts, Fellow of Merton College, Oxford, and
heretofore our Missionary Chaplain, of whose Sufficiency in
Learning, Soundness in the Faith, and Purity of Manners, we
were well assured, to the Office of BISHOP, and did Canonically
Consecrate him publicly in the Church of St. Paul, Auckland,
according to the Manner prescribed by the Church of England,
the Royal Mandate only being excepted.
In Testimony Whereof we have caused our Episcopal
Seal to be affixed to these Presents.
Given at Auckland, New Zealand, on the second day of
March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred
and sixty-one, and the twentieth year of our Consecration.
G. A. New Zealand.
Bishop of New Zealand, and Metropolitan.
WE, CHARLES JOHN, Bishop of Wellington, and
EDMUND, Bishop of Nelson, were present and assisting at
the Consecration above mentioned.
C. J. Wellington.
Edmund Nelson
Which I attest, having been present,
William 1?racey,
Notary Public.


ACTS I, 24.
And they prayed , and said : Thou , Lord , which knowest the
hearts of all men , whether of these two Thou hast
chosen.
If a reason be asked for the peculiar character of this con-
gregation, it is given in the first words of the text,
THEY PRAYED-.
On other occasions the House of God is as free as the air of
Heaven. The sojourner, the wayfaring man, the friendless, the
rich, the poor, the old, the young, the full Communicant, and
the proselyte of the gate, all may enter freely through its open
doors, for the Church is the House of Prayer for all people,
where every one may come, to cast down his own burden, and
to pour out his soul before the Lord.
But this is a season of special prayer, and of that most
solemn act of prayer which is offered up in the Holy Com-
munion. And therefore the invitation has gone forth fat and
wide to all who have partaken of the blessed Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ, to meet the Bishops and Pastors of
our Church at the Lord’s Table, and to pray with us and for
us.
We ask for these special prayers in a season of special
need, for the solemnity in which we are engaged is one of fear-
ful responsibility. We have not come here in a spirit of
boasting, but of fear and trembling. We have not met together
to exalt ourselves above our brethren in Christ, because we are
Bishops or Presbyters or Communicants of the Church: for the
day reminds all Pastors of the Church, of him of whom Christ
said : “Have not I chosen you twelve and one of you is a Devil?”
and the place reminds us, that it was from that Holy Table
that the first Communicants rose up, one to betray His Lord
one to deny Him, all to forsake Him.
Was not that a season of fear and trembling, when the
eleven Apostles met in that upper room, in which they ‘all
abode after the Ascension, and continued with one accord in
prayer and supplication. ? Prayer was their comfort even then,


though the Holy Ghost was not yet given. We can well under-
stand why they prayed. The Bridegroom had departed from
them. They were a band of mourners. There was Mary the
mother of Jesus weeping for her Son. And there was Mary
Magdalene weeping for her Saviour: and Peter mourning for
his denial of his Lord: and Thomas mourning for his faithless-
ness : all mourning for the brother who had fallen from his
Bishopric and gone to his own place.
A book was unrolled before them, in which were written!
lamentations and mournings and woe. The dark word of
prophecy had been then fulfilled. The Shepherd had been
smitten, and the sheep of the flock had been scattered abroad.
One habitation was desolate, and no man to dwell therein. Each
in his own degree had been offended because of Christ; even
that Apostle who said “Though all men shall be offended
because of Thee, yet will I never be offended.’ 1 Judas, Peter,
all the Apostles, had stumbled at that stumbling stone: and all
this had been foretold by prophecy as foreordained by God : and
yet they could not excuse themselves, by alleging God’s fore-
knowledge. Their Lord had said “It must needs be that
offences come, but woe be to that man by whom the offence
cometh.”
And now to this sorrow for the past was to be added fear
for the future: for this word also of prophecy was to be fulfilled:
“His Bishopric let another take.” Another Soldier of the
Cross was to step at once into the place in which he had seen
his comrade fall. There was no special guidance of the Holy
Ghost, as when Paul and Barnabas were separated for the work
whereunto God had called them. All the past was full of bitter
proofs of their own unfitness for their Master’s service. They
had not known their own hearts. They had fancied themselves
ready to go up to Jerusalem, to die with Him : they promised
to go with Him to prison and to death; yet they had denied
and forsaken Him. They had not known their own deceitful
hearts: how should they know the hearts of other men ? One
source of comfort and of light had been opened to them by
their Divine Master, and to that they resorted. They prayed,
and said
“Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, shew
whether of these two Thou hast chosen.”
They did not pray alone. The same Blessed Saviour who
had borne their griefs and carried their sorrows, who had prayed
for them in His Agony, while they were sleeping, would not for-
sake them in their act of prayer. He knew that Satan had
desired to have them that he might sift them as wheat: and
He prayed for them, that their strength might not fail.
In the power of that intercession Peter stood up in the


midst of the disciples; Peter foremost in the blessing, “ Blessed
art thou Simon Barjona,” and foremost also in the offence,
“Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offence unto me.”
Had he forgotten his own bitter tears for his threefold denial;
or his grief at his Lord’s threefold exhortation to him to feed
His sheep? Was his bearing that of the primate of the
Apostolic brotherhood, proud of his owm office, and confident in
his own strength? If he had been righteous in his own eyes, he
would have brought a railing accusation against his brother.
But his words are not of condemnation, but of sorrow. He
speaks of Judas not as a traitor, but as the guide of them that
took Jesus. He does not deny that Judas was an Apostle, but
puts it forward as a sorrowful fact, that he was numbered with
them, and had obtained part of their ministry. In fear and
sorrow he recognised the fulfilment of prophesy in his brother’s
fall; in fear and hope, he called upon his brethren to fulfil the
same Word of God by appointing another to take part of
that ministry and Apostleship from which Judas by trans-
gression fell.
1 have endeavoured to explain the feelings with which the
Apostles must have offered up those fervent prayers at the
election of Matthias, as some guide to our own thoughts and
feelings on the present occasion.
We too must come to this work in a spirit of prayer,
because it is to us a work even of greater fear.
I speak first of the consecrating Bishops.
We are called upon to execute this office of the Apostles,
in an age when the Bridegroom has been taken away, and when
all outward gifts and guidances of the Spirit of God have been
withdrawn. IVe are not like those Holy Men, who were with
the Lord Jesus “all the time that He went in and out among
them, beginning from the baptism of John, unto the same day
tht he was taken up.” We cannot choose from men who have
enjoyed the like privileges as eye-witnesses and ministers of the
word. We are inferior to them both in respect to the power to
choose, and of the field of choice. Compared with them, w r e
are but “blind leaders of the blind.”
And yet the office of the Apostles is laid upon us. They
have long gone to their rest: but the commandment still
remains in force “Go ye into all the world and preach the
Gospel to every creature” God neither gave immortality to
the Apostles, nor a sudden spirit of conversion to the world.
It is seen then to be the will of God, that the fulfilment of
prophecy, and of our Blessed Lord’s Commandment, should be
a gradual work, to be carried on by successive generations of
the Christian Ministry.
Through a hundred steps of spiritual lineage that Apostolic


Ministry has been brought down to us. At this distance from
the source of blessing, we fear lest we be found wanting. W e
are called upon to exercise the office of Apostles, but without
the special gifts and graces of the Apostolic age. are we
that we should have power to carry on the Lord’s word in
obedience to His commandment ?
When we look to the side of prophecy, the thought is no
less fearful. The whole volume of Holy Scripture seems to be
unrolled before us with its warning of woe. “Woe be to me,
if I preach not the Gospel.” Is the promise yet fulfilled, that
in Abraham and his Seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed? Has Christ already received all the heathen for His
inheritance and all the uttermost parts of the earth for His
possession ? Is there no wilderness which has still to blossom
as the rose ? No Islands that still wait for the Lord ? No
kingdoms that must become His ? Are all idols utterly abolished?
Are there no Gentiles yet to come to His light; no doves to
come back to the windows of His ark ; no sons to come from
>far; no daughters to be brought to be nursed at His side ?
Has His Church been established in the top of the mountains
as a city set upon a hill ?
The vastness of the scope of the prophetic visions at once
humbles and enlarges the mind. “1 hy heart shall fear and be
enlarged” is God’s promise through Isaiah. However little our
work may be, it is part of that purpose of God which can never
fail. We pray for our little one in fear and humility, and while
we pray it becomes a thousand. It is but a drop in the Ocean,
but that Ocean is the fulness of God.
But when we thus recognize the work as of God alone,
ordained by His determinate counsel and foreknowledge,
a new cause of fear arises, and brings with it a new motive to
prayer. In this w r ork of God, belonging to all eternity, and to
the Holy Catholic Church, are we influenced by any private
feelings, or any personal regard? The charge which St. Paul
gives to Timothy in words of awful solemnity “to lay hands
suddenly on no man” may well cause much searching of heart.
“ I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the elect angels, that thou observe these things, without pre-
ferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality. Does
our own partial love deceive us in this choice ? We were all
trained in the same place of education ; united in the same
circle of friends; in boyhood, in youth, in manhood, we have
shared the same sorrows, and joys, and hopes, and fears. I
received this my son in the Ministry of Christ Jesus from the
hands of a father of whose old age he was the comfort: he sent
him forth without a murmur, nay rather with joy and thankful-
ness, to these distant parts of the earth. He never asked even


to see him again; but gave him up without reserve to the
Lord’s work. Pray, dear brethren, for your Bishops, that our
partial love may not deceive us in this choice, for we cannot so
strive against natural affection, as to be quite impartial.
And yet, as standing in the “ presence of God, and of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and of the elect angels,” we solemnly declare
that we are not laying hands suddenly on this dear friend and
brother ; so far as we can search our own hearts, and judge of
our own motives, we are doing nothing by partiality. In fre-
quent conference, and in solemn Communion we have spread
the matter before the Lord ; and, we have received at least this
satisfaction, that no one single whisper of the voice of conscience
within has warned us to forbear. We have risen from our
prayers more and more resolved to go forward in the name of
God, and in the full belief that this is indeed His work, and
that this is His chosen servant.
Here again was the need of prayer, that we were left to our
own unassisted judgment. It is true that I had received
Commission, now nearly twenty years ago, from the Primate of
the English Church, to regard New Zealand as a fountain to
diffuse the streams of salvation over the Coasts and Islands of
the Pacific Ocean; and that supplies have been furnished by
the Church at Home with no sparing hand to enable me to
begin the work. But in this special act of the Consecration of
a Missionary Bishop the authorities in Church and State at
Home have advisedly left us to exercise our own inherent
powers: with the kindest expressions of sympathy with our
undertaking, but with no division of responsibility. And yet we
do not stand alone in the work, for at this very time, the Sister
Church in the Cape Colony, with the active support of a former
Governor of New Zealand, is sending out a Missionary Bishop to
Central Africa. We too have received the same encouragement
from the Officers of the Crown in New Zealand, their attestation of
the fitness of the person whom we have chosen, their assurance of
the lawfulness of our act. We have called upon the Laity in all
our Churches to come forward, if they know of any just cause
or impediment. The general consent of Church and State, of
the Clergy and Laity, both here and at home, seems to justify
our act. I have not heard of one dissentient voice. We
humbly trust, that we may go on with this our work, with a
conscience void of offence, toward God, and toward men.
Having asked your prayers for us the Consecrating Bishops,
I now ask them for him who is to be consecrated. And these
are the reasons.
Because, like all others of his brethren, he will have care
of many Churches : the stewardship of the Mysteries of Christ:
the guardianship of the purity of His Word : the administration


of godly discipline: the oversight of the flock, which the Son ol
God has purchased with His own blood.
But, especially, because he will go forth to sow beside many
waters, to cultivate an unknown field, to range from Island to
Island, himself unknown, and coming in the Name of an unknown
God. He will have to land alone and unarmed among Heathen
tribes, where every man’s hand is against his neighbour, and
bid them lay down their spears and arrows, and meet him as the
messenger of peace. He will have to persuade them by the
language of signs to give up their children to his care: and
while he teaches them the simplest elements which are taught in
our Infant Schools, to learn from them anew language for every
new Island. Surely then, dear brethren, we must pray earnestly
that this our brother-may have a large measure of the Apostolic
gifts • a power to acquire divers languages; and also boldness
with ’ fervent zeal constantly to preach the Gospel to all the
nations now to be committed to his charge. Already sixty
Islands will come under his care, and at least one hundred others,
stretching westward as far as New Guinea, are among the number
of the Islands which are waiting for the Lord. I can but
indicate the outlines of this great work: your own minds
All up the details, by that lively Faith, which springs from a
hearty acceptance of all the prophecies and of all the promises
of the Bible. It may be, that your prayers will be more
earnest for objects which you see as through a glass darkly;
like those solemn prayers which faithful men offer up m the
darkness of the night, to the God who seeth in secret.
One duty yet remains: to commend our dear brother to the
work to which we believe God has called him.
It was the privilege of the Apostles to elect Matthias out ot
the number of those “who had companied with them all the
time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among them, beginning
from the baptism of John unto the same day that He was taken
up.” Our privilege though different in degree may be the same
in kind; for faith supplies what is denied to sight.
So may every step of thy life dear brother, be in company
with the Lord Jesus. . 1 £ll , ~,i .
May the baptism of John be in thee, to fill thee with that
<r odly sorrow which worketh repentance not to be repented of:
‘a foretaste of that comfort which will be given to them that
m "y the baptism of the Holy Ghost and of fire.
May Christ be with thee, as a light to lighten the Gentiles ;
may He work out in thee His spiritual miracles : may He through
thee give sight to the blind, to see the glories of the God
invisible : and open the ears of the deaf to hear and receive the
preaching of His Word : and loose the tongues of the dumb, to
sing His praise; and raise to new life the dead in trespasses and
sins.
10


May Christ be with you when you go forth in His Name
and for His sake “to those poor and needy people; to those
strangers destitute of help' 1 ; to those mingled races, who still
shew forth the curse of Babel, and wait for the coming of
another Pentecost; poor alike in all worldly and spiritual goods,
naked to be clothed, prisoners to be loosed, lepers to be cleansed.
To you is committed Christ’s own Ministry, to seek for His
sheep that are dispersed abroad; to hold up the weak, to heal
the sick, to bind up the broken, to bring again the outcasts,
to seek the lost. Your office is, in the widest sense, to preach
the Gospel to the poor.
May Christ be ever with you; may you feel his presence in
the lonely wilderness, on the mountain top, on the troubled sea.
May He go before you, with His fan in His hand, to purge His
floor. He will not stay His hand, till the Idols are utterly
abolished. *
May Christ be ever with thee, to give thee utterance to
open thy mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the
Gospel. Dwelling in the midst of a people of unclean lips, you
will feel Him present with you to touch thy lips with a live coal
from His own altar, that many strangers of every race may hear
in their own tongues the wonderful works of God.
May Christ be ever with you: may you sorrow with Him
in His agony and be crucified with Him in His death, be
buried with Him in His grave, rise with Him to newness of
life, and ascend with Him in heart to the same place whither
He has gone before, and feel that He ever liveth to make
intercession for thee, “ that thy strength fail not.”— Amen.




SERMON
PREACHED AT SAINT MARY’S CHURCH,
AUCKLAND,
#
ON SUNDAY, THE 3rd OF MARCH, 1801,
BY THE
RIGHT REVEREND JOHN COLERIDGE PATTESON,
MISSIONARY BISHOP.
AUCKLAND:
PRINTED AT THE MELANESIAN PRESS.
186 1.




JOHN xrv, 15, 16.
lf ye love me, keep my commandments. And I will pray the
‘ Father , and He shall give you another Comforter , that '
He may abide with you for ever.”
There are, my brethren, in the lives of us all, certain times, as
I suppose, of special trial and anxiety, when the sense of our-
weakness presses heavily upon us. When some heavy affliction
overwhelms us, or the difficulty of any work committed to us
appears almost insurmountable, when our hearts are troubled,
and we are afraid.”
At such times, when we are more than usually conscious
of our own utter inability to contend with the temptations to
despondency presented by troubles from without and the weight
of care within, the mind seems by God’s blessing to be furnished
with a more than ordinary power of appropriating and realizing-
the words of Christ.
We naturally turn to that last discourse of our Lord, in
which He unfolded for the comfort and support of His sorrowing
disciples the counsel of God determined of old, by which He
would provide for the wants of His people, when Christ’s visible
presence was withdrawn from them. We read again and again
those words of consolation and blessing and peace, and as we
read we grow into a comprehension of the reality of His presence,
amono- and in us; and we know that we have Him with us still,
in greater power than ever, in more intimate communion: and
ou? hearts become calm, and patient, and collected; and we
feel that we shall be enabled to bear any sorrows that He may
in His wisdom send upon us, and fulfil any task which He may
commit to us, because we have the promise of the Comforter to
abide with us for ever.
If it were not so, how could we live through the trials to


which all are liable, and under which so many are suffering?
Sickness and pain and poverty are the lot of some, and what
but the consciousness of the “love of God shed abroad in the
heart by the Holy Ghost” can “comfort them when they lie
sick upon their bed,” or when they “eat their bread with
carefulness” ? They know that they are in the hands of their
Father in Heaven, and that “ all things are working together
for good to them that love God.” —Loss of friends, bereavement,
loneliness and desolation fall with heavier sorrow upon others
>—the flowers of life early faded, hopes destroyed, fond imagina-
tions gone for ever, no human arm to help them along the weary
toilsome road to that rest which seems so far away; but the word
of mercy speaks to the dull grief-stricken heart, “ Thou art not
alone; the God of the fatherless and the widow is with thee;
Christ who has endured it all and who knows thy present sorrow,
is in thy soul comforting and soothing thee by the blessed
influences of His Holy Spirit.” He is bringing peace, His own
peace He is giving to the mourner and the heavy laden: they
see Him not, but He is present by His Spirit; He is calling
them unto Him, that they may in Him find rest unto their
souls.
And upon us all in our several callings this trial must come,
viz: that we have to lead a life of holiness and purity and self-
denial in the midst of many sore temptations, that we are
commanded to regulate our thoughts and actions by a rule
which it is very difficult to observe, that the attempt to do so
involves a continual struggle against our natural desires, that we
must wait (and perhaps wait long) upon the Lord for the
accomplishment of our hopes and anticipations of Rest and
Peace.
What but the knowledge of the presence of God with us
can enable us to carry on this daily struggle ? The sinful
propensities, the love of indolence and ease, procrastination and
inactivity in our Master’s work—these are ever present to us—
what should we be, if God’s Spirit were not ever present also, to
urge us to withstand these sinful inclinations, and to enable us
to do so ? Our hearts might well sink down and die within us,
wlien we contemplate the duties assigned to us ; unless we could
cling to Christ’s own promise “ of the Comforter to abide with
us for ever.”
This is the great gift which God has given to us, the
complement, if we may so speak, of the gift of His Son Jesus
Christ. The Spirit had indeed of old communicated His
gracious influences ; for we know that John the Baptist and his
parents w T ere “ filled with the Holy Ghost,” that the Holy men
of God spake in old time “ moved by the Holy Ghost”; David
prayed expressly “ take not Thy Holy Spirit from me”; and all
the saints of the Old Testament who walked with God did so


only by the grace and power of the Holy Ghost, The very
order of the words in the text teaches us that the Spirit of God
was already working in men’s hearts before the Comforter was
given in the sense in which Christ then spoke to His disciples ;
for how could they “ love” Him and “ keep His Commandments
except by the Holy Ghost ? Can we love in order to receive
Him, without whom we cannot love : for it is “ by the Holy
Ghost that the Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts ?
Can we keep His Commandments except by the Holy Ghost,
when it is written, “ No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but
by the Holy Ghost ? ”
But the full plentiful outpouring of the Spirit, which marks
the special dispensation of the Spirit was not, until Jesus was
glorified-—when He had cleansed His disciples by the sacrifice
of Himself, then the Holy Ghost lighted upon them, TL he
Spirit did not descend upon them w r hile Jesus was yet visibly
among them, because the sacrifice was not yet offered. But
when they had been redeemed from their sins and were being
sent forth to dangers, and were stripping themselves (as an old
writer says) for the contest, then need was that the Anointer
should come. For, without the Holy Spirit we cannot love
Christ and keep His Commandments, and only by continual
accessions of grace can we grow up into the measure of the
stature of th e fulness of Christ. And this grace He diyideth to
each one severally as He will. God gave not the Spirit by
measure to His Own Son, because in Him dwelleth all the
fulness of the Godhead. It is not without the grace of the Holy
Spirit that “He is the Mediator between God and man, the
Man Christ Jesus”, as He declares that in Himself the prophecy
was fulfilled, “ The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He
hath anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor”. It is
indeed not of grace but of nature that He is the Only begotten
equal with the Father, but the taking of Man into Unity of
Person wfith the Only begotten is of grace, not of nature, as we
read “ The Child grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled with
wisdom ; and the grace of God was upon Him.”
But to all other than Jesus, the Spirit is given by measure,
and being given is more given, until each one according to the
measure which God wills, has his proper gift completed. And
so Saint Paul bids each one “ not to think of himself more
highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly, according
as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith”.
So, as the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon the whole
company of Christ’s disciples gathered together all with one
accord in one place on the Day of Pentecost marked the
commencement of that work which Christ by His Church should
carry onward to the end of time, we read continually in the Acts
of the Apostles of the “ gift of the Holy Ghost” as the necessary


grace by which each individual also might be qualified to live
according to his profession after the example of his Master and
Saviour. He dwelt in the Apostles and Evangelists, men filled
with the Holy Ghost. He both sent Philip to the man of
Ethiopia and “ caught him away” when he had fulfilled his
mission. In His Comfort the‘Churches throughout all Judaea
and Galilee and Samaria were multiplied. He fell on the first
Gentile converts to the Faith of Christ so that they of the
Circumcision were astonished as many as came with Peter to the
house of Cornelius. He separated Barnabas and Saul for the
work whereunto He had called them. He guided the Apostles
assembled at Jesusalem to declare the liberty of the Gentiles.
He forbad Saint Paul to preach the word in Asia, and suffered
them not to go into Bithynia. He ordered and guided every
action and prompted every good thought and word. He was
with them in all places and at all times—the Spirit of their
dearly loved Lord and Master: and He has been present with
the Church of Christ ever since, animating, encouraging,
strengthening every faithful servant of the Lord—the energy
and life of the company of believers —convincing the world of
its infidelity, the parent of all sins ; working in men’s hearts the
knowledge of the righteousness of Christ; proving that Christ is-
stronger than Satan, that truth shall prevail over error, and
holiness over sin, that Christ has judged the prince of this world,
that He will show that judgement unto the Gentiles, and that
He will carry on His blessed work among all the nations of the
earth “ until He send forth judgement unto victory”.
What this power is, what strength is derived into the soul
from this indwelling Spirit of the Father and the Son, we learn
most fully in seasons of peculiar trial—when the world fails us
altogether, and no human friend can minister consolation ; when
no human wisdom can perfectly conceive, and no human energy
can adequately execute, the plan by which the object of our desire
may be obtained; when the issues ot all our undertakings are
clearly seen to depend wholly upon the will of God, because it
is so evidently beyond our own power to control them—then it
is that the confession of our weakness most brings with it strength
from above, and that in the absence of all earthly help we have
the most entire assurance of support from the Spirit of God.
Then we shall receive comfort when we most feel the want
of it, then we shall be filled with spiritual gifts when in our
destitution we hunger and thirst after them.
And so when new responsibilities are laid upon us, new
gifts are also conveyed to us; when to human eyes great events
seem to depend upon individual energy and wisdom and
forethought, the soul is upborne by the thought that prayers
and hopes from many hearts are ministering to the same end ;
the Spirit is working invisibly amongst us and in us all, and the


outward manifestation of His secret presence is given to every
man to profit withal.
Had Christ in His spiritual body stdl dwelt visibly on
earth, it might have been a blessed thing to have journeyed
into a far land, and there like the Magdalene to have fallen at
his feet, or like Thomas to have seen Him with our eyes
and adored Him as our Lord and our God; but how could He
then have been present with each and every one of His servants
throughout the world; how could the consciousness of His
indwelling power quicken the zeal and devotion of His
Evangelists now in the crowded city or the lonely wilderness, in
Tndia°and Africa, and among the vast multitudes of China ; or
how could we hope to “bring again the outcasts and to seek the
lost” ones, scattered throughout an hundred isles, unless we
knew that the power of Christ is present by His Spirit, “pouring
down gifts abundantly upon men to the spreading abroad His
Gospel and the edifying and making perfect His Church.”
It is indeed a great and extraordinary grace of God to
have an unwavering faith in the constant presence of His
Almighty Spirit; yet the Spirit is present, though our faith be
weak; and His grace is given, though we are most unworthy of
it: and the more feeble the instrument, the more evidently is
the work, if work there be, seen to proceed from God, who will
■ not suffer our unworthiness to hinder the operation of His Spirit
in the hearts of His people. • w
Christ has said “If ye love me, keep my Commandments,
and this is His Commandment that we love one another, and
this love must be more than affection to our relations, and
patriotism to our country ; for He has said again into
all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature.” And
since the whole map of the destiny of the world was unrolled
before His spiritual eye when He gave commission to His
disciples to evangelize all nations, and since He well knew the
opposition that would be raised to this blessed work by the
malice of the Evil one and the sinfulness of men, since He fore-
saw that His servants must needs sink and grow fainthearted in
the loneliness of their solitary tasks, since He knew what it
(must be to dwell among nations wholly given to idolatry and
heathenism, without God in the world; therefore He added
His blessed promise to cheer and sustain them with the cer-
tainty of the final triumph of Light over Darkness “Lo I am
with you always even unto the end of the world.” He is with
us by His Spirit who is one with Him and the Father —“always"—
for the Comforter abides with us for ever. His word must
stand fast, His prayers must be effectual. He, God and Man is
Himself the dispenser and Ruler of the economy of the world ;
for “all power is given unto Him in Heaven and in Earth.”
And the Power seems to come to us, while we read and


meditate on such words as these; but we lose our hold upon
them amidst the details of every-day life; and so by continual
Prayer and frequent Communion we need to renew our strength,
to confirm our faith in the abiding presence of Christ’s Spirit:—
And not by Prayer for ourselves only, but by intercessory
prayer for each other, by United Prayer for the stability and
increase of the Churches, for the extension of Christs’ kingdom
throughout the world. He is praying for us, and His Spirit is
making intercession for us, and He spreads the power of His
Prayer over our unworthy petitions, and presents them all
efficacious in His Name before His Heavenly Father. Fray
therefore my brethren daily and fervently for the conversion of
these poor islanders lying in darkness and the shadow of death,
that the Spirit of Christ will mightily sway their hearts, to turn
them from darkness unto light and from the power of Satan
unto God. They are specially committed to the prayers and
the charity of the New Zealand Church. And pray for me
called too young as in years so in all else to an office of which I
dare not say that I realize the responsibility; that the Holy
Ghost may ever abide with me to comfort and guide me in all
doubts and difficulties, and that I may daily increase in God’s
Holy Spirit more and more, and may come at length to His
everlasting kingdom.


REPORT
OF THE
MELANESIAN MISSION.
March 18, 18G1.
AUCKLAND :
PRINTED AT THE MELANESIAN PRESS*
]BG 1 .
















REPORT
/
OF THE
MELANESIAN MISSION
March 18,1861.
The last Report of the Melanesian Mission concluded
with the account of the arrival of the Southern Cross
Mission Schooner in Auckland Harbour on November 16,
1858, with a party on board of 47 Melanesians, including
two children, and four natives of Pitcairn’s Island, who
had been brought away from their new home in Norfolk
Island to spend the summer in New Zealand.
No Report was published last year, the papers having
been lost in the Southern Cross when she was wrecked.
Previously to the year 1848 no attempt had been
made by the Church of England to carry the Word of
Life to the Inhabitants of the South Sea Islands. In
that year the Bishop of New Zealand made his first
missionary voyage to the Loyalty and Southern New
Hebrides islands.
In the year 1850 the Australasian Board of Missions
was formed, and the special task of visiting rfie Southern
islands of the Western Pacific was entrusted to the
Bishops of New Zealand and Newcastle, New Zealand
being selected as the head-quarters of the mission. The
Bishop of Newcastle was however able to accompany the
Bishop of New Zealand on one voyage only to the islands,
and the Mission has been carried on since that time by the
Bishop of New Zealand alone.
The extent of his missionary labours has been greatly
increased since the time when his little schooner of 23 tons


carried him and his Melanesian scholars from the Loyalty
Islands, New Caledonia, Aneiteum, Futuna and Erumanga
to their summer home at St. John’s College, Auckland,
and again at the approach of winter took them back to
their several islands. But the same carrying on
the work of the mission which the Bishop commenced in
the little Undine was followed out by him when he sailed
in the Border-maid and the Southern Cross.
A mission vessel of some kind in which to visit the
islands and to bring away and return scholars, and a home
for them while in New Zealand, were essential to the
carrying out this plan.
Other considerations would regulate the size of the
mission vessel and of the mission buildings, but some
means of locomotion and some place to live in while on
shore were necessary.
There are, at a moderate calculation, from 150 to
200 islands lying between New Zealand and New Guinea
in a state of absolute heathenism, in many of which no
white man has ever been seen, in all of which the languages
are wholly unknown, or known only in some instances o to
our own small party.
The problem is, how is the Gospel to be communicated
to these small islands, scattered over so wide an expanse
of ocean, and inhabited by tribes of various races; among
whom so great a diversity of languages and dialects
prevails, that of 29 islands (exclusive of these on which
more closely related dialects of the great Polynesian
language are spoken) we may assert that each one possesses
a dialect peculiar to itself, while in many cases two, three,
and four different dialects are spoken on the same island!
It is believed that the only practicable method is that
of associating native teachers with English missionaries.
The great hope of evangelizing and providing for the
permanent establishment of Christianity in these islands
lies in training up young men from every part of the
Mission field to become eventually the teachers of their
own people.
It may-be many years before such a result can be
obtained, but it is necessary to work with reference to it
from the first. It is already found to be difficult in New
Zealand to keep up an adequate supply of English
Missionaries, in consequence of which greater attention is
being given at this moment than at any previous time to
the training up of the most promising men from the various
mission stations to be ordained as missionaries to their
countrymen.
This is a principal object that wc have kept in view in


bringing away natives of the islands to spend the warm
months of the year in New Zealand, in the hope that by
repeated visits they might gradually be educated to become
useful in their turn to their own people.
And now that not less than 80 islands have been
visited, and every voyage has confirmed the belief that
almost every island must be regarded as possessing a
distinct dialect of its own, the importance of deriving
teachers from each and every island who can tell their own
people in their own language what they have themselves
been taught, is more than ever apparent.
But all persons who have lived with young converts
from heathenism know well how great are their trials and
temptations. The employment of native agency does not
supersede the necessity of obtaining English missionaries.
Our hope is that it may please God to move the
hearts of many men to join this Mission, so that the work
of educating native teachers may advance rapidly, and a
sufficient number of English Missionaries may always be
dwelling among the islanders to assist the young converts,
and watch over the growth of the Island Churches.
A reference to the Chart of the Islands which have
been visited by the Mission vessel will show at once the
facilities which are afforded for carrying out such a system
by their geographical distribution into separate groups.
The present circumstances of these islands may be
thus stated:
Lifu and Nengone in the Loyalty Group have for
some years been occupied by missionaries sent thither by
the London Mission Society, while native teachers from
Samoa and Rarotonga are living in Toka and Uea, two
islands from the same group. On the island of Fate in
the New Hebrides they have placed teachers also.
Tana, and Erumanga are occupied by
Presbyterian missionaries sent thither from Nova Scotia
and Scotland. The small islands of Futuna and Niua
have received teachers from Aneiteum. New Caledonia
and the Isle of Pines are in the hands of the French.
The islands now occupied as above stated by the
London Mission Society or by Presbyterian missionaries*
have been for many years visited by the Bishop of New
Zealand in the course of his missionary voyages among
the islands of the Western Pacific Ocean. Mr Geddie
had not arrived at Aneiteum when the Bishop made his
first voyage among the islands. Samoan and Rarotongan
teachers had been located at Nengone, Lifu, the Isle of
Pines, Futuna, Tana, Erumanga, and bate.
No English missionary was living anywhere


among these islands at that time. The Bishop of New
Zealand year by year making his voyages in these seas
gave much assistance to these teachers, which has been
thankfully acknowledged in a book written by a member
of the London Missionary Society, While from Nova Scotia
and Scotland he has received Resolutions passed in formal
assemblies, expressive of'their gratitude to him for the aid
which he has afforded to their Mission. With the Loyalty
Islands especially he has been closely connected. At the
request of the native teachers residing on them he took
young men away with him to New Zealand, and both ac
Nengone and Lifu their influence has been powerfully
exercised for good upon the people. But it is with the
islands lying to the North and North-West of Fate (or
Sandwich Island) that we are principally concerned, and
the present position and future hopes of this Mission will
be most easily understood if the geography of this portion
of the South Pacific be borne in mind.
The Northern division of the New Hebrides group
from Fate Island to Aurora Island with Malicolo and
Spirito Santo to the Westward constitute one section of
the field of work.
The next group in order to the Northward is that of
the Banks 1 Islands, with which may be reckoned tl\e
Torres Islands to the Westward.
Still going Northward we come to the Santa Cruz
Archipelago, including Tubua and Vanikoro to the South,
and Tauraako (Duff’s Islands) to the North.
From thence a Westerly course of about 800 miles
brings the Mission vessel to the Easternmost Islands of
the Solomon group.
Speaking generally, it may be said that each group
of islands possesses its own language, as each separate
island of the group possesses its own distinct dialect of a
language common to all. In very few cases does the
dialect of any one island sufficiently resemble the dialect
spoken in the next island to enable their respective
inhabitants who dwell inland to communicate freely with
each other. Where the islands lie within a few miles one
of another there are always many persons who from their
roving habits are frequently passing about from one part
of the group to another, and such persons speak generally
two or three dialects: many others who are not such
advanced linguists know enough to understand a native of
another island speaking his own dialect, and they carry on
their conversation, each man speaking in his own tongue.
On many islands, probably on most of them, several
dialects are spoken. For example: At Vanua Lava in the


Banks’ Islands at least three dialects are spoken. At
Valua (Saddle I.) only three or four miles distant from
the North East end of Vanua Lava there are two dialects
distinct from each other, and both distinct from the three
dialects of Vanua Lava. Mota (Sugarloaf I.) has again
two dialects not widely distinct from each other, but unlike
any other dialect spoken in the group. At Ureparapara
(Bligh I.) another dialect prevails. Mera lava (Star I.)
has again its own dialect. With the dialects of Gaua
(Santa Maria) we are not yet acquainted. The natives
of the neighbouring islands say that they cannot understand
them.
But although these dialects for practical purposes are
quite distinct, yet a moderate acquaintance with one or
two of them is sufficient to satisfy any person at all
accustomed to a comparison of languages that they are
all philologically related as members of the same family.
And so also in reference to the different clusters or
groups of islands. The type of language that prevails in
each group is characteristic of that group, hut the affinity
between the languages of these groups becomes year by
year more and more apparent.
Of all these four Archipelagoes I believe it may be
asserted that they belong to the same great family of
languages, or that there is in each language or dialect
something that is common to all, though in many cases it
may be difficult to detect the principle of connection
between them.
There is every reason to expect that a more accurate
acquaintance with these languages and their dialects will
satisfactorily establish their relationship with each other.
It is quite certain that the Polynesian element enters
widely into the composition of the languages of the
Northern New Hebrides, Banks’, and Eastern portion of
the Solomon Islands. Several small islands to the West
of the ethnological limits assigned to Polynesia are
inhabited by tribes of pure Polynesian descent.
At present we have four comprehensive classes of
languages to deal with following the law of the geographical
distribution of the groups of islands.
Assuming that only four English missionaries are
engaged in this work each one would be connected with
one of these groups of islands, and would be placed in
charge of that section of the Central School to which
natives from the group to which he was appointed belonged.
If more men are led, as we trust they may be, to join
the Mission, new stations may be formed in different parts
of each group, and so fresh subdivisions may be from time


to time made, as the work advances. Native teachers
from each island might in process of time be located in the
different islands of the group. In each Archipelago there
exists at least one harbour, in which the Mission vessel
might for a time lie securely anchor, while during the
winter season the various islands of each Archipelago, with
some few exceptions, could easily be visited in an open
boat.
In this manner missionaries might be located in the
islands, either permanently or during the winter season
only, according as the particular locality is found to be
healthy or sickly, and according as the nature of the work
to be done and the circumstances of each island or
archipelago may require any modifications of the general
system. One great object will be to endeavour to gather
around the Missionary young men from the various islands
of the group, and to educate them to fill by God’s blessing
the posts of teachers and eventually missionaries, each one
in his own island. This seems to be the most feasible
method of overcoming the great difficulty presented by the
multitude of dialects.
The Mission vessel would be the means of connecting
these groups with each other, and all with New Zealand;
as the Missionary’s boat would keep up the communication
between the various islands of each group. Thus a
regular and frequent system of visitation would be
maintained between all the members of the Mission,
located as they would be in distant and newly-occupied
I lands.
As in each group of islands the station occupied by
the Missionary would form a centre, to which young men
of promise might be brought from the various islands
within reach of the Missionary’s boat; so during the
summer months the Mission Station at Kohimarama would
be the centre, to which young men recommended by the
Missionaries might be brought together from all the islands
within reach of the Mission vessel. This would tend to
combine a unity of teaching with a wide diffusion of things
taught.
Many young men would also be moving about in the
vessel as she sailed from one group of islands to another
during the winter months, and made visits of more or less
duration in each part of the whole mission field. Such a
plan offers great facilities for opening communication with
the inhabitants of islands not as yet well known to us.
Natives are easily induced to take a cruise of a few weeks,
and during these short voyages many opportunities occur
of acquiring their confidence and learning their language.


The necessary buildings for the accommodation of
scholars during their residence in New Zealand have
lately been erected at Kohi-marama, an estate of 157 acres
of land, situated on the Southern shore of Auckland
Harbour, and about three miles to the East of the town.
The situation is admirably suited to the purpose of a
College for natives of tropical islands, being protected
from cold winds by the natural slope of the ground.
Moreover bathing, boating, and fishing, are the natural
occupations of Melanesians, and all may be enjoyed in
perfection at Kohi-marama.
The expense of these buildings has been defrayed by
the liberality of Miss Yonge, who has devoted the entire
proceeds of her book, the Daisy Chain, to the purposes
of the Mission. Already we have received from this lady
a sum little short of =£*2ooo. £6OO has been given by
Sir John Patteson for the same object.
The Mission is supported :
First: —By the income derived from the Endowment
Fund of <£*lo,ooo, of which £3500 has lately been
invested in the purchase of land in the immediate
neighbourhood of Kohi-marama ; £5OO has been lent to
the College at Christ Church, Canterbury; £lOOO is
invested in land near Auckland, and the remainder is
invested at present in English Securities.
Secondly :—By the Annual Contributions of Friends
of the Mission in England, who meet at Eton year by year
on St. Barnabas Day, to commend this work to God in
Prayer and Holy Communion. The large sum of £5OO
was paid regularly to the account of the Bishop, of New
Zealand until the year 1859, since which time there has
been an increase of £2OO in each year, making the whole
sum now contributed £7OO per annum.
It is with heartfelt thanks to the Giver of all good,
and then to our dear friends associated together in His
Name for this work, that we acknowledge the blessing of
their prayers and Christian charity.
Thirdly :—By Collections and Subscriptions towards
the support of the Mission in New Zealand and
Australasia.
Fourthly :—By money paid into the Mission Fund
on the private account of the Bishop of New Zealand
and the new Bishop of the islands.
We have hitherto been enabled in this way, though
not without difficulty, to meet the current expenses of
each year. But further subscriptions are earnestly
solicited to enable the Mission to provide for. the mainte-
nance of an increased number of missionaries and teachers.


The present working staff of the Mission consists of
Bishop Patteson, Mr Kerr, and Mr Dudley. The Rev
L. Pritt will accompany us (D. V.) to the islands, and
spend this winter among them in the hope of being
ultimately connected with the Mission, should he be found
qualified for a work of so peculiar a character. Mr Dudley
has for five years been engaged in this Mission, and has
given valuable assistance. He speaks several of the island
languages, and is thoroughly conversant with all the details
of our missionary life. Mr Kerr, who is an Officer in Her
Majesty’s Navy, had long entertained the idea of becoming
connected with missionary work, before he went to live in
the district assigned to the Rev. R. Y. Ashwell on the
Waikato river in New Zealand.
His acquaintance with the circumstances of the
Melanesian Mission induced him to offer himself more
than a year ago to the Bishop of New Zealand for the
purpose of joining the Mission to the islands. The
peculiar nature of this work renders his assistance especially
valuable.
To these may be added Wadrokal and Harper Malo,
two young men, natives of Nengone, one of the Loyalty
islands. The former has for many years been one of the
Bishop’s scholars; the latter has been living with us for
four years. The last winter they passed with us in the
Banks’ islands, and proved themselves competent teachers,
and earnest, hard-working men. They are the first of a
goodly band, as we trust, of teachers from many islands,
raised up by God’s providence to minister to the necessities
of the heathen.
It would be tedious to repeat the account already
printed in former years of our manner of life on shore, or
at sea, or among the islands. To any one who has hitherto
followed the history of the Mission it will be evident that
we are not to expect that the progress can be other than
gradual. A great change must pass upon a native of the
Melanesian islands as we see him, destitute of any kind of
clothing, with bow and arrows tipped with human bone,
waving his spear and club, or standing with painted face
and girdle of human teeth watching the cautious approach
of our boat, or it may be with wild gesticulations and
noisy cries beckoning us to the shore, or dashing through
the surf to meet the boat—a great change indeed must
pass upon such an one, before he can be brought by the
grace of God to sit “clothed and in his right mind” at the
feet of Christ.
Moreover there is always to be considered the


difficulty presented by the great multiplicity of languages.
We must in each island learn a new language before we
can teach the inhabitants the object of our coming among
them.
And we must be prepared to find some of the young
men who have been with us for two or three seasons and
have made some advance in reading and writing, and can
talk with some degree of intelligence about what they
ought to believe and do, swept away once more by the
torrent of heathenism in their own homes, too weak in
faith to withstand the influences of parents and brothers
and of a whole population seeking to draw them again to
the commission of their old vices. It needs an extraordi-
nary strength from God to enable the young convert to
remain stedfast under such temptations, and we must not
be altogether cast down, if we see many a fond hope
unfulfilled, and if we must go forth again to seek once
more for those, whom we trusted, God had already gathered
into His fold.
But it is a matter for great thankfulness that the
opportunity of preaching Christ’s Gospel to these poor
scattered sheep is presented to us already in several islands.
We thank God that we do see in not a few places indica-
tions of the coming harvest, and if we cannot see it
elsewhere, we believe that it will come, and so the work
must go on, because it is the work of God.
It is true that our return from the islands on
November 28,1860, with only 16 scholars, in the schooner
Zillah chartered for the voyage after the loss of the
Mission vessel, Avas a someAvhat mournful contrast to the
return of the Southern Cross in former years with parties
respectively of 63, 45, and 38 islanders. It is true that
we have been greatly tried by the death of one native
teacher from the island of Lifu, and the severe illness of
Mr Dudley, and our two friends already mentioned,
Wadrokal and Harper. But we may be sure, that God
is ordering all these things to the ultimate fulfilment of
His own Promise, that “ the abundance of the sea shall be
converted unto Him.” We know that even now “ the isles
are waiting for Him.”
So we commend this Mission to the prayers and the
alms of the Churches of Christ, and especially to the
Churches of Australasia, to which these islands seem to be
in a peculiar sense committed. May God’s Spirit
strengthen those whom He has already called to this
work, and send forth other labourers made fit by Him to


carry the message of salvation to the “Multitude of the
Isles.”
J. C. Patteson,
Missionary Bishop.
St. Andrew’s College,
Kohi-marama.
March 18, 1861.


LIST OF SCHOLARS
RECEIVED INTO THE MELANESIAN SCHOOL,
From 1849 to 1860.
Number of
Half Years.
[LOYALTY ISLANDS.
1. —Nengone :
George Siapo . .♦ 3
Uliete . . 1
Kateingo. . 2
Mark Kaiwhat . .2
Solomon Cho • • 1
Napai . . 1
Isaka . . . . 1
Wadrokal . • .5
W adarubu . 1
Barini . . 1
Ttopupu . . 1
Thamua . . I
Henry Nikeula . . 1
George Wathole . . 2
James Henry Kowine . 2
George Simeona. . 3
Caroline Wabesane . 3
Sarah Wachatrutru . 2
William N. Wapai . 2
Harper Malo . .4
Andrew Tui . . 1
Philip Ngazo . . 1
2. —Toka ;
John Patteson Kapua 3
Frank Amabuch . . 2
Mary Hnaroredune . 1
3. —Lifu:
John Thol.. . *3
George Nelson Apale . 1
Isaia Wapai . • 1
Daniela Waihema . 1
Hoetha . • 1
John Cho . • • 3
Margaret Cho . • 2
George S. Huono • 2
Wachini . . 1
William Martin Tehie. 3
Henry Hnahnema . 1
Mark Chekhom . • 2
Matthew Sidhane . I
Daniel Valu • - 1
;4. —Ufa :
Mango . • 1
s.—New Caledonia :
Dalap . • 1
Number of
Half Years.
K auamhat . 5
6. —New South Wales:
Charles Combo . . I
7. —Western Australia:
John Girba . . 1
NEW HEBRIDES.
8. —Aneiteum :
Tupua • . 1
9. —Futuna :
Saliua . . 1
Iri . 1
10. —Erromango :
Selok Nivi .2
Sapandulu . 2
Umao . . 2
Lowe . • 1
Üben . . 1
11. —Fate or Sandwich I.
Kaledong Karei . . 1
12. —Mai, or Three Hills:
Petere . . 1
Laure . . 1
Mbeo . . 2
Masuluai . 1
Matimboloaliu 1
Tivea . . 2
Sila . . 2
Moto . i 2
Pepeu . . 2
Porao . . I
13. —Tongoa :
Tongo . . 1
14. —Mallicolo:
Hakai . . 1
Nabong . . 1
15. —Spirito Santo :
Nata . • 1
SOLOMON ISLANDS.
16. —Bauro, or St. Cristoval:
Wm. Nihill Didimang 3
Benjamin Gariri . . 2


Number of
Half Years.
Rimania . . 1
Sumaro . .1
Keriaurua . 2
Hirilia . . 1
Naru . . 1
Tahi . . 1
Tehe . .1
Garia . . 1
Sonoma . . 1
Toheanimai . 1
Maura si . . 1
Maga . . ]
Maragubua . 1
Paranga . . 3
Bum . . 1
Taraniaro . 1
17. —Guadalcanar:
Toto • . 1
Waramai. . 1
W aihunu. . 1
Raumahuo . 1
Heheana. . 1
Manaha . . 1
Poriki . . 1
Ninipua . .1
Apui . . 1
Haikeremi . 1
Sasara . . 1
Kourai . . 1
Maneiru. . 1
Marahua ma . 1
Marahua mi , 1
Hataihia . . , 1
Hauleraru . 1
Iroa . . 1
Bekene . . 1
Sukai . . 1
Mamamura . 1
Moremore . 1
18. —Ulaua or Contrariete I,
Takeli . . 1
. Hasieta . . 1
Liliu . . 1
19. —Mara or Malanta :
Latewalia. . 3
Araana . . 1
Tororihu. . 1
Houa . . 1
Suruipuri. . 2
Toikao . . 2
Aitolm . . 1
Number of"
Half Years.
BANKS' ISLANDS.
20. —Vanua Lava Gt. Banks’ I
Sarawia . . 2
Palemana . 1
Pepewaka . 1
Tavuntetu . 1
M atuwutkboi . 1
Posopsop. . 1
Etsur . . 1
Molovrir. . 1
Pepeukbasa . 1
21. —Mota or Sugar Loaf I.
Wonpas . . 2
Utagilava . 3
Takosaliwowut, 1
Wenewene . 1
Supwesal. . 1
Asungtavarung 1
Pepeutapua . 1
Sogoivi . . 1
Baratu - . 1
Gopsorut. . 1
Poromalui . 1
22. —Yalua or Saddle I.
Ambuswurmbim 1
Metowolang . I
Warilav . . 1
Avngasum . 1
Hotaswul . 1
Mantansim . 1
T agalana. . 1
Rovemal. . I
Etkpalrao . 1
Pasvorang . 1
25. —Ureparapara or Bligh I,
Oldrin . , 1
26. —Ravenga :
Vilsermal . 2
27. —Mera Lava or Star I.
Wutlingaling 1
Somelel . , 1
Butsum . , 1
Wutmeremere 1
28. or Aurora I.
. Lidi , . 1
23.—Araa
24.—Roua
List of Scholars continued—


Year.
1849
Countries.
3
Scholars.
5
1850
3
4
1851
6
13
1852
8
27
1856
3
13
1857
9
34
1858
12
45
1859
15
38
18c0
10
•
-
18
Scholars.
1.
NengONE— Loyally Islands .
22
2.
Toka Ditto
3
3.
Lieu Ditto • •
14
4.
Uea I>i«o
1
1
5.
New Caledonia
I
6.
New South Wales
2
i
7.
Western Australia
i
8.
Aneiteum— New Hebrides
1
9.
Jb'ii TUNA Ditto
2
IO.Erumanga Ditto
0
1
11.
Fate or Sandwich I. Ditto,
i
12.
Mai on Three Hills I. Northern Hebrides.
10
i
13.
Tongoa Ditto . •
1
Q
14.
Malicolo Ditto
M
1
15.
Sfirito Santo Ditto
X
16.
Bauro or St. Christoval— Solomon Islands
18
22
**
17.
Gera or Guadalcanar
18.
Ulaua or Contrariete Island .
d
n
19.
Mara or Malania .
4
•j
n
20.
Vanua Lava— Banks’ Islands.
21.
Mota or Sugar Loaf I. Ditto ,
22.
Va-lua or Saddle I. Ditto
u
o
23.
Araa . •
•
J*
n
24.
Roua .
&
1
25. Urefarafara.
1
26.
Ravenga .
I
27.
Mera Lava or Star I.
4
28.
Maiwo or Aurora I.
1
154
ANALYSIS of ISLANDS :
Uninhabited (68, 69, 70.) • • * * f
Inhabited by White or Half-caste (3, 4. ) . • • J
Inhabited Islands on which we have not landed ( 57, 58, , 77,
78) . • • • * .•. 6
Islands on which we have landed and held some communication
with the people ..•••• 74
SUMMARY
OF SCHOLARS RECEIVED INTO MELANESIAN SCHOOL
from 1849 to 1860.
SUMMARY OF ISLANDS
AND NUMBER OF SCHOLARS FROM EACH.


LIST OF ISLANDS VISITED.
j. New Caledonia
2, Isle of Pines
3_ Norfolk Island
4. Sunday Island
LOYALTY ISLANDS.
5. Nengone
6. Toka
7. Lifu
8. Uea
NEW HEBRIDES.
9. Aneiteum
10. Tana
11. Futuna
12. Niua
13. Erumanga
14. Fatd Sandwich Island
NORTHERN NEW HEBRIDES.
15. Mau Hinchinbroke
]6. Sakelaba
17. Nguna Montague’
18. Mataso Two Hills
19. Makura
20. Mai Three Hills
21. Tasiko or A pee
22. Lupevi
23. Paama or Paum
24. Malicolo or Sesok
25. Ambrytn
26. Whitsuntide
27. Gpa Leper’s Island
28. Maiwo Aurora
29. Espirito Santo
Shepherd Isles.
30. Buninga
31. Tongariki
32. Ivalea
33. Iwose
34. Tongoa
35. Oanuta Cherry Island
36. Tikopia
Banks’ Islands.
37. Meralava Star Island
38. Merisi Betts’ Island
39. Gaua Santa Maria
40. Vanua Lava Great Banks’ L
41. Mota Sugar Loaf I.
42. Valua Saddle I.
43. Ravenga
44. Ureparapara BKgh I.
45. Roua
40. A raa
47. )
48. V Torres Islands
49. )
50. )
51. )
52. Vanikoro Peroase Island
53. Tubua
54. Taumako Duffs’ Island.
SANTA CRUZ Archipelago-
-55. Nimanga ) g waUow Is .
sb. Bakanmo )
57. leli i
58. Lomlom f
59. Beleni
60. Nukapu
61. Indeni Santa’Cruz
62. Tenakula Volcano Island
63. Analogo
64. Nupani
SOLOMON ISLANDS.
65. Oarii' Sta. Catalina
66. Oaraha Sta. Anna
67. Bauro St. Christoval
JJ M alaU p ai ? Three Sisters
TO! AS { uninhabited)
71. Ulaua Gontrarie'td Island
ll‘ \ Gulf Islands
73. Bio 1
74. Gera | Guadalcanar
Marau j
75. Mara Malanta
76. Sikaiana )
77. Fore | Stewart’s or
78. Matuwawe | Hogan’s Is.
79. Matuirata f
80. Mongava Rennell Island
81. Mongiki Bellona




£
s.
d. £ s. d.
I. Balance . . • •
110
7
34
11. Bills on England .. •
800
0
0
III. Donations . . •
151
13
0
IV. Rents, Interest of Money, &c. .
80
13
0 •
V. Private Account. .■
105
0
0
Balance * • •
72
13 104
•
£1320 7 St
£
s.
d £ s. 4
t Bills
4 i
1106
I
10
11. Donations. *
.
198
12
4
HI. Interest of Loatt to the College,
Christchurch .
. £80
0 0
1
Bent of 8 Acres .
* 8
0 0 83
0
0
IV. Private Account.
X *
200
0
0
V. Balance * *
i *
115
8
0
•
£ 1705 2 2
TREASURER IN ACCOUNT WITH NORTHERN MISSION.
RECEIPTS.
From \st July , 1859, to 30 ih June, 1860.
From is/ July , 1860, to 6th April , 1861.


£ s.
d. £ s. d.
I. Capital Account .
134 15
0
II. Repairs . .
4 *
147 17
3
III. Wages
* •
459 5
10
IV. Stores .
#
282 10
11
V. Melanesian School.
•
315 18
2
£1320 7 2
£
s.
d. £ s. d.
1. Balance .
, ,
72 13
104
11. Building Account.
£196 11
3
Farm Account *
283 0
0
481
11
3
lit. Wages . »
280
18
4
1V. Expenses of attempting
to get off
the Southern Cross
* *
179
2
5
V. Stores . »
' •
140
3
11
Vi. Charter Of Zillah
. 321 9
8
Outfit of Bo. .
k 101 3
8
422
13
4
VII. Welallesiaii School
‘
127 19
04
£1705 2 2
EXPENDITURE.
From \st July, 1859, to 3 Oth June, 18G0.
I'yom Isi July, 1860, io 6th April, 1861.
Gr. A. New Zealanft.
J, C. Pattesok, Missionary Bishop»
9
TREASURER IN ACCOUNT WITH NORTHERN MISSION.


