



CXN* a.9






REMINISCENCES.
There is, perhaps, no circumstance in life more useful to a
contemplative mind, than to have tasted the bitterness of
adversity and misfortune, from the lesson it affords to make us
feel for others, and to take pleasure in the welfare and happi-
ness of mankiifd. It further inculcates and imparts the senti-
ments of religion in its truest form, it arms the mind with
fortitude, it invites our compassionate exertions for the human
race, and establishes that best of all principles,—“ To do to
others what we wish to be done to ourselves,” and to make
self subordinate to every other consideration.
On the entrance of the nineteenth century, I was visited by
the keenest sorrow that could possibly befal man; and I,
therefore, most gladly offered my services to my brother, just
appointed to the Bourdelais frigate, as a volunteer to perform
the religious duties of the ship, there being no chaplain, and
to fight the battles of my king and country, in the anxious hope
to fall in their defence, and so to free myself from the agony of a
distressed and wretched mind. This celebrated ship was as
beautiful a model of naval architecture as ever was seen,
and was captured from the French in the year 1799, by the
u


Hevolutionaire, which ship had also been taken from the enemy,
and, most singular, both ships were built by the same man
at Bourdeaux. The Bourdelais is said, a short time before
she was taken, to have captured British prizes to the amount
of £400,000, and had been repeatedly chased by our frigates
cruizing' in the channel, and had, by her superior sailing,
escaped from them. This being told to the builder, he replied,
“ and such will always he the case, except she falls in with the
llevolutionaire in blowing weather, then she must take care of
herself.” The fates so decreed, that his prediction came to pass,
after one of the most extraordinary chases upon record, of
twelve hours duration, and running fifteen knots per hour;
and it has been related to me as coming from Captain Twisden,
who commanded the llevolutionaire, that his ship’s gunwale
was quite under water from the press of sail he carried, and
had the chase been continued half an hour longer he must
have given up the pursuit, there being four feet water in
the ship’s hold, when fortunately one of his shot carried away
part of the Bourdelais’ rigging, her crew were put in confusion,
the steadiness at the helm was lost, and by that alone the
important prize was captured. Her length on the gun deck was
138 feet, beam 31 feet, draught of water 16 feet 4 inches aft, and
13 feet 8 inches forward.* We sailed from Plymouth on the 7th
of April, with orders to proceed to Dublin to complete our com-
plement of men ; and in our passage to that place, through
unceasing thick and stormy weather, we struck on the dangerous
Arklow bank. The striking of the ship was the most awful and
momentous period 1 had hitherto experienced ; the immediate
hallooing of all hands on deck, “ to the pumps, plumb the well,
* Would it not be a wise measure of our government, on every
occasion where any superiority of nautical property is confirmed, not to
disregard the hints, although made by an enemy ? Nor is it too late, should
the above ships not be broken up, to cause exact draughts of them to be
made, for the study of those who deeply interest themselves in that important
branch of science, naval architecture.


cut away the masts, throw the guns overboard,” and the dismal
moans of some imploring the protection of heaven, with the
screams of women, .added to the bustling scene of all hands coming
on deck, many only in their shirts, are circumstances, to relate
which cannot admit of the slightest possible description, ex-
pecting every instant the ship to go to pieces, and terminate the
existence of every soul on board. As for myself, I also went on
deck, and offered my aid to any part of duty my brother might
allot to me. I cannot here speak of him without stating that to
his collected deportment, his dissipating confusion, and his
truly judicious and prompt decrees, and the ready execution of
them, must be attributed the preservation of His Majesty’s Ship,
and salvation of all on board. The master ascribed the occur-
rence to two circumstances: the one from the strong inset of
currents, the other a magnetic attraction from the land influenc-
ing the compass. Certain it is, that innumerable losses have
here taken place, and, from all the information I could collect,
proceeding from the same cause—the compass not properly
traversing. Whether the Arklow hills contain within their
bowels metals of an attractive power is a subject worthy of
natural consideration. It was now, for the first time, that I
experienced the horrors of a storm in the period of total
darkness, and learnt to feel another’s woe, in so awful a
situation. On the ship coming to an anchor in Dublin bay, an
invitation was immediately sent from Black Rock, the beautiful
and hospitable mansion of Mr. Lees (the father of the present
Sir Harcourt Lees) to my brother and self to repair to that
place during our stay in Ireland, which we accepted, and on
our arriving at that enchanting spot, we were received by a
generous attention and friendly politeness, proceeding from a
long-existing family friendship, in Mr. Lees’ having filled the
situation of private secretary, while my father did that of first
aide-de-camp, to Lord Townshend, while he held the vice-
regency of Ireland. On the service being completed, we were
ordered to return to Plymouth, and on arriving there went
b 2
3


immediately into do cl;, where we found, on examination, the
perilous situation in which we had been placed—that of fifty-
eight feet of the false keel being knocked off, besides other
damages—to a ship of her class, a sharp-built French corvette,
constructed purposely for fast sailing —I saw the lives of all on
board owed their preservation to the merciful interposition of
a bountiful Providence.
In our course on running past the Smalls Lighthouse, that is
placed on a rock mid channel between Ireland and Wales, it
brought to my recollection an interesting circumstance, that
had induced me, two years previously, to visit it for the purpose
of ascertaining the fact of the following narrative. It was usual
for that desolate habitation to have three attendants; but, from
it being summer, two were considered sufficient, and one of these
allowed to be absent on leave. During the period while two were
left, one of them died; the survivor, in the most distressed agony
of mind, was at a loss what to do, adding, that “ if I throw him into
the sea, it may be said that I murdered him, as it is known we
were not on the most friendly terms with each other.” He therefore
nailed some boards together as a coffin, and placed it in the
balcony that surrounded the part in which they resided, until a
vessel came with supplies, which was three weeks. The poor
fellow told his story with so much heartfelt sorrow, that I
deeply regretted I had no means to offer him, beyond the
sincere expression of my approbation and admiration of his
humanit} 7 and conduct.
This extraordinary building having been since destroyed,
some account of it may be interesting: it was erected on piles of
wood let into* the rock, and secured by boiling lead. On the
top of these piles was an octagon of twenty-two feet diameter,
seven feet high, divided into three apartments for the atten-
dants to live in, to keep the necessary stores, as well as for their
private stock and workshop, they being generally shoemakers.
Above this dwelling was the room for the lights, sixteen feet
diameter and eight feet high, surrounded by a balcony; the


extreme summit of it, seventy feet from the surface of the rock;
and the imagination cannot conceive a situation more horrible
as a residence for a fellow-creature; as, at the time I was in it,
from the influence of a fresh breeze, I could not help com-
paring it to being perched on the top of a fishing-rod.
The damage to the ship being repaired, it went out of dock
on the 30th of May, and was immediately dispatched, with the
Shannon frigate, to cruize in certain latitudes in the Atlantic,
for a given time, in quest of three large French ships, that were
staled to be sent for intercepting a homeward-bound Brazil
fleet. The news arrived while I was labouring under severe
illness. As I considered at the time my death was inevitable, I
preferred letting that fate take place among a consoling and com-
passionate class of men, rather than, left to the care of the mistress
of a lodging, to be hurried to my grave unnoticed and unknown.
I was therefore wrapt up in blankets and carried by men to a
boat and conveyed on board the Bourdelais, where I soon
recovered, and was ready to do my duty if required. In the
course of our cruize, just as the two ships went in chase of
vessels in sight, standing on different directions, a violent storm
came on, that separated us; and we saw no more of each other
until we met in port, although every effort was made to meet
with our absent friend, .and we ran along the picturesque Azorc
Islands. On passing that of Floridas, being to leeward of it, the
delightful perfume of its flowers, from which it takes its name,
induced me to request a boat, not only for setting my foot on
African soil, but for procuring a bouquet: as the boat approach-
ed the shore I observed we were eyed with jealousy —not hostility,
but cautiously. On landing, I begged to be conducted to the
Governor, judging that an interview, and the informing of him as
to the object of our cruize, would remove the impression the ap-
pearance of a ship of war might create. On passing a large convent
of friars, they all assembled in the balcony of its windows, to
whom I took off my hat, bowed, and walked bare-headed to
the extent of their cloistered walls; a respect that appeared


greatly to please these holy fathers, on which they all followed
me to the Governor’s. 1 lis Excellency received me with much
pomp and parade. He could speak a little English ; and on
learning the motive of the ship’s visit, he gave me a hearty
welcome, said that ho loved our country, and inquired after
King George, who I said was adored by his subjects, from its
being his unceasing endeavour to promote the prosperity of
his country and happiness of his people. On a repast being
prepared, consisting of fruits, vegetables, and new cheese, he
apologized that it should be on a day when the Portuguese are
precluded of meat. These, however, were accompanied with
a plentiful supply of wine and some excellent noiau, all of
which I partook and greatly enjoyed.
A book being brought (a custom usual there) for inserting
the names of those who visit the Island, a thought struck me, to
inscribe my name with some small tribute of good feeling for
the courtesy and kindness I had received, by encircling the ship’s
name and of that of her commander by a wreath of oak leaves and
acoms, surmounted by a shield with the admiralty symbolic
anchor; and under it I wrote the following:"—The Bour-
delais frigate, belonging to his Britannic Majesty, commanded
by Captain Thomas Manby, while cruizing in the Atlantic
Ocean, by order of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty,
in search of French marauders, touched at this Island; and
I take leave to express, with feelings of the warmest gratitude,
my thanks to the Governor and inhabitants of the Island of
Floridas for their great hospitality and kindness, which I will
never fail to express,” —putting my signature at the bottom.
This tribute being finished, it was read aloud, and received the
approbation of all who were present, especially the Governor,
who pledged me in a bumper of his delicious liqueur, and express-
ed his wannest regard for the English, and his execration of the
French. He sent his emissaries to procure whatever was imme-
diately to be obtained; and I returned to the ship with a large
bundle of its choicest flowers, and the boat loaded with two


pigs, haslets of oranges, and its most delicious onions. On
the period of our cruize having expired, after a run of twelve
thousand miles in eight weeks and two days, we returned into
port, where I found a letter detailing the death of my much-
beloved sister, Maria, at Lynn, and who had bequeathed to me
a small legacy, which would he paid on my arriving at that place.
I there learnt she had been buried, according to her dying
request, under the spreading branches of a beautiful horse-
chesnut-tree, at the south-west entrance-corner of the burial-
ground of St. Nicholas’ Chapel. My first duty was to visit
this spot, to contemplate the place where the remains of one
of the most beautiful and amiable of her sex were deposited,
and where the following tribute of my affection was wrote
and nailed upon the tree.
ADDRESS TO THE TREE.
No sculptured marble could so proudly rise,
To mark the spot where every virtue lies.
When wandering footsteps to the place shall turn.
Say, thou art charged to be “ Maria’s uni,”
To guard her ashes with devoted care. —
Whisper, ye leaves, the virtues buried there.
If truant boys the sacred spot annoy,
Murmur displeasure, and o’crgloom their joy :
Strew silent grief, ah ! show the mournful space ;
And thou, sweet memory, sanctify the place.
G. W. M.
The Bourdelais, during my absence, having been ordered
to the West Indies, I lost my situation; and, in order to restore
my health, went to Clifton. The delightful scenery of that
place greatly tended to remove the heavy gloom with which
my mind was overcast; and it was here 1 was first led to feel
the advantages and great improvements to be derived from good
female society, and there obtained the friendship of Mrs. Jeflfy,


a lady celebrated for her general literary attainments, and the
unostentatious display of great abilities, without the slightest
degree of pedantry. She would adapt her conversation to be
pleasing and intelligible to the most uncultivated; but to
those who sought to be informed her society was delightful,
from her unceasing anecdote, deep reading, and memory
scarcely to be paralleled. She was sister to the celebrated
John Wilks, of “ 45 and Liberty" renown, and was a plain
likeness of that exceedingly ugly man; but she was so enter-
taining, and studied so much to please, that her strange looks
disappeared, and it was impossible not to take much interest in
her presence, and covet her society. She had a peculiar talent
in the happy allusions to poetic quotations, and an extraordi-
nary neatness in double entendres, not to olfend the ears of
delicacy; but when taken in their literal sense, they were
encouraged by some of her Irish female friends who used much
to visit her; and it afforded great amusement to them, from
her wit being tempered with rich, though not indelicate
touches. Her home was at Bath; but each summer she visited
Clifton, where she had constant evening parties, at which I
was always expected to attend. The kindnesses I received
induced me to dedicate to her my Fugitive Sketches of Clifton,
a work which had a successful sale, and enabled as well as
encouraged me to pursue my intention of a greater undertaking;
and I applied my little capital for the purpose of collecting the
interesting History of a Picturesque Guidefrom Clifton ., through
the counties of Monmouth, Glamorgan, and Brecknock ; espe-
cially that part so long occupied by the Romans, termed the
Silures. Having no prospects in life before me, beyond my
own industry, I felt that it would improve me in drawing, a
circumstance encouraged by Mr. Edward Bird, then a drawing-
master at Bristol, with a large family, but whose splendid
talents at once struck me as pre-eminent. He was, like myself,
very poor. We took great delight in the society of each other:
the fare we partook of when I visited him never exceeded a


mutton-chop and a tankard of ale: when he came to me, my
offering was more humble. Yet we both enjoyed our repast; and
I was made most happy in the company of a man, whom I saw
nature had designed to be at the head of the fine arts, which
he certainly would, had his life been spared —but, alas ! he
died from intense application to his profession, to obtain a
comfortable support for his family. I shall always take credit
to myself for impresssing on his mind, and making him sensible
of the great powers gifted to him. During the period of the
holidays, when his attendance at some schools, at and in the
vicinity of Clifton, was not required, we set out on a pedestrian
route as contemplated, the kind intention on his part to practi-
cally instruct me in drawing. While at Chepstow we each sat
down to make sketches; he, to represent different features of
nature, of groups that were about; and myself, part of its
richly-tinted and foliated castle-walls. It is usual, when persons
are about such pursuits, to be surrounded by numerous chil-
dren : my efforts produced no amusement to them; but the
display of Bird’s happy talent caused a large concourse about
him; and just as he had represented a curious character then
passing by, there was a simultaneous shout and laugh from them.
I left my station to learn what had afforded such delight, when
they all, pointing to his sketch, shouted out “ that’s the old
crier—on which I addressed my friend, “ nothing can so fully
establish the high opinion I entertained from the first, of your
superior genius; for if the most uncultivated and critical
observations of childhood proclaim the magic power of your
pencil, I feel assured the more cultivated cannot deny you the
meed of praise and honour in store for you. My advice is, give
up teaching at schools, go to London, and prepare for the
exhibition at Somerset-House some historical subject, or where
nature is strongly characterised.”—lie took my advice: his
first productions established his fame, the Life of a Poacher,
and Historic Representations from Chevy Chase; and he died


a Royal Academician, was considered a national loss, and was
greatly lamented by every friend and encourager of the fine
arts: he also left a handsome property to his family.
After Bird and myself parted, I pursued my objects over
that most interesting and historic county, let nothing escape
my observation, and retnrned to Clifton, where I learnt the
art of aquatinting for the purpose of engraving myself the
subjects intended for the work. On completing it, I inscribed
it, from a sense of gratitude, to the Marchioness Townshend,
as it was by her noble consort I was taken by the hand, and
placed in a situation where I first obtained the instruction of
*
drawing in the Drawing-Room in the Tower.
On representing to my very intimate and facetious friend, Tom
Adkin, that its sale was not so fortunate as that of my previous
work, and lamenting that it would scarcely repay the incurred
expences, he dryly expressed his regret, and ascribed it, no
doubt, to the powerful operations of the press, in which he feared
that more than ordinary power had been employed by the printer,
“ who had squeezed out the merit it possessed when it left my
hand.” I felt the force of his satire; and I could not, as an ad-
mirer of wit, be displeased, as it was from a man whose happy
vein of humour had so often delighted me; and I recollected that
he never spared a friend in the exercise of it. The work, though
it did not benefit my pocket, or advance me as an author,
obtained for me the friendship of many, and the following
flattering testimonial from the celebrated and learned Bishop
Watson on his perusal of it: —
Sm,
Your taste for antiquity is, I perceive, strong and
genuine, and your knowledge of the subject sufficiently ex-
tensive to afford pleasure to yourself and information to your
readers. But your meditation, when locked within the walls
of my Cathedral, is the part of your work which I most admire.


and on which you ought to set the highest value, inasmuch as
a pious heart is preferable to a learned head. These qualities
are not incompatible: happy may the man esteem himself in
whom they are united.
I am, Sir,
Your faithful and most obliged Servant,
Calgratii Park,
Kendal, Feb. 12, 1803.
R. LLANDAFF.
In reference to Tom Adkin, whose celebrity was such that
his portrait has been engraved, and who was really an extra-
ordinary man, the following anecdotes may not be uninteresting,
especially as I have never heard of his history being before the
public. He was a native of Downham in Norfolk, a small
market town adjoining Denver, the place of my birth; and
he was an only child, and born to a good fortune, but
from the indulgence of a fond mother (his father dying soon
after the birth of this son of mirth) he became a spoiled child;
we went to the same school, and on his natal day a whole
holiday was for all the boys, and a plentiful repast of plum
cake to them; the church bells rang, and general joy was
diffused to the town of Markct-Downham: ho did not remain
long at school, for though a day scholar, the absence of a few
hours from his parent made her wretched, and she procured
a private tutor to live in the house; but as he stated that study
made him unwell, the tutor was consequently directed not to
press his attention to a book, but to be his companion, and
ready should he feel inclined to study; but his services were
not called in requisition.
I perfectly recollect his making a most earnest application
for the moon, and the ingenious recourses adopted to gratify
his possession of it, by the lowering of a large lighted lantern
down the chimney, as a substitute for this bright luminary of
night, and the joy he experienced on looking up and crying,
“ ah, moon !” I likewise remember his crying in the kitchen


“ to ride on the saddle.” His wailings being so loud and vehe-
ment brought his mother there to learn the cause of his sorrows,
and on his repeating his desire, and pointing to a saddle of
mutton then roasting at the lire, the tender-hearted parent
ordered the jack to be instantly stopped, the mutton taken from
the spit, and immersed in cold water that it should not scald her
darling. He was set across it, when, after a few movements, as
if riding, he dismounted, and it was replaced on the spit, to
be served up at dinner for Tommy and his kind mother to
partake of.
At a proper age he was entered a fellow-commoner at
Bene't College, Cambridge, where his extraordinary and un-
ceasing wit made his society coveted by all. About this time,
among his most intimate friends were the present Earl Grey, the
late Mr. Whitbread, and the present Earl of Durham’s father.
The two latter personages left him annuities, in consequence
of his having expended much of his property in their asso-
ciation. Previously to the death of the last, it was inti-
mated to Adkin, that, if he could get into orders, he would
confer upon him some church preferment: Tom, well knowing
the impossibility of his passing an examination, from his want
of reading, was still induced to try, on his understanding that
a Bishop (I think it was of Peterborough) made a point to
examine in the first chapter of John. It struck him that, if he
could get that by heart, his wishes might be realized: he, there-
fore, by the aid of his friend Ncstficld’s repeatedly reading to him
that chapter in the Greek Testament, became as he conceived
perfect, and became a candidate for orders. At the examination,
the Bishop required to know where he would wish to be ex-
amined; our candidate replied, “It is perfectly indifferent to
me, from my being so thoroughly acquainted with the Twelve
Apostles; but, as your Lordship has a preference to .the first of
John, we will take that, to spare your Lordship’s time.” It being
assented to, Tom commenced, and all went on well for a few
verses; but on proceeding, his having jumbled one verse with


another, looking attentively on his book all the time. The
Bishop said, “ It is not so in my book,” on which Adkin replied,
“ But it is so in mine, my Lordon this the Bishop desired to
see it, when, unfortunately, Tom had his book the upside down,
rvhich detected, as well as defeated, his object, by his being
what is called “ plucked.”
During my residence at Clifton, two incidents obtained for
me the thanks and approbation of many of its principal inhabi-
tants : the one, on finding that a lady, one of the beautiful
daughters of Mr. 11. Smith, a Banker of Bristol, from whom I had
received kindnesses, was upon the eve of marriage with a person
who assumed and wore the uniform of a captain of the navy,
but who, I was confidently assured, had been, when a mate,
dismissed from the service for most atrocious conduct. I felt
it a duty to communicate such information to her father; who,
in reply deplored his own infirmities and age as precluding his
personal interposition, and his having no friend whom he could
request to have an interview with the man in question, to ascer-
tain the truth of the imputation against him. I offered my
services, immediately went to him, and thus addressed him:—
“ Sin, It is rumoured that you formerly belonged to the
Greyhound sloop of war, and that while in the West Indies,
you were accessory to the death of a black man, under
very aggravated circumstances; and further, that you com-
mitted a forgery on Captain Jones, commander of the
ship to which you afterwards belonged, and fled to avoid
prosecution and punishment; and as you have engaged the
affections of the daughter of a friend, it becomes highly neces-
sary that you should remove these serious charges, before you
are allowed to see or be again admitted under the roof where
that lady resides.”
He blustered and threatened to call me out, and withdrew
as he stated for such purpose; but, no doubt, from a conscious-
ness of the truth of my exposition, I heard no more of him
beyond his having packed up his things and decamped in the


night, without settling the account at his lodgings, and other
numerous bills he had contracted.—The other was connected
with a person whose usual habits of intemperance caused him to
be much shunned. On one occasion he fell from his chair in the
assembly rooms : the simultaneous expression was —“ that fel-
low Lane is beastly drunk again”—without any one to offer him
assistance. I saw, from the distortions of his face, that he was
paralyzed, and that the hand of death was severely laid on him;
and, observing that he had not one pitying friend, I took him
in my arms, conveyed him to his lodgings, procured the best
medical advice, and remained until he breathed his last, which
was about twenty hours. I then sealed up all his papers as well
as his property, which was considerable, apprized his relations
in Ireland of his decease, and saw the last earthly duty per-
formed over his remains: on which the following testimonial*
was received from a professional friend :
Dear Sir,
I have received a letter from Mr. Saunders,
the husband of Mrs. Saunders, who says he is under the
highest obligation to you, who have proved that Fielding’s
character of Allworthy was not fictitious, &c. &c.
He and his wife will take administration to Mr. Lane’s
effects; but I cannot obtain it until I know his wife’s Christian
name —I believe you have a letter from her which will inform
me —I shall be much obliged to you to let me know her
name.
1 am, Dear Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
R. B. WARD.
Bristol, IOtA March, 1802.
* The original of this letter is happily preserved, and is in the hands
of my friend, Mr. Dawson Turner.


The revolutionary feeling of Fiance spreading so widely,
I could not resist expressing my abhorrence of its Author,
as a lesson to my countrymen, and denouncing him as our
implacable foe, which was published under the title of
AN
ENGLISHMAN’S REFLECTIONS
ON THE
AUTHOR
OF THE
PRESENT DISTURBANCES.
"Nor brib’d by hopes, nor by mean fears controll’d.”
As liberty is the source of happiness to all degrees of life,
and the only security to every man’s person and property,
we must consider it as one of the noblest gifts of God, and
inseparably connected with religion —its prosperity depends
on the prevalence of virtue, and the fear of a future judgment
in the hearts of its possessors ; if otherwise considered, irregu-
larity and confusion to that order and harmony of nature by
which the universe subsists, must be the consequence. With
gratitude we contemplate the enjoyment of this our inherent
right, handed down by a long succession of ages to the pro-
tection of a virtuous Prince, now 7 reigning in the hearts of
his people; sensible of our blessings, we are naturally led to
deplore the fate of the inconsiderate, who, deluded by the
harmonious vibrations of its name, have thrown themselves
into the arms of tyranny, and whose lives, liberties, and fortunes,
are commanded, or tom from them, by the mandates of arbi-
trary authority.


Under the impressions of sorrow and indignation, we turn
our eyes to France, a nation once opulent and happy under
the protection of a mild sovereign, but now reduced to poverty
and vassalage by the military despotism of an individual,
whose actions, past and present, are so remarkable, as never
before to have sullied the page of history, and so extraordinary,
that he will become the notice and scorn of posterity ; a
Foreigner,* established by usurpation —a ruler, disdainful of
all honour,f bound by no solemn contract, a hypocrite to all
religion, who aims at nothing else but personal grandeur and
dominion, and would desert the objects of degraded fame in
the trying moment of adversity.J Lamentable, indeed, is the
state of that nation, who have no other security for their
liberty, no other laws for their safety, than the will of a
Despot; their awful situation compels me to offer a few re-
marks, arising from the gratification I take in the welfare of
the civilized world, and cultivation of the gentler manners of
peace.
Can the millions who people the French nation reflect on
such a character, and tamely submit to be impoverished by
ambition and avaricious views ? Can they contentedly be
disloyal, or the panders to his vices, by countenancing a
rebel to their King, and the community at large. Is there
not one who would rescue his country’s honour, and bring a
monster to justice, in satisfaction for the injuries at present
endured, and which posterity will suffer for ? Is there not one
who has the ambition to be ranked the deliverer of his country,
to step forward and check the author of their oppressions, and
the just object of their resentment ?
Let them remember, they have still a Monarch, a legal
inheritor of their throne, who, when they have wiped away the
stigma, by being accessary to usurpation, and are by contrition
deserving of care; he will then become the father of his people;
* A Corsican.
f His treachery during peace. f Flight from Egypt.


restore them Liberty, a substance which they now know only
in its most outward form, and bring to them peace, happiness,
and prosperity —the offspring of such government.
It is well known, the Tyrant, who governs by the sword,
has no other friends but men of the sword. Will they sanctify
his actions ? Will they allow a lasting reproach to be brought
upon an honourable profession ? Will they consent to be the
instruments of a despot, or the profligate tools of infuriate
caprice, the wanton sacrifices to an imposing spirit, and per-
secuting temper ?
Conscious how falsely he has dealt with those who elevated
him to his present situation, and fearing the vengeance he
knows he so well deserves, he attempts to divert their minds
from actions at home; and to get rid of their importunities, he
amuses them by an intention of invading the united kingdom,
the performance of which to render them the victims of his
perfidy , and of their own temerity.
Recollecting, however, the innumerable achieves of our
Navy, and that the bravest troops France ever produced,*
headed by himself yielded to inferior numbers of our Army;
and apprehensive also of their promptitude to undertake the
expedition, he stimulates their passions by the offers of plunder,
and of delivering up the country to their licentiousness and
rage.f After such avowals, what hopes can they entertain of
success? what hopes can they entertain of safety from the
people’s vengeance ?
Bid them put their insulting threat into execution,
to add another proud day| to the fame of England; let them
know we burn with impatience and resentment, to meet and
punish the vaunting foe; let them know this is the land of
liberty, and by that unspeakable blessing, so truly the darling
* Invincible Legion.
f England to be given up to pillage, and every one to be put to death,
who has defended his country!
J Cressy, &c.


property of our nation, we have a kindred spirit to maintain,
and animation to revenge an insult offered to a King whom we
adore, and who requites us, by centering his glory on the
happiness of his subjects.
I cannot refrain from reviewing the various actions practised
by their usurper, and the modes employed by him to arrive at
the station he now holds; to the least thinking mind, a charac-
ter every way so notorious,* treacherous, and cruel,t in the long
catalogue of iniquity attributed to numbers, there are none who
can be so deservedly execrated, or found to have lived more to
the real affliction and disturbance of mankind, than himself,
* Toussaint, by terms of capitulation became a prisoner; the treaty was
violated the moment he was in ms power, and, immured within the walls of
a prison, found a release from his sufferings by poison.
-(- St. Domingo.—Fancy was never exercised to give a greater variety of
forms to cruelty than employed on the unfortunate objects of that country.
Some were tied back to back, and thrown into the ocean ; others thickly
stowed in vessels and (sent to sea) there to find a watery grave—the ship
being scuttled.
To enumerate the various and unparalleled sufferings exercised on
the unoffending subjugated countries, would claim volumes to detail :
I must, therefore, in conformity to my paper, content myself with a few
truths from Sir R. Wilson’s History of the Egyptian Expedition. Did
he not express strong displeasure when the soldiers spared the lives of their
prisoners? and had he not (three days afterwards) these unfortunate victims
of captivity (amounting to some thousands) marched to an eminence, and
there deliberately destroyed by vollies of grape shot and musketry ? the
execution of which he beheld by such strong marks of joy, that his feelings
could not conceal them. When the hospitals were filled with his OWN
soldiers, did he not send for a physician and communicate an intention of
roisoNiNG them, which the gentleman refused to obey, and expressed his
horror and detestation at the proposal? At length he prevailed on a
“ caitiff wretch,” who distributed a large potion of opium under the guise of
grateful food, and thus terminated the lives of 580, who had purchased his
greatness at the price of their blood : this last proof has, by endeavouring to
be refuted, established the truth of 20,000 more victims, and made him, if
possible, more hateful in the eyes of the world.


embruetl in the blood of thousands, and decorated with the
plunder from the miserable victims of his avarice, he glitters in
the rays of robbery. What epithet can be too strong to stig-
matize a man who has violated every act that degrades human
nature? His ambition disquiets the nation; his extravagance
impoverishes it; his cruelties stain its character; and his per-
fidy, if not restrained, will ruin it: his inordinate appetite
for sway, without the smallest regard for justice, and the natural
depravity of his heart, has occasioned the multitudes, of whom
he assumes the head, to be looked on as the worst order of
society, and a confederacy unhinging the nerves and sinews of
every government and its happiness.
I wish not to trouble myself with the community at large,
because, unhappily for themselves, it is by him they have ac-
quired the stigma of guilt; every victory gained by them is
against themselves, and forges new links to the chain of their
slavery: it is him alone I wish to hold up to the view of man-
kind, as the greatest test who has been permitted to continue
in existence; defending one vice by the commission of another,
breaking down all boundaries of order, and overwhelming the
people in misfortunes, oppression, and criminality. From the
muedee of a King, he has usurped the authority, and by con-
tinuing in intrigues, is seated on a begicide theone, from
whence all honest power, glory, riches, and becoming dignity
arc banished; and, in their stead, tyeanny, with the utmost
rigour, brandishes its despotic arm.
The character of a tyrant, having been detailed in so minute
a manner, and the application being so strong, I shall avail my-
self of the labour of another,* as better calculated to describe
than any composition that I could produce.
“ All tyrants have been first captains and generals for the
“ people, under pretences of vindicating or defending their
“ liberties; to subvert the present government they pretend
* Lord Clarendon, on his paper entitled ‘ Killing a Tyrant no Murder'
c 2


“ Mderty for the people. When the government is down,
“ they then invade that liberty themselves.
“ Tyrants accomplish their ends more by fraud than force,
“ and with cunning plausible pretences, impose on men’s un-
“ derstanding; but afterwards master those who had so little
“ wit as to rely upon their faith and integrity.
“ They abase all excellent persons, and rid out of the way
“ all noble minds; or at least have few or none who have either
“ honour, conscience, wit, interest, or courage to oppose their
“ designs.
“ They dare suffer no assemblies, but professed gamblers or
“ their equals, from an apprehension of plots against them.
“ They have their spies* and delators, who, under the mask
“ of friendship, may get trust, and make discoveries, circulate
“ false reports, and insinuate themselves for the only purpose of
“ the future destruction of the state.
“ They make war to divert and busy the people, in order
“ that whilst engaged in projects, they may render the seat less
“ uneasy.
“ All things set aside for religious uses, are exposed to sale,
“ that, whilst those things last, they may exact the less of the
“ people.f
“ Above all, pretend a lore to God and Religion. This
“ expedient he has resorted to in an earnest manner; but not
“ longer than was suitable to his interest; as frequently chang-
“ ing his opinion, as situations required, experimentally finding,
“ that in [show of] godliness there is great gain, and that, by
“ a seeming observance well managed, Kingdoms might be
“ obtained as well as Heaven. But what foundation have we
“ for reliance on those professions ? when it is well known,
“ that in the early part of his career, all religious establishments
♦ Sebastian i, and dismembering of Egypt.
f Let the ancient order of religious houses explain this, and account
why he will not immediately impose further contributions —a new name
given for robbery.


“ were by bim abolished, and the teachers driven for an asylum
“ to other states, for that security his apostacy denied them.”
Such was Cromwell in England !
Such is Buonaparte in France !
Par «//nobile fratrum ! ! !
By the means already described, ho has, in the strictest
sense, acquired power, and become an enemy to justice, and
the liberty of mankind; under such circumstances, his retention
of authority is not only to the misery, but infamy of the nation,
nor can we be surprised at his extreme caution, when it is
considered, that, as a usurper, it is only by force he retains
the government, and consequently at war with every man.
But though at present France and others are in such
ignominious bondage, it is ardently to be wished those exe-
crable cords may soon be loosened, and that courage may
exert itself to break them ; for never was a government
managed with justice, when procured by infamy.
As a magnanimous man, who has so frequently asserted
his willingness to die for the good and glory of his vassals,
nor hesitating to risk the greatest dangers for its welfare, it
would impart great comfort to his dying moments , to consider
what advantage must arise to the world by his leaving it, and
preventing future occasions of making more women without a
protector, and children without a parent; and other laws exist
than the government of the sword.
His conscientious discharge of the arduous duties according
to his principles and hetiejicence of heart, he so proudly boasts
of, can never fear death from the terrors of a misspent life.
He will then be beyond the reach of malice, nor suffer the
torments arising from faction or displeasure more to perplex
his mind, or give disquiet to his hours.
But should Providence, for reasons unknown to us, still
prolong the life of this scourge, (to make his downfal more
remarkable and impressive on present and future ages) he will,
when he perceives an unfavourable aspect in his affairs, again


try his success by delusion, or attempt to lull this nation to
forbearance by offers of peace; the former for his own safety,
the latter to recover his lost advantages, and making a more
sudden attack on the nation’s prosperity ; does he suppose the
guardians of our nation’s honour will relax from their ardour,
by any artifice he can adopt ? No ! they are too much alive
to the welfare of the people, and disdain to listen to his delusive
overtures: and in return for which, and to accomplish the
views of our patriot government, I am confident no English-
man will refuse to make the greatest sacrifices, but manfully
come forward with personal service, and cheerfully bear every
burthen for the defence of his King, Laws, Country’s good,
and while a tyrant exists.
For the world in general, and the happiness of France, the
downfal of a tyrant is devoutedly to be wished, producing the
gratifying return of order —the restoration of religion the
exercise of moral duties—real liberty—and the various bless-
ings so valuable in life.
With an earnest hope that these truths may perchance meet
the eyes of the Tyrant, I have been induced to offer my real
signature, preferring to be recorded in the list of his hatreds,
than enrolled in the catalogue of having been introduced to the
court of the Usurper —and enemy to my country.
Clifton Hotwells,
June 4, 1806.
G. W. MANBY.
N. B. To be translated into French, for the information of that Nation.
To this public reprobation I shall ever ascribe the pre-
servation of my life, as well as my present position and
successful career in those pursuits which have unceasingly
employed my attention for upwards of thirty-five years. A


copy of the hook was forwarded to the head of the Government,
accompanied witli expressions of my readiness to undertake the
effort to rid my country of its bitterest and most revengeful
enemy; but my offer was not countenanced. I also sent a copy
to a friend under whom I had formerly served, Colonel Charles
Yorke, then filling the station of Secretary at War, making
the same proposal, which he discouraged, as impossible for a
British statesman to countenance; but expressed his friendship
towards me.
The sale of this little work brought me a few shillings; and
as poverty stared me in the face, and every hope had lied,
I disposed of my last piece of plate to enable me to go to town
and procure, if possible, an audience of Mr. Yorke. On inquiring
at his residence for the favour of an interview, the porter, pro-
bably observing the sorrows of my heart so strongly marked in
my face, and my attire calculated to excite a suspicion that my
application to see his master was from motives of necessity,
sternly replied, “ he is not at home,” and was about closing the
door, which I prevented by my foot, saying, “ You may make me
a cripple, but you shall not defeat the object of my inquiry, as
I come on a special service, to make a personal and an im-
mediate communication to your master.” lie still refused the
information required, and became violent: I as determinedly
represented the importance of my mission, and refused to retire
until I could learn where he was to be met with ; when, just as
additional force was collecting to turn me out, a kind provi-
dence interposed by the presence of Mr. Yorke, who instantly
took me by the hand, informed me that he had given directions
to his servants not to let him be disturbed. At once I told him
that I came to solicit some military appointment, and to offer
my services on any enterprize, however daring the undertaking;
preferring an honourable death to an existence scarcely sup-
portable from domestic affliction, and being almost reduced to
destitution, from the loss of my patrimony in Norfolk, by rapa-
cious lawyers. He instantly replied, “ Manby, you arc deserving


of a better fate; your loyalty and patriotism expressed in the
little work you sent me on i the Author of the Present Dis-
reflect high honour on your head and heart, and
bring to my remembrance your firm and dignified deportment,
when I requested you to wail upon a brother officer for some
satisfactory explanation of language that was impossible to be
passed over: it also reminds me of your spirited conduct,
when the disaffected lawless rabble accompanied us on our
march, using the most inflammatory and revolutionary lan-
guage, to produce insubordination amongst our men; and your
manly exertions to suppress the mutiny in our regiment, when
encamped at Warley; but especially, my admiration of your
intrepidity in saving the life of a drunken soldier, who would
inevitably have been burnt to death, had you not gone through
the flames and rescued him. I have now several Barrack-
Master situations to fill up; of which, if approved by you,
I will give you one, which perhaps would make the appointment
pleasant, that of Great Yarmouth, in your native county.”
1 most and gratefully accepted it; and in a few days
was Gazetted, with the rank I had held under that generous
and noble-hearted man, that of Captain-Lieutenant.
In explanation of his first observation, it may be proper to
state, that in early 7 life 1 set my face against duelling, consider-
ing there were only a few cases that could possibly justify such
a recourse. I also came to the following conclusion, that a man
might be compelled to seek such redress from some flagrant
act of impropriety made on a female relation ; but if he
had been twice out, I strongly suspected he was quarrelsome,
and should be cautiously viewed; and if it was ascertained that
he had been three times engaged on what is called “ affairs of
honour,” I looked upon him as a dangerous person, and scru-
pulously" avoided his society". 1 likewise made a resolution,
considering it a moral duty for every" man to act in the capacity
of a mediator, in preference to that of a second, provided he
could do so without compromising the honour of his friend;


and as the dispute proceeded from the influence of wine, I felt
that resolve to be in point. Calling upon the officer, there-
fore, on the following morning, to afford time for reflection,
without informing him that I was the bearer of a hostile mes-
sage from Colonel Yorke, I addressed him thus: —“The
language you indulged in last night was most offensive to all
present, and especially to myself. As a friend, I strongly wish
to impress on your mind that there is no circumstance in life
more honourable to man, and none so strongly marks a great
mind, as acknowledging an offence when committed; and
mean must be that mind which will not readily accept such
acknowledgment: remember, we are a band of brothers, and
unanimity, if once broken, destroys all the comforts of society,
and unkind feelings are generated.” My admonition had the
desired effect —he felt the force of my appeal —he placed his
situation in my hands—and I had the unspeakable delight to
walk arm in arm with him to receive the hand of all his
brother officers.
On receiving my appointment, I applied to my former
agent, who readily made an advance, which enabled me to
procure a proper outfit. I hastened to enter upon my duties at
Yarmouth, on the 14th of August, 1803, with a determination
to be faithful to the trust reposed in me; to study the comfort
of the troops that might occupy my barracks; to give a devoted
attention to promote the prosperity of the town, and the welfare
of its inhabitants; and to omit no opportunity to advance its
interests and contribute to exalt its reputation.
There being no residence for a Barrack-Master, I took
lodgings in an obscure row, where Mrs. Sleorgin, the widow of
an officer of the Navy, also resided. I soon observed that she
took a lively interest in my behalf; and as there was then in
the town a celebrated fortune-teller, Mrs. Williams, she felt
great anxiety to obtain my history, and urged me to allow that
renowned sybyl to tell it, to which at length I consented; but
as she never would consent to an interview with a man for the


purpose of telling his fortune, I must myself write down the clay
of the month, and the year, and hour of my birth. I therefore
gave the actual statement, 28th November, 1765, at six o’clock
in the evening of that day: after the sorceress had examined
this statement for some time, and referred to authorities, as she
called them, she addressed the lady in the following manner:
“ The person whose past, present, and future fate you take so
deep an interest in, has suffered mental affliction almost un-
paralleled ; and I greatly fear that she, who vowed at the altar
‘ to love and cherish him, ’ has not only been the cause of it,
but instigated an attempt at his assassination.—He will under-
take pursuits that will obtain for him the highest credit, and
load him with honours; —he will live to a good old age, and
die the happiest of men.” It is here proper to remark, that
the lady had never before heard of my domestic sorrows, or
the distressing cause of them; and that it was previously to
my efforts for the preservation of human life.
The former parts of this extraordinary necromancer’s tale is
precluded being given in detail, from a promise extorted from
me, when I was considered to be dying, to ascribe it to ac-
cident. It is, however, only justice to myself to say, that the
real fact was, that I was basely shot by an officer of high rank
in the East-India Company’s Service, w r ho seduced and carried
off my wife; and that I have left in the care of Mr. Dawson
Turner, of Yarmouth, a full and faithful account of the cir-
cumstances, for him to lay before the public after my decease,
should he think proper. I have also left, and which are
in his present care, a few of the slugs that w'ere deeply
imbedded in and taken out of my head, where they had
been lodged for sixteen months, after one of the most painful
operations that perhaps ever mortal underwent; an operation
made necessary by the pieces of hat being under them, as the
only chance to preserve my senses, and to rid me of unceasing
distracting head-ache. On my death, I have further directed,
that my head shall be taken off, and, with the slugs, delivered


to Sir Astley Cooper, Bart., trusting that some public benefit
may result, by showing what injury the head is able to undergo.
The person who performed the operation assured me that he
distinctly saw my brain ; and at that time I was strongly
advised to be trepanned, as the only mode to preserve my life;
but as life was far from desirable then, I left myself in the
hands of Providence, and am still alive, although forty-one
years have now elapsed since its occurrence.
The cause of my selecting that truly great man to be the
keeper of my head during his. life, and afterwards causing it to
be deposited in the first anatomical institution in the kingdom,
is from the following circumstance:—On my consulting him
some few years since on an injury to my knee, I observed he
looked at me for some time with great attention; and, from my
name not being announced, he said “ Surely I must have seen
you before.” On my reminding him that it was at his brother’s,
in Yarmouth, on learning my name he honoured me with his
approbation; and, on taking my leave and offering him his
usual fee, he instantly replied, “ Return it to your pocket; and
know, from your having rendered so much service to mankind,
it is the bounden duty of mankind to render the same to you.
Consult me whenever you please; and it will always afford me
great delight to give you my best advice.” —My reply was
brief—“ As it is my intention to leave my head for a public
good, and as I shall lay as quiet in my grave without it, my
last will shall establish the bequest to you.”
As the next proof of the veracity of this extraordinary for-
tune-teller, which has come to pass since her prediction—
I have received the thanks and honorary distinction of four
.Foreign Sovereigns, for having saved the lives of their subjects;
and eight medals from British and Scotch Societies, for the
services rendered by me to humanity. And I sincerely deplore
that I cannot here record a tribute from a Sovereign of my own
country, although my application has been unceasing; and it
is a known fact, that more than seven hundred British subjects


have been saved by my inventions, many by my own hands,
and some at great hazard to the loss of my own life.
My brother’s success in the West Indies enabled him to
send me an order on his agent for £150; by which means
I became the master of a small house on the Denes, near the
beach, commanding a beautiful view of the ships of war in the
Roads. This edifice I fitted up with so much corresponding
neatness and taste, that all visitors took pleasure in its inspec-
tion ; and being near the Barracks, no regiment received
a route to march in, but a breakfast and hearty welcome was
ready for the officers: this placed me on terms of friendship,
and made the often unpleasant duties of my station to pass off
agreeably, especially on finding that I was also the private
soldier’s friend; and never would sanction any charge to be
made against a man for an unavoidable occurrence, but only
when proceeding from wanton waste or culpable negligence.
For three summers I set on foot public promenades and
balls, and acted as Arbiter elegantiarum. My endeavours to
contribute to their amusement, and the firm and impartial line of
conduct I pursued, not only obtained for me their approbation,
but the subscribers honoured me with their thanks, and voted
me an elegant and costly sword, which bears the following
inscription:—“ Presented to Captain G. W. Manby, by the
Subscribers to the Rooms at Yarmouth, in the summer of 1806,
as a testimony of their respect.”
At this period, Yarmouth was one of the most interesting
and agreeable places possible, especially to myself, from the
hopitality, kindness, and generosity of its inhabitants.—lt
also afforded to visitors a series of amusement scarcely
paralleled, from an unceasing display of the true character-
istic eccentricity of the British sailor, of the extraordinary
modes resorted to by him to spend his prize-money; an
eccentricity that made him not only different, but rendered
him so peculiarly superior to that rank of men of every other
country. The flag of Rear-Admiral Macnamara Russell’s


ship was flying at the time in the Hoads, with a squadron to
meet six sail of the line belonging to the French, lying in the
Texel, should they dare to come out. I became particularly
intimate with that most interesting and gallant man, and used
to be one of the chosen few, who, when his ships were at
anchor here on a Monday, it being a blank post day, were
allowed to take a cruize with him into the country to partake
of eggs and bacon ; at which time he would order a squadron
of one-horse chaises, according to the number invited, and
nothing could exceed the day for mirth and hilarity. I won
his especial friendship, from having observed to him that
no communication could possibly pass between the ships
and shore, in violent easterly gales, and that great inter-
ruption must thence occur to the service. I therefore con-
certed with an ingenious Lieutenant on board his- ship, and
proposed, that if he would, on similar occurrences, send
a launch, with directions for it to be anchored at the back
of the surf, off the Jetty, and the person on board would
send up a kite, with a down hauling line, about fifty or
sixty yards from the kite, with a piece of lath-wood at the
end to float on the sea, I would daily attend at the post
and at the port-admiral’s office, to receive letters, dis-
patches, or papers, and would punctually send them off to
him. Arrangements for the design and co-operating signals
being agreed upon, I duly performed the service, by securely
enclosing all in a large bladder, and was honoured with his
regards.
There were two other officers belonging to this squadron,
whose friendship I had the pleasure of forming; the one well
known as the Lively Captain Burlton, a name he obtained
from the following anecdote ; —On his going into action in
a frigate of that name, after the enemy had been popping at
him for some time, his laconic order was most coolly expressed
in these few words —“ not a gun, my lads, must be fired until
we get close along side, and then I shall only allow you
five minutes to unrig her.” The action commenced, and within


that time the enem} r had not a mast standing. He was a
man beloved by his crew; and the duty of his ship was
carried on in a manner I never saw the like, and scarcely to be
equalled. It was impossible to be more perfect in regard to
neatness and arrangement; and he never inflicted corporal
punishment, but his only method of punishing was by pri-
vation of enjoyment to the amusements he prepared for
his men. He kept an excellent band on board for his
friends, and the deserving of his crew and their lasses to
dance; also an excellent showman, to exhibit punch and
fantoccini. He gave extensive leave to his men to go on shore,
yet he never lost a man, except those who were not worth
keeping. His attachment to me proceeded from the following
cause : —On the ship’s return to port for victualling, watering,
or supply of stores, he used, if it was likely the ship would be
detained for a few days, to set off with a fair friend to a place
in the country, a few miles from Yarmouth, for the enjoyment
of shooting, &c. It happened on a Sunday, a beautiful sum-
mer’s evening, on sweeping the horizon of the ocean through
an excellent telescope given me by my brother, I had the good
fortune to discover the royal-masts of a ship just peeping
above the convexity of the ocean and making signals; and
having been intrusted with the key of the general signals, for
knowing what was going on, I referred to the book as soon
as I could distinctly make out the number denotive of each
flag, 'and it expressed that “ six sail of the line were at sea.”
The number so exactly according with the number of ships in
the Texel, 1 naturally drew my conclusion that they were the
ships destined to be brought in by my gallant friends. I in-
stantly made the following brief communication to Captain
Burlton:—
Dear George,
I have just made out the signals of a ship at a great
distance, stating that six sail of the line are at sea. Paddy
Russell will no doubt be off the moment he receives the intel


ligence: for God’s sake return instantly by the carriage I have
sent for you; leave your wine, nay, your lovely widow, rather
than let your ship go to sea without you —a circumstance that
would break your heart, and mollify your sincere friend,
G. W. MANBY.
Cottage on the Denes, Six o' Clock.
I hastened with this, without communicating it to any one,
procured a chaise with four of the best horses that could be got,
and told the drivers to use all possible speed, assuring them
they should be well paid. The ship on firing her guns first
gave the alarm; the town was in a bustle; guns firing from
the flag ship, accompanied by the sailing signal. Every one
anxious, and none more anxious than myself, I proceeded to
the Jetty, and heard persons lamenting the absence of Burlton:
at length I had the joy to see the chaise arrive and my friend
step out; and I accompanied him to his boat, which I had the
delight to see along side of the Resolution, before her topsails
were sheeted home. In a few days the fleet returned, on
finding they were Russians from the Baltic, with which
nation we were then in amity.
Another distinguished officer belonging to that fleet,
I cannot pass over in silence, and whom I had the happiness
to meet at that time—Sir Sidney Smith, the Hero of Acre,
whose friendship was formed from viewing me, to use his
own words, “ as one calculated by nature cut out to have
been a companion in his exploits; and, had my professional
duties allowed, he should have selected me on particular
services.”
It was at the time just referred to, that my brother’s ship also
rendezvoused in these Roads. He commanded the Africaine,
belonging to a squadron of observation off Helvoet Sluice;
and it is only justice to say of him, that no man had his
ship in higher order. I shall never forget the smartness of the
ship’s company on coming into these Roads with dispatches,


with every sail set, even to sky-scrapers and moon-rakers,
and the almost incredibly few minutes in which the ship
was brought to an anchor, every sail taken in, the yards
squared, and the dispatches landed.
There is one circumstance in the history of my brother’s
life which I consider necessary to place upon record, inas-
much as it is in some way connected with myself, and unfor-
tunately caused the name of Manby to be visited with royal
displeasure, and I have strong reasons to apprehend it has
unfairly as well as unjustly been injurious to me. I must
preface the circumstance by stating, that from his generally
admitled intelligence, resulting from a good education,
polished manners, and personal appearance, as well as from
the anecdotes he had collected at sea, especially while cir-
cumnavigating the globe under Captain Vancouver, he was
invited by the Marchioness Townshend to Rainham, to meet
Her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales ; and it was
this introduction which so unhappily brought his name so
prominently before the country, on the subject which
was improperly termed “ The Delicate Investigation." —l
am denied stating many particulars, from their having been
confided to me in strict confidence, in reference to this affair,
for confirming the injustice, the persecution, and the dis-
creditable acts and arts resorted to, to effect an object
scarcely paralleled by those that so much disgraced the reign
of Henry the Eighth. There is one act, however, on this
subject, in which secrecy has not been imposed on me, and
which I shall relate in the words delivered to me by my
brother. —That while he was staying at the Spring-Garden
Coffee-House, where we usually lived together when in
town, an anonymous letter was addressed to him, containing
the following overture —“ That, as he was not a man in afflu-
ence, a carte-hlanche was inclosed for him to name a sum not
exceedingT4o,ooo, if he would give or furnish such information
as would convict the Princess of Walesthat, from his not


being within at the time, the person who brought it left word
that he would call on ihe following day, at twelve o’clock,
for a reply. On my brother making this communication to
me, I naturally asked him what steps he had taken respecting
it; and if he could ascertain who was the person who brought
the letter. His answer to the questions were, that from the
indignation of his feelings on so base and insulting a proposal,
he had hastily burnt it, and determined to take no further
notice of it; but it was ascertained from the persons belonging
to the coffee-house, who personally knew Colonel M‘Mahon,
that he was the man who brought it: in fact, the bar-maid
subsequently assured me, that it was he who came to inquire
of her if Captain Manby had left an answer to the letter he
had brought the previous day. 1 shall never forget the ex-
citement of my feelings on my brother making this commu-
nication to me, and my reprobation of so unthinking, nay,
foolish a measure; stating, “ you ought to have seized the
disreputable pander by the collar, and never let him out of
your grasp, until he had given up the name of the person who
had dared to make him the bearer of so dishonourable and
ignoble a proposal, and exposed him to infamy.”
Never shall T erase from my recollection the arrival of the
coach, bringing the news of the glorious victory off Trafalgar,
and the intense jo)' it diffused, until learning it was attended
with the death of Nelson, when the delight instantly dis-
appeared, and was succeeded by a melancholy gloom spread
over the countenance of all; and all expressed the most heart-
felt sorrow that the victory was so dearly bought. To me, it
brought the following sorrowful reflection : —it was Nelson
I had fixed upon as my model and desire to imitate, in the hope
of obtaining fame. We had both received our birth, not only
in the same county, but the same district of that county, West
Norfolk. Although my idol was now no more, but as his
illustrious name would live to the end of lime, I still felt the
stimulating and encouraging desire to persevere, by endeavour-
D


iiig to register mine to future remembrance, by efforts to pre-
serve the lives of that class of men whom he had so gloriously
led, and whose prowess had saved the country.
The county in general most deeply felt the great national
loss the country had sustained, and determined to record this
last achievement of its hero by a public testimony of a ball and
supper, that took place on the 17th of December, 1806, at
the Assembly-Rooms at Norwich, which were splendidly deco-
rated with suitable and most elegant allegorical designs; and
every one wore some symbolic tribute to departed greatness
and to naval lame. My humble contribution was the offer of
a song, which 1 wrote for the occasion; and which, after the
memory of the immortal Norfolk Hero was drunk in profound
and solemn silence, I sung, to the air of “ The Sun sets by
Night:'
The sun-beaming glory was darting its ray,
Its splendour was dimm’d by the fate of that day;
’Twas Nklson that fill’d the horizon with woe,
The pride of our country, the dread of its foe !
Remember those dangers he braved for our isle,
Remember “ those anus which were bless’d” at the Nile,
Remember those wreaths the proud Dane forced to give.
But his name with Trafalgar for ever shall live.
The genius of Britain, bewildered by grief,
At the fale of so noble, so gallant a chief,
Was frantic, till told, on ascending the sky,
That the spirit of Nelson still lived —should not die!!
For four successive winters I had been a painful witness
to the loss of vessels with all their crews —a calamity greatly
aggravated by their being within a few yards of the shore and
of safety—though every attempt was made to rescue them by


the methods then iii use. But, in the dreadful gale of the 18th
of February, 1807, after several hours employed in fruitless
attempts to save those on board the Snipe gun-brig, that was
wrecked at the back of Yarmouth Pier, I was a distressed
spectator of the perishing of sixty-seven persons, within fifty
yards of the shore, and among them many women, whose
piercing shrieks carried an agony to every manly heart. I made
a vow, at the close of that mournful event, that, if Providence
spared my life, I would devotedly apply my attention to the
subject, and produce some means by which sufferings under
similar circumstances might have a chance of rescue, and thus
prevent such heart-rending scenes, which were not unusual on
this dangerous coast; and as the fatal effects of this lamentable
gale had caused no less than one hundred and forty-four dead
bodies to be washed up in the vicinity of Yarmouth, it made
a forcible appeal to prevent the recurrence of so great a national
calamity in the loss of its sailors; who, “ without weighing their
preservation in the scale of humanity, imperiously claim our
regard, as bulwarks of our national strength, and the protection
of its glory; whose ardent spirit, daring intrepidity, and con-
tempt of death and danger, have so often hurled back upon her
foes their boasted menaces, and advanced our naval fame above
that of every nation in existence. Let us not be unmindful
how many blessings have been insured to us by their exertions,
and that it is by their bravery and energy that our commerce
has been increased to an extent unprecedented, either in the
annals of our own country or of other rich and mighty
nations.”
Before I enter upon a detail of my endeavours to redeem
the vow I sacredly and solemnly made, 1 cannot refrain from
observing, that, although there is no calamity, the occurrence
of which excites more sympathy than that of fatal shipwreck,
aild although it is morally certain that, from the earliest era of
navigation, not a winter has passed without some distressing
case Of this description, yet it is lamentable to remark, that.


until recently, no general attention has been drawn to the
subject, nor any systematic arrangement prepared to soften
the horrors of the storm. This fatal snpineness cannot surely
have proceeded from a disinclination to enter into a subject,
so important to ever}’ maritime nation. It were more reason-
able and more consistent to ascribe it to the fact, that the
painful circumstances of shipwreck do not chance to come
under the immediate observation of those in exalted life, who,
by their advocacy, would be listened to, and whose station in
society would at once enable them powerfully to aid and
arrange the most judicious measures for relieving the sufferings,
and for administering comforts, and providing necessaries of
shipwrecked mariners.
As nothing could abstract my thoughts from the recent
distressing shipwreck just related, I rose early on the following
morning to commence the task 1 had imposed on myself.
I reflected on an observation I had formerly heard, that “ some
of the discoveries in science owed their origin to accident, and
have been attained or aided by the efforts of those who have
gone before usbut, in this instance, the sight of the most
urgent distress suggested the pursuit, considering the vow I had
made as a solemn obligation and a duty to mankind I had
to perform. 1 should here mention, that, during the awful
scene, observing that no manual force was adequate to effect
a communication by the projection of a line, though many
ingenious and intrepid endeavours were made for that object,
I advised the aid of gunpowder; but my opinion was over-
ruled by the remark, that such resource had been often
tried, but always failed. 1 therefore entertained the idea of a
machine (the hi Uhl a of the ancients) for casting a weight, with
a line attached to it, from the shore to the vessel. So small
was the distance from the beach of many of the shipwrecks of
which I had been a spectator, and in which I had seen the
people on board perish, that such a machine would have given a
sufficient power in most instances for the purpose; but its bulk


and weight, and consequent difficulty of movement from place to
place, induced me to abandon it. In principle, it was the same
as ihal of gunpowder; the only difference being between
mechanical force in the one, and irresistible chemical com-
pound in the other. From this difference I was warned of
the impracticability: indeed, the difficulties which I encoun-
tered from it almost justified the truth of opinions commu-
nicated to me on that head, without examining whether those
opinions proceeded from practical or theoretical persons.
Unable, however, to succeed in any other plan, I determined
not to reject it from its improbability, until its actual impos-
sibility was ascertained; and I began some discouraging
attempts to project a shot, with a line attached to it, over
a vessel, from a cannonade. I suffered, according to their
dispositions, the ridicule, the pity, and the contempt of some
spectators of my experiments; but from those whose generous
hearts and noble minds were not tinctured by the unamiablo
qualities of envy, every encouragement and every assistance
was given to promote my success; and I cannot deny myself
the duty of recording the names of Admiral Macnamara Russell,
and Captain, since Sir George Burlton already spoken of, who
especially stood forward as its wannest patrons.
1 have often asked why the conduct of naval officers should
not generally have been friendly towards me; and why so
many of that profession should have, up to the present day,
pursued me with unceasing unkindness, nay, some with illibe-
rality; of which I shall hereafter feel myself called upon to
require a public investigation and satisfactory explanation.
Having at last procured a piece of ordnance better adapted
to the purpose, and discovered an incombustible medium of
connection between the shot and the line, which did not, as all
before had, burn at the discharge, I succeeded in effecting this
great object, and worked a complete change in the public
opinion as to the practicability of the design. It is here proper
to state a circumstance in reference to the effecting this im


portant desideratum, an incombustible medium between the
shot and the line, by means of hide, who not only suggested
it, but supplied me with a large piece for practically determining
its adequacy to the purpose. It was Captain Burlton, of the
Resolution, and not Captain Curry, the officer of the port-
admiral’s flag ship. I should not have taken the trouble to be
thus minute, had 1 not been given to understand that that
officer has used much pains to attach to himself the credit of
the suggestion which is due to another. By repeated experi-
ments 1 obtained another important result: the absolute
necessity of a line or rope to be employed for this service,
such as might possess the properties of pliancy and elasticity,
to obey, without obstruction, the violent impulse occasioned
by the first impetus and velocity of flight in the shot.
Having attained these objects, I submitted my plan to the
consideration of the Suffolk Humane Society; who appointed
the Bth of August, 1807, for a public exhibition to lake place
in their presence, when all the pilots and sea-faring people
of the coast were invited to attend. It received the fullest
approbation, and was held of the highest importance by those
who could best appreciate its value: thanks were unanimously
voted on the spot; and subsequently it was honoured with the
presentation of a medal from that philanthropic society, bearing
the following inscription:
“ Oh ejus eximios labores mortem avertendi nautis."
After this, on the 10th of September in the same year, I
submitted to that society an unimmersible boat, and the means
of forcing it from the beach through a heavy surf, for bringing
the crew in safety from a stranded vessel, or for other important
services—as that of going to ships in distress; on which occasion
the following occurrence took place. I must first preface this by
an anecdote, which has subsequently been communicated to me,
and which the conduct of the party employed in it confirmed.
The boatmen, in secret, became jealous of my producing a boat
that probably might be injurious to their interests, and determin


ed to defeat my object and cool my ardour. They therefore
proposed among themselves a set to man my boat who were
known to he good swimmers. On the boat being launched,
they volunteered their services; with these, a poor tailor from
Beccles, who felt animated by an object designed for the preser-
vation of his fellow creatures, and myself, composed the crew.
I exhibited the properties of the boat when filled with water,
and the impossibility of her sinking by means of air-boxes
on each side of her. The people on board soon confirmed
to me they were bent on mischief, for when the boat was
drawn some distance from the shore, they exclaimed, “ we
want to see if she will oversetl remonstrated, as her perfect
unimmersibility was the object of my design; but on seeing
from their efforts in swaying the boat from side to side, that
in so doing, as soon as she reached the influence of a rapid tide,
then running at the time from the Ness point, she must go
over, I said, “ then we must all go to (I hope 1 said Heaven)
together.” Poor siitch and myself, unaccustomed to such
situations, were in a very unpleasant dilemma—l, in particular,
from never having before or ever since tried to swim, from the
great dislike I have to water—but yet I swam to shore, though
all admitted 1 was a most clumsy hand: it served, however,
to establish the important fact, that all men can swim. The
tailor, from want of presence of mind, was swimming out to
sea, when one of the men, who had a spark of humanity in
him, and probably considered that he was not the projector
of the boat, brought him to shore. On recovering himself, he
set off to his home, expressing a determination never again to
go to sea.
As I had been the cause that drew together such an im-
mense concourse, and amongst the number, many of the first
ladies of that part of the country, to witness what was intended
for the purpose of humanity, considerable solicitude was ex-
pressed for my preservation. It is greatly to be feared that the


generous endeavours of Admiral Pakenham, who nobly rushed
into the water to save me, at the time he had the gout upon him,
probably shortened his days. Another friend, Mr. J. S. Bell,
of Gorleston, by his gallant and generous conduct in plunging
in and swimming to assist me obtained the applause of all,
and was not unrewarded; for his gallantry won him the heart of
an amiable lady, who was present, and who ultimately bestowed
her hand on so good and deserving a man. She no doubt
felt the fullest persuasion, that a benevolent and manly heart
is among the first considerations to insure happiness in matri-
monial life they married, and this sentiment has been a
consideration confirmed to the letter; while I have had the
heartfelt gratification, that, in my endeavours to do good to
one class of society, I have unintentionally been the source of
happiness to an excellent pair in another.
On the 19lh of January, 1808, I made farther experiments
before a committee of Colonels and Field Officers of the
Royal Artillery, by order of the Board of Ordnance, and in
their Report is the following passage; “The committee
approve of the principle, and think that Captain Manby
deserves much credit for his attention to the subject for con-
veying a rope to a vessel in distress, which evinces a mind
occupied in the cause of humanity.”
These important objects having been attained, I lost no
time in submiting them to the opinions of those whom I con-
sidered best qualified to form a correct judgment of their
utility, and were fully, competent to point out their defects.
I therefore determined to make experiments at various places
notorious for shipwreck, and to invite the attendance of those
who were known to take an interest in that service.
Encouraged by the flattering opinions conferred on my
experiments at Lowestoft, on the 26th of August and 10th of
September, 1807, I applied to the Board of Ordnance, who
had kindly assisted me with a royal mortar, also acceded


to my request, and allowed me to lay my plan before a
committee of the Royal Artillery, for them to report upon it;
and I had the pleasure to appear before a committee of
colonels and field-officers of that distinguished corps, on the
seventh of October, at a place appointed on the wharf of the
arsenal, opposite to a ship then at anchor in the Thames, some
distance from the shore: a communication was effected with
the vessel by means of a rope attached to a shot fired over
it; and the concluding part of their report is thus given:—
“ The Committee, in giving their opinion on the merits of
Captain Mauby's invention, most readily subscribe their
unanimous commendation of his laudable zeal and perse-
verance in bringing to perfection an invention for so noble
a purpose; at the same time submitting the practicability of
the measure, after communication is gained, to the officers of
the Royal Navy, who can speak professionally upon the
subject with reference to the winds and waves.” Determined
to have the professional opinion of naval officers, on the second
of October I made similar experiments at Yarmouth, before
the Port-Admiral, the Flag-Captain, the Commander of the Sea
Fenciblcs, and Captain of the Impress Service, whose report is
as follows: —“ The experiments made by Captain Manby this
day, for conveying a rope to vessels in distress, we think it
incumbent upon us to express our conviction in the strongest
terms, that such experiment succeeded to the utmost of our
expectation; and we feel a great confidence, that if his plan of
rendering assistance be adopted, it may be the means of happily
saving the lives of many seamen who are wrecked on this
coast.” On the 31st of October I made the like experiments
at Yarmouth, before Major-General Thomas Blomfield, com-
manding the Royal Artillery, going to Copenhagen, whose
opinion I esteem of the utmost value, from his highly-expe-
rienced qualifications, whose report thus concluded: —“ that
so ingenious a contrivance merits every encouragement.”


In consequence of the high approbation conferred on my
plan by the naval officer stationed at Yarmouth, with that of
Major-General Blomfield, whose report I forwarded to the
Board of Ordnance, the experiments were renewed at Wool-
wich, on the nineteenth of January, 1808, and the following is
the concluding passage of the report: —“ the Committee ap-
prove of the principle, and think Captain Manby deserves
much credit for his attention to the subject, which evinces
a mind occupied in the cause of humanity.”
Soon after, the happy day arrived to prove its utility by the
surest test, the twelfth of February, 1808, and to see the fondest
wish of my heart realized, by effecting a communication
with the brig Elizabeth, of Plymouth, J. Fronting, master, at
a distance of one hundred and fifty yards from the shore.
This took place in a storm, when the conflicting elements of
wind, snow, hail, and rain were raging with the greatest
violence; and the perishing crew, seven in number, were all
brought in safety from the wreck, in a boat hauled off by the
rope thus projected, to the astonishment and admiration of the
spectators; an event worthy of record, to substantiate the
following historic fact of its being the first instance of lives ever
saved by such means, and of its having taken place where, in
the memory of man, never had a previous winter passed
without lives having been lost from stranded vessels.
To express the joy of my heart on this occasion words are
utterly impossible. 1 was even unable to welcome those whose
lives I had been the happy instrument of preserving. With-
drawing from the crowd, 1 fell on my knees to return thanks
to God, and cried like a child. My feelings being thus relieved,
I sought out the master of the vessel, John Fronting, who
made the following statement: —“ That himself and crew were
so benumbed by extreme cold and fatigue, that they were
ready to sink under the inevitable fate that presented itself;
but no sooner was the rope unexpectedly thrown on board,
than he was struck with the conviction that he should be


saved, with all his crew. On seeing the rope, he felt as if a
new life had been given to him, and, with the whole of his
people, instantly became collected, and they were enabled to
take every precaution for their preservation.” He subsequently
made the following affidavit relative to his providential
escape
“ John Prouliug, late master of the brigantine vessel, called
the Elizabeth, of Plymouth, maketh oath and saith, That he
was on board the said vessel when she was unfortunately
stranded on the beach of Great Yarmouth, in a violent
gale of wind, on Friday, the twelfth day of February instant.
That a rope from the shore was thrown by a piece of ord-
nance, to the distance of one hundred and fifty yards, over
the said vessel, lodging upon her rigging, at which time no
other communication could be obtained ; and to the rope,
so thrown, he solely attributes the safety of himself and
crew. That he could not at that time have used a piece
of ordnance, or any ropes on board, for effecting a communica-
tion with the shore, from the rolling of the said vessel, and the
sea making continual breaches over her. And the deponent
is fully convinced that the invention of throwing a rope
to a ship or vessel, stranded on a lee shore, is of the utmost
consequence and importance to a maritime and commercial
country, and interesting to the world at large.
JOHN PROUTING."
Sworn before me, at Great Yarmouth,
the 21 st day of February, 1808.
E. K. LACON, Mayor.
The successful result that had now blessed my labours,
and had so satisfactorily confirmed the adequacy of my plan
for the object required, rendered it quite impossible for me to ex-
press my thankfulness, or the superlative happiness it imparted
to me, and was a balm to my mind, tending to lessen the
sorrows, nay, almost banish from my thoughts the affliction
that weighed so heavily on me; as I could not but see the


benefits that must assuredly follow, and would hereafter be
considered not only as a public service, but a boon to my fellow
creatures, and entitle me to be considered as the founder of a
good work: reflections that created a further determination,
that of using my unwearying endeavours to procure its adop-
tion on the dangerous parts of the coast of my native land,
and to extend it to universal promulgation.
With such views, I invited the attention of all those whose
names had been distinguished on this part of the coast for the
activity of their services in cases of shipwreck; and proposed
exhibiting to them the plan I had fortunately introduced for
mitigating the horrors of the storm. I more particularly
addressed myself to Mr. Huntington, a magistrate of Norfolk,
the lord of the manor of Winterton, and possessed of a large
property in that village, a place nine miles to the northward
of Yarmouth, most notorious for that distressing calamity,
understanding that he had often distinguished himself by
his noble efforts to rescue the lives of those on board of
stranded vessels. He made an appointment, which I gladly
attended; and the more, on his informing me that he had not
only convened the men, who on all occasions had been foremost
in their exertions, but had applied to all the gentlemen on
that part of the coast to attend. It took place on the second
of March, and I was happy at so fair an opportunity to exhibit
a further plan, proposed by me, for showing the dispatch that
might be used for bringing the apparatus to any proposed spot
—the Ileport is as follows:
Minnies of Experiments, made hy Captain Manby, at
Winterton, 2nd of March, 1808.
A galloper carriage conveyed from Yarmouth to Winterton
the following stores, viz ; —One royal mortar, on its bed; two
ammunition boxes, filled ; two hundred fathoms of one-and-a
half-inch rope; two hundred fathoms of deep-sea lead line ;
twenty fathoms of one-and-a-half-inch rope, fitted up with two
blocks, as a gun-tackle purchase; three iron-shod stakes, and


a large maul to drive them with ; one cot, fitted up on a
stretcher with gudgeons and forelock pins, to convey people
on shore; two round twenty-four-pound shots, with eyes to
receive a line, to get communication ; one round twenty-four-
pound shot with barhed hooks, to catch the rigging of a vessel,
for the purpose of hauling off a boat when the crew are so
benumbed by cold or fatigue, that they are incapable of apply-
ing the system intended for their relief; one grapnel, forty-two
pounds weight, to haul a boat over a surf, to go to ships in
distress at a distance from the land.
It travelled with considerable ease, accompanied by two
men seated on the ropes; and was found capable of going,
with two horses, at the rate of eight miles an hour.
The mortar being laid at an angle of twenty-two and a half,
(that elevation being found to give the greatest.range with a
rope, when projected against a strong wind) threw the deep-
sea line with
4 ounces of powder 140 yards
6 ditto 182 ditto
8 ditto 215 ditto
10 ditto 249 ditto
12 ditto 290 ditto
14 ditto 310 ditto
16 ditto 332 ditto
The barbed grappling shot, at the same angle, with sixteen
ounces, carried two hundred and forty-six yards of one-and-a
half-inch rope ; the grapnel, with the same quantity of powder
as the last, was blown to pieces; but the same grapnel had
been thrown at Lowestoft, on the tenth of September, with ten
ounces of powder, one hundred and ninety yards, and was
found to answer every purpose of its intention.
I do hereby certify, that the above experiments were made
in my presence.
J. B. HUNTINGTON,
One of Hit .Majesty's Jut lire s of the Peace,
for the County of Norfolk.


Tlie following testimonial was also presented to me: —
Richard Worts and others, we, of the parish of Winterton, in the
county of Norfolk, having witnessed the experiments made by
G. W. Manby, Esq., by bis newly-invented method for saving
lives in actual shipwreck, do affirm and declare our belief and
opinion to be, that had the plan above-mentioned been known,
to our own knowledge upwards of one hundred lives might
have been saved on this beach since the year 1788; and we
do hereby attest, by our signatures hereunto, our approbation
and full conviction of the value of this invention, being
perfectly satisfied, whenever necessary, it will be found prefer-
able to any plan hitherto known to us. Given under our
hands, the third day of March, 1808.
RICHARD WORTS
W. PILE
SAMUEL HAYLETT
SAMUEL GEORGE
JOHN HAYLETT
ROBERT BROWN
MATTHEW HAYLETT
I do hereby attest the signatures of the persons above, and
do declare, that the fact of the number of persons mentioned
to be lost at this place have passed under my own knowledge.
Witness my hand, this third day of March, 1808, at East
Somerton.
J. B. HUNTINGTON.
There was another gentleman whose favourable opinion
I am most happy to add: —
Dear Sir*
I deg leave to express my pleasure and great
gratification, from the experiments which you did mb the
favour to make yesterday, at Caistor, in my presence, and in
the presence of the principal inhabitants of that parish, most
of whom have from their infancy resided there, and have been


eve witnesses of many sad scenes of shipwreck, which have
occurred on their beach, and all of whom (I believe) ex-
pressed their thorough conviction, that had the experiments
tried yesterday, been within their reach on those agonizing
occasions, they might now exult in the glorious reflection
of having rescued numbers of their fellow creatures from
an untimely and watery grave. This seemed to be the uni-
versal and concurrent opinion of all present yesterday. For
my own part, having lived more than thirty years upon
the sea-coast, I feel no hesitation to add mine to the many
respectable testimonies in your possession of the efficacy of
your invention, and that by affording a certain and safe
communication between the shore and the distressed vessel,
you have provided the means of escape to numbers of forlorn,
and otherwise lost mariners, even where a life-boat could not
be able to reach the vessel’s side. But I firmly believe that
hardly in any case this will be prevented; for lam persuaded
that the round shot with barbed points, having been thrown
over the ship, and drawn back by the people on shore, (even
if the wretched sufferers were so enfeebled or benumbed as to
render no assistance,) would lay such hold on the sides, or
rigging, as would enable the men in the life-boat to keep the
boat’s head at right angles with the opposing wave; and
that they would, in spite of the most outrageous surf, reach
the vessel. This (T am almost confident) might, and would
he effected, and for the accomplishment of it, your country,
Sir, is your debtor. In short, whether the invention origi-
nated with you or not, certain it is, that through your means
it is become practicable, and may be rendered subservient
to the noblest purposes, that of saving the lives of our fellow
creatures; and, in particular, of many of that ever to be
respected body of men, the British Seamen.
I ant sure, Sir, that the labour and attention which you
have bestowed on this highly important subject, Will ever
afford you the most heartfelt satisfaction; but, Sir, it is entitled


to something more, it is entitled to your country’s gratitude,
which gratitude I most sincerely wish may be expressed by
an ample remuneration.
That you may long experience the benefits of your praise-
worthy exertions externally , as I am sure you must from
self-complacency internally, is the sincere wish of,
Dear Sir,
Your obliged and obedient Friend and Well-wisher,
B. W. SALMON,
Rector of Caislor, and one of His Majesty's Justices of Peace
for the County of Norfolk.
Ormaby, March 8, 1808.
To G. W. MANBY, Esq.
I pursued a similar line of conduct for the like purposes
to the south of Yarmouth, with Mr. John Fowler, a gentleman
residing at Gorton, a place also where shipwreck often oc-
curred, and was fatal in its consequences; requesting that he
would have the kindness to select men who had aided him,
and had repeatedly distinguished’ thcmscVes by their active
exertions and daring intrepidity. The approving testimony
of that gentleman, and the persons whom he had selected for
their opinion, is here subjoined.
Sir,
Your having done me the honour to request
particularly that I would he present at your experiments, I
have made it a point to be so, and have seen with great idea-
sure, the ardent zeal with which you prosecute the perfection
of your excellent apparatus, for the relief of shipwrecked
seamen.
That it is extremely difficult, (and in many cases absolutely
impossible,) to get a communication with a vessel, I have
seen many instances of, especially on the beach between
Yarmouth and Lowesloffb, parallel to which runs, for about


sixty miles in length, a ridge of sand about one hundred and
/illy yards from the shore, on which vessels ground, and on
which breaks, (in a storm) a tremendous surf, the intervening
space between the ridge and the shore being full of a very
cross and heavy sea, which forms an eddy, something of the
nature of a whirlpool, that baffles every endeavour of the
people on board, or on shore, to get communication with each
other; a cask, for instance, or any other floating substance,
instead of drawing on shore, turns round, and continues mid-
way, and with the wind at, or near north, or south, never
comes on shore at all; and 1 have seen two hours employed
in the attempt, which in winter, when the people are perish-
ing last, owing to their being wet and frozen, is particularly
distressing; but in many cases it is absolutely impossible for
the men to be on deck, (especially in small coal-laden vessels,)
the sea breaking completely over them, as high as their lead-
ing blocks, consequently the people are obliged to be in the
rigging, and then it is quite out of their power to assist them-
selves, nor is it possible for the people on shore to give them
any, except with the assistance of your excellent apparatus,
which I do consider a most effectual relief in such cases of
distress.
It has been asserted by some people, that the best method
would be, instead of having the apparatus on shore at different
stations, to have one on board of every ship, so that the shot
might be thrown on the beach or rocks, which it is considered
would answer best: who made the assertion I cannot tell,
but I cannot think it possible to succeed, as will appear when
it is considered that in many cases of shipwreck, (especially
when the vessel is deep laden,) the men, as 1 have observed
before, are totally unable to keep the deck, the sea completely
breaking over it, consequently they are obliged to take to the
rigging, where they are soon benumbed by the extreme cold,
and quite unable to assist themselves, while those on shore,
who are dry, and who have room with exercise to keep their
E


blood in circulation, are the reverse; besides, it takes up a
considerable space (more than there is on board small vessels,
supposing the men arc capable of exerting themselves,) to
manage the apparatus. In short, many more reasons might
be slated, which are equally strong, but I think it is needless
saying any thing further on the subject.
The throwing the grapnel I consider a most important
part of the business, as, without it, I conceive it impossible
to get a life-boat off a beach similar to the one I have before
mentioned; and, indeed, it has always been found imprac-
ticable, and seldom attempted when blowing very hard, and
a great surf, as the weight of the boat is so considerable when
she is struck by a sea, that it is not in the power of any set
of men to pull her through, without the assistance of a rope
a-head; now the grapnel being thrown by the force of the
powder two hundred yards, falls without the broken water,
and enables the men to haul her through it without difficulty;
and such a new and effectual power is acquired by the inven-
tion, as will be the means of saving many valuable lives: for
instance, the efficacy of the grapnel may be conceived by a
case I will slate, —Suppose that a ship is on Corton sand, with
a flood tide, and the wind blowing very hard at N. N.E., the
life-boat at her station at Lowestoff is rendered useless, be-
cause she is too far to leeward to gain the vessel, until perhaps
the ebb makes, before which the ship would be all to pieces,
and every soul on board lost to their country and friends. To
obviate such a dreadful calamity, it would be proper to put
the life-boat into a carriage made on purpose, and by means
of the turnpike-road, which runs parallel to the shore, she is
easily conveyed to any point to windward of the vessel on the
sand, so as to be able to gain her; but when she is drawn on
the beach ready to be launched, the difficulty of getting her
through a tremendous surf of one hundred and fifty yards is
insurmountable, without the assistance of your invention of
the grapnel, which enables the men employed to accomplish


the task with ease; even supposing the greatest sea possible
to be breaking on the beach, the grapnel, together with the
life-boat, will save every soul. Now, Ido not state this as a
case that may happen, but that often (too often indeed) occurs,
and really did so to a ship the other day, but there not being
either so much wind or sea, as but a very few hours previous
to her getting on the sand, the life-boat was able to get off at
her station, and by means of horses was towed along the
beach to windward of the ship, and passing completely over
the body of the sand, without the least danger to any on board
her, reached the ship; but had she struck the sand a very
short lime before she did, the means I have mentioned must
have been had recourse to, and the grapnel thrown to haul her
off by, as it would have been impossible to have gained the
ship any other way, owing to the sea running so very high,
that any attempt to get her off at her station would, 1 have no
hesitation in saying, have been quite fruitless.
Before I conclude, I will relate what I was an eye witness
of lasi year, the same morning that the Snipe gun-brig was on
shore, and which I think will prove the great utility of throw-
ing the shot, and endeavouring to gel a communication by the
means of it.
A large coal-laden brig came ashore on the Gunton beach,
a little to the north of the Ness Point, and where it is rather
steep, in consequence of which she grounded very near the
shore, so that the same sea that struck her broke on the beach,
and so very heavy was the surf, that it broke over her as high
as her leading blocks, the brig lying broadside to the beach.
Being in this dreadful situation, her people were all obliged
to take to the rigging for safety, the deck being, by the fury
of the sea, completely cleared of every thing; nor was it in
our power, although so near them, to give any assistance to
the poor men (nine of whom were in the lee main rigging, and
two in the fore top,) but were obliged to be silent spectators
of the dreadful scene. Had we been so fortunate as to have


been provided with your excellent apparatus, I am confident,
before the dreadful end of the fatal catastrophe, we should
have been able to have saved, with ease, every soul on board,
but we we e not so fortunate; the consequence of which was,
that all but one man were lost to their friends and country for
ever. The brig, after laying some time in this situation,
parted at her bins, her upper works, masts, and men, all fall-
ing together with a most dreadful crash to sea-board, and in a
moment the nine poor men in the lee main shrouds were lost
to our view. The two men in the fore top were in a belter
situation, for when the masts, &c. fell, the wind being at
north (parallel to the shore) canted them round, and in con-
sequence the mast heads swung on the beach, when one of
the men getting from the lop to the wreck, by swimming, w'as
lost, the sea being too heavy for him. Such is the dreadful
tale, which might have ended differently, had we been pro-
vided with your excellent apparatus.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
JOHN FOWLER.
Carton.
To Captain Geo. Manhy, Yarmouth.
My experiments having hitherto been confined to the
effecting a communication with stranded vessels, by means
of a projected rope, by which a boat might be hauled from
the shore to the vessel to receive the people belonging to the
wreck, I could not help being struck with the observation
made by a person present, in a tone to attract the attention of
all at my experiment: “ Your plan seems only adapted where
a boat is at hand.” “ Excuse me,” I replied, “ they have the
line, by which, if they cut away the shot, they may be drawn
from the wreck in safety by the people on shore.” He admitted
the possibility of such a plan, but doubted how far any one
would have recourse to such an expedient. This was, however,


a sufficient hint that other means were necessary, but wanted
maturing. As soon, therefore, as I had arranged my plans,
1 requested the Port-Admiral, Douglas, to attend an experiment,
in which, after effecting a communication with a vessel at an-
chor on the opposite side of the river, by this communication
I sent off a warp to be made fast just above the round-top of
the mainmast, and a tail-block to be placed below it. I also
sent off a cot, and passed in it across the river; not only to
prove its safety, but that I might be the first man that ever
came from the mast-head of a vessel by such means. The
novelty of the plan gave the greatest satisfaction; and I was
delighted to observe that many were induced to take a similar
trip, and all expressed their fullest confidence of its benefit;
especially on its being applied near the ship’s deck for the
rescue of the infirm, and where there were women or chil-
dren. I cannot help here adverting to a subject that I
have often heard touched upon, and which I can so well
confirm—the unkind feeling so often attendant on any new
invention, that, however useful may be its purpose, it is treated
by some with ridicule or scorn ; yet I must place upon record,
the conclusion that experience has taught me to draw, that
it is only from those who have neither head to invent, nor
heart to allow merit to others, that such opinions emanate.
I have, on more occasions than one, heard indirect remarks
made, that evidently were designed for me, by their touching
on the simplicity of my inventions ; and T remember, on one
occasion at the table of a friend, after hearing all that was said,
and observing it was evidently directed not with feelings of
sincerity, but those of envy, I made the following observation
■with very happy effect. “ Columbus, who, no doubt, all have
heard was the discoverer of America, was persecuted by the envy
of the Spanish courtiers, who, when all decorum was banished by
the heat of wine, murmured at the reputation he had obtained, for
having, (as they said) with mere animal resolution, pushed his
voyage a few leagues beyond what any one had yet chanced to


have done. Columbus heard them with great patience, and taking
an egg from a dish, proposed that they should exercise their
ingenuity by making it stand on end. It went all round, but
no one succeeded. ‘ Give it to nic, gentlemen,’ said Columbus,
who then took it, and crushing it in at one of the ends, it stood
at once. They all cried out, ‘ why ! any one could have done
that.’ ‘ Yes, if the thought had struck them,’ replied Columbus;
‘ and if the thought had struck you, you might have discovered
America.’ Now, I say that, if the thought had struck you to
project a line by the force of gunpowder to a stranded vessel,
you might have been entitled to the honour of affording relief
in cases of shipwreck.” It closed their invidious insinuations
in my presence ; and as there were some who, with a similar
yenermis desire to detract from my labours, used to assert,
that surely it would be much better for all vessels to be
provided with the apparatus, to be at band, in case of their
being stranded, I considered it best to set those opinions at
rest, by the authority of practical men, and I therefore obtained
the following testimonials: —
Yarmouth, Bth September, 1808.
Dear Sir,
You ask me whether I think the communication
would he best effected by each vessel carrying the apparatus
to communicate with the shore, or whether the communication
would be most certainly effected from the shore to vessels
stranded ?
1 conceive that the violent agitation of a vessel on a lee
shore, with the sea breaking over her, added to the confused
and uncollected state of the minds of men, in such a perilous
situation, would render the apparatus, nine times out of ten,
abortive. 1 am, Dear Sir,
Your most obedient humble servant,
BILLY DOUGLAS,
Vice-Admiral.
To Captain Manky.


Yarmouth, 23rd September, 1808.
Sin,
Having witnessed your experiments in the presence
of some of my brother officers, I am convinced of their great
utility in effecting a communication, if within a given distance
of the shore, when all other means would prove abortive.
1 must at the same time express my conviction, that similar
means being attempted from coasting and trading vessels is
not only impracticable, but nearly impossible; and I strongly
recommend the use of the larger rope, it being found capable
of being projected a sufficient distance to relieve, in very many
cases, ships stranded on a lee shore ; and the expence attend-
ing them being very trifling. I should also strongly recommend
their being deposited at the different dangerous situations
along the coast, and proper people being instructed in their use ;
and if premiums were offered for the saving of lives, it would
be the means of people attending more to their utility.
Wishing success to your endeavours in the cause of
humanity, I am, &ir,
Your most obedient Servant,
JOSEPH LARCOM, Captain.
I shall here close the account of my experiments; not
considering it necessary to give the details of even those cases
of preservation that \\ ere under my own direction; as they
would be tedious, and my book would be swelled to an
immense size, nor would they be very interesting to the reader.
1 shall therefore confine myself to such cases of preservation
by others, as possess peculiar interest in their circumstances.
My experiments having excited great public attention, it
was suggested as most desirable to exhibit them in the vicinity
of the metropolis, for the purpose of showing their different
applications, and encouraging their adoption; and leave hav-
ing been obtained to exhibit them in Hyde-Park, a day
was appointed by His Royal Highness the Duke of York,


whose condescending kindness I so warmly experienced, on
every occasion. Therefore I was proud to obey, and made my
arrangements accordingly for projecting a line across the Ser-
pentine river, over a high tree on the opposite side, branching
over the stone conduit, near the eastern end of that celebrated
piece of water, and from it brought a person, to illustrate the
manner invented by me for bringing persons from stranded
vessels. I was further requested to repeat the experiments
recently made at Woolwich, for preventing the recurrence of
a calamity, by which a crew was lost from the darkness of the
night, when the flight of the rope could not be observed, either
by the persons on shore, or those on board, and seven long
and anxious hours elapsed before the light of day favoured the
endeavours to effect the much-desired communication, when,
at the very instant the cot reached the vessel, there being no
boat at hand, she went to pieces, and every soul perished. The
remedy suggested by me for such an occurrence, excited more
than ordinary interest, from its requiring the attainments of
three distinct requisites which I supplied.
First. —To devise the means of discovering precisely where
the distressed vessel lies, when the crew are not able to
make their exact situation known by luminous signals.
Secondly. —To discover a method of laying the mortar for
the object in the dark with as much accuracy as in the
light.
Thirdly. —To render the flight of the rope perfectly distin-
guishable to those who project it, and to the crew on
board the vessel, so that they cannot fail of seeing on
what part of the rigging it lodges, and consequently
can have no difficulty in securing it.
Every experiment was successful, and received the highest
approbation. The exhibition was honoured with the presence
ol several branches of the Royal Family, as well as many of
the first nobles of the land ; and an immense concourse of
persons assembled to see what had hitherto been considered


an impracticable undertaking. I was personally congratulated
by many, especially by their Royal Highnesses the Dukes of
York and Kent, and had the distinguished honour to have the
following flattering testimonial addressed to me, in the hearing
of many, by the latter illustrious personage. The words were
taken down at the time by a friend, Mr. Henry Cooper:—
“I see the importance of your invention; I .anticipate, and
am convinced, that immense good will result from it, to this
and other nations, and I am sure your country will he grateful
to you for it.”
Being ever strongly impressed with a sense of the great
public advantage to be derived from illustrative explanatory re-
presentations of implements for any useful purpose, I sought for
some distinguished artist to make representations of mine, cut
in wood, to shew their application for the purpose of saving life
from stranded vessels; and I found in Mr. J. Berryman the man
exactly to my mind. He was enthusiastic in whatever he under-
took, and most delighted to be employed on a work so congenial
to his feelings. In order that he might make himself perfect
master of the subject, I invited him to Yarmouth, not only to ex-
plain, but to exhibit their several uses; he stayed with me for a
week or two, and I soon saw what I discoveied in Bird, r. a.,
the strongest characters of genius, and great versatility of talent;
and had he, like Bird, pursued the advice I gave to him, that
of confining himself to one line of art, he must have realized
an ample provision, nay, an independence for himself; but,
alas ! his generous heart was unsuspicious, and open to the
artifices of others; and I afterwards visited him in a garret
where he was surrounded with some plausible hangers-on, whose
idleness was supported by his industry, and, I fear, with every
prospect of beggary before him. Berryman being most desirous
to have my profile, similar to one he was then cutting of Nelson,
he strongly urged me to apply to Mr. D’Costa, who had made
the original drawing of that great naval hero. I therefore
applied to Mr. D’Costa for this purpose, to obtain from him his


terms for such an object; to which he replied, “ I have dis-
continued that part of my profession, confining myself to the
teaching of drawing alone, on account of the number of appli-
cations I had from friends and pupils for me to take their
likeness; and have some lime since made this resolve —that
I will not take the profile of any man, except one, whom I
never saw, but whose services I do so much admire, from their
being in some way connected with those of Nelson—l mean
Captain Manby; if I should ever meet with him, I would go
so far even as to ask him to sit to me.” It may be easily ima-
gined how such a compliment was received, and the pleasure
it afforded the artist on my presenting my card to him, to
assure him of my identity. He invited me to breakfast with
him the following morning, when I sat to him at his lodgings
in Suffolk Street, and he afterwards presented the sketch to
me that has been admirably etched by that amiable, accom-
plished, and highly-talented lady, Mrs. Dawson Turner, of
Yarmouth.
Having ever entertained a peculiar pleasure in selecting or
associating with real inherent genius, I could not he otherwise
than gratified in meeting with Berryman; and I often look
with much pleasure at specimens he left with me of his in-
ventive mind. His lively imagination brings to my recollec-
tion a man, whose warmest friendship I had the good fortune
to obtain upwards of half a century back—the late John
Raphael Smith, of King-Street, Covent-Garden. An ex-
traordinary circumstance brought us together—at my earliest
entrance into life, the family estate at Woodhall, near
Downham, abounding with game, I became an enthusiastic
and inveterate sportsman; it happened that Smith was on
a shooting expedition, at the same inn which I occasionally
went to at Stoke, having leave to sport on the property
belonging to Captain Gamaliel Nightingale, of the Royal Navy,
(of which gallant man I must, in the proper place, repeat an
anecdote that has never been before the public, and which


I had from his own lips.) The place we met at abounded with
snipes, but the spot was intersected by turf-pools and ditches
that made it both difficult and dangerous in the pursuit, which
made him content to be a spectator; but I, from habit, and
accustomed to such treacherous ground, proceeded, and, being
an excellent shot, filled my bag with snipes and wild-fowl,
the whole of which, as sport was entirely my object, I gave to
him. Knowing that nothing was more acceptable to a cockney
sportsman than game, I invited him to accompany me the
following day to shoot on Captain Nightingale’s property, where
I assured him I would get him a bag full of pheasants. We hunt-
ed the whole of it, without seeing one: he was disappointed,
I was mortified, at having made a promise and being unable
to perform it. This property was contiguous to that of Sir
llichard Bedingfeld, abounding with game that was closely
preserved, and was separated by a wide boundary-drain, which
was considered ample protection; and the keepers watched the
other side of the estate. Determined Smith should not leave
me with an imputation of my having forfeited my word to
him, on our coming to this watery barrier, I said not a
word; put my powder, shot, and wadding into my hat, took
off my jacket and placing it with my gun on the top of
it, I waded through with the water just up to my chin,
soon filled my bag, and returned in the same way, and
giving him the produce of it, which so completely won him,
that he hoped soon to see me in London, where 1 should
always find a welcome at his table, and a free admission into
the theatres. I therefore soon availed myself of his kind in-
vitation, and took up my lodgings at the Old Hummums.
Smith received me in a manner that convinced me of his
sincerity; and I found him to be a man eminent in his line
of mezzotinto engraving, of great genius and taste, most
hospitable, and extremely amusing. He was very musical,
especially in singing social and convivial songs; and I was
not a little flattered by his approbation of a song which I


wrote, and used to sing at that time, called “ Lovely Dear
Woman" especially this verse:
To make us most happy, nature moulded the fair,
Endowed them with charms all our woes to beguile;
To impart to us bliss, to sooth every care,
And dispel all our griefs by the ray of a smile.
’Tis the charms of the fair
That make life welcome here,
Sweetest source of delight for to soften our woes ;
So fill well up your glass,
See, see, it briskly do pass,
To the health of dear woman, wherever she goes.
Smith kept quite open house; and the celebrated Dr.
Walcot, better known as “Peter Pindar,” was a daily visitor;
and very often Old Bannister, and Edwin, and Johnston, so dis-
tinguished for his Hibernian character; also Parsons, Quick, and
many others, whose anecdote and pretty wit used to keep the
table in a roar. Peter’s tongue was as brilliant as his pen;
and the same strain of humour he preserved in animated de-
bate, remained so long as his reason was retained; and I will
do him the justice to say, that he never was disloyal in my
presence; but he was unfortunately a perfect sot, and would sit
and drink by himself, if no one would stop with him. Tire
theatrical men knew when they had enough; but not so Peter;
and, most happily for him, on one occasion, I was persuaded
by Smith as well as himself to remain, when all the rest were
gone. He fell from his chair in a fit, and would soon have
been suffocated, had I not instantly loosened his cravat, ob-
serving him to be perfectly black in the face. On Peter’s
recovery, he was sensible of the sendee I had rendered to him.
Smith, with singular good feeling, thanked me for having
saved the life of his friend; and I rejoiced to have been in-
strumental in his preservation, which I have since remembered
was the first instance of the kind ever effected by my own hand.


1 cannot content myself with this brief account of John
Raphael Smith, without ascribing to him my first impression
of admiration of the fine ails. He was not only eminent in his
line of engraving, but was enthusiastic in all the several branches
of the fine arts; and I well remember the pleasure he imparted
to me in the high encomiums he bestowed on old Paul Sandby ;
as it was under that celebrated father of water-colour drawings
1 was first instructed, when a cadet in the Royal Academy at
Woolwich. Smith was, at the time I became acquainted
with him, engaged in a series of sporting subjects; and he re-
quested me to sit for one he was desirous to produce, saying,
“ you are the true cut of a sportsman ; and character to my
mind is ever of the first consideration in all representations.’'
The subject was a “ Sportsman taking Refreshment at the
Door of a Public-House and 1 sat to him, when he pro-
posed a young girl bringing me a mug of beer. The person he
selected for representing this girl was a beautiful young lady,
who was a pupil of his learning the art of mezzotinfo engraving,
a Miss Bartolozzi; and never did I sit to an artist with so much
delight. There was no weariness as usual in the tedious process
of sitting, as she was exquisitely beautiful; and Smith could
not help remarking at the time, “ my eyes expressed feelings
that so strongly conveyed the wishes of my heart, as to render
it impossible not to tint her lovely cheek with a most becoming
blush, that gave much value to the subject.” He was, as 1 have
already said, a devoted patron of the fine arts, and had a choice
collection of paintings, and among them some charming repre-
sentations of what I consider nature’s master-pieces of art —
a lovely female form. In staling this part of Smith’s history,
it has brought to my recollection a beautiful series of these de-
lightful models of human perfection I once saw at Kingswcston,
the seat of Lord De Clifford, while I was residing at Clifton,
principally from the pencil of Correggio, Titian, Raphael, and
many other distinguished artists of the highest excellence:
among them were many Vennses, Ledas, Danaes, a Venus


Whipping a Cupid, Susanna and the Elders, &c. The
subjects being so in accordance with my fancy at the time,
and having so enthusiastically expressed my admiration of
them, I wrote the following lines:—
The pictures that most pleased my eye,
The pencil’d art to prove.
Were those to raise the tender sigh,
And lead the mind to love.
The forms of love, in varied size,
Did various charms present;
A swan appeared in secret guise,
With, God knows what intent.
Showers of gold did fall in haste,
But where—l must not tell;
My hand I wished there to place,
To catch it as it fell!
The little god, on beauty’s knee,
Perhaps had been too coy ;
Or cold methinks, for sure was she
Hard spanking of the boy.
Susanna did in charms appear,
O’erlook’d by aged sires;
Whose longing eyes so wished that fair
To quell their fancied fires.
Her lovely form, gods what a sight!
Did am’rous fancy win,
While feelings of a dear delight
Pi •ovok’d a wish to sin.
G. W. M.


These lines were written at the instigation of Mrs. Jeffry,
already mentioned,* who, knowing the vein for poetical de-
scription I most . delighted in, sent me in her carriage to
witness that splendid collection, on an understanding that
I would detail in verse those which most pleased me. I per-
formed my agreement, and presented my verses; and I after-
wards learned they found their way into the pocket-books of
her fair friends.
In reference to Captain Nightingale, the following inter-
esting and authentic anecdote, known only in his own family,
is 100 good to be lost, and is deserving of being recorded, from
its being so truly characteristic of a true-hearted British sai-
lor, which I shall relate as he repeated it to me: —“While
commanding the Vengeance, and under the orders of Admiral,
afterwards Lord Hawke, I was dispatched by him on service,
and, while in the performance of it, two enemy’s ships bore down.
I cleared ship, and knowing that I could depend npon my men,
engaged, and took them both. One earned the same number
of guns as myself, the other had more : tough work, I assure
you, Master Manby, and a good many broken heads! On my
return to the Admiral, he thus addressed me: —‘Captain
Nightingale, although I cannot but applaud your spirit, and
rejoice at your success, I am almost inclined to censure you,
on considering the irreparable loss 1 should have sustained,
had your ship been taken, a circumstance probable from the
great inequality of force you engaged: you ought to have
counted their guns, and avoided the action.’ My reply was,
‘ as you had not given me orders to run away, I pursued
a line that I was taught on my first entering into the service—
to fight an enemy first, and to count their guns afterwards.’
The success of my plan having received such practical
confirmation as to use, and its advantages being so strongly
certified by the opinions of those best qualified to form an
accurate judgment, I did not hesitate to submit these original
* See page 7.


documents to the Secretary of the Society for the Encourage-
ment of the Arts, being strongly impressed with the great
public benefit to be derived in obtaining the approbation of
so highly-enlightened and distinguished an institution; that
would enter into the subject both by theoretical inquiry and
profound practical utility, and adjudge according to its merits.
In order to demonstrate the actual occurrence of distress that
led me to devote my attention to the subject, I also caused a
faithful representation of it to be painted, which was sent
with the documents to the society, accompanied by the fol-
lowing letter; —
Yarmouth, Norfolk, March 28, 1808.
SIK,
I request you will do me the honour to lay
before the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufac-
tures, and Commerce, the various papers herewith transmitted,
respecting my invention for throwing a rope a given distance
to a ship stranded on a lee shore, whereby an apparatus can
be used to rescue the crew, &c. The idea was suggested
from the numerous melancholy events of shipwreck that have
happened on this part of the coast, within a short distance of
the shore; these determined me to make it a favourite pursuit,
and I resolved to persevere in it, until some happy mode
succeeded effectually to give assistance on similar occasions.
From the distressing day when His Majesty’s gun-brig, Snipe,
came on shore within fifty yards of the beach, when no commu-
nication could be procured, I have been making innumerable
experiments, but was unable to carry them to the extent wished,
until the Right Honourable Board of Ordnance did me the
honour, on my application to them, to supply such a piece of
ordnance, stores, and apparatus, as appeared best calculated
to complete my views. They have likewise further complied
with my request, and the dangerous stations of Cromer, Hap-
pisburgh, Winterton, Lowestoft, and Orfordness, are to be
immediately supplied.


The service can be performed in a quarter of an hour from
the time of the mortar coming opposite the vessel, in distress,
when the persons are initiated in their several offices. Models
explanatory of its performance I request you will do me the
honour to place, for the use of the public, in the Repository
belonging to the Society; and, as a painting of the subject
will convey a clearer idea of the service, and extent of'the
invention, than it is possible for me to describe, 1 have di-
rected one to be brought for the inspection of the Committee.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Vour most obedient,
Very humble Servant,
GEO. WM. MANBY,
Captain , B. M. Yarmouth.
To C. Tayloii, M. D. Sec.
There is so peculiar a history respecting the painting here
alluded to, that I cannot refrain from giving it: — Having
observed a very spirited sketch of a ship in a storm at a window,
in a passage leading into Drury-Lane, I at once saw that the
artist who performed it was well calculated to represent the
subject that 1 required. After much difficulty, I found him in
a most obscure lodging, not far from that part, residing in a
miserable garret, almost in a state of destitution, and without
even the means to paint a picture, or money to purchase the
necessary materials, having been obliged to part with every
thing he had for subsistence. On our coming to terms, I
purchased a stretcher, canvas, the colours he required,
brushes, tools, &c., and promised to be with him on the fol-
lowing morning, with the sketch I had made of the Snipe
gun-brig. From the time of my arrival I never left him,
pointing out what I required to be represented, and directing
its arrangement; and never did I witness such extraordinary
facility in the art; as he actually painted the picture in
the course of the day. The engraving of it is given in
r


the Transactions of the Society, vol. xxvi. The original,
which I have now by me, I sent in the following year to
the Exhibition in Somerset-House, when the subject attracted
great notice. The artist was named Sartorius. He was a son,
I understand, of the celebrated horse-painter of that name.
The picture, from its spirited representation, excited great
attention; and Sir Home Popham sent to me for the address
of the artist, being desirous, from the great talent he had
displayed in the performance, to engage him to paint him a
series of naval subjects. Sir Home proposed, as he was about
dispatching a ship, I think it was to South America, that he
should sail in her and be well supplied with every requisite,
and that he would pay him well for the subjects he might
finish. Sartorius was delighted with this prospect before him:
every possible arrangement was made for his comfort; he re-
paired on board the ship in the Downs, destined to convey
him; but the joy at a transition from a state of misery to
the probability not only of comfort but prosperity, was too
intense: he became instantly deranged; and, as I was informed,
on the night previously to sailing, came on deck in a hurried
manner, cried out, “ you are going to murder me,” gave his
hat to a person standing by him, jumped overboard, and was
never more seen.
No sooner were the models of my apparatus, the certifi-
cates of success, and testimonials of experienced and practical
persons regarding my plan, received by the Society, than
they were referred to a committee as to its merits. I was at
the same time reminded, “ that the Society had, so far back
as the year 1792, rewarded by a bounty of fifty guineas Mr.
John Bell, the Sergeant, afterwards Lieutenant of the Royal
Regiment of Artillery, for his invention of throwing a rope on
shore by means of a shell from a mortar, fixed in a boat
moored in the river Thames. To the shell was attached a
rope, one end of which remained on board the boat; and
the shell, falling on the land, buried itself, when Mr. Bell and


another person, on a raft floated by casks properly ballasted,
hauled themselves on shore by the before-mentioned rope.”
Without entering into this communication at large, or its
intention to lessen the value of my production, it would call
from me a few observations to confirm its impracticability, had
not the practical opinion of most experienced persons set the
matter right. I shall therefore only ask two simple questions—
the one, was the plan of Lieutenant Bell ever attempted,
although fifteen years had elapsed between his theoretical
idea and my practical proof? The other, why was it not at-
tempted, when every winter so imperiously required its im-
portant sendee ?
The Society however awarded to me their gold medal,
inscribed —“For Relief to Stranded Ships;”—which inscrip-
tion, I must confess, greatly depreciated its value in my mind;
for I had anticipated that it would have recorded an invention
highly honourable to my name for its hitherto unapplied
character, to confer immense benefits on mankind, and not
render it liable to a construction of an almost every-day
occurrence —“ that of affording Relief to Stranded Ships by
ordinary means.” Upon this medal, and from what transpired
between the Society and myself, I must offer two short remarks
—the first, that, if I had been secretly and disingenuously ap-
propriating Lieutenant Bell’s invention, it is incredible that I
should have submitted mine for the approbation of the Society,
who were its very'patrons, and whose archives were the reposi-
tory of the models and expositions; the second, that the Society
appear, by the consideration and reward with which they ho-
noured my system, to have admitted that it was an invention
of merit, different from Lieutenant Bell’s; or, at least, that it
was,a meritorious coincidence of invention.
The demeanour of the Society to me is a virtual dis-
avowal of the implied design of the advertisement, and repub-
lication of the plan of Lieutenant Bell, set forth in the 251 h
volume of their Transactions. If . they sanctioned that ad-
F 2


vertisemenl, and coincided in opinion with the Committee,
of which I have reason to complain, instead of the approba-
tion and reward, they should, to have avoided inconsistency
in the extreme, have held out this language:—“ Sir, we already
possess, and have rewarded a project, which you offer as
your invention, discovered some years ago by Lieutenant Bell,
of the Artillery. We rejoice that your exertions have applied
it to the rescue of your fellow creatures from destruction, and
lament that the spirit of our institution, which has for its
object the encouragement of arts, commerce, and manufac-
tures, precludes us from bestowing on you those rewards,
which we hope you will meet elsewhere, for your zealous and
active services.” I ask common sense, if this would not
have been their tone, had the temper which dictated that
advertisement and the more recent conduct of the committee,
then prevailed. I am therefore justified in contending, that,
as the latter certainly is, the former also was, the act but of
few: and that the censure and vigilance which will prevent a
repetition of such a want of candour and justice, will not
linger long after my representation of it.
Every gale of wind blowing on the coast of Norfolk now
furnished fresh proofs of the utility of my plan, and made it
considered almost an antidote to storm, and it began to excite
uncommon public attention; and some extraordinary occa-
sions of preservation at once stamped its reputation.
At length the day arrived to receive the reward adjudged to
me by the Society for the services I had rendered, when His
Grace, the Duke of Norfolk, then president, expressed himself
in the following eloquent and elegant compliment, too flattering
not to place on record: —“ Sir, there is a peculiar feature in the
invention w'hich will render your name memorable, and your
life truly honourable, since you have converted an implement,
purposely formed for mau’s destruction, to be the instrument
that alone can effect his preservation: long, very long, may
that life be extended to you.”


Nothing could possibly exceed the applause the beautifully
turned compliment of the noble President called forth; and
naturally, as may be supposed, were my feelings most sensibly
touched by so flattering a meed of public praise bestowed on
me; indeed too much so to render me sufficiently collected to
remember with correctness the language of my acknowledg-
ment ; yet, in my thanks, I did not omit expressing a pious
sentiment of gratitude, that by my humble exertions a suc-
cessful expedient was at length produced, not only to revive
and cheer the forlorn shipwrecked mariner when in the most
perilous situation, but where inevitable death stared him in the
face. I also expressed my religious thankfulness that the
painful scenes which had so often come under my view would,
at least, much more seldom occur, if that they could not entirely
be removed; and that an end would be put to the torturing sus-
pense of bystanders on the beach, unable to save, but doomed
to hear the supplication of men, and the agonized imploring of
women on board, craving aid in vain ; and that the sight of
dead bodies washed on shore, and probably the lamentation
of a fond wife over the corpse of an industrious and affectionate
husband, would no longer be witnessed.
At the close of this meeting I was honoured with the con-
gratulations of many, and especially of a gentleman to whom I
was totally unknown, and who proved to be Mr. J. C. C. Curwen,
the member for Carlisle, one of the vice-presidents of the so-
ciety, who requested to be informed what parliamentary friend
I had proposed to myself to bring the subject before the House
of Commons, considering it one most highly worthy of im-
mediate national consideration. On my replying that I did
not know any one of whom I could ask such a favour, he
instantly offered his services, and requested me to breakfast
with him the following morning at ibbotson’s, where he was
residing, to make arrangements for such purpose.
In Mr. Curwen I at once saw the devoted friend, zealous
to improve the condition of mankind, not only to aid and


bring into effect any useful project, but to exert himself by
unceasing labour to promote the views of those who were the
instruments of such endeavours.
He took me by the hand, and never left me while his
valuable life was spared. He set-to at once, proposed for me
to address a petition to the House of Commons, and promised
he would afterwards move for the appointment of a committee
to inquire into the merits of my plan. He also expressed
himself as having disapproved of the step the Society of Arts
had taken to lessen the value of my invention, by the uncalled-
for and totally unnecessary one of Lieutenant Bell. My
petition was unanimously received. The motion of Mr. Curwen
was agreed to, and all the naval men belonging to the House
appointed.
They sat, and Mr. Curwen, as chairman of the committee,
resolved to investigate both Lieutenant Bell’s claim and mine
most scrupulously; and in this determination he brought down
to the committee-room, from the repositories of the Society of
Arts, all the documents that had any relation to the scheme
of Lieutenant Hell. They underwent by the committee a
long, diligent, and impartial examination. The result of the
inquiry is contained in the following extracts from the Report
of the Committee to the House, printed by their order, 26th
March, 1810.
“ It further appeared to the Committee, that the invention
of Mr. Sergeant Bell, in 1791, though ingenious, has in no in-
stance produced any beneficial advantage! and it appears to
this Committee, that it is totally inapplicable in case of vessels
being stranded, the sea in such cases breaking over them in
such a way as would prevent a shell being fired to shore,
supposing the vessel to be provided with a mortar, which is
never the case in the merchant-service.”
At this time, some very interesting cases of preservation
had taken place, the certificates of which were laid before
them, that increased the number of lives saved to the number


of thirty-three; to which the Committee says, “ that the inven
tion is new, highly meritorious, and, when generally known,
likely to be productive of very great and essential services.
“ It was also proved to your Committee, that the life-boat,
by the means of Captain Manby’s invention, may be forced
through the surf, and be made the instrument of preserving
many lives, in situations where it has been found unavailable.
“ The strong and cogent proofs which have been adduced
before your Committee, place the advantages likely to result
from Captain Manby’s plan in the most favourable point of
view, and indisputably prove that its general adoption will be
the means of preserving annually a number of valuable lives.
“ The evidence produced by Captain Manby has satis-
factorily proved the great and important benefits likely to be
derived from his plan being generally adopted.”
An awful gale visited the north-eastern coast of the kingdom
soon afterwards, when the crews of no less than sixty-five
vessels all perished, within one hundred yards of the shore.
The number was estimated at five hundred souls, and the case
excited more than common interest for the national loss of so
many of our fellow-countrymen, who were engaged in the sea-
service, and ready to expose their lives to the storm or to the
battle. A powerful appeal was consequently made by the
Right Honourable George Rose, Mr. Wilberforce, Mr. Whit-
bread, and many others, warmly eulogizing my system, in
language so energetically pathetic and nobly humane, each in
his appeal drawing from the house the liveliest cheers, that
the vote was unanimously carried.
On the Corporation of Yarmouth granting me an extent
of ground surrounding my cottage, I made several arrange-
ments to render it elegantly habitable, as well as comfortably
convenient; and, as soon as completed, availed myself of the
earliest opportunity to return the great kindness and atten-
tion that had been so hospitably conferred on me by the
leading persons of the place and those in its contiguity, by an


occasional fete; by a dejuue with a dance on tbc green, with
music and fireworks in the evening; or by a ball at the Town
Hall, which the chief magistrate always allowed me to use for
such purposes, when I spared neither expence nor labour to
afford them amusement.
At this time improvements in the town began to take
place; as it w-as, without exception, previously the most
unpleasant possible for pedestrians, which used jocularly to be
ascribed to a combination of shoemakers having placed the
stones with their points uppermost to promote their trade. On
the Act of Parliament being obtained for paving, watching, and
lighting the place, I took a lively interest to carry its object into
effect, and was a constant attendant at the meetings to further its
advantages. Meeting followed meeting; and nothing was done,
from the want of funds. At length I made the following pro-
posal to them —“ lam a poor man; but, as I take the deepest
interest in the welfare and prosperity of the town, I will sub-
scribe £200; and I feel persuaded, that, if any two of the
persons present will accompany me from house to house
and solicit subscriptions, a sufficient sum will be raised to
carry the purpose of the Act into effect." Mr. Reynolds and
Mr. Robert Cory acceded to the proposal; and before the day-
closed =£12,800 was raised, by which the town was flagged and
the buildings in the new or Regent-street commenced.
To select those possessing superior mental acquirements
for my companions was always my natural desire; and I became
the intimate and confidential friend of Mr. Abbot Upcher, from
his refined talent for poetry, which was chaste, elegant, and
tasteful, especially on subjects of sentiment, and in praise of
the fair sex; and on his coming of age he left entirely in my
hands the arrangements to commemorate that event by a ball
and supper; and I have often heard it repeated, that it was by
far the most splendid entertainment that ever had before or
since been displayed at Yarmouth; and I believe I gave Jiim
some other proofs to show the interest I took in his welfare and
confirm my friendship.


About the same time I also attached myself to another
gentleman just entering into life, the remembrance of whose
name and conduct, on his subsequently filling the distinguished
office of High Sheriff for Norfolk, has been often since quoted,
by the elegance of his manner, his highly-accomplished de-
portment, and the true designation of the dignified well-bred
English Gentleman; but to me Mr. Bemey had further recom-
mendations—his intellectual attainments, strongly gifted by
nature and improved by intense application, and especially from
his possessing much inventive genius, a great mechanical mind,
and considerable chemical knowledge—qualities sufficient to
make me view him as the friend of my heart, and to excite the
wannest desire in me, by some act, to confirm the deep interest
and sincere regard T entertained for him. It was quite impossible
for me not to view' such a man as a person eminently calculated
to make any deserving woman happy : and although I had un-
happily failed in the attainment of matrimonial bliss for
myself, yet, feeling I had faithfully performed my vow even to
the sacrifice of my fortune, and unceasing endeavours to pro-
cure it, I was not the less warm advocate of it with others,
and earnestly recommended it to my friend; but as he said
he had never yet seen the person on w'hom he had given such
thought, he did not treat my suggestion with the attention
I was anxious for him to regard it. I could not however resist
endeavouring to persuade him that, from my observation,
I felt assured that I knew a lady highly gifted, w’ith an
amiable mind, well educated, highly accomplished, of con-
siderable personal attractions, and one recommendation not to
be overlooked in the present times, that of possessing very, very
weighty charms in point of fortune, one, to my mind, admirably
calculated to be his partner through life, and to make him
happy. My wish was therefore to introduce him to such a
person; and I had not only prepared in my mind, but arranged
how such introduction could be best and most successfully
effected. Having the good fortune to possess the friendship of


such a lady, I intimated my intention to give a hall at the
Town-Hall to all the leading persons of the place and this
part of the county, and I asked, as a personal favour, that the
lady would allow me to introduce a particular friend to dance
with her the first two dances; at the same time informing her,
that he was a perfect gentleman, a highly honourable man,
and one of the first commoners of the county. She did not
hesitate to accede to my request, well knowing that I should
only introduce a person that could not reflect discredit on
myself. My friend came to stay with me, the ball took place,
and, in the words of the poet, “ a mutual flame was quickly
caught.” They married ; and I have had the joy to receive
the thanks of both, and to witness a course of uninterrupted
happiness as the best imaginable reward for my act of
friendship ; a friendship inestimable to me, a friendship duly
appreciated by that highly-minded and noble-hearted man,
who, disdaining to follow the low feelings of mean prejudice,
or conspire to basely calumniate and have recourse to the
despicable expedient known only to inferior minds, to perse-
cute and unjustly defame those who endeavour to advance
themselves by intellectual labour, honourable exertions, and
straight-forward maidy conduct.
From the deep interest as well as generous patronage Colonel
Yorke had shown to me, and the reflection that he was the man
who had probably saved my life, and certainly had given me
bread, I was encouraged in a well-grounded hope that he would
not only rejoice, but receive with more than ordinary gratification
an account that I had wamdy given my attention to a pursuit
congenial to his noble and patriotic mind. I therefore detailed
to him the success that had attended my labours; also the pro-
gressive course of them, and favourable opinions that had been
formed of them. This I drew up in the form of a memorial,
accompanied with a solicitation for his advice as to what steps
would be most proper for me to take for being reimbursed the
expences that had been incurred in such pursuit, and to lead


to the extensive promulgation of my plan ; which memorial he,
with that friendship I ever experienced from him, forwarded
to the Admiralty, and first brought my services before that de-
partment, as will appear by the following letter: —
Admiralty-Office, sth June, 1809.
Sir,
My Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty having
had under their consideration your memorial of the 30th ultimo,
transmitted to me by Mr. Yorke, resquesting that you may be
reimbursed in the expences incurred by you in the prosecution
of your plan for conveying a rope from the shore to vessels in
distress, I am commanded by their Lordships to desire that you
will state the amount of your expences.
I am, Sir,
Your very humble servant,
To G. W. Manby, Esq.,
W. W. POLE,
Barrack-Master, North Yarmouth. Secretary.
My answer was as follows:—
Yarmouth , II th June, 1809.
Sir,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your favour of the 5th instant, communicating the commands
of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, that I should
exhibit to their Lordships a detail of the expences I have in-
curred in the prosecution of an object, wherein 1 conceived
myself usefully employed and in the service of the public, and
wherein I can truly say my heart has had no less share of
interest than my mind of labour, in inventing a more than
probable means of preserving the lives of shipwrecked mariners.
Indeed, Sir, it is not in my power to obey their Lordships’
commands in this particular; for, absorbed in the object itself,


1 kept no such account of my expenditure as would enable
me to do this with the precision which might be necessary, or
my mind would be satisfied with. Ido not however (I am
persuaded) hazard a suspicion of wilful error in saying, that in
constructing an unimmersible boat, and its most commodious
vehicle for the expedition of it, the apparatus, making ex-
periments and instructing persons at different places on the
coast of Norfolk and Suffolk, taking several journies to town,
and other incidental circumstances, I have not expended a less
sum than £300; a sum which, though too important to my
circumstances*to make an absolute sacrifice of, yet never in my
contemplation had any weight when compared with the im-
portance of the object in view; a sum which would have been
a feather in the balance, had I been prepared to meet the
calamity which befel His Majesty’s gun-brig, the Snipe, in
February, 1807, and gave rise to my exertions, when no less
than sixty-seven souls perished within fifty yards of the shore,
where crowds of people were standing without being able to
give the least assistance. In that awful and agonizing scene
I would have cheerfully put thousands to the hazard, if thou-
sands could have effected what I have no hesitation to affirm
could now be effected, namely, a communication with the ship
from the shore, and by that communcation a safe vehicle of
conveyance of the people on board to land. And I hope to
be credited in this assertion, that the general adoption of this
very means, in all cases of distress, in preserving the valuable
lives of sea-faring people, the approbation of my country and
the countenance of Government, are of infinitely more value
than any other considerations. Notwithstanding, I scruple
not to cherish a presumption, that my zeal, perseverance, and
labours, are not undeserving pecuniary remuneration; and I
will go so far openly to avow, that I have no wish nearer my
heart, nor more flattering to my ambition, than to be so far
honoured by their Lordships’ countenance, as to receive from
them an appointment to instruct others in the use of the


apparatus, and to superintend the execution of this my plan
along the shores of Norfolk and Suffolk, the dangerous navi-
gation of which has furnished, alas! innumerable instances of
shipwreck and disaster; but along which shores, the minds
of the most intelligent of the inhabitants, and of those who
have on such melancholy occasions been most prompt to be
present, and to give assistance, have received complete con-
viction of the efficacy of my plan, and have given verbal and
written testimony thereof. It has, Sir, it appears, been urged
by some, not perhaps by minds pregnant with candour,
that this plan of mine is not entitled to the merit of origina-
lity. I will not presume to determine what ideas may have
influenced their minds, as they have shrunk from the investiga-
tion; but I hazard nothing in saying, that if the idea has
existed, it has never been acted upon so far as to produce
anything efficient. But I must, in justice to myself, declare
that I have availed myself of no man’s labours; and will
challenge all and every oppugner of my scheme, that they
cannot produce, even in contemplation, what I may posi-
tively affirm I have rendered reducible, viz. the means of giving
assistance in the darkest night—a time when, from every sur-
rounding circumstance,' even to the most wary and experienced
navigator, danger is doubled.
Allow me to request the honour that this my representation
may be submitted to their Lordships’ notice through your kind-
ness ; for which favour you will ever have the grateful acknow-
ledgements of,
Sir,
Your most obedient very humble servant,
GEO. W. MANBY.
The Hon. VV. W. Pole,
Admiralty.


The iucontestible proofs of the utility of the system on the
coast of Norfolk, amounting to no less than the preservation of
fifteen crews in the course of the first three winters of its
adoption, and, proud am I to say, that seven of these were
under my own directions; I was naturally led by an anxious
amor patria: for the Magistrates of the County where the
service had emanated, to take the lead in a design so impor-
tant to the best interests of the nation, as that of the rescue
of sailors from shipwreck ; and the more so from its being
in some way associated with the renown of Nelson, in its
tendency to preserve the lives of a class of men, whom that
heroic chief had led into battle, and by whom the most brilliant
naval action had been won, and the country preserved from
the devastation of its most haughty and inveterate foes.
I therefore addressed the following Appeal to the Public,
accompanied by a Letter to the Grand Jury of the County of
Norfolk; a copy of which was subsequently forwarded to the
Lord Lieutenant of every maritime county in England.
APPEAL TO THE PUBLIC.
Those who reflect how much of the coast of the United
Kingdom resembles that of Norfolk, on which coast I have
from ray surveys ascertained that eight hundred and fifty
persons have perished within these last twenty years, (without
the crews of those vessels being included that were known to
be totally lost, when driven on shore during the long periods
of a winter’s night,) must feel for the horrors of a situation
whose proximity to the shore affords no means of escape.
And if so many hundreds of lives have been lost on this
part of the coast, how many more hundreds of this valuable
class of the community might be saved to their country, if the
means of affording them relief were to be established at every
dangerous part of it ?
The many distressing scenes of whole crews perishing
within only one hundred yards of the shore, from the im


possibility of forming a communication between the shore and
the stranded vessel, pointed out the necessity of adopting
some certain mode of preventing similar misfortunes; and"also
suggested the invention of such apparatus as should best suit
the casualties of shipwreck, under the different circumstances
of the nature of the coast, hour of distress, &c. &c.
At length, after several years of earnest pursuit, labour,
and expence, the experiments have been so far matured as to
have met with the approbation of some of the most distin-
guished, enlightened, and experienced men in the kingdom,
and led to the actual saving of ninety men from a watery
grave with only six mortars; at the same time, it is lamentable
to learn that the loss of so many crews has taken place for
the want of such an apparatus.
It has, therefore, occurred to me, that infinite advantage
would be derived to the Nation at large, and to Humanity,
if a plain and intelligible system could be promulgated
for carrying it into immediate and more general effect; but as
my visits to the whole coast of the United Kingdom must
necessarily be the work of considerable time, my personal
attendance for establishing the system in remote places must
be greatly retarded, and it is consequently much to be feared
that, without some Plan for prompt and universal tuition,
the interval may be productive of further distressing events.
These considerations having increased the desire to give
the speediest benefit to my own Country, and to those of
Foreigners, and applications having been made by several
Philanthropists, to furnish certain dangerous places (at their
own expence) with the life-preserving means, should the
estimate not be heavy, I have been induced to make this
arrangement, and submit the accompanying explanatory
representation and code of directions, which shews at
one view the nature of the apparatus, and gives a detailed and
perfect description of the method of using it with certain effect,
and at the same time exhibits the full amount of the expence


attending it. The distinguished approbation this design has
met with, affords the best proofs of the success likely to attend
it, and gives an encouraging hope that every parish on the sea-
coast will (by the benevolence of its inhabitants, when at So
little cost) be supplied with the means of saving the lives of
their fellow-creatures.
I cannot, however, feel satisfied, and leave the work of
humanity half perfect. That the shipwrecked mariner, when
preserved, is brought on shore worn out with bodily fatigue,
and menial horror and agitation, with limbs benumbed and
swollen with wet and cold; destitute, most probably, of both
linen and clothes, except those on his back; wet, drenched,
and dripping; that he preserves neither money nor means to
relieve himself, nor to procure those necessaries and comforts
which cold, hunger, and nakedness claim; that he, perhaps,
is many miles distant from his family and friends, or from a
port from whence he might get a passage to them; these, and
such like circumstances of distress, which have been realized
in many instances of shipwreck wherein I have been con-
cerned, induce me to make one more effort in behalf of such
sufferers, by submitting to the consideration of every county,
where calamities of this kind are frequently occurring, whether
an alleviation of the hardships to which this valuable order of
men are exposed, might not be purchased at an easy rate;
and whether the injury of their health might not be easily
repaired, or provided against, comfort administered, and
helped on their way to their place of abode.
For this purpose, 1 would propose, that Societies
BE FORMED IN THE DIFFERENT MARITIME COUNTIES FOR
such Objects.
It may, possibly, be thought a difficult matter to provide
for contingencies, confined to neither time nor place, but we
have daily proof, that the great zeal and invention of the people
of this country are seldom foiled, and that, u hen stimulated by
motives of benevolence, will surmount almost impossibilities.


With a very earnest wish to promote the end proposed, I shall
be happy to lend the best assistance my slender abilities can
furnish, and to form plans for such institutions.
GEORGE WILLIAM MANBY.
Address to the Grand Jury of the County of Norfolk, August 12 th,
1811, and subsequently to the Lord Lieutenants, Vice-Admirals,
Magistrates, and Clergy of the Maritime Counties of the United
Kingdom.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I shall not, I trust, be considered guilty of
-presumption in addressing myself to you, by calling to your
attention, that amongst the many charitable establishments
which adorn the realm, whether they are of a general or a
local kind, they are, for the most part, so constituted as to
answer the end proposed in their foundation. The want,
however, of the fostering hand of care of the superior orders,
has prevented some of them from producing the full effect of
their design, and the intention of the individual, from whom
a beneficial scheme may have originated, has in part failed,
or not attained to a pitch of perfection. In this Country,
celebrated for benevolence and liberality, many a charitable
institution flourishes under the protection of the humane and
opulent, testifying the spirit that animates the heart of man.
But amongst the various establishments for the relief of
suffering humanity,
“ Societies for the Relief of Shipwrecked Mariners
it may be fairly presumed are not the least important. It is
not from a disinclination to advance such an institution, that
it exists not generally in this maritime and naval country; it
is only because the call has not been made to those who can
best support it, who can appreciate its utility, and interest the
public feeling in its promotion. With this view, I offer my
humble endeavour, as I cannot satisfy myself that my labour is
a


over, and my work complete, until a plan is effected for their
certain relief, comfort administered, and necessaries provided:
without these, the motives by which I am actuated cannot
have their full scope.
You, therefore, Gentlemen, Guardians of the Liberty of
the Subject! Administrators of the Laws of your Country!
Magistrates and Ministers of Religion! you are exhorted and
entreated to encourage by your sanction, and promote by your
example, an Institution —
“ For carrying into effect the best means of saving the Life of a
Sailor— for providing such Clothing and Necessaries as may,
in different cases, he required when he has been saved from
Shipwreck — and for assisting him to his Home.”
These, and such as these, are the objects for which your
aid is solicited, and for which no appeal to your feelings can
be required; your own hearts will suggest the propriety of
such an institution —you will readily advance its interests —
you will, I trust, sanction the views of its author —you will
excite the noble and opulent to extend their bounty—you wall
assist the Clergy in this benevolent task —and by your influ-
ence in the county, you will induce those who have the
means to lend their aid in this work of humanity and mercy.
You can want no further (and you can have no higher) sti-
mulus, than that of Religion. Nor can an appeal to your
Patriotism be needful; the bare mention of the wants of
British Seamen is enough to excite your zeal and energies in
advancing an institution of such importance to the security
of these dominions. Considering the various blessings this
country so eminently enjoys—that the comforts, nay, the orna-
ments and embellishments of life, have been chiefly acquired
through their toil —and, especially, that through them we
have been advanced in Naval Glory above every nation now
existing, or recorded in history; when we reflect, that, in
spite of the efforts of our enemy, our commerce has been in


creased to an extent unprecedented both in our own annals, and
in those of once rich and mighty states, you will feel disposed
by every motive to uphold, support, and comfort that race of
men, through whom these things have been attained, and
afford them both the casual consolation of the moment, and
also every kindly office, by assuaging a calamity to which they
are so repeatedly exposed.
You, Gentlemen, whose rank, station, and profession,
enable you to promote so benevolent an Institution — “ For
the Relief of Shipwrecked Mariners,” —you, whose libe-
ral views and sentiments entitle you to estimate its due value
and importance —you are earnestly entreated to encourage and
support, by your patronage and example, this salutary mea-
sure —to urge the Noble and the Rich to unite with you and
the Ministers of religion, in giving strength and stability to
it; in exhorting, encouraging, and entreating the inhabitants
of j-our County to co-operate with you in the task of Charity
and Patriotism. Let the splendid examples of those Heroes
who have in different a:ras graced this, their native Country,
excite you to emulate their virtues —to be guided by those
truly dignified motives which actuated them —-and never forget
the last bequest of Him, who has attained the highest pitch of
Naval Glory and Excellence —“ England expects every
Man to do his Duty:” —this Signal, by which the matchless
standard of valour, genius, and patriotism, has acquired a
deathless Fame, the gratitude and applause of remotest poste-
rity 7 —a signal which was no sooner repeated, than it was
answered by the most splendid and greatest triumph which the
world ever beheld upon the watery element, during which he
breathed forth his exalted soul in the cause of his Country,
and his unconquerable spirit ascended to that bright abode of
reward and endless glory, leaving behind him a memory of
unperishable fame. Amongst the various duties, then, which
as Britons we are called to fulfil, this (if he is permitted to
observe us) must be most grateful to his exalted soul, to
G 2


behold his Felloiv Countrymen relieving the wants of men,
like those whom he has repeatedly conducted to Victory and
Renown —of men, over whom he was not only Leader, but
Benefactor, Parent, and Friend. These, and men like these,
require the hand of Liberality to promote and confirm an
Institution for the purpose of providing them relief and
comfort. The Seamen of Britain, Bulwarks of our Strength,
and Pride of our Glory, whose ardent spirit, whose daring
intrepidity, whose resolution, whose contempt of death and
danger, have hurled upon our foes their boasting menaces —
these are the persons who now claim your sympathy and
support in establishing the plan here recommended—a claim,
it will be admitted, founded in justice, and which you will, no
doubt, both cheerfully and willingly patronize and advance.
I have the honour to be,
My Lords and Gentlemen,
Your most obedient Servant,
GEO. WM, MANBY,
Honorary Member of the Royal Humane Society.
In placing the following flattering testimony of approbation
on record, I pledge an honourable assurance, that I neither
inserted it myself, nor had I any knowledge of it, directly
or indirectly, until it appeared in the provincial paper;—
TO THE PRINTERS OP THE NORFOLK CHRONICLE.
Gentlemen,
If, when Paganism overspread the face of the earth,
the highest honours were decreed to the man who saved the
life of a fellow-creature, it would surely be a reproach to the
profession of Christianity were we to suffer such a benevolent
act to pass unnoticed and unrewarded.


I cannot read the various instances of philanthropy with
which the weekly journals abound, and suppose that the spirit of
humanity is diminished by the promulgation of the Gospel and
the practice of its doctrines. Ii is impossible to consider the
exertions which were made, and the dangers which were en-
countered, by the late Mr. Howard, to ameliorate the sufferings
of individuals, and preserve the lives of his fellow-creatures,
without subscribing to the public testimony which has been
paid to his memory, and acknowledging the sublime effects of
Christian charity upon the human mind. Many, very many
instances besides this, I say, might be produced to prove that
the present age is not degenerated in point of humanity; but
the fear of encroaching upon the limits of your paper induces
me to confine myself to one character, which bids fair to rival
the above invaluable citizen.
After the accounts which have appeared in yours and other
papers lately, your readers will anticipate the name of M ANB Y,
which I mean to hold up for public encouragement and imita-
tion. The merit of the invention used by him for saving ship-
wrecked vessels and their crews, has been claimed by others;
I mean not to enter into the discussion of it —since the appli-
cation and improvement of it, and the anxious endeavour to
establish its general use, will remain with the Captain incon-
testibly. And it is, I believe, an undoubted fact, that the greatest
part of the sum voted to him by Parliament has been expended
for those laudable purposes.
The experiments lately tried by him before some of the
Admiralty Board were crowned with the highest approbation;
and I have the pleasure of announcing that accounts are re-
ceived from the island of Anholt, that six men have been lately
saved by the use of the mortar, &c. sent there by him, making
eighty-nine souls rescued, by his means, from a watery grave.
Who that reads this, and is told that during this winter,
eight have been saved on the Suffolk, and forty-one on the
Norfolk coast; that the crews of six vessels all perished, ex


ccpt one man, within one hunched yards of the shore, for the
want of the apparatus; that the crews of eighteen vessels on
the Lincolnshire and of thirty on the Yorkshire coast met tire
same fate, chiefly from the same cause—who, I say, will not
lament that this simple but certain means of forming a com-
munication from the shore with the vessels in distress, is only
established, at present, at Lowestoft, Yarmouth, Winterton,
Ilappisburgh, and Cromer? Or who, that has the means, can
withhold his assistance to establish, at every place where it
may be called for, so humane and beneficial an apparatus ?
2 nd February, 1811.
BENEVOLUS.
Among the numerous cases of preservation that have oc-
curred by the means I have happily brought into practical
use, some are of so extremely interesting a nature as to claim
a place in these pages. The first from a gentleman residing
at Lowestoft, who on all occasions of distress was foremost,
and eminently distinguished himself by his zeal and daring
conduct; and when, alas! he was cut off - in the prime of
life, he left one of the loveliest of her sex to bewail, in
common with every one who had the pleasure of his acquaint-
ance, the irreparable loss she had sustained, and which friend-
ship so severely suffered.
Dear Sir, Lowestoft, 1 4th January, 1810.
It is with the greatest satisfaction I write to
you, to state, that yesterday your application of throwing a
line from a mortar was most successfully put in practice on
Kessingland beach. A Dutch vessel, from Rotterdam, was
run on shore, she being water-logged; a most tremendous surf
breaking over her; seven men on the bowsprit, and one man,
the master, on the shrouds. The circumstance being known
at this place, Captain Hinton, as well as myself, were applied
to for permission to take the gun, which was instantly com-
plied with; Mr. Payne and myself getting the powder, &c.


which was lodged in the battery, a coil of rope and two shots,
a cart and two horses, with four men, set off as fast as we
could drive, followed by Captain Hinton on horseback. When
at Pakefield, two expresses met us, to say that the men
would be lost, unless the gun arrived in a short time, as the
vessel was breaking up; and the greatest exertions were made,
by getting us a fresh horse, by the people on the road. A
shout from the people on shore welcomed our arrival; and, in
a few minutes, we threw the shot and line over them, who all,
seven in number, took the desperate resolution of trusting to
this one line all at once, and committed themselves to the
water, having previously cut away the shot; but the last man
but one fell over the jib sheet, so that the last two were
hanging, and we, in the greatest fear of all of them perishing,
pulled, and as Providence ordered it, the jib sheet broke, and
all the seven were brought safe by the line to the shore: our
attention was now turned to the master, who waved most
piteously to us to fire again, and we threw the line over
the top-sail yard in good style, but he had not the ability to
get up the shrouds: we hauled it on shore, and threw it again
close to him, which he looked at without attempting to secure
it, and before one minute from the last shot, the bowsprit,
main and mizen-masts, went, and he was lost, as must the
entire crew, had it not been for your apparatus. This was
witnessed by several gentlemen, four Lowestoft pilots, all the
beachmen of Pakefield, and others. As another vessel was
expected on shore, a request was made to leave the gun, &c.
at Pakefield. I write in great haste to request another coil of
rope, a shot, particularly a barbed one, leathers, &c.; several
lines, with logs of wood, were veered away by the men, but
not one could be reached from the shore, as the drawback
prevented creepers being thrown in to reach it; a barbed shot
would have heen of great service to us.
Yours, most truly,
To Captain Manbv.
JAMES REEVE, JUN.


Yarmouth, January 24, 1810.
This is to certify, that Myself and Son were providentially
rescued from the jaws of death, by the meritorious plan of firing
a rope; and I am fully convinced that no other means what-
ever could have extricated us from our perilous situation,
being wrecked at Horsey in the Vrou Maria; and beg further
to say, that I consider it a duty I owe to the inventors, if
necessary, to confirm this statement on oath, and shall recom-
mend its adoption on every shore I may hereafter visit.
L. V. LAMPES, K. ZACHARIAS.
The grateful foreigner came purposely to Yarmouth to pre-
sent me with this Certificate, and to express his thankfulness
for the preservation of his own life, and that of his son.
The particulars of this shipwreck were subsequently com-
municated to me by my friend, Mr. Huntington:—“ The vessel
had beat over Hasbro’ sand, by which three of its crew were
washed overboard aud lost, and on its running for Horsey
beach, it took the ground upwards of one hundred and fifty
yards from the shore, and a line was soon thrown by the
mortar on board; the master instantly secured the line, cut
away the shot, lashed in it his sou, then himself, with direc-
tions to the other person on board, a passenger, to do the
same: they all approached the side of the vessel to jump off
together, for being hauled through the surf by the people on
shore; unfortunately, the passenger got entangled with some
part of the wreck, and all were in the absolute slate of
drowning, when the master, with a presence of mind scarcely
ever equalled, look from his pocket a knife, opened it, and
disengaged himself from the passenger; the father and son
were brought in safety to the shore, the former with the knife
in his hand; at the same instant the vessel broke up, and the
poor passenger was buried in the wreck.” Mr. Huntington
also informed me of another most providential circumstance
of a brig, that was driven on shore near the Ness light, at


Winterton: the line was immediately thrown on board, and
the greatest apprehensions were that she would soon go to
pieces. The master, sensible that not a moment was to be lost,
instantly hauled a sufficient quantity of the line to secure a
certain communication with the shore; having a daughter on
board, a girl about sixteen, his great solicitude was for the
preservation of his child, whom he inclosed in a close hitch,
then himself, and just as he was handing it to his men to do
the same, a raging sea swept himself and daughter overboard
they were hauled to the shore; the line was hauled back by
his crew, and they all lashed themselves, consisting of seven
persons, in a similar manner, then all jumped off the vessel’s
side together, at the very instant the vessel went into a thous-
and atoms.
Although many cases of preservation have come under my
own view, and some of which I look back upon with feelings of
most religious thankfulness for my own preservation, yet I
shall only record one, from a singular occurrence of accidents,
that prevented the mortar being fired by the usual methods, from
the wet falling at the time—a circumstance that pointed out
the necessity to produce, by some chemical process, a certain
mode of discharging the mortar to prevent future disappoint-
ment, which I effected by the means approved of, and which
the following Report and high practical authority confirm :
lleport upon the Plan proposed by Captain Manby, Barrack-master
at Yarmouth, to supersede the use of Matches in action, from
Experiments made before them on board the Utile, in Yarmouth
Haven, the 28th of October, 1811.
“ We beg leave to state, for the information of the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty, that from the several expe-
riments made in our presence this day, on board the Utile,
on the mode proposed by Captain Manby, Barrack-master at
Yarmouth, to supersede the use of matches in action, it ap


pears in our opinion to possess the following advantages and
properties; viz.
“ That the liquid with which the tube is touched (being
previously primed with a certain composition) either by a slight
pressure of the finger, or a small stick or reed wetted with it,
will cause the gun to go off fully as quick as a lock will do, and
much more so than a match, and with greater certainty than
either.
. “ That the liquid is of such a nature as not to set fire to
gunpowder, upon which we caused a quantity to be poured,
nor does it inflame pitch, rope' or wood, unless permitted to
remain ; in which case it will destroy the rope, and scorch the
wood so as to leave a deep stain, if an immediate application of
water is not resorted to; therefore precaution ought to be taken,
that it should not, in any quantity, by accident or otherwise, be
permitted to come in contact with the breechings or tackles, but
should it by any accident do so, the immediate application of
water appears to prevent any bad effect.
“ That the liquid has no effect upon the common port fire, or
slow match, without their being first touched with the powder
with which the tube is primed.
“ That upon the whole, this mode appears to us, if properly
understood by those who use it, and the materials retain their
properties, to possess more facility, safety, and certainty in
firing of guns, than either the match or lock.
“ Given under our hands, on board his Majesty’s sloop
Utile, in Yarmouth Haven, this 28th October, 1811.
ROBERT MURRAY,
Vice-admiral ami Commander-in-Chicf.
RICHARD CURRY,
Captain H. M. S. Solebay.
ARTHUR FARQUAR,
Captain H. M. S. Desiree.


Victory, Wingo Sound, 14th November, 1811.
“ Sir,
“ I received by Captain Willis the honour of your letter, with
the small case containing the materials for discharging guns
without any application of fire. I directed the experiment to
be made on board this ship, and the discharge from the gun was
as instantaneous as possible, without even the cartridge being
previously pricked.
“ I consider the invention of this system of firing guns
without priming, or the use of matches, to be deserving the
attention of government; and, with your former invention for
relieving persons from shipw'reck, to entitle you to the highest
credit.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your most obedient Servant,
“J. SAUMAREZ.”
“ To G. W. Manby, Esq.”
On the address to the throne having been graciously
received, and reported to the House of Commons, “ that
directions had been given for the plan to be established on
all the dangerous parts of the coast,” my attendance at the
Home Office was required, and directions given to me to
furnish an estimate of the expence for providing the apparatus
that might be required at each station. To obtain such in-
formation with the accuracy best calculated to entitle it to
public approbation, and make it creditable to myself, I applied
to the Board of Ordnance for permission to make the necessary
inquiries at the different departments in the Royal Arsenal at
Woolwich; on which being granted, I took up my quarters at
that place, and availed myself of the opportunity to make experi-
ments to perfect my plan, by the advice and opinion of those so
well qualified to give it; and whose ready assistance I had on
former occasions so kindly received, not only as a matter of ser-
vice, but from the aid of recollections in early life, as brother


cadets in the Iloj’al Military Academy, and where I had received
those rudiments of education by which my life had now become
to be publicly useful. 1 was here not only reminded of some
circumstances that took place at that period of our lives, but
there was brought also to my recollection, what may not be out
of place here to put upon record, why I had been there educated.
My father, who first inspired me at as early an age as I was
capable to receive impression, inculcated a religious feeling
to my God, a devoted attachment to my country, and an
affectionate regard to my fellow-creatures. To the memory of
such a person, I trust it will neither be misplaced nor im-
proper for his eldest son to perpetuate bis revered name and
services by the following historic and dutiful tribute. Of
that excellent parent, I once had the unspeakable delight to
be addressed at the table of the present Admiral Sir Charles
Nugent respecting him, by Admiral Lord Hotham:—“ Your
father served in the marines, in which he procured a com-
mission on his leaving Westminster school, was with me
when I commanded the Melampe, and in the action when
I look the Danae French frigate, and never in my life did
I behold a more active and intrepid officer, although he was
at the time quite a youth ; and on another occasion, regarding
his conduct at the taking of Belleisle, the senior officer of his
company (the grenadiers of the regiment to which he be-
longed, 1 think it was the 23rd) being killed, and himself
wounded, he still led the men, and was honoured with pro-
motion on the field.” He unfortunately fell a sacrifice to
friendship, from the consequences to a delicate state of health
of the severely-contested election at Tamworlh, in support
of the interest of his friend and patron, Lord George Viscount
Townshend. At its successful termination he returned home,
and died at his residence in Denver; and his honoured
remains are deposited in the chancel of the church of Hilgaj',
on which is inscribed on a tablet, “ In memory of Matthew
Pepper Manby, Esq., lord of the manor —who, to the cha


racter of a brave and intrepid soldier, added that of an
affectionate husband, a tender parent, and an amiable friend
—died on the first of November, 1774, in the thirty-ninth
year ofhis age.” On his lamented death, Lord Townshend,
knowing my loss and from my being his godson, took me
under his protection, removing me from the grammar-school
at Lynn to a large and highly-reputed seminary at Bromley,
near Bow, in Middlesex, the once spacious mansion of Sir
John Jacob, who built it in the reign of Charles the First,
surrounded by a large park, having every appendage suitable to
a place of great distinction. On his lordship’s appointment
to the Master-General of the Ordnance, he placed me under
Reuben Burrows, mathematical professor at the Military Draw-
ing-Room in the Tower, preparatory to my being admitted
at the age of twelve a cadet at the Royal Military Academy,
which took place in 1777. Although inspired with an
anxious desire to advance myself, yet, from its abstruseness,
I formed an unconquerable dislike to mathematics, and could
not bring myself to discover and combine its useful applica-
tion with mechanics, a study I was passionately fond of, and
which, I have since reasoned with myself, must have proceeded
from its dryness to keep pace with the natural activity of my
mind ; a circumstance 1 have often since regretted, as it pre-
vented my getting into the upper academy, an advancement
only to be attained by close application to mathematics ; ex-
treme idleness in that branch of instruction kept me the unusual
length of four years in the lower academy, and unfortunately my
name on each monthly report was handed with that of “ idle-
ness.” To get into the upper academy was my anxious desire,
where the studies congenial to my inclination were taught—those
of mechanics, artillery, fortification, landscape-drawing, and es-
pecially that of pyrotcchny ; but a knowledge of my want of
attention to mathematics persuaded me of the impossibility to
undergo the scrupulous examination of Dr. Charles Hutton,
the professor of that science; however, I came to the resolu


tion, as a forlorn hope, to make a bold effort, and try if a
fertile mind and the fortune of war would not aid me. I made
my intention known to no one, and applied to the mathematical
master of the lower academy for a recommendation for exami-
nation ; on my application, I deservedly subjected myself to his
severe animadversion on my idleness; however, on my assuring
him of an alteration, he at length consented, and gave it me to
take up. The Doctor, on my presenting it, looked at me; but
it was a look that foreboded my fate, and conveyed to me that
he was well acquainted with the notoriety of my want of
application ; and, no doubt, both to save time and to set the
matter quick at rest, he gave me a most difficult byquadratic
equation, and not as usual commencing with a common
equation ; and I was directed to the desk appointed to those
for examination, placed in one corner distinct and far from all
the others, in a situation supposed impossible to receive any
assistance, as no one could approach without the keen observa-
tion of this profound lynx-eyed philosopher. My looks and
gestures intimating that, if not aided, I was inevitably lost,
made a powerful appeal to one, whose abilities and studious
attention had much distinguished him, and was fast leading him
to promotion, the present Lord Bloomfield, whose friendship
I had the good fortune always to have found, the expression
of manner convinced me of his usual desire to serve; on which,
1 copied the subject given, twisted it up in the form of a dart,
watched the opportunity when the Doctor’s attention appeared
to be deeply engaged, and shot it as an arrow by my two fore
fingers. I saw my friend secure it, he readily worked it, and
shot it back in the same manner; I transcribed it, and took it
boldly up ; on which, the look of my sage examiner became
changed to a smile of approbation; then addressing me: “ You
have been most unjustly accused of stupidity, but you have
proved yourself a boy of much genius, and I readily admit
you;” presenting me at the same time with his Report, to take
to the proper officer.


There is an anecdote respecting this circumstance, that
does so much honour to that great mathematical professor, as
here to be deserving of notice. Many years after he had
retired into private life, I called on him at his residence in
Bedford-row, to apologize for the imposition I had played on
him, and explained the method T had recourse to; on which
he replied, “I do not regret at the deception you used; and I
feel pleasure that your first essay on projectiles should have
been made when I was present, and which has been since so
happily applied for the preservation of life—a circumstance
that has confirmed the expression I made on your being
admitted into the upper academy—that of your possessing
considerable genius.”
My attention to my favourite studies was distinguished by
close application, totally unlike my former indifference and
shameful idleness, which I now felt had thrown me irreco-
verably backward, and my only chance of promotion in the
Artillery was by volunteering to America, but at that time my
diminutive size prevented my being accepted. On the peace
taking place in 1783, and at that time there being only four
battalions of that distinguished corps, I obtained, from piy
high standing in fortification, artillery, and drawing, an ap-
pointment to India, as first of the class to the Engineers,
when, as the fates appeared to interfere, I was attended with
a violent fever, just about sailing, that confined me several
weeks to my bed; the fleet sailed without me, and I lost my
situation: how far such disappointment may be considered
by me a misfortune, it may be proper for me not to deplore,
for most certain it was, that every one who went out in that
fleet on promotion, was, soon after landing, sent to the dif-
ferent appointments, and every one of them was killed in the
first conflict with Hyder Ally.
On my having obtained the estimates required for the being
supplied for saving of shipwrecked sailors, I submitted them,
and was soon after directed to attend at the Home-Office,


when the following minute was drawn up and executed by
the Under Secretary of State and myself;—
Whitehall, 3th Oct. 1811.
Captain Manby is to have leave of absence from the
duties of the Barrack Department for two years from this dale,
during which time he is to be employed in superintending
the execution of his plan for preserving the lives of ship-
wrecked mariners, and to receive, during that period, a salary
of five hundred pounds a year, to be paid quarterly, together
with his reasonable travelling expences, giving up, dining the
period of his being so employed, his salary as Barrack-Master.
—He will report monthly to the Secretary of State for the
Home Department, the progress which he has made in the
execution of his plan, together with any observations which
the course of his experiments may suggest.
(Signed) GEO. W. MANBY.
HENRY GOLBURN.
I now returned to Yarmouth to make all necessary arrange-
ments, to provide a suitable carriage that would enable me
to carry a mortar and all the apparatus, to personally instruct
and illustratively explain at every station where the service was
likely to be required, that a dispassionate opinion might be
formed of its practicability and adaptation at each place. All
being perfected, and just as I was about starting, our coast
was visited by one of the longest, coldest, and severest gales,
for intense bad weather, I ever experienced : our roads were
crowded with shipping, from the three-decker to cutters and
gun-brigs, and no less than four of the latter had signals of
distress flying, and were momentarily expected to be driven
on shore; in this expectation I remained with my apparatus
ready, either on the beach or near at hand, for three successive
days and nights, hence I took a most severe cold, which af-
fected my limbs, and almost reduced me to the state of a cripple,


that confined me to my bed for some time, and to the house
for upwards ot four mouths.
On the Admiralty having informed me “ that they had
caused directions to be given to the officers superintending
signal stations to the northward of Yarmouth, to give me
every assistance in their power, and to receive such instruc-
tions as may appear to me best calculated to carry the object of
my expedition into effect,” I proceeded, under the extreme dis-
advantages of excessive nervous debility, to subject myself rather
to the sacrifice of my life than the suspicion of unwarrantable
delay, in discharging the duty that 1 had the distinguished
honour of being entrusted to me. This service commenced,
and the following letter accompanied the first Report: —
Boston, Lincolnshire, 6lh September, 1812.
My Lord,
For the honour of addressing your Lordship,
I consider it a duty to state, that in commencing on the ser-
vice, and prefacing the General Report herewith annexed, on
the Survey of the coasts of the United Kingdom, for the
purpose of carrying into effect and establishing my system
for saving shipwrecked persons, that I have lost no time in
obeying your Lordship’s commands, and that of the Legisla-
ture, in making the survey with minute and diligent circum-
spection; instructing the inhabitants on the most dangerous
part of the coast, in the necessary measures to be adopted in
the event of shipwreck, as the season is fast approaching when
their exertions in the cause of humanity may be shortly called
forth; which urges me to hope that the stores, so essential,
will speedily be sent to Yarmouth, for the purpose of being
conveyed to the respective officers along the coast, command-
ing signal stations, all of whom have received every necessary
instruction from me.
I have however a painful task to perform, in stating to
your Lordship, that I find my health greatly destroyed by
H


fatigues endured during the three last winters, by passing
many nights on the shore, aiding vessels in distress; which,
added to intense application, deep research, and repealed expe-
riments, so indefatigably bestowed in my various productions
to perfect a subject of so much importance to my country and
humanity, that I fear I may not make that rapid progress
along the coast your Lordship may expect, and that I do so
ardently wish. My anxiety to promulgate the service with
every promptness, induced me to set off from Yarmouth, con-
trary to the advice of my physicians and friends; and I regret
to say, the zeal with which it has been pursued has brought
on a train of complaints and debility, that I despair, without
some speedy alteration, a close of my existence will be the
result.
The Survey, as your Lordship will observe, commences at
the south extremity of Norfolk; and in the pursuit it is a
matter of infinite gratification to me, to find the great appro-
bation that has attended my labours, and the marked convic-
tion of success, confidence, and utility, that has followed, from
those features of simplicity that characterize the service.
Independent of my instructing every Officer of Signal
Stations by practical proofs (having a mortar and stores with
me) I leave with him, as an appendage to his station, my
Essay on the Preservation of Shipwrecked Persons, embel-
lished with explanatory plates of every part of the service;
impressing on his mind, that, by due attention to them and to
the directions given, it can never fail. In every parish on the
confines of the ocean through which I pass, I leave descriptive
sheets of the service, with a set addressed to the Clergyman,
with the subjoined Circular Letter. To every Lord Lieutenant
of a maritime county several are forwarded, requesting they
may be disposed of in such ways as will tend best to promote
this work of charity. I cannot however conclude, without
stating to your Lordship, and humbly calling to your attention,
the general opinion and assurance that appears from every


person with whom I have conversed on the subject, of the
infinite benefits that would result from a Head-money granted
to the active people of the shore, for each life saved in such
cases of difficulty and hazard, when in the effort their own
lives are exposed to great danger; it would likewise be the
means of reimbursing them for damage done to their boats,
defraying the expenses attending getting the mortar, stores, &c.
down. In making this appeal, 1 cannot avoid submitting an
extract from the Sixth Number of the Ibitish Review on the
subject. “ And if in addition to this precaution, the activity
of the fishermen and the villagers on the coast was stimulated
by a bounty, in the way of Head-money, for the life of each
mariner saved out of the wreck by this process, at least in
every case of difficulty and hazard, when the people concerned
risk their own lives in the attempt, the provision would be a
wise one, and worthy of the justice and humanity of a British
Board of Admiralty.” I beg further to have the honour ol
observing, that it has been the subject of a Memorial from me
to the late First Lord of the Admiralty, and been repeatedly
urged from a conviction of the great good that would result
from it.
It will, I hope, be pardonable in me, stating to your
Lordship every suggestion that appears calculated to benefit
the cause of humanity, and to carry the country’s views into
the fullest extent. This has induced and will ever stimulate
me to seek with unwearied attention, as far as my health will
permit, to deserve my country’s praise, and your Lordship’s
approbation.
With the most profound respect,
1 have the honour to be, &c.
GEO. W. MANBY.


CIRCULAR LETTER.
Sir,
In obedience to the commands of His Majesty’s
Government for establishing along the Coasts of the United
Kingdom my Plan for rescuing the Lives of Shipwrecked
Persons, I conceive the best means of promoting this object
to be, in submitting a copy of my “ Directions for using the
Apparatus" to the Clergyman of every parish resident on the
coast.
Under this impression, Sir, I beg to offer the accompa-
nying descriptive sheet for your attention; being convinced
there is not a Clergyman resident on the confines of the ocean,
whose philanthropy will not adopt so charitable an institution;
nor any set of men, who would not, in so virtuous a cause,
distinguish themselves by their zeal and energy in promoting
an event so deeply interesting to those feelings of humanity
which have ever been the pride of Englishmen.
I-trust, Sir, these instructions will be carried into effect;
and those of your parish who cannot contribute in a pecuniary
manner to this charitable work, will yet immortalize themselves
by their personal exertions.
I have the honour to be, &c.
GEORGE WM. MANBY.
To the Rev.
The Report, containing a detailed account of the survey
of the coast from the southern extremity of Norfolk to the
Firth of Forth, being before the public, from its being
presented by the Secretary of State for the Home Depart-
ment, and printed by order of the House of Commons on
the seventh of December, 1813, it is quite unnecessary to
give them a place here, but to confine myself to the further
letter of my instructions, that of “ such observations which the
course of my experiments may suggest,” and which are in imme-
diate connection with the history of my life, to confirm that


nothing was overlooked or neglected to promote the benevolent
intention of the country, tending to national benefit, and to
prove myself qualified for such an undertaking, and executed
with persevering industry and indefatigable zeal.
The encroachments of the sea, and the inevitable destruc-
tion of the noble hill on which the light-house stood at Cromer,
most deeply interested me, from its general importance to
navigation in the North Sea; this being the first land that
is looked for by vessels coming from the Baltic “ to make” by
day, and reflecting on the consequences that may result to
foreign ships from the change of its appearance, being so
unlike the representation shown on charts, to regulate the
conduct of foreign navigation on sighting this celebrated
land-mark.
So strongly impressed was I that the light-house would
be in the greatest jeopardy, and that the destruction of this
land proceeded from springs, which, in my opinion, might
be prevented by a system brought into practice by Mr.Elkington,
that I considered it a duty to submit such opinion in ray report;
and as my predictions have since been realized, by the face
of this high land being changed and the light-house removed,
it may not be amiss to state some circumstances of this extra-
ordinarily gifted man that came under my own observation.
About the year 1794, when occupying the family estate
of Woodhall, in Hilgay, a gentleman possessing considerable
landed property in the contiguous parish of Southery, (Mr.
Creasy) had Mr. Elkington over, for his opinion if he could
remedy the cold springy clay land, that otherwise was so
admirably adapted to agriculture. I was invited to meet him,
and to accompany him over the estate, and was requested to
minutely observe, and to draw from him any remarks by which
public benefit and general good might result. I found him
exceedingly reserved, but he stated that he could effect the ob-
ject, which he certainly did most effectually. He said,” I must
carefully examine if the village is dependent on those springs,


for water.” To prove the necessity of such examination, he
repeated the following circumstance:—“l was once sent to
tap and draw' off the springs on an estate, that was at least
two miles distant from a town, that a large pond partly sup-
plied with the water it required, but I felt confident that, if
such undertaking was to take place, it would be detrimental
to the town: my employer ridiculed the remarks; he persisted
in the object for his own benefit, and the great reservoir was
nearly drained, to the great injury of the place.”—My con-
clusion is, that if the well that was sunk for the use of the
light-house and the signal station, had been drawn off', this
high land would have been saved, and no necessity for re-
moving this splendid revolving light to another and infinitely
worse situation would have been occasioned.
My observations on, and strong recommendations con-
tained in the Report for, a floating light being placed in
Boston Deeps, as an important security for the preservation of
life and property, have, I rejoice, to find, been adopted, and its
benefits have on several occasions been represented to me.
The dangerous coast of Bridlington Bay urged me strongly
to point out the great advantage navigation would derive by a
harbour of refuge; and I am equally happy to find, that an
act for that important service has passed the Legislature.
My experiments at Scarborough excited uncommon atten-
tion, and I was attended by the most distinguished visitors, as
well as inhabitants: among the former was the Duchess of
Leeds; and on the present Lord Canterbury presiding at a
large dinner, to which I was invited, he honoured me by pro-
posing my health in a most eloquent compliment, expressive
of the approbation which he himself, the company, and the
county entertained of my labours, and of their immeasurable
good to the state, by the preservation of its sailors.
On mj’ reaching Whitby, I had the honour to receive an
invitation to Mulgrave Castle, by the then noble possessor;
and never did I spend two more delightful days than under


the hospitable roof of that noble edifice, which will be ever
held in grateful remembrance; and on my taldng my depar-
ture, the Earl of Mulgrave had the kindness to send a guide
to point out and to conduct me to what he considered would
interest as well as amuse me, and be essentially useful to the
service on which I was employed.
The like hospitality and kindness were shown to me at
Cortham, the seat of Mr. Vansittart, not only by himself, but
his accomplished and amiable consort, Lady Turner.
The public attention I received at Hartlepool was of more
than a common nature; and a deputation from the committee
of the life-boat was appointed to receive me, and to accompany
me for the examination of the arrangements made in the town
to avert the horrors of shipwrecks, one of which greatly excited
my admiration, that of a sermon being annually preached, to
carry into effect so laudable and patriotic a design, and on
which occasion every one attends, and contributes to the best
of his means ; an example worthy of imitation in every
maritime town, and reflecting credit as a work of humanity,
or true charity, and noble patriotism. I there pointed out the
necessity of a harbour of refuge in the vicinity of a place so
replete with dangers, and made a minute survey of that coast
for such purpose.
At Easington I found a note from the Ilev. Dr. Prosser, one
of the prebendaries of Durham, and a trustee to the benevo-
lent and extensive charity founded by Lord Crewe, to mitigate
the distresses of shipwreck, and many other philanthropic pur-
poses, in which I was informed, that directions had been sent
and arrangements made for my being received and welcomed
at Bamborough Castle, on my reaching that part of the coast,
and for remaining there as long as agreeable to myself.
The great attention I experienced at Sunderland induced
me to remain there for a week, and I was almost daily
requested to repeat my experiments, and to instruct the
various modes of my productions for the preservation of life


from the perils of the storm. I also received from the Rev.
Dr. Gray, of Wearmouth, (who subsequently died Bishop of
Bristol,) the greatest possible aid, by his selecting all the per-
sons in that part of the country, who were distinguished by
their talents, genius, and general intelligence, for service of
public good and acts of philanthropy.
On my approaching the iron-bound coast of Northumber-
land, the innumerable horrors that presented themselves made
an impression on my mind impossible to be expressed; and the
details of distress called on me to devise such plans as appeared
best calculated to their future prevention. Finding on that
part of the coast a most intelligent officer at one of the signal
stations, and from whom great local information could be
obtained, and on his representing there was no place of se-
curity to shelter vessels from easterly gales between Sunderland
and Holy Island, we made a regular survey of that most
dangerous coast between Drueridge Bay and Dunstanbury
Castle, for vessels to anchor in safety under the lee of Coquet
Island, made a chart of the same, drew out accurate and
minute sailing directions for vessels to run in, and forwarded
the same to the Admiralty. ‘ Earl Grey honored me with
an invitation to Howick, where I staid two days, in the en-
joying of the advantages, not only of bis exalted mind, but the
society of the most lovely family I ever had the good fortune
to meet with; and I was not a little gratified, that the services
and arrangements I had made for affording protection to
vessels in distress on the dangerous parts of the coast in
his Lordship’s county, should receive the reward of his
approbation.
The late Duke of Northumberland being then alive, I
availed myself, when at Alnwick, of the opportunity there
afforded, to respectfully address a note to his Grace, expressive
of the happiness it would afford me in being allowed the
honour personally to exhibit and make known the service on
which 1 was employed, by a vote of the House of Commons,


for saving the lives of shipwrecked sailors, and for any infor-
mation he might require of me. To this application, it is
with regret I stale, that it was replied to hy a rejection; and
I must place on record the only discourteous treatment I ever
received from any nobleman or gentleman during my pro-
ceedings along the eastern coast.
On arriving at North Sunderland, I received a letter from
the resident secretary at Bamborough Castle, to inform me
that he had received directions from the Trustcees to ap-
point a person to escort me to the castle. On my arrival,
the Rev. Mr. Maughau, the secretary, conducted me to the
apartment allotted to me, at the same time intimating that his
directions were for me to remain as long as agreeable to myself,
and that every attention possible was to be paid to me: never
in my life did I receive so flattering a welcome, nor one at a
time more required for some rest, finding myself fast sinking
from the great fatigue of the body, and the excessive exertion
of the mind.
The ocean in front of Bamborough Castle exhibits, at one
view, more dangers to navigation, and its history records
more distresses, than'any place I ever met with; particularly
before the Corporation of the Trinity House placed a revolving
light on the great Fern Island, and a similar one on the
Brownsman’s Rocks, one of the Staple Islands. These situ-
ations, so noted for destruction, no doubt pointed out to the
philanthropic and patriotic Lord Crewe’s mind the necessity to
avert its horrors, and to bequeath his extensive estates to that,
and other “ unconfined charitable purposes,” by the application
of their funds (among numerous acts of beneficence) to cases
of shipwreck; stimulating exertions in giving assistance; en-
couraging every effort to save the lives of the crews, and
providing comforts for them when rescued. An institution
more wise, human policy never formed; and the judicious
and humane distribution and arrangements made by the
Trustees do infinite honour to their heads and hearts. The


service in which 1 was engaged cons'itnting so material a
feature, and so congenial to the views of the Trust, induced
them to declare their readiness to carry into effect whatever
would conduce to this work of national charity in which I was
engaged. By the uncommon assistance they took care to
provide for me, I have been enabled to explore the dangers
with the deepest attention, and produce those suggestions for
the benefit of my country, which could not have been derived
from any other source.
In minutely examining this place of dangers, I judged
it proper to make a faithful representation and chart of
them, in order to point out some subjects of importance to
navigation, and submit to die consideration of Government,
what (it is reasonable to hope) will prove superlatively bene-
ficial to present and future ages.
Among the many situations that have come under my
consideration, none has ever called my attention equal to
this part of the coast, on account of the contention of
currents, running in every direction, settings of rapid tides,
sunken rocks, dangerous shoals, straggling islands, and ha-
zardous beaches; where souls beyond number have perished;
where property exceeding all estimate has been lost.
From the fullest persuasion of the greatest importance
that would be derived to navigation in general, and especially
to poor industrious fishermen, if security could be found in the
vicinity of the Fern Islands, as an object of great commercial
maritime interests of the coundy, and to humanity, I was in-
duced to bestow considerable attention to the roadsteads about
the Islands, to discover where vessels might shelter and anchor
in safety, one only being laid down in any chart, and scarcely
more known of, which is under the Great Fern Island, the light
on it bearing N. NW. But this affords no safety; nor could
vessels anchor in gales when they require to be sheltered from
distress and inevitable destruction. There is, however, one
which I have been able to ascertain, where they can anchor and


ride in safety, particularly when the wind is at that most fatal
quarter, the east; when night is coming on, and ships have not
clay-light to reach Holy Island. It is on the north of the
Great Fern Island about one cable’s length, the light on that
island bearing south: 1 have laid it down in the representative
chart in my Report, and as it never was before noticed, I am
entitled to the credit of a discovery of a spot where vessels can
ride in perfect safety (having the whole chain of Islands to
windward) in five fathoms water, and in clear shingly ground,
that will not injure a cable.
To Mr. Blackett (of North Sunderland, agent to the Trinity-
House,) I submitted those suggestions, which received his
cordial approbation; and it is a duty due to that intelligent
gentleman to express how greatly I am indebted to him for his
valuable information, and indefatigable exertions to promote
the intentions of this important service.
The castle consists of a large square and lofty tower, with
angular turrets on each quarter, which part is rendered habi-
table and extremely comfortable, resembling the baronial halls
of former ages, with smaller apartments, and a spacious library
well filled with useful and instructive books. In the lower
part of the tower is the great entrance-hall, with apartments,
fitted up for shipwrecked sailors, and where bedding is provided
for thirty, should such a number happen to be cast on shore
at the same time.
To what nation the honour is to be given of being the
founders of Bamborough Castle, I could find no documents to
establish that point, but it is strongly conjectured to have
been occupied by the Romans; but history has placed upon
record, that about the year 547, a Saxon warrior, Prince Ida,
attended by his twelve sons, landed at Flamborough, and
extending his conquest to the province of Bernicie, extending
from the river Tyne to the Firth of Forth, took possession of
Bamborough Castle,^ and was declared the king, the first
sovereign over the Northumbrian colonies. Without pursuing its


succession of proprietors, I shall come to the period of its more
interesting history, in reference to the noble purposes of ex-
tensive benevolence, when it devolved by marriage to Nathaniel,
Lord Crewe, Bishop of Durham, which took place on the twenty-
third of July, 1700. This ever-memorable and noble-hearted
prelate died on the eigthteenth of September, 1720, in the
eighty-eighth year of his age; and having no issue, he be-
queathed by will, these and all his immense estates to
charitable uses; thus erecting to his memory a monument,
not only of imperishable fame, but of unparalleled beneficence:
when, after providing for his funeral, and giving several
legacies to his friends, he left the residue of his property, of
every kind and nature whatever, upon trust hereafter declared,
and for ever to five trustees, all of whom must be clergymen;
three of them are a majority.
The arrangements for works of charity, in the supply of
food, from the granaries ; for instruction by schools ; and for
medicine with medical advice to whoever may require it, are
of so extensive a nature and character, that would occupy a
volume to detail the unparalleled acts resulting from a generous
mind and noble heart. The arrangements during severe
storms by patrolling the beach, for bringing the unfortunate
shipwrecked men, who may be cast on shore, to this asylum
of benevolence, greatly excited my admiration; and I wish
here to place upon memorable record, my best and most
grateful thanks to those, by whose kindness I had the extreme
delight to witness how faithfully the Trust discharged the
duties imposed on them.
It is quite impossible to conceive any sight so terrific,
as to view this part of the ocean during an eastern gale, from
the innumerable dangers that are presented; and if the wea-
ther is sufficiently clear, the eye may range from Tynemouth to
St. Abb's Head, the group of the Fern Islands, with its rocks,
and Holy Island, sublimely but awfully grand, surrounded by
white foam.


Earl Grey having most kindly favoured me with letters of
introduction to Mr. Hamilton Nesbit and to tbe Earl of
Lauderdale, I received the greatest kindnesses from these dis-
tinguished persons. The latter noble peer drew my par-
ticular attention to the circumstance of the two frigates that had
been lost, and that such loss probably proceeded from the
mistaking or want of proper lights. This determined me to
be excessively circumspect and particular in collecting tbe best
information I could procure on my proceeding on this highly
important and interesting subject. Before I left tbe noble
Earl, he had the kindness to favour me with letters of intro-
duction to many of the most distinguished persons in science
and general information residing in Edinburgh: among them,
the Lord "Provost, Professors Playfair, Leslie, and Monro, Sirs
J. Sinclair and G. Clarke, Mr. Patrick Walker, the gentleman
usher of the white rod, and many others, celebrated by their
literary attainments, or high professional acquirements.
The object to which Lord Lauderdale particularly directed
my attention, induced me to report as follows:—“ Among
the various improvements produced with a view to guard
against shipwreck, and constituted to add security and advan-
tages to navigation, the system of Lights deservedly stands
first, because it warns and points out objects of danger in the
hours of darkness; and giving certain information of a vessel’s
situation in a trackless and stormy ocean, and thus aiding
her to reach the destined port in safety.
“ If, however, this admirable and well-designed plan be not
duly attended to, or inadaption to the purpose intended, (for to
nothing else can it be attributed) the Lights are at times not
visible, or present repeated obscurations, the dangers that
attend the maritime interests of the country, and to which
the lives of a most valuable class of men are constantly ex-
posed, increase to a truly alarming degree.”
These remarks I felt called upon to make from the observa-
tions I had made on the Light upon the island of May, which


is situated at die mouth of the Firth of Forth. My attention
was particularly directed to it, by the repeated representations
I received from persons along the coast, that the loss of many
vessels had been attributed to it; and it was farther said,
partly to involve the destruction of the two frigates lately
wrecked at Dunbar.
As this subject is so important, 1 must make the following
extract from my Report: —“ In order to make correct observa-
tions for forming an opinion, I took the aid of a good glass,
and employed myself in looking at the Light on several clear
winter nights: Sometimes (when 1 presume the lire was stirred)
a hrujht JI ante was exhibited, hut it was of short duration ,
and sunk atjain into darkness.
“ 1 am confirmed in this remark by the officer commanding
the signal station at Black Castle, which is on an eminence
immediately opposite to the island; and by the reports of
many of the officers commanding ships of war on the Leith
station; but 1 may in particular mention Captain Pierce, of
His Majesty’s sloop Rifleman, who declared, in the presence
of Vice-Admiral Otway, commanding on this station, that
during the eighteen months he had been under his command,
he had repeatedly run within half a mile of the island before
the Light was discernible.
“ This Light was maintained by coals, which is at all times,
and in any situation, improper; but it is more so on this
coast, because there are many lime-kilns burning so near it,
that unless the utmost attention be used to keep a regular
blaze, and render the streams of light perceptible, it can be
of no service to navigation, and may easily be mistaken, from
its similitude to those lights on shore.
“ The Island of May, with its Light, are private property;
and to that circumstance I cannot avoid attributing in a great
degree its imperfection, from the want of that control which
is essential to so important a subject; and cannot be properly
maintained, except by Government authority, or a well-regu-
lated society.


“ Under a strong impression of the truth of this, 1 would
earnestly recommend, that this Light be purchased, and placed
under the immediate control of Government, or of a soc'ety
such as the Brethren of the Trinity-House, or the Commis-
sioners for Northern Lights: I need scarcely add, that the
Light should be illuminated with reflectors, so as to form a
distinction from any other.
“ I cannot conclude without remarking, that no study would
be more beneficial to navigation, than that of producing a
method of determining the situation of, and knowing every
Light, when seen. It is a subject worthy of serious conside-
ration from those to whose department so important a branch
of maritime science belongs; and I shall most readily give my
humble aid, to perfect a system, the result of which would be
of incalculable good to this nation, and to universal maritime
commerce. It gives me much pleasure now to state the light
is now in the hands of the Trinity-house, and is one of the
most distinguishable on the eastern coast.”
On the presentation of the letters of introduction, nothing
could possibly exceed the flattering reception, and the hospi-
table intentions expressed by all to whom they were addressed;
and from each I was assured of the great interest my endeavours
in the cause of humanity had excited, and of the value of
my productions on the dangerous iron-bound coast of that
country. An anxious desire was also communicated, not only
with a view of its general adoption on the coasts of the king-
dom, but its most extensive promulgation for all nations to be
partakers of its benefits. The chief magistrate of Edinburgh,
the Lord Provost, toolcthe lead in conveying such information
to me, and suggesting that, by a public meeting, such objects
would be best and most effectually attained; and he requested
to know if I had any objection to his proposal, and for my
developing and giving a detailed exposition of my plans, by
models and illustrative and explanatory descriptions, in all
its various parts, for the opinion of persons best qualified


from tlicir .scientific and professional attainments to report
upon them.
On expressing m3’ readiness, an application was immedi-
ately made to the Highland Society of Scotland for the use of
their hall, not onty from its spaciousness, but as calculated to
gratify the numerous persons who took so warm an interest in the
subject; and as securing the attendance of its members, whose
countenances, if the plan was found entitled to encouragement,
could, from their influence, go far to its general adoption, and
facilitate its extensive promulgation. A da}’ was fixed for
such meeting: as the time approached for my undergoing such
ordeal, I could not but reflect on the engagement I had made,
and the task I was about to undertake, knowing that among
the members of that society were the Professors of the Univer-
sity, as well as all the eminent men of the day, and many who
had handed down their names to posterity, by placing on
record their fame, not only in this emporium of learning, but
to lasting posterity: and I would have gladly avoided such
meeting, if I could have done so without compromising m3’
character, and drawing on me the opprobium of a want of
confidence. Indeed, I was strongly impressed with a fearful
apprehension that I hazarded the little reputation I had al-
read}' attained; these sentiments I communicated to a friend,
Mr. Walker, who cheered me b}' the following encouraging
remarks —remarks I have ever since found a perfect truism:—
“ Be not dismayed; for be assured, that on all subjects from
which good or useful projects arc contemplated, they will
always receive the approving and ready assistance from
men of exalted and highly-gifted minds; and that it is only
those of low and mean understandings who debase and make
attempts to depress, as well as defeat, the honourable pursuits
of those in the field of industry, who labour to render their
lives useful; you may therefore, in the expectation of appro-
tion, divest 3’ourself of all apprehension, and confidently ap-
pear before them.”


In the interim, I dispatched my Fifth Report to Lord
Sidmouth, accompanied by the following Letter: —
My Lord, December 12/h, 1812.
I now beg leave to enclose my farther Report,
and to call your Lordship’s attention to its contents.
It has cost me much labour; but I have the satisfaction of
thinking, that in discharging a duty so important to the best
interests of the country, my efforts have not been in vain.
To devise a plan, by which thousands of our fellow-crea-
tures might be rescued from the horrors of shipwreck, has
hitherto been the constant study of my life; to carry it into
execution, will be my future object and pursuit. To accom-
plish these great ends, I have sacrificed my health, property,
and friends: no obstacles have stopped me —no difficulties
have deterred me; without the aid of early patronage or con-
nexions, I have matured a system which every lover of his
country must support, every friend of humanity must rejoice at.
My Lord, I wish not to claim more than my due; let the
public appreciate my merits —I ask no more.
It is extremely painful to me to slate, that the not issuing
my last quarter’s warrant has pul me to the greatest inconve-
nience. How can I pursue this great important object with
advantage to the nation, or credit to myself, if my means are
withheld? Indeed, my Lord, I must appeal to you on this
subject, in a manner the most earnest: I am a stranger to the
language of complaint.
I wish not to offend your Lordship’s feelings, or distress
my own: but how can it be said that justice is done me, when
that support, without which I cannot proceed, is cither denied
me or withheld.
I throw myself on your Lordship’s consideration, and am,
very respectfully, Your Lordship’s
Most obedient and humble Servant,
The Right Hon . Lord Sidmouth, Secretary of
State for the Home Department , London.
GEO. WM. MANBY.
I


On meeting the assembly, my kind friend, Mr. Walker,
introduced me to the leading members of the Highland Society,
to whom I had not been previously known; and, on my being
led to the station where I was to give an exposition of the
services upon which I was employed, a denotive expression
of approbation not only quieted my fears, but gave me full
confidence to read the following address, and which I must
here place upon record, as the first public appeal I ever made.
Gentlemen,
There is no subject, perhaps, so interesting as the pre-
servation of human life, particularly when it is to relieve persons
from the most perilous distress, and especially to save a race
of men who are so much our admiration, and whose preser-
vation is so intimately connected with our nation’s security
and prosperity.
I am fully aware of the difficulties of rendering any address
interesting or instructive, deficient as I know myself to be in
language so absolutely necessary to describe my plans and
thoroughly to convey my meaning; I have therefore much to
contend against in this effort, though I am not without hopes
of making this appeal worthy of the consideration and counte-
nance of this Society.
In the present instance, those difficulties are greatly in-
creased by the attempt to offer suggestions in the presence of
persons accustomed to hear the finest oratory, and to subjects
of science elucidated by the most fascinating powers of elo-
eloquence, supported also by arguments carrying conviction,
and in language wholly irresistible. My hopes, therefore,
only extend to making my plans intelligible; and happy shall
I be, if my attempt at success crowns my endeavours.
Great as the conflict of my feelings is on this occasion,
they derive considerable encouragement from the assurance,
that, in appearing before enlightened characters and liberal
minds, which are known to be invariably generous and candid,


1 shall experience that countenance and kind consideration, so
essential to a person of humble talents, though not the less
zealous in the cause he undertakes.
In submitting my ideas to the notice of so distinguished a
society, on the saving of shipwrecked persons, and in attempt-
ing to confirm ray suggestions by explanatory plans, &c.,
should I succeed, my success will, I hope, sanction the inven-
tion I have had the good fortune to realize being considered
a science, and entitle it to a place in experimental philosophy,
it having undergone the test of experience.
Some of the discoveries in science owe their origin to
accident, and others are attained to or aided by previous steps;
but in this instance, urgent distress has suggested the pursuit,
perseverance has produced the means of relief, and successful
application has confirmed the benefits that will be derived
from its general adoption.
I have been induced to make these observations in con-
sequence of what recently transpired, and in reply to the
innumerable attacks that have been made upon it; in justice
therefore to my feelings, I do declare, that in all the various
productions, I have availed myself of no man’s labour, nor
profited by any man’s ability; but the whole is the result of
infinite reflection, intense application, much toil, and great
expense. Did I view it of importance to establish the right
of originality to the invention, most readily could I do it by
producing living testimonies; that previous to the year 1783,
the attempt was made by me to project a cord from a mortar
over the church where my parent resided, and consequently
some years before the experiment was made in 1791, by an
officer in the Royal Artillery, whose name will for ever bear the
most distinguished respect when merit is fairly appreciated.
Suppose, for argument’s sake, the invention was not the
creation of my mind, no one can scarcely deny me that of
successful application ; by way of analogy, let me ask, was
that great and immortal man, Lord Nelson, the inventor of
I 2


gunpowder? you will naturally say, No; but when I ask, did
he usefully apply it? you will as readily say, Yes: then to
whom is the credit of gunpowder due; the monk, who by
accident produced it, or that great and glorious chief who ap-
plied it to such advantage, and with it saved his country?
1 shall no longer take up your time with my remarks, but
proceed to the immediate object of my experiments, briefly
touching upon the heads of the, service, and endeavour to
confirm and elucidate my suggestions by representations and
actual experiments, leaving the conclusions on each progres-
sive step to the Report of your Committee, whose abilities
and scientific knowledge so much better enable it to describe,
than any composition of mine could explain or express.
At the close, I was honoured with a public vote of thanks,
and the congratulations of many distinguished personages,
who all testified their approbation. I must, however, not omit
one in particular, from an incident I shall ever look backward
upon as the most gratifying I ever experienced, and shall re-
tain with a recollection the pleasure to the latest moment of my
life. The Bishop of Meath having intimated the very deep
interest which he took in the subject, and approbation of
my labours, expressed to me the warmest terms of friend-
ship, requested that 1 would fix an early day to dine with
him, as he would, on that occasion, endeavour to get a few
friends to meet me, as he was sure would render the day
pleasant. On the fixed day, and without knowing in whose
society I was to assemble, it may readily be imagined the
delight 1 experienced by my introduction to, and taken by
the hand by, Sir Walter Scott. Mrs. Grant, the lady who
wrote the letter from the Mountain, and Mr. John Kemble,
who formed the party, besides the hospitable and excel-
lent prelate’s family, who all expressed great pleasure in
being personally known to me, it will be quite impossible,


while my faculties of remembrance are retained, to forget the
delight afforded to me on that day; I must therefore place it
on record, not only for registering my gratitude to my noble
host, but being hailed as a friend taken by the hand, and my
services receiving the warm approbation of the above-named
party.
In the warm-hearted Bishop (Dr. Bums) I found to be
realized the first impression I had formed as to his generous
disposition; also the attributes of a superior mind, and great
perspicuity of taste and ability he displayed when in conver-
sation with his illustrious guests, to rank him highly qualified
for the distinguished station in life he was placed, and at once
to command my reverence to him as a divine, and to admire
him as a man. In Sir Walter, I could not behold him but
with the stare of astonished admiration, from the vastness of
his imagination, the brilliancy of his fancy, the powers of his
wit, and his dignified elegance on every subject, made me re-
gard him as a phoenix of genius; but when he touched upon our
duties to humanity and to philanthropy, and by powerful com-
prehensive sublime reasoning, associating these duties with my
labours, and flattering expressions of friendship in being perso-
nally known to the man who had so devoted his attention to
them, I shall ever consider the proudest reward I have re-
ceived, and to register that day as one so extraordinary, as to
deny a hope that I can ever see the like again.
In Mrs. Grant I found a coldness of manner, yet her great
reservedoess could not conceal her possessing extraordinary
intellectual attainments, and a highly-gifted person; and her
manner reminded me of two ladies, whose friendship I had
the pleasure of possessing when I lived at Clifton, not only as
authoresses, but their generally admitted abilities, Mrs. Piozzi
and Mrs. Pemberton, and whom the world said were members
of the blue-stocking assembly; and I felt it necessary, as sel-
dom as possible, to attend their literary meetings, to shelter
myself from the imputation of being branded an ignoramus.


Mrs. Grant, no doubt from the compliment she had heard
paid to me, and probably from the reputation I had obtained
while at Edinburgh, concluded I was a man of reading, and
appeared desirous of my opinion as to the works of some
authors whom she named; I parried her questions by cautious
replies, but these were unsatisfactory to her: she pressed me on
some others, and unwilling to hazard an opinion that might be
.an injustice or improper, and would betray my ignorance, at last,
on finding it was impossible to avoid her scrutiny, I addressed
her, much to the amusement of all at the table. “ I regret to
say, that I never read but one book in my life, and that was
Robinson Crusoe, from the habits and disposition of that man
being so much in union with my own: indeed, madam, those
habits of enterprize and of exploration, when at school at
Bromley, where there was a large piece of water near at hand,
and a small island upon it, I made a raft to convey me to it,
and in which passage I discovered and caught some very
large tench, where a fish had never before been heard of, and
which obtained for me the nick-name of “ Robinson Crusoe."’
It is proper also to state, madam, that the few advantages I
possess, have been derived from an unceasing desire, and
anxious endeavour, to get into the society of persons known to
possess superior and reputed abilities, instruction far better
attained, and best suited to one whose mind could never be
kept closely attentive to three pages of any book. It may
therefore be readily conceived, not only the instruction, but
the great delight I have experienced for the pleasures of this
day:” at the same time bowing to her, and giving a significant
look for her to apply it to herself. Mr. Kemble said but
little; but one anecdote much pleased me, as it did all who
heard him. On our host’s addressing him, “ I fear your silence
is occasioned by indisposition,” this distinguished tragedian,
in his solemn tone of voice, briefly answered, —“ No, my Lord,
it proceeds from my remembrance that to-morrow night I am
to take my benefit at the theatre; and as my voice is my stock
118


in trade, I must reserve it for that occasion.” All were satis-
fied with it, and no one more than myself, for the opportunity
of more specimens of splendid magical eloquence of the great-
est dramatic author that ever has appeared, to amuse, delight,
and-astonish.
Sir John Sinclair shewed me the greatest attention, and,
on finding that I was enthusiastically devoted to the pursuits
of agriculture, and had occupied a very extensive tract of land
in Norfolk, questioned me much, not only on the course of
husbandry of the high land, but of the low, or fen land; and
I amused him much by the details of proceedings I had taken
to preserve the latter from the deluges that used so often at
those times to take place, previously to the great improvements
in drainage: 1 wound up these recurrences with a senti-
ment that excited great merriment to all that were present.
Although no exertion of mind, or body, or expense, was
spared, to save my property, yet in one day, alas! a crop of
coleseed worth one thousand pounds, a new bank I had just
completed, that had cost me one hundred guineas, and much
other property, were all washed away by an overwhelming
flood, which brought me to this conclusion: —“that the fates
had determined that farming was net destined for me, and
made me apprehend, that if I was to set up a cook’s shop,
every one would leave off eating.”
Mr. Walker, (afterwards honoured with knighthood) whose
kindness and attention on every occasion to promote my views,
and especially the services on which I was engaged, repeatedly
invited talented and superior persons to meet me; and I have
often looked with recollection of great delight, especially on
one lady, whose personal beauty and mental accomplishments
so much engrossed my notice, and whose admirable writings
at the present day arc so highly appreciated and so much ad-
mired, as those of Lady Stepney. At one of these parties,
after the ladies had taken their departure, the company, as
well as myself) expressed the great delight derived from female


society, and especially those who had rendered themselves
eminent from various causes. I therefore introduced the fol-
lowing anecdote that occurred to me in early life, from my
knowledge of Chevalier D’Eon.
1 became acquainted with this celebrated person under-the
following circumstance:—about the time I attained the age of
twenty-one, and enabled to enter into the gaieties of life more
than I had hitherto done, myfriend Raphael Smith, knowing the
great delight I experienced in the society of the fair sex, intro-
duced me to the head of an establishment then at the comer of
Charles-street, Soho-square, where an excellently-conducted ta-
ble d’hote was kept, and the arrangements carried on in a most
delicate way, to prevent any embarrassment either to the mis-
tress of the undertaking, or unpleasant to the feelings of the
visitors, as no person could be admitted without a previous
introduction by some well-known friend: the subsequent ar-
rangements were, that each visitor placed under his plate
half-a-guinea, which the confidential servant took up on his
removal of the first plate. The daily visitors to dinner ge-
nerally consisted of ladies with their friends, under whose
protection they lived, and other females in the absence of their
friends, where they were sure to set down to an excellent
dinner and good society; and where, by the personal attractions
they displayed, and the advantages of mental attainments,
could not fail to captivate, and to meet with a ready compa-
nion to escort them to some place of amusement. It would
occupy a great space to detail in general the persons who
then used to meet; hut there were two I shall never forget,
the one, Lady Ligonier, and the other, Chevalier D’Eon; the
propensities of the former are so well known as not to require
an account of here, but she was a very clever as well as a very
pleasing woman, especially to a very young man: but of the
latter, with the exception of delight I experienced from the
anecdote and brilliancy of thought, and flow of words, on the
happy occasion of meeting with Sir Walter Scott, 1 had never


derived so much gratification as from this extraordinary per-
sonage, whose selection of language was most clever, the sallies
of her wit most delightful, and the boldness of her expression,
especially when delivered for the object of satire, when it was
most keen: indeed, her two former properties so completely
won me, that I could not resist from giving her my r best support
on every subject in which she entered; and on an occasion,
when I thought an undue advantage was endeavoured to be
taken of her in a conversation then passing, I could not help
volunteering my services, asserting, that as I never would
allow a woman in my hearing to be attacked without my best
efforts to support, I silenced her adversary, and for which she
used to designate me her “ little championbut she soon proved
how little she required such assistance, as the following anec-
dote will suffice. In the course of an argument she had with
a foreign officer, who not knowing who she was, and the con-
versation being on that of continental warfare, the subject
greatly excited both; and the gentleman, finding that he had
not only the worst of it, but provoked a laugh at his expence,
that chagrined him, concluded by saying,—“ as lam arguing
with a woman, I shall repress my feelings;” to which she
hastily and instantly replied, —“ Sir, I desire you not to shield
your feelings under such consideration; and allow me to tell
you, that if your feelings require redress, and that nothing but
satisfaction will restore them, to consider me still filling the
situation of a captain of dragoons, and consequently ready
immediately to repair the injury your feelings have suffered on
my account,” at the same time handing her card to him; the
gentleman read the card, and observing the name, bowed and
apologized for his warmth, and the argument closed.
Her history being so extraordinary, a great friendship was
formed betwee.i this celebrated woman and myself, and she
related many interesting details of the different actions in which
she had been engaged while serving in the army, as well as her


exploits, when filling a diplomatic situation; and informed me,
that in consequence of being wounded and carried from the
field in a senseless state, led to the discovery of her sex;
I also inquired what induced her to assume the character of
a man, and to enter into the army, of which she gave the fol-
lowing particulars: that it was to preserve a family patrimony
dependant on male issue, and that her birth was kept as secret
as possible; and that so soon as she was at a proper age to
receive information, it was impressed upon her mind, the ne-
cessity of her assuming the male character as the only step to
save her family from destruction and abject penury, if her sex
was disclosed; she was therefore from her childhood accus-
tomed to manly exercises, and received a manly education;
and she chose the profession of a soldier as a life less liable
to discovery, and to advance her to fame.
I have often listened with extraordinary delight to the
details of the different actions and public services in which she
had been engaged and employed; and her narrative of the
discovery of her sex, when carried senseless from the field of
battle, was detailed in language to excite the warmest sym-
pathy from her hearers. On one occasion, when at the table,
I inquired how she conducted herself in the society of females,
as it ever is expected a soldier should be gallant and court the
attention of the sex: her reply was —I was like you, as I
observe, always endeavouring to ingratiate yourself with the
fair sex; but I was unlike you, knowing how far I might go
without the hazard of detection. The remark caused a hearty
laugh at my expence, and especially on her comparing me to
a bee that roved from flower to flower. Her appearance was
most masculine, with strong hard features, and was tall for a
woman. She always wore a black dress, a very deep low
stomacher, or more properly long-waisted gown, wore her hair
in a roll before, and a high peaked cap.


In completing my survey of the eastern coast, it was for-
warded to Lord Sidmouth, with the following address: —
Edinburgh, 11 th March, 1813.
My Loud,
With this letter, 1 have the honour to transmit
the continuation and conclusion of my report from the southern
extremity of Norfolk to the Firth of Forth; and I cannot help
flattering myself with the hope, that ray labours will be pro-
ductive of infinite good to the country at large, and therefore
meet with your Lordship’s approbation, as I am proud to say,
they have from every person who have witnessed them: among
whom arc some of the most distinguished characters in the
north, who have been pleased to bestow on me unequivocal
marks of the highest approbation.
I feel thankful to your Lordship for your assistance, of
which I stood in abundant need, (having expended a conside-
rable sum in the prosecution of the service,) though I cannot
enough lament the serious deduction made from my account of
expences, actually incurred in the execution of a duty in its
very nature arduous and unavoidably expensive. Had I ri-
gidly confined m3 7 inquiries and operations to the strict letter
of my duty, much useful information might have been lost,
and mam’ important points neglected.
In the discharge of my office, it has been my constant and
anxious wish to present my country with information and
instruction calculated to secure from shipwreck the valuable
lives of its seamen, the property of its merchants; and that I
might not fail in so desirable an object, no means have been
left untried, no suggestion that promised benefit unproduced:
thus it is, I have necessarily’ been subjected to expences which,
though perhaps not strictly according to the reading of 1113’
engagement, yet, being incurred in maturing a plan for the
salvation of my countrymen, and so useful a part of them, I
cannot believe it will be denied me the reimbursement of these


expenccs; and in the justice and liberality of my country, I
hope it will not be insisted I am to be paid according to the
“ bond,” and the bond only, but according as my services shall
appear to merit reward. I ask no more.
I have the honour to be,
My Lord,
Your Lordship's most obedient humble Servant,
GEO. WM. MANBY.
The Right Hon l)le Lord Sidmouth,
Secretary of State for the Rome
Department, London.
I had now the gratification to receive the following com-
munication, referring to the Report of the Committee of the
Highland Society of Scotland.
Drumseugh, loth March, 1813.
Dear Sir,
The Highland Society of Scotland are constituted
for encouraging agriculture and manufactures in Scotland, but
the common cause of humanity in which you have so inde-
fatigably and successfully exerted yourself, induced them to
appoint a committee (of which I have the honour to be con-
vener) to meet with you and report the result of, and their
opinion upon, the series of experiments you were pleased to
make in illustration of your plans for effecting a communication
with a vessel stranded on a lee-shore, and rendering assistance
to shipwrecked persons.
I consider myself very fortunate in the opportunity I had
of so particularly noticing your experiments and understanding
your plans, of which I have endeavoured (with the appro-
bation of Admiral Fraser, w’ho accompanied me) to give a
connected description, in the form of a report read by me to
the committee of the Highland Society, and which, in com-
pliance with your request, I now beg leave to enclose to you.


From what I have stated of the constitution of the society,
you will readily perceive, though the committee contained the
names of Dr. Playfair, Dr. Rutherford, Dr. Hope, and other
scientific men, it would not be consistent for them to report
scientifically and minutely on a subject of which they were
to judge as country gentlemen, therefore, though they were
pleased to give a portion of that credit to me for my descrip-
tion of those plans, which of right belongs to you as the
author of them, the meeting declined going into a detailed
report, but requested me to draw up a short one, approving
generally of the result of your experiments, concurring in
opinion with the parliamentary and other reports, than which
nothing can be more strongly expressed, and recommending to
the society to use every endeavour to promulgate these plans,
and induce the parishes and landed proprietors to aid the
views of government for establishing your apparatus along the
dangerous parts of the coasts and islands of Scotland, and
further to recommend to the society to present you with a
medal, expressive of the high sense they entertain of your
abilities and exertions in so meritorious a pursuit.
The above is the general outline of what the report will
contain, of which you will receive a copy on application for it
to the secretary, as soon as it is officially notified.
My own opinion is so fully expressed in the report read to
the committee, that to add to it here would be superfluous;
but if the plans proposed by you be not adopted along the
coast, I shall certainly think, independent of the great loss
which must happen to our mercantile interests, that the public
will be accessary to a degree of neglect so great, that I may
almost apply to it the term of criminal, because many valuable
lives are from the absence of such means annually lost. This
opinion is not chimerical, for a Greenlandman (the Orion) was
wrecked on the Aberdeen coast no longer ago than last month,
and forty-six men perished so close to land, that their features
were quite discernible by those on shore; and under cir


cumstances, that had your apparatus been there, the most
reasonable prospect appeared of saving every one of them.
I am, Dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
PAT K . WALKER.
Captain G. W. Manby.
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE.
That on the first of February, Captain Manby proceeded
to explain the principles of his plans illustrated by drawings,
models, and the production of part of the apparatus: on the
fourth of February they were continued by some experiments
in the Castle; and on the eighth of February, second and
fifth of March, they were further exemplified by throwing
the shot and rope affixed, from mortars placed in Bruntsfield
Links. The mortars used on these occasions were a twelve-
pounder and a two-pounder. By the former a deep-sea-line
was projected, both with the common shot and the barbed
one, about one hundred and ninety yards, with eight ounces
of powder; and the two-pounder, with an ounce and half,
projected a line above one hundred and twenty yards with a
pear-shaped shot. At the second exhibition, the former
went above two hundred yards with the same quantity of
powder; but on this occasion, probably a few degrees of
elevation were gained by the slope of the ground from whence
it was fired; upon the other trials the elevation of all the
mortars was seventeen and half degrees. A tree was selected
to represent the mast and rigging of a vessel, over which
the projections were made, with the utmost precision, though
the wind blew a hurricane from the SW., almost at a right
angle to the line of direction given to the shot.
These experiments and others have been performed before
former committees, and whose reports, accompanied with
such certificates and documents as appear proper to form the


most complete and comprehensive view of this highly im-
portant subject, were submitted to us.
The committee are bound to notice in the outset, the
praise-worthy and humane motives which induced Captain
Manby to lay his plans before the Society, namely, that in
obedience to the commands of government, he was in the
course of examining the coasts of the United Kingdom, for
the purpose of promulgating and establishing such plans as
might seem to him most likely to be of assistance to ship-
wrecked persons. This, he stated, he had now performed
from the southern extremity of the coast of Norfolk to the
Frith of Forth, and his report thereon had been forwarded
to the Secretary of State for the Home Department. As the
season prevented his progress on that service, he judged that,
from the influence of the Highland Society extending along
the whole coast of Scotland, his time could not be more
usefully employed, nor the objects of government be belter
attained, than by submitting to them the whole of his plans.
It appears, that in most cases of shipwreck upon a lee
shore, the vessel strikes within eighty or a hundred yards of
the beach. This was particularly the case with His Majesty’s
gun-brig, Snipe, which was wrecked on the 18th of February,
1807, within fifty yards of the Haven’s Mouth at Yarmouth,
and upwards of sixty persons lost. Other melancholy wrecks
were recounted by Captain Manby, but the Snipe is here
mentioned only as it was the cause of drawing his attention
to perfect the plans now under consideration.
Communication with the vessel in distress, forms the most
prominent and essential feature in this service To obtain
this, Captain Manby’s plan is to project a ball with a rope
attached to it from a mortar on the beach.
The apparatus consists of a mortar, a ball with a hook
and eye to affix the rope to, a piece of plated hide or leather,
or a case or tube to cover about two feet of rope, and a rope
of length and thickness proportioned to the size of the mortar.


These form the primary means to effect communication, and
be noticed separately.
The mortars used by Captain Manby, in the experiments
shown to the committee, are peculiarly light in their con-
struction, and powerful in their effect, which are most
important qualifications in this service; for though his
twenty-four-pounders are preferable to his two-pounders,
because they convey a larger rope, yet it often happens that
sufficient space cannot be had to lay them ; besides, they
require additional power and time to convey, and more hands
than at all times can be found to manage them. Three sizes
are used—one that throws a two-pound ball with a long line
above one hundred and twenty yards; one that throws a
twelve-pound shot with a deep-sea line two hundred yards;
and one that throws a twenty-four-pound shot with one and
half inch rope two hundred and fifty yards.
Three different kinds of balls were also shown, with each
an eye rivetted into them. The first was a common round
shot; the second had a longer neck to the eye, on which are
grapples with barbs; and the third of a pear-shape to fit the
small mortar, which by this form, gains a third in weight,
acquires a greater range, and consequently produces a greater
effect. It may here also be observed, that Captain Manby
proposes another shot similar to the former two, but with the
addition of holes to insert fusees, which, when enflamed,
enable the people on board to see what part of the rigging
the rope attaches to in a dark night.
The rope forms the next consideration: a good deal of
difficulty and consideration has been requisite to attach it to
the shot: —experience has proved that as little play at the
eye as possible should be given to it. A chain had been
tried without success, owing to its being without sufficient
resistance and elasticity, and a rope, though it possessed
these qualities, was affected by the fire in defiance of several
chemical applications. Captain Manby has adopted, and


successfully used, a piece of plaited leather orliide to affix to
the ball, or he applies with like success a leather tube or
case to pass that part of the rope through.
Though not strictly within the object of this report, yet,
as connected with it and forming a matter of itself important,
the committee think fit to notice what Captain Manby
stated regarding ropes, the characters and qualities of which
he had been led to attend to in considering those best
adapted for this service. The requisite characters are—pli-
ancy, strength, and durability. The former implies elasticity,
as essential to resist the violent action or impulse occasioned
by projection; for if the elasticity be in any place checked
by a kink, there it is almost certain of breaking; strength is
obviously requisite, and nothing will tend so much to attain
it, as an attention to the regularity of the yams or strands.
To acquire durability, the use of mucilaginous matter must
be abolished. It has been usually employed to render the
threads smooth, but when it is affected by humidity, that
powerful enemy to vegetable substances, it causes a process
of fermentation that mildews and destroys the rope. To
counteract this, a character of water-proof may be given it
by a solution of equal parts of sacchrum satumi and allura.
The patent ropes are those recommended by Captain Manby,
and used by him.
Having now noticed the radical apparatus, the next and
most important consideration is the delivery of the rope to
follow the progress of the ball; for if it happens to be in the
least entangled, or overlapped, it is next to impossible to ex-
pect success. Two things are necessary' to be in view: first,
ease and readiness for the rope to deliver itself; and second,
to be laid in such a form that a glance of the eye may at once
discover any irregularity in it.
To accomplish this, three modes were exhibited, which
all afforded the first of these qualities, termed French faking,
whale laid, and chain faking; but as the two last do not
x


partake of the second qualification, they are abandoned,
being liable to confusion in the hour of hurry and distress.
On the other hand, though the French faking does possess
them both, yet it requires a large smooth space of level
ground, which may be chosen for the purpose of calm expe-
riment, but cannot be had on the rugged and uneven ground,
where service in most cases require the use of the rope.
These difficulties have been removed by the ingenuity of
Captain Manby’s discovery of a new method of laying the
rope within a narrow compass, in a sort of double or com-
pound French faking, and consists of an alternated French
fake placed longitudinally and transversely: this has been
exhibited to other committees; and the whole extent of the
largest rope used in this service is laid in a crate or frame of
three feet by six, and four inches deep. The top is fastened
down until required, when it is hurried to the beach along
with the mortar and its stores, and when the top is removed,
all is ready for action, the bottom of the basket forming a
level bed, and the rope by that means is projected from it on
the most rugged rocks or surface without the chance of
interruption.
A new and simplified mode of coiling or laying the rope
has been invented by Captain Manby since his arrival in
Scotland, that enables it to be done amidst the dark and
storm with the greatest correctness. It consists of a square
or oblong frame, with its outer edge surrounded by conical
pegs at equal distances, along which the rope is laid, and
the rope, as in the one exhibited to former committees, fas-
tened down by a cover or lid until required, when it is only
necessary to invert it, unlace the side straps and lift up what
was the bottom part, and the pegs immediately quit the rope,
which is thus left upon what was the lid, more correctly laid
than by any other mode could be done ready to be used as
from a platform.
Departing from the order, but with a view to complete the


description of apparatus, the committee think fit next to notice
Captain Manby’s inode of exploding gunpowder, and setting
off a mortar by means of a composition. The nigged beach
and uneven ground have heen by the former contrivance com-
pletely overcome; and following out the train of obstacles that
are likely to be met with, this mode enables a mortar to be
exploded when the contending elements prevent the use of a
light or application of gunpowder. This is done with the
common tube, primed with a powder, that on being touched
with a liquid (even after immersion in water) an action imme-
diately takes place, it ignites and communicates combustion
to the powder in the mortar.
A sailor was now exhibited with the deal frame already
mentioned, containing one hundred and fifty yards of log line
coiled for service, slung as a knapsack, with the two-pounder
mortar slung by a leather strap in a socket and two rounds
of ammunition, with his box of tubes, liquid, and powder
fastened in front round his w r aist, the whole weighing only
thirty-two pounds. The sailor said he could readily go aloft
with it; and the intention is to give the people on board the
chance of aiding themselves by throwing a shot on shore from
the tops. It appears by the Artillery Report (tw’cnty-sccond
of May, 1811,) that a man w'as exhibited, equipped in a
similar way on horseback, but having a three-pounder on its
carriage fixed upon the saddle, altogether weighing sixty-tw'o
pounds, with which he travelled one and one-third of a mile,
dismounted his mortar, and projected a line one hundred and
fifty-three jards from it, all in six minutes.
On many rocky parts of the coast it may not be possible
for the crew r to get up some of the stupendous cliffs under
which vessels are sometimes driven, but even here Captain
Manby puts despair to defiance, for he uses a rope-ladder,
which consists merely of a rope with loops at convenient dis-
tances, spliced on for the support of the feet and hands in
getting up the cliff. This was projected one hundred and
k 2


ninety-four yards from a twenty-four-pounder mortar before
tlie Artillery Committee.
Captain Manby’s exertions have also produced a mode of
applying all these means of communication in the night, by
the contrivance of a compound yet simple process. Three
points are necessary to be gained—first, to ascertain the
situation of the vessel to which relief is wished to be given;
second, to fix its direction by points on shore; and third,
when the shot and rope are thrown, to enable the unfortunate
people on board to know on what part of the vessel the rope
has fallen, which once ascertained, a sailor can make his way
to it in the dark.
The first of these points is obtained by throwing light
spheres or balls filled with luminous balls of star composition,
and a charged fusee from a mortar at an elevation of eighty
degrees, which bursts when between two and three hundred
yards high, and produces a great body of light for nearly a
minute, so as to point out the exact situation of the vessel.
The second part is in readiness to be applied when the star-
light is thrown from the sphere: it consists of a board of two
or three feet long, with a tall thin white piece of wood at each
end, which is brought to bear upon the vessel so as to set
or fix her line of situation, which is thus preserved in the
darkness that succeeds. The mortar is then laid behind this
piece of wood, so as to prolong the line of direction already
fixed by the two pieces of wood, and fired with the fused ball
of the description mentioned, when speaking of the different
kinds of shot as intended to be used to point out the part of
the rigging to which the rope attaches.
Having described the various modes and situations in
which communcation is to be effected with the vessel from the
land, it remains to speak of the means of bringing off the
unfortunate people, which varies according to circumstances.
At one time the people may bring themselves on shore, but in
many cases they are benumbed and lashed in the rigging.


without the power of assisting themselves. Sometimes persons
must go from the shore to cut them from their lashing, for
which purpose a boat may be occasionally used with success;
but Captain Manby has formed a cot or cradle, supplied with
air tubes to preserve its buoyancy, and skirts of fortified bands
of cork along the sides to prevent its oversetting. This forms a
useful part of the invention, for it is so light that four people
can carry it with the greatest ease and expedition, and serving
as a machine to bring the sick or wounded men or women.
The cot is made to travel between the shore and the vessel,
and return by the exertions of the people on land, by the
application of what is termed a gun-tackle purchase and a tail
block. This was explained by a model of the cot, which by
this plan travelled backward and forward between the table of
the committee-room and a map hung on the wall, representing
a vessel, over which it was presumed the barbed shot had
been thrown.
Situations, however, often occur where the vessel is on the
point of going to pieces, and to project the rope is all that
the perilous occasion will admit of, or perhaps no boat is
ready. A knot called a clove-hitch is here applied, by which
persons can fix themselves in the rope at any part of it, and
on the shot being cast off are immediately drawn to shore.
This, however desperate it may appear, has been used with
success, as is certified by nine persons saved. The only cau-
tion here necessary is to bring the tying or knot part to the
breastbone, so as when the rope is pulled, the face may occa-
sionally be enabled to be above the surface of the water to
obtain respiration.
Perhaps, in point of order, it may be next observed, that
Captain Manby proposes a telegraphic mode by certain marked
gestures of the human body, which will enable the people on
shore to understand what is doing on heal'd, and vice verm ;
as for instance, when to cast off the ball, when to pull, when


fo quit the wreck, &c. They are very simple, and annexed
to his report to the Secretary of Slate. Connected with this is
a triangular flag divided into three compartments, or triangular-
shaped colours, by the transposition of which, signals may
be made to vessels which are compelled to run for the shore,
to denote a favourable spot, or one to be avoided. These are
to form part of the stores of each mortar, and he recommends
that they should be universally adopted, and no vessel allowed
to clear at the custom-house without being in possession of a
copy of them.
Before describing the mode successfully employed to get a
boat from the beach, it is necessary to state Captain Manby’s
observations upon life-boats. He considers them in many in-
stances objectionable from their being so large and cumber-
some, as to render it both difficult to have them conveyed to
the point of danger, as well as in many cases to get them from
the beach, as the power of the winds and waves take such a
hold on their unwieldy size. Besides, they are generally so
different from the figure of the boats in which alone the people
on the coast have confidence, that it is often with difficulty
they are manned. The boat at several places have, from these
defects and a general prejudice against it, been given up.
If life-boats are continued, much improvement is requisite,
and here great credit was bestowed by Captain Manby on
John Davidson, Esq., of Sunderland, who remedied an impor-
tant defect in such boats; for at Shields it had been obliged
to return without effecting its purpose of assisting at a wreck
to bale the water out, which suggested to him the propriety of
a mode of fixing a sufficient quantity of air in the boat to force
it to its own buoyancy, which, though filled with water, he
has enabled it to recover by means of holes in the bottom to
allow the water to escape. Still, however, Mr. Davidson’s
boat is not so safe as it may be made by securing the air in
kegs, for at present the air may be entirely lost by an accident


to the bottom of the boat, and the lives of the crew endan-
gered, when by this improvement, her buoyancy will continue
to be preserved, though her bottom was gone.
Captain Manby’s plan is to convert the boats in common
use at any place into a life-boat, because the people are accus-
tomed to repose confidence in them; and he conceives that
that confidence would naturally be increased by any additional
means of safety and security proposed to them. Several plans
have been produced upon the same principle, by fixing casks
in boats, but Captain Manby’s mode of distributing them is
certainly advisable. He calculates on two gallons of air being
requisite to support a person, and he secures this in oil casks
as most preferable. The whole expence will not exceed fifty
shillings a boat; therefore he holds it highly culpable in any
vessel whatever which is not so prepared.
Having now stated Captain Manby’s remarks on life-boats,
the attention of the committee was directed to the situation of
a vessel on a bar at the entrance of a harbour, with his sug-
gestions for giving relief with a small mortar placed in the
boat’s bow; and when on a bank at a distance from a shore,
where, owing to a heavy surf, it has been found impossible
to get a boat from the beach to her assistance. This most
distressing situation has been successfully remedied by Cap-
tain Manby, by the following simple process: —On parts of
the coast where wrecks frequently occur, and where the storms
raise such a surf as is above alluded to, he moors a buoy
between two anchors put down beyond the breakers, and pa-
rallel to the shore, having the length of rope proportioned to
the flatness of the beach and the flow of the tide, which pre-
vents its embedding in the sand. When an accident happens,
the barbed shot is projected over this buoy, and when hauled
upon holds upon the rope connecting the two anchors, and by
means of this purchase the boat’s head is kept to the wind and
weather, when no oars could propel her, and so reaches the


deep water, where her oars may be applied, and she then
becomes manageable and useful.
A new apparatus was submitted to the committee for assist-
ing persons liable to perish from the breaking of the ice. One
part of it is aEke applicable to accidents at sea, as a person,
for instance, falling overboard. It consists of a rope with
a noose, which can be tightened by drawing a small wooden
button or slide, through which the doubled part of the rope
passes. The noose part is kept open and afloat by a piece of
whalebone, with which the rope passes through a number of
corks. An egg-shaped piece of wood, asm small buoy, is also
upon the rope, so that when grasped by the person in danger,
it is prevented from slipping through his hands. The object
is for the person to get the noose over his head and arm, when
he may be drawn up the ship’s side in perfect safety, and the
corks have the additional use to prevent him being hurt by
the rope.
The cradle, or wicker boat, with little alteration, is made
to. slip along the ice and settle in the hole where it is broken,
and in case the body has sunk, the person in the boat is pre-
pared. with a long grapple, fixed upon a shaft that may be
lengthened at pleasure, by a set of pieces each six feet in
length, for the purpose of immediately fishing up a body that
may have been drawn some distance under the ice.
The committee having now concluded their description of
the apparatus used, proceed to state their conclusions on the
experiments made before them, with such other observations
as may have been submitted to them by Captain, Manby, on
the different uses to which these inventions, may be applied,
and suggestions for promulgating the means of aiding, persons
who are shipwrecked, and encouraging the people, on the coast
to be aiding on these melancholy occasions.
It is unnecessary for the committee to repeat any thing
they have already stated in describing the apparatus, as to the


mortar, rope, and shot; nor can any commendation of the 1
society add to the high character given to this mode of com-
munication by the various reports of committees more qualified
from their habits and educations to form a correct judgment of
them than this committee.
A good deal of discussion has taken place in regard to the
originality of this part of the plan, but all the other parts are
admitted to be the result of his awn mind. This, however, is
a subject it is not presumed the society meant the committee
to inquire into, nor does it seem to be of any moment to the
cause of humanity, for it is an equal chance that the mode of
projecting a harpoon with a rope attached, and the using a
ball thrown from a mortar on board, as proposed by Mr. Bell,
to the shore, and from the shore to the vessel, as practised by
Captain Manby, may have all been discoveries by these indi-
viduals unknown to, and unconneced with, each other. To
both Lieutenant Bell and Captain Manby the greatest merit is
due; but surely the eopiator, who nobly practices the inven-
tion of another, and by it saves above ninety lives, cannot
be too highly applauded.
Upon this point it would seem that the committee of par-
liament had judged of the originality, for they state, “ It has
been proved to this committee that the lives of thirty-three
persons have been saved; that the invention is new, highly
meritorious, and when generally known likely to be productive
of very great and essential sendee.” Captain Manby main-
tained before the committee his right to be considered the
inventor, without wishing to interfere with Mr. Bell. “In
justice to my own feelings,” said he, “ I do now declare, that
in all the various- productions, I have availed myself of no
man’s labour, and profited by no man’s ability, but they have
been the result of infinite reflection, intense application, much
toil, and great expence.”
Mr. Bell’s mode was to fire the shot from the vessel, and
he made several successful experiments from a boat on the


Thames in a calm day. The parliamentary committee upon
this point reported, “ that the invention of Mr. Serjeant Bell,
in 1791, referred to in the report from the Board of Ordnance,
printed by order of the House in the last session, though in-
genious, has in no instance produced any beneficial advantage;
and it appears to this committee to be totally inapplicable in
case of vessels being stranded, the sea in such cases breaking
over them in such a way as would prevent a shell being fired
to shore, supposing the vessel to be provided with a mortar,
which is never the case in the merchant service.”
An Artillery Committee made several reports which are
hereto annexed, wherein they uniformly gave great praise to
Captain Manby, whose experiments had been most successful
in their results, but still they as uniformly revert to the plan
proposed by Mr. Bell of that corps, and do not seem to coin-
cide with the opinion of the parliamentary committee, which
was, that it was “ totally inapplicable,” for the artillery com-
mittee report that Mr. Bell’s “ idea was to project the rope
from the ship to the shore, which is assuredly the method most
to be depended on, as the vessel in that case carries the means
with it, and need not rely upon any fortuitous assistance from
the shore.”
Though the committee are not to investigate the fact of
who first suggested the mode of projecting a shot with a rope
attached from a mortar, (which is the only part claimed for
.Mr. Bell) they think it their duty to give their opinion upon
whether the projection of the rope from the ship to the shore,
or from the shore to the ship, is likely to be attended with
most success. In judging therefore between them, reference
must be had to actual experiment, and results aided by the
opinions of experienced and practical men, all of whom are
decidedly in favour of Captain Manby’s method of communi-
cating from the shore to the vessel.
If the rope could be projected from the vessel, the com-
mittee would concur in the opinion of the ordnance committee,
that it would still be better than the other mode, though it


might expose those who other their assistance on the beach to
the hazard of being struck by the shot; but until some other
invention is made, the committee must, though much against
their inclination, concur in the opinion of the parliamentary
report, the truth and justice of which is proved, —first, by
the certificates of naval men, and people who have been saved
by means of projecting a rope from the shore, when it was
utterly impossible to have fired a mortar from the vessel; and
second, by the grateful certificates of numbers who have been
saved to their country and their friends by Captain Manby’s me-
thod of communicating with the vessel from the land, whereas
not an instance of one having been saved by Mr. Bell’s method
has been produced to the committee, from which they con-
clude that none has occurred, because it was found impossible
to fire from the deck of the vessel.
It is also to be remarked, that Mr. Bell, in place of laying
the rope as Captain Manby does, used it on a common fishing-
line reel, which is assuredly a bad plan, and never to be
depended on, for the chances of its breaking are very many,
and even if it should not break, its direction is made uncertain,
and its range much reduced by the continued resistance and
jerking occasioned by its disengaging itself from the reel.
It has not failed to meet the observation of the committee,
that other cases may occur at sea, where a shot and rope may
be projected from one vessel to another, when communication
might be essential, and could not otherwise be obtained. In
this way a vessel might be taken in tow, or receive other
assistance without hazard of danger by approaching too near
when water-logged, when damaged in action, and numberless
other cases which especially in large convoys often occur, and
can easily be conceived.
On this subject, Dr. Jamieson, physician to the fleet, says, —
“ I think I may quote with propriety from my own knowledge,
that had our fleet been supplied with your apparatus, in the
gale following Trafalgar action, that several hundred lives


might have been preserved, when all other attempts would
have proved dangerous and abortive.”
The difficulties of firing a mortar from a stranded vessel,
are in some degree obviated by the application of Captain
Manby’s chemical powder and liquid; and though it may not
be practicable to five it from the deck, there may still be a
distant possibility of firing it from the tops, and however re-
mote the chance, it is certainly worth the trial. In this view,
the sailor was equipped as already described, with his little
mortar and stores to go aloft: a life-boat should also be
provided with a small mortar, though it may not always be
possible to discharge it; it is no encumbrance, and if one case
occur in a hundred, where a life-boat upon approaching a
vessel stranded on a reef or bank, finds her so surrounded
with breakers as to prevent her communicating with her, and
which could be accomplished by projecting a rope, it would
be highly culpable not to be prepared even for such a chance.
It is not in the cause of humanity alone that the plan of
projecting a rope from a mortar may be useful. It promises
to be of service in the art of war, in effecting communication
with the opposite banks of rivers and creeks, and so to expedite
the passage of an army, or its stores and supplies, especially
where they move in detachment, or act in desultory warfare
in a country intersected with rivers, which is thus confirmed
by the opinion of General Sir David Baird: —
“ I have no hesitation in expressing my firm conviction,
that the mode you adopt for the projection of ropes, might be
successfully applied to effect a passage across a river, and
might materially facilitate military movements, by aiding the
construction of bridges in countries intersected by streams of
water courses.”
“D. BAIRD.”
“ June 3, 1812"
The committee, in concluding this part of their report, bog
to add their entire approbation of the plan to the many strong


opinions in its favour already given, by which, to use the
words of Dr. Jamieson, is “ given to a shot discharged from a
gun, the too frequent messenger of death, the new character
acquired when armed with the invention, of being the welcome
messenger of protracted life.”
With respect to the mode of firing a gun without a match
or lock, the committee have now to speak. It is a subject
worthy of particular attention, both as forming an important
part of the means of assisting shipwrecked persons, and as
it regards other branches of the public service and the art
of war.
The attention of Captain Manby has been a good deal
directed to overcome the difficulties which can easily be sup-
posed to generally occur in firing a gun amidst wind, rain, and
spray. He had always preferred a tube to loose powder for
priming, as it is neither liable to be blown away, nor does the
cartridge require piercing. It is very simple, and easily made
with a paste of meal gunpowder and spirits of wine; the case
is of a piece of common writing paper, rolled up and cemented
with gum at the outer edge. The only care is when the paste
is put into the case, and in a drying state, to make a longitu-
dinal perforation through which a stream of fire will issue
with such violence when inflamed, as to penetrate and explode
the cartridge.
Previous to the application and discovery of the chemical
composition, Captain Manby used mechanical means to get the
better of the weather. He used a pistol successfully, having
the lock covered with a tin box, and the barrel obliquely cut
over so as not to require much exactness in the direction of
the aim. This has been given up since the chemical dis-
covery, but the committee conceive it would be well to be
prepared with it also.
In all the experiments made before the committee, and in
firing the guns in the castle, Captain Manby used a powder to
prime his tube, which upon being touched with a liquid, never


failed to explode. Neither the powder, nor the liquid pro-
duced any action with gunpowder when separately applied;
but whenever they met, ignition immediately took place, and
exploded gunpowder. Port fires, slow matches, tubes, and a
wax taper, were primed with the powder, and inflamed on the
application of the liquid.
The component parts of the powder were not explained
to the committee, who do not conceive that it partakes of the
character of several powders, which they in similar circum-
stances will ignite, though never applied to discharge pieces
of ordnance. Under the impression that is was a fulminating
powder, and having heard it reported to be dangerous, as
being liable to explode by percussion or friction, they attended
several experiments to have that fact ascertained.
For this purpose, a small instrument on the principle of a
gun-lock was used, with a hammer, which struck a smart blow
on the pan, when the trigger was drawn. Many trials with it
were made, but Captain Manby’s powder remained quite inac-
tive, while others exploded with considerable violence.
The committee also attended Captain Manby at the castle,
on the fourth of February, when the guns were fired by his
primed tubes and liquid, and at their request, some of the
powder was placed in every different way, behind and around
the trucks of the guns, in heaps, scattered, mixed and un-
mixed with gunpowder, and primed tubes and port-fires, but
the guns when fired, recoiled over them, and except scattering
the powder and squeezing the port-fire and tube, no alteration
or change took place. The powder was first ascertained to be
the same used by Captain Manby, by the application of the
liquid to it, both before and after the discharge of the guns.
Under all these circumstances, the committee are inclined
to think, that independent of the advantage to be derived from
its use in cases of shipwreck, that it may be of great service
in war, especially on board of ship, as they cannot imagine
any danger likely to arise, or chance of its igniting between a


deck, and the percussion of by the recoil of a gun with a
wooden truck, since it would not do so either between the two
metallic bodies when tried with the instrument, nor between
an iron truck and a stone platform, when tried with the castle
guns; and further, that these appear to be more severe trials
than the casualties of an action are likely to produce. The
commander-in-chief of the forces in Scotland, and several
general and naval officers, who were present, concurred in
this opinion.
For land-service, it is on many duties especially to be
recommended, as in secret and night attacks, for the explosion
is most certain, the whiteness of the powder aids the direct
application, and the effects are felt by an enemy before they
are aware of the danger; whereas by the common mode, the
port-fire in general use, acts like a blue light, both to betray
the movement and strength of the party.
In regard to the other agent, the liquid, the committee had
no opportunity to judge, but by perusing the naval report of
Admiral Murray, and Captains Curry and Farquhar, it appears
that no danger can arise from it, as it will not inflame gun-
powder, port-fire, slow match, pitch, rope, or wood, and that
the only effect is, that if allowed to remain, it will destroy the
rope and scorch the wood, so as to leave a deep stain, but it
is instantly checked by the application of water.
The committee at the time they formed their opinion in
favour of this mode of discharging guns, were not aware of the
high corresponding opinions given both by the artillery and
naval committee, which they now beg leave to add. The ge-
neral and field officers of artillery, report to parliament, that
in the experiments made before them, “ the effect was certain
and instantaneous, and particularly well adapted to the service
he proposes, which frequently happens during severities of
weather, when it is most difficult to keep matches alight, or to
make the fire of a lock take effect, and in situations where,
from the impossibility of renewing a light, the delay might


prove fatal.” And the naval committee above mentioned re-
port, that it appears to them, “if properly understood by
those who use it, and the materials retain their properties, to
possess more facility, safety, and certainty in firing off guns,
than with the match or loch.” Admiral Sir James Saumarez
gives a similar opinion in a letter to Captain Manby.
The mode of ascertaining the situation of a vessel at night,
and of setting her so as both to throw the shot with precision,
and also to enable the crew to know on what part of the rig-
ging the rope has attached, strikes this committee in as strong
a point of view as it appears to have done the parliamentary
committee, in whose opinion they concur, “ that it is admira-
bly adapted to its purpose.”
This plan occurred to Captain Manby in consequence of
the loss of a Swedish brig called the Wandering Main, which
came ashore in a dark and dismal night at Hasborough, on the
fifth of January, 1809; for seven dreadful hours attempts had
in vain been made to effect the communication, and when the
first dawn enabled them to accomplish it, the vessel had been
so strained in the night, that just as the cot had nearly reached
her, she went to pieces, and all on board perished. The mode
of effecting the communication at night has not been tried, but
affords the strongest prospect of success.
The method of getting a boat from the beach is a most
useful and simple discovery. The committee are very much
disposed to agree with Captain Manby, in thinking the life-boat
too large and cumbersome to enable it to be useful on all occa-
sions; and though it would be greatly aided by this contrivance,
still it is certain that much benefit would accrue if every vessel
had a common boat fitted up with casks, and a proportion of
the boats in every fishing village along the coast prepared in
like manner. The expence is so trifling, and the inconvenience
so small, that many a valuable life might be saved if generally
adopted.
The rope-ladder, the buoyant cot, the rope for aiding per


sons who have fallen overboard, or are in danger owing to the
breaking of the ice, and the grappel and other apparatus for
fishing up quickly the bodies when they have sunk, are all
well adapted to the purposes for which they are proposed by
Captain Manby, who seems so sensibly alive to every situation
of human distress, to so many of which his fertile and perse-
vering mind has afforded the prospect of relief.
One other subject is necessary to be touched upon, though
unconnected with the more immediate means which Captain
Manby has produced for affording relief to shipwrecked per-
sons. —He wishes to stimulate the fishermen and villagers on
the coast to be aiding in cases of wreck, by giving a bounty
or head-money for every person saved. Captain Manby has
strongly urged this subject, and contrasted the head-money
that is given for prisoners taken in war, with the saving of
British lives, for which, though more merited, no reward
is given.
The committee join with Captain Manby in the opinion
that something ought to be done for those who assist at wrecks,
but they are not inclined to think that any reward should be
given in the way of head-money, because humanity is too pre-
cious a jewel to admit of having a price put upon it; and it is
to be hoped that the natural impulse is so strong among the
people on the coast, that the cry of a fellow-creature in distress
will be a sufficient stimulus. Besides, the giving to them to
render every aid in their power, head-money, might lead to
accidents, as the people would get out of control, and lose all
in endeavours to take too many. It occurs to the committee,
that Captain Manby’s laudable views would be equally attained,
if assurance was given that the families and friends who de-
pended for support upon those who might be lost in their
endeavours to save persons from shipwreck, would be amply
provided for by the public: that no other inducement would
be requisite in most cases. At the same time, a reward now
and then to persons who signalized themselves, would no
L


doubt be of infinite service, and secure the assistance of others
whose motives might not be so pure.
Captain Manby estimates, that by the general adoption of
his plan along the coast, the number of lives which may be
saved will average at least five hundred per annum.
In concluding, the committee feel that so much is due by
the country, and indeed by the world, to Captain Manby, for
his able and zealous perseverance in not only perfecting such
a system as that under consideration, but in putting it so suc-
cessfully iu practice. In truth, what words from any committee
can convey to the heart of Captain Manby feelings half so
grateful, and proof of the success of his-plans so strong, as
the known fact that they have “ been already instrumental to
the preservation of ninety souls from a watery grave, of whom
seventy-seven were our own countrymen, and thirteen unfortu-
nate Hollanders.*’
The committee beg to give the concluding opinions of the
artillery and parliamentary committee. The former “ most
readily subscribe their opinion in favour of Captain Manby’s
experiment, and unanimously express themselves in commen-
dation of his laudable zeal and perseverance in bringing to
perfection an invention for so noble a purpose.”
And the parliamentary one thus concludes: —“ The strong
and cogent proofs which have been adduced before your com-
mittee, place the advantages likely to result from Captain
Manby’s plan in the most favourable point of view, and indis-
putably prove that its general adoption will be the means of
preserving annually a number of valuable lives.”
“ The evidence produced by Captain Manby has satisfac-
torily proved the great and important benefits likely to be
derived from his plan being generally adopted.”
The committee do, upon the whole, most heartily concur
and report their opinion to be the same with the above. The
readiness and attention shown by government in furthering
Captain Manby’s plans, and enabling him to survev the British


coasts for the purpose of promulgating them, and suggesting
such improvements as may occur to him in his progress to
afford assistance to shipwrecked persons, deserve the thanks
of the nation. Is is to be hoped, that at every signal station,
at every custom-house and excise-office, and even at every
light-house where they can be kept with safety, government
will enable mortars and requisite stores to be kept, and give
directions for training the persons in charge of them to the
proper use of them.
It is not, however, to government alone that the only suc-
cess is to be looked for. Much may be done by individuals at
no great expence, since the most complete set of apparatus
for a twenty-four pounder will not exceed twenty pounds, and
the twelve and two pounders in proportion.
The committee beg to suggest that it be recommended to
all the parishes in Scotland, and more especially the maritime
ones, to join in the views of government, by establishing sets
of apparatus for their own application in case of necessity;
and as the influence of this society extends along every creek
and haven on the coast of Scotland, the committee would
recommend still farther, that at the houses of the principal
proprietors, or their factors, and even in the smaller islands,
where perhaps a single family reside, that the small mortar,
with its stores, (which the committee have seen, can be easily
carried and managed by one man) be provided, and the larger
ones where the population or situation will admit of them.
Thus will the views of government, and the best interests
of a maritime country be forwarded, and the unfortunate ma-
riner, who has been driven upon those shores for which he has
fought, and conveyed their produce and manufactures to other
lands, have still a hope left, and cling with heartfelt gratitude
to those means of preservation which Captain Manby’s inven-
tions bave enabled his friends on shore to communicate to him.
The committee would advise a record also to be kept of
the various persons saved, and of the persons who have been
i. •_>


instrumental in saving them, and in transmitting their thanks
to Captain Manby, which the society cannot do in too marked
a manner. They would also recommend to his consideration,
some arrangement for fixing in Scotland a depot, as has been
done in England, where parishes and individuals may be
supplied with the mortars and apparatus by the tradesmen
at fixed prices.
PAT K . WALKER.
Drumseugh, \5th March, 1813.
During my sojourn at Edinburgh, two incidents occurred,
from which originated my endeavours to avert the calamities
attendant from fire, and from drowning by breaking through
the ice: the former, from a conflagration in one of the lofty
buildings in the old town, that became very destructive, from
it raging at an height scarcely within the reach of engines, the
difficulty of approach, the scarcity of water, and from the im-
possibility of its extinguishment by ordinary means. The
latter, from the drowning of persons who had broken through
the ice while skaiting. These circumstances induced mo to
invent the implements that are already before the public.
There was one other circumstance that greatly invited my
attention while at Edinburgh, from its connexion with my far-
famed county-man, the immortal Nelson —it was the pillar
erected to his memory on Carlton-Hill: I viewed it in all
situations, and at various distances; and in one position, about
two miles off, where I observed the rock on which it stands to
bear the resemblance of the human face; and so powerful did
I find the impression on my mind to resemble the profile of
that renowned chief, under such impression I made a sketch
of it, possibly from devoted partiality, and the licence often
taken by artists to give interest to their productions; but, in
the present instance, an allowable one, from the causes already
spoken of.
The flattering as well as approving testimonial contained


in the Report of the Highland Society, induced me to transmit
a copy of it to Mr. Rose and Mr. Wilberforce, the mover and
seconder of the Address to the Throne, not only with a view to
confirm their expectations, but as a tribute of my gratitude for
the generous interest they took in the subject.
TO
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE GEORGE ROSE,
AND
WILLIAM WILBERFORCE, ESQ., M.P.
Gentlemen,
To your generous patronage, and above all, to the
very handsome manner in which you did me the honour to
propose in the House of Commons, an address to His Royal
Highness the Prince Regent, I feel myself indebted for my
appointment to carry into effect a system for saving shipwrecked
persons on the coasts of the United Kingdom. It becomes
therefore a duty that I should use the earliest opportunity of
communicating my proceedings, not only for your satisfaction,
but for the information of those persons who have expressed
a deep interest in the success of my endeavours. You will be
pleased to observe, that in this undertaking, I have availed
myself of the great assistance given me by the Lords of the
Admiralty, w'ho have, at my solicitation, directed the officers
of the different signal stations, to afford me such information
as could best conduce to correct the charts, and point out
dangers in navigation hitherto unnoticed. Conceiving it a
primary consideration in my pursuit, to suggest such ideas as
might be best calculated to prevent occurrences of shipwreck—
availing myself at the same time of every method to confirm
my suggestions, and to omit no means that promised public
good, and ultimately tended to the success of the undertaking,
although perhaps not immediately within the letter of the duty
on which I had the honour to be employed. On completing


the service to Leith, the severity of the season, added to the
difficulties, and in many parts the almost impracticability of
travelling, prevented me from carrying it more northward for
some time; anxious however to further the views of the legis-
lature with the utmost expedition, my time was employed in
confirming my theoretical observations by practical experi-
ments, in the presence of the Highland Society of Scotland,
being well assured that an institution so distinguished for
promoting scientific pursuits, could do more towards establish-
ing the use of the service by its approbation, than my labours
could effect in any space of time, with the utmost assiduity
and perseverance. I consider the report of a committee se-
lected by that society, a proud mark of approbation, carrying
with it a conviction of the utility of my plans; and it is highly
gratifying to submit the same for your perusal. The admirable
manner in which the detail is completed, so as to elucidate
each progressive step delivered in my lectures, will not fail
to render it more interesting. In the earnest hope that my
humble endeavours may prove conformable with the object of
your benevolent intentions, and of that of the legislature,
I have the honour to be,
Gentlemen,
Your most obedient Servant,
GEO. W. MANBY.
I also transmitted a copy of tlie Report to His Royal
Highness the Prince Regent, with the following Address,
having previously obtained his most gracious permission for
the same.
TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
THE PRINCE REGENT.
Sir,
To meliorate the condition of sublunary existence—
to extend the cause of humanity—and to increase the happi-
ness of mankind, are universally known to be the desire, the
150


delight, and the practice of your Royal Highness. Animated
by the exalted example of your venerable and Royal Father,
the well-being of all degrees of men has been justly consi-
dered, in the enlightened mind of your Royal Highness, as
one of the most holy duties, as it is the highest prerogative
and the purest felicity of supreme rule. The power of Princes,
when directed to this glorious end, is exempted from limita-
tion ; like the light and the heat of the sun pervading the
whole range of the universe, the authority of Princes to effect
good, penetrates the extreme recesses of the human condition,
and embraces all measures that can add safety and dignity to
man. Thus has this favoured empire beheld in your Royal
Highness a zealous disposition to promote the sciences, and
to protect the arts, to inspire humility with confidence while
in the arduous pursuit of valuable objects, and to encourage
the aims of laudable application in the race of every excellent
attainment. These are a few of the many distinguishing traits
by which your Royal Highness is made truly illustrious among
the great Princes of the earth. For these condescensions,
your Royal Highness has secured the first best reward—the
sanction of an approving mind, accompanied by the homage
and gratitude of genius and learning.
The votaries of science are encouraged to approach your
Royal Highness with the confidence of a welcome, as effica-
cious and honourable as it is spontaneous and sincere.
The youth of your Royal Highness was devoted to the
acquirement of knowledge, and the present momentous meri-
dian of your life is equally distinguished by affording it your
eminent protection.
Impressed with these truths, I humbly submit my labours
in the cause of humanity to your Royal Highness, full of cer-
tain hope, unmixed with the anticipation of being rejected,
and without the fear of repulse.
I must, however, confess, that I could not venture to solicit
the notice of your Royal Highness upon any occasion of an
151


ordinary nature. It would be presumption not pardonable to
attract the important attention of your Royal Highness to
works or objects of comparative inutility. It would be equally
inadmissible to request your countenance in behalf of schemes
3'et in the vague embryo of indefinite speculation, or of imma-
tured experiment. But when the study and scrutiny of many
years of laborious research and innumerable comparisons have
attained the successful character of demonstration, that hope
will not be deemed arrogant which looks for the effective sup-
port of your Royal Highness to plans thus recommended.
Thus much I may be permitted to say of my System for
preserving the Lives of Shipwrecked Persons —a system which
I ardently entreat may, on public grounds, be judged worthy
of the protection of your Royal Highness, and of that govern-
ment which you have so wisely chosen for the honour and
service of the nation.
The system which I have been so fortunate as to devise
and complete, has for its particular object the rescuing from
death of that valuable and numerous class of mariners, who
are continually exposed to the awful and frequent dangers of
shipwreck on the coasts of this kingdom and her dependencies.
The plan which I have now finished for this desirable purpose,
after seven years’ steady perseverance, is at length reduced to
the most simple and practicable form ; and I beg leave to say,
only require to be seen, in order to establish a firm conviction
of its national importance and infallibility.
The work that I have the honour of dedicating to your
Royal Highness, contains a clear elucidation of all the means
and principles found necessary for saving shipwrecked persons
by night and day ; and the manner of doing this service is set
forth by authentic vouchers, declaratory of the success that
lias uniformly attended their adoption.
How incalculably great will be the benefit resulting to the
maritime interests of the country, w hen this work of humanity
shall be generally known to have been honoured with the
152


express approbation of your Royal Highness! The saving of
lives, which must otherwise have perished, will become a
theme of public joy and gratitude. The restored mariner, who
saw destruction in every billow, will be delivered from the
storm and the waves, to adventure again on the ocean to fight
the battles of his King, or to transport the industry of his
native soil. The mothers, the wives and the children, who
would be left destitute, and deprived of those on whom their
affections are fixed, and on whom they depend for support,
will, in the instances where their kindred are rescued from
shipwreck, raise their grateful thanks to the Almighty, and
bless the Prince whose patronage shall save their friends from
sudden death.
These effects cannot be indifferent to the humane breast
and patriotic feelings of your Royal Highness. Your natural
benevolence will exult, that it is within the province of your
government to institute and enforce the happy means now
humbly submitted for the preservations of thousands from the
horrors of a terrible and premature death !
This mode of saving life, it is hoped, in time, will not be
confined to England alone. Every part of the world, liable
to require its benefits, may partake of them. It cannot fail
to afford the highest pleasure to your Royal Highness, to see
friends and foes delivered, in cases of danger, from the power
of the storm.
If, while your Royal Highness sways the sceptre, that glo-
rious period should arrive, known to be so much your desire,
when the olive branch shall extend over all the regions of the
earth, the commercial genius of England will again distribute
to every country her productions and her discoveries, and this
plan for preserving those who traverse the ocean, may then
become universal.
It is a reflection too obvious and pleasing to elude notice,
that, while under the triumphant auspices of your Royal High-
ness, the well-directed arms of England are victoriously hurling


legitimate destruction on the implacable enemies of the nation,
the condescending attention of your Royal Highness is gra-
ciously employed in protecting a system for the safety of those
whom the terrors of the main are daily bringing to the last
extremity of human dismay. The contrast between the sad
necessity of destroying our fellow-men, and the grateful duty
of saving them becomes most gloriously conspicuous.
But, it is not the intrinsic utility or merit of any invention,
however perfect, that will bring it into general adoption. It
cannot have escaped the knowledge of your Royal Highness,
that all new designs are received with distrust, and that it
is the common fate, even of the very best discoveries, to en-
counter the greatest opposition. Happy then, indeed, am I,
that a system such as that now brought before your view,
should obtain the free and effectual approbation of your Royal
Highness; an approbation that needs only to be expressed, to
secure the decided success of the plan, and to produce the
preservation of thousands as the happy result.
Honoured as I am by the gracious permission of dedicating
my labours to the protection of your Royal Highness, it will
be readily imagined how inadequate I feel to the full expres-
sion of my sense of an honour so beneficial to the country,
and distinguishing to myself. I shall ever continue filled with
sentiments of loyalty and gratitude.
I now withdraw myself from the attention of your Royal
Highness, with the best wishes of a loyal mind, that you may
long reign in health and happiness, in strength and glory;
and when it shall please the Infinite Disposer of Events to
call you to his own realms, may all your successors over these
kingdoms be truly worthy of their illustrious progenitor.
I am, Sir,
With profound respect and submission,
Your Royal Highness’ most humble,
And devoted Servant,
GEORGE WILLIAM MANBY.
Sloman, Printer, King-Street, Yarmouth.
