

pgrrM Pr^n\-\
fr*
<►
MELBOURNE :
J. Whitolaw & Son, Machine Printers,
1882. '• •,
.'j -i v't-»■/ r - •


PROPOSED RULES
The Provisienal Committee appointed to
draw up the Rules of the Australasian Secular
Society has been guided by the Rules of the
National Secular Society, and has made such
alterations and additions as was deemed neces-
sary.
This Society is called “ The Australasian
Secular Society.”
The objects of Secularism are to
maintain the Principles and Rights of Free-
thought, and to direct their application to
to the Secular improvement of mankind.
By the Principles of Freethought are
meant the exercise of the understanding upon
relevant facts, independently of every intiraida-


By the Rights of Freethought are meant
the liberty of free criticism for the security of
truth, and the liberty of free publicity for the
dissemination of truth.
Secularism relates to verifiable knowledge,
and to actions, the issue of which can be tested
by experience.
It declares that the promotion of human
improvement and happiness is the highest duty,
and that the test of morality is utility.
That human improvement and happiness
cannot be effectually promoted without civil
and religious liberty; and that, therefore, it is
the duty of every individual to actively attack
all barriers to equal freedom of thought and
utterance for all, upon political theological, and
social subjects.
A Secularist is one who deduces his
moral duties from considerations which per-
tain to human welfare, and who, practically
recognising the above duties, devotes himself
to the promotion of his own and the general
good.
The Objects of The Australasian Secu-
lar Society are to Disseminate the above
principles by every legitimate means in its
power, the Branches and the
Affiliation of Kindred Societies, and to


secure Concerted Action throughout Aus-
tralasia on all matters pertaining to the general
good.
Members may be Either Active or
Passive.
The Active List consists of those who do
not object to the publication of their names as
Members of This Society.
An Active Members’ Duty is to send
as often as possible reliable reports to the
President or Secretary, of Special Events,
Sermons, Lectures, or Publications affecting
Secular Progress. He should also aid in the
circulation of Secular Literature, and gener-
ally in the Freethought propoganda of his
neighborhood. Where a Local Society exists
he ought to belong to it, whether or not it be a
branch of this Society.
The Passive List consists of those whose
position does not permit the publication of their
names, except at risk of serious injury. The
Knowledge of these names is to be confined to
the Executive and the members will be referred
to only by Initials.
It is earnestly requested that persons in an
independent position will enrol themselves only
as Active Members.


The Executive Council shall consist of a
President, three Vice-Presidents, Secretary,
Treasurer, Librarian, and twenty Members of
Committee, nine of whom shall form a
quorum.
The Executive Council and two Auditors
shall be elected by ballot at the Annual Meet-
ing ; they shall hold office for one year, and be
eligible for re-election, and shall be nominated
in writing to the Secretary not less than seven
days prior to the Annual Meeting.
Any Member of the Executive Council
absenting himself from three Consecutive Meet-
ings, without a satisfactory explanation, shall
be deemed to have vacated his office, and any
vacancy occurring through resignation or
otherwise, shall be filled at the next Ordinary
Meeting of the Society. Due notice of such
vacancy shall be given at least fourteen days
prior to date of meeting.
The Executive Council Meetings for
the Election of Members and transacting Ex-
cutive Business shall be held monthly, viz,, on
in each month.


The Ordinary General Meetings for
receiving contributions and transaction of
general business, shall be held quarterly, viz., on
the ...
Annual Meetings for receiving Com-
mittee’s and Auditor’s Report and Balance
Sheet, the Election of Officers, and transacting
any other business that may be deemed of
sufficient importance by a vote of the Meeting
shall be held on the
Special Meetings may be called by the
Executive at any time ; and shall be called by
the Executive upon a Requisition signed by not
less + han thirty members, fourteen days prior to
holding the meeting, due notice of which
meeting shall be given by circular to every
member not less than seven days prior to date
of meeting. No business other than that of
which due notice has been given shall be trans-
acted.
Members unable to attend personally may
vote on all matters in writing addressed to the
Secretary at least one day prior to meeting.
Rules shall in no case be adopted, altered,
or rescinded, unless at a Special Meeting
called for that purpose, and thereat carried by
two-thirds of the members present, the two-


thirds numbering at least fifty members ; and
due notice of every new rule, alteration, or rule
proposed to be rescinded, must be fowarded to
the Secretary.
Members’ Yearly Subscription shall be—
For adults, ten shillings ; for persons under
eighteen years, five shillings ; and for families,
twenty shillings, and shall be paid quarterly,
half-yearly, or yearly, in advance. Persons may
be admitted free on satisfying the Executive
that they are unable to pay the subscription, and
that they are doing good Secular Work.
Any person who shall sign a form of decla-
ration, as hereafter provided, and forward it to
the Secretary, with not less than one quarter’s
subscription, may, in the discretion of the Exe-
cutive, be admitted a member of this Society.
Should any candidate be not admitted, the sub-
scription shall be returned.
Any member more than six months in
arrears may, provided due notice of his default
shall have been sent to him, and disregarded by
him, be erased from the Roll of Member-
ship.
The Executive shall have power to expel any
member, but the member so expelled shall
have power to appeal to the next General Meet-
ing of Members, or to a Special General Meeting


Dated this. . .
•Active or passive member .
DECLARATION.
I am desirous of joining The Australasian
Secular Society, in order to extend its prin-
ciples ; and I pledge myself to do my best, if
admitted as a member, to co-operate with my
fellow members to obtain the objects set forth in
its rules.
Name . . vII *' r ‘" r
oi , ) no roil a>aJ icnha e I
Address ....
■ ' r , r U;:.:/
Occupation. . . . .
