

Signed by
John Campbell (wharf.)
W. Byllyard, Solicitor
Thomas Ireland
TXT T * T1
Thomas Briellet, M. P.
John P. Eoxhourgh, do.
Wm. Laidley
Henry Beit
Alexander Thompson
William B. Allen, M. P.
T. H. McCulloch, Solicitor
John Dnnmore Lang, M. P.
J. H. Bucker
L. S. Spyer
Benjamin Buchanan
Bobert Johnson, Solicitor
"Richard Johnson. do.
J. Henderson
E. Lipman
B. Monntcastle
J. S. Mort, M. P.
W. S. Friend.
Alexander Dick, M. P., Solicitor—[I have
M. Gorman
always considered G arsed has been
JLvXvJllCiJ. VI- 1/ • v
Edwin Daintry, do.
C W Keele
E. H. Cameron
G. King
harshly treated, if not unjustly
punished.]
V/ • Mi vxv
"William Bussell, Solicitor
E. A. Henderson
William Hcilyer, Selicitor
Henry Milford, do.
Jacob Montefiors, M.P.
John Hoskins, M. P.
E. M. Say or
George A. Lloyd
George Thornton
Frederick Korff
John Frazer and Co.
Walter Scott
Alexander Sage
John Miller
J. B. Holdsworth
Andrew Lenchan
Joseph Clayton
Captain Smith.
William Fanning
Edwin McEncroe
Samuel Henry Terry, M. P.—[I recommend
I T XX.LXIAJ.XJ. -A- ti’XXXXXLXW
John Caldwell, M. P.
William Love, M. P.
Joseph Bayliss
A. G. Dalgleesh, M. P.
William Bland
the prayer of tins petition to the favor-
Bussell Jones, Solicitor
able consideration of the Government,
B. P. Bichardson
but do not consider Garsed innocent of
Daniel Egan, M. P.
the charge brought against him.]
John Mackintosh
B. M. Bohey, M. P.
A. J. C. Macafee
M. E. Mnrnin
0. B. Ebsworth
Church, Brothers.
James Oatly, Mayor
Charles H. Woolcott
Mitchell and Co.
George B. Luson
Milton Church
Charles McDonald
S. M. Lord.
W. C. Windeyer
Bichard Driver, M.P. Solicitor
(Oven)
The following documents and statements are published by MR. GARSED in further illustration of the hardship of his case,
he having suffered in consequence of a wrong conviction three years and nearly five months in prison fv f
iftrsh (SamtTs four® anft lm ,
To his (Excellency Sill JOHN YOUNG Bart., Govenor in Chief of the Territory of New
South Wales &c &c.
The humble Petition of Emma Gaesed on behalf of her husband J ohk Gaesed,
now confined three years and three months on the 21st March, 1862, in
Her Majesty’s Goal, Sydney,
Humbly Sheweth,
That your Petitioner is suffering both in body and mind, and respectfully prays that your Excellency will
release her unfortunate husband, John Garsed, from confinement, and feels confident in her own mind that he is innocent of the
charge brought against him. , ,
Your Petitioner saith, that her husband was committed on the 21st day of December, 1858, to take his trial at the next
Criminal Court, on the charge of purjury. The pnrjury is assigned on his equitable plea, filed in the Supreme Court, 26th Fe-
bruary, 1858, in defence of an uction
was fully prepared to defend himself at the said sittings, which were held inEebruary, 1859,
and so stated to the Court when brought to the Bar, but from delays, to which her husband was no party, he was not put upon
his trial until the sittings held in the month of October following. _ . .
That vonr Petitioner’s husband was then tried befor his Honor the Chief Justice, for swearing, viz:—
u j gave Ashdown & honus of £2OOO or thereabouts, of which the £6BO 15s. od., the amount of the hill of exchange now
Ashdowndemes' the bonus, and says the said bill of exchange now sued upon was the balance due by her husband to the
firm of AY. Dean & Co. Yirdict, Guilty,"' and sentenced to three years confinement in Her Majesty’s Gaol, Darlmghurst.
Your Petitioner most respectfully saith, that her husband was guided solely by a high sense of right and justice in defending
the payment of the bill of exchange for £6BO 15s. 3d. out of which the charge of purjury arose. That before defending the pay-
ment of the said bill of exchange on equitable grounds, her husband’s Solicitor took the opinion of Conned, namely, Mr Justice
"Wise then practising at the bar of this colony. Mr. Wise examined a number of her husband s documents afterwards deposited
in the Prothonotary’s office; but which, though called for, were not produced in evidence upon his trial. [Subsequently her husband
wrote to the acting- Chief Justice to ascertain the safety of these documents, and received in reply a letter stating that he, the acting
Chief Justice had made all due enquiry but could not ascertain their whereabouts.!] That her husband never disputed the agi cement
signed “A Ashdown,” and dated 30th September, 1857, but disputed the account submitted by the said A. Ashdown, in evidence
on his trial and stated by him (A. Ashdown) to be a true copy in figures of a “Bed Ink Account” delivered to her husband by
aMr Pritchard (his, Ashdown’s clerk,) on the 24th September, 1857. This “Red Ink Account” does not appear in any
account book, neither is it mentioned in either of the three agreements signed, “ A Ashdown,’’ and produced by him
(A Ashdown) in evidence upon the prosecution. That the joint affidavit sworn by A. Ashdown and C. 1. Pritchard, and filed
in the Prothonotory’s office, 2nd March, 1858, (but lost at the time her husband was committed,) distinctly sets forth in the 3rd
“ The settlement of the transactions mentioned in her husband’s affidavit sworn on the 26th February, 1858, was made by
an agreement dated 30th September, 1857. The bill of exchange for the sum of £6BO 15s. 3d. was the balance found to be due
on the accounts between the said Archibald Ashdown and her husband.” . . ,
y[].. Pritchard’ conversation with Mr. Edwin Daintry, solicitor, in September, 1857, and given in evidence before the
Magistrate Mr. Eorbes, proves that her husband did at last agree to give Asdhown a bonus of £2OOO ; and your Petitioner says
that her husband did actually give A. Ashdown a bonus of £2OOO. That the account books kept by Mr. Pritchard at
W Dean & Co.’s office proves that the bill of exchange for £6BO 15s. 3d. was payable to A. Ashdown individually. I hat Sir
John Dickenson, at her husband’s trial at the Supreme Court, ruled that Dean & Co., (A. Ashdown’s partner,) were bound by
the books kept by Mr. Prichard. .. , , •, , .
Your Petitioner humbly begs your Excellency to take into merciful consideration the length of time which elapsed between
her husband’s committal and trial—a period of nearly ten months—and, therefore,
Humbly prays that your Excellency will be graciously pleased to remit the remaining
portion of her husband’s sentence,
And your Petitioner, as in duty bound, will ever pray, &c.
(Sigxed,) EMMA GARSED.
I recommend the Prayer of the Petitioner to the favorable consideration of His Excellency.


J. E. Roberts, Solicitor
John Sutton, Alderman
Alexander Moore & Co.
M. Chapman, Alderman
John A. Smithers, Alderman
Thomas Spenco, Alderman
Alexander Steele, Alderman
P. J. Carraher, Alderman
Robert Watson, Alderman
Robert P. Abbot, Solicitor
G. E. Ellis, Solicitor
John Dilion, Solicitor
Hon. Thomas Ware Smart, M.P.
J. M. Kowin, Alderman
Edward Bell, City Surveyor
J. H. Atkinson, M.P.
Rabone Feez
Peterson, Season, & Co.
Hon Henry Prince, M.P.
Robert Muriel
R. Stewart, M.P.
Rev. Charles Kemp
Felix Wilson
G. Stabler, (one of the jury,)
Thomas Holt, M.P.
Rev, Mansfield
civil action |
Edward Raper, M.P.
Iredale and Co.
Robert Phenna, one of the jury,
Henry Armitage
John Binney and Co.
Darlinghurst
W. C. Curtis, Solicitor,
S. C. Brown, Solicitor, M.P.
D. H. Denieh, Solicitor, M.P.
Herbert Croft, Solicitor
W. P. Moffat, Solicitor
James Leverick and Co.
Edward J. Blacket
W. Townley Pinhey
Alfred Mitchell
Hon. Geoffery Eagar, M.P.
J. R. Treeve
J. R. Young
J. Thomas Ford
W. G. Ainsworth
W. M. Alderson
Denis McEncroe
Charles C. Durham
;0 ;
And Twenty-four other Gentlemen,
George Benbow
M. Sutherland, M.P.
Henry Atkin, Alderman
I, J oen Gabbed, beg most respectfully to inform those gentlemen that signed the above and three previous petitions that I
am guided in this my appeal to the public by a high sense of right and justice, and all that I require is what in England would
not be denied to the meanest of Her Majesty’s subjects, and that is an opportunity of establishing my innocence before the
highest tribunal in the colony, from the plaintiff Ashdown’s own account books and his own evidence without calling further
evidence. In figures my case is remarkable for simplicity, and all that is wanted is for W. Dean to produce Dean and Ashdown’s
account books and to let his accountant, Joseph Carroll, exhibit all entries made in connection with Ashdown’s fictitious account
for which I suffered, endorsed in the handwriting of his Honor the Chief Justice, “ Pritchard’s Red Ink Account, or Memo-
randum.” 5, 10, 59. I will then ask Mr. Joseph Corroll the following questions,—“ How many accounts did Ashdown keep in
my name in the firms books, on 15th July, 1857 ? ” The names of each account ? ” “ And the balance of each accountat that
date?’ The following are the names and balance of each account in W. Dean and Co’s books, 15th July, 1857, copied from his
Honor the Chief Justice’s notes of Mr Crroll’s evidence:—“Advance account, £1323 12s. 4d.; Loan account, £2500; Glebe
account, £1600; Special ([Account, £500; General account, £4O 6s. Bd.
(Copy.)
62—1820. 199 Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 2nd May, 1862,
See.—l am directed to inform you that your letter of the 14th ultimo and the petition therein, forwarded from Mrs. Garsed,
in favor of her husband, a prisoner in Darlinghurst gaol, have been laid before his Excellency the Govenor, but that there do not
appear to be any grounds for authorising the remission of any poi'tion of John Garsed’s sentence.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Alexander Dick, Esq., M.P., Your most obedient servant,
267, George-street, Sydney. (Signed,) W. ELYARD.
Before Mrs, Garsed’s third petition was refused a proposal was made to her that if I, (John Garsed,) would sign a memo-
randum, already prepared in substance, that I might have been mistaken , I should have my liberty. This unprecedented proposal
was refused with indignation.
I had to thank the Hon. Attorney General, (now Solicitor General,) for my release from confinement, on the 19th May, a.d.
1862; and that gentleman is of my opinion, and that is, if I had been guilty of pur jury it tvould not have taken seven days to grove it ;
and am happy to have it in my power to say, that if an opportunity is afforded me, I can establish my innocence from his Honor
the Chief Justice notes of evidence.
The following is the late Lord Macaulay’s opinion of false witnesses: —
“To the guilt of making innocent persons suffer he has added the guilt of violating the most solmen engagement into Avhich
“ man can enter with his fellow men, and of making institutions to which it is desirable that the public should look with respect
“ and confidence, instruments of frightful wrong and objects of general distrust.”
The information for perjury was filed in the Supreme Court of Kew South Males, on the Ist of August, 1859; on the same
evening I pleaded before his Honor, Judge Milford, “Hot Guilty,” and stated that I was prepared to take my trial without
calling a witness; all I required of the plaintiff, Archibald Ashdown, was for him to produce AY. Dean & Co’s account books and
exhibit all entries made in connection with C. P. Pritchard’s account books, kept by him Pritchard, under the plaintiff Ashdown’s
inspection, on the premises occupied by AA r . Dean & Co.
[Copy. Received some time between Ist and sth August, 1859.]
In the Supreme Court, )
Criminal Jurisdiction, i
/
In the matter of the prosecution of the Queen against John Garsed for perjury.
Take notice that you are hereby required to produce to the court and jury, on the trial of this prosecution, a memorandum
of account , written in red ink, and prepared by Mr. Charles Pearson Pritchard, shewing the settlement that was made on the 30th
September, 1857, and handed to the said John Garsed by the said Charles Pearson Pritchard, on or about the 23rd or 24th of
September, 1857, and all other documents, letters, books, papers, and writings whatsoever containing any entry memorandum or
minute, or other matter in anywise relating to the matters in question in this prosecution.
Dated this day of August, a.d. 1859. Amours, &c.,
To Air. John Garsed. _ (Signed,) John Will laws, Crown Prosecutor.
The original subpoena was left with my petition and statement at Government House, on or about Ist Alay, 1860.
The first time I had the misfortune of seeing the said account, prepared by Air. (I. P. Pritchard, was on Tuesday the 18th
May, 1858: on that day it was improperly admitted as evidence by the learned Judge in the civil action, and the cause of my
loseing the virdict. Koticeof motion for a new trial was filed on the 22nd Alay, a.d. 1858, and certified by AYilliam B. Dally, Esq.
Pritchard’s evidence proves that the said red ink account prepared by Pritchard is totally untrue. About thirty" of mv
documents were in the civil action deposited in the Prothonotry’s office. After receiving the above subpoena, or notice to
produe, I received the following document, written in pencil, from a person unknown to me and whom I cannot trace :
(Copy.) Crown v. John Garsed.—Get from Garsed a copy of the affidavit of A. Ashdown, or the statement of account in
lied Ink showing that the bill of £6BO 15s. 3d. was given to balance an account due to AY. Dean and Co. by Garsed. Get the
items composing the balance of £6BO 15s 3d., as proved by Ashdown and Pritchard on the trial that lasted six days.
I, in open court, on or about the sth August, 1859, produced a copy of Ashdown and Pritchard’s join affidavit, signed
“ AYant,” the original was filed in the Supreme Court, 2nd Alarch, 1858. * The Attorney General, in August, 1859, refused to
prosecute me for perjury.


(C o r Y.)
0. 11. M. S.
Tobacco Factory, 304, Castlercagh Street,
October, 29th 1864.
Queen against John Garsed.
4nformatxon for perjury tiled Ist August, 1859.
Attorney General-Mu. - Bailey.
Witness —Archibald Ashdown
Cn> ™ ProSeCUt ° r ' M "- for the plaintiff at the Police Office April
and December, a. d. 1858.) p U
Tried at the Criminal Court sth, 6th, 7th, Bth, 10th, 11th, 12th days October, a. n. 1859.
,co
co
•2 To the Honorable
3 e The Premier.
§ Sir,
J*' r - x i?s : y “*•-
If". “ 1 Cmflrmai b 7 Solicitor’s evidence, sworn at
■■J 'i by me to kofim of v’DcTl Co ‘aC 5 ™ “ ** ®> “» »f £6BO 15s. 3d. was a debt duo
J | thatonthe Ist August, i 8 59,H Zl Z^
| A Of the ink on this paper W ’ Dean & Co -’ Auctioneers, to the value
ff ?
S■§ | an agreement prepared and attested by his own Solicitor Mr li J W t il MM Ashdown, in terms of
5 | | Mr. 11. J. Want’s evidence at the Police ote“ fha^^hm
4” > • A , S “°™ al “ no ! also tllat «» «M attested agreement contains nothing false ’ *” “ *"> aWe to
| I I « (-**•
fi i assart , the j r
~f 1 1 that sum is a bomjor not £no ““ *“ 4 » to “ 4 • P° rti » a » f whether
i a
52 s
fictitious lied Ink account, now deposited ‘in tt(WWOffl 7* Pritta ->
after the trial, proves the lame totally m. W ’ "* ““ » *-* hereon
oidy trilml ““* ° f * d °“ Miss
me Jrtn “ th ° Cr °™ H ° Wd &r ““«
■S -2
§
J§ § s
s
" O OX S
s §
rtw> 5S
5-> -3>
§> r« 1
s
£ * 5
a
.Co
S v_
- ~s
§ §
J
s *5 J
-j or, IVJ.
§
•2 « -2
rv S
gH o-
fo .a
I 1
> L <S>
\3 S
s ~ ■“
tsj
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) JOHN" GARSED. -
(Extract.)
Hyde Park, 7th Feb., 1860.
~I | cedenM “ iT? 1 *7* rduCto f o f.‘ at 1 tmnommy inability to enter again into this case-a trial nnpre-
I I 'nt2v M d Cro “ matlms ' f u ‘ » “ “™- to « W» inquire into facts while the means of
2 j”, , , T’ howe ™’ must bc mstituted by the Government, as in England is invariably
Jg 1 • jt 18 not m T clut J in the present state of things to enter into any such inquiry *
■ m «ry . (Signed) ALFRED STEPHEN
[Case of Garsed convicted at the Sydney Gaol Delivery of perjury.] ‘
The last four letters John Garsed received from the Hon Charles Cowper, Colonial Secretary, states “that
ld8 “ CWI “ PCdlellt fOT th ° Government to investigate certain circumstances connected with
(Then the question is, “ why not ? ”)
Sir, 6 * J 3 ° oG ’ Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, Btli August, 1862.
Colonial Secretary to inform t f° 1 ? ultimoj lam directed by the
your case, which appears to he the object of jour comma,*«tio„, should toZST***
Mr. John Garsed, 1 luive tho llonor to bc > Bir ,
Care of H. Milford, Esq., Pitt-street. 4 our most obedient servant,
Annexed to my letter was a printed statement, which statement includes an epitome of my schedule filed


I, John Garsed, addressed a letter to the acting Chief Justice to ascertain the safety of my documents deposited in the
Supreme Court in a certain action relative to a hill of exchange for the sum of £6BO 15s. 3d.—“ the plea for defence amounts to
a plea of want of consideration,” —and received the following reply:—
(Copy.) k
Supreme Court, Sydney, January 3rd, 1861
John Garsed, If
lam directed by the Acting Chief Justice to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, dated 29th Dec. 1860. His Honor further directs
me to state that he has made all due enquiries regarding the documents to which you allude, but has not been able to learn their whereabouts.
(Signed,) SEDGWICK S. COWPEE.
I receieved a letter from Mr. Eobert Sempill, that gentleman in his letter states that he took great care of my documents, and placed them in the
proper place appointed by law. In the year a. d. 1862 I receieved from the Supreme Court twenty-one of my documents, (but not all;) each is marked
“Exhibit,” in the handwriting of Mr. Sempill, and the endorsement will prove that not one of them was in evidence in October, 1859.
Ashdown and Pritchard’s joint affidavits, filed in the Supreme Court, 2nd March, 1858, proves that the said bill of exchange £6BO 15s. 3d. is payable
to A. Ashdown alone, in terms of an attested agreement annexed thereto—and I say the same. The said joint affidavit states that the only joint trans-
action Ashdown had with me was a place called “ Eosherville,” situate on the North Shore. In the Sydney Times, dated 11th June, 1864, is published
a copy of an indenture dated 18th March, 1857, and made betwen me and Ashdown, which deed states I held in trust for Archibald Ashdown and his
heirs one half undivided interest in seven houses, situate in the city of Sydney—the remaining half for myself and heirs.
On the 31st of March, a. d. 1858, Archibald Ashdown brought the case to a dead lock, before going to trial, by swearing at the Police Office that
the said bill of exchange for the sum of £6BO 15s. 3d. was a debt due by me to the firm of W. Dean & Co. Auctioneers, and not a debt due to him alone:
The case was tried before Mr. Justice Dickenson, in April and May, 1858, the particulars of which will be published. In doing so I shall copy Ash-
down and Pritchard’s evidence from the briefs held by my counsel, now Mr. Justice Wise, and the Honorable W. B. Dally. Suffice it to say at present
that I sequestrated my A'aluable estate to have W. Dean & Co's, account books examined before Mr. Purefoy, in connection with Pritchard’s journal
and a certain fictitious account, only 106 figures, called “Pritchard’s Eed Ink Account or Memorandum,” (judges orders were served for that purpose
hut no examination took place,) and then to release my estate from sequestration.
(Copt or Letter to the Chief Commissioner.)
O. H. 31. S.
Tobacco Factory, 304, (lastlereagli Street, Xov. 21st, 1864.
Estate of John Garsed, Merchant. Voluntary Sequestration,3rd July, 1858.
Schedule prepaired by Mr. P. A. Thompson, Solicitor, to meet the regulations of the Court.
To Alfred McFarland, Esq., Chief Commissioner of Insolvent Estates.
Sir, —On the sth inst., I received a further communication from the Hon. Colonial Treasurer. That gentleman states that
‘ ‘ moneys are paid into the Treasury by the Official Assignees without such information as would enable him to show the amounts,
if any, that have been paid into the Treasury by the Official Assignees in my estate ; ” and I have to suggest that you address any
further letters thereon to the Chief Commissioner of Insolvent Estates, under whose supervision the Assignees perform their duties.
I was greatly surprised on learning that Official Assignees arc allowed by your Honor to pay monies into the Treasury
without being accompanied with such information as would enable the Treasurer to state at once the exact amount paid belonging
to each separate estate placed under their management; for, under the present system, it is possible that an Official Assignee might
receive monies belonging to several estates, amounting in all to £20,000, and only pay £5OOO of that sum into the Treasury.
On the 3rd inst., I received a communication from Mr. Campbell, Registrar : that gentleman states, “ with respect to the
monies paid into the Treasury by Mr. Adam Wilson, I presume the accounts were filed with the prothonotary under the old rules
of Court. The same remark applies to Mr. Mackenzie’s intromissions with Mr. Garsed’s estate, in which, I believe, no monies have
been paid or received since the appointment of a Registrar under the Act 25 Vic. No. 8, and the rules in insolvency made thereunder.
My letter to your Honor, dated 21st October, 1864, was returned to mo on the 22nd, endorsed, “ To be returned unopened
to Mr. Garsed, who, I believe, is the Avritcr.” (Signed) A. McF. 21. 10. 1864.
I beg most respectfully to request of your Honor to read this letter, and to answer by return of post the following questions:—
Ist. —Were the account books belonging to my Official Assignee, Mr. Adam Wilson, balanced at the time of his death ?
2nd.—lf not balanced, did his successor at any time correctly balance Mr. Adam Wilson’s account books, that is shewing
the exact amount of monies received and paid in each separate estate (not closed) placed under the management of Mr. Adam
Wilson up to the time of his death ?
3rd. —Did the Registrar arrive at the amounts received and paid in my estate, as published by him in the Sydney Morning
Herald from the receords of your office ? and if not please to state from what source he derived his information—for figures speak
for themselves.
I beg most respectfully to state that I make no charges against my Official Assignees, but at the same time I again state that
my complaints arc not groundless, and that some of my complaints, which I consider to be matters of public importance, are
(according to law) duly certified by your Honor to bo true copies, or extracts from the original proceedings, filed of record in your
•office in my estate. My Assignee’s report, filed 20th October, 1861, states “my estate is mixed up in law and equity suits:; the
property has not passed to the Official Assignee : (Signed) J. P. Mackenzie. My Official Assignee, on the 20th July, 1863, was
dqly sworn and examined before your Honor, and the question put to him, —“ Did any assets come into your hands from the date
of your appointment as Official Assignee, from that time up to the 7th November, 1862?” His answer, “ non.', did”
My complaints are not denied by your Honor; and I say, among other things, that my Official Assignee’s management of
my estate ceased to be legal 23rd September, 1858, (and, according to law, what followed subsequent to that date must bo
illegal);—that large sums of money have been received in my estate and not accounted for on the file ; —that the official accounts
published in my estate are inconsistent with the records of your office; —that a certain document filed in your office, (signed, M.
Constable, President,) was, some time after being filed, altered; —and that several documents are missing.
During the last two years I have frequently and most respectfully requested of your Honor to change my Official Assignee
for one that will act, or allow me to use his name to enable mo to release my valuable estate from sequestration,—but this simple
act of justice is denied me, —and, I respectfully state that if your Honor declines to answer the above three questions by return,
I will forward a copy of this to the Honorable Attorney General, who is also Premier, and as such, I has the power to
order Mr. Adam Wilson’s account books to be forwarded to the Treasury, that the same may be examined and correctly balanced
by competent accountants I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
JOHN GARSED.
My letter was returned to me open, by the Messenger of the Court, on the 28th November, at 5 p.m., I believe in consequence of my having
addressed a further letter to the Chief Commissioner, dated 28th November, 1864, in which I say, “ Not receiving a reply to my letter of the 21st inst.,
I have, according to promise, forwarded a copy to the Honorable Attorney General, and beg most respectfully to state that in consequence of your
Honor’s administration of justice in my estate I am compelled to appeal to the public for that justice which is denied mo by your Honor.”
If my Official Assignees have kept proper accounts in accordance and within, the sense and meaning of the Insolvent Act, 5 Vic. No. 17, then there
•can be no possible objection to the accounts being examined in open court. I have in my possession a summons signed by Mr. McFarland, ordering
Mr. Mackenzie to produce before him the late Mr. Adam Wilson’s account books; but the books were not produced, neither was my attorney, the late
P. A. Tompson, examined. I presume that if an insolvent fails to keep proper accounts and squandered his means of payment the Chief Commissioner
would refuse his certificate. In my case I was committed to take my trial for perjury because Pritchards journal, kept under the inspection of plaintiff
Ashdown, proves that the settlement between us is strictly in accordance with an attested agreement annexed to Ashdown and Pritchard’s joint affidavit.
The said journal further proves that on the Ist October, 1857, I had a balance in my favor of £19,315 Bs. 2d. and after having suffered three years
and nearly five months in prison for swearing the truth, I am now anxious to know what is done with my properties and my wife’s properties, and
why a bill in equity was filed Ist Feb. 1859. Mr. SV. Dean, and Mr. J. Carroll, his principal accountant, signed Mrs. Garsed’s first petition; the
Isat named gentleman proved at my trial, in twelve minutes, that the fictitious account for which I suffered, endorsed in the handwriting of the Chief Justice,
“ Pritchard’s red ink account or memorandum,” 5. 10. 59,, is totally untrue. (See Mr. Carroll’s letter, published in the Empire, 12th October, 1869.)


On the 30th September, A. d. 1857, I, John Garsed, by an agreement dated 30th September, 1857, and registered the 13th
February, a. d. 1863, ]S T o. 814, Book 81, re-purchased from one Archibald Ashdown, (at that time a partner of William Dean, and
trading in Sydney under the style of W. Dean & Co. Auctioneers,) certain properties for the sum of £9830 15s. 3d.; this sum
4 includes a bonus of £2OOO and the balance a Bill of Exchange for the sum of £6BO 15s. 3d., which said Bill of Exchange 1, at
Ashdown’s request and for his accommodation, accepted in favor of W. Dean & Co.
On the 9th day of February, a. n. 1858, an action was commenced in the Supremo Court of New South Wales on the said
Bill of Exchange, in which said action William Dean and another were the plaintiffs and I was the defendant, and in the course of
the proceedings in the said action, and in order to defend the same it was necessary that my attorney should file a plea to the
declaration of the said plaintiffs, and that my plea should be ace. mrpanied by my affidavit of the truth of such plea as required by a
certain Act of the Legislature, intituled, “An Act to facilitate the remedies on Bills of Exchange and Promissory Notes.” Mv
equitable plea, prepared by my attorney and verified by my affidavit, was filed on the 26th February, in the year aforesaid and is
strictly true. The alledgcd perjury for which I suffered illegally in a prison three years and nearly five months is assigned on
this affidavit. The Honorable Attorney General only copied from my affidavit the following few words and figures:—
“I gave Ashdown a bonus of £2OOO or thereabouts, of which the £6BO 15s. 3d., the amount of the Bill of Exchange now
sued upon forms part.” My affidavit was sworn before Edwin Daintery, Esq., a Commissioner of the Supreme Court for'takin**
affidavits.
Law.—■“ When perjury is assigned on an affidavit that part on which the perjury is assigned may be explained by another part.”
In the Supreme Court in its Criminal Juresdiction I was not allowed to travel out of the record or demur to the informal,
and my questions relating to partnership transactions mentioned in my affidavit were not allowed to be answered.
Application was made to take my equitable plea off the file, on the grounds disclosed in the joint affidavit of Archibald
Ashdown and Charles Pearson Pritchard, filed in the Supreme Court, on the 2nd March, in the year aforesaid; and on the 3rd of
the same month the Judge sitting in chambers refused the said application. On the 4th my attorney, the late Piddock Arthur
Tompson filed my reply to the said joint affidavit.
Law. — “ L'pon an indictment for perjury there must be two witnesses; one alone is not sufficient, because there is in that
case only one oath against another.”
Endorsed on the information for perjury, filed in the Supreme Court, Sydney, Ist August, a. d., 1859.
Witnesses, Arcaibald Ashdown.
Law. — “Affidavits being admissions upon oath are evidence as such against the parties who made them.”
After I had sequestrated my valuable estate to protect my properties and to seek justice, the said joint affidavit was taken
from its proper place of deposit appointed by law.
Law.—Stealing, obliterating, or removing records: Statute Enacts, —“That if any person shall steal, or shall for any
fraudulent purpose take from its place of deposit for the time being, or from any person having lawful custody thereof, or obliterate,
injure or destroy any record, deposition, affidavit, or any original document whatsoever of or belonging to any court of record, or
relating to any matter civil or criminal, began, defended, or terminated in any such court, every such offender shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
(Copy.) — Copied from evidence received by me from the Crown Law Office: —
“The deponent, Andrew Mackechnie, on his oath states, ‘I am one of the clerks of the Supreme Court; I produce the pro-
ceedings in the said court, in a case of William Dean and Archibald Ashdown against John Garsed: I produce a summons dated
2nd March, 1858 issued by the Prothonotary calling upon Defendant to show cause why the plea should not be struck out. I
have not got an affidavit sworn before Mr. PownaU, 2nd March, 1858, by Ashdown and Pritchard; I am not aware that any such
affidavit was ever filed; if it had been filed and in its proper place it would have been in the hands of the Prothonotary, and
then in my custody among the papers I produced. If it had been sworn and filed in the case of Dean and Ashdown against
Garsecl and was in its proper place it would be with the papers produced: There would be no record kept of any such affidavit
having been filed. I know nothing about the affidavit; I said yesterday that there was an affidavit missing, and I say so again ;
I dont know of my own knowledge that such an affidavit was ever filed or in the Court; I wont swear I never saw the affidavit,
I dont remember having seen it. (Signed,) Andrew McKechnie.’
Sworn at Sydney, this 17th day of December. Signed before D. Forbes, J. P.
In the Supreme Court of New South "Wales.
The Twenty-sixth day of February in the Year of our Lord 1858.
Garsed, Defendant, Dean & Ashdown.— The Defendant, by Piddocke Arthur Tompson, his Attorney for defence ®n equitable
grounds, says, that before the commencement of this suit Defendant and Plaintiff Ashdown were in Partnership together in various
transactions, and that in settlement of those transactions (except certain lands, buildings, and premises at Onions Point, on the
North Shore of the Harbour of Port Jackson, in the Colony of New South "Wales, and known as the Ilosherville house and grounds
in which they were also jointly interested.) The Defendant gave to the said Ashdown a bonus of £2OOO or thereabouts, of which
the £6BO 15s. 3d., the amount of the Bill of Exchange now sued upon forms part. And the Defendant further says, that the said
Bill of Exchange for £6BO 15s. 3d. was drawn by the Plaintiff, Dean & Co., of which firm, the said Ashdown was and still is a
partner upon Defendant, and was at the request of the Plaintiff Ashdown accepted by Defendant. And that to secure the payment
of the said sum of £6BO 15s. 3d., Defendant then handed to the Plaintiffs the title deeds of certain other land belonging to Defend-
ant, and Defendant also requested the said Plaintiffs to sell his, the Defendant’s interest in the Ilosherville house and grounds,
and to apply the proceeds in or towards liquidation of the said of sum £6BO 15s. 3d. and the Plaintiff Ashdown has repeatedly
promised to do so, but has broken his promise. And the defendant avers, that it was the duty of the said Plaintiffs to sell the
said Ilosherville house and grounds, and the other lands, which, on the said 3rd day of October, in the year 1857, were and still
are of greater value than the amount of ths said Bill of Exchange, and that until they have exhausted the aforesaid securities they
are not entitled to proceed against Defendant upon the said Bill of Exchange. Piddocke Arthur Thomson,
1, Commercial Chambers, New Pitt Street, Sydney. Defendant’s Attorney
The above equitable plea is rarefied by affidavit sworn before Edwin Daintry , Esq., Solicitor.
In the Supreme Court of New south Wales.
Between William Dean and Archibald Ashdown, plaintiffs , and John Garsed, defendant.
Let the Defendant, his attorney, or agent, attend before the Judge sitting in Chambers, at the Supreme Court House, King
Street, Sydney, on "Wednesday next, the 3rd day of March instant, at the rising of the Court, to show cause why the plea filed
herein, should not be struck out with leave to the Plaintiffs to sign judgement, as for the want of a plea on the grounds that the
said plea is so framed as to prejudice, embarrass, and delay the fair trial of the action. And that the said plea is wholly false
and on the further grounds stated and disclosed in the joint affidavit of Archibald Ashdown and Charles Pearson Pritchard, sworn
and filed in support of this application, and a time copy whereof is served herewith.
Dated this second day of March, A.D., 1858. For the Prothonotary,
A. P. Mackechnie, 3rd Clerk Supreme Court.
To the above Defendant, and to Piddocke Arthur Thompson, Esq., his Attorney.
In the Supreme Court of New South "Wales.
Between William Dean and Archibald Ashdown, Plaintiffs ; and John Garsed, Defendant.
On the 2nd day of March, in the year 1858, Archibald Ashdown, of Sydney, one of the above-named Plaintiffs, and Charles
Pearson Pritchard, of O’Connel Street, in the Colony of New South "Wales, gentleman, being severally sworn, make oath and say
as follows—
1. I Archibald Ashdown, for myself, say I never was in any partnership transaction with the above-named Defendant.


The only joint transaction In which I was concerned with him, being the purchase of a place called Posher v idle, and the erection
of certain buildings thereon.
2. The said John Garsed never gave me a bonus of Two Thousand Pounds.
3. The settlement of the transactions mentioned in the affidavit of John Garsed, sworn herein on the 26th day of
1858, was made by an agreement of which a copy is hereunto annexed, and marked with the letter A, and which agreement was
in fact a mere re-purchase by th e said John Garsed, of certain properties previously purchased by me from him, and the said Bill
of £6BO 15s. 3d., the subject matter of this action docs not form part of any bonus, none having ever been given by the said John
Garsed to me.
4. shortly before the said agreement, I offered to the said John Garsed, if he would place me in the same position I was in
before I had any transactions with him, to give him £2OO and give him back all the property I had so purchased from him, -which
terms the said John Garsed refused to accede to.
5. The title deeds of some property, of the said John Garsed, were handed to the said William Dean and Company, as a
collaterial security for the due.payment of the said sum of £6BO 15s. 3d., but the said AV. Dean and Co. never had any power of
sale in the said property.
6. The title deeds of the said Roshervillc Estate have been in my hands since the month of April last, or thereabouts, as
the joint owner of the same with the said John Garsed, but I never promised the said John Garsed to sell the same, and apply
the proceeds in and towards the payment of the sum of £6BO 15s. 3d.
7. lam advised that the plea filed by the Defendant herein, contained no defence to this action, and I verily believe, that
such plea has been filed merely for the purpose of delaying the above-named Plaintiffs, in obtaining judgment for the amount
due upon the Bill of Exchange, upon which this action is brought.
8. I have been informed, and verily believe, that the said Defendant is making away with his property for the purpose of
avoiding the payment of this Bill of Exchange, and that the said Defendant has stated his intention to place his property in such
.a position as the above-named Plaintiffs shall not be able to touch it under any execution obtained herein.
9. I, Charles Pearson Pritchard, for myself, say, 1 have been fully acquainted with the whole of the transactions between
the said John Garsed and the said Archibald Ashdown, and have been employed by the said John Garsed and the said Archibald
Ashdown, to malce up the accounts hereof. (Cleaning to keep a set of account books.
10. The said Archibald Ashdown never was in partnership with the said John Garsed, and never had any joint transaction
with him, except the purchase and building of Roshervillc.
11. The settlement of the transaction between the said John Garsed and the said Archibald Ashdown, mentioned in the
affidavit of John Garsed, sworn herein on the 26th day of February, 1858, was carried into effect by an agreement, a copy of
which is annexed to this affidavit.
12. The said John Garsed never gave the said Archibald Ashdown a bonus of £2,000.
13. The said Archibald Ashdown having previously to the entering into such agreement, offered to the said John Garsed
to re-convey all the property which he had purchased from him, and to give him a cheque for the sum of £2OO if lie would
place him in the same position as he was before purchasing any property from him.
14. The Bill of Exchange for the sum of £6BO 15s. 3d. did not form part of a bonus of £2OOO, but was the balance
found to be due on the accounts between the said Archibald Ashdown and the said John Garsed, but was in no way a part
of any bonus.
15. We, the said Archibald Ashdown and Charles Pearson Pritchard say that we have read the affidavit of the above-
named defendant, sworn herein on the 26th day of February, 1858, and that the several allegations therein, that “before
the commencement of this suit, he and the plaintiff, Ashdown, were in partnership transaction,” and that in settlement of
these transactions “ (except certain lands, and buildings, and premises, at Onion’s Point, on the North Shore of the Harbour
of Port Jackson, in the Colony of New South Wales, and known as the Roshervillc house and grounds, in which I and
Ashdown were also jointly interested, I gave Ashdown a bonus of £2OOO, or thereabouts, of which the £6BO 15s. 3d., the
amount of the Bill of Exchange now sued upon, forms part,” are altogether untrue.
16. And I, the said Archibald Ashdown, for myself further say that the allegation in the above-mentioned affidavit,
“that he, the said John Garsed, requested the plaintiff to sell his interest in Roshervillc house and grounds, and to apply the
proceeds in or towards payment af the said £6BO 15s. 3d., and the plaintiff, Ashdown, has repeatedly promised to do so, hut
has broken his promise, ” is also totally untrue.
Sworn by the two deponents, in the day first above-mentioned at Sydney, before me, |;V ,^ SH .J )OWX )
J J ’ ( C. 1. Pritchard.
George Powxall, a Commissioner for Affidavits.
Archibald Ashdown on his oath states as follows:—I was at one time a partner in the firm of Dean and Co. I engaged
Pritchard to look after the accounts' between Garsed and self. The books kept by Mr. Pritchard were kept by him in an
office he had in the building occupied by W. Dean and Co.; Mr. Charles Pearson Pritchard has left the colony. About 23rd
or 24th September, 1857,1 saw an account produced, marked N, handed to defendant, it was in red ink (meaning the fictitious
account for which I suffered.) Mr. Daintrey prepared the whole of the deeds. The Bills £l9OO and £7OO (meaning two Bills
due 11th and 14th August, 1857), were renewed by Garsed as I have stated, were given to Dean and Co., as between Garsed
and self. I only was liable, and not Dean and Co. There was not a fresh agreement between Garsed and self 11th August,
1857, but a letter passed. Mr. Randolph Want prepared and attested the agreement 30th September, 1857. I understood
it. Ido not come here to impeach that agreement. The Bills making up the £7830 15s. 3d, are all paid. If, under all my
agreements with Garsed, I had been a loser, Dean and Co. would not have participated in the loss. I never took from Garsed
yet any Bills in my own name, except two for £5O each, on account of Pritchard’s salary, and these 1 sold at twenty per cent,
discount, endorsed without recourse. Those Bills were given long after the agreement of 30th September, 1857.
Sworn at Syndey, this 20th December, 1858, . (Signed), A. Ashdown.
(Signed), D. Forbes, J.P.
Copy from receipts for documents deposited in the Prothonotary’s office, marked exhibits in Dean and Another v. Garsed
Bill of Exchange £GBO 15s. 3d.
Deed of Trust, Garsed to Ashdown, dated 18th March, 1858. (Signed), Phillip Dive for R. J, AVant.
On reading this deed the Judge ruled partnership transactions proved.
Agreement 11th August, 1857, Asbdown to Garsed, (Signed), K. A. SeawELL.
The above two documents are published in the Sydney Times, dated 4th and 11th June, 18G4.
[Copied from Affidavit filed in the Prothonotary’s Office.] In the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
In the matter of Randolph Johh Want exparte John Garsed, on the 21st of October. 1862, Randolph John Want, of
Number 142, Pitt Street, gentleman, being duly sworn, maketh oath and saith as follows :
1, lam not aware and cannot comprehend from the very general description given in the summons what Exhibits the
said John Garsed requires, except the two documents of which the dates are given (meaning the two documents published.)
2. The said two documents are, I believe, in the possession of Mr. Archibald Ashdown, one of the Plaintiffs in the action
mentioned in the first paragraph of the affidavit, sworn and filed herein by the said John Garsed in support of his application
herein. (Signed), R. Want.
Sworn by the deponent on the day first above mentioned, at Sydney, before me,
Richard Milford, a Commissioner for Affidavits.
I believe 1 have now proved that the information for perjury was filed contrary to common law.
In this my appeal to the public for justice, I beg most respectfully to state that all I require is to establish my innocence
before the highest legal tribunal in this colony from plaintiff’s own evidence and their own account books, without calling
further evidence. In my next will be published a Copy of Agreement annexed to Ashdown and Pritchard’s joint affidavit, the
said fictitious, red ink account, also my examination of W. Dean & Co.’s account books in connection with the same.
