

RECORDS OF VANISHED
DAYS
CLARENCE RIVER HISTORICAL SOCIETY
SUBSTANTIAL OFFICIAL RECOGNITION GIVEN
VALUABLE GIFT FROM PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY
Substantial and encouraging recognition has been given to the Clarence
River Historical Society, as a result of its research work over the last three
years, by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Library at Canberra.
Recently the secretary, Mr. !R. C. Law, wrote to the Library Committee,
asking that the society be provided with a full set of the historical records
of Australia and, after further inquiries had been made regarding the work
of the society, a, full set of the records, 35 large volumes, bound in calf, with
an index, and also a copy of "Beginnings of Government in Australia, also
beautifully bound and indexed, was received.
The latter contains lithographs of documents of absorbing interest,
dating back to 1788 and including a pardon for a man sentenced to death
for felony, on the condition that he agreed to act as public executioner tor
the term of his transportation; the first entry in the marriage register; the
proclamation granting the Rev. Dixon permission to carry out his duties as a
Roman Catholic priest (1803); the papers granting the first experiment farm
to James Ruse, in 1790; the deed of exchange whereby the first land grant
in Sydney was made; and other documents of absorbing interest to the student
of history, and of considerable value.
wj- j 7
The society now has 51 members, and
is almost ready to open the rooms in the
Grafton City Council buildings, with a
librarian in charge on certain evenings,
weekly.
The room is a bright and attractive
one, airy and well-lighted, on the first
floor, and is being fitted with a large
library table for readers. Cedar cup-
boards are already filled with bulky files
of historic documents, including the
Tindal letters, Dr. Dobie’s stud book of
Gordon Brook Station, dating back to
1839, and a complete record of the open-
ing of the Grafton bridge, with photos
bound in a book, by the Mayor, Alderman
B. C. Eggins.
Printed proofs of the articles on the
history of the Clarence, in sets, are
ready for reference or for sale, and there
are other articles of historic value, such
as a rusty convict hoe, the steering
wheels of” the river steamers, Favorite
and Kalatina, and the remains of the
iboat in which Harry Searle won tlfe
championship of the world.
On the walls are many pictures of
Grafton and district, showing the town
in various stages of development, and a
number of paintings of Grafton land-
scapes, with photographs of old Grafton
identities. These are to be added to
immediately, from the large collection in
the possession of the society.
READING ROOM.
The society’s room will be opened in
the near future, and will 'be occupied for
about six months, when the Australian
Broadcasting Commission will take it
over, and the society will move into a
larger room on the same floor.
The City Council is the trustee of all
the society’s property, and the Mayor is,
ex-officio, the president of the society,
which ensures the preservation of the
documents in the event of the society
disbanding at any time.
A perusal of the correspondence relat-
ing to the application for an edition of
the Historical Records of Australia gives
a clear idea of the thoroughness of the
society in its methods, and the wide
recognition that is being given to its
efforts.
INTERESTING CORRESPONDENCE.
In reply to the letter from Mr. R. C.
Law, the secretary of the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Library, Mr. Kenneth
Binns, wrote asking for particulars of
the work of the society, its standing and
information showing that the records
would be used for definite historical re-
search purposes.
To this Mr. Law replied that the best
indication that the records would be
used for historical research was, perhaps,
the amount of research already done by
the society. A set of the articles pub-
lished in the last three years was for-
warded. These had a documentary basis,
hardly intelligible, without the explana-
tory notes. Many other articles had
been published, embodying all that had
been discovered on a certain subject, or
concerning a certain man. For instance,
the article on Walter Hindmarsh had ap-
peared in the ‘‘Daily Examiner,” and
the article on Toolibilliban, which was
annexed, had appeared in last "Saturday’s
issue of the ‘‘Sydney Morning Herald.”
WORK PRAISED.
Professor Cumbrae Stewart, of Brisbane,
writing to a friend, had said that, in
his opinion, no better work was being
done in Australia. These publications
were read with avidity by the local pub-
lic, who were picking up a knowledge
and interest in the subject which were
of great educational value; and many
of the articles had been copied in other
country papers. The money paid by
the newspapers for the privilege of pub-
lishing the articles formed the greater
part of the society’s income. During
the three years the society had paid its
way, and had saved £3O.
After describing the method of colla-
tion, the letter stated fhat the first volume,
comprising nearly 300 pages with a
copious index, was just completed and
one copy was to go to the Mitchell Lib-
rary. The other copy was kept in the
society’s library and printed proofs of
che articles contained in it were sold
in sets.
A copy of the society’s constitution
was enclosed, together with the annual
reports, and the society’s room was
described, and particulars were furnished
of the institutions ail'd individual in-
vestigators helped by the society, includ-
ing students at the Grafton High School,
and the Teachers’ Training College at
Armidale, and Mr. C, D, Rowley, B.A.
of the Grafton High School, who had
obtained permission to take the history
of the development of the district as the
subject of his thesis for the degree of
Master of Arts, and had read the whole
of the society’s documents and taken
notes on them.
STRIKING RECOGNITION.
The Royal Australian Historical
Society had given the Clarence Society
very striking recognition. The main
part of volume XX of its journal was
taken up with a paper based on the
'Tindal letters, from the Clarence Society’s
publications. The Clarence River Society
was the first country society to fbe affili-
ated under the Royal Australian Histori-
cal Society’s amended constitution to en-
courage country societies, and mention
was made of this fact in the Royal
Australian Society’s annual report. The
secretary of that society had written a
very kind letter to say that his society
had instructed him to pay particular
attention to the Clarence Society.
Professor Cumbrae Stewart had come
to Grafton in 1932, and had given the
society a historical lecture, and after-
wards had read a paper, on the Science
Congress of 1932, on the discovery of the
Clarence River. In it he had acknow-
ledged the assistance he had obtained
from the material collected from the
society, and afterwards had presented to
the society the manuscripts of the lecture
and the paper.
In March last, Dr. F. P. Kepple, presi-
dent of the Carnegie Corporation, had
found time to inspect the society’s library
when passing through Grafton. He was
very interested and asked many questions,
and was kind enough to say that the re-
sults achieved so far were admirable, and
he had taken away with him a copy of
the annual report.
Mr. Law added that if he was spared
for the task he would go through the
records and extract all that concerned
the Clarence River, and would make a
complete index of that information.
PROMPT APPRECIATION.
A letter was received in reply to this,
stating that the articles, 1 to 67, cer-
tainly indicated the strength of the
society, and the keen interest of its
members in serious historical work, and.
if this information had been in the
writer’s possession previously there was
no doubt that the complete set would
have been made available, practically on
a presentation basis, the only condition
eing that, if the society disbanded,
they would be returned. Though Par-
liament had adjourned the librarian was
taking the responsibility of making the
set available on those terms, pending
confirmation by the committee.
Mr. Binns stated that he was par-
ticularly interested in the arrangement
of a set of the Clarence articles for
presentation to the Mitchell Library,
and, would be glad if a similar arrange-
ment could be made in respect to the
Parliamentary Library, also. The first
67 articles forwarded were being mounted
and bound in a volume for the Parlia-
mentary Library.
The articles referred to have been
bound in typescript, and will form the
first volume of the society’s work. The
Bawden lectures, the publication of
which was commenced in ‘ ‘ The Daily
Examiner” on Saturday last, will form
the second volume. Miss Bawden has
communicated with the society, pointing
out that, by a coincidence, the publica-
tion of the first instalment occurred on
the anniversary of her father’s death,
which took place on May 18, 1897.
