

W. a. AINSWORTH & CO.,
(MARTIN & PAIN.)
PH £
W £
fi s
« S ®
rjj Q
a H] a
o <ri S
M hi ®
fi a
B £
g 1 O
s- g 8
1 § g
£ g “
2 p g 1 P
H H o
g* p* | s
f-.
CD 2 m
p B «-
2 (D g
e & g.
® CD
pj
« I
THE
LAND QUESTION.
LEASING NOT SELLING,
Homes for all,
Robert
President of the Lands Settlement League of New South Wales.
PRICE 6 a.
Sydney, June, 1879.
187 & 189, YORK STREET, SYDNEY.


R. B. ARMSTRONG'S
HTfiIKNIC,
k EILKIBLB
REMEDIES.
Amstrong’s CtoHiomilo Liver Ik Billions Fills.
THE BEST FAMILY MEDICINE
For Indigestion, Dyspepsia, Bilious and liver Complaints, Sick Headache, Giddiness.
Armstrong’s Pectoral Cherry Balsam.
AN ELEGANT PREPARATION FOR ALL AFFECTIONS OF THE PULMONARY ORGANS.
Bottles only, Is. B d., 2 s. 6d., and 4s. 6 d.
ARMSTRONG’S REMEDY FOR INTERNAL PILES,
PRICE, 4s. 6d.
The Proprietor of this invaluable remedy has received numerous testimonials from parties
who have suffered more or less continuously for years from Bleeding Piles.
ARMSTRONG’S CONCENTRATED COMPOUND
FLUID ESSENCE OR EXTRACT OF
MS® &AMAMA
In combination with DANDELION and Potash.
Sold in Bottles only, at ss. 6 d. and 10*. 6d. each.
ARMSTR ONG ’ 8 INFALLIBLE EYE L OTION. 2/6 and 5 /-
Armstrong’s Vegetable Worm Lozenges.
In Boxis at I*. each.
ARMSTRONG’S AUSTRALIAN MOUTH WASH.
A new and elegant substitute for ordinary Tooth Powder & Pastes. Price 3/6 & ss. per bottle.
ARMSTRONG’S TOOTHACHE TINCTURE.
An instantaneous cure for Toothache. In bottles at Is. and 2s. each.
ARMSTRONG’S RINGWORM LOTION. Bottles 2,.
S:ffi®22i£ l JS,<BS<E FHceSs.ee.
ARMSTRONG’S PARAGON OINTMENT. 2 ».
ARMSTRONG’S TRANSPARENT CEMENT. Price 6 d. Sf Is.
AUSTRALIAN SPECLFLC LINIMENT for RHEUMATISM,
Sold in Bottles only at ss. 6d. and 10s. 6d. each.
i, b. ilfx
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL DRUGGIST,
472, GEOE6E STEEET, SYDNEY, Opposite tie Markets.
N.B.—The Cheapest House in Sydney for Patent Medicines, Toilet Druggist’s
Sundries, Horse and Cattle Medicines, Strychnine, Blnestone, Arsenic, &c.
PBICE LISTS forwarded Post Free on Application.


DIISON ANO SONS,
TOIBMOD MAnnFMTHJKEffiS.
Office— 193 York-street ;
Works— 305 and 307, Castlereagh
street, Sydney
Sole Manufacturers of the following Brands of
TOBACCOS :
YANKEE DOODLE,
CONQUEROR,
SIR ROGER,
LITTLE PLUM,
GOLDEN PLUM,
EUREKA,
GEM of the SOUTH,
NEEDLE GUN (Cut.)
Smokers desiring an enjoyable pipe should see
that they get some of the above Tobaccos.
N.B.—Cut Tobaccos, Cigars, and Pipes, in large
variety.
amors tobaccos.
BE SURE YOU GET THEM! ! !


N°. 571, GEORGE STREET, BRICKFIELD HILL,
SYDNEY,
J. T. Ryan, Proprietor.
—♦—
Table D’Hote Daily at One o’clock.
—♦ —
The house having been thoroughly renovated from top to bottom, visitors to
the Metropolis will find the Establishment replete with
everything of the best quality.
This Hotel contains 28 large and spacious Rooms with Hot and Cold Baths.
Accommodation for 50 persons with every convenience; moderate charges and strict attention.
STABLING FOR 20 HORSES WITH 3 LOOSE BOXES IN YARD BEHIND.
PROTESTANT REGISTRY OFFICE.
All kinds of Labour supplied to Country Settlers—
GROOMS,
MARRIED COUPLES
COACHMEN,
PLOUGHMEN,
STOCKMEN,
HOUSEMAIDS,
FENCERS,
COOKS,
and GENERAL LABOUR, supplied at shortest notice.
IMMIGRANTS ENGAGED.
COUNTRY ORDERS PUNCTUALLY ATTENDED TO.
Several First Class Married Couples and Farming Men
waiting Engagements.
FULL PARTICULARS REQUIRED.
Note the Address: —
284: CASTIiEREAGH STREET,
ETczt door to the Great Jewish Synagogue.


AMERICAN RUBBER HAND STAMPS
Invaluable in Office, for stamping Envelopes,
Cheques, etc., and in business for printing Bill-
heads, Paper Bags, Address Cards, &c.
GREAT REDUCTION IN PRICE
STAMPS for MARKING LINEN a SPECIALITY.
Full Name with Pads, Ink, Box, and directions complete,
from ss.
POST FREE ANYWHERE.
Inspection invited ; over 3,000 designs to choose
from. Initials 3s. 6d. Call and see samples.
All kinds of Crests, Monograms, Corporate Seals and Moveable
Date Stamps, made especially to order. Sole manufacturers of
the Self-inking Eoller Stamps, for printing Handbills, &c. —will
print over 1,000 an hour, are simple in their use, and totally
indestructable.
Note. —The Address is—
77 KING STREET,
TWO DOORS FROM GEORGE STREET.
Beware of composition imitations not made of Rubber, and Purchase
only the AMERICAN RUBBER HAND STAMPS.
Samples of impressions sent anywhere.
SMITH, MERRITT & CO., 77 KING STREET.


INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION.
8 H E E P.
CHLOEO-FEBBIC SALT,
(REGISTERED COMPOUND.)
CAUSES THE GROWTH OF WOOI , Sfe.
Chloro-Ferric Salt, is a chemical compound producing the following extra-
ordinary effects : —lt increases the growth of Wool and improves its quality.
It conduces to the general health of the animal, by its powerful tonic, altera-
tive, duiretic, and anti-worm qualities, its power and effect, as a preventative
of Eot, and Fluke, is extraordinary. The Sheep will fatten early, thrive well
on scanty pasturage, and produce excellent mutton, by the free use of this salt.
We have also Chloro-Ferric Salt prepared especially for Horses and Cattle,
it improves their wind, condition, and energy. In Cows it largely increases
the flow of milk.
For economy the sa’t is the cheapest, 11b. being equal to 51bs. of ordinary
salt, which does not contain the salutary powers of Chloro-Ferric.
Directions forwarded. Price .£2O per Ton.
TOVZEAU, j<f- €o. 9
ANALYTICAL & MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS,
WORKS, BOTANY ROAD; OFFICE, 419, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
218, PITT STREET.
ran&ipaw sifimssmiHi
PIAWOS, HARMONIUMS,
CABINET ORGANS.
(A. E. HUENERBEIN.)
PIANOB TUNED, REPAIRED, AND TAKEN IN EXCHANGE
SIB PITT STREET,
OPPOSITE HORDERNS.


BALES BALES BALES
FOR THE FOR THE FOR THE
FARMER, SQUATTER, SELECTOR,
OPT ALL CLASSES,
vv*wv\‘vvwv*w
BALES, ANY VALUE, from £2 10s. and upwards sent
free to the nearest Bailway Station,
Wharf, or Coach Office-
W V*\fV VAW''
Our Customers are reminded that they can
select any goods they wish, the Bales not being
packed up without first allowing a selection to be
made. Every line we quote or advertise we are
able to do, and on receipt of an order, special care
is given to its immediate dispatch, and every
attention possible is paid to its execution. Time
is saved by making Post Office Orders payable at
the Haymarket.
Special arrangements for packing orders and
purchases for the country.
LARGEST RETAIL BUSINESS IN THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
Purchase for CASH and always sell for CASH,
T 56 GEO&GE STREET,
HAYMARKET ONLY,
SYDNEY.
NEAR THE RAILWAY STATION.


Bales £2 10s. Carriage Free.
Anthony Hordern and Sons
■WISH TO LET
EVERYBODY KNOW
THAT THERE IS ONLY ONE ADDRESS VIE
HAYMAEKET.
Men’s Strong Shirts, from 3s. 6d.
Men’s Crimean Shirts,, from ss. 6d.
Men’s White Shirts, from 3s. Gd.
Men’s Scarfs, Collars and Ties, Braces and Belts.
Any orders for these goods have special care taken. Every
article sent is of the best quality at the prices.
Men’s Strong Cotton Socks.
Men’s Warm Winter Socks.
Men’s Warm Mufflers,
Men’s Undershirts.
Men’s Pants and Drawers.
Boys and Youths Socks.
Youths and Boys Socks at
ANTHONY HORDERN & SONS,
HAYMAEKET ONLY,
nsnE-iYIR, THE EAILWAT STATIOhT.
Dresses in every material. Country residents can write for
patterns which will be at once forwarded, and all Bales of Goods
value £2 10s., and which can be selected from any Goods in the
House, are sent Carriage Free.
NO READY MADE BALES LIKE YOU SEE ADVERTISED.
An}' Goods you wish, and at any price, made up only on
receipt of the order.
ESTABLISHED FOR 60 YEARS AND INCREASING EVERY DAY.
Price Lists sent on application, and every dispatch
used in getting all orders away.
Orders must be accompanied by remittance to cover the same.
BE CAREFUL IN WRITING THE ADDRESS,
MAKE POST OFFICE OEDEES PAYABLE AT THE HAYMAEKET.


Bales £2los. sent Carriage Free.
TEE BEST HOUSE IN SYDNEY
MEN'S AND BOYS’ CLOTHING
And to residents in the country a reliable house where orders can Ibe
sent with confidence is a very great boon. We never Sent
any substitute for orders. We sent the
exact thing ordered.
Men’s Tweed Trousers, 6s. lid.
Men’s Tweed Pagets 14s. lid.
Real Colonial Tweed-. Trousers, all
sizes, 7s. 6d.
Boys’ Sailor Suits, from 7s. 6d,
Boys’ Knickerbockers, from 6s. lid.
Men’s Trousers & Vests, from lOs.lld.
Men’s Overcoats, to 255.
Strong Tweed for making up, all
prices.
72 inch White Sheeting 9|d. per
yard.
100 inch Twilled & Plain from Is. 9di
These and all Widths in Sheeting are imported direct
Grey Calico Water Twist, 3d. to 8-|d.
36 inch Grey Twill, from 4d. to Bd.
2 yards wide Grey Sheeting, from Is.
to Is. 9d.
2 yards and a quarter wide from
Is. 2d. to Is. lid.
Cotton Tick, 4£d. to Is.
Linen Tick, 10|d. to 2s. 6d.
Huck Towels, Is. lid. a dozen.
Towelings —Damasks.
Body Linings.
Brown Hollands, from 4|d. to Is. 6d.
Strong Shirtings, 3|d. to Is.
Wincey Tweeds, 3|d. to Is. 6d,
Blankets all prices.
Quilts all sizes.
Table Covers all patterns.
HAYMARKET ONLY,
NO OTHER ADDRESS.
PATTERNS AND PRICE LIST SENT ON IMPLICATION


MASON BROTHERS,
14, SPiURS STREET, SYBREY.
Count! Imporurs, Igamiftiduras ajiir
Shipping Agents
-—ss
mm mmm
“ The EOYAL BLEND ” Scotch Whisky.
Walker’s “ OLD HIGHLAND” Whisky.
“ COEK DISTILLEEIES Co’s.” Whisky.
“HA YEN’S” Aromatic Schnapps, Old Tom, & “Palm” Geneva.
“ LOEIN’S ” Brandy, Bulk and Case.
IMPOETEES of lEONMON GEE Y, EAETHENWAEE,
GLASSWAEE, and CHINAWAEE, WINES and
SPIEITS and GENEEAL MBECHANDISE, including
the following :
STATION REQUISITES.
Woolpacks, full, 10.} lbs. Fencing Wire, Nos, 4,6, 8, 10, 12.
Seaming Twine; Cornsacks. Boiled Oil; Hoop Iron. Sheep
Shears. Corrugated Iron, Eoofing Felt. Turkey and
Washita Stones. Lamp Black and other Shearing supplies.
LIBEEAL ADVANCES made on every description of
COLONIAL PEODUCE whether consigned for sale in this
Market, or for shipment to our London House, — Messes.
EOBEET MASON and Co., who will bestow personal
attention to saving expenses at sale and delivery.
WOOL . —Eeceived for Shipment or Disposal as instructed.
SHIPPING AGENCY.— I hrst Class Clipper Vessels
dispatched at regular intervals to London,
Packet for June. — “LOCH SHIEL,” 1218 tonsEegister,
LONDON HOUSE.
HOB3EHT IMIYYSOLP Sc Co.
36 cj- 37, LEABEXIIALL STREET.
GLASGOW HOUSE.
G. and R. MASON,
BANK OF SCOTLAND BUILDINGS, GEORGE SQUARE.


he Qand Question.
ROBERT BARBOUR, M.P.
President oe the Lands Settlement League of
New South Wales.
The subject of the greatest importance in a new country such as
the Australias, where the people have unlimited power over the
disposal of the Crown Lands, is how to dispose of these to the best
advantage for the good of all. Coming as the great bulk of us
have done, from a land of agrarian pursuits, where for centuries
past the habits of the people have become moulded by the in-
evitable circumstances by which they were surrounded, into
servitude and toil, the result of the aggregation of large estates
of land in the hands of a few persons, we have been slow to
realize the power conferred upon us, and slow to shape and
administer our Land Laws in the direction that will give the
greatest good to the greatest number.
Englishmen are, as a rule, slow to give up their early habits,
and so we have perpetuated in the colonies, the system of land
alienation we had been accustomed to in the old country, with-
out troubling ourselves much to enquire how far such a system
was good or otherways for the progress of the colonies.
When I consider the vastness of the subject and the large
interests involved, coupled with the fact that wise Land Laws
contribute largely to the comfort and happiness of the people, I
wonder that we have had so little practical legislation upon such
an important subject. And what we have had in Legislation
and Administration has tended principally in one direction. All
of us have either actively or passively, by continuing the Aliena-
tion of the Public Estate, been assisting to produce a monopoly.
We have been handing over to a very small minority of ourselves
the exclusive possession of that which was not ours to give,
thereby laying the foundation for the objectionable Landlord and
Tenant system of the old country. Wo have been fostering an


incubus upon our prosperity by permitting and assisting a few
to acquire inordinate wealth which seldom increases happiness,
and is too often the parent of profligacy and idleness and if we
reflect seriously upon our position we must come to the conclu-
sion that in alienating the Public Estate we have been acting
contrary to natural laws. What moral or equitable right have
W© to alienate any land ? It is evident we have none ; and if we
continue to do so, the consequence must be that a land tax to
“ burst up the large estates ” will be demanded, and an agitation
once begun in this direction will be continued until it eventuates
in a movement to take away exclusive possession, that the land
may be used for the general support of the great body of the
people.
I think that my readers will admit that “ the earth is a gift of
nature to mankind,” not given exclusively to one generation of
men but to all generations; and no one age at any period of
tlm earth’s history, has any right to allow a few scores of in-
dividuals to appropriate to themselves and to their heirs in per-
petuity, any portion of the earth’s surface for land, unlike
commodities cannot be x’eproduced or increased, by no power of
man, can our City of Sydney be multiplied, for when any particu-
lar portion of the earth’s surface has been alienated, it is gone ;
we have no other exactly the same to take its place • and if we
do part with it, we are giving away the birthright of generations
yet unborn ; it is not so with the earth’s produce with wheat or
grain or other articles of subsistance or commerce, of any of
these things we may sell all we have to-day, and in a very short
time they can be reproduced thirty fold.
If we trace to the effect of selling Crown Lands we will find
that it tends to raise the price of the land’s produce, and if flour
and potatoes and butcher’s meat be raised in price, it is the
workers of the population that have principally to pay it. All
experience teaches that immediately the land passes into private
hands the owner’s idea of value becomes changed; what was
formerly looked upon as scarcely worth 20s. an acre, rises to £3
to £5, and sometimes to £2O an acre, this will increase the price
of produce, and although the great bulk of the people pay it, still
no public voice is raised to prevent it; here is protection with a
vengeance, and we see it not, protection to the Capitalist who has
enough already it may be, protection to land monopoly, which
tends only to make things dearer and dearer until reaching, as
in England, to the point of taking away the means of purchasing
the better class of necessaries, leaving a bare subsistence only to
the great mass of the people.
But there are other evils of a social nature which this
monopoly of land produces. When land once passes into fee


simple, the owners immediately urge that they can do as they
please with their own, they may demand exorbitant rents, or
refuse altogether to allow the land to be used except for their
own pleasure or amusement. They may appropriate it for hunt-
ing, or they may prefer grazing to agriculture, and human
beings may have to give place to sheep or cattle; this happened
on the Sutherland Estates in Scotland not very many years ago.
It was between the years 1811 and 1820 that “about 15,000
“persons were driven off the lands of the Marchioness of
“Stafford alone, all their villages were pulled down or burnt
“ and their fields tinned into pasturage. A like process was
“carried on about the same time by seven or eight neighbour-
ing Lords. The human inhabitants were thus ejected in
“order that sheep might take their places because some one
“ had told these great Lords that sheep would pay better than
“human beings.” The fundamental error being the crude and
monstrous assumption that the land which God has given to the
whole human family is, or can be the private property of any
one. It is an usurpation exactly similar to slavery. The slave
master calls himself slave owner mid pleads that he has pur-
chased the slave and that the law has pronounced slaves to be
chattels. I reply that the law is immoral and unjust, and that
no one can sell what does not belong to him. Mr. Herbert
Spencer speaks out on the Land question when he says—“ equity
“ does not permit property in Land, for if one portion of the
“ earth’s surface may justly become the possession of an in-
“ dividual and may be held by him for his sole use and benefit
“ as a thing to which he has an exclusive use, then other por-
tions of the earths surface may be so held and eventually the
“whole of the earths surface may be so held and our planet
“may thus lapse altogether into private hands—observe now
“ the dilemma to which this leads supposing the entire habitable
“ globe to be so enclosed it follows that if the Land holders
“ have a valid right to its surface all who are not Land owners
“have no right at all to its surface. Hence such can exist on
“the earth by suffrance only. They are all trespassers save
“by permission of the ‘ Lords of the soil,’ they can have no
“room for the soles of their feet, nay should the others think
“fit to deny them a resting place these landless men might
‘ ‘ equitably be expelled from the earth altogether. ” “If then the
“ assumption that land can be held as property involves that
“ the whole globe may become the private domain of a part of
“ its inhabitants and if by consequence the rest of its inhabitants
“can then exercise their faculties—can then exist even—only
“by consent of the landowner it is manifest that an exclusive
“ possession of the soil necessitates an infringement of the law


“of equal freedom. For men who cannot live and move and
“ have their being without the leave of others cannot be equally
“ free with those others.” Mr. Mill says, “the land is not of
“man’s creation, and for a person to appropriate to himself
‘ ‘ a mere gift of nature not made to him in particular but which
‘ ‘ belonged as much to all others until he took possession of it,
“ is prima facie an injustice to all the rest.”
And thus it appears evident that no person ought to have an
exclusive right to land ; his natural right is to the use, and to
the use only; other human beings will follow after us in the
world, and these will want the use of the land also; all other
rights, save that of usage, is the creation of artificial law; no
party of men have any equitable or moral right to alienate a
gift of Nature, or to destroy the natural rights of all mankind,
and should we do so, we are participators in an immoral bargain,
and are contributing to make “the rich richer, and the poor
poorer.”
But by a universal system of leasing on long leases, we will
escape from the monopoly, for thereby all classes of the people
will be suited—the grazier, the farmer, the selector, and the
squatter; the enterprising man will have a field opened up for
his labor; the man of experience also in increasing the pro-
duction of the land—the farmers, graziers and selectors, by
paying only a rental instead of a large deposit in cash, will be
enabled to use their capital in buying stock, in improving their
holdings or in putting in a crop that will repay them abundantly.
The squatters too, if insured of a permanent tenure and freed
from free selection before survey, will gladly escape from sink-
ing so much money in land, using spare capital in the improve-
ment of stock or of the land, and there is another class, and that
a very numerous one, I mean the sons of well-to-do parents of
the middle classes. They have not hitherto been considered in
any plan for the disposal of the public estate. Brought up by
loving parents, and supplied with a good education in order that
they might have the materials to become something, but the only
thing now open is a government situation or a clerkship in some
banking or commercial house, and many fail in obtaining even
one of these ; but if pastoral pursuits were more come-atable,
such a life would be more suited to the native youth ; many an
embryo agriculturalist and useful, if not celebrated, breeder and
grazier is compelled under existing circumstances to waste his
physical energies and subdue and control his natural ambition
over a desk or a counter, or a still less congenial occupation, who
would under the leasing system be assisted with a moderate
amount of capital from parents or friends willing to assist, and
join with him in a limited speculation suited to their means:


thousands would thus be drafted off to agrarian pursuits, some
as graziers, as growers of wool and mutton, breeders of shorthorns,
of clydesdales, of coachers, or of thoroughbreds, some also as
agriculturalists; and thus a congenial field would open to all;
the country would attract the surplus population of the towns;
increased producers would develops our resources, and give to
commerce a healthy tone and stimulus, and attract a great popu-
lation. I think the present an opportune time for directing
attention to this matter, and for asking the question whether a
thorough change should not now be made in the disposal of the
public estate ? I believe the public mind is becoming awakened
to the necessity for such a change. The financial institutions of
the Colony have been assisting investors in broad acres, and en-
couraging the accumulation of large estates in land, unmindful
that thereby they are shutting out population, and consequently
are postponing the time indefinitely for realizing from such in-
vestments, and have to wait until returning seasons yield wool
and other produce from the land to recoup their advances : the
result is a tightness in the money market that affects all. The
pastoral tenants, too, feel that they have been hanging a millstone
about their necks and incurring indebtedness in order to protect
their property as they say from spoilation by the inroads of selec-
tors ; and it is questionable if many will ever recover from the
heavy interests and liabilities thereby incurred. The commercial
and trading classes severely feel the curtailments in the circulating
medium and reduction of discounts and cash credits at their banker’s
and the selector desirous to take up land and become a producer
even he by the unholy administration of the Land laws has been
doomed to disappointment by delays and doubtful titles, for after
investing his hard earned savings in paying the deposit expecting
that by offering the land so acquired and improved by his labour
he would obtain assistance from the Banking institutions even
he has not been able to do so for the accommodation required by
the pastoral Tenants in order that they may purchase more land,
their accounts being more attractive, has absorbed the power of
the Banks to give others accommodation, and made money scarce
and dear. Surely such circumstances warrant the conclusion
that our relationships are not natural, that any system for dis-
tributing the gifts of nature that tend to set class against class
and provoke to hostility the worst passions of our nature, that
tempts a man to injure himself in order that he may possess
that which does not in truth benefit him, while at the same time
it ruins another, surely this cannot be a good thing, cannot be
in accordance either with the natural laws of the Creator, or
the moral and equitable laws of man, I am therefore tempted to
enquire how is the change to be effected ? the reply is, by stopping


alienation or selling-, and Substituting Leasing, and the following
is the mode by which I purpose to carry those principles into
effect viz.:
Ist.—By stopping the sales of all Crown Lands.
2nd. —Leasing on 21 or 30 or even 50 years leases, the Bent for
the first lease to be fixed by tender as herein after mentioned,
but on the expiry of the first lease the Tenant in possession to
have the right of renewal for another term at an advanced rental
of 25 or 50 or even at double the rental paid under the lease
then about to expire,—or of having the rent fixed by the Com-
missioners, —or of having the new lease put up to tender in the
usual way.
3rd.—Owners of country lands may continue in their freeholds
as at present, or they may sell to the Crown, and receive pay-
ment in Treasury Bonds bearing 4 per cent, interest redeemable
at such dates as the Commissioners may see fit, and the seller
may thereafter lease the land from the Crown, paying a rental of
not less than 5 per cent, interest on the amount of the lands
value.
4th.—The management of the public Estate to be in the hands
of a permanent Board of three Commissioners, selected men for
probity and fair dealing, paid good salaries, forbidden from
having a personal interest in land, and appointed as are the
Judges, responsible only to Parliament.
sth.—The land to be surveyed in lots to suit every person, the
smallest in extent being nearest the centres of population, as for
example, country lands near a town containing not less than 300
inhabitants, and within a radius therefrom of 5 miles, the lots
not to exceed 200 acres.
Erom 5 miles and up to 10 miles not to exceed 640 acres.
n 10 u n n 20 ~ ~ ~ 1,280 ~
y> ii ii ii °0 i) ii ii 2,560 ~
» 30 » ii i, 40 „ „ „ 5,120 „
ii 40 ~ ~ ~ 50 ~ ~ ~ 8,000 ~
ii 50 „ „ „ 75 „ „ „ 16,000 „
ii ii ,i ' ~ 100 ~ ~ ~ 64,000 ~
Note— The foregoing is only to illustrate the principle. The Lands
Commissioners will fix areas and minimum rents of each particular lot.
6th.—At the commencement of every lease all the permanent
and beneficial improvements on the land are to be valued and paid
for in Treasury Bonds bearing 4 per cent, interest, the amount to
be charged against the property and the tenant to pay 5 per cent,
interest thereon in addition to the rent of the land, but the
tenants who renew their leases before being submitted to tender
shall not be bound to have the improvements valued, and if they
did not want the money they would thereby save 1 per cent.


7th.—A maximum reserve price to be determined upon for each
lot offered for Lease, not being less than one penny per acre,
and all lots to be surveyed before being offered. I would prefer
the tender system for the disposal of leases —for example, the Com-
missioners would advertise in the Gazette and in local papers the
properties that were to be let on a certain day—that tenders were
to be deposited in a certain place up till —say, 12 o’clock of that
day —the Board Boom would be open to the tenderers and the
public, and the tenders opened in their presence ; but before
being opened, the Commissioners are to announce the minimum
reserve price for each lot (they shall not be bound to accept the
highest or any tender), but they may accept the highest tender
at or above the minimum so declared. If there be no tender at
or above the minimum, the land may afterwards be taken up at
such minimum, or the Commissioners may withdraw it from
selection, and again advertise for tenders, and the like process
shall be adopted as in the first instance. The Central Board
will sit in Sydney, but there will also be district boards that will
sit in the country.
Bth.—l would continue the principle of free selection of land to
be leased, but that it be surveyed before being leased —for ex-
ample, in addition to what is brought forward in the ordinary
course by the Commissioners, any person of the full age of 21
years may apply for any available land to be put up for tenders
in lots as surveyed, or he may apply for a sub-division of any
surveyed lot, or for any Crown Lands not surveyed that are
available ; but he is first to get it surveyed by the Licensed
Surveyor for the district, who shall send in a plan, and the ap-
plicant shall send in his application. The Commissioners shall
advertise in the Gazette , and, at least, in one local paper, calling
for tenders, and shall otherways proceed as before mentioned ;
any money paid for survey fees to be credited in rent or returned.
9th. —All pre-leases to cease, and determine on expiry of current
leases ; but before they expire the holder may convert them, or
portions thereof, into the long leases in the manner before
mentioned.
10th.—In regard to land held under pastoral leases on all runs
from which two-thirds of the original area shall have been
alienated, I would cancel the pastoral lease, giving to the Crown
Lessee the option of remaining in possession at a rent to be
agreed upon until advertised for tender, and of tendering in the
same way as others of the public are permitted to tender.
11th. —On all runs from which one-third but not two-thirds has
been alienated. Then not more than one-half of what remains
unsold shall forthwith be open to a long lease, but the remaining
half shall not be so open until after the expiration of five years
from the passing of the Act.


12tli.—On all runs from which less than one-third hasheen alien-
ated, then not more than one-third of what remains unalienated
shall be open forthwith, one-third not sooner than five years, and
the remainder not sooner than ten years from the passing of the
Act.
13th. —Townships to be reserved at say day’s stages for travelling
stock 8 or 10 miles apart, and all other reserves to be cancelled
unless required for public purposes.
14th. —The Commissioners may grant annual licenses for vacant
Crown lands until such lands be required for long leases or for
township purposes.
15th. —Within twelve months’ granting of a long lease when
the area does not exceed 5,000 acres—within two years when
the area exceeds 5,000 but does not exceed 10,000 acres, and
within three years when the area exceeds 10,000 acres —the owner
must fence in the external boundaries thereof with a substantial
fence, and every ad j oining owner shall, after three months’ notice,
do his half or pay for the half of the fence when erected. All
persons who become owners of adjoining lands after the boundary
fence has been erected shall, after three months’ notice pay his
half of the fence at its then value.
16th.—It shall not be legal to impound from unfenced lands:
but in the event of any trespass occurring the owner of the animals
trespassing is first to be warned, and should the trespass be re-
peated he shall be liable to pay for every head of cattle,
for every horse, for every sheep, for every goat, and
for every pig for every trespass ; such amounts to be for damage
done and grass consumed ; and if not paid on demand may be
sued for as a debt at the nearest court of petty sessions, or the
cattle may be impounded.
17th.—Within one year of a lease being granted the land must
be occupied and stocked, and if not so stocked a three months’
notice to be given, and if at the expiry of such notice it shall still
be unstocked the Commissioners may cancel the lease. Leases
shall also be cancelled for non-payment of rent, or non-fulfilment
of any conditions entered into and set forth in the lease.
My readers will perceive that it is my desire in these pages
to carry out a fair adjustment of the long vexed Land Question.
If carried into law the Sales by Auction will be stopped, Im-
provement Purchases will be stopped, Conditional Purchases
stopped, and Pre-leases stopped ; the feuds that have arisen be-
tween Squatter and Selector will be hushed, because there will
be plenty of land for all. For years past I have noticed the de-
moralizing tendency of this earth —hunger; I have known men,
who in other circumstances, might fairly be reckoned as honour-
able and true, who, for the sake of obtaining a few more acres


of land to which they must soon hid for- ever adieu, sell their
souls to the Devil. I have known a man already possessed of
many thousands of acres, whose thirst for more prompted him
to lead a hand of ten men, with crowbars and other articles of
destruction, and pull down a dwelling-house whilst occupied hy
helpless, unprotected females and young children; and when the
work of destruction had been accomplished, left them crying and
houseless on the salt-bush plains of Riverina; while their title to
the land was as good as his. But I hope we are nearing the
dawn of a brighter era, in the development of an entirely new
mode for the disposal of the public estate; and if the reader
will seriously and earnestly study this subject, I am convinced
that he must arrive at the conclusion that the leasing system is
best for all interests, whether pastoral, agricultural, commercial,
or manufacturing, and, above all, the best for the future welfare
of this great colony. Let me ask all those who peruse these
pages to think out the arguments, and when they have done with
the book to hand it to others to read. Within the last few
months I have conversed with many intelligent men on the sub-
ject, and from the almost universal approval expressed, I am
confident it only requires to be understood to be accepted, not
only by the majority of the people, but also by Capitalists and
it is well for capital and labour at all times to see a mutuality—
an advantage to both.
I can assure the present pastoral tenants that I have no pre-
judice against them as a class (although one or two interested
persons in Riverina may have tried to circulate such a report) ;
I am actuated solely by a spirit of duty, from honest conviction,
and not from any personal feeling. The Pastoral Tenants, as a
rule, have always admitted that they, the pioneers of settlement,
were only temporary occupants —holding until the increase of
population demanded a sub-division and participation in the
public lands. A change is now demanded, and if agreed to, as I
would like it, it will not so injuriously affect existing interests as
a continuation of Alienation is almost sure to bring about. The
change I advocate is a sub-division of large holdings near to
centres of population, giving a security of tenure to all tenants
of the Crown, whether they be small or large holders. All persons
in the State must be considered, and it would be wrong for any
one class to expect all the advantages, privileges and preferences;
of course I have taken into consideration that the Pastoral Tenants
have long been in possession of a good thing, and the present
uneasiness of public feeling proves that we shall not long con-
tinue under present conditions ; a change is near at hand, and in
view of all this, I would ask the Pastoral Tenants seriously to
consider whether the proposals I have submitted in these pages,


taken as a whole, are ’ not the best they can expect. I have
endeavoured to submit a fair and equitable compromise, one too,
in which no class can be said to be injured, whilst the general
body of the public will reap large advantages, not only in in-
creased rental, but also in increased production. I have heard
it said —and the remark carries with it much truth—that ‘ ‘ selfish-
ness is the motive power to all our actions,” and it is the con-
tending and opposing selfishness of other men that stimulates as
well as subdues, controls, and moderates our otherwise insatiable
selfishness. However, “ the happy medium is the best,” and
the nearer we can approach such an equilibrium, so in proportion
will we enjoy prosperity and happiness.
There is a principle in our nature that acts very strongly, I
refer to the desire to keep to ourselves all we have acquired, I
will illustrate it by the following. If we have long enjoyed the
exclusive use of anything (even if the thing referred to did not
belong to us) we look upon it as our own, and if a borrowed
article and the owner were to claim it and we had to give it up
we experience a feeling of having lost something which time and
possession had given to us an interest in a sort of nine-tenths
ownership, we part from it with reluctance, and with a feeling
anything but that of thankfulness ; in short we experience the
consciousness that the person is taking from us something which
is our property, when in fact and in truth we have no right to it
whatever. Hence it may follow from this particular tendency
that we may be told that before we can enter upon the considera-
tion of this New Land System, vested interests are to be con-
sidered and satisfied, and there are pastoral lessees in possession
to be^ compensated. I hope, however, that the proposals I have
mentioned will be looked upon as fair and satisfactory, and that
no factious or too selfish an opposition will be given to a system
that must ultimately benefit the pastoral lessees as well as the
whole colony, but before entering upon this argument, I will
recapitulate some of the proposals that are in favour of the
pastoral lessee, viz.:—
Ist.- -Tne repayment of all moneys expended by him as repre-
sented by beneficial improvements on all lands resumed, whether
reserved or unreserved.
2nd.^ —The stoppage of all conditional purchases and of pre-
leases in virtue thereof.
3rd. —The stoppage of the necessity for finding money to pur-
chase land or to make improvements to secure land.
4th. Stopping the sinking of capital in land and substituting
the payment of a small interest only.
sth.—Remaining in undisturbed possession for 10 years of the
greater part of those runs where little purchased land has been


secured with the probability that the demand will not press for
the resumption of any considerable quantity until long after the
time mentioned.
6th. —The advantage of getting money refunded and paying
only 5 per cent., when in many instances 8 to 10 has to be paid
now, and if the pastoral tenant will follow me a little further, I will
review his position under the present law, and draw a contrast
with my leasing system. I will suppose that his run contains
64,000 acres, that the selectors are coming about, and in order to
secure his property he purchases one-half which with reserves he
reckons will keep him tolerably safe; well, after weeks or it may
be years of great anxiety and of much money expended in urging
forward surveys and auction sales, in improvements under the
2nd and 31st and mining lease and selection clauses and in
volunteer orders the land will have cost him 30s. an acre, or
£48,000 for the 32,000 acres, this at per cent, interest comes to
£3,600, add rent for the remainder of the run say fifty sections
at £2 a section is £IOO, or a total of £3,700 a year, whereas by
leasing 64,000 acres at 3d. per acre is £BOO, showing a saving of
nearly £3,000 a year. Ok take the Cobram and Thule runs
where 110,000 acres have been purchased, they changed hands a
year or two ago at £2 per acre, deduct for improvements and
leave 30s. as the price of the land, and at 7-J per cent, interest
it comes to £12,450, add for 32,000 acres held under lease or 50
sections at £2 say £IOO, total £12,550. Whereas by my leasing
system 142,000 acres at 3d. per acre would only be £1,775, and at
6d. £3,550, showing a saving in the first case of £10,675, and in the
latter case of nearly £9,000 per annum. Of course the interest
in some cases will be more and in some less. I have taken h l\
per cent, as an average, to serve as a test. Any one interested—
knowing his own circumstances—will be best able to ascertain if
his savings will be greater or less than the instances I have given.
Let the Pastoral Tenants and Capitalists consider well and judge,
whether any amount of profit which they might hope to get, on
the re-sale of such purchased lands 30 years hereafter, will ever
repay the great amount of savings before referred to ; (for money
at 10 per cent, interest and compound interest, doubles itself in
7 or 8 years) and in view of this will they consent to continue
the present system any longer ?
Nor must we underrate the advantage to the pastoral tenant of
getting rid of the conflicting interests of the free selector and to
do so they must be ready to compromise, and it were better to
realize the position before things get worse. It may I think be
reasonably assumed that the mode proposed of withdrawing from
the lease of the pastoral tenant so much land at a time will be
better for him than to continue under the Auction and Selection


System—not to speak of the security of tenure in the remainder.
The period of time that must elapse before any considerable
quantity can be taken up will enable him to work out of the old
system and workinto the new, while free from ruinous competition
—in fact competition as known and felt during the last few years
will no longer operate there will be but one system, and the
sooner all are brought within it the better; whilst therefore the
interests of the Crown tenants in possession may be said to be
fairly considered and provided for, those of the selecting class
and the general public have equally been provided for—for it
cannot be doubted that the quantity of land proposed to be
resumed will be amply sufficient to satisfy all demands, even if
our most sanguine expectations as to the increase of our popula-
tion were more than realized. In considering this part of the
subject it may be useful to know the quantity of land conditionally
purchased during 16 years. —From the commencement of the year
1862 until the close of the year 1877 it comes to a little over
twelve millions of acres (the exact figures are 12,017,685 acres),
and under the arrangements that I propose there will be available
immediately on the passing of the Act 60,000,000 of acres, and
in five years afterwards another 60,000,000, and in another five
years the remaining 50,000,000 acres. In other words the present
pastoral tenants are, in the majority of cases, to have ten years
to work out of present arrangements and to transfer the holdings
under the long lease fixed tenure (and many may even at the
commencement enter upon that tenure), whilst the dairyman, the
market gardener, the agriculturalist, and the grazier may, sub-
ject to the regulations, have access to the whole colony, and ob-
tain upon a life-time lease 5 acres, 500 acres, 5,000 acres, or even
up to 64,000 acres.
And now as to the free selector, what advantage does this new
system offer to him ? It offers :
Ist.—A long lease for 21, 30, or 50 years, (I would prefer the
30 years as being about an average lifetime) renewable at the
end of the lease.
2nd.—All the necessary and beneficial improvements he makes
will be valued and paid for to him at the end of his lease.
3rd.—He can get as much land as he thinks he can manage
from 5 acres up to 64,000 acres, at a rental fixed by tender,
which will likely be a reasonable one : the minimum I have fbted
is a penny an acre, but some land will bring’ a shilling or more.
At present the selector pays cash down 5 shillings an acre. The
interest on that at five per cent would be three pence, (this is the
Government rate of interest) but money to a selector (at all events
when he is beginning the world, and for a long time after), is


worth ten per cent, and this on 5 shillings is sixpence a-year for
every acre. And then if he did not pay the balance 15 shillings,
at the end of three years he would have to pay nine pence per
acre more ; ninepence and sixpence come to ono-and-threepence
an acre, and that is more than the rent is likely to ho unless near
townships. The reader will remember that I have been counting
upon an average of sixpence per acre, so there is a likelihood of
his saving money even on the interest he pays at present. But I
will take it in another way —Suppose at the end of three years
he pays the fifteen shillings, he will then have paid one pound
for the freehold, and put on improvements of twenty shillings or
ten shillings per acre ; but interest on thirty shillings at five per
cent, would he one shilling and sixpence per acre, and at ten per
cent, three shillings an acre.
But this is supposing that the selector had the money by him
to pay, which is rarely the ease ; and if is on this account I say
that a selector would rather pay a rental and have his capital to
buy stock with. If a selector takes up 500 acres the rent at six
pence an acre would, under my system, be £l2 10s. a-year, but
under the present Law he would have to pay cash down £125.
If he took up 1,000 acres under my system at six pence, rental
comes to £25 a-year, but under the present Law he would have
to pay cash down £250 —If 2,000 acres, under my system at six
pence an acre £SO a-year, and under the present Law he would
have to pay cash down £SOO. And so on. It is like this —a
selector if he went to the land agent under the present Law and
wanted to take up 1,000 acres, would take £250 with him and
pay it all to the agent, but under my system at six pence per acre
rent the agent would say, I only want £25 a year, the amount
you usually pay for the loan of £250 ; you can keep the money
and use it for your own purposes and have the use of the land all
the same.
I think that the intending settler will see plainly that there
must be at all times sufficient land open for all comers, whilst
existing interests will not be unnecessarily interfered with, and
the limitation of areas within certain distances from ascertained
centres will prevent any one from monopolizing large quantities,
at the same time when population has sufficiently increased, the
man who has 640 acres or more may be induced to subdivide his
holding. It may also happen that some one more enterprising
than his fellows may have gone back into the interior, secured
one of the larger areas, induced others to go with him, and estab-
lished a centre of population there; he too may be induced to
subdivide his holding, and it will be all the better for the Colony,
for instead of having one tenant only, there may be ten or twenty
at the next letting by the Crown.


And now as to the Pastoral Lessees in possession, how will
they he affected by the change ? It is well-known that, at the
time of the passing of the Land Act of 1861, the leases granted
by the orders in Council had expired, or were about to expire,
and the colony haying obtained from the Imperial Parliament
full control over the waste lands, the Parliament of New South
"Wales was placed in a position to deal with the Public Estate
and the Crown Tenants; and they passed the Act of 1861 for
that purpose; that Act resumed possession of the waste lands,
and granted new leases upon new conditions, giving to other sub-
jects of the Queen certain rights, and the Crown Lessees accepted
their leases upon these conditions, subject, of course, to all these
other rights, and they have held their leases upon these con-
ditions ever since. These conditions are well known to be, free
selection before survey all over the Colony, the Crown tenant
well knowing that his leasehold was liable to be taken from him
all in one day; how then can it be argued that there is a vested
interest ? Such a claim, if it ever existed, has been done away
with seventeen years ago. His Honor Mr. Justice Hargrave in
delivering his judgment in a case not very long ago said ; —“ The
“ subject matter of the two Land Acts passed in 1861 was that
“ the old orders in Council were repealed and a new code insti-
“ tuted—one Act of Parliament providing for the alienation of
“ freeholds, and the other protecting the interests of Crown
“ lessees and occupiers : no Acts of Parliament could be more
“ carefully prepared than these two; all complaints of vested
“ interests were prevented, for as the old leases expired all the
“new ones were issued subject to the new legislation, and all
“ the present leases were taken on the footing of the new Acts
“ of Parliament, so that there could be no talk about equitable
“ and vested interests.”
It is no doubt true that very many of the present occupants of
station property when they purchased did pay very high prices,
as much as four or five times the price of the sheep, cattle, and
improvements the several properties contained, but this only goes
to prove the very profitable nature of the occupation—such sur-
plus of value must be looked upon as a goodwill given to secure
a monopoly—that the Government got no benefit therefrom—that
it was simply a speculation entered into by private individuals,
in which the State derived no benefit, and therefore a claim can-
not be urged as against the Government.
It may, I think, be argued with every degree of fairness that
the pastoral lessees in the prosecution of their particular calling
entered upon the purchase of their stations very much in the
same way as a business man or company do, when they purchase
the business of some other person who had enjoyed a monopoly


which suddenly became a failure; or to give another familiar
example —suppose a number of men had purchased into a gold
mining claim that had been paying 40 or 50 per cent, and for a
time they had shared in its prosperity ; suddenly a collapse takes
place and it becomes a failure. No one would for a moment urge
that the unfortunate speculators in either case were entitled to
be compensated by the Government.
But the position of the pastoral lessees commands even fewer
claims to consideration than either of the cases I have mentioned;
the majority of them have long enjoyed the special and lucrative
advantages of being Crown lessees, some are original holders,
and but few, when compared with the whole, have purchased
within five years, whilst the greater number have held for ten,
fifteen, or even twenty years.
In a return laid before Parliament and printed on 21st March,
1876, we find there are 4,254 runs held under the then existing
tenures, the estimated areas of which are nearly 140 millions of
acres, and the total rent paid £176,205 17s. Bd., or a fraction
under one farthing and a quarter, of a farthing per acre. I give
the summary contained in that return for public information.
It will be seen that the district paying the largest rental is the
Murrumbidgee, which averages nearly three farthings per acre,
and the smallest is the Albert District, which is less than half a
farthing per acre.
the summary contained, in tnat return ror puoiic uuuim<uiun.
It will be seen that the district paying the largest rental is the
Murrumbidgee, which averages nearly three farthings per acre,
and the smallest is the Albert District, which is less than half a
farthing per acre.
EETUEN OF CEOWN LANDS HELD UNDEE LEASE OE
LICENSE, N. S. W., 1876.
Estimated p rese nt i * Estimated Grazing
Districts. of rca f. of Annual ! Capabilities un-
Runs. Existing Rental Renta s. improved State.
Tenures.
Acres. £ s. d. Farthings. Cattle. Sheep.
Albert 681 35,510,170 i 17,117 19 4 -46 .. 981,250
Bligh 385 6,857,300 13,618 18 0 R9l 68,610 771,979
Clarence 104 2,831,605 | 4,607 10 0 1-56 134,550
Darling 329 16,614,149 : 14,563 0 0 -84 2,900 636,300
Gwydir 167 5,803,363 10,614 0 0 1*76 97,814 505,850
Lachlan 620 20,574,353 ; 30,529 0 0 1-42 19,820 1,367,745
Liverpool Plains..., 269 6,790,632 10,899 15 0 1’54 76,375 284,100
Macleay 24 339,065 374 0 0 I*o6 7,100
Monaro 224 3,047,636 5,434 0 0 1-71 92,370 318,310
Murrumbidgee .... 387 9,900,966 29,180 0 0 2'83 18,140 1,151,730
New England 171 4,806,166 9,788 12 0 1-96 125,950 609,800
Warrego 473 15,588,604 14,216 18 4 -88 56,400 593,369
Wellington 420 10,557,592 15,262 0 0 | 1-39 62,335 803,100
4,254 139,221,601 176,205 17 8 i 1-22 762,364 8,023,524
15


Average Rent
per Acre.
Pence.
1* 5
156
1-48
1-40
1-45
1-38
1-36
1-34
1-45
1-77
1-388
The above return does not include the land held under pre-
lease, the rent of which varies, the lowest district being f an
acre, whilst in others it reaches one penny per acre.
RETURN OF CROWN LANDS HELD UNDER PRE-LEASES.
No. of Pre-Leases. Acres. Rental. Rate per Acre.
Whole Colony 18,394 13,642,560 £44,229 ss. Bd. fto 1 penny.
In the ordinary concerns of life, it is sometimes well for us to
contrast our position with others similarly situated with ourselves,
and as a contrast to the treatment the pastoral tenants of New
South Wales receive from the Grovernment of that colony, I give
as follows a Return made to the Parliament of Victoria, on Bth
August, 1877, for ten years, showing the area held, rent paid,
and stock carried by Victorian squatters :
THE CROWN COLONY OF
PASTORAL
TENANTS OF
VICTORIA
The Assessed Grazing
capacity and number of
sheep paid for.
Date.
28,505,344
27,034,785
27,703,314
27,702,287
27,972,528
26,556,429
25,830,641
24,230,128
22,967,639
21,906,540
178,495
176,593
171,736
164,123
170,027
153,522
140,791
127,114
139,304
162,443
5,354,850
5.297,790
5,152,080
4,923,690
5,100,810
4,605,660
4,223,720
3,813,420
3,359,349
3,248,860
Area.
Rent.
The average rental for ten years is of a penny, and for the
year 1876 it is If per acre, or fully 5 times the rental paid in
New South Wales. The rent is thus shown to be progressive,
and in accordance with the increase of other properties. The
squatters pay by assessment one
the estimated quantity the land
shilling per head on
will carry, and they
Victorian
sheep on the
estimate the grazing capabilities for the year 1876 at 3,248,860
sheep, the estimated total acreage being 21,906,540 acres ; this
gives 6 acres to a sheep —a large allowance certainly ; but when
it is considered that the parts of Victoria that remain unalienated
is but the worst of the land—the Ranges, the Mallee Scrub, tho
Rocks, the roads and the timbered country, coupled with in-
security of tenure, perhaps the allowance is a reasonable one.


The New South Wales return of stock carried (part of which
is set down in cattle, but counting 5 sheep to one head of cattle)
makes the New South Wales estimate equal to 11,835,344 sheep
for 139,221,601 acres, which gives very nearly 12 acres to every
sheep ; thus it is seen that the Victorian squatters pay double
in proportion to the land he occupies, and in money pays five
times the amount per head more than the New South Wales
squatter does ; nor can it be said that the New South Wales land
is inferior in quality to the Victorian for carrying sheep. All
who are acquainted with both countries know well that the very
opposite is the fact, and I believe and assert without fear of con-
tradiction, that whenever we are able to introduce into the New
South Wales Colony four times the population she now has, her
Crown Lands will carry four times the quantity of stock, or at
the rate of one sheep to every three acres —a total of nearly 50
millions of sheep upon Crown Lands alone, yielding 500,000
bales of wool, which at £2O per bale, will give the annual in-
come of £10,000,000 without counting the stock on land held
under fee simple ; add this, and add also the agricultural pro-
duce from some 10 or 20 millions of acres additional, and we
realize a country big with prosperity, large in production, and
abundantly cheap in all the necessaries and luxuries of life.
It appears to me that if the Victorian squatters pay one
shilling for sheep, New South Wales —except in the back country
where water is not yet secured —might do the same ; some of the
New South Wales Land will carry a sheep to one and a half acres,
while in other parts it may require 8 or 10 acres to a sheep;
certain it is that no proper valuation is made, and first-class land
is valued at about the same as the worst land. Those favoured
are benefitted, as I have before shown, and the public purse is
defrauded to the extent of a million pounds sterling annually.
If I am right in my figures and in my deductions, the reader
will have no difficulty in arriving at the conclusion that the public
have been permitting the Pastoral Tenants to put into their own
pockets, instead of into the public Treasury, upwards of one
million pounds sterling annually, and this has helped them to
buy so much land ; the people have been permitting the Grovern-
ment to part with the fee simple of the land for money that
ought to have come into the Treasury as rent; no other class in
the community can afford to purchase land as do the squatters.
The merchants and traders require all the capital they start with,
and all the profits they accumulate from year to year for the
legitimate demands of their business, and were they to withdraw
from their cash balances, sums equal to what is invested in broad
acres by the Pastoral Tenants, their occupation would soon be
gone. None, therefore, but the squatters can afford to buy


country land, and it is this fact that enables them to have it all
their own way in the auction room, and to purchase without
competition.
But let us hope that the time is fast approaching when the
people will awake from their indifference, and will take an in-
terest in public matters, and bring to bear upon the Government
of the day such a pressure as to obtain for all classes an adjust-
ment of their rights and privileges, obtaining from each section
of the people a fair contribution to the State for the privileges
they enjoy. We have been contented to stand by and to see
Government after Government jog on in the easiest way possible,
permitting one class, and that the Pastoral Lessees to enjoy the
privilege of almost exclusive possession, without paying more
than a fractional part of a fair return for the privileges they
enjoy, whilst the commercial class have been saddled with a
Stamp Tax and other trammels upon trade to make up for revenue
which ought to have been recovered from the occupiers of the
land, nor have they even complained of the monopoly that has
been permitted to exist and continue. The farming class have
noticed such things and grumbled, but have been unable success-
fully to assail the strong hold the squatters influence has had
upon the officials and the Government; the struggling selectors
have felt that the money savings have been used to scourge those
who dared to intrude upon their almost exclusive Preserves by
Supreme Court actions for trespass and ruinous litigation, which
crushed and soured and drove away many, who, if allowed to
remain in peace, would have been useful colonists.
Nor can the several Governments that have held office since
1861 plead that no necessity has existed, requiring them to get
income by increased taxation. The time has not long passed since
the resources of the Treasury were sorely tried to supply the
ways and means for the necessary expenditure of the country,
yet the savings of the pastoral tenant were not intruded upon.
The Colony has required money to construct railways and other
public works, and loans have been resorted to which have brought
the New South Wales’ indebtedness to some (£12,000,000) twelve
millions of pounds sterling, and, marvellous to record, the pas-
toral tenants have always escaped. I know a squatter’s run near
Deniliquin, rich black soil well grassed, carries one sheep to
one and a half acres. It was appraised during the present year,
1878, (by the very questionable mode of one person acting for
both squatter and the Government) and after deducting aliena-
tions, the Crown lands were said to be 37,307 acres—all this
was valued at £BS a year. Now just fancy a run carrying
25,000 sheep—convenient to a railway station—yielding to the
owner in wool, increase, and fat sheep equal to 6s. Bd. per head


on the whole, or say £8,333 a-year —the land is worth £2 an
acre or £74,000, and all the Government receive for the exclusive
use of it (for the reader will remember that the owner has either
got the Government to make it reserves from sale, or he has put
on improvements to prevent its being selected), is only £BS a-year.
Had the run been on the Victorian side of the Murray the rent
would have been Is. per sheep or £1,250 a-year: but this is not
all, he has often 20 to 30 men carting and splitting timber on the
Crown lands to improve his purchased land, or lands which he
intends to purchase by virtue of improvements made with such
timber; and if he paid for licenses such as selectors or splitters
have to pay, it would alone amount to more than he pays for the
whole station; but he pays not a shilling of license and not a
shilling of taxes. I leave the reader to draw his own conclusions
and simply ask will he now believe in the million of annual
savings which goes to swell the freehold estates instead of into
the public Treasury.
It is high time then, that such a state of things was brought
to an end, and brought to an end as I think by a thorough
change in the existing system. The pastoral tenants, as we have
seen, have no equitable right to the land longer than until it is
required to be resumed by the decision of the people, and none
of them will deny that they have had a very good bargain for
the last seventeen years. They cannot I think now complain if
the public resume possession, and make such alterations in the
Law as will enable hundreds and thousands to settle and become
producers, and thereby to relieve the labour market. The pastoral
tenants will also have an opportunity of continuing tenants of the
Crown, their leases reduced it may be in area, and increased in
rental, but improved by having a security of tenure and freed
from the contending free selector, they will be encouraged to
make improvements of a reproductive character; and thus the
reduced holdings may become reasonably profitable and satisfac-
tory.
Part 2.
ADVANTAGES OF THE LEASING SYSTEM.
Many are the advantages that will accrue to the colony by the
adoption of the Leasing System. One of these is, that land will
never reach so high a value if the State continues to be the land-
lord that it would if in the hands of private individuals, and in
this alone we trace a very great saving to the consuming public.
We all know that when land rises in value, its produce is increased
in price, and the consumer has to pay for it; in like manner if


land is cheap and easily attainable, it encourages more people to
become producers, and this cheapens the production, but the
most palpable advantage will be in the increased income which
the State will obtain. New South Wales has still unalienated
about 170 millions of acres, which, if let at an average of 6d.
per acre, will amount to upwards of £4,000,000 sterling per
annum. An amount far in excess of what is received from
alienations and from rental; and this without selling a single
acre. As under, I give the actual revenue from land for the
years 1876, 1877 and 1878
REVENUE.
1876. 1877. 1878.
Auction Sales - £1,469,648 1,967,057 1,061,670
Improved Purchases ... . ... 91,596 133,358 239,943
Selections after Auctions
Provisional Pre-rights ...
98,280 166,730 124,197
189,664 77,263 20,049
Deposits on Conditional Purchases ... 496,053 424,954 398,729
Instalments on Conditional Purchases... 7,134 10,751 23,775
7,134 10,751 23,775
Balances on Conditional Purchases ... 61,700 61,090 47,060
Total Revenue from Sales ... £2,414,075 2,841,203 1,915,423
ANNUAL REVENUE,
Interest on Land Conditionally Purchased £99,329 126,654 160,581
Rent from Annual Leases 48,871 51,176 50,186
Rent from Pastoral Runs 172,088 176,305 165,405
Assessment on Runs . 938 2.376 3fio
Assessment on Runs 938 2,376 360
Quit Rents 195 949 141
195 249 141
£222,092 230,106 216,092
From the comparison thus presented it will be seen that the
selecting interest is rapidly increasing, and in point of income
pay to the State for rent on Pre-Leases and annual interest of
£45,000, more than the pastoral tenants pay for rents of their
runs. The selectors hold say 18 millions of acres, and pay
£210,/67. The pastoral tenants hold say 150 millions of acres,
and pay £165,765. Annual excess paid by selectors, £45,002.
This proves incontestably the advantage to the state of’sub-
division and an increase of occupiers.
I think it will be conceded on all hands that pre-leases and
cf /AT»nl I rvo cr\d Tvmr At, 1 „11 1 * PiT . , 1 -I.
pastoral leases pay only a small proportion of the rent they ought
to pay, hence it is obvious that we are sacrificing the public
interest if we continue the present system any longer. The
total amount received for pastoral occupation from squatter and
selector during the year 1878 amounted to £216,092, and the
expenses of managing these branches of- the public service to
about one-fourth of that amount. Will the reader now see that


there is something radically -wrong and requiring a complete
change in the management of our public estate, no amendment
nor patching up of the old law will accomplish the object, and
what system is more equitable and just to all than leasing, it
places every one in an equal position, and as I have already
shown the very small rental of sixpence per acre average on what
still remains unalienated will amount to four millions of pounds
sterling per annum. But it may be doubted by some whether
sixpence will be realized, and to such I reply that if that much is
not obtained all at once it will very soon not only be accom-
plished but far exceeded. Just consider for one moment the
security of tenure, a lease for 30 years ; why 6d. or a Is., or even
2s. an acre would be looked upon as almost nothing for some
lands. Consider also that the improvements belong to the tenant
and see in that alone the encouragement that is given to expend
money in reproductive improvements which the tenant himself
will have the benefit of for 20 or 25 years if he makes them at an
early period of his lease, and for whatever of these or other
improvements remain at the end pf the lease he will be paid, and
answer, whether such a tenure is not almost if not quite equal to
a freehold. Consider further that the Victorian pastoral tenant
pays nearly two pence per acre for land that may be taken from
him within a few months, land too of the worst description, for
all the best has been selected; consider again that the New
South Wales conditional purchaser pays 9d. an acre interest on
the balance add 3d. interest on the ss. deposit, and it comes to
Is. per acre, and where is the selector who would not gladly
continue to pay a rent using his capital in purchasing stock
rather than sink it in land. In view then of all these facts, can
you doubt the possibility of realizing an average of 6d. per acre.
For myself I anticipate no difficulty of realizing from the very
start more money from leasing alone than is now obtained from
selling and leasing, and in a few years the income we must derive
from our public estate will pay for railways and other reproduc-
tive works, and save us from borrowing a single shilling.
The late Secretary for Lands, Mr. Farnell, informed Parliament
that the unalienated Crown Lands in New South Wales were
upwards of 177,000,000 of acres in November, 1878; so that if
we deduct seventeen millions for water, timber, and barren rocks,
there still remains one hundred and sixty millions of acres which
ought to be for the greater part at least fit for occupation. Some
would have us believe that the good land is all gone, selected,
and purchased, but it is not so ; there is as good land in the
colony still unalienated, as has yet been alienated, and a great
deal more of it, and from my knowledge of the country, I fear-
lessly assert that more than one-half of the 160,000,000 acres


referred to would be thought sufficiently good for selection, and
would be at once selected if all obstructions were removed, and
we had the population to do it; and if the one-half was let at Is.
per acre, that would of itself realise an average of sixpence on the
whole acreage. But let us take it in another way. Suppose one fourth
to bring Is. per acre, one fourth 9d., one fourth 3d, and one
fourth nothing at all; why, this would average 6d. an acre, and
in thirty years the amount might be doubled. Practical men
will be glad to take up land at these prices, and there are
hundreds, and I might say, thousands of them in the adjoining
colonies of Victoria and South Australia only waiting for the
offer and the opportunity, and there is no better opportunity than
the present; the gold-fields of Victoria are on the wane, and
thousands are leaving, and are anxious to abandon those pursuits
to settle on the land. The differences that have arisen between
labour and capital in that colony have disquieted many minds
causing unsettledness, and a desire to pick up their household
effects and cross the Border ; the limited area of that colony has
compelled a curtailment of the extent of land to be obtained;
and although the great bulk of the would-be settlers are satisfied
with small portions, still there are many—very many —of the
very best of colonists who would gladly take advantage of an
extended field for their energy and their ambition. And then
there are the South Australian Colonists, practical men who will
gladly take advantage of the unlimited field the leasing system
will offer to them, and the privileges of becoming either a small
farmer or a large farmer, a small grazier or a large squatter
without let or hindrance, save that of the ability within them-
selves to take advantage of it. All, therefore, that is required to
make this colony great, is to offer inducements for people to come,
and they will come, and we know that wherever labour and skill
is expended, the earth will yield her increase.
The statistics furnished by the agricultural returns gives to
the purchased lands an average of a sheep to one and a half
acres, whereas the estimated grazing capacity of the Crown Lands
held by the Pastoral Tenants (the estimate being made by them-
selves) gives 12 acres to a sheep. If, therefore, there were no
other argument to prove the utter foolishness of continuing such
a system of downright waste, such negligent abandonment of a
proper supervision and use of our public estate, surely this alone
would determine us not to allow it to continue one day longer.
Some 40 or 50 millions of acres purchased land have thirty millions
of sheep assigned to them. Whilst one hundred and fifty millions
Crown Lands are represented as carrying only eleven millions of
sheep.


It is a principle in our natures that the more we try to do the
more do we accomplish. Our exertions are to a large extent con-
trolled by our necessities, and when a pressure is brought to bear
upon us we attempt more and we accomplish more. It is not
many years ago since people freely said that land in New South
Wales was not worth anything like one pound per acre —some
of it they would not take as a gift; there were few selectors
about then, they began to make their appearance in numbers
about the year 1872. The pastoral tenants became alarmed, and
spies were placed all over the runs to watch the selectors and to
hunt them away if it were possible. Schemes were also laid for
securing the land by auction purchase and by improvements some-
times of a very questionable nature, that is—certain erections called
improvements were used to secure the land, which would not have
been placed there at all had it not been to prevent the selector
from getting the land. This class of improvements are called
dummies ; they consist for the most part of portable iron sheds
in the form of houses, but they cannot be called houses because
they have no lining and no floors and are not habitable. They
are put up in pieces and bolted together, can be taken asunder
and erected again in a few hours. They thus become all power-
ful in scaring away timid and ignorant selectors. Knowing ones
who are plucky enough to resist, get plenty of law in the shape of
Supreme Court actions for trespass to bring them to ; and if they
wont go without, an offer to buy them out is submitted and often
gladly accepted. I have known a selector looking for a home go on
to Crown lands and fix upon a spot; he was seen and watched.
This was on a Tuesday —on Thursday he appeared at the Lands
Office, 30 miles away, and conditionally purchased the land. —
On the following Monday he returned to take possession, when
he found an iron house and iron fence around 320 acres, notwith-
standing this he took possession and lived there for some months,
when he received a letter from the Lands Office telling him his
selection was cancelled and he could get back his deposit, as the
land was claimed by the lessee by virtue of improvements. I may
mention that the lessee had taken care to post off to head quarters
in Sydney an application for leave to purchase ‘ ‘ a woolshed with
a fenced paddock,” dated several days before the purchase by the
selector. I have known an industrious man inspect Crown lands
on the Tuesday with a view to select it, —he was watched —and
when he reached the Land office on the selection day (Thursday)
he was shown an entry in the Intended Improvements Book,
under the 31st Clause Amending Act, purporting that it had been
taken up by the pastoral tenant. In this way, by a continual
system of blocking, I have known men that would have made
good colonists soured and driven over the border into Victoria,


where, if they cannot get as good land or as much of it as in New
South Wales, they can get such an administration of the Law as
will give them justice. These are not exceptional cases, but
illustrations to show the almost universal system of blocking
adopted. Where is the man that will advocate a continuance of
this sort of thing ? Nor is it a profitable thing for the squatter,
for the land bought in this way must cost him upwards of two
pounds an acre, —perhaps when all the contingent expenses are
taken into account a great deal more —and although it is com-
monly said by the pastoral lessees that ‘ ‘ the selectors levy
black mail ” on the squatters, and that they are only waiting for
the squatter to buy them out, it is equally true that many
squatters are only waiting for a buyer, and they will as gladly
sell as a selector will, they begin to find that 7|- per cent
interest on £2 comes to 3s. per acre ; and three shillings a-year
for what under lease was only a halfpenny or at most three
farthings, will tell a tale some day in at least a reduction of
income, if not in financial difficulties.
It was only about a year ago that the Cobram and Thule
pastoral property situated near Deniliquin, was sold. The free-
hold land 110,000 acres brought about £2 an acre, which at 7£
per cent, interest, comes to 3s. per acre per annum. On the
Victorian side of the Murray Liver, near Moama, is what was once
the pastoral run of Wharparella, it was alienated from the
Crown some years ago, and 16,000 acres were secured by Mr.
Glass ; this he sold about two years ago to Mr. Macintosh at three
pounds five shillings per acre, which at 71- per cent, comes to
4s. 1 Old. per acre per annum, both properties are in the same
locality, although the Cobram and Thule land is of better
quality, both are stocked with sheep, and the owners are pleased
with their bargain that is, they think they can make a fair return
after allowing for interest; but there is another feature which had
better be mentioned. Mr. Macintosh has to pay the Victorian
land tax which is 6d. per acre to be added to the 4s. 10M1. On
the New South Wales side of the Murray Liver opposite A Char-
par ella before mentioned, and adjoining Cobram and Thule also
before mentioned, is the run of Moira, belonging to Sir John
O’Shannassy; it is also occupied with sheep, and much of the land
is quite as good as Wharparella, but the rent he pays to New South
Wales is only three farthings per acre per annum; small in-
deed, as compared with 3s. or 4s. (without the Land Tax) ;
but then it is urged that although he has occupied this property
for the last 10 or 15 years, and is permitted to fence in paddocks,
and even stock route reserves, and exclude everybody therefrom,
that he has no security of tenure. AVell, why should matters
not be altered; yes, why should matters not be altered to give


this fixity of tenure, or anything that will bring a fair return
from the public estate. Can any possible excuse be pleaded for
opening our eyes; can we delay the consideration of this im-
portant question any longer, and in view of all these facts, can
the reader doubt that we shall realize at least an average of six-
pence per acre. I do not hide from view the probability that
this system, when adopted, will drive many of those that are at
present engaged in squatting pursuits away from such pursuits,
and probably this wifi, be all the better for the country ; they are
all capitalists, and will not suffer much by the change, while their
withdrawal will open up many a profitable channel for enter-
prising, deserving men. To be a squatter as things are, requires
that you shall also be a capitalist; small areas suitable to the
man of small means are not to be had, and good practical men,
who could throw additional energy and plenty of work into a
small property, and be assisted by their friends, to the extent of
a thousand pounds or two, are compelled to take situations, al-
though they would gladly do otherwise if they could only see an
opportunity; and thus pastoral pursuits, as at present, is a
monopoly open only to the few—to the men of large means —
who, as a rule, do not live upon their stations where they could
take care of the pennies, but live far away therefrom, enjoying
the privileges which their wealth entitles them to enjoy in the
capitals of the colonies, or as absentees in England; such men
may perhaps under the leasing system find it more profitable
to lend their capital to smaller men, who will practically super-
intend the use of it, and pay interest thereon, and then the
capitalist would occupy his proper position, viz., that of assisting
labour, and the practical men Avho labour with head and hands
would be more numerous and more prosperous; ten producers
would in such circumstances be stimulated to action where one
only can labour at present.
The aim and object of all good Government is to increase pro-
duction ; we have now the world for a market, and by the aid of
telegraph and rapidity of transit, the markets of the Globe are
all pretty well balanced; the necessity no longer exists for hesi-
tating about being able to sell; the only question now-a-days is
how to increase production, and the best way to do this is by the
subdivision of labour ; capital has its functions, so also has labor,
and by maintaining a proper balance between the two, the better
is it for all parties, and better would it be for all the people to
be prosperous than that a few only were very rich, and the great
mass of the people very poor.
Hitherto in the colonies too much importance has been placed
upon acquiring land, and capitalists have been tempted to over-
trade. The pastoral tenants, besides investing their own cash,


Land sold
other than
Conditional
■iy-
Sold Conditionally.
Total received.
ACRES
R.
p.
ACRES
R.
p.
£
s.
d.
1868-
— 149,945
1
13|
239,516
2
0
265,249
12
11
1869-
— 164,890
1
2*
397,328
2
26
319,612
17
8
1870-
— 94,373
2
329,318
1
2
250,842
16
4
1871-
- 88,637
2
10 J
358,682
2
8
261,401
1
3
1872-
— 166,833
3
H
749,586
3
0
430,373
0
9
664,670
2
2,074,432
2
36
£1,527,479
8
11
1873-
- 389,200
0
37i
1,391,719
0
0
845,410
8
1
1874-
- 702,758
0
0
1,586,282
0
0
1,111,040
19
2
1875-
-1,135,273
3
29
1,756,678
0
0
1,760,570
9
7
1876-
-1,873,059
1
22f
1,984,212
0
0
2,513,403
13
0
1877-
-2,150,759
0
19
1,699,816
0
0
2,967,857
2
1
6,251,050
2
28
8,418,707
0
0
£9,198,282
11
11
Excess last 5
i years over
previous 5 years
£7,670,803
3
0
have been assisted by others, and on the security of broad acres
the limited capital of the Colony has been invested. Our trading
capital has been absorbed in land, and commerce has been cor-
respondingly hampered and curtailed, and may yet have to
suffer by insolvencies ; and when we consider that such a state
of things induces a crippling and a curtailment of our energies
and our productions, we feel constrained to wish for a change, a
something that will produce a relief, a loosening of the money
bags and a cheapening of money. Just think for one moment
of the large quantities of money sunk in land during the last
five years, not only by the squatter but also by the selector, com-
pare these with the tables of the five former years, and you will
be able to realize the fact that we have been on the wrong track.
MONEY RECEIVED BY NEW SOUTH WALES FOR LANDS SOLD
DURING THE LAST TEN YEARS.
The wonder is that such a young Colony, with but a handful
of people, can stand such a drain, and it can only be accounted
for—firstly, by the savings from rents before mentioned; secondly,
by the borrowed money for construction of railways ; and thirdly,
by the indebtedness of the financial institutions of the Colony to
the Government. But while I record the latter fact, Iby no
means think that it is a good thing for the Colony to be placed
in such a position, for in it I see nothing but a harvest of large
interest to the money lenders for a long time to come, and this
difficulty will be increased, unless we restrict, to a very limited
extent, or stop altogether the alienation of land.
Of the other stepping stone, viz., the borrowed money, although
amounting to several millions, and its circulation throughout the


Colony must have produced for a time at least a plentifulness
of the circulating medium, still we must be careful not to over-
estimate its actual advantage to the Colony, and as this is a
subject of some importance, I shall record a few passing thoughts
upon it. The money was borrowed for the construction of Kail-
ways and was expended thereon, that is,—money was expended
in buying the material in England and elsewhere, and in paying
for the labour of construction here, and this last item circulated
amongst ourselves. The railways no doubt are value to our
creditors for the money we borrowed, a large amount of which
was expended amongst our own people, but those labourers so
engaged, had to be supported by the produce of the labour of
others, hence the real benefit accruing to the Colony from the
expenditure of this borrowed money, was the profits left, after
paying for the actual cost of the labour that was so expended.
My readers will therefore see, that the Colony stands in relation
to the borrowed money so expended, the same as a merchant or
storekeeper stands in relation to the goods he vends, and to his
customers, it is true that the storekeeper may receive thousands
of pounds from his customers for the goods he delivers to them,
but these goods have been produced by the labour of others, and
that labour has to be paid for, and when paid for, and the ex-
penses he has been out of pocket to transact the business have
been deducted, the balance remaining is the actual benefit to
him, it is what he calls the profit on his transactions, and goes
to swell the credit balance at his bankers.
Of course we require Kail ways,—and labour must be supplied to
make these, but if the same quantity of labour was expended on
productions within the Colony, the actual benefit or profit to the
Colony would be very much greater; for example, if the labour
expended in making the railways was applied to growing corn
or wool, in making sugar or producing minerals, the product of
the labour so expended would not onty pay the expense of pro-
ducing the articles, but leave a profit besides, and neither the
expense of producing nor the profit would have to leave the
Colony ; whereas, in the money received for the labour and pro-
fits of making the railway, no more is received by the Colony
than would be received from a Colonial production, yet it has all
to be repaid from the future labour of the Colony, whilst the
profits from the Colonial production goes to swell the wealth of
the Colony, and no charge for repayment remains against the
future labour of the Colony. Our readers will, in this argument,
perceive the great benefits that will accrue to New South Wales
if she increased the producers. It would doubly bless hex’—
firstly, by increasing her capital; and secondly, it would lessen
the army of those that live upon the produce of others.


One of the grandest features in this leasing system is the large
number of additional producers it will place upon the land, be-
cause when more rent has to be paid the unwieldy properties will
be brought within workable limits, and the subdivisions will open
the way for many more occupiers; the tendency of permitting
large quantities of land to go into the hands of a few people is
to lessen enterprise, and to congregate a large proportion of the
people in towns. For myself, I am inclined to believe that the
object of all good Government should be to encourage the
scattering of the population over the country, thereby encouraging
many to become producers who might otherways be living upon
the productions of others. I also think it is the duty of our
legislators to frame such laws as will encourage population to
come amongst us, for our immense territory will never be of much
benefit to us until it is more thickly populated, and besides the
thousands in the adjoining colonies who are only waiting the
opportunity of being attracted to New South Wales by a liberal
Land Law, —many amongst ourselves are ready to enter upon
agrarian pursuits, who decline the annoyances and trouble of a
selector, and are deficient with capital to become squatter as
things go. I can conceive of nothing more attractive to draw
population, and that of the sort that the Colony will be mostly
benefitted by, than the offer of land in any quantity that may be
desired from a quarter of an acre up to 64,000 acres on easy
terms, and on what may be termed a permanent tenure, the
townsmen can have his quarter of an acre less or more, the
market gardener his 2or 5 acres, the dairyman his 100 acres, the
agriculturalist his 40 to 640 acres, and the grazier his thousand,
and up it may be to 64,000 acres, at a rental of their own making
in one of the best climates on the face of the Globe, and under
Constitutional Laws that give to the people the most perfect
freedom, and the greatest security to life and property.
For some time back there has been a growing feeling’ amongst
townspeople, tradesmen, shopkeepers, and professional men, to
acquire a home in the country where they could retire to recruit;
or, when declining strength and years required rest from a busy
life, they might withdraw from the city’s gaze, and spend the re-
mainder of their days in peace. There are no means under the
present law of doing this satisfactorily. You cannot even hope
to purchase at auction, for the Pastoral Lessee cannot spare a
single acre, and he will outbid you at auction; and you cannot
be a selector, because it is inconvenient to fulfil the residence
clause ; but it can be done under the Leasing System. You may
lease a farm of any size from 5 acres upwards, and improve it
as you have a mind to do, and a good leasehold is quite as good
security for money invested or borrowed as a freehold can be.


Again, it often happens that persons engaged in business or in
a profession have money to invest, they may by this system rent
a property and stock it, placing a practical man in charge, and
sharing with him the profits. Such an investment would be sure
to yield a handsome return ; the money would be perfectly safe,
no possibility of losing it, for the investor could retain all in his
own hands, or if placed in the hands of others, he could take a
mortgage and insurance thereon, and two or three thousand
pounds invested in this way would return, perhaps, 20 per cent,
interest; but this could not be done under the present Land Law,
for supposing £3OOO was the capital, only two thousand acres could
be purchased with that, under the present Auction System, and
that would be conditional on the Crown Lessee allowing the pur-
chase of even that much land ; thus the whole capital would be
absorbed in the land, and money would have to be borrowed to
buy stock and carry on operations, and for this 8 to 10 per cent,
would have to be paid;—but under the Leasing System probably
not more than Is. per acre, or say, £lOO for the two thousand
acres would have to be paid, leaving the capital free, the difference
in interest alone, if money had to be borrowed at 10 per cent.,
would come to £2OO a year.
Part 3.
IMMIGRATION.
The immigration question has already been the subject of a
difference of opinion, but I think it has not been so much as to
the advisability of increasing our population as to using public
money to bring out unsuitable immigrants that hang about the
city and produce a surplus of labour. While the people in the
interior are calling out for assistance, no one will object to a class
of immigrants that will increase and cheapen the necessaries of
life, that will give us plenty of good butter and eggs and bacon
and meal and flour and fruits and vegetables and beef and mut-
ton and wool and other raw materials to be used in manufactures.
It will be advisable then that we adopt some scheme of immi-
gration that will have the effect of bringing population without
violating the principles of the anti-immigrationist, and this can
be done under this new system. Publish well and make it known
amongst the tenant farmers of England Ireland and Scotland and
throughout Germany, offer them farms of 50 acres for 50s. a-year,
of 100 acres for £5, 200 acres for £lO, and larger areas for even
less than Is. per acre a-year. Show them that the local markets
are good, and that the English market can be reached by paying
about a pound a-ton for carriage, that the land in many places is


ready for the plough and will yield without manure from 10 to
30 bushels to an acre, that large farms can be had as well as
small ones where grazing can be carried on along with agricul-
ture, that the improvements made on the land belong to them-
selves and will be paid for by the Government at the end of the
lease, that the lease is for 30 years, and that even then they
will have an opportunity for renewing for another 30 years or
longer, there being every probability that the land will remain
in the family as long as it might be expected to remain even
if held as freehold. But I would offer still greater induce-
ments to this class of immigrants. I would convey them, their
families and chattels, by ship to Sydney, thence by railwav to
the nearest point to their farms, to enable them to retain what
capital they may have (for they will think more of their own
savings than of double the amount given to them) to start with
afresh in the new country; and to convince them still more of
the honest intentions of the Government, I would allow them to
instruct friends already here to pick out farms for them, or they
themselves could do so from charts after they arrived in Sydney.
But at the same time, to test their lona fide ft and to make them
feel an interest in the transaction, let them pay as a deposit on
account of the passage money a small sum in amount similar to
what is now paid under the assisted immigration scheme, the
balance of the passage money to be a charge upon the land in
the same way as improvements are a charge, the tenant paying
interest thereon at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum. For those
of the same class of immigrants who desire to come as servants,
let them be nominated and brought out by the immigrant settlers,
ox nominated by and consigned to well-known agriculturalists,
giazieis, and citizens in the colony. AVe would thus be en-
couraging and promoting family immigration, and of a class that
will not intrude upon the tradesman. The agricultural servants,
both male and female, of the old country we want here to increase
and cheapen the necessaries of life. And how can they come
unless we bring them ? All who have had experience of this
class of labour in the old country know well that it takes the best
part of their lifetime to gather as much as would pay their pas-
sage and outfit to this colony, and if they are inclined to emigrate
and we did not induce them to come here, they would in all
probability go to America, where the expense would be nearer
to their means. But by all means bring them here, for any
scheme of immigration that will induce an agrieidtural population
must meet the approval of all classes of the people.
Why is it we have to go to Victoria, Tasmania, and South
Australia for our bread stuffs, fruits, and vegetables ?It is
because we have not got the right sort of people to produce them


here. The early settlers did not take kindly to agriculture, and
their children prefer grazing to following the plough. We cer-
tainly ought to grow our own flour and cereals, and it is our duty
to encourage agricultural immigrants, for all classes depend upon
them—our necessaries and luxuries come from them, our com-
merce also, our mechanics and tradesmen, and our best domestics.
Get this class in abundance and we shall soon have all classes—
place this class in a prosperous position, and soon all other
classes will become correspondingly prosperous. lam convinced
that if such offers as I have mentioned are properly laid before
the Tenant farmers of the old country they will accept, and in a
few years we shall have a steady stream of immigration in extent
as great as the colony can satisfactorily absorb.
But let me again impress upon the reader the advantages the
colony must secure by opening a wider door than that of con-
ditional purchase to another and still more eligible addition to
our population, which the leasing system will bring to us.
I mean the well-to-do settlers .from the adjoining colonies of
Victoria and South Australia, a class of men who by intelligence
and hard work have accumulated one, two or three thousand
pounds or more in a smaller field of labour, but now too small
for their increased family, capital and experience; these men
will be glad to sell out and come to New South Wales in order
that they may obtain one, two, three, five or ten thousand acres
for thirty years certain at a moderate rental, and enjoy a tenure
secure and permanent, and for all practical purposes equal to a
freehold. Their capital would then be free and ready to buy
stock and implements to work the property; the money could be
more profitably employed by the settler than by the Government,
and if the reader will admit this and apply the reasoning to the
great number of settlers who will be so situated, he will thereby
catch a glimpse of the great advantage of the leasing system to
the entire colony. Reader, let us welcome this class of colonist;
under our present Law he is looked upon with not a little doubt
and suspicion, by the small selector who often sneeringly speaks
of him as “a sort of small Squatter,” and by the Squatter
who finds in him a formidable rival, for when he determines
to select upon a run he takes away a very large slice of it. Not-
withstanding all this, the sensible citizen, who is neither Selector
nor Squatter, must appreciate this class of colonist, for he brings
with him capital, intelligence, experience, enterprise, ambition,
and a determined fixity of purpose, and that purpose is to secure
for his family, which is generally a very large one, a permanent
home and an influence in the State. They are large headed
men, they are leaders. Secure a thousand or two of this class,
and several thousand others follow them. They are distinguish-


ably progressive, and in this respect they essentially differ from
the ordinary New South Wales Selector and colonist; by all
means secure them by a liberal Land Law, for they will give a
tone and an impetus to onward progress, nor will their determin-
ation be one whit restrained by the knowledge that the land on
which they labour is not a freehold; all they think about it is
can we make it pay. Still it may be said that the Englishman
prefers a freehold, and having the feeling that he does not
possess the land in perpetuity, he has not the same desire to
effect improvements; but Ido not know that this argument will
bear scrutiny, for we all know it to be a truism that mankind, as
a rule, are alive to their own interests, and if by the expenditure
of money we can make money out of it, the knowledge that the
holding is a leasehold will not prevent our making the invest-
ment, and our experience in Sydney and neighbourhood points
to the fact that magnificent buildings are erected on leasehold
lands, on even a twenty years lease, and the buildings to become
the property of the land owner on the expiry thereof. My plan
is very different from this, the improvements are to belong to the
Tenant and he is to be paid for them at the end of his lease.
Let us, however, divest our minds of all theory, and we will find
that now-a-days at least wo are governed solely by the principle
of “ will it pay.” The days of boasted chivalry have become a
thing of the past. The once cherished devotion of our ancestors
to the “ Llalls of their forefathers ” has become almost obliter-
ated from the race. We live in an utilitarian age, the govern-
ing power of which is money. We buy, sell and part with our
most cherished goods if we can only see that thereby we can
make money. The human mind is controlled by the things that
surround it, each man being governed by the peculiar circum-
stances in which he happens to be placed. We become conser-
vative and grow fonder of freeholds as we become rich. It is
the rich, as a rule, that are conservative, but the great bulk of
the people are not rich, therefore the great bulk of the people
are not conservative, and therefore have not arrived at the posi-
tion of preferring freeholds, and I have already laid down the
principle that it is the great body of the people that must first be
considered and not the few. It is in the operation of the same
principle that the Capitalist gives a preference to a freehold as an
investment, having plenty of money, his aim is to make secure
what he has, rather than speculate to make it more. The man
with limited means acts differently; he imposes upon himself
greater industry, and diligence undertakes greater risks, and
uses his limited means in trading or in productions, and makes
more of it than he could do were he to sink it in fixed property;
each of them views the question from his own stand-point. The


capitalist prefers the freehold, although it yields a smaller return;
the other cares not whether a freehold or a leasehold, he prefers
what will pay the best—both are representative men —the one of
the few— the other of the many—and as these pages are addressed
to the many, it is sufficient if the many favour my view. Again,
a man’s desires and feelings are controlled by his power, and this
gives a bias to his mind. Thus, the business man as a rule has
no inclination to purchase his business premises, but he rents
them, preferring to use his capital in his business, and if he
exercises a good judgment he will continue to rent. Therefore,
the few—the exceptionally few—can purchase, and they desire to
purchase; the many—the great bulk of the people —can only afford
to lease, and their desire is to lease and not to purchase. The
experiences of my life have proved to me that the great bulk of
mankind prefer to tax their exertions in the future, rather than
to part with present accumulations; they prefer paying a pro-
portion of future earnings as a rent, rather than burden them-
selves, and their limited capital with a freehold. Furthermore,
I have found there are nine men' out of every ten who are willing
to rent for one who is willing to purchase, and there is no
better way of testing this than by advertising a property to sell
or to let, when it will be found that out of every ten who apply,
nine prefer to rent for the one that prefers to purchase.
What then becomes of the statement that the Englishman pre-
fers a freehold, some do perhaps, but they are the few, and for
them I have provided by continuing the Fee simple holding for
Lands already alienated, but for the many, and it is those that I
am desirous to attract to the colony, I have devised and do now
most seriously recommend a leasing system for all the unsold
lands.
Part 4.
CONTINUE A FEE SIMPLE TITLE.
As to the land already sold, I propose that owners in Fee and
those holding conditional freeholds, may if they please continue
to hold their freeholds or sell to the Crown, and thereafter rent
the land on thirty years leases as other Crown Lands are to be
rented, and this will provide for those who prefer freeholds, thus
the two systems will continue to work simultaneously together
without interfering the one with the other, my belief, however,
is that before many years shall have passed, all the Fee Simple
Titles will have reverted to the Crown. But some may want to
know where the money is to come from to pay for these purchases
as some millions will be required for the purpose, I reply


pay in Treasury Bonds bearing four per cent, interest, redeem-
able within a certain number of years, sufficiently long it may be
to enable the Crown to be recouped to a large extent from the
accumulations from sayings from rents. The rents to be not less
than five per cent, upon the redemption money.
When talking over this new land system with anyone for the
first time, the first impression seems to be that it will be a fine thing
if it can be carried out, and had it been the law from the start,
before so much land was sold it would have been just the thing
for the colonies. On further reflection, however, it will be found
that the land sold bears but a small proportion to what is not
sold, and even with regard to what is sold, were its owners to
prefer to keep it a freehold it would not very materially interfere
with Crown Lands, the extent of which is upwards of One
Hundred and Sixty Millions of acres, which at six pence per
acre rental will bring in four million pounds sterling per annum.
On the other hand again some may possibly think that if the
alienation of land be stopped altogether, the land now held as
freehold will rapidly increase in value, and we would be playing
into the hands of the Capitalist, but I am of a contrary opinion,
and I will show you how. We will take a case—suppose Ais
the owner of 1000 acres in freehold, and that B rents 1000 acres.
Say that A has paid £1 10s. for the land and £1 10s. for im-
provements, this at 7-|- per cent, interest comes to 4/6 per annum.
B pays 1/6 for rent and 1/6 for improvements, in all 3/- as
against 4/6 which is 1/6 an acre in favour of the leasehold ;or
suppose the improvements to be £2 and £1 for the land in all £3
it would then at 5 per cent, interest come to 3/- an acre per
annum as against 4/6, it will thus be seen at a glance that in
whatever combination we try, the result will be in favour of the
leasing system. Money to a private individual is worth at least
7|- per cent., and if worth more the advantage would be still
more in favour of leasing, whereas we assume 5 per cent, interest
as the standard to the Government —of course the higher we
value the land, the difference will be all the more in favour of
the leasing, thus if the land is worth £4 an acre, the improve-
ments £l, in all £5, this at 7-J per cent, comes to 7/6 an acre,
whereas in renting say 4/- for rent, being 5 per cent, and 1/-
improvements makes 5/- an acre as against 7/6. In the same
proportion stands the lower values of the land, thus if the pur-
chased land and improvements cost 30/- an acre at 7£ per cent,
it comes to 2/3 an acre, whereas 1/- for rent and 6d. for improve-
ments is only 1/6 per acre per annum.
Again, we will take the case of an owner in fee who reckons
his land to be worth £2 an acre, and we will suppose it
appraised at £2, including improvements; if money is valuable


to him he may count the interest 10 per cent, this would
come to 4s. an acre, but he would only have to pay rent to
the Crown at the rate of 5 per cent or 2s. a-year per acre, only
one half of what he now pays, or a saving of 2s. per acre every
year. The advantages of holding upon lease over that of a free-
hold is so apparent and substantial that I need not farther extend
the argument, but I may add that in view of all these facts and
figures sentiment must be strong indeed in the mind of a man
who in such, circumstances prefers a freehold, for what security
is there that he is not to leave it behind him long before 30 years,
and then the startling question, “ whose shall these things be ?”
shall they remain in my family or go to the stranger ?
Part 8.
HOW IS IT TO BE MANAGED ?
I propose that the Public Estate shall be managed by a Board
of three Commissioners, and thereby to remove the administration
altogether away from political influence. They are to be picked
men of the highest honour and probity, paid good salaries,
appointed as are the Judges of the Supreme Court, removable
only by Parliament upon good cause shown, and forbidden by an
oath taken when entering office not to be interested themselves
directly nor indirectly in land investment. A Board so consti-
tuted must be above all suspicion, and they would no doubt en-
deavour to discover what path must be followed in order that the
material wealth which labour creates may procure and maintain
the greatest well-being for all. And it is my belief that under
such a Board the tenants, numerous as they must be, will be as
loyal patriotic and law-abiding as they could possibly have been
holding under a fee simple title; indeed you could hardly con-
ceive a state of things otherwise : they have tendered for and
fixed their own rentals, they have contracted to pay only for the
use and occupation of the land, and as a rule they will have in-
vested their all in their holding, each will be a cheek upon his
neighbour, and others will be ready to take his place when he no
longer wants it. In short, I look upon the ties and associations
that shall have been created by the long leases and the easy con-
ditions under which they are held, to be productive of more
loyalty and less rebellious and revolutionary feeling than the
rack rents resulting from the landlord and tenant system of the
old country.
And now in conclusion let me ask the reader to thoroughly
think this subject out; do not allow your early prejudices to take
the throne of your judgment, but calmly consider, and weigh
well the subject, and having done so, I believe you must arrive at


the conclusion I have done, viz., that the leasing system is by far
and away the best for all classes of the people. Let me direct your
thoughts to England, and see what is the tendency of things
there; is it not that rents are becoming higher and higher—that
the farming population have to get larger prices for their produce,
and that the great bulk of the people have to pay for all this,
and to what purpose are these increased rentals put ? Is it not
to swell the ranks of those who produce nothing themselves, and
who live upon the produce of others; it is not the drone bees
that gather the honey, but the workers, and wherever legislation
tends to increase producers, the wealth and happiness of the
people are correspondingly increased. Labour is the source of
all wealth, and the more labour we can apply to the land, just so
much the more will be its productiveness ; it is from the increased
producers that we shall receive the increased income from our
Crown Lands ; this will pay for our Water Supply (which should
be extensively distributed all over the colony)—pay for Railways
and other public works construction, and effect large reductions
in taxation, especially doing away with the duties upon tea and
sugar and other necessaries; and this in the place of having to
increase taxation to pay for borrowed money. Every one must
thus see that in so doing we shall introduce a system of great
national prosperity in which every class of the community will
participate.
Before closing, let me impress upon the property holders and
capitalists the necessity for giving their serious consideration to
this subject, for unless some great change—such as the Leasing
System will introduce and open up —is allowed to take place,
serious political questions will take hold on the public mind;
conciliation should be practised, for the “majority must rule.”
The “ Schoolmaster is abroad,” the masses are becoming educated,
and in their associations are asserting “ they shall no longer be
the slaves of capital,” and in the colonies more so, than in the
older countries, because here poverty does not force them into
submission. “Let live and let live” be the watchword; let
capital help labour and labour help capital, by a willing mutual
reciprocity, and the result will be an increased prosperity to
both; but if antagonistic feelings are permitted to engender and
to be practised, then it is only a question of time, and New South
Wales must follow the example of other countries ; the labouring
portion of the people will begin to feel their strength, and de-
mand a share of the good things of this life. Better far to con-
cede it without compulsion, to throw open the land, the source
from which we draw all the material wants of man, that thousands
may produce where tens only are now permitted to occupy,
Assistjn assisting others to help themselves. Stimulate industry;


increase production; occupy men’s minds with their own in-
dividual prosperity, and you will thereby kill the germs of dis-
satisfaction, or it may be of revolution, and, at the same time,
prevent the necessity for additional taxation. Open the lands
by leasing at a moderate rental and thereby bring them within
the means of the great bulk of the people. You cannot do it by
sales by auction. Selling can only be said to be fair or
equitable amongst the few who are able to luy. This ex-
ceptionally few may advocate selling,—nay more —they may even
agree to divide the lands of the colony amongst themselves.
But would this be fair to the rest of mankind, or politic for the
Colony to permit? What of the great mass outside of these
few —those very ones who would turn the land to best account by
their labour, and thereby to contribute most to the advancement
and prosperity of the whole human family ? What have they
done that they are to be excluded from participating in the gift
to universal man by the One Universal and Almighty Father ?
Let us open our minds to cultivate more liberal sentiments
towards our fellow man, why should we act so as to increase the
tax-gatherer, and swell the ranks of the non-producers ? Why
assist in cempelling the imposition of a- land tax, a property tax,
or an income tax ? Why give occasion for a cry to stop immi-
gration, or for protection in order to supply employment to our
people ? There is no necessity if we will enact liberal laws.
Let us throw open the lands so as to bring the profitable employ-
ment of them within the reach of all ; let us encourage people
in crowds to settle permanently thereon to draft the surplus
population of towns, enabling them to be producers in the coun-
try and thereby to increase and cheapen the necessaries of life.
I shall only add that I sincerely believe that all this can be
done by stopping alienation and substituting a universal leasing
of our public estate.
N.B. —The Author desires to state that the opinions herein
expressed are his own; they are given to the world with the
intention of enlisting those favourably disposed to join him in
forming a strong League, and thereby to influence the next
General Election. Many of the present Members of Parliament
approve of stopping Alienation and substituting Leasing of the
Public Estate; but the Electors must express their opinions
thereon, and to bring this about we must agitate —agitate. Com-
munications addressed: Egbert Barbour, M.P., Parliament
House, Sydney.
Joseph Cook 6* Co., Printers, 370, George-street, Sydney.


llpfltfKPS, JfilwSiK,
AND OTHERS.
Gentlemen,
As we possess special advantages in tlie conduct of our busi-
ness as Stock and Station Agents, and we have not at present
the opportunity of visiting you personally, we desire to say a
few words as to matters in general in which we are all mutually
interested.
EEPOETS.
We regret to observe that a custom is growing of making
Agents Eeports mere advertisements, with many misstatements
and exaggerations, and as we will continue to report only sales
actually effected by us you may rely on the accuracy of all state-
ments therein.
CLASSING.
This very important part of our trade is conducted under
the immediate supervision of our Mr. Badgery, who thoroughly
understands it, and holds that no Agent can value and sell to
advantage who is absent when stock are classed.
BUYEES.
With the large amount of Stock we have continually coming,
we have constant influence with buyers, and all consignments
are sold at full market rates, and no sacrifices made.
YAEDS.
In and out of Parliament we have continuously agitated for
new Yards, and we are pleased to say that they will shortly be
commenced.
CALVES and LAMBS.
We receive large numbers, and are most successful in dis-
posing of them.
STATIONS and STOEE STOCK.
From the number of years we have been in business, we are
in the best possible position to conduct sales of the above and
invite particulars.
We desire in conclusion to refer you to any of our very
numerous constituents all over the colonies, and to thank those
who have hitherto patronised us. Peeling that we can continue
to give every satisfaction in skilful classing and selling, prompt
payments and low charges.
We remain, yours truly,
PITT, SON and BADGEEY,
21 st May, 1879. Stock Agents, Sydney.


LAND & PARLIAMENTARY AGENT.
26, BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY.
ESTABLISHED 1873.
Undertakes the transaction of business in connec-
tion with all the Public Departments of the
Colony.
To Conditional Purchasers.
Pre-emptive Lease applications urged forward
to gazetting and chartings and tracings supplied.
Certificates of conformity and ratifications and
Refund Vouchers upon void Selections obtained.
Complicated cases undertaken and watched with
care and attention.
FEES MODERATE.
Copies of official maps, tracings of new surveys
and compilations undertaken by the most efficient
Draughtsmen.


JOHNSON'S TEMPERANCE PALACE.
52 YORK STREET,
(Two doors south of King-street, opposite McArthur & Co.’s)
Tbs only Public Temperance Bar and Eefreshment Booms
in Sydney.
On a magnificent scale, grander than anything of the hind hitherto
attempted in the Australian Colonies.
LAMES & GENTS’ REFRESHMENT ROOMS.
Tea, Coffee, Chocolate, & Cocoa, with hot Pies or Muffins, Rolls or Pastry Gd.
ALL SORTS of TEMPERANCE DRINKS Hot or Cold -Vanilla,
Raspberry, Strawberry, Pine-apple, Orange, Lemon, Sarsparilla, Ginger,
Peppermint, Pear, Prunes, Ratafia, Cherry, Cinnamon, Clove, Carraway,
Exhibition Punch, Almonds, Grape, Orange Bitters, Orange wine,
Strawberry wine, Gooseberry wine, Black Currant wine, Red Currant
wine, Peach wine, Gingerette, Ginger wine, Tonic wine, Champagne,
Quinine wine, Noyeau, Maraschino, Curacoa, Rum Shrub, Rum Punch,
Cherry Brandy, Ginger Brandy, Raspberry Barm, Soda Water, Lemon-
ade, Tonic, Acidulous, Potass, Litha, Dr. Byers’ Bitters Water, Vichy,
Magnezie, Orangeade, Raspberryade, Strawberryade, Lirnejuice Cordial,
Limejuice, Ginger Cordial, Cherry Cordial, Stoughton Bitters, Dr. Con-
quest’s Golden Bitters, Brandy Bitters, Aromatic Bitters, Sensation
Bitters, Stomachic Bitters.
AMERICAN ICED DRINKS
From the only Marble American Fountain used in Sydney :—lced
Vanilla, Iced Strawberry, Iced Raspberry, Iced Lemonade, Iced Ginger
Beer, Iced Sarsaparilla, Iced Peppermint, Iced Orange, Iced Pineapple.
a®i3 (Biaamau a®ia (Btßia&sa,
Von Hutson’s celebrated Cocoa, and Taylor’s Chocolate.
Cigars of the Best Quality.
In connection with the above will be found SUPERIOR
BOARD & RESIDENCE—A First-Class Table being Kept.
All the beds are of Hair. Shower and Plunge Baths. Added
to which it is the most Central House in the City, being within
a few minutes walk from all the principle business places and
Wharves, and one minutes walk from General Post Office.
N.B.—The Proprietor requests the especial attention of visitors to
the Magnificent Palace Restaurant in connection with his Hotel,
where Breakfast, Luncheon, Dinner, Tea and Supper may be had com-
prising all the delicacies of the season, at the charge of One Shilling
per meal. Separate Ladies Dining Room, and Private Dining Rooms
for Families.
Will be opened early in July of which due notice will be given in
the Public Journals.


HENRY’S
IN' LID POTS Is. EACH,
AT ALL CHEMISTS AND STOREKEEPERS,
Is the Original, the Genuine, and the
BEST OINTMENT EVER OFFERED TO THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC.
It is compounded from the balsams, resins, and essential oils,
extracted from native, colonial, and world-renowned Plants, by a Pure
Chemical Process which preserves the active properties of the herbs,
while it eliminates the mere green colouring of the woody matter of
the plants.
Prepared only by tbe Inventor and Proprietor, and may be had from
all Chemists and Storekeepers.
J. HENRY, Chemist,
754 GEORGE STREET, HAYMARKET.
60, STREET.
|OHN %UINN,
ipitarg, nub ffetml fbihrr,
(From HENRY POOLE’S,
SACKVILLE ROW, LONDON.)
Begs to announce that he has Established himself
in Sydney at the above Address, and
respectfully solicits a share
of public patronage.
LIIVERIES MADE TO ORDER.


MINING and SCHIMEL,
COACH BUILDERS.
*
295&298 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
(NEXT THE GUILD HALL.)
Have a Large A ssortment of
®®a®jma Aisssmsf
BUGGIES,
WAGGONETS,
SOCIABLES,
BRAKES ,
DOG CARTS,
PAGNEL CARTS,
And CARRIAGES of every Description,
BUILT TO ORDER.
REPAIRS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO AT REASONABLE PRICES.
Any one wanting a really Good Buggy, should give
this Establishment a visit.


The Americas Novelty Co.,
Mlmlcsalc an!) letail Sealers
O
m ALL »MOS or HO¥®LTIIS.
ARTICLES OF USEFUL
INVENTIONS & YANKEE NOTIONS.
■VVN.-VNAtVVW'
fm& Koveltie* by @wy Mail,
v.-XAA.WWW'
Send for our 48 Page Catalogue and Price Lists.
SENT FREE TO ANY ADDRESS.
MARKET STREET, BETWEEN PITT & GEORGE STREETS, SYDNEY.
THE
emim Mf
SYDNEY, N. S. WALES
The above Association are sending by Mail to all parts oT
the Colonies choice Oleographs and Engravings at one-third the
usual retail price. And all who desire to beautify and make
home pleasant should send, for their Catalogue and Price List.
This Association is an old and well established concern, and
have the name of sending more and better pictures than any
other firm in the Colonies. Picture Frames and Mouldings
furnished at the lowest prices.
Send your name and address plainly written to the
c &7n^i€ / Ua/ cc. T^fddc£€a/w / yi,
66 Jliar'het Street, Sydney, JY.S.W,


Time Ball connected with Sydney Observatory drops daily at 1 o’clock
O. ROMBACH,
WATCH-MAKER. JEWELLER & OPTICIAN,
364, GEORGE STREET.
A choice stock of Ladies and Gentlemen’s Gold and
Silver Watches by the best Makers. Chains, Rings, Pins
and Bijouterie. Repairs promptly effected. Strong Double
cased Silver Lever Hunting Watches suitable for Bush
£6 los. to £8 ios., carefully packed for transmission.
N.B.—Note the Address, near the G. P. O. Best and
Cheapest House in Sydney.
MONOGRAMS, & INSCRIPTIONS, ENGRAVED


W. DOUGLASS,
Estate & General Agency.
VALUATOR OF PROPERTIES.
41, MARKET STREET.
HOBART TOWN SEEDS, k
FROST TREES, FWWERIHS SHRUBS, M.
9 & 11, lew Market,
George-street, Sydney , and
Lilydale Inrsery,
Marnckville .


M:E:D:I:C:A:L:.
COM.&DX.T
DR, DE SPENCER,
SPECIALTIES
She Stomaeh ; J>iver /
System t Generative Organs,
and Chronic Eruptions oj- the Shin, from
impurities of the Mood d other causes.
OVER 30 YEARS EXPERIENCE, INCLUSIVE OF 6 YEARS IN THIS CITY.
Let the Afflicted avail themselves of his skilful
ability, if desirous of ensuring the perfect restoration
to health and vigour, Bona-fide.
Letters in confidence promptly replied to,
CONSULTATION ROOMS,
3 0 4) CASTLEREAGH STREET,
BETWEEN PARK & BATHURST STS., SYD'EY.
Medicines securely packed for transmission by post or
otherwise.
st* N.B.—OBSERVE THE ADDRESS.


oc
QO
O)
S
a
cd
O
Cl
o
,fl M
rj T 3 fc
EJ g g
®S 9
£ 33
&| 5
ri I w
(§S q 5
M §
ns?«
* [fills
® J 5 M
jg: <IS g
__-_gjP td .2 g
(llpl o
•» O
001 -
||||P S 3
B c "**
■pl'r- O
|Pp V £
LANDS OPEN FOR SELECTION.
The undersigned having made arrangements with the
Lands Department for MAPS of latest Surveyed Laud, is pre-
pared to procure blocks of 100 to 6000 Acres of SUPERIOR
GRAZING and AGRICULTURAL LAND.
TRANSFERS REGISTERED.
Certificates of Approval of Declaration obtained, and all business
in connection with Land Matters conducted.
Maps on view from Moama to the Darling.
Wm. M‘CONNELL,
LAND & GENERAL COMMISSION AGENT,
MOAMA.


& I o LI O
r /
1811 BMi«, STBIII,-
WOOL AND PRODUCE AUCTIONEER.
LIVE STOCK AND STATION AGENT,
ELOUE, GEAIN, AND METAL BEOKEE.
fifswMEi smason,
| 3fei(iiiiiie
404, CASTLEREAGH STREET,
AND
VETERINARY FORGE, DIXON STREET,
(Between Hay and Goulhurn Streets.)
My Medicines have been used in the Woollahra and
Waverley Buss Stables for the past six
years, excluding all others.


ARTIFICIAL TEETH.
flHfe
From One to a Complete Set—Mounted on Gold, Platina, Dental Alloy,
Silver, and the various Vulcanite Bases. A Single Tooth from
7s. 6d. Complete .Set from £7. Teeth Stopped with Gold, Silver,
Enamel Stoppings, preserving the Teeth for years.
teeth: scaled,
Deformities of the Mouth, congenital or accidental, and all difficult
cases undertaken. Misfits and failures b} other dentists remodelled.
TEETH EXTRACTED WITHOUT PAIN. CHILDREN’S TEETH REGULATED.
A never failing remedy for true toothache. Sold in Bottles, 1/-, 2/-, 2/6.
mil KtOsOj
SURGICAL & MECHANICAL DENTIST,
35, BLIGH STEEET, and
PARK STREET, (One door from Pitt Street.)
HOUSEWIVES 1 Ask your Grocers for it, and do not be put off with
an inferior kind, as this is the best, and when you have tried
it, you will appreciate its surprising qualities.
FIRST PRIZE, 1878.
rn *1
< ffl S ce>
m ui s, e>o
hi WAUGH’S Is si
y « ,i ;SSh
!|BAKI NG iifh
H|S 9
s i| Ills! POWDERf
-°° HIGHEST TESTIMONIALS.
GEOCEES ! Who have not yet tried it, are invited to procure a
Sample Case. It will give great and certain satis-
faction to your Customers.


WATERLOO STORES,
MARKET STREET, SYDNEY.
HOLDSIORTH, MACPHERSON & CO.,
IRONMONGERS AND IMPORTERS.
In this Warehouse are to be found all the princi-
pal British and Foreign Manufactures suitable for all
classes of buyers, and at prices which cannot be beaten
in fair competition.
Bar Iron and Ironmongery in all its departments.
Brass Foundry of every description.
Builders, Joiners, and Blacksmith’s Tools.
American Axes, Adzes, Bloks, Shovels and Spades,
Hair and Millet Brooms, and Brushware.
Guns, Eifles, Shot, Powder and Cartridges.
Oils, Paints, Turps, Tar, Pumps, Manilla and Flax
Eope, Twine and Fishing Lines.
Galvanized Iron Eoofing and (Dis.) Fencing Wire.
Weighing Machines, Chaff Cutters, Mangles, Sheep
Shears, Wool Sacks, Com Sacks, English and Colonial
Saddlery and Harness, &c., &c.
Wholesale Buyers are particularly requested to
observe the address:—
HOLDSIORTH, MACPHERSON & GO.,
WATERLOO STORES,
CORNER MARKET AND GEORGE STREETS, SYDNEY.


THE CUMBERLAND TIMES AND PENRITH ADVERTISER, SATURDAY, JUNE 14, 1879.
Review.
The Land Question, by Eobt. Barbour, m.b.
This pamphlet lately handed to us for
review, we have had very considerable
difficulty in perusing : not from its length,
which is only some five and thirty pages of
loosely printed matter, but from the fact
that there is nothing whatever in its contents
to recommend it to any intelligent reader.
It is as wearisome by its dullness, as it is
obscure and illogical, and we are afraid we
must add is alike inelegant and ungramma-
tical in expression. The Land Question is
however of such vital importance to the
public ,at large, that it becomes the duty of
every conscientious journalist to note its
every phase, and to make himself, as far as
possible, acquainted with the opinions of
public men on the question either spoken
or written, in the event of any new light
being thrown on this vexed question. This
we say is one of those laborious and pain-
ful tasks to which every journalist must be
prepared to .address himself; and in the
execution of that duty we have carefully
perused the maiden essay of the member
for the M array and “President of the Lands
Settlement League of New South Wales.”
We can only hope in closing it, that such
another harrassing effort may never again
be called for during our editorial career.
“ There is no new thing under the sun,”
and they who might by chance be induced
to read Mr. Barbour’s views on the Land
Question, by first reading the nota bene at its
conclusion, would have great reason to
regret that they preferred Mr. Barbour’s
statement to the dictum of Solomon. The
views he puts forth are in brief a system of
leasing as opposed to sale in any form, and
a project for the re-purchase by government
of all Lands originally belonging to the
Crown. This is the gist of his land scheme,
and what merit, however, the first of his
propositions may have intrinsically, it has
not most certainly the merit of originality.
Were Mr. Barbour as conversant with the
history,of the Land Question in this and
every other Australian colony as well, as he
apparently is, with the most approved method
of “ driving a coach and four” through the
present Land Act (see the recent disclosures
regarding some of the Cornelia selections),
he would be as well aware as we are that
this question of leasing, versus selling, has
again and again cropped up, been ably
advocated and debated, and is no more novel
either in conception or in promulgation, than
the laws of gravitation or the motive power
of steam. Mr. Barbour says : “ The
author desires ; o state that the views heroin
expressed are Jus own” Mr. Barbour wishes
to claim the paternity of the scheme he
announces, aad li it is by virtue of adoption
instead of generation we have no objection to
make to his assertion; at the same time we
must remind him that the individual who
finds the purse or handkerchief dropped
accidentally on the road would have little
sympathy if he appropriated the property
to his own use on a similar plea. Wliters
should never forget that there is a property
in thought and utterance as well as in mer-
chandise and goods, and that if any undue
appropriation of the latter is theft, an un-
acknowledged use of the former is plagiar-
ism. With regard to the merits of the
question he has resurrectionized, we must
refrain from discussing it now or here;
but we say that the vast and intricate social
problems that must be raised by such a
completeTeyolution in our land system (whi«h
is also virtually that of every civilized nation)
are of such a nature, that even philisophers
the mostsage,and statesmen themost intrepid
and accomplished,have shrunk from anything
more decisive than speculative theories in
ponderous and unread tomes, or mere orato-
rical outbursts without either intention or
effect. And yet what has furnished food
for a lifetime of thought on the part of hun-
dreds of political economists, philosophers,
and statesmen, and afforded ignorant dema-
gogues with a convenient party cry or pop-
ular gathering point for many a decade, is
settled in ten pages of a crude essay by the
sapient member for the Murray. To which
of the bands of the prophets we have indi-
cated has this new Saul attached himself ?
If as a land reformer Mr. Barbour is no ‘put-
ter forth of strange doctrines—as a financier
he certainly is—his scheme for buying back
all land sold by (Government (at the option
of the present holder) ‘ by treasury bonds
bearing 4 per cent, interest, redeemable at
such dates as the Commissioners may see
fit,’ is not only novel, but something out of
the usual line. But farther on Mr. Barbour
tells us that there are 20,000,000 acres al-
ready alienated in New South Wales. Take
the average value of this acreage at £2 per
acre (plenty of it is worth £5O), and the im-
provements should be at least worth £1; and
if, say one half, of the acreage should be
re-sold to the Government, there would be a
floating debt of £30,000,000, and an annual
interest of £1,200,000 sterling, with a mar-
gin of £1 in every £lOO of interest to pro-
vide all the magnificent income that Mr.
Barbour derives from this source —on paper;
and to pay for the cumbrous and expensive
machinery of the several processes of valu-
ation, re-purchase, payment of interest, and
collection of rent. Besides, if Mr. Barbour
lias any idea of finance, we would ask him
if he knows what effect on our credit as a
borrowing member of the world of nations,
the issue of from thirty to sixty’’ millions of
Treasury bonds to our own citizens would
have? also their market value as securities
liable to such peculiar disturbances in a de-
mocratic country, as revolution or repudia-
tion; and above all most certainly conducive
to political corruption ? And further, what
status as a convertible security (the peculiar
value of Government stock in England)
these said treasury bonds would hold?
With regard to the modus operandi the au-
thor, evidently with a view to the future,
proposes the appointment of a Commission
of three who— ‘ are to be picked men .
. . paid good salaries .... and
forbidden, by an oath taken when entering
office, not to be interested themselves di-
rectly nor indirectly in land investment/—-
(page 35 lines 15-20) Either Mr. Barbour
is in the habit of using language as a me-
thod of concealing his thoughts, or the
printer’s devil has got him into the devil of a
mess, indicated by the last sentence. Does
he really intend that the ‘ dauntless three ’
shall not possess a villa site at North Shore,
nor even a final resting place on the grassy
slope of Haslem’s Creek ? We would also
like to know if the member for the Murray
could recommend an eligible man as chair-
man of this picked and well paid commission ?
Finally, the pamphlet is fairly got up, and,
to use the remark of a very young lady,
after reading a Yankee newspaper,—‘ The
best thing of the lot is the advertisement
sheet 1 1
