

REPORT
OF THE
ROYAL COMMISSION ON CERTAIN MATTERS IN
CONNEXION WITH THE BRITISH PHOSPHATE
COMMISSION;
TOGETHER WITH
APPENDICES.
1926.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
Presented by Command; ordered to be printed, 11 th August, 1926.
[Cost of Report: —Preparation, not given, 830 copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing, £21.]
Printed and Published for the GOVERNMENT of the COMMONWEALTH of AUSTRALIA by H. J. GREEN,
Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
No. 67.—F.11512.—PRICK 9D.




COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
GEORGE V., by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominion*
beyond the Seas King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India.
To Our Trusty and Well-beloved The Honorable Sir Arthur Robinson, K.C.M.O.
Greeting :
IT NOW YE that We do by these Our Letters Patent, issued in Our name by Our Governor-General of Our Commonwealth of Australia,
J\_ acting with the advice of Our Federal Executive Council, and in pursuance of the Constitution of Our said Commonwealth, the Royal
Commissions Act 1902 -1912, and all other powers him thereunto enabling, appoint you to to be a Commissioner to inquire into and report
upon the alleged inharmonious relations existing between the Australian Phosphate Commissioner on the one hand and the British and
New Zealand Phosphate Commissioners on the other, and between the Australian Phosphate Commissioner on the one hand and the
Executive Staff of the Commission on the other; the manner in which such relations have arisen and the person or persons responsible
therefor ; the extent to which such relations have affected the interests of the Commission in general and Australian interests in particular;
the extent to which they have contributed towards the decision of the Commissioners to transfer the Head Office of the Commission
from Australia to New Zealand ; and, further, to report how far the investigations of this Royal Commission support the contention of the
British Government, contained in the cablegram of the 20th May, 1926, from the Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs to His Excellency
the Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia, that harmony between the Commissioners cannot be established so long as the
present Australian Commissioner remains in office.
AND We require you, with as little delay as possible, to report to Our Governor-General of Our said Commonwealth the result of
your inquiries into the matters entrusted to you by these Our Letters Patent.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF We have caused these Our Utters to be made Patent and the Seal of Our said Commonwealth to
be thereunto affixed.
WITNESS Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Counsellor, John Lawrence, Baron Stonehaven, Knight Grand Grogs of Our
Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Companion of Our Distinguished Service Order, Our Governor-
's.) General and Comraander-in-Chief in and over Our Commonwealth of Australia, this thirteenth day of June, in the year of
Our Lord One thousand nine hundred and twenty-six, and in the seventeenth year of Our Reign.
STONEHAVEN,
• Governor-General.
By His Excellency’s Command,
S. M. BRUCE,
Prime Minister.
>
Entered on record by me, in Pvegister of Patents, No. 25, page 448, this fifteenth day of June. One thousand nine hundred and
twenty-six.
F. STRAHAN.




COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONER.
INTRODUCTION.
To His Excellency the Bight Honorable John Lawrence, Baron Stonehaven, a
member of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross of
the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Companion of
the Distinguished Service Order, Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief in and
over the Commomvealth of Australia.
May it please Your Excellency :
In accordance with the Commission issued by Royal Letters Patent, dated the thirteenth
day of June, 1926, empowering-me to inquire into and report upon—
(1) the alleged inharmonious relations existing between the Australian Phosphate
Commissioner, on the one hand, and the British and New Zealand Phosphate
Commissioners, on the other; and between the Australian Phosphate
Commissioner, on the one hand, and the Executive Staff of the Commission, on
the other :
(2) the manner in which such relations have arisen, and the person or persons
responsible therefor :
(3) the extent to which such relations have affected the interests of the Commission
in general and Australian interests in particular:
(4) the extent to which they have contributed towards the decision of the Commissioners
to transfer the Head Office of the Commission from Australia to New Zealand ;
and, further, to report-
(s) how far the investigations of this Royal Commission support the contention of the
British Government, contained in the cablegram of the 26th May, 1926, from
the Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs to His Excellency the Governor-
General of the Commonwealth of Australia, that harmony between the
Commissioners cannot be established so long as the present Australian
Commissioner remains in office,
I have the honour to submit the following Report
The cablegram above referred to is in Appendix No. 1 to this my Report.
The origins of the control over phosphates in Nauru and Ocean Island by Commissioners
representing His Majesty’s Governments of the United Kingdom, the Commonwealth of Australia,
and the Dominion of New Zealand are briefly indicated in Appendix No. 2.
The constitution of the Board of Commissioners furnished some opportunities for differences
of outlook on the part of the Commissioners. The predominating interests of Australia and New
Zealand may be said to lie in their being assured of an abundant supply of phosphates, at the
cheapest possible rate. The interest of Great Britain in more financial,' that is to say, she is
concerned in the administration of the undertaking in such a manner that the stipulated rate of
interest on the British share of the purchase price is duly paid, that adequate provision is made
for a sinking fund, and that, if’surpluses arise (see Article 12 of Agreement of 2nd July, 1919),
she shall get her due proportion.


As the output from the Islands exceeds the demand from the partner countries, this surplus
must be disposed of to other countries. The Table in Appendix No. 3 shows the proportion of
the phosphates shipped that have been taken by Australia and New Zealand since operations
commenced. The United Kingdom has taken less than 2 per cent, of the total output from the
Islands since the Commission began to operate. No sales to non-partner countries may be made
without the unanimous consent of all the Commissioners (Article 10), and the Australian
Commissioner took the view that no such sale should be made unless it was practically certain
that not even the slightest hitch could occur in the delivery of phosphates to Australia and New
Zealand. The British Commissioner took the view that the Commission was a commercial
undertaking, and that, though the claims of the partner countries were paramount, yet ordinary
business risks regarding deliveries to partner countries should be accepted by the Commission.
The Australian Commissioner and, at first, the New Zealand Commissioner appeared to think
that the British Commissioner desired the Commission to acquire large surpluses for distribution
to the partner countries. As a fact, no portion oi the surplus accumulated through sales to
non-partner countries has been distributed, all of it being used in the business. Further, foreign
sales on a good basis were essential to secure a low f.o.b. price for phosphates for Australia and
New Zealand.
The apparently divergent interests of the three partner countries were capable of
reconciliation, in the interests of all, and were not, in my opinion, sufficient to cause long continued
differences between the Commissioners, had a basis of mutual trust and confidence existed between
them.
1 see no reason to think that the British Commissioner acted contrary to the view that the
interests of Australia and New Zealand were in the direction of a constant supply at the lowest
possible price. The other Commissioners might well consider that any particular course of action
proposed by the United Kingdom Commissioner might affect, to some extent, the continuity
of supply to Australia and New Zealand, or the cost of production of phosphates. But this,
after all, is only one of those differences of opinion that frequently occur in the management of
large businesses. Such differences not seldom lead in commercial undertakings to strained personal
relations, disappearing, however, with the progress of the undertaking.
The Commissioner appointed by the British Government, Mr. A. R. Dickinson, had been
Managing Director of the British Phosphate Company for a number of years. He was a trained
and competent business man.
The Commissioner appointed by the Dominion of New Zealand, Mr. A. F. Ellis, had been
with the Pacific Phosphate Company since its inception, and, at the time of the winding up of that
company, was one of its local directors in New Zealand. He appears also to have been a trained
business man.
The Commissioner appointed by the Australian Government was Mr. H, B. Pope, who
entered the service of the British Phosphate Company as a junior clerk in 1903, and gradually
rose to the position of Chief Accountant on Nauru Island. He was then appointed to the staff
of the administration of that island, and afterwards enlisted to serve in the Great War. Mr.
Pope’s experience with the company extended over twelve years, and there is no reason to think
that he was other than an honest and zealous employee. After the war was over Mr. Pope was
attached to the Department of the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth at a remuneration of
One guinea per day, his services being required to advise the Government on matters connected
with or arising out of the Nauru Island Agreement. From this comparatively modest position
he was appointed to the responsible one of Commissioner for Australia at a remuneration of £2,000
per annum. (The remuneration of the British Commissioner was also £2,000 per annum, that
of the New Zealand Commissioner being £l,OOO per annum.) Mr, Pope states that he had no
thought of applying for this position until it was suggested to him by the Secretary of the Prime
Minister’s Department.
As to the qualifications of the Commissioners : I have no evidence from Mr. Dickinson or
Mr. Ellis, but I have the statements of Mr. Pope in the witness box, and an enormous mass of
correspondence, as well as the results of the Commission’s work. In the cable of the 26th May,
1926, from the British to the Australian Government, Mr. Dickinson is referred to as possessing
“ unrivalled experience and standing in the phosphate business.” So far as lam able to form
an opinion, his handling of the foreign sales of phosphate on behalf of the Commission seems to
have been marked with great skill and judgment,s but he was evidently very irascible and
overbearing, and inclined to be curt to those from whom he differed.
Mr. Ellis was evidently highly regarded by the New Zealand Government, and was described
by Mr. Pope in an early communication as a “most worthy, honorable, and capable gentleman.”


Mr. Pope as I have said, had office experience, but not, so far as 1 am aware, any experience
in the conduct of large business transactions. It is clear to me that he has a him belief in ns
own probity, and this appears to me to be well founded ; but he is apt to think that those who
differ from him are influenced by indirect or discreditable motives.
The difference in outlook between the Commissioner for the United Kingdom and the
other Commissioners contained elements of trouble, but with mutual trust, confidence and
forbearance, serious differences between the Commissioners should not have arisen. Unfortunately
as regards Mr. Pope and Mr. Dickinson, the chance of securing harmonious working was not
brioht from the very commencement of the undertaking. Prior to the appointment of ninse
as Australian Commissioner and of Mr. Dickinson as the British Comimssioner, Mr Pope had
written minutes for the information of the Prime Minister for Australia, which indicate an unusual
degree of distrust of Mr. Dickinson.
Tn one of these minutes (page 65 of the transcript) he states that Mr. Dickinson lias but
“ little sympathy for Australia and the Australians ’ ; that he believes Mr. Dickinson or his
wife is a large shareholder of the Pacific Phosphate Company, which retains a large interest in
the French Island of Makatea (a phosphate-producing island competing with Nauru and Ocean
Island) and he doubts whether it would be “ humanly possible for Mr Dickinson to act in a
disinterested manner In another minute he advised that a cable should be sent to the Secretary
of State, questioning the advisability of retaining Mr. Dickinson’s services for other than a very
brief period.
It is clear also, from his oral evidence, that Mr. Pope regarded with suspicion propositions
relating to foreign sales and other matters put forward by Mr. Dickinson He seemed to think
that Mr. Dickinson’s recommendations were influenced by indirect motives injurious to the
interests of Australia.
While Mr. Pope speaks of Mr. Ellis in high terms, he does not seem to realize that he also
nursed suspicions regarding the bona fides of Mr. Ellis. On the winding up of the Pacific Phosphate
Company Mr. Ellis received, at first, the sum of £1,500 as compensation for loss of office, &c. A
sum of £150,000 had been set aside by that company to meet all such claims, and Mr. Dickm.
was the liquidator of that company. Early in 1921 Mr. Ellisi told Mr. Pope that he had 0%
received £1 500 from the company or its liquidator, and that he was very dissatisfied with this
payment Early in 1922 Mr. Ellis informed Mr. Pope that he (Ellis) had received from the
liquidator of the Pacific Phosphate Company (Mr. Dickinson) a further sum of £6,500 for
compensation for loss of office. In a conversation at Mr. Ellis s house in New Zealand in November,
1923 (i e about eighteen months or more later), details of which are given by Mr. Pope, Mr. El is
urged Mr. Pope to abandon his attitude of opposition to Mr. Dickinson s requests regarding foreign
safes in which, at that time, Mr. Dickinson was supported by Mr Ellis. Mr. Pope says in his
evidence • “ he (Mr. Ellis) indicated to me that if I did not agree to these requests of Mr. Dickinson
in which he (Mr. Ellis) supported him, some day there may be a public inquiry, and it would then
transpire that I was unsupported in the action I had taken, that my colleagues were opposed to
me and the principal Executive Officer, and, in short, I would have to take the consequences. I
replied to Mr Ellis, saying : ‘ Mr. Ellis, allow me to inform you that I do not fear such an inquiry,
but if the inquiry should ever come, which you apparently hold over my head so to speak I
think it is sure to transpire that you received from Mr. Dickinson, acting as liquidator, a further
sum of £6,500, and let me, as an old friend, enjoin upon you the probable interpretation wine i
the public might put upon your action.’
On important questions prior to this conversation Mr. Ellis and Mr. Pope had been in
agreement, and opposed to the views put forward by Mr. Dickinson, and the relations between
Mr. Pope and Mr. Ellis appear to have been harmomous up to this time.
Mr Pope states that Mr. Ellis did not resent this remark and that the relations between
himself and Mr. Ellis continued to be most friendly. 1 find a difficulty in accepting this state-
ment however, as further evidence by Mr. Pope, relating to interviews in Australia with Mr
Ellis k few months later, indicates that Mr. Ellis was labouring under a feeling of strong resentment
against Mr. Pope by reason of the suggestion contained in the statement quoted. 1 doubt
whether, even at the time of giving his evidence before me, Mr. Pope fully realized the seriousness
of the innuendo made by him.
It must be borne in mind that I had no oral evidence fern anybody but Mr, Pope.
There was no cross-examination of Mr. Pope by counsel on behalf of Mr. Dickinson, or of Mr.
Ellis or on behalf of any member of the Executive Staff of the Commission. The reason for this
k set out in the letter from Messrs. Blake and Biggall which appears in Appendix No. 4.
Hence in considering the attitude of Mr. Dickinson and Mr. Ellis towards Mr. Pope, I have to rely


solely on the oral testimony of Mr. Pope ami the document* put before me, and such inferences
as 1 feel can be legitimately drawn from such evidence. I felt, of course, unable to avail myself
ot the opportunities suggested in Messrs. Blake and Riggall’s letter.
The chief differences of opinion between the Commissioners were those relating to—
1. Makatea phosphates.
2. Purchase of additional ship.
3. Erection of cantilever for loading vessels.
4. Sales to countries other than partner countries.
n. Shipment of paint and Customs prosecution which arose out of it.
0. The dismissal of Captain Evans.
, . fl > so far as Makatea phosphates are concerned, Mr. Dickinson’s views are set forth in a
statement which he made to a meeting in Australia House on 23rd May, 1923, at which Sir- Joseph
,rc^nt Mr ' Tt erb + r t BK ’°. kes > Mr - GH - Reading. Mr. J. Sanderson, and Mr. M. L. Shepherd wwe
present. This statement appears at pp. 26 et set), of the transcript.
i ? Ir ' DIC J C S S0 J ll>B . views 0n 1 sub i ect were opposed both by Mr. Pope and Mr. Ellis the
latter being at that time very hostile to such an arrangement as suggested by Mr. Dickinson
Mr. Pope held, rightly I think that the Commission had no legal power to enter into such an
arrangement as Mr Dickinson desired. But he also felt, lam satisfied, that Mr. Dickinson’s
ttitude in this matter was not bona fide and in the interests of the successful conduct of the
undertaking, but really in the interests of the company controlling the xMakatea Island phosphates
Mr. Pope, m a letter to Mr. Dickinson dated 26th February, 1924, definitely suggested want of
!?]}“ P 1 ® 1 ™ 8011 * 8 ) P ar £ in re S ard . to dealings by the Commission with Makatea.
pronounced M ° P6 8 " WaS SUch aS t 0 make any iU - fee]in S that previously existed more
v T he P arckase an additional ship was recommended by Mr. A. H. Daze, the Chief
fx- 80 aBO T d l the erection of tbe cantilever. It is important to note that
the Chief Representative pressed these proposals and that Mr. Ellis and Mr. Pope supported them
They were both opposed by Mr. Dickinson. 1
in regard to sales to non-partner countries, Article 10 of the Agreement of 2nd Tulv 1919
TTCtTT 0f a,l * he any such sales. As Ih“ Lted, ml’ Pope
felt he should not agree to any such sale unless it was a practical certainty that every ton of
phosphate required by Australia would be delivered without any hitch. Mr. Dickinson felt that
ths attitude made it exceedingly difficult for him to negotiate’ sales to foreign countries which
were essential to the success of the undertaking, and necessary to secure a low f.o.b. price for
p osphate for Australia and New Zealand. Mr. Dickinson’s views are disclosed in a letter
flick r hlm Mt ' V ° PB m 2nd Nov T ber ’ im , the tone of which is most regrettable Mr
Dickinson s views are again expressed in his letter dated 26thMune, 1924, to Mr Pope ’which
views had then the support of Mr. Ellis. p ’
Mr. Pope did not regard Mr. Dickinson’s attitude in regard to foreign sales as beum
single-minded, and held the same view of Mr. Dickinson’s attitude in relation thereto as he did
regarding proposed business with Makatea, i.e., that it was influenced by improper motives Then!
is a significant sentence m a cable sent by Mr. Pope to Mr. Ellis on 18th October, 1922 regarding
certain negotiations for foreign sales, which is as follows ’ regarding
" I am more concerned with rendering material service this Commission rather
than to rival undertaking with whom we are in active competition.”
This cable was repeated by Mr. Pope to Mr. Dickinson, and appears to have angered that gentleman
very much, hie wrote to Mr. Pope on 2nd November, 1922, in hot, and indeed bitter terms
and his comment on this particular sentence is worth noting : ? ’
Let me say that this sort of fustian does not influence me. You worked for manv
years under the Commissioner for New Zealand and myself, as well as under the Chief
Representative. We are very well aware of your record, and the fact that yon are now
one ot the three Commissioners does not qualify or entitle you to adopt a censorious
and dictatorial attitude towards your fellow Commissioners.” P ■
1 think that by this time Mr. Dickinson had an inkling of Mr. Pone’s distrust of him ~,.,1
of the grounds therefor, and, probably, he also felt irritated that his one-time junior shoulddont
a somewhat self-righteous attitude. This, however, does not justify the tone adopted bvTr
‘ ck , m ;f m | n letter of 2nd November, 1922. I regard the terms in which Mr. Dickinson couched
this letter to Mr I ope and a number of subsequent references to Mr, Pope, as objectionable and
as not calculated to allay, but rather to increase, ill-feeling.


Regarding the paint shipment: A huge mass of evidence, oral and documentary, was
tendered on this subject, and no good purpose will be served by attempting to make a digest
of it in this Report. A precis of some of the principal points is set out in Appendix No. 5.
It will be observed that this incident commenced in September, 1923, some considerable
time after the shipment arrived in Australia, and was not finally disposed of until June, 1926.
This matter embittered the relations between Mr. Pope and his fellow Commissioners to an
extraordinary degree, and seems to be one of the causes of the definite steps taken by the
Commissioners for the United Kingdom and New Zealand to exclude Mr. Pope from any real
share in the direction of the Commission s activities. It also seems to have caused both the Chief
Representative and the Assistant Representative to believe that Mr. Pope was intent on forcing
them out of their positions.
I think that Mr. W. Chambers was guilty of a grave irregularity in regard to this shipment
of paint. His first explanation was not the full and candid one it should have been. His conduct
was deserving of severe censure by the Board of Commissioners.
Mr. Pope’s action in referring the matter, without prior consultation with his colleagues,
to the Prime Minister’s Department for advice as to whether Mr. Chambers’s action was such as
to warrant the Commission dismissing Mr. Chambers, was premature, and calculated to lead to
further differences between him and his colleagues. The length to which this incident was drawn
out was largely due to Mr. Pope’s zeal for a conviction in the courts of somebody connected with the
shipment, a feeling from which neither professional nor amateur detectives are entirely free. I
am unable to accept Mr. Pope’s statement that in this matter he was actuated solely by a desire
to protect the good name of the Commission. I think that the evidence shows that Mr. Pope
was not free from the frailties of ordinary human nature, and that this incident caused him to
exhibit some of them.
Shortly after the paint shipment question arose, Mr. Pope secured possession of a cable
sent by the Chief Representative to Mr. Dickinson on 11th September, 1923. I regard the means
by which Mr. Pope secured this cable as objectionable, and 1 feel that they inflamed to a very
material extent the ill-feeling that existed between Mr. Pope and Mr. Dickinson, and also caused
the Chief Representative to regard Mr. Pope as a bitter enemy. The cable referred to was not
in any way connected with the paint question, but its contents certainly would have influenced
the minds and actions of most people in Mr. Pope’s position, and I think Mr. Pope was so influenced.
It appears that Mr. Dickinson had cabled confidentially to the Chief Representative asking
for his confidential opinion regarding the attitude of Mr. Pope on certain business of the Commission.
While this action cannot be defended it shows the feeling which at that time existed between the
two Commissioners, and is, I think, some support to the view that Mr. Dickinson must have had
by this time some idea of Mr. Pope’s distrust of him and of the reasons therefor.
The Chief Representative sent a long cable in reply (see pp. 173 and 174 of transcript).
This cable was sent forward as on Commission business, the cost to be charged to the Commission,
but the day after it was dispatched the Chief Representative paid the Pacific Cable Board the
cost of the cable out of his own pocket. Notwithstanding that Mr. Pope knew of this fact, he asked
for, and eventually secured through the Prime Minister’s Department, a copy of the cable as sent
by Mr. Gaze to Mr. Dickinson.
Mr. Pope’s persistence in the paint matter was due to a belief that the Chief Representative
and the Assistant Representative were in some way interested in an attempt to benefit themselves
at the expense of the Commission ; and also to the belief that if he could demonstrate this, then
the confidence placed by Mr. Dickinson and Mr. Ellis in these officers would be shown to be sadly
misplaced, and he (Mr. Pope) would be vindicated as the more vigilant and reliable Commissioner.
Everything that has taken place between the Commissioners since September, 1923, seems
to have been poisoned by this paint incident. The feelings of distrust on the part of Mr. Pope
orew stronger and stronger. Mr. Dickinson’s feelings of contempt and hostility for Mr. Pope
grew more pronounced. Letters from Mr. Dickinson to Mr. Pope ceased on the 26th June, 1924,
the former contenting himself with cables to Mr. Pope when he found it impossible to avoid
communications with him. Mr. Dickinson, however, wrote letters on the business of the
Commission to the Chief Representative, copies of which were forwarded by the latter to Mr.
Pope. In these letters Mr. Dickinson did not scruple to make sarcastic comments on the
Commissioner for Australia—-a very objectionable proceeding. Probably, however, Mr. Pope’s
letter of 26th February, 1924, expressing doubts as to the propriety of some actions of Mr.
Dickinson, contributed materially to the acrimonious tone adopted by the latter. Mr. Ellis
ceased to ’write to Mr. Pope early in 1925, although Mr. Pope continued to write to Mr. Ellis.
The paint episode appears to have been the cause which determined both the New Zealand and
the United Kingdom Commissioners not to hold communication with Mr. Pope other than by
cable messages.
F. 11512. —2


The dismissal of Captain Evans arose out of the fact that when handling the ship Nauru
Chief at the Islands on 13th August, 1924, the ship lost moorings valued at about £2,500. On
her return to Sydney an inquiry into the reasons for this loss was held on 22nd October, 1924,
by Mr. W. Chambers, the Assistant Representative, and Mr. Sted Thomson, a consulting marine
engineer appointed about a year previously to advise the Commission on matters connected with
the ship. Mr. Thomsan advised that Captain Evans had been guilty of negligence, and that he
should be dismissed, and this step was taken by the Chief Representative.
A protest against this dismissal was forwarded by the Merchant Service Guild to Mr. Pope,
who immediately took the matter up and endeavoured to prevent the dismissal from taking effect.
Without going further into details, it is clear from the evidence that Mr. Pope regarded the dismissal
of Captain Evans as a device to prevent him (Mr. Pope) from securing a conviction in any Customs
prosecution regarding the paint. Mr. Ellis and Mr. Dickinson supported the action of the Chief
Representative, and declined to interfere with this action.
I was pressed by counsel for Mr. Pope to take the view that the dismissal of Captain Evans
was not bona fide, but this lam not prepared to do. The evidence before me falls very far short
of justifying any such conclusion.
The relations between Mr. Pope and Mr. Dickinson had been going from bad to worse,
and Mr. Pope’s actions regarding the paint shipment and the dismissal of Captain Evans seem to
have made an unbridgeable gulf between Mr. Pope and his fellow Commissioners. Mr. Pope
held more tenaciously than ever to the view that Mr. Dickinson’s interest in the Anglo-French
Phosphate Company (the holders of the concession over Makatea Island) made Mr. Dickinson
an untrustworthy Commissioner, and he appears to have come to the opinion that Mr. Ellis, the
New Zealand Commissioner, was not to be trusted either, because, as Mr. Pope alleged, some of
the relatives of Mr. Ellis had shares in the rival company. Mr. Pope, in his evidence, states
that the interest of Mr. Dickinson in this particular company comprised less than 350 shares “ of
very little value.” There is no evidence that Mr. Ellis has any personal interest in this company.
The Australian Government, on the 16th December, 1924, sent to the British Government
a cable message stating that: —
“ The Australian Commissioner suggests that the attitude of the United Kingdom
Commissioner was influenced by the fact that he is a shareholder in the Anglo-French
Phosphate Company, and that the New Zealand Commissioner, who previously supported
the Australian Commissioner’s view, but now supports that of the British Commissioner,
is influenced by the fact that relatives have become shareholders in the rival company.”
This cable was shown to Mr. Dickinson by permission of the Commonwealth Government in March,
1925. Clearly it rendered personal relations impossible between the Australian Commissioner
and his colleagues.
Both Mr. Dickinson and Mr. Ellis (who were in constant communication) had now definite
proof that their Australian colleague attributed dishonest motives to them, and had so informed
his Government. They felt, apparently, that the time for decisive action on their part had come.
The steps they have taken practically eliminate Mr. Pope from any effective voice in the conduct
of the Commission’s undertaking.
On 4th June, 1925, Mr. Gaze addressed the following confidential letter to the Board of
Commissioners :
“ On the 30th instant the first five years of the Nauru Ocean Phosphate business
under the Commissision will be completed, and 1 assume that the results obtained during
this period and arrangements for the future will be under the consideration of the three
partner Governments.
Remarkable results have been achieved since Ist July, 1920, phosphate production
and shipping have been largely increased, efficiencies improved, and costs reduced.
Selling prices to the manufacturers in the partner countries have been progressively
reduced until they are now below the pre-war level. We now hold contracts for all the
requirements of all the superphosphate manufacturers in Australia and New Zealand,
worth over £1,000,000 per annum, and transport and distributing arrangements are
effectively organized.
The three Governments have not been called upon to provide any money for
the purposes of the Commission beyond the original purchase price paid to the Pacific
Phosphate Company Limited, and the Commission has paid to the Governments 6 per
cent, interest upon that purchase price with sinking fund contributions to redeem the
principal in 50 years. The Commission is in a very strong financial position, substantial
reserves having been created for developmental and other purposes, principally out of
surplus funds from foreign sales.


Under proper conditions, and run upon commercial lines, the undertaking should
continue to prosper and results be still further improved, but good will and co-operation in
direction and management are essential if progress is to be maintained.
My agreement with the Commissioners does not expire until 31st December,
1925, but in view of the early termination of the first quinquennium of the Commission
I refer now briefly, but candidly, to the existing situation.
To a gradually increasing extent my work for the Commissioners has been rendered
unnecessarily difficult and unpleasant through friction on the Board and the hostile
attitude of the Australian Commissioner to his colleagues, myself, and the Assistant
Representative. Question after question is made the subject of controversy, generally
without any valid business basis or reason, resulting in much useless expenditure of
time and energy on the part of the Commissioners and their executive officers, and
incidentally causing a considerable waste of money on cabling.
Differences have been referred by the Commissioners to the Governments which
except for this internal friction could readily have been settled by the Board. The
selling of our surplus production to foreign countries has been done with a maximum
of difficulty, due to the use made by the Australian Commissioner of Aiticle 10, which
requires the Commissioners to be unanimous regarding such sales. We are at the present
time losing large sums of revenue through the loss of foreign sales owing to unnecessary
stipulations and delays by the Australian Commissioner imposed under that article.
A very unpleasant feature is the introduction by the Australian Commissioner
of prejudiced personalities regarding the other members of the Board and myself, which
alone —apart from his general attitude on business questions —would render the mutual
confidence and co-operation necessary for the proper conduct of the undertaking difficult,
if not impossible.
The interests of the partner countries are common, not conflicting, and 1 can see
no justification whatever for the introduction of such an objectionable atmosphere,
which is wholly foreign to the efficient conduct of a big business. If allowed to continue
such conditions must, in my opinion, lead to inefficiency, and bring discredit upon a
Government enterprise, which so far has been unusually successful, and which is a common
asset of great value to the partner Governments.
The organization for direction and management is unusual, the Commissioners
appointed to the Board by each Government residing in their respective countries, and
operating through myself as attorney duly authorized to carry on the business with a
Central Office in Melbourne. With co-operation and good will, however, the arrangement,
which is adapted to the peculiar circumstances of the case, can be effective and
satisfactory ; without such goodwill and co-operation no form of organization will give
the best results.
When accepting the managership offered to me by the Board in the latter part
of 1920,1 anticipated that the full confidence of all the Commissioners would be accorded
to me. In fact, I have received full confidence and support from the United Kingdom
and New Zealand Commissioners only, without which my position would have been
untenable.
As to the future, while I should be glad to continue to act for the Board, if desired,
under conditions offering some assurance of smooth working, and with the full confidence
of the Board, I have no wish to continue under existing conditions, which would be
unacceptable to any responsible man with a vital interest in securing efficient results.
I shall be glad if this letter can be brought under the notice of the three partner
Governments.”
I presume that the request in the last sentence was complied with.
A Board Meeting was arranged to be held at Vancouver in October, 1925. Mr. Ellis notified
Mr, Pope that he was leaving for this meeting, but the notice only reached Mr. Pope 47 hours
before the vessel by which Mr. Ellis intended to travel left Sydney, and Mr. Pope had to travel
by the next steamer. Mr. Ellis and Mr. Dickinson arrived in Vancouver about a month ahead of
Mr. Pope, and no doubt discussed and decided upon a plan of campaign. When Mr. Pope arrived
at the meeting he was presented with a series of resolutions which had been prepared by the other
Commissioners, and which were duly carried without Mr. Pope's assent, and, indeed, as regards
some of them, in spite of his strong dissent. These resolutions (inter alia ) provided for the transfer
of the head office of the Commission from Australia to New Zealand. They renewed the appoint-
ment of Mr. Gaze as Chief Representative and of Mr. Chambers as Assistant Representative.
Mr. Pope put forward various suggestions, nearly all of which were rejected by his colleagues.


The effect of the decisions thus taken (if they be given effect to) will be that the Head
Office of the Commission will be shifted to Auckland, New Zealand, at which place an option over
office accommodation has already been secured. They also mean that the Chief Representative
and Mr. Ellis will be in constant touch with each other, and that the influence of the Australian
Commissioner will be negligible.
Cables have passed between the British and Australian Governments in regard to this,
but these are not before me. I have, however, by the terms of my commission, to consider the
contentions of the British Government in their cable of 26th May, 1926, that harmony between
the Commissioners cannot be established so long as the present Australian Commissioner remains
in office. This cable states :
“He (Dickinson) has met to our (i.e., the British Government’s) complete
satisfaction the imputations on his personal honour brought against him by the Australian
Commissioner. But these imputations were of such a nature that it is hardly to be
expected that harmony can be established so long as the present Australian Commissioner
remains in office. We have no desire to see the Central Office removed from Australia,
and we understand that the Commissioners for the United Kingdom and New Zealand
would not themselves wish it if it were possible to work harmoniously with the Australian
Commissioner. We see no reason to suppose that if other arrangements were made
for the representation of Australia on the Phosphate Commission the affairs of the
Commission could not be conducted in a friendly spirit.”
In my opinion no justification exists for the imputations cast by Mr. Pope on the
Commissioners for the United Kingdom and New Zealand. Mr. Pope is “ extraordinarily
suspicious ” of the good faith of those from whom he differs.
I think it is impossible for harmony to be re-established between the present. Australian
Commissioner and the Commissioners for the United Kingdom and New Zealand. The imputations
on the personal honour of both the latter, and the discreditable innuendo regarding the
compensation paid to Mr. Ellis for loss of office, are of such a nature as to render the
re-establishment of harmonious relations impossible.
I think I should say that however the Commission is constituted in the future there is need
for a revision of some of its methods. It is a great pity that regular meetings of the Commission
did not take place. The first meeting was held in London the latter part of the year 1920 at
which time Mr. J. R. Collins was the Acting-Commissioner for Australia. No subsequent meeting
was held of the three Commissioners until the meeting at Vancouver on 17th October, 1925,
although before ordinarily courteous relations became impossible, Mr. Pope and Mr. Ellis had
several conferences. In an undertaking of the magnitude of the Phosphate Commission a meeting
of the Board of Commissioners should be held, to use the words of the Companies Act, “ once
at least in every calendar year and not more than fifteen months after the holding of the last
preceding meeting.” In view of the great distance that has to be travelled some intermediate
spot might be arranged for such meetings. Meetings between the Australian and the New
Zealand Commissioners, who are representatives of the countries most vitally interested in the
supply of phosphates, could be held more frequently without inconvenience. Any revision of
the emoluments of the Commissioners rendered necessary by such meetings would be, to some
extent, offset by a reduction in the inordinate cable bill that has been incurred during past years
by reason of the internal and never-ceasing strife and wiangling. Personal conferences and
discussions do much to reconcile differences of opinion and of outlook. They tend to a better
understanding of the attitude of those with whom one must frequently correspond, and they
lessen the necessity for continuous reliance on cablegrams—a very fruitful source of misunder-
standings, as most business men are aware.
My answers to the specific questions addressed to me are as follows :
1. The alleged inharmonious relations between the Australian Phosphate Commissioner
on the one hand and the British and New Zealand Phosphate Commissioners
on the other, and between the Australian Phosphate Commissioner on the one
hand and the Executive Staff of the Commission on the other, do exist. I
interpret the words “ Executive Staff of the Commission ” to mean the Chief
Representative and the Assistant Representative.
2. The manner in which such relations have arisen, and the person or persons responsible
therefore, is to be gathered from what I have said above. The root cause
was the distrust by Mr. Pope of Mr. Dickinson, and his belief that Mr.
Dickinson was actuated by indirect and improper motives. Then when Mr.
Ellis differed from him, Mr Pope felt that the attitude of Mr. Ellis was
materially affected by the compensation he received from the Pacific Phosphate


Company of which Mr. Dickinson was liquidator. Later on came the definite
imputations by Mr. Pope of improper motives to each of his colleagues as set
out in the cable to the British Government of 16th December, 1924. In my
view r no justification existed for Mr. Pope's distrust and suspicion. Ido not
regard the divergencies of outlook, or the differences of opinion on matters
connected with the working of the undertaking, as being sufficient, in themselves,
to have produced the present deeply regrettable position.
As regards the inharmonious relations between the Australian
Representative and Mr. Gaze, the former seems to have had suspicions of the
Chief Representative before he (Mr. Pope) was appointed Commissioner (vide
Memorandum from Mr. Pope to Australian Prime Minister, dated 4tn October,
1920). Ido not think Mr. Pope ever really trusted Mr. Gaze, and the incidents
of the paint shipment, and the dismissal of Captain Evans, effectually destroyed
any possibility of amicable relations between them. These two incidents
also made friendly relations impossible between Mr. Pope and the Assistant
Representative, Mr. Chambers.
3. The evidence before me does not enable me to give any substantial answer to this
question. The confidential letter of the 4th June, 1925, from the Chief
Representative to the Board of Commissioners set out above, indicates skilful
management of a large undertaking.
4. The decision of the majority of the Commissioners to transfer the Head Office of
the Commission from Australia to New Zealand was due to the inharmonious
relations aforesaid and to the manner in which such relations arose.
5. Harmony between the Commissioners representing the three partner countries,
cannot, in my opinion, be established so long as Mr. Pope remains as Australian
Commissioner.
I have the honour to be,
Your Excellency's most obedient servant,
ARTHUR ROBINSON,
Royal Commissioner.
C. NANCE, Secretary,
Melbourne, 21st July, 1926.


APPENDICES.
1. Copy of cablegram received by the Governor-General from the Secretary of State for Dominion Allans, dated
26th May, 1926.
2. Statement re origins and control over phosphates in Nauru and Ocean Island.
3. Table showing proportion of phosphates shipped from Nauru and Ocean Islands —taken by Australia and
New Zealand, Ist July, 1920, to 30th dune, 1925.
4. Letter dated 26th June, 1926, from Messrs. Blake and Kiggall to Royal Commissioner.
5. Statement re shipment of paint ex Nauru Chief and Customs prosecution.
APPENDIX No. 1.
Copy op Cablegram received by the Governor-General from the Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs,
dated 26th May, 1926. 7 p.m.
26th May. Following for your Prime Minister begins :
We have now carefully considered the views expressed in your telegram of 27th February with regard to the
British Phosphate Commission, and have also had an opportunity of considering the reply given by the New Zealand
Government with the summary which they have furnished us. We are not disposed to relinquish our share in the
undertaking. Indeed, we attach great importance to the retention of our interest. We concur with you in regarding
any public inquiry into the affairs of the Commission as undesirable. There is no occasion for such an inquiry so far
as the commercial success of the business is concerned. It could only deal with highly personal matters investigation
of which in public could not but react prejudicially on the future of the enterprise. Nor do we regard the situation as
one calling for revision of the agreement or of the present organization of the Commission.
The problem as it appears to us relates solely to —
{a) the personal relations between the United Kingdom and New Zealand Commissioners on the one hand
and the Australian Commissioner on the other ;
(h) the personal relations between the latter and the executive staff of the Commission.
The present lack of harmony is greatly to be deplored, but we do not feel that we should be justified in terminating
the appointment of our Commissioner. He has an unrivalled experience and standing in the phosphate business, we
know of nothing to indicate that his relations with the executive staff leave anything to be desired, and we should view
with great regret the loss of his services to the undertaking. He has met to our complete satisfaction the imputations
on his personal honour brought against him by the Australian Commissioner. But these imputations were of such a
nature that it is hardly to be expected that harmony can be established so long as the present Australian Commissioner
remains in office. We have no desire to see the central office removed from Australia, and we understand that the
Commissioners for the United Kingdom and New Zealand would not themselves wish it, if it were possible to work
harmoniously with the Australian Commissioner. We see no reason to suppose that if other arrangements were made
for the representation of Australia on the Phosphate Commission the affairs of the Commission could not be conducted
in a friendly spirit on the present basis, and we would earnestly urge upon you desirability of giving further consideration
to this means of dealing with the situation. Proposals for settlement of all outstanding questions with regard to the
financial control were submitted to you in my telegram of 16th January. These have been agreed to by New Zealand.
No reply has yet been received from Australia, but we are advised that their adoption should, if the personal questions
were settled, eliminate all possibility of difficulty.
I am repeating this telegram to New Zealand.
Ends.
APPENDIX No. 2.
The phosphate business in Australia, before being taken over by the British Phosphate Commissioners, was
conducted mainly by the Pacific Phosphate Company, and the phosphates used in Australia and New Zealand were,
in the main, obtained from Ocean Island, Nauru, and Makatea.
The Pacific Phosphate Company had the exclusive right to work the deposits of phosphate on Ocean Island
under a grant from His Majesty’s Government for something like 100 years.
Nauru was a German possession, and the right to work the deposits there had been granted by the German
Government to a German company. That company had assigned its rights to the Pacific Phosphate Company.
The phosphates in the island of Makatea (a French possession) were worked by a French company. The Pacific
Phosphate Company held 51 per cent, of the shares in that company.
After the war a mandate for Nauru was granted to the British Empire and an Agreement, dated 2nd July, 1919,
was entered into by His Majesty’s Government in London, His Majesty’s Government of the Commonwealth of
Australia, and His Majesty’s Government of the Dominion of New Zealand, which provided that the phosphates there
and the working of them should be vested in a Board of Commissioners of three members, one to be appointed by each
of the Governments parties to such Agreement. Article 15 of the Agreement states that the Agreement shall come
into force on its ratification by the Parliaments of the three countries. This Agreement was duly ratified by an Act
of Parliament of the United Kingdom passed on the 4th August, 1920—the Nauru Island Agreement Act 1920 (10 and 11
George the Fifth Chapter 27) —and also by an Act of Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia passed on the
28th October, 1919, and was ratified by resolution of the House of Representatives and of the Legislative Council of
the Dominion of New Zealand, passed on the 23rd and 28th days of October, 1919, respectively.


Appendix No. 2 — continued.
Article 7 of Agreement, dated 2nd July, 1919, reads :
“ Any right, title, or interest which the Pacific Phosphate Company or any person may have in the
said deposits, land, buildings, plant, and equipment (so far as such right, title, and interest is not dealt with
by the Treaty of Peace) shall be converted into a claim for compensation at a fair valuation.
In negotiating with the Pacific Phosphate Company for the amount of compensation which should be paid to it for
its interest in Nauru, it was brought under the attention of the Governments that the Pacific Phosphate Company was
also working the Ocean Island phosphate deposits, and that it was very undesirable that the Governments should
be operating the Nauru deposits whilst that company should be working the Ocean Island deposits m competition
with it. An Agreement was entered into with the Pacific Phosphate Company for the purpose o acquiring rom a
company of its rights in Ocean Island, and the working of the Ocean Island deposits was to be vested in a Commission
under similar articles of Agreement as those which applied to Nauru.
No arrangement was made to take over the interest that the Pacific Phosphate Company held in the French
company that was working the Makatea deposits. After the transfer to the Commissioners of the Pacific Company s
interests in Nauru and Ocean Island, that company still remained the holder of 51 per cent, of the shares in the French
company controlling the Makatea deposits.
By an agreement, dated 25th June, 1920, it was agreed that the Pacific Phosphate Company should sell and
transfer, and the Governments of the United Kingdom, the Commonwealth of Australia, and the Dominion of New
Zealand should purchase and acquire, at the price of £3,500,000, the whole of the undertaking and assets of the company
on Ocean Island and Nauru and all the rights, title, and interests of the company m the guano phosphate deposits
in and upon both islands.
By an indenture, dated 31st December, 1920, between the Pacific Phosphate Company Limited and His Most
Gracious Majesty the King, on behalf of the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand, and with the three persons
named therein, Alwin Robinson Dickinson, James Richard Collins, and Albert Fuller Ellis, the interests of the Pacific
Phosphate Company were transferred to these Commissioners “ to hold all the said premises (subject respectively
as aforesaid) Unto and to the use of the present Commissioners, their heirs executors administrators and assigns
according to the nature thereof as joint tenants upon trust and to the intent that the said premises shall at all times
hereafter be held by the present Commissioners (as such Commissioners) and the Board oi Commissioners from time
to time hereafter to be duly appointed under the Phosphate Deposits Agreement (hereinafter included in the expression
“ the Board of Commissioners ”) for the purposes and upon the terms and with and subject to the powers and in
accordance with the provisions contained in the Phosphate Deposits Agreement and to the intent that the phosphate
deposits on the said Ocean Island and the said Island of Nauru shall at all times hereafter be worked sold dispose
of and dealt with by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the provisions of Articles 9 to 14 (both inclusive)
of the Phosphate Deposits Agreement and subject also to the Agreements and obligations on the part of the Board
of Commissioners and the Governments respectively hereinafter contained.”
Under the Agreement of 2nd July, 1919, Mr. A. R. Dickinson was to represent the United Kingdom, Mr A F.
Ellis New Zealand, and Mr. J. R. Collins, Australia. (Mr. Collins was appointed to act temporarily as Australian
Commissioner from Ist July, 1920, to sth January, 1921. Mr. H. B. Pope was appointed as Australian Commissioner
on the 6th Pacific Phosphate Company went into liquidation shortly after the payment of the consideration for the
transfer of its rights to the Commissioners.
APPENDIX No. 3.
TABLE SHOWING PROPORTION OF PHOSPHATES PRODUCED AT NAURU AND OCEAN ISLANDS.
Taken by Australia and New Zealand, Ist July, 1920, to 30th June, 1920.
1920- — Total Shipments .. • • • • • • • * '' St’oi 1 tonS ’ 70 070/
Quantity taken by Australia
New Zealand .. ■ ■ ■ • ■ ■ • ■ ” I7 ’ Jo ° • •
Total 283,014 77.66%
1921- -Total Shipments .. •• ■■ •• •• tonS ' „ uO/
Quantity taken by Australia *«“ ™ - «•»%
New Zealand .. • ■ ” 38 ’ BUU • •
Total .. 20i >. 786 68.04%
1922- Total Shipments 818 -™ tonB '
Quantity taken by Australia t«ns 203,446 .. 64.84%
New Zealand .. •• •• •• ** ” okaqqb *’ w'tU/
Total .. •• » 254,996 81.27%
1923- — Total Shipments •• •• •• •• . 320 031 70 81°/
: _”S S3*
Total 380,881 84 - 28 %
1924- Total , Australia •• tons 337,298 71.66%
:: '■ •• •• .. _w9o •• w
Total >, 436,088 92.65%
Combined Totals for five years .. L 962.300 tons. 100%
Quantity taken by Australia
New Zealand .. • • • • ■ ■ • • ” 2l)(l - 7a(> •' __
Total ~ ... .. .. 1,564,766 79.75%


APPENDIX No. 4.
120 William-Street,
Melbourne,
The Hon. Sir Arthur Robinson, K.C.M.G., . , Une ’ 1926 '
Collins Gate, Melbourne.
Dear Sir Arthur Robinson—-
Royal Commission on British Phosphate Commission.
m miestf ’ Go ~ nt in and
We are instructed to inform you that these Commissioners do not propose to appear officially before the Koval
SsrattasaiKS!? - -«• «-- JJsaat
zzzzxsri tr
owever, considered that it would be undesirable as regards these Commissioners, and undignified as regards the respective
Governments which they represent, for them or the officials mentioned to appear before you “n aTSws milarTS
of a litigant -whether for purposes of attack or defence. » capacity similar to wiat
, These Comm.sioners were of opinion that the Australian Government had already before it sufficient materials
o enable it to deal with the issues submitted to the Royal Commission for inquiry. Nevertheless so far as thov mav
Investigationa *“ It 'T, T*’ “* b CoSff tl
investigations, and to render you, personally and alone, all necessary assistance.
. n Wlth £ llls ob i ect m view, we are instructed to inform you that the Commissioner for New Zealand is prepared
Representltive y of l botll . theSe agree to the Chief Representative and Assistant
nepresennative of the British Phosphate Commission, and also its solicitors, doing likewise.
As to the Commissioner appointed by His Majesty’s Government in London, he is prepared unofficially to answer
any appropriate questions telegraphed to him by you. 1 1 unomciany to answer
the BrMsSho,llb C rZw n " S are ‘h* yOU »kould insect any official books or documents of
o f tb o(WrTATVT 1 w T ms P ectlon , ?«» «ot interfere with the routine of business or delay
t.llO removal of the Central Office to Auckland, as arranged by the Board of Commissioners.
We have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient Servants,
(Sgd.) BLAKE & RIGGALL.
APPENDIX No. 5.
SHIPMENT OF PAINT EX “ NAURU CHIEF,” AND CUSTOMS PROSECUTION.
_ Qfp., W i C [\ an \ h f rH ’ Assistant Representative of the British Phosphate Commission, was sent to England to buy
a steamship for the Commission, and to purchase, or arrange for the purchase, of a steamer called the Nauru Chief. '
When in England Mr. Chambers purchased certain paint, and invoiced same to Chambers and Co Pty Ltd
Sydney a company formed by his brothers, but in which he had no financial interest. ’’ ’ ’’
On the arrival of the Nauru Chief in Australia she proceeded to Port Kembla to replenish her bunkers and
teTb“ S eTth”tip WaS th the Captai " and ehirfofß< * r for the f "-..in board a, sldpe ator"a
r , ..... £ s. d.
Cost, as per original invoices, to Chambers and Co. Pty. Ltd. .. .. 434 jq 7
Total charge for paint Chambers and Co. Pty. Ltd., to Commission .. ~ 557 5 g
Gross profit .. .. .. . jgg jq j
0 —(P. 350.)
repairs nSitSby flro 1922 ' “ “ 4208 * 11d ' on board, for
Average Adjuster’s apportionment is—•
• £ s. d.
Allow to steamer for paints for holds and topsides No. 3 and No. 4 holds . 04 15 3
BemaindwTto owners .. .. .. ~ " g
Total •• •• •• •• •• .. 208 911
—(P.[354.)


Appendix No. s — continued.
Australian Commissioner. —Mr. Pope states that the matter of shipment of paint was first brought under his
notice just before he left for a visit to the Islands by the Auditor mentioning to him that he (the Auditor) thought
it highly inadvisable for the Commission to be making purchases to a considerable extent from Chambers and Co. Pty.
Ltd., of Sydney (p. 344).
On the return of Mr. Pope to Melbourne the Auditor was requested by Mr. Pope to make inquiries, and, as a
result, he reported that paint had arrived by the Nauru Chief consigned to Chambers and Co. Pty. Ltd., but he was
unable to ascertain whether freight had been paid (p. 344). The Australian Commissioner then asked for a report
of the Chief Representative (p. 346), and he, in turn, asked the Assistant Representative for a report (p. 345).
Reports.
Chief Representative.
To Australian Commissioner,
sth September, 1923,
(Ex. 111, p. 347.)
The paint was not landed as intended, but some of it
was used en route, and balance left on board by arrange-
ment with the Chief Officer, for use on the ship. Consent
was given to retention, conditional on the Commission’s
receiving an advantage in price equivalent to not less than
the freight which would otherwise have been collected.
Assistant Representative.
To Chief Representative,
4th September, 1923.
(Ex. 110, p. 346.)
When in England he was asked if he could recommend
a good Australian firm to represent “ Hoyle’s Paint for
Steamers.” He recommended his two brothers, trading
as “ Chambers and Co. Pty. Ltd,,” Sydney. It was
suggested to send out about 10 tons of paint, and freight
arrangements were being booked by a Commonwealth
liner, when the agent of the Nauru Chief suggested that
the paint should go by that vessel, as she would not be
down to her marks on leaving the Tyne, Agreed to
this on the understanding that the rate of freight would
be arranged in Melbourne.
On the 21st September, 1923, the Australian Commissioner cabled the other Commissioners, stating that Mr.
W. Chambers, when in England, had purchased certain paint consigned to Chambers and Co, Pty. Ltd., Sydney, and
setting out the information contained in the report of the Chief Representative. The views of the Commissioners in
the action of Mr, Chambers in arranging this consignment without authority were requested (Ex. 13, p. 109).
Reports.
Chief Representative.
To Australian Commissioner,
4th October, 1923.
(Ex. 112, p. 351.)
The first knowledge he had of the matter was after the
Vessel reached Melbourne, and the paint was being used.
He believed that no irregularity was intended by the
Assistant Representative, and would do everything pos-
sible to guard against any transaction open to criticism
being allowed in the future.
The report of the Assistant Representative was also
Assistant Representative.
To Chief Representative,
Ist October, 1923.
(Ex. 113, p. 355.)
In allowing the shipment he thought that to do so was
to benefit the ship, but realized that it would have been
better to have obtained approval before he allowed it.
He would endeavour in the future to see that-everything
in regard to the ship would be transacted on regular
and formal lines.
forwarded.
The reports of the Chief Representative and the Assistant Representative were forwarded by the Australian
Commissioner to the other Commissioners on sth October, 1923 (Ex. 16, p, 110) for an expression of views.
Views of Commissioners,
United Kingdom.
22nd November, 1923.
(Ex. 17, p. 110.)
Considered existence Bill of Lading disproved intention
concealing. Although advanced freight arrangements
omitted, the matter was promptly reported by Mr.
Chambers on arrival in Melbourne. Case nothing more
than inadvertence. Chief Representative to direct
Chambers to avoid recurrence, and close matter.
New Zealand.
u>
26th October, 1923.
(Ex. 22, p. 115.)
The most serious view he could take of the transaction
was that Mr. Chambers may have committed an error
'of judgment subsequently in thinking that the vessel
could be supplied with paint in any way but the usual
manner in which the Commission obtains supplies, and
particularly in that the business was done with his
brothers’ firm. His confidence in Mr. Chambers’s
integrity had not been disturbed, and he had no doubt
that Mr. Chambers would be more careful in such
matters in the future.
Reference of Correspondence to Customs Department.
On 13th October, 1923, the Australian Commissioner, without reference to the Commissioners for the United
Kingdom and New Zealand, forwarded papers to the Prime Minister’s Department for advice as to whether Mr. Chambers
had committed any breach of his duty which would warrant his appointment being terminated (p. 117). The matter
was referred to the Attorney-General’s Department, and advice was received that on facts disclosed the papers contained
nothing justifying the conclusion that Mr. Chambers had broken the undertaking contained in Clause 2 of the Agreement.
(Clause 2 reads —“ The said William Chambers agrees to carry out to the best of his ability all instructions he may
receive from the Commissioners or their Chief Representative for the time being to devote the whole of his time to the
interests of the Commissioners ; and not to trade for himself or to engage in any other business than that of the
Commissioners,’’) The matter was oue doy the Commissioner -to decide whether Mr. Chambers, had been guilty of
conduct which rendered him unfit to act ‘as their representative. Suggested mhttet be referred to the Trade and


Appendix No. s— continued.
Customs Department for consideration of the question as to whether any offence under the Customs Act had been
committed (p. 117). The Australian Commissioner was advised of this opinion, and, on 7th December, 1923, without
reference to his brother Commissioners, requested the Prime Minister’s Department to forward the papers to the Trade
and Customs Department (p. 116).
On 22nd November, 1923, the Australian Commissioner cabled the other Commissioners, advising that the matter
had been submitted to the Customs Department as to whether an offence under the Customs Act had been committed
(Ex. 18, p. 111).
Comments of Commissioners.
United Kingdom.
22nd December, 1923.
(Ex. 19, p. 111.)
Objected to action without being consulted.
(Ex. 25, p. 129.)
Matter should have been dealt with by Board, through
its Chief Representative.
New Zealand.
22nd December, 1923.
(Ex. 19, p. 111.)
Protested against action without being consulted.
31st December, 1923.
(Ex. 24, p. 123.)
Of opinion Australian Commissioner should have
advised that he feared a breach had been committed ;
matter could then have been submitted for expert legal
opinion, and, if breach committed, it should have been
placed before the Department.
The Australian Commissioner, on 22nd December, 1923, and 27th December, 1923, cabled the New Zealand
Commissioner (Ex. 19a, p. Ill) and United Kingdom Commissioner (Ex. 20, p. 112) respectively, that the matter
should be brought under the notice of the respective Governments.
On 16th January, 1924, the Australian Commissioner informed the United Kingdom Commissioner that it was
not considered any offence against the Customs Act had been committed —the Customs Department decided to take
no action —Chambers informed he was exonerated (Ex. 21a, p. 112).
Mr. Pope, in a memorandum to the Prime Minister’s Department, dated sth August, 1924, stated that it had
been reported to him that an irregularity had occurred at the time the paint was transferred from stock for repair work
while the vessel was in dock in Melbourne, and, as it appeared likely that the Customs had been defrauded, he requested
that the matter be referred to the Customs Department for immediate investigation (p. 138).
Customs Prosecution.
—(P. 148.)
For Charges see Table.
The Stipendiary Magistrate dismissed all the informations, being of opinion that the evidence given failed to
support, and, in fact, disproved, the averments of the informant.
An appeal was made to the High Court of Australia, and, it is stated, inter alia, “ The question for us is whether
his determination was erroneous in law ” (p. 148). The charges against Mr. W. Chambers (the Assistant Representative)
were not pressed by the Crown, and the case was dealt with as if the charges were against Chambers apd Co. Pty. Ltd.
and L. Chambers alone.
Stipendiary Magistrate.
L. Chambers and W. Chambers were charged with —
(1) Failing to enter the goods (sec. 68);
(2) Evading payment of duty (sec. 234);
(3) interfering with goods wliich were subject to the
control of Customs (sec. 33).
The Judgment of Chief Justice, High Court.
(1) Of opinion that obligation to make entry arose at
time ship arrived at Port Kembla ;
(2) Magistrate correct in dismissing information ;
(3) Decision of Magistrate correct.
Determination i or High Court, Bth June, 192 G.
Re Section 68.
Remit case to Water Police Court to be dealt with. Determination of Stipendiary Magistrate was erroneous
in point of law, as respondent ought to have been convicted of being directly concerned in the offences committed by
the company against that section, but not of having committed such offence with intent to defraud the revenue.
The matter thus came before the Police Court again.
Fines imposed of 10s. in each case, with Is. 6d. Court costs.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by H. J. Green, Government
Printer for the State of Victoria.




