

lummg t \t JfbJto
A. J. CAMPBELL,
GEELONG.
READ BEFORE THE
HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY OF VICTORIA,
On WEDNESDAY, Ist OCTOBER, 1873.
1


AMONG THE FLOWERS.
Mr Chairman,
Ladies, and Gentlemen —
SS I am a stranger to most of those whom I have
now the honor to address, I shall ask leave to
introduce myself with a little bit of horticultural
autobiography.
Next to my father, the man of whom I have the
distinctest recollection in the days of childhood, is the
gardener. He had been a soldier, whom the battle of
Waterloo had sent home, with many others, to beat his
sword into a spade. He wore a queue, which it was
our delight (there were four of us) to pull,—and a red
plush waistcoat, with mother-of-pearl buttons, by which
buttons he used to measure our growth each time we
came home from school. From this old man we begged
a piece of ground for a garden. He gave us a piece,
but it was badly chosen. My father’s garden was one
of his own making; so it had neither the antiquity of the
old Dutch style, nor the novelty of the modern geome-


trical style. It was laid out on that system of garden-
ing with which the Empress of Russia declared herself
to be “ wildly in love,” a hundred years ago, ‘‘with
waving lines and gentle declivities ” A winding
stream, descending from the Torwood, divided it into
two parts, —the orchard and the shrubberies on the one
side, the vegetable garden on the other. At the far end
of the vegetable side we got our allotment. It was
large enough, but had two serious drawbacks; it was
under the shadow of a high wall on the north side and
of three huge firs on the south ; while the soil was
composed of tough red clay. There, with considerable
juvenile labour we grew some daffodils, polyanthuses, and
Nancy Pretty (as we called it); and planted a few
roses, which flowered once or twice, and then declined
to bear any more roses unless we gave them a freer soil
and a brighter out-look to the sun and the sky. It was
a great mistake to give us such an intractable piece of
ground. Children should get a choice bit \ —not too
conspicuous, for their style of gardening may not
harmonise with the general amenity ; but in the sun-
light,—clean, soft soil, where seeds will quickly germi-
nate, and cuttings freely strike.
By-and-bye the old soldier went away. He accepted
the care of a lock on the Forth and Clyde Canal—easy
work, but idle work —which gave him time to cultivate
friendship with the workman’s deadliest enemy —the
Bottle. Our partnership was then dissolved, and I set
up for myself. On a picturesque nook, girdled by the
bright stream, I established my garden, —and, in the
centre of a bed of Rhododendrons, reared one of your
Australian Altingias. It was not raised from seed, but
from a stone quarry. It was a fossil tree which grew
in a much older Torwood than that which is now, or
which was, 500 years ago, when Sir William Wallace
found safe cover in its dark recesses. Y ou are probably
aware that Craigleith Quarry, out of which Edinburgh is
built, contains various specimens of Australian plants—
especially of the Fern trees. How did they get there 1
Did the Australian woods march upon Scotland as
Birnam Wood marched upon Dimsinaue ? Of course,


there is another theory—that Scotland once en-
joyed a climate as genial as this. However, I did
not puzzle myself with these questions, but having
got delighted possession of the tree, and squared its
broken joints with hammer and chisel, I raised it to
its old uprightness—for which, I have no doubt, it
was duly thankful, *
Since that garden of the nook I have tried to make
other three.
The first was on the banks of the Tweed, in the out-
skirts of “Fair Melrose.” Near me flourished the author
of that charming book “ The Manse Garden.” To that
book, and an old gentleman beside me, I was indebted
for any success I had in that work. This old gentleman
had left the neighbourhood when he was a lad—had
left it in a huff, with half-a-crown in his pocket; had
got into Kew Gardens, and became an accomplished
horticulturist; then got into Mr Coke’s service (Lord
Leicester), and had helped him to build up a fortune
by teaching him the turnip husbandry, which he had
learned on his father’s farm ; and had come back to his
old country-side, with much honour and a heavy purse,
to help his neighbours, and especially to help me in my
first genuine attempt at garden-making.
The second and third are still in progress. One at
St George’s Manse, Geelong ; the other on the banks of
Lake Connewarre, where I have got a choice selection
of your scions growing. When they come to fruit I
* Children are all naturally mechanics, and should be
encouraged to develop these wholesome tastes. Besides our
horticultural work, the associated gardeners did a good deal of
mason-work as well. Our first achievement was the erection
of a gravestone over a deceased cat. Then w r e constructed a
dam across the Torburn, with the view of making a bathing
place, which the Burn resented, and swept the dam away,—
unfortunately just before it had passed the Inspector of Works.
On an overhanging rock opposite the drawing-room window,
we built a castle—Castle Campbell—from which we used to
sally forth to fight the English—and always heat them. My
last work was the building of a pier at Lochnaw, in which I
was assisted by Sir A. A.'s two daughters—who “ served the
mason.” That was education in the good times that have
#oue away.


trust that the members of this society will give me the
pleasure of coming to eat it. This privilege ought to
belong to membership. Where your scions go, you
should have a right to go. The freedom of your city
may be a fine thing—l would prefer the freedom of
your gardens.
It has always seemed to me that in a work of so
beneficial a character as that in which you are engaged,
some at least of our ministers ought to take a part. So
long as my loved friend Mr Mackie was among you
I did not feel myself under any duty in the matter, but
on his death I applied for admission into your ranks,
with the desire of lending what aid I could, to make
this society a means of good to the people of the land.
I believe that there is no Lever by which this world
can be lifted out of its moral debasement but the Cross
of Christ. And in these days when men seem dis-
posed to look out for a new Christ to lead them into
warmer zones and higher scientific light, I feel that we
must very jealously guard from dishonour that Name,
which is above every name, and in which stands the
world’s only hope.
At the same time, placed as we are in God’s World,
at the centre of a most wonderful and beautiful
Mechanism, which every day exposes to us Sights of
new loveliness, and new objects of usefulness, it would
be an insult to the Great Creator to imagine that He
does not wish us to find healthful instruction and delight
in these works of His. If there was a mere show of
glory on them, like the golden braiding of the clouds at
sunset, we might think that we had exhausted our
duty when we had admired them. But when we ob-
serve how carefully, and with what nice adjustments
they have been contrived, —how stable they are, how
gently, how silently, yet how irresistibly they are all
working to the one end of bringing us good and pleasant
gifts; and especially when we discover that in all these
operations and processes of nature God himself is at
work, —making the seed grow, and blessing the spring-
ing of it ) clothing the grass with its livery of green, and


dressing the summer flowers in their coats of many
colours, we must feel that if God is working in all these
ways for us, we ought to take a deep interest in them.
We ought to become fellow workers with Him, counting
nothing beneath our care that engages His. “Can a man
be safe,” Dean Alford asks, “who goes through the world
without making any further use of it than that which
his bodily wants demand?” We need not worship
Nature while we praise her beauty and accept her
blessings. We know that she is nothing more than “a
shell cast up from the ocean of Christ’s infinite love,
in which the childlike listener may hear faintly and far
off its everlasting melodies.” Nevertheless, let us put
this shell to our ear. He that hath an ear to hear let
him hear.
Nowhere does Nature own its relationship to God
more articulately than in the Garden. It is impossible
to ignore His presence there. Every work there is so
obviously a joint work, that even when you have done
your best, have planted and watered, you are forced to
allow that it is only God that can give the increase.
The Workers in wood, iron and stone, are much more
the creators of their work than the gardener. The con-
ception as well as the execution of a Picture in high art
belongs to the painter and he claims the praise of both.
But he, who carries off the highest laurels at your exhi-
bitions, knows that it was not he who gave to his prize
fruits their delicious flavour, or to his flowers their
splendid bloom.
Of course, a man may escape from all this—in pride,
if he is a philosopher —in stupidity, if he is a fool. He
may try to persuade himself that the laws of nature are
something distinct from, and superior to their Maker.
But I do not think this dismal Atheism finds much
favour among the busy workers in the garden. The
atmosphere is too pure, and the life and growth of plants
are too incessant and too luxuriant to admit of any explan-
ation of their living and growing but the simplest of all,
that they have their being in God ; and they who love
their gardens never fail to understand the words with
which their flowers greet them—


How dearly God must love you,
And this poor world of yours,
To spread blue skies above you,
And deck the earth with flowers,
That is the language of flowers. And if the busy men
of Melbourne would not only look at them and say
“How beautiful you are,” but would “consider”
them, and say “ How peacefully you grow,—with no
push, with no noise, but much inward contentment,
yielding your flowers and perfumes—not for yourselves
but for my enjoyment,” they might begin to think that
these plants are living truer lives than they, perhaps,
are living, and fulfilling the ends of their existence better
than they are doing, who are expending the strength
and substance of their soul in gathering up wealth, and
working themselves up to some coveted position in
society.
We want simple pleasures here. Especially we want
them for the young—pleasures of a pure and elevating
kind, that will carry the mind away from the debasing
engrossment of self, and enrich it with the knowledge
and enjoyment of the beautiful things of God. On the
corner of one of your streets I read this announcement
“ Academy for finishing young ladies.” I would not
finish young ladies at the corner of a street. I would
finish them in the garden, with an occasional turn in
the kitchen. Our country girls come up to your schools
in Melbourne, and there can be no question about their
beingfinished when they come back— finished for country
life. Just think what a blessed change would come
over the aspect and manner, and whole adorning of our
young maidens if they would sit down for five minutes
every day and behold the lillies —How they grow, —so
simply, so modestly—in the hollow of God’s hand, with
no attempt to hide their natural grace under an im-
posed and hideous deformity ; and if they would lay to
heart the astonishing yet delightful assurance, that in
their Maker’s eye, that lily, growing in the sun and
bathing in the dew, is arrayed in a splendour which
Solomon in all his glory could not reach.
Then, to our working-men what a boundless source of
gentle yet manly pleasure their gardens would afford, if


they really made it their business to keep them and to
dress them. A man may have rough work through the
day, and ungenial companionships, but when he comes
among his flowers they will give him no bad words,
they Avill raise no envious, and no unholy thoughts in
him ; and when he finds that his cherished roses have
carried the palm from his rich neighbour, and that he
can beat the Chief-Secretary (we shall say) in the pro-
duction of peaches and pears, he feels that though his
toils are less than that high Functionary’s, his rewards
are sweeter to the taste. And then what a counter
attraction to the public-house his garden is. Where-
ever you see the embellishment of a tidy garden—plants
neatly staked—and flowerbeds tastefully trimmed, you
say “He is a sober man who lives there.” These
tastes —a taste for drink and a taste for flowers—are
contradictories of the highest order. I have only known
one publican, in all my life, who was a florist; and, I
believe that his passion for flowers has saved that man
from the self-destruction to which, alas 1 the majority
of publicans are doomed.
These general remarks may indicate in what varied
ways the culture of the garden may become a hand-
maid to morality. I shall confirm them by a few
illustrations.
I may say, however, that I do not claim for the
flowers of Australia those extensive powers of moral
discipline which Charles Warner attributes to those of
New York. In his brochure, “My Summer in a Garden” —
a bright, merry little book, spiced, however, and spoiled
by some touches of profanity—he says “ The principal
value of a garden is not understood. It is not to give
the possessor vegetables and fruit (that can be better or
cheaper done by the market gardener) but to teach him
patience and philosophy, and the higher virtues—hopes
deferred, and expectations blighted. The garden thus
becomes a moral agent and a test of character. I mem
to have a. moral (jarden, if not a productive one ; —one
that shall teach—o my brothers —0 my sisters —the
great lessons of life.” One of these great lessons of life,
he says, is the necessity of early rising. “If you wish to


save your tomato plants from insects, you must sprinkle
soot upon their leaves. But to do this effectually, you
must get up very early, before the dew is off the leaves ” —a
fact which draws from him the query—in which all
lazy, lie-a-bed people will join—“ Why don’t the dew
stay on the leaves till after breakfast 1 ”
One practical hint he drops, which may have truth,
as well as humour, in it. He had set up a scarecrow
among some peas; this attracted the birds, who saved
him all further trouble in gathering the peas. Elsewhere
he had another sowing, but he gave them no intimation of
it; he left the old scarecrow among the old pea-stalks. “ 1
am convinced that this is the true use of a scarecrow.
It is a lure, and not a warning. And so if you want
to withdraw men from some particular vice, set up
a cry and warning against another, and they will transfer
their affections to it,”
Very good, Mr Warner. But we are aiming at some-
thing better than getting men out of one vice into
another. We want to lift them out of base pleasures,
into wholesome air and the pleasantness of nature; —
which will teach them many a lesson of the need of
patience and industry, and conscientious performance
of duty, in digging, weeding, and watering, but which
will leave no diligent learner and faithful worker in her
school without a bountiful reward.
And now for my facts :
1. Those who are acquainted with Mr Reynolds Hole’s
delightful book about Roses will not wonder that I
should quote from so great an authority. His book is
dedicated to his wife, without whom, he thinks, a
garden would want its fairest flower.
There’s a Hose looking in at the window,
In every condition of life ;
In days of content and enjoyment,
In hours with bitterness rife.
Where’er there’s the smile of a woman,
As bright as a beam from above,
’Tis the rose looking in at the window,
And filling the dwelling with love.
P. M. James.
Twelve years ago, Mr Hole tells us, he received a note


from a Nottingham mechanic, in the end of March,
asking him to act as judge at an exhibition of roses, to
be given by working men, on Easter Monday. Very
sceptical as to whether he had not been hoaxed, he
went through a storm of sleet to Cathcart Inn on the
appointed day, and when he reached the long room up-
stairs, lie got a surprise of beauty of a most interesting
description. The old table—usually of a repulsive and
beery aspect—was covered from head to foot with a
brilliant show of cut roses. They stood in the necks
of bottles —made teetotal for the occasion and filled
with water. After the prizes had been awarded he
went to inspect some of the gardens. They are small
allotments on the sunny slopes just outside the town —
three to a rood—separated by boards and hedges. Even
on these narrow hand-breadths of soil the owners had
managed to grow a succession of flowers. But the
roses had been raised under glass; and these green-
houses, many of them constructed by the men them-
selves, were such as a giant might carry in his hand. It
was hard to believe that such magnificent roseshad come
(like some fair maiden out of a lowly cottage) from such
meagre accommodation ; but there were the beautiful
plants—with the broken stalks—which had been robbed
that morning of their choicest specimens. And how was
this work done ? From a true love of the rose. “ It’s
more n’or a mile from my home to my garden,” said
one of them, “ but I’ve been here for weeks in the
winter months, every morning before I went to my
work, and every evening when I come from it, —and
not seldom at noon as well, —here and back and my
dinner to get between twelve and one o’clock.” “ How
do yoii afford,” he asked another, “to buy these new
and expensive varieties ? “I’ll tell you how I afford it,”
he said, “By keeping away from, the Beershops.”
A lady near Nottingham told him this story. She
had been visiting one of the mechanics during the
coldest part of a severe winter, and observing that the
bed was very scantily clothed, she asked the woman
if she had no more blankets'? “ Yes, we’ve another;
but”—“But what?” “It’s not at home.” “Not


gone to the pawn, surely 1 ?” “Oh, dear no, ma’am;
Tom has only just took it; just took it, ma’am.”
“ Took it where 1 ” “ Please ma’am, he took it to keep
the frost out of the greenhouse; and, please ma’am, we
don’t want it; we’re warm enough.”
In 18G7, Nottingham seemed still to be pursuing
its cherished pleasure. “No town in says
the local paper, of March 8, “ displays the gardening
spirit more manifestly than old Nottingham. There
are 10,000 garden allotments near the town, many of
which are sub-divided, so that it is not too much to
affirm that from 20,000 to 30,000 of the inhabitants,
or nearly one-half, take an active interest in the garden.
And where will you see such roses as are produced by
these amateurs, —such cabbage and lettuce, rhubarb
and celery 1. ”
In 1870, Mr Hole revisited Nottingham, on the occa-
sion of the Summer Exhibition of the St. Ann’s Amateur
Floral and Horticultural Society. The exhibits were
all of the highest character. The winners being shoe-
makers, twist-hands, tailors, mechanics, &c. The Presi-
dent spoke to him of their .devotion to their gardens
and their glass. How they carried their bags of coal
through the deep snow, and robbed themselves of their
rest for their roses. •
I must give Mr Hole’s conclusion in his own words,
“ I have always believed that the happiness of mankind
might be increased by encouraging the love of a garden;
that love of the beautiful which is innate in us all. Get
a man out of the dramshop into the fresh, pure air ;
interest him in the marvellous works of his God, instead
of in the deformities of vice ; give him an occupation
which will add to his health, and the comforts of his
family, instead of destroying both, then build up re-
vealed religion,” “and hope to sec that man a Christian.”
A sentiment which the Saturday Reviewer of his book
endorses. “From this love of flowers,” he says “may
be learned the road —difficult to find in these days—to
the inner heart of the lower classes, the key to tastes
dearer than beer-swilling,—the secret which, if rightly
applied by those who bear spiritual rule over the work-


.mg man, may do much directly to civilise, and indi-
rectly to Christianise him.”
2. Besides these elevating influences, horticulture
ought to be encouraged among the working classes on
economic grounds. There is no better food for children
than well ripened fruit, and no better preventive, or
even curative, of a tendency to pulmonary complaints,
than a plentiful consumption of grapes. So fully has
this been established that in the South of France in-
stitutions have been organised for the grape cure. It
is surely a remarkable fact—indicating very clearly the
Creator’s purpose—that there were no fruitbearing trees
in the antemundane ages. Their appearance was contem-
poraneous with the appearance of man upon the earth,
and in the first stage of his existence, they constituted
his only food. I was very much struck, a few years
ago, with the strong health and well-to-do appearance
of the Yaudois peasantry, who live very much on the
produce of their ground. Their farms, in many cases,
do not exceed four or five acres, yet they raise on
them—First, a little Rye, which is baked once a year
into bread; the loaves are laid up among the rafters of
the cottage, to be dealt with by a hatchet, and plotted
in hot waiter when wanted for use. Secondly, the Vine,
which forms a glorious awniyg over the cottage, yield-
ing fruit and the Yin ordinaire. Thirdly, the Mulberry,
which is planted round the little holding, and closely
pollarded; whose leaves the wife and children strip off
during the six weeks that precede the silkworms’ spin-
ning their silken shrouds, for which they get, per-
haps, £3 a-year. Fourth, the Olive; two or three on
one estate, which, if fifty years old, are worth £2 each
per annum ; a very old tree being worth a great deal
more.—l have heard of a man dividing his only tree
among his children when he died. And, Fifth—the
sweet chesnut, which grows on the free hillside, and
yields a very nutritious fruit. If you add to these the
cow, the pig and poultry, with garden vegetables, you
will see how bountifully God has provided of His
goodness for these pom-people. It is true that to some
of them the work of subduing their bit of God’s earth


has been no easy achievement. Their lines had fallen
on rocky places, and so they had set themselves to
pound the tufaceous stone into soil, and placed it be-
hind terraced walls to prevent the winter torrent sweep-
ing it away. When the people here come to be rooted in
the land as firmly as the Vaudois are in their much loved
mountain homes, we may hope to see a similar develop-
ment of the skilful and profitable culture of the ground.
3 That is a utilitarian view of the subject. Here
is another of a different yet of a very interesting kind.
In her notes on nursing, Florence Nightingale says,
“ It is inconceivable the degree to which the sick suffer,
from seeing the same walls, the same ceiling, the same
surroundings, during a long confinement to the sick
bed. The effect in sickness of a variety of beautiful
objects, and especially of brilliancy of colours, is hardly
at all appreciated. I shall never forget the rapture of
a fever patient over a bunch of bright coloured flowers.
I remember a nosegay of wild flowers being sent to me,
and from that moment recovery became more rapid.
The effect is not only on the mind, it is on the body
too.” And again, “it is cruel to let a patient stare at a
dead wall. In many diseases, especially in convales-
cence from fever, that wall will appear to make all sorts
of faces at him, —now flowers never do this; their form,
and their colours,, will free the patient from painful ideas
better than any argument Yet there must be some
discrimination. No one who has watched the sick can
doubt the fact that some feel stimulus from looking at
scarlet flowers, —exhaustion from looking at blue.”
These hints, 1 am glad to find, have received prac-
tical recognition in your Melbourne Hospital. One
lady visitor (I know) used to carry with her on her
weekly visit 80 or 100 bouquets for the patients of her
ward. Besides the exhilaration which these bright
flowers might bring, I am sure that her thoughtful
kindness would win the regard of the poor sufferers,
and make her words about “ The things which are
above ” more, welcome. * The gardens of her friends,
as well as her own, were put under requi-


sition for Hospital Flower-day,*
Mrs. Shepherd tells us how, on one of her visits to
the Hospital for Incurables, near London, one of the
inmates —an old cripple—grasped a bunch of flowers
which she had in her hand, and kissed them, and wept
over them. And what were those flowers do you think 1
Carnations, roses, dahlias? No! —these would have
raised no such tide of emotion in that poor woman’s
breast. There was a dandelion, and a buttercup, and a
piece of ground ivy picked from under a hedgerow.
They were old friends, whom it was a joy to see again ;
—a joy of God’s providing—for they were from his
garden. As a little aboriginal girl, who was a scholar
in my Sunday School, used to tell her kind protector —
“ The flowers in the garden are your flowers, sir; but
the flowers in the field are God’s—and I love them the
best.”
During the Cotton Famine, which brought the
working people of Manchester into the very jaws of
death, a lady, visiting among their stricken homes,
found in one of them a dying woman, lying on a pallet
of straw. Every article of furniture had gone in
exchange for food. There was only one thing the poor
woman couldn’t part with—a favourite plant, which
* Considerable donations of flowers are sent to the Hospital,
in a miscellaneous way—for any body (I suppose) that has the
good luck to get hold of them. The lady visitors should be asked
to distribute them. And some kind friend should make a
present of flower-glasses to the wards. Flowers do not look
well in mugs or broken teapots—any more than children look
well in rags. A beautiful rose, standing in a glass of clear
water, would feast a poor patient’s weary eyes beyond anything
else that I know. Miss Nightingale’s remarks about the influence
of colours should also be studied. There is no doubt about dark
blue being dismal; hence —“the blues.” But have the perfumes
of flowers not a more potential influence ? They are Nature’s
essences, elaborated by a subtle process of chemistry and elec-
tricity—surely with some high human purpose. It would be
in the line of homoeopathy to investigate this matter. Her
globules are an excellent change upon blue-pill—(darkest of
the blues). Her next triumph will be among the still more
invisible, but very powerful odours of flowers. For aches of
the head, and humours of the heart, the best physic may yet
be found to be a well-compounded Nosegay.


stood on the window sill. “ While I watch its beauti-
ful flowers,” she said, “I feel sure that the God who
made it cares for me;” a simple argument, yet a divine
one—as Mungo Park felt, when, fainting in the desert,
his eye fell on a green moss plant—“ Does the great God
watch over that plant in this lonely place, and can I
be forgotten before him 1 ? ” _
“Even the prisoner,” says Charles Dickens, “is found
gardening in his lonely cell, after years and years of
solitary confinement.” And some of you, I daresay,
recollect the story which you read when you were
children, of the French prisoner, who was sinking under
the pressure of his dreadful solitude, but came to life
again when a little plant thrust up its tender plume
from a chink in the stone floor. He found wonderful
solace in the companionship of that flower, which
seemed to have come there in pity to his loneliness, and
to be doing its best to grow beside him, away from the
sunlight and fellowship of flowers —as a loving child
might quit the bright world outside and carry the joy
of its presence to its father’s cell.
There are other forlorn persons on whom flowers shed
a peaceful happiness. “In one of our most beautiful
midland gardens there is a circular space hedged in and
filled exclusively with sweet-scented plants—the eglan-
tine, honeysuckle, sweet pea, &c. It is called ‘ the
sweet garden.’ The idea has been gracefully imagined
and happily realized ; but it suggests sorrowful sympa-
thies, for the owner of that garden is blind.” — S. R. Hole.
And all who have read Charlotte Elizabeth’s delight-
ful chapters on flowers know what elevating pleasure
she found in communing with the living things of her
garden, when her deafness had shut her out from all
hearing of human speech.
I might multiply these illustrations indefinitely ; I
shall give you just one more. I have known many
cases in which (as in the case of the poor cripple) the
Jtoivers of childhood have been so interwoven with the
days of childhood that the sight of the one has brought
back the sweet memory of the other. In one of the
poorest garrets of London I could have shown you


some time ago an aged woman tending a plant in her
window as carefully as if it had been a beloved child.
Long ago she had drifted from a happy home to a very
loathsome one ; and all that was good and womanly had
fallen away from her. She was visited by one of those
best sisters of mercy—a Bible-woman—but she could
get no access to her heart. She knocked at it, but
there was no answer; all was dark and dead in there.
One day the thought;came to her (from Him from whom
all good thoughts proceed) to take her a flower. It
was a primrose, I think, in its first bright bloom of
spring. The woman looked at it for a moment, and
then burst into tears. The years of her childhood came
rushing back upon her as she smelled the old sweet
smell —the days when her life was sweet too. How
unchanged the plant! How changed the woman ! The
door of her heart opened then.
God moves in a mysterious way,
His wonders to perform.
But his footsteps are not always planted in the sea ; he
does not always ride upon the storm.
Happy are they who have happy homes to look back
upon ! and the fragrant piety of parents, and the un-
forgotten love of brothers and sisters. O, the spell of
the “ Father’s House ! ” How many a prodigal is drawn
back by the subduing tenderness of the recollection.
Parents —strive to make your homes bright and
happy; not with the fulness of bread so much as with
the fulness of love—the love of God and of one another;
and not with the hollow pleasures and demoralizing ex-
citements of the gay world, but with the pure and
homely joys which spring up in the bosom of the family,
and the wholesome and exhilarating pleasures which
flourish on the bosom of the garden.
If these remarks had not run to so great a length, I
would have spoken to you now on the duty which is
lying on all large land-owners to plant extensively. I
hold this to be an incumbent and very important duty.
If I were a proprietor here, and were wishing to sur-
round myself with some material guarantees for the
permanency of my tenure, I would plant ten thousand
16


trees per annum. That is one of the ways I would
take to root myself in the soil of Victoria. * I must
leave that subject alone, however, for the present, as I
wish to press upon the members of the society the im-
portance of their work, and to submit a proposal in
regard to its extension.
“We live, gentlemen, in a wealth-making age. More
wealth has been accumulated in Britain during these
sixty years than in all the preceding ages from the
time of Julius Caesar.” So Mr Gladstone said the
other day at Liverpool. And I daresay you have not
forgotten the Avords spoken in your own city by Sir
George Yerdon, “Men are making fortunes by the
million,” he said, (referring to England) “and are
building stately mansions ; but they are embellishing
the sides of a volcano ; for while the rich are growing
richer, the poor are growing poorer, and more dis-
contented ; ” and I am sorry to have to add, more
drunken. But now, if a storm of anarchy were sweep-
ing over England —which may God forbid —1 think
* One of them—but by no means the most important. In
the first place, I would live here. I would enforce upon myself
the condition of residence. 2ndly—l would cultivate the good-
will of my neighbours, and especially of those who were in my
employment; remembering that although the servant is not to
aim at being greater than his master, the master is to aim at
making him as good and happy as himself. 3rdly—l would
encourage (as I am glad to know some are encouraging) the
workmen to provide for their own sick, and widows and
orphans—adding pound to pound raised by themselves. 4thly
—Knowing that one of the greatest earthly needs of a com-
munity is to be righteously governed, I would, if called to it,
take my share of the duties of the Magistracy and the Legisla-
ture, and would strive, with God’s help, to make it plain that
neither personal nor class interests governed my judicial or
political action, but the love of justice and the fear of God.
And finally— Inasmuch as He who made all things is the
true owxek of them, —(“ The gold and the silver are Mine and
the cattle upon a thousand hills.”) —and inasmuch as I am the
occupier merely, I would set aside a certain portion of my income
(say a tenth), as His Lordship, and employ it in Christian and
charitable works.—lf any one says that it is easy to be good
upon a hypothesis—easy to say what one would do if he had the
chance, —I am just saying what I, if I was a wealthy Laud
Owner ought to do.


that one of the safest places to fly to would be old
Nottingham. I am sure that the rose-growers there
would not like to have their gardens and their glass
shivered by the tempest and the hail. I would like to
see the criminal statistics of that city; lam persuaded
that they would convince our Legislature that the
subsidy which it gives you is a legitimate expenditure
of public money, bearing in it a moral and educational
value; which cannot be shown, perhaps, in the revenue
returns, but may be proved by this fact, which I state
—at hazard, I confess, yet with considerable confidence,
that you hardly ever see —I do not recollect ever see-
ing—a gardener in the dock, or a lover of flowers
charged with beating his wife. "
But this society should make itself more widely known.
It should set itself to diffuse its benefits over the colony,
and the suggestion which I beg respectfully to submit
is, that some direct effort should be made to get affiliated
societies established in all the towns and townships of
Victoria, Your rules contemplate such kindred institu-
tions ; but it seems to me that that the terms of union
are too high. Suppose that among the cottagers of
Kensington and Connewarre we could form a society,
I do not think that we could ask more than 2s fid from
them as an annual contribution ; for we would have to
collect as much more at least for prizes. Thirty members
would thus give £3 Ids; but you ask £5 ss. If the
* When I wrote this, I knew nothing of the modern history
of Nottingham. lam told, however, that it gained a had name
at the beginning of this century for the frequency and violence
of its riots. An organized resistance to stocking and lace
machinery was carried on for many years, with sucn successful
daring, that Parliament was forced to enact the penalty of
death against all machine breakers. And in 1831, when the
Reform Bill was rejected by the House of Lords, the Notting-
ham Reformers took the usual wise way of resenting the wrong
by destroying £50,000 worth of their own property. But that was
forty years ago. I would like exceedingly to know what their
temper is now. Has it been mollified by their garden works ?
Has the turbulence of their spirit been quelled by the sweet
gentleness of their flowers ? Mr. R, Hole’s arguments and
mine would be sadly shaken if they are not. Can any Notting-
hamshire man tell me ?


rule were altered so as to regulate the payment by the
number of members, <£3 3s being the minimum, and £< r ) 5s
or £6 Gs the maximum, I think that societies might be
successfully started at various points. But the first
question they would ask would be “ What benefit they
would derive from connection with the parent society t
The Melbourne competitions would be open to them, I
suppose ; but they would compete at a disadvantage.
Would your committee return them a certain propor-
tion of their payments in the shape of prizes ? Or
would it be within the scope of your operations to
raise certain choice plants for distribution as prizes (
There are many amateur florists who would prefer a
beautiful plant to a medal or a cup. Indeed, 1 am not
sure whether some of them would not think themselves
well rewarded with a case of your splendid apples.
They would be allowed, I suppose, to make their own
bye-laws ; for example, they would be allowed to make
it a rule that no prize-taker of this year should take
the prize in the following year or two, for the
same plant. Let him take the highest honour, but let
another take the prize. This would not deteriorate the
plants, while it would give courage to a much larger
number of persons to enter the circle of competition,
and would send the Prize-men cf this year to try their
skill on some other species of plant for next year.
Thanking you for your attention to these remarks, I
conclude by repeating my conviction that your work is
a work of true well-doing—and by expressing my hope
that you will not grow weary in it.


34Fp
BieUo
THE press
SERVICE BOOK FOR THE BUSH
BEING
PRAYERS FOR SOCIAL AND PUBLIC
WORSHIP,
Ministers of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria
EDITED 13Y A. J. CAMPBELL,
Of St. George's Church, Geelong.
gar t|.c |leto |)£lraks.
FREDERICK A. CAMPBELL,
GEELONG ]
With an Account of the Early History of the New
Hebrides Mission, by A. J, Campbell;
A Narrative of the Voyages of the “ Dayspring,” ‘
by D. McDonald.. D.D.:
AND
A Descriptive Catalogue of Plants in the New Hebrides,
by Baron Von Mueller, F.R.S.;
WITH. SKETCHES OF THE ISLANDS.
HENRY THACKER, PRINTER, GEELONG.
