

0F 1




REPORT
THE MELANESIAN MISSION,
FOR THE YEARS 1861 1862:
TO WHICH ARE ADDED,
Swnum anh a f itte
THE RIGHT REY. BISHOP PATTESON;
TOGETHER WITH
A STATEMENT OF THE ACCOUNTS OF THE MISSION
FOR THE YEARS 1861—1862.
LONDON:
RIVINGTONS, WATERLOO PLACE.
1863.


LONDON:
GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, PRINTERS,
ST. John's sguarb.


REPOUT
OF THE
MELANESIAN MISSION
FOR THE YEARS 1861 — 1862.
Melanesia is the name given to the Islands of the
S.W. Pacific Ocean, including the Loyalty, New Hebri-
des Banks’, Santa Cruz, and Solomon Archipelagoes, and
reaching onwards to the W. and N.W., so as to include
New Guinea.
There is no estimate of their number which can be
depended upon. But there are certainly more than 200
islands. . .
They are inhabited by people differing widely m ap-
pearance from the natives of the E. Pacific Ocean, or
Polynesia.
The Polynesians are lighter in colour, and tor the most
part of larger stature than the Melanesians. They speak
dialects of one common language, and observe, speaking
generally, similar customs and superstitions.
The Fiji Archipelago occupies an intermediate posi-
tion between Polynesia and Melanesia. The structure
of its language is Polynesian, but its vocabulary differs
in many instances from that of the ordinary Polynesian
dialects.
A native of any one Polynesian island would almost
a 2


immediately recognize in the dialect spoken in any other
Polynesian island a dialect similar to his own.
Sandwich Islanders, New Zealanders, Tahitians,
Rarotongans, Samoans, and natives of the Kingsmill
group, in a very short time are able to converse together;
but it is very different in Melanesia.
A comparison of dialects already acquired discovers
indeed affinities in the vocabularies to some extent, and in
the general structure of the dialects to a great extent;
and it is quite certain that one type of language prevails
throughout the whole Pacific. But the dialects of
Melanesia diverge so greatly from the common type, and
from each other, that each dialect forms at first almost a
separate study.
Nearly seventy islands have been visited by the Mission
V essel.
Concerning more than thirty of these islands it may he
said confidently that each possesses its own dialect, and
that on many of these islands many dialects are spoken,
mutually unintelligible to the inhabitants.
No native of a Melanesian island naturally understands
a man of another island, nor can he understand (in many
cases) inhabitants of his own island living out of his own
immediate neighbourhood.
There are indeed always some men who are able to
go about safely among the people of different districts and
islands. Such men usually know several dialects. People
living on the adjacent coasts of neighbouring islands can
usually communicate with each other ; but not through
the medium of a common dialect, unless the one party be
an offshoot from the other, but through the knowledge
that each has acquired of the other’s dialect.
The natives of Nengone and Lifu in the Loyalty
Islands speak dialects of the same language ; but no
Nengone man understands a Lifu man, unless from some
cause or other he has made himself acquainted with the
Lifu dialect. This is the case in all the islands of the
S.W. Pacific Ocean, of which we have any information.
With this great diversity of dialects a great diversity of
manners, superstitions, and character would naturally be
expected; and yet, inasmuch as all these dialects are really
parts of a common language, some reference xn all their
various superstitions and customs to a common system un-


derlying all would probably be discovered. We can already
see good reasons for supposing that this is the actual state
of the case; but not to such an extent as to make one
method of treatment applicable to all the islanders.
This is the explanation of the plan followed by the
Primate of New Zealand. As he obtained an accurate
knowledge of the character of the work entrusted to him,
so he perceived more and more clearly the necessity of
carrying on the instruction of the islanders through the
agency of native teachers. He saw that each island must
draw upon its own resources as soon as possible, and that
young men from many islands could be educated simul-
taneously at one central school, if they could be induced to
attend it.
It has been found that there is not very much diffi-
culty in obtaining young men and boys from many of these
islands. There is oftentimes a considerable delay ; but
generally speaking we succeed within two or three years
from the time of our first visit in bringing away some one
or other, who instantly is converted into a living dictionary
and grammar ; for when once we can talk to the people,
the first great step is gained.
By paying repeated visits to the islands, endeavour-
ing to bring away the same scholars year after year, and by
maintaining central winter schools in the islands, so that
the teaching may not be interrupted, we hope to educate
the most promising young men in each island to become
themselves at no distant day the teachers of their own
people.
We cannot speak with certainty on this point as yet.
There are several young persons with us now, about whom
we are very hopeful: they have willingly returned to New
Zealand for several summers, and have in some cases left
their own islands during the winter months, in order to live
at the winter school held on a neighbouring island. That
they are really in earnest we have every reason to believe,
and that they are likely to make competent teachers, as far
as their capacity and knowledge are concerned, we have no
doubt; but we cannot say yet that they have been fully tried :
the plan has not been worked long enough to produce decided
results as yet; it seems to be answering exceedingly well.
What has taken place at an island of the Banks 1
Archipelago (named by Bligh Sugarloaf 1., and by the in-


habitants Mota) is perhaps a fair illustration of the work-
ing of our plan.
Some nine years ago the Bishop of New Zealand was
sailing out of the great bay at the north of Espirito Santo,
a large island at the N. W, of the New Hebrides Islands.
He saw from the fore-yard land in the extreme distance.
No land was laid down in the charts, but he was convinced
that he was not deceived, and steering for this land he saw
gradually the whole group of the Banks 1 Islands one by one
appear above the horizon. In the newest charts they are
still laid down nearly one degree of longitude to the east of
their real position; and Santa Maria, the finest and most
populous of all, is to this day not laid down at all. The
Bishop had no communication then with the people of Mota:
he was steering through the group, when the water suddenly
became shallow, and the bottom of broken coral was visible;
and he was only too glad to be able to beat back from these
unknown waters.
His visit to England, and other circumstances, pre-
vented his revisiting these islands until the winter of 1856.
On that occasion no landing was effected at Mota : the
narrow beach (so well known now) was crowded with men;
we counted more than fifty swimming round our boat: all
were apparently friendly, but the landing was difficult, and
the number of people too great: we made some small pre-
sents, and returned to the vessel, and sailed away. The
next year the Bishop discovered a fine harbour in the
neighbouring island, called Vanua Lava. Here we anchored
in the “ Southern Cross. 11 Several young men were induced
to come on board the vessel. We had already made friends
with the people on shore before we brought in the vessel.
We visited the neighbouring islands, and again sailed away.
But the next year two young men came away with us, and
spent the winter at Lifu, where our school was for the time
carried on.
Their report of us when they returned was soon cir-
culated among the islands, and now full confidence seemed
to be established. We went where we pleased, slept ashore,
brought away scholars, learned the language. Now lads
from all the eight islands of the group have been with us in
New Zealand : we have spent two winters at Mota: one of
the two young men who first came away with us to Lifu is
at this moment the most promising scholar in our Melanesian


School. We must not say too much; but in these three
years we have seen great changes. No man on Mota
walks about now with bow and poisoned arrows, without
which they scarcely stirred from their huts a few months
ago. Men who had never walked round their own small
island till within the last two years, now go about freely
where they please. Lads from six or seven different
villages of the island, and even from three or four neighbour-
ing islands, all lived together for more than two months last
winter at our school, —to such an extent has their mutual
distrust of each other been removed. Our daily morning
and evening prayers were attended by an average of 50 or
60 people, who indeed knew very little of the meaning of
what they saw and heard, but whose presence indicated
at least curiosity and friendliness of feeling. No one per-
son has treated us unkindly.
During the time that we were living at Mota, we
visited in our boat all the islands of the Archipelago, with
the exception of two rather more distant than the rest.
These two are only thirty miles off from us, but at the time
when we hoped to sail and row across to them, sickness
among our party made it impossible to leave the island of
Mota, on which we were living.
All these islands were first visited by us in the
schooner; but we have seldom time then to remain long
on shore: and indeed in these introductory visits it is not
wise to leave the beach at all. But in these boating
excursions we have ample leisure to feel our way among
the natives of those islands with which we have already
established some kind of connexion, and in this manner
we have walked round all but two of the islands of the
Banks 1 Archipelago, spending several days and nights
among the people, and always receiving kindly treatment
from them.
What is being done at Mota might, we believe, be
done also in many other parts of Melanesia. There are
islands in the New Hebrides Group and in the Solomon
Archipelago where we are well known, and where we can
talk to the people. There is nothing to prevent the
introduction of such a winter school among them as already
exists at Mota but the want of funds and men. The
plan is applicable to twenty islands as easily as to one, and
it seems to meet every requisition.


The Mission is supported :
1. By endowments of Land, amounting to 469
acres.
2. By the interest of £4lOO, invested at present
in English Securities.
3. By the Subscriptions raised annually in Aus-
tralasia and England.
The current expenditure, before the loss of the
Mission vessel in 1860, amounted on the average of three
years to about £l6OO.
Now we have had a large additional expenditure
occasioned:—
1. By the buildings erected at Kohimarama for
the Mission.
2. By the farm buildings, and by the clearing
and bringing into cultivation and stocking the
Mission farm.
3. By the wreck of the “ Southern Cross ”
schooner.
We have also at present a staff of three Clergymen to
be maintained.
The larger portion of the expense of the Mission
buildings has been defrayed by a gift of £lOOO from Miss
Yonge, and of £6OO contributed for this purpose; but the
whole sum was withdrawn from the General Endowment of
the Mission. Another sum of £lO7O, which forms, with
the former £lOOO, the sum received by Miss Yonge from
the sale of the “Daisy Chain,” has been, with her consent,
withdrawn from the General Endowment of the Mission to
meet the expenses of a new vessel.
More than £2600 have thus been withdrawn from the
General Endowment of the Mission.
The income of the Mission consists of:
The interest of £4lOO invested in
England - -£123 00
The interest of £5OO, invested in
Canterbury, N. Z. - - - - 40 0 0
And the rental of a portion of the
land - -- -- -- -- 100 00
£263 0 0
The remaining portion of the Mission estate will


probably next year pay its own expenses ; after which time
it may be reckoned upon as a source of considerable income.
There has been a very heavy expenditure upon the Mission
farm during the last fifteen months.
Subscriptions in New Zealand, Australasia, and Eng-
land are needed to the amount of £I4OO or £ISOO, to
enable us to carry on the work on the present scale.
The Eton Subscription List produced £350 during
the past year, and there was a balance to the credit of the
Mission in England, upon which the large amount of bills
that appear in the Money Statement has been drawn.
At this moment the Treasurer’s account shows a de-
ficit to the amount of £196. The charter of the schooner
“ Sea Breeze ” costs £6OO, and to meet this sum of £796,
which must be paid on or before our return (D.V.) to New
Zealand in November next, we have less than £4OO to
depend upon.
The Current Expenses of the Mission are carried on
indeed by supplementing the account with sums from
other sources, which should properly be used to increase
the General Endowment Fund.
There can be little doubt that before long the expen-
diture must be greatly increased, if advantage be taken of
the many openings occurring now among the islands, and
it is of great importance that this should be borne in mind
now.
Nine Dioceses of Australasia are this year represented
in our Subscription List.
Regular Annual Donations from each Diocese would,
with the English Subscriptions, probably suffice to pay
the Current Expenses of the Mission. And we make our
appeal to the Churches of Australasia, in the confident
belief that the responsibility laid upon us of evangelizing
these islands will be fully accepted. We cannot doubt
that it will be responded to willingly, when we see what
has been done during the past year to meet the unusually
large expenditure that has been incurred. Most thank-
fully we acknowledge the blessing of these gifts, praying
that they may be blessed to those who gave, and us who
receive them ; that we may have grace to use them as they
desire them to be used, for the extension of Christ’s king-
dom to the glory of God.




A SERMON
PREACHED AT ST. PAUL’S CHURCH, AUCKLAND,
ON WHITSUNDAY, 1862,
THE
RIGHT REV. JOHN COLERIDGE PATTESON, D.D.
FELLOW OF MERTON COLLEGE, OXFORD;
MISSIONARY BISHOP OF THE MELANESIAN ISLANDS.
PRINTED BY REQUEST.




A SERMON
Isaiah lx. 22.
“ A LITTLE ONE SHALL BECOME A THOUSAND, AND A
SMALL ONE A STRONG NATION.”
This morning we considered the obligation laid upon
us in this country, as constituting a branch of the Church
of Christ, to discharge each one of the several duties
which together make up the work and the life of a
Christian people. Our special work among the heathen
has been decided by the General Synod of the Church in
this country to be the Propagation of the Gospel among
the Islands of Melanesia.
And remembering the blessed gifts poured out as on
this day upon that small company of disciples at Jerusalem,
in trust to be conveyed in successive generations to the
world at large ; remembering, too, the position in which
God’s great mercy has vouchsafed to place us, who have
been grafted into the true Vine, and are commanded to
abide in it as living branches, and so bring forth fruit, we
took comfort and final encouragement to undertake the task
which God has assigned to us.
Regarding then this Mission to Melanesia as a special
trust committed to us by the Providence of God, let us see
how it has been attempted to discharge this duty, what are
the chief obstacles which present themselves, and what
the best means by which we may hope to overcome them.
The condition and circumstances of the islands which
are called by the general name of Melanesia are very
various. Not even an approximate estimate of their num-
ber can be made as yet: all that can be said is, that
they exceed in number 200. We expect that this estimate
will one day be found to include little more than half of
these unknown islands.


They are inhabited (to speak of some 70 with which
we are more or less acquainted) by people differing widely
in stature, colour, and language. Frequently we have
gathered into our school from the very same village two or
more young persons whose appearance would indicate that
they belonged to different races ; and so, upon a close exa-
mination of many dialects, the same fact is perceived, of
fragments of many widely-different vocabularies co-existing,
with affinities in the general structure of the language.
Where this is the case we cannot presume upon any
great similarity in the customs and superstitions of the
islanders, and we cannot attempt to bring them under any
one method of treatment. But, on the other hand, the geo-
graphical distribution of the several groups of islands is
favourable to the idea, that some one type of language and
character may be found to prevail among the islands which
constitute each separate archipelago. This we know to be
the case in a portion of the Solomon Islands, and again in
the Loyalty and the Banks’ Islands, with which last group
the Northern portion of the New Hebrides Cluster again
connects itself.
We have good hope that as the knowledge of the
dialects increases, so it will be comparatively easy to classify
the whole number of islands under not more than four or
five heads. It may be said, that all these many dialects
really belong to one great language, if the idea of a lan-
guage be very widely extended to include very many off-
shoots, which seem at first sight to have lost almost all
traces of connexion with the parent stock.
In the Eastern Pacific the dialects of the one preva-
lent language are so similar as to be easily recognized and
acquired. One of these dialects is spoken by the natives of
this country. But in the southern portion of the W.
Pacific Ocean (with the exception of some small scattered
islands, inhabited by members of that great family which
has peopled the E. Pacific) the dialects differ so greatly
from the common type and from each other, as to make the
acquisition of each dialect, by one unaccustomed to such
pursuits, practically the study of a separate language.
This again necessitates a different method of treatment
from that usually employed in missionary undertakings.
One more peculiarity remains to be noticed, which is
indeed in some sense rather an accident than a property
of this Mission. The climate of the islands, not differing


widely among themselves, is very different from the climate
of this country, with which they are now connected by this
Mission, and hence again arises a necessity for some special
method of dealing with them.
The difficulties which presented themselves to the
Primate of New Zealand, when first he went forth to under-
take the additional charge which the Archbishop had com-
mitted to him, were principally these : the multitude of the
islands; the endless diversity of dialects; the variety of
customs; the improbability of obtaining efficient helpers
from any one island already evangelized to act upon any
other country (or rather district of a country) than their
own ; the difference of climate; and the want of sufficient
means of locomotion.
The plan adopted, widely different from the ordinary
methods employed, had been observed in one instance cer-
tainly (and probably in more than one) in the Missions of
the Middle Ages: it presents some analogy to the circum-
stances related in to-day’s Services.
It is this, —to gather together into one place inhabitants
of many countries, and there (as their languages are acquired)
to teach them what our parents and teachers have taught
us; then to return them to their several islands, and use
them as instruments for the conversion of their people.
That the Gospel was in the first ages propagated
mainly through the instrumentality of converted Jews, we
know : they had already the Old Testament in their hands,
translated into the Greek language, which then was the
language of civilized nations: when once they had been
taught by the Spirit through the Apostles’ preaching that
Jesus of Nazareth was indeed their Messiah, every pro-
phecy and type then fell into its own proper place: they
already possessed knowledge to expound the word of God,
and needed only Apostolic guidance to expound it more
perfectly.
Many such men, gathered out of many nations, we
may reasonably suppose to have been present at the great
Pentecost: there, in the central city of the Jewish nation,
they heard in their own tongues the works of God ; they
felt the power of the Spirit; they recognized the truth and
wisdom of the Apostles’ words. From this centre—(bap-
tized Christian men) —they went back to their own coun-
tries, and as they went they bore with them the seed of
the Everlasting Gospel. So each city with its Christian


Church soon became a centre, from which men were con-
tinually going forth to carry the message of life into new
regions. Colleges of young men were formed, in which
natives of many countries were educated: some purchased
from their masters that they might become servants of
Christ; some induced by curiosity; some drawn by the all-
unperceived power of the Spirit; all alike to be trained
in Christian doctrine and discipline, and then sent forth
to their own people, to tell them in their own languages
what they had seen and heard. It is precisely in the same
manner that the plan of this Mission was conceived—a plan
now being effectively carried out in the Missions on the
West Coast of Africa.
Our object is to obtain an acquaintance with the
languages and customs of each island through the agency
of the inhabitants of each; and ultimately to provide
teachers and missionaries from within its own population.
Each island has resources upon which we must draw : they
are to be evangelized. And have we not the best reason to
know that such is the will of God ? We feel convinced that
it must be through the instrumentality of men chosen by
God for such a work from among themselves.
We cannot locate ourselves on any one island, directing
all our energies to the education of one people, in the
hope that they may be found hereafter available for the
propagation of the Gospel in other islands. That can only
be the case, and then only partially so, where the islands
possess dialects and customs in common.
But we know well that to evangelize exclusively one
of the New Hebrides Islands, e. g., (though a blessed thing
indeed,) would afford but very little help to the thousands
and tens of thousands dwelling in the islands of the Solomon
Archipelago,—and so of each several group. And, more-
over, we see no reason to suppose that the location of the
English Missionary on an island secures a permanently
beneficial result, so certainly as the system by which the
most promising young men of that island are being gradu-
ally educated to be Missionaries themselves to their own
race. There is a more rapid change at first in all proba-
bility ; an importation of new habits, an alteration to the
outer eye in the character of the people. But the Mis-
sionary living there may die, and by whom is his place to
be supplied ? A continual succession of English Clergymen
to occupy 200 islands is a thing almost impossible; and all


men are agreed that at some not very distant period from
the date of the introduction of Christianity, a Native Church
ought to be self-supporting. And so it comes to this, that
a Native Minister must take the place of the English Mis-
sionary ; and this man, who is to succeed the Missionary,
can be educated for the work of the Ministry, at least as
well in this country, under the influences of a Christian and
civilized community, as among his own native customs and
friends ; who moreover will hearken more readily to the
words of a countryman, when he returns to them from a
distant land, with all the advantage derived from his foreign
education.
But if it is not necessary to expend the force at our
disposal by locating men permanently in some three or four
islands ; if the training of eligible young men at some
central school affords really the best hope of making known
the Gospel in the islands of which they are natives; it is
evident that we should endeavour to carry on simulta-
neously the education of as many young men as we can
induce to live with us from as many islands as we can con-
trive to visit.
It may be objected that this can hardly be the case,
since the number of dialects spoken at the Central School
would soon become so great as to render the thorough
education of the young men exceedingly difficult. But we
find as a matter of fact, that, first, when a few dialects are
acquired so that the points of similiarity are easily observed
and appropriated by the mind, the difficulty of dealing
with the diversity of languages is much less than might
be supposed, —it is found to be so by all who have tried it:
secondly , the consequence of bringing together natives from
many islands is, that the most prevalent dialect of any
cluster of islands comes to be used almost exclusively at
last as the vehicle of teaching ; to such an extent, indeed,
as to lead us to hope that in some cases a translation of
portions of the Bible into one dialect of a group may be
found (through the medium of scholars from many islands
taught in that one dialect) sufficient for the instruction of
the whole group.
Thirdly, the remedy lies with you and the Churches
of Australasia. Give us the means of maintaining more
Clergymen, and thus subdividing again and again the classes
of the Central School, according to the various languages
and degrees of capacity of the scholars. Give us the means
B


of extending a work which has already indeed received aid
with no grudging hand, and has already been blessed be-
yond our expectations. May God grant that we may ac-
knowledge the blessing in all thankfulness and humility and
fear ! We must also expect some great trial when we have
such great blessings. Thankfulness must be mingled with
a feeling of awe, when we gather round us from islands,
four years ago untrodden by the foot of a stranger, no less
than ten young men and children, and hear them repeat
our own Catechism in their tongue, and answer ques-
tions, and quote the few verses of the Scriptures that they
have learnt, with an intelligence and seriousness that must
be a sight for angels in heaven to rejoice at. Others, too,
the first-fruits, we trust, of their islands unto Christ, first
drawn within the influences of Christian teaching, already
join with us daily in prayer and praise and profession of
faith—singing our own familiar psalm-tunes, repeating our
own Creed, praying our own Lord’s Prayer. Who can say
what a power God may make them to be in their several
islands I Who can limit the possible influence of these young
men (soon, we trust, to be baptized into the fold of Christ’s
Church), speaking (as no stranger ever can speak) to their
own countrymen of the contrast which they have witnessed
between the heathen and the Christian life ?
For the most part the daily work goes on, and we have
little time or care to look back and measure the distance
travelled over—it is no very useful occupation to do so—
and every energy is needed for what has to come.
But when some circumstance obliges us to take a
retrospect of the last few years, we are (and may well be)
startled to see how great a change in some cases God has
wrought. It seems very wonderful, quite unaccountable;
we cannot say how it has come to pass, and we know it is
very little in comparison with what remains to be accom-
plished ; but- it makes us for the time at least feel sober-
minded and almost fearful.
Such thoughts come upon us in the night, when some
child sitting upon our knees has just whispered his first
confession of sins committed against his newly-found God
and Father, such sins as the Christian child, aye, and many a
Christian man has never known of—or when a young man
(himself now a Christian) tells us (as one told me not
many days since), how some eight months ago he saw in
his own island a village surprised at night, from which one


man only out of more than forty escaped with his life, while
men were burned all unarmed within their huts, and women
murdered, and the little children in his sight dashed against
the stones.
Yes, my brethren; one story such as this affects you
more than the bare knowledge that millions of our own
fellow-creatures are living and dying in the midst of such
circumstances. Now we know why God bids us carry His
Gospel of mercy and love to the heathen. Yes; it is all
summed up in one short sentence : “ they know not God.
All the lust and cruelty and revengeful passions of the wild
man proceed from his ignorance. Very few take pleasure
in the mad recklessness of their lives,—almost all are con-
scious of some want, and will recognize the truth of what
the Christian Minister can tell them.
And this is the spirit in which we must meet them,
with deep compassion and love in our hearts, with no self-
complacent assumption of superiority, but with intense
thankfulness to God, who has called us to the knowledge
of Him, and sent us to convey this knowledge to them.
We must leave them, alas! once or twice before we
can tell them what we long to tell them : we dare not do
more than remain a few short minutes among the wild
armed crowd on the bright coral beach ; we have not as
yet persuaded by signs and presents any one to join us.
But at length something—we cannot tell what—moves
some one among the crowd to venture to follow us to the
boat; and now in the Providence of God (I am speaking
of what has occurred this very year at two different islands
from which under such circumstances we have now for the
first time brought away young men), now we return no
longer (as before) speechless in the presence of the
countrymen of our scholars : we can say a little, and they
can say much of what they have been taught: we can
leave the beach now, and hand-in-hand with our young
guides walk securely to some neighbouring village : no
more spears are brandished now, no more bows are bent,
no wild looks turned upon us ; —so the little seed is sown ;
to grow up when and how we cannot tell; God knoweth,
for He rules the hearts of men —we testify of what we have
seen ; we cannot account for it—we can only give praise
unto God. But we do see this, that one little child given
to us from any newly-found land may open in Gods
Providence the door to the conversion of thousands of his


countrymen. From that little child we can learn to speak
to the people of his island ; and he will speak favourably
of us : through him fears and suspicions will be removed ;
others will be induced to join us; his own relations will
entertain a special goodwill towards us for our care of their
child ; —new ideas of confidence in a man of another tribe
and country will grow up ; a comparison of their own wild,
lawless life with the peace and order of the strangers 1 mode
of life will be instituted—new thoughts will work their
hearts; a new power is recognized in their land. It is
the thought of what each one of the scholars from more
than twenty islands may by God's grace become; of what
His people may through His instrumentality become, that
brings the words of Isaiah to our minds: “ Then thou shalt
see and flow together, and thine heart shall fear and be
enlarged. 11 Every school presents a noble and a fearful
sight, when we consider the power which it represents for
working out hereafter good or evil—and what shall be said
of a school representing thousands and tens of thousands
who know not the name of Christ, who have never heard
of their Father in heaven?
It is not only the present but the prospective blessing
for which we ought to give praise unto God. The work,
if we may dare to say so, seems to be following the order
which God has prescribed; “ first the blade, then the ear,
after that the full corn in the ear, 11 —and it seems, like
leaven, to be going on silently, with no startling results, no
great tokens of success; but we see, thanks be to God !
the gradual progress, the evidence of a power working not
in such outward ways as are capable of being talked about,
but moving irresistibly the hearts of nations: and why
should it not be so ?
Christ foresaw and provided for all the exigencies of
the work. He knew that no human power could effect it.
He sent down the Spirit from on high. He came as on
this day to “ dwell with us and to be in us. 11 He has ever
been with the Church of Christ, its life-giving, informing
energy : He is with it now. He gives wisdom in all per-
plexities, and courage in all dangers, and hope in all sor-
rows, and comfort in all trials. He guides, and directs,
and teaches, and rules our hearts. All is through Him,
the Spirit of God ; sent by the Son from the Father—
the work of the ever Blessed Trinity, to whom be glory
for ever. Amen.


A LETTER
PROM THE
RIGHT REY. JOHN COLERIDGE PATTESON, D.D.




A LETTER,
My dear * * * *
You wish to have some information about the
Melanesian Mission, in which you take, I know, a warm
interest. Our Reports published from time to time furnish
you with lists of our Scholars, and the number of islands
which they represent, and (as I supposed) would enable
you to form a fair notion of the plan upon which we are
working. Rut you want something less dry and business-
like, —anecdotes, descriptions of scenery, and of the appear-
ance, manners, and customs of the islanders.
All that I conclude you want me to write has become
so familiar to us, that I dare say I have fallen into the mis-
take of taking it for granted that you must know the very
things about which you require information.
Rut where am Ito begin ? If! am to tell you every
event which occurs to us while sailing to and fro in Mela-
nesian waters, or while living on any island, I should have
to write a book, and not a letter; and I have barely time
to write even a letter.
Perhaps our Treasurer’s Account for the last fifteen
months, and a Sermon I have been asked to print, may tell
you what you wish to know of the nature of our work and
the sources from which we have hitherto derived the funds
for carrying it on. You will notice this year a large expen-
diture on the Farm Account, and no receipts. This arises
from the fact that we are getting our Mission Estate gra-
dually into order; clearing the bush, draining, fencing,
putting up the necessary farm buildings, buying cattle,
ploughing up the cleared land and sowing it with grass, &c.
I hope that we have just now turned the corner, and that
next year we may have at all events no excess of expendi-
ture over our receipts for Dairy Produce, &c.


You will notice that this statement includes the
expenses incurred during fifteen months.
We require an income of not less than £l6OO to carry
on our present work; and we only need funds to enable us
to extend our operations indefinitely.
The Endowments of the Mission in Land or in Eng-
lish Securities yield but very little now. The Dividends in
England are £123 per annum : the landed property in New
Zealand cannot be regarded as yielding more than £l5O
for the next year or more. For all the rest of our income
we are dependent upon Subscriptions.
Since this is the case, you will wonder at the Bills
drawn upon England this year to the amount of £900;
but of this large sum only £270 are derived from the
interest of money invested in England, of which a large
amount has been withdrawn to be invested in the purchase
of land here, besides £9OO more since the beginning of
the year, to meet the expense of building the new vessel.
The rest of the money is made up of sums transferred from
the Bishop of New Zealand’s old account, and of other
monies subscribed in the course of the year. Should the
Eton Subscriptions decrease, and the support of those who
have hitherto contributed to the Mission Fund be with-
drawn, we shall have very great difficulty in carrying on
our work.
You perceive, of course, that the Primate’s resignation
of this branch of his work may make a great difference in
the Subscription List. It will not perhaps be understood
that he is really connected with the Mission almost as much
as heretofore.
It is therefore of very great importance that the cir-
cumstances of the Mission should become known, and that
people should be urged to help us liberally. And this is
the more necessary just now, because people seem to have
a notion that money is to be obtained by us without any diffi-
culty, as if we had an inexhaustible fund to draw upon.
Much has indeed been given, but we cannot now pay our
way without supplementing the deficiencies in our Income
by drawing more largely than is wise upon Capital, or upon
such private means as should be used rather to increase the
Capital and provide for future increased Expenditure.
What we really hope is, that this Mission will be
recognized as the natural Mission Work of the Churches


of Australasia. Not that we want to monopolize their
charities, but to act in the real meaning of the old proverb
that “ charity should begin at homewe do not wish it
to stop there. We do not grudge a penny (God forbid !)
that is given to India, Africa, China, and any portion of
the world ; but we much wish to see some distribution of
charities according to a systematic plan, by which the whole
work of the Church may be carried out more completely.
No less than nine Dioceses of Australasia, I rejoice to say,
are represented in our Subscription List. We hope that
regular Annual Contributions may be forthcoming from
every Diocese in Australasia, to such an extent as to relieve
the Mother Country ultimately from supplying any funds at
all for the Evangelization of Melanesia. It seems to be
our special charge, the peculiar work lying at our doors.
Yet until we find our Subscription List in this part of
the world amounting to £] 400 or £ISOO annually, we must
be still dependent upon your charities, and we trust never
to be without your prayers.
But I am again giving you a history of our money
matters, and you want stories about wild savages, and dan-
gerous reefs, and adventures by sea and land. Years ago
this may have seemed to me a strange life that I am called
to lead ; but now the very familiarity with scenes and per-
sons and events once so strange makes me in one sense a
very unfit person to write about them. Things do not
strike me which would strike a stranger.
But I will try to give you some idea of what we see
and try to do. You ought to think yourself in the position
of the Primate when first he sailed for Melanesia many
years ago, if you want to understand the nature of the work
thoroughly; you ought to imagine yourself to be standing
on the deck of a little schooner of twenty tons, yourself the
navigator into unknown seas, about to find the way to
islands 1200 miles distant, inhabited by people of unknown
race, manners, and languages. That was an undertaking
indeed which only a man of real faith and courage could
have attempted.
It is very different now, when a regular plan has been
year after year followed out, when many islands have already
been visited, when watering-places and anchorages have
been discovered ; narrow passages, once unknown, have
been often threaded, and islands replaced in their right


positions on our chart, or even wholly restored to the know-
ledge of geographers.
And yet there is still some part of our present work
which in some respects resembles the work in its com-
mencement : there are always new islands to be visited, new
languages to be learned, new seas to be sailed over.
So, if you will, take a voyage with me in imagination;
and I will, in writing about what we are supposed to see
and do together, confine myself to a statement of events
which have actually occurred. We must sail in a chartered
vessel, for we have no ship of our own as yet; and we are
leaving New Zealand two months after our usual time, for
we could not obtain a suitable vessel till now. But, thank
God, our Melanesian scholars are all pretty well, though
they are anxiously wishing to get home again.
The schooner, “ Sea Breeze,” is just the size of the
“ Southern Cross,” which was wrecked, as you know, two
years ago: she is a smart little vessel, and I hope we may
make rapid passages in her among the islands.
But first take a look at our New Zealand establish-
ment. This beautiful place we dignify by the name of St.
Andrew’s College. Is it not admirably suited to our pur-
pose? Healthily situated on a dry sandy soil, a stone’s
throw from the beach, protected from the cold winds, and
at a convenient distance from the town. Miss Yonge, you
know, gave us dCIOOO towards the buildings, and her part
of them, the stone hall, kitchen, and store-rooms, are
really collegiate in appearance. There is also some money
given by her with which we hope some day to build a stone
Chapel: at present this money is being used to pay for the
new vessel for lack of other funds.
You can see by our Farm Buildings, and the general
look of the land behind the College, that we have had a
heavy drain upon our purse to pay for our farming opera-
tions ; but I hope that the income of the Mission from
this source will be a considerable one by and by, and it
will be needed to meet an expenditure which, as the work
increases, must increase also.
Now come into the hall. They are all at school there
now. We are detained so long this year in New Zealand
that we keep school now in the hall, where we can keep up
a good fire. 4
What do you expect to find? wild-looking fellows,


noisy and unruly? Well; it is true that they come of a
wild race, that many of them are familiar with and have
been concerned in scenes that you would shudder to hear
of. But what do you see ? Thirty young persons seated
at four tables, of whom the youngest may be nine or ten
years old, and the oldest perhaps four-and-twenty. Some
are writing. We will see presently what they are writing :
some are answering questions in arithmetic—if I buy eighty
pounds’ weight of yams for a hatchet, how many can I buy
for seven hatchets ? Four cocoa-nuts for three fish-hooks,
how many for fifteen fish-hooks? &c., &c. —others are
spelling away, somewhat laboriously, at the first sheet ever
written in their language. Well, seven months ago not an
inhabitant of their island had ever worn a stitch of clothing,
and that patient but rather rough-looking fellow can show
many scars received in warfare, perhaps in capturing or de-
fending his wives, of whom he has four. I hope you notice
their teacher: he is a young man called Harper, from an
island 400 miles to the south of the three different islands
from which his pupils come. He has learned to talk their
language a little, and it is Ms little book which they are
reading. I did little more than alter the mode of spelling
and writing some of the extraordinary sounds which those
fellows pronounce.
You ask who is that older-looking man sitting with
two lads and a youug girl at that table ? He is Wadrokal,
our oldest scholar. This is the tenth year since the Bishop
of New Zealand first brought him from his island, and he
is teaching his little wife and two of his countrymen.
But come and see what this class is about. Yes;
they look very unlike a class at an English Sunday School,
but yours must be a good school if the second class, and I
had almost said the first, will show more quickness than
some of these fellows.
“Why! what’s this? ‘The Catechism!’ You
have printed the name of the little book in English, so I
can read that. Do you mean that these boys and young
men are learning their Catechism ? I thought they were
just caught wild from those savage South Sea Islands.”
“ Well, so they are : we could tell you stories of most of
these lads that would convict them, poor fellows, of being
quite wild enough. But shall T translate any question you
like to put them, and the answers they give ? They are


some of them Candidates for Baptism, and we are well
satisfied with their intelligence and earnestness.” “ How I
noticed the individuality of character coming out more and
more as they talked to you ! At first they looked to me all
alike: I did not observe the bright intelligent eye, and the
thoughtful look of some of them. I wish I could under-
stand what they say, but I catch familiar Old Testament
names now and then.” “ Yes ;we teach them something
about those characters of the Old Testament whose names
most frequently occur in the New Testament. We don’t
want to go minutely into the Old History, but to pass on
to the New Testament events as soon as some general idea
has been given them of the gradual unfolding of the great
promise concerning the seed of the woman.” “Do you
find that they understand such teaching V “ That is the
very thing that surprises us, and makes us so hopeful and
thankful. They do not learn facts only as so many isolated
facts, but combine and reason upon the facts. There is no
want of mental power about them ; and some are very clear-
headed fellows.”
“ But I want you to see what these boys are writing.”
“ They are not writing, I see, from a copy.” “No ; they were
questioned yesterday upon that print of our Lord raising
Lazarus, and now they are writing down their account of
it out of their own heads. This little fellow, Pantutun, and
that little girl, Irotuvag, have only been with us at school
this summer, and the language in which they are writing
was not a written language at all three or four years ago.” “ I
am so struck with their quiet orderly manner, —no noise, no
impatience of manner.” They are indeed most docile,
loveable fellows : we all become very much attached to them;
but they were rather different when first we made their
acquaintance. That young man, e. g., Marauvelav, comes
from an island called Santa Maria. He told me the other
day that I gave him a fish-hook now some four years ago,
when the Bishop of New Zealand and I were standing on
the beach with 800 naked men (of which he was one) about
us. I can see the Bishop now as he took a bow out of a
man’s hand and drew a line on the beach, making signs
that no one was to step across it. There we stood close
to the sea, the boat some hundred yards off, the Bishop
holding these 300 wild fellows in check by the very dignity
of his presence. Now that young fellow is going back


(D.V.) to tell those men who that great chief is, and why
he came to see them.
But if you come in this evening to see our school, I
think you will be most of all pleased to see these young
people teaching their own friends. Every evening one of
the first class is set to teach six or seven of the less advanced
scholars: it is capital training for them, and you know our
great object is to teach these young men to be teachers.
We are all astonished to find them so “apt to teach : it
is really surprising to hear and see how very well they un-
derstand their business : no mere loose talk about the
matter in hand, but real catechizing, explaining, and then
questioning out of the boys w'hat has been Phis
is the most hopeful sign of all. I did not hit upon this plan
myself, but it answers admirably.
And now let us walk up and down the beach while the
stewards and cooks for the week get the tea ready. We
tell off each week a certain number of the lads, who do the
cooking work, cut the wood, fetch milk, We take all
our meals together, and you will see them taking their places
and using their knives and forks as if they had used them
all their lives. They are very fond of tea, especially with
plenty of sugar in it. Living in the land of sugar-canes,
they are all fond of sweet things. They have bread and
biscuit and potatoes with their tea at breakfast; a good
mess of soup in the middle of the day for dinner; and
bread or rice and tea again in the evening. This cold
weather we give them a good cup of hot chocolate all round
at 8 p.m., after the evening school, and then send them off
to bed.
After tea we have prayers, before the evening school:
at this time of the year it is too cold to take them out of the
warm hall into the cold school-room where we have our
temporary chapel.
We hope to fit up this portion of the long wooden
school-room, so as to make it look more like a chapel: it is
already lined with smooth boards, and a little quatre-foil
ornament runs round the wall plate, as you see.
We sing a hymn, say the Creed, and offer up our
prayers in several languages, according to the number of
islands represented during any given year in our school,
and according to our knowledge of the languages.
You will feel that this is the time when the real nature


of our work comes home to us. It is a blessed thing in-
deed to hear these children praying in the words of our own
General Confession, island after island passing in thought
before our minds, as we take up one language after another,
and then gather all together in our own English Prayer.
Well; you have a new notion now, I dare say, of a Melanesian
as he is to be seen at Kohimarama. Now let us go, by
God’s blessing, to see him as he is in his own island.
It is a busy time here at Kohimarama now, for we ex-
pect to be off in three or four days, and all the lads are col-
lecting their treasures —knives, bottles, fish-hooks, hatchets,
old iron, &c.
There is much to do, putting away printing materials,
books, school apparatus, &c., taking our inventory of our va-
rious possessions, selecting clothes and books for the voyage.
But every one seems bright at the prospect of getting
soon into warm, genial weather.
You will think that the vessel is small for such a party,
twenty-nine Melanesians, one New Zealander, one Norfolk
Islander, four English clergymen, and the crew ; but we soon
shake into our places, the boxes disappear in a way that no
landsman can ever understand, and in a few hours after the
anchor is up we are all comfortably stowed away.
School goes on day by day, but not so conveniently as
in our old days on board the “ Southern Crossthere is
no large main-cabin in this vessel, and it is not so
easy to convert the hold into a school-room. However, we
have an unnecessarily large and luxurious after-cabin in this
particular vessel, and we can pack almost all our lads into it
for school.
Six or eight days bring us usually to Norfolk Island,
which is about 600 miles from Kohimarama.
You know the history of the Pitcairn people. They
have a beautiful island now to live in, and are thriving and
multiplying rapidly. There is a prospect of a Branch
School being established here some day for Melanesians.
I have heard absurd stories of some of you good people in
England being horrified at the notion of contaminating the
Pitcairn people by bringing them into contact with Mela-
nesian savages ! What a pity it is that people cannot see
that men on the spot are the right men to determine such
questions, and, with all respect, what do you know about a
Pitcairner ? And are we, or are we not, to be supposed


anxious and competent to consult for the good of both par-
ties concerned \ However, such notions do get into people’s
heads, and do much harm. The question is settled in this
particular instance by the Pitcairners unanimously request-
ing the governor of Australia to allow the formation of a
Branch Melanesian School on their island. The advantage
will be at least as much on the Pitcairn as on the Melane-
sian side.
It is always pleasant to spend a day or two here. I
am sure that they and we have a very true affection for
each other. And we now more than ever are bound together
by the fuller recognition of the duty of working together
for the Propagation of the Gospel in Melanesia.
Well; we have no time to remain long at Norfolk
Island. The happy Sunday services are over; the Confir-
mation of seven dear children has taken place; the little
pier is crowded by the whole population ; all are wishing us
God speed ; many unable to do more than wring our hands,
for they cannot speak ; many in tears. There is something
very touching in these short visits; every hour seems so
precious : time gains an additional value. And there is
an advantage, I think, in it. There is no time for common-
place conversation : we go at once into the real wants,
feelings, wishes, circumstances, that need to be considered.
We learn more of each other in one or two such visits than
next-door neighbours in a town learn of each other in years.
The Loyalty Islands are 400 miles almost due north of
Norfolk Island. We are bound for them now. Perhaps
it may be better to sail first for Aneiteurn, the southern
island of the New Hebrides chain. That depends upon the
time of our catching the trade wind, and other considera-
tions, which you will learn more about as you become some-
thing of a sailor. These Loyalty Islands were visited
by the London Mission Society’s vessel before there was
any Church of England Mission in these seas. Subse-
quently by arrangement between the Bishop of New
Zealand and the Deputation of that Society, the Bishop
undertook the charge of them, removed young men from
them to New Zealand, and located the Bev. Mr. Nihill as a
Missionary on Nengone or Mard Island. Difficulties have
arisen since that time, in consequence of the London Mission
Society sending Missionaries of their own body to both
Nengone and Lifu. We solve these difficulties as well as


we can, but there are many complicated questions which
it would take me a long time to explain to you. You will
understand more about it all, when you have been ashore
with me and seen something of the state of things.
That island about twenty-five miles to the west of us is
the Isle of Pines. You see the high hill near the centre of
the island, and the low land stretching out a long way, and
covered with trees. We like to give it a wide berth : it is
surrounded with dangerous reefs, and we do not visit it
now. The Bishop of New Zealand used to go there in old
days, and had at one time much influence with the chief;
but he hearkened, poor fellow ! to some Romish clergy who
were living there, and refused to accept the Bishop’s offers.
I have been told by a person who was with him when he
died, that he greatly lamented his mistake, when it was too
late.
The French have taken possession of New Caledonia,
as you know, and the Isle of Pines forms the southern
extremity of the long chain of the New Caledonian reefs.
There is our well-known mark for the S.W. point of
Nengone, a rocky promontory shaped like a low-crowned
hat. We shall soon be in perfectly smooth water, and
probably be on shore in a few hours.
There is no beauty about the Loyalty Islands, excepting
such as is given by the stunted cocoa-nut trees and a some-
what scanty tropical foliage. They are mere coral reefs
upheaved, not at all fertile, and only two or three degrees
inside the tropics, so that few tropical trees and fruits are
found here in perfection. On the other hand, they are very
healthy ; the coral beats all draining machines, and malaria
and ague are not known here.
Do you see that long, low, white building, like a large
barn? That is the Native Chapel, plastered with coral
lime, a building large enough to hold, I dare say, 700 people.
You can see some of the native houses built in the same
way. Natives of the Samoan Islands and of Rarotonga have
been living here for many years, and have taught the people
to build after the fashion which their Missionaries taught
them.
We will lower away the boat now : jump in : do you
feel the sun hot ? You must not mind this : we have another
1000 miles more to go to the north yet, and then you will
find it hot, I can tell you.


“ I see a good many people on the beach: most of
them have some clothing.” “Oh ! yes; this part of the
island has for some years past received Christianity, and
attended the chapels. On the other side they are still in a
very sad state, and there is a great deal of fighting going
on now among them.” Well, here we are : you must not
expect me to pay much attention to you now: I have quite
enough to do to talk over many matters with old acquaint-
ances. But just shake hands with this fine powerful fellow;
he is the Chief, Naisilene. I will tell you more about him
by and by. Those few men, naked and powdered white
with coral lime, whom you see standing rather apart under
the cocoa-nut trees, are heathen men. They all talk one
language here : the population may be estimated perhaps at
5000 or 6000. I leave Wadrokafs wife here for a while,
and poor Harper, who lost his wife this summer, will stay
here among his people. We shall pick them up again
(D.V.) as we return in about three months. I can hardly
tell yet how long I shall be on shore. I must hear what is
going on, and talk over sundry matters.
Well, let us go back now to the vessel. The sun will
soon be down : we will lie off and on to-night in the smooth
water, and run down to Toka in the early morning. “ How
have you spent your time ?” “Oh ! I have been wandering
about looking at the chapel, and I went into some of the
native houses. My good friends, Wadrokal and Harper,
took good care of me : they talk English quite well enough
to make me understand what they mean. You don t call
this pretty, because, I suppose, the more Northern Islands
are far more beautiful; but it is all new to me : and lam
delighted with it. All the foliage is new, every sight new,
look where I will; and they seem so friendly. Tam quite
sorry to go away.” “Soam I; I always am sorry to leave
one of these places; but before the voyage is oyer you will
see, I hope, why it is impossible for us to loiter about:
there is not time enough for the business part of these visits;
and so much depends upon getting off in time to put the
vessel in the proper place for running on to the next island
at the right time.”
Toka is only a few miles distant: we need not stay
there long, and if we can get away by 10 a.m. we shall be
able to get ashore at Lifu by 2 or 3 in the afternoon, if this
fine weather lasts. And it is of consequence to take ad-


vantage of the calm weather, for the landing at Lifu is diffi-
cult when there is any sea running. 1 remember going
ashore more than once with the Bishop, when it was just as
well that we all knew pretty well how to take care of our-
selves in the water. But what is of much more importance,
it is an uncomfortable place for the vessel to be near in
thick weather. I spent four months on Lifu once, and know
the people well: and we have printed a good many books
in their language, besides the Gospel of St. Mark, of which
many copies have been circulated among those of the inha-
bitants who can read.
What you may see on shore at Toka and Lifu will
much resemble what you have seen at Nengone, so that I
need not tell you more about the people and their cir-
cumstances now: you will be in a position to understand
much more about it, as you become more familiar with
native customs and modes of thought.
We shall almost fetch Aneiteum, the wind is so far to
the south. The little “ Southern Cross ” used to cross
this piece of water in style : there is often a jumping hollow
sea here.
You have heard about Aneiteum :itis a much more
picturesque island than Nengone or Lifu. Missionaries from
Nova Scotia and Scotland are living on it; and all the inha-
bitants profess Christianity now. Poor people ! they suf-
fered fearfully from the measles last year. Some vessel
from Sydney brought the disease to the island, and more
than one-third of the whole population, then consisting of
3600 people, died of the disease, or from weakness and
dysentery brought on by it. It was a season of great trial
to our good friend Mr. Geddie.
There is a convenient harbour here; safe enough in
the winter months, but it affords but little protection against
the hurricanes in the summer.
And now we are off to islands of a different descrip-
tion. We must be more cautious now in our intercourse
with the people. You have seen as yet islands in which
some considerable progress has been made. Now we have
many to visit which are lying in heathen darkness.
This is Erumanga. The bay now opening is Dillon’s
Bay. We will go ashore here, and kneel once again by
the grave of our dear friends, Mr. and Mrs. Gordon, It
was on the 20th May, 1861, that they were killed by the


people here, who attributed to their presence and teaching
the fearful visitation of measles, the strange new disease
which devastated the island. Their bodies lie here in one
grave, not many yards from the spot where John Williams,
and his young companion Harris, were killed now many
years ago. Their memory will yet be held blessed on this
blood-stained isle.
You must stay on board the vessel for the most part
now; not that there is really much risk in visiting these
islands among which we are sailing, the central islands of
the New Hebrides chain, but yet you had better not come
with us in the boat, because it is not your business, and we
canT have a mere passenger adding to the weight and taking
up room. We have often landed at all these islands, some-
times wading, sometimes swimming ashore, not liking
to trust the boat within reach of the people on the beach.
I think that in some places they are rather more suspicious
than they used to be : some trading vessels have been sail-
ing about here lately, and very frequently quarrels are occa-
sioned by the manner in which these visits are conducted,
and so a distrust of white people generally grows up. In
addition to this, their own manner of life leads them always
to regard any stranger, white or black, with great jealousy.
They do not know us well enough yet to discriminate be-
tween our object in coming to them, and the object with
which these traders visit them: so we have to be cautious.
There was more handling of bows and arrows than was plea-
sant last voyage ; and so (as I said before), as it is not your
duty to go, you had better stop on board.
“ All right; here we are again ; and at length, I am
thankful to say, we have succeeded in inducing two lads to
come away with us. 1 ’ “ Poor fellows! they look wild indeed :
their eyes never rest quietly on any object for an instant:
they cling to you, I see. That is a good sign, as if they
looked to you as their natural protector among all these
strangers. I wonder that they are not afraid to come.
“ Why, this is not our first, nor our second visit, to begin
with ; and then I expect they are afraid ; but they will get
over that. Here, boys ! bring them a bit of yam and cocoa-
nut, and an old shirt to dress them up,” What can induce
them to come ? Why, if we look only to secondary causes,
I suppose a strong feeling of curiosity is enough almost to
account for it; but there are deeper reasons. Who knows
c 2


what these two naked lads are to become some day'? All
that great island with its wooded mountains and leaping
cascades may hear their voice some day, “ preaching glad
tidings of good things. r>
Were they friendly on shore ? Pretty well: there were
some people lurking in the bush close by, and once or twice
some among them bent their bows, but others stopped them,
and at last we came away quietly enough.
How did you make them understand you? Signs, and
a few fish-hooks, and kindly looks go a long way ; and then
we know a few, very few words, that we have heard at dif-
ferent times; so that I could make them understand that
in ten moons we hoped to come back. A literal translation
of what I said would be something of this kind : “ No fight;
no bow; no spear; who his name? where Waratia?
(luckily I had found out on a former occasion the name of
a man, and looks of intelligence followed the sound of a
name familiar to them); ship very good ; no fight; plenty
food; plenty yam; plenty cocoa-nut; plenty clothes; all
the same this (pointing to my exceedingly ancient garment,
dripping wet); very good, these boys go away ; stop with
me ; my land very good; no fight; ten moons we come
back ; by and by plenty talk; boys come, I hear boys
talk ; by and by I talk ; by and by plenty man go to my
land ; my land New Zealand; you say, New Zealand.”
Then followed a distribution of fish-hooks ; and then these
two young fellows came with us. Thankful lam to have
them on board : more than once I thought they would have
jumped out of the boat.
How long will it be before they will feel easy in their
new position ? I dare say they will suffer a little from sea
sickness, more from home sickness, but in two or three days
they will hardly be recognized as the same boys: their hair
cut, paint and lime washed off, and clothes on, they will
look quite tidy and clean. Then you may try your hand at
a new Melanesian dialect.
Are there no more islands with which you are well
acquainted ? You mean islands with whose inhabitants
and languages we are really familiar? Yes ; the whole of
the Banks’ Archipelago to the north of us, with the excep-
tion of one island, is known to us in a sense in which most
of these New Hebrides Islands cannot be said to be. I
coidd not yet walk about where I please in Whitsuntide


and Lepers Islands; nor in Malicolo and Spirito Santo;
but in the Banks’ Islands I can go where I please, and be
quite sure to meet with friendly treatment. Perhaps 1
ought to except Santa Maria, though I hope by and by to
o-o round it with one of the two young men now with us
from that island. Then again the Solomon Islands ; we
can do much as we like in respect of walking about and
sleeping ashore in parts of three or four of them. Here,
as you see, and in the Santa Cruz Archipelago, and the
greater number of the Solomon Islands, and many otheis,
such as the Torres Islands, it is still necessary to be very
cautious. . , . 9 T
How much longer shall we cruise about here? 1 can
hardly tell: it is very desirable to follow up at once all
such openings as may be afforded to us: we may find men
willing, perhaps, to spend a few days on board whom we
may trade about to some of the neighbouring islands, and
then return them again to their own homes, and possibly
induce one or two young men to come away with us. It
is a great thing to accustom them to be with us even for a
short time : they learn to place confidence in us, and then
things soon go on well. , ,
You never can tell then exactly wlmt you may do.
We have a general plan, which we work with many modi-
fications : the circumstances of the islands, which are always
altering, must guide us in some degree : a trader’s visit may
have changed the whole manner of the people towards us.
There are many indications of the line we ought to take m
each instance, which I cannot possibly make intelligible to
you : it comes by degrees; and you know under whom 1
received my training. . , ,
I noticed that you did not land on that island this
morning. I was watching the boat with my glass : why
was that? The number of the people on the beach was very
great; more than 300 : and they were all armed, and
would not throw away their weapons when I made signs
to them to do so. Yes, I saw you standing up m the
boat waving your arms. Then there were no children nor
women visible; and parties of men were moving about m
the bush, which grows down to the beach. You did not
think it safe to go ashore ? I thought it wiser not to do so :
there was no reasonable prospect of any thing being gamed
by it; and there may have been some special cause of irn-


tation of which we know nothing. I thought it right to
wait until (U.Y.) we see them again. But in all these
cases the difficulty is not so much in doing any thing, as in
knowing what one ought to try to do : it is not at all easy to
decide in these cases upon what it is right to do. One must
hope to be guided aright. Well, 1 need not take you now
through all the islands. There is no need to tell you about
Mota and the Banks’ Islands; nor of the Santa Cruz
Islands, of which the descriptions by Mendana, 300 years
ago, are more accurate than any that I can write now, ex-
cepting only his accounts of spices and gold and precious
stones, which we have not as yet discovered. In our re-
ports of the Mission year by year, we have stated what we
know about these places, and of the Solomon Islands.
■ I may say something about them perhaps by and by.
We must bring our imaginary voyage to a close now, and
suppose the schooner to be freighted with some forty Mela-
nesians gathered from fourteen or fifteen islands; most of
the party, as I trust, old scholars already able to read and
write ; some, as we pray, baptized during the winter.
It is a happy day when the schooner drops her anchor
in our own little natural dock off the Mission buildings at
Kohimarama; and when we meet again dear friends, and
read our packet of English letters.
Then in a day or two all have settled down into the
more regular life on shore ; but each year the school as-
sumes a more and more hopeful appearance : more rapid
progress is made; more languages acquired; the work is
expanding ever more and more widely.
After all I fear that I have not said what you wanted
to hear ; that I have not answered the questions which you
would put to me if you were really and not only in imagi-
nation sitting by my side.
But if you will ask definite questions, I will try to give
definite answers, for I am most anxious that you should
know as much as I can tell you about the Mission.
Thank you, my dear friend, for your kind words and
assistance.
Affectionately yours,
J. 0. PATTESON,
Missionary Bishop.


4 £
Jf.
M
i
accounts,
1861-G2


TREASURER IN ACCOUNT WITH THE MELANESIAN MISSION,
From 6 lh April , 1861, io 30 th June, 1862.
£ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d.
Apr. 6.
I. Interest of Money
11. Bills on England—
8 4 6
Apr. 6. By Bishop of New Zealand . . 59 8 10
Dec. 3. By Bishop Patteson . . . 150 0 0
Dec. 10. By Bishop of New Zealand . . 200 0 0
Feb. 7- By Bishop Patteson . . . 200 0 0
June 7- Transfer from General Account
in England to Ship Account in
England 346 13 6
956 2 4
111. DONATIONS, New Zealand.
1860. Auckland.
Dec. 21, O. Neill, Esq 2 0 0
Apr. 19. Central Division Fund . .59 9 6
May 18. By Mrs. Kempthorne . .3180
May 31. Rev. T. Lanfear . . .200
June 3. Hon, H. Sewell . . . 10 0 0
Mrs. Cracroft . . . . 10 0 0
July 29. Mrs. Abraham and Mrs. McGuire 3 0 0
11. Brown, Esq. . . .10 0
Aug. 17. Yen. Archdeacon Maunsell .200
Aug. 27. Rev. T. B. Hutton . . . 2 10 0
Sep. 20. Rev. M. Lally . . . 10 0 0
Nov. I. Mr, Archibald Clark . . .550
Dec. 19. Hon. Col. Kenny . . .110 0
Dec. 25. Mrs. Stapley . . , .10 0
Taupiri Mission Station . .600
1862.
Jan. 9. Hon. R. Wood . . . ,220
By Rev. S. Blackburn . , 2 15 0
Feb. 24. Kohanga Mission Station . .390
Mar. 26. William Selwyn, Esq. . .600
J. Heywood, Esq, , , .10 0
Apr. 16. Collections in St. Mary’s Parish, 4
Parnell . . , . . 21 14 0
Apr. 28. An Irish Settler , . .10 0
May 12. Anonymous , . . . 010 0
May 27. Rev. J. Kinder . . .110
June 11. Anonymous . . . .050
Rev. B. Y. Ashwell . . .500
June 13. Hon. Chief Justice Arney . .500
June 16. Hon. H. Sewell . . .500
Anonymous . . . .10 0 0
Parnell 10 0
June 22. Anonymous • . . .020
Dor A Ring
Carried forwards , . £lB3 10 6
£964 6 10


TREASURER IN ACCOUNT WITH THE MELANESIAN MISSION,
From 6th April, 1861, to 30 th June, 1862.
Cr.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
I. BALANCE 115 8 0
11. CAPITAL ACCOUNT.
FARM.
Clearing . . . . . 68 7 0
Draining . . . . . 40 0 0
Fencing . . . . . 710 4
Do 39 16 10
Posts and Rails . , . . 35 15 0
Well 19 II 6
Dairy Utensils . . . . 20 0 8
Expenses on Stock . . . 27 14 2
Labour...... 141 18 10
Cash Payments .... 128 711
629 3 3
111. BUILDING ACCOUNT.
Strange (Mason) . . . . 48 12 0
Do. do. . . . . 21 0 6
Firewood (Old Account) . .12 3 0
81 15 C
Carried forwards . . . . . £726 6 9


£ s. d. £ s. d.
Brought forwards . . 183 10 C
£ s. d.
mi g 10
1801. Offertories.
Dec. 25. St. Mary’s, Parnell . . .11 10 0
1802.
Mar. 16. Do. do. . . .13 5 0
1861.
Dec. 28. St. Paul’s . . . . 8 12 3
1862.
June 8. Do. . . . • .26 0 0
May 29. St. John’s College . . .314
June 11. St. Stephen’s . . . .723
June 15. St. John’s College . . .444
73 15 6
Taranaki.
By Archdeacon Govett . .13 0 0
Do. do. . . . 18 0 0
Mrs. Hetley . . . .10 0
J 32 0 0
Nelson, Diocese of.
Bishop’s Chapel . . .239
1861. Diocesan Subscriptions . .24 0 0
Feb. 27. Do, do 54 1 0
Feb. 24. D. Rough, Esq. . . .330
Rev. R. H. Codrington . .500
Apr. 5. Bishop’s Chapel . . .600
Alms Box, Christ Church . . 1 15 6
Golden Bay . . • .246
June 9, Do. do 6 4 0
Motueka (Maori Collection) . 11l 0
170 14 0
1862. Waiapu, Diocese of.
Feb. 24. Maori Collection ... 612 0
Christchurch, Diocese of
1861. Canterbury.
May 18. Remitted to Auckland . .50 0 0
1 n n n
July 29. Do. do. . • .900
!862. n
Feb. 24. Maori Collection . . • 5 0 0
f»4 0 tl
1861. Otago.
July 29. Dunedin . . . • .26 7 0
Waikowaiti . . • .414
Oct. 3. J. Jones, Esq 50 0 0
1862.
Jan. 30. Riverton, Jacob’s River . . 13 0 0
Apr. 7. Dunedin, by Rev. E. G. Edwards 40 11 0
1861. Melbourne.
May 28. St. Peter’s Juvenile Missionary
Society . • • *5OO
1862. r A A
Do. do. • 5 0 0
June 19. Treasurer of C. M. S. . .8019 10
Carried fomards
19 10
£692 11 6 964 6 10


Brought forwards . . • £720
Carried forwards . • • £726 6 0


£ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d.
Brought forwards . . 692 11 6 964 6 10
Sydney ..... 100 0 0
1861. Tasmania.
Campbell Town Church Collection
in Gold Nuggets and Money .910
Ross Church . . . . 816 10
Skelton Castle . . . . 3 17 10
O’Brien’s Bridge . . . 2 10 0
St. John’s Sunday School, Hobart
Town, Missionary Boxes .280
St. David’s Sunday School . 113 0
Mrs. Davies . . . .10 0
Balance to credit of Old Mission
Fund . . . . . 11 0 5
Rev. F. H. Cox . . .08 11
Less premium on draft at 2 per
cent., 16s. 40 0 0
Queensland.
Sir George Bowen ... 10 0 0
Norfolk Island.
Jemima Young. . . .200
Mr. Rossiter . . . . 1 10 0
James Dawe . . . .050
John Quin tall, Junior . .10 0
David Buffett . . . .10 0
Frederick Young . • .0150
Charles Christian . . . 5 10 0
Fletcher Nobbs . . .10 0
Francis Nobbs . . . .10 0
14 0 0
Aneiteum Island ... 100
S. P. G. Special Donation . 24 6 2
Anonymous .... 135 8 0
lOl7 5 8
IV. SPECIAL DONATIONS TOWARDS
THE PURCHASE OF A MISSION
VESSEL.
1861. Canterbury.
Nov. 1. Draft on Auckland . . . 72 0 0
Mr. Latter . . . . 10 0 0
B2 0 0
Nelson.
Oct. 1. Bishop of Nelson’s Chapel . 5 6 0
Nov. 27. Taranaki .... 10 0 0
May 28. Presbyterian Synod in Scot-
land 50 0 0
1862.
Jan. 3. Do. do. in New Zealand :
Otago 39 17 6
Canterbury 10 0 0
Nelson 3 0 0
102 17 6
1862. Melbourne .... 35 0 0
Apr. 16. Collections in St. Mary’s Parish,
Parnell, Auckland... 1300
June 7. Newcastle Church Society. . 100 0 0
348 3 6
Carried forwards . . £2329 16 4


Brought forwards
£726 0 9
IV. GENERAL ACCOUNT. £ d.
Biscuit 109 9 2
Bread 38 13 0
Flour 29 18 0
Bice 7 18 0
Potatoes 9 12 6
Groceries 11l 18 10
Meat 167 7 7
Medicines . . . , . 515 6
Clothing 78 9 G
Teachers’ Extra Expenses . . 20 12 6
School Expenses . , , . 46 3 6
Garden and Field Expenses . . 14 10 4
Trade . , . . . . 31 12 1
Tools 20 12 8
Timber 30 6 0
Tinman 9 11 6
General Expenses . . . . 18 16 2
House for Mota Island . . . 29 6 0
Firewood 12 12 0
793 4 10
Carried forwards .
£1519 11 7


£ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d.
23-9 10 4
Brought forwards .
V. LOAN.
Repayment of, to St. Mary’s
Parish . . . • 150 0 0
Interest on Do. . . .15 0 0
IGS 0 0
Interest on £5OO to Christ’s
College, Canterbury
40 0 0
205 0 0
Purchase of Stores of “ Southern
Cross”..... 50 0 0
Donation.
Discount on Payments . . 3 5 0
VI. COMMONS, &c.
Bishop Patteson . . . 200 0 0
Rev. L. Pritt . . . . 25 0 0
Rev. B. T. Dudley . . . 25 0 0
Rev. T. Kerr . . . 25 0 0
275 0 0
VII. BALANCE 265 0 7
£3128 1 11


£ s. d.
„ ... £ s. d. £ s . d.
Wrought forwards . . 1510 117
V. SHIP ACCOUNT. 7
Charter of “ Dunedin ” . . . 260 3 8
Fittings, Purchase of Paint, &c. . 17 11 9
Charter of “ Sea Breeze ” . . 303 11 9
Boat 17 0 0
Sail 3 5 0
Cargo Boat 2 10 0
Oars, Repairs 5 10 0
Ju, 25. Ist Instalment of Charter of “ Sea
Breeze ” . . . . 150 0 0
VI. WAGES 102 8
VII. STIPENDS ....
Rev. L. Pritt 200 0 0
Rev. B. T. Dudley . . . . 100 0 0
Rev, T, Kerr 100 0 0
VIII. TRANSFERRED to SHIP ACCOUNT in ENGLAND 346 13
£3128 1 II
N.B. All Sums of money contributed specifically to the Fund for the
purchase of a new Mission Vessel have been carried to that Account. But
there may be cases where money contributed was intended by the Donors to
be appropriated to this Fund, and yet no notice of their wish has been com-
municated to the Treasurer. In such cases the money has been used to meet
the Current Expenses of the Mission.


The new Mission Schooner “ Southern Cross, built
by Messrs. Money Wigram & Sons, sailed from South-
ampton on Wednesday, November 12th, 1862, and it is
hoped that it will arrive at Auckland early in March, 1863.
The total expenses of building, insuring, and provi-
sioning the vessel, together with the wages of the crew,
have amounted to £5OOO.
The sum of £4496 has been already raised by sub-
scription, and a sum of £5OO has been borrowed to defray
the remainder of the expenses.
It will be seen by this Report that the vessel is an
indispensable part of the Mission, and that the expenses of
chartering vessels at Auckland for the Mission work have
fallen very heavily upon the Melanesian Fund.
It is earnestly hoped, therefore, that those who are
interested in this Mission, and into whose hands this Report
may fall, will come forward and contribute towards the
reduction of this debt, it being of the greatest importance
that no further charge should be laid upon the Funds of
the Melanesian Mission.
Subscriptions will be thankfully received by J. H.
Patteson, Esq., 1, Elm Court, Temple, or may be paid to
the account of the Melanesian Ship b und, at Messrs.
Hcrries & Co., 16, St. James’ Street.
December, 18C2.
GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, PRINTERS, ST. JOHN’S SftUARE, LONDON
