

Souvenir...
of the
Australian
Commonwealth.
[Price 6d,]
Dedicated to Mis Excellency LORD HOPETOUN, First Governor-General
of Federated Australia.
Inauguration Day,
1st Jan., 1901.
[By “ANGLO-AUSTRAL.”]
VAIVAT AUSTRALIA!


1901.
jjagjKEE sland on the threshold of another age !
WWr- What will it bring us ? A century of woe
Or will it usher in the universal reign
Of Christ the Lord ? Ood grant it may be so.
The Future looms before us, big with Fate.
Long, long ago hath God this age mapped out;
Laid well His plans, and like a wise, omnipotent
Master-Builder, He hath all things made
Subservient to one end. The evils cf Life,
Its sweets and joys ; its sorrows and its cares ;
All work the self-same end. So ne’er despair.
God is all-wise, merciful, and just,
He will not try us more than we can bear ;
But out of all will ever work our good,
And fit us thus for everlasting life, —
Life with Him, in endless realms of bliss.
Submit, then, now ! Bow low to Him the knee
Of inmost soul! Give rev’rence, worship, praise.
And all that’s due to Him, thy God and Lord,
And may He help you by His matchless grace
To see His face in Jesus Christ, His Son !
C.E.WILTON,
JVaverley, Sydney , N.S JV.,
28th December , 1900.


1st January, 1901.
AUSTRALIA’S CORONATION.
(One of the Competitive Federal Odea.)
HENCE this scent of native roses?
SwW* With flannel flowers why strewn the way ?
Who is this rides on so briskly,
Clothed with smiles —in bride’s array ?
Haste we forth with joy to meet thee,
Blue-eyed maid, Queen Australie 1
With vows renewed, once more we greet thee ;
Listen to our melody !
Fresh from Heaven thou com’st to bless us,
Decked with grace and smiles most rare.
Who is there can now distress us,
With a Queen so brave and fair ?
In a car, drawn by her emus,
Led by bounding kangaroos,
On she comes, can any refuse
To devote to her his Muse ?
Crowned with wreaths of Gold Mimosa,
Before her borne the Waratah,
The Lyre-bird’s plumage for her head-dress,
See her come, like some great star,
Diamonds floating all about her,
Resplendent with her own bright gems,
Products all of her rich country,
Crowning her with diadems.
Rich and queenly is her presence,
Young and strong, and sweet and fair,
In all the world there’s none that presents
Such a beauty beyond compare !
Envious gaze the older nations,
On this wond’rous, matchless scene.
Listen to their observations, —
“ Would that we had such a Queen ! ”


Queenly Austral! hear the praises
Sung of thee with heart and mouth.
All Britannia to thee raises
Hymns of praise, Queen of the South !
Seated on thy throne of glory,
Wrought of,richest, rarest gold,
Thou wear’s! a grace which none before thee
Ever wore in days of old.
Here, to-day, once more we crown thee
Empress, where but Queen before :
For now thy Sister States have joined thee ;
Thou art mightier than of yore !
Thou hast proved thyself in battle
Worthy of thy parent’s name.
Let none now dare against thee prattle ;
On war’s stern field thou’st won a fame.
In all the arts of Sport and Learning
First and foremost is thy place ;
Ev’ry day new laurels earning,
Adding still new grace to grace.
Rich in golden grain and fleeces,
In various products of the mine.
Heaven and Earth aye thee increases,
For thy enrichment all combine.
Once more hear the vows that meet thee,
On this thy Coronation Day.
Listen to the songs that greet thee
’Midst this greatly loyal display !
Each day may thy Sun’s bright glances
Shed their rays on thy dear ones,
And as each dying year advances
Success aye mark thy setting suns.


BRITAIN-AUSTRALIA.
Sons of England greet thee,
Australia, Queen of the South !
And all Australia welcomes them
With heart as well as mouth.
Bravely they won us Freedom
In the sterner days of old,
And now they come to crown our Queen
With a crown of purest gold.
Worthy descendant of her race
Comes Australia proudly now,
Robed in jewelled and costly garments,
Diamonds flashing from her brow.
Greet her ! Greet her, all ye Nations,
All ye Heathens greet her too,
As she approaches in her chariot
Drawn by Lion and Kangaroo !
Rides she on in glorious splendour,
Swift as an Emu, proud and strong,
Beautiful in youth and vigour.
Gaze on her, ye wond’rous throng !
Behold our Queen as she approaches,
Greet her with your shouts and song,
And your loud and sweet Hosannahs,
All ye children now prolong.
Let the Nations all acknowledge
Her youthful grace and pride of birth,
True to her free and high-born destiny,
Ever true to her native worth.
Queen, indeed, of a land of plenty,
Unbroken peace and sunny smiles,
Rich beyond the dreams of avarice,
Free from all the Old World’s guiles.


Ride on ! Ride on ! in all your splendour,
In Honour, Riches, Health and Fame
Thou hast earned the best of places,
Reached the highest niche of Fame.
Nor war of greed, nor guilt has stained thef
N'or senseless lust of fame or power,
Rut Truth and Honour still sustain thee,
Strengthen thee in this crowning hour.
Industry and Trade and Commerce
Mark thy past and future course :
These shall ev’ry moment crown thee
With peace and joy and not remorse.
Rich thou art in ev’ry product
Of Earth and Air and Land and Sea ;
Surely, then, thou art the richest
Queen the world did ever see.
Rich, indeed, beyond conception,
Hidden wealth still unexplored,
Rlessed by Heaven and Heaven’s Master,
.Jesus Christ, thy God and Lord.
Never was a Queen e’er like thee,
None with thee can now compare,
Blue-eyed maiden, bright and sunny,
Fairest of the loveliest fair.
Here, to-day, we’ve met to crown thee,
All the world now looking on 1
Here thy sons and daughters gather-
To gaze on her the sun shines on.
Here thy children haste to meet thee,
Strangers, too, from near and far :
And all the world joins in their praises,
And greets thee with a loud “ Hurrah I ’


Australian History and Federation.
IN EASY VERSE FOR SCHOOLS.
yis WRITE of a land of plenty,
Sjrjjtf A land of sunny smiles,
A land of wool, and wheat, and gold,
Free from the Old World’s guiles.
Land of the Opal—glorious stone,
With rainbow hues of light,
Land of the Diamond, and other gems
Of countless hues most bright.
DISCOVERY.
In April (1770) seventeen-seventy
The immortal Captain Cook
Discovered our famous Botany Bay,
Mentioned fully in his book
Of “Voyages around the World,”
Having home and friends forsook
To sail the unknown Southern Seas, —
Hurrah for Commander Cook !
FIRST GOVERNOR.
In (1788) seventeen hundred and eighty-eight
A settlement was begun,
Captain Philip made first Governor,
A most illustrious one !
Discovered “our beautiful harbour,”
The finest under the sun !
Named after Sir George Jacksox,
Australia’s most famous port, —
Now sheltering mighty merchantmen,
Ships of war, and every sort
Of floating vessel that one could name, —
Sydney’s pleasure resort.


In (1793) seventeen hundred and ninety-three
The second fleet arrived, —
And during its first infant years
The Colony had not thrived.
The conveying stores,
Was lost upon the way,
Struck upon an iceberg,
. And, was beached at Table Bay.
GOVERNOR HUNTER.
Governor Hunter, the Colony’s father,
Introduced free people and food ;
Then followed the “ Rum Currency,”
When “rum” for “money” stood.
Rev. Rd. JOHNSON.
The first chaplain was Mr. JOHNSON,
A good, kind, Christian man,
Who built the first Church in Australia,
Then placed under the ban
Of convict settlement ( a thing of the past,)
To-day Australia’s free
From end to end—a Christian land —
A land of Liberty !
Rev. SAMUEL MARSDEN.
Then the Rev. SAMUEL MARSDEN,
A “ warrior brave of old,”
Who fought the enemies, of truth,
Could be neither bought nor sold,
. Laid the foundation of happier things,
And was invested, with the trust
Of magisterial authority—a magistrate most just
GOVERNORS MACQUARIE AND BRISBANE.
Now Governor MACQUARIE
(He of the famous “ Chair,”)
Took up the cause of the prisoners—
Gained a mighty triumph there.
Espoused the cause of the Emancipists,
(That is, of prisoners set free),
And gained for them fuller citizen rights,
In this land of Liberty.


Sir Thomas Brisbane followed,
Whose views were not so good, , .
Being contrary to those of MACQUARIE,
(Similar now in the land of flood
And cheap black island labour, —
Which we have so long withstood ) ,
GOVERNORS DARLING AND QIPPS.
Their reign was the reign of Party,
Faction fights were all the rage,—
The Press suffered much through libel,
And war with Government did wage.
GIPPS collided with the squatters,
But those glorious pioneers,
Squatters and pressmen, won the daj
And earned our heartiest cheers.
GOVERNOR BOURKE.
Amongst our earlier Govt rnors
Was the great Sir Richard BoURKE,
(His statue you see in the Domain)
A man who ne’er did shirk
Where Duty, Honour, and Truth did call—
One full of zealous work.
Political and religious disabilities
He managed to remove,
And a most noble Governor
Sir Richard Bourke did prove.
WISE POLITICS.
All religions were equalised
In (1836) eighteen thirty-six ;
And (1840) eighteen hundred and forty
Is the time historians fix
For the cessation of transportation,—
Then began true politics.
Free immigration was promoted,
Education fostered, too,
More liberal home rule established
In the land of the Kangaroo.
Agriculture quickly advanced,
Commerce greatly did increase,
Social manners improved most happily
In the Land of the Golden Fleece.


WM. CHAS. WENTWORTH.
Attempts to re-introduce the convict
Were icpulsed with mighty force,
Wentworth against this protested. —
And the Emancipists lost their cause,
Australians then strove for freedom,—
For a settlement of the Free,
And made Australia what it is—
A land of Liberty !
DISCOVERY OF GOLD (1851).
And now a new diversion succeeded the oldqr one,
The “ Yellow Fever ” attacked them all in the land of
Perpetual Sun.
Thousands came over the Ocean to seek for precious gold,—
The advantages to Australia of course were manifold.
THE NEW CONSTITUTION (1855).
Responsible Government was established in (1855) eighteen
fifty-five,
Australians in those stirring days were very much alive.
The oratory of Wentworth, Bland, Thomson, Lang,
and a score
Of others won us freedom from a yoke of officialdom sore.
Since then Australia’s flourished, and the unlocking of her
land
Has placed her wealth within the reach of every indus-
trious hand.
Many thousands by this attracted, quite as much as by
her gold,
Have made their homes in the Newer World, and forsaken
quite the Old.
PORT PHILLIP (Victoria).
In (1850) eighteen hundred and fifty Victoria, took its rise,
Developed into a Colony, to everyone’s surprise.
yjjjQQ when she s greatly flourished een threatened to
take the lead
Of the older city of Australia,—which jealousy did breed.
We, too, have had our “ Border Fights,” like the “Land of
the shaggy wood,”
(Of course, I mean Auld Scotland, the land of the brave
and good).


MORETON BAY (Queensland).
In 1851), her Colonial carter began,—
And wonderfully she has developed in spite of her scorch-
ing sun.
Rich in wool and agriculture, and gold and opals too,
And every kind of mineral in the Land of the Emu.
Bravely she fought for freedom, in Africa as well,
And many a deed of noble worth historians yet may tell.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
South Australia, discovered in (1802) eighteen hundred
and two,
Started und,eT a charter (India did so too).
August (1834) eighteen thirty-four the historians fix,
But the. colony was not settled till (1830) eighteen thirty-
six.
Captain Hindmarsh appointed Governor, December 28—
Since then this part of Australia has had a happy fate,
Made into a Cro\vn Colony in (1841) eighteen forty-one,
Sir George Grey appointed Governor —a very able one.
Since then responsible Government, by the people, it has
gained,
And its great success in consequence has been happily
maintained'.
■ v WEST AUSTRALIA.
.West Australia was truly settled in (1825) eighteen twenty-
five,
And (1848) eighteen hundred and forty-eight is the time
she ’gan to thrive,
She was then formed into a Colony, under the sway of
the British Crown.
Since then she’s wonderfully risen, gained political free-
dom’s rule,
And instead of a convict prison, has now become a full
And free-born nation, still under the Biitish Crown,
But the yoke of sore officialdom from off her back has
thrown.
Her gold-mines and her pastures are the sources of her
wealth,
But the climates in the north and east are rather too warm
for health.
But further civilization may alter soon all these,
And West Australia prove a land that everyone will please.


TASMANIA (Hobart Town.)
Sweet “ Sanatorium of the South,”
Thy name is now in ev’ry mouth,
No climate, p’rhaps in this world so fair,
With thine, Tasmania, may compare,
Suiting all sorts and kinds of men,
Thou must inspire the poet’s pen.
Though small in area, like Britain, great
With all that constitutes a State.
Though thy summer sun is sometimes hot, —
Like our Australia, thou art not
Visited by cyclonic heat,
Thou loveliest, greenest. South retreat.
Sea breezes and mountain airs pervade
Thy sea-girt home, and cool and shade
All through thy land may aye be seen,
Land of fruits and flowers, sweet Austral Queen !
In (1642) sixteen hundred and forty-two,
Great Tasman, a sailor brave and true,
Anchored off thy genial shore ;
Nay, further, landed, and what is more,
Called thee after Van Dieman a Dutch Governor ;
Then others came, until our Cook
Surveyed thee, and for Britain took ;
Planted the flag that long has waved,—
A thousand years of tempest braved !
This in (1777) seventeen seventy-seven,
Since when, Bligh, and others came
And filled thy land with grief and shame I
Bushrangers, convicts, roamed thy land,
Robbed and murdered on ev’ry hand.
All that is past, and now we see
Tasmania, the land of the brave and free,
Land of mountain and of wood,
Of fruits and flowers, and all that’s good ;
Australia’s favorite summer resort,—
Free from much of the vice of sport,
That gambling fiend so rooted here,
That harms Australia much, we fear.
My “History” now is ended, Federation’s on the scene--
Three cheers for Greater Britain, and for Britannia’s Queen .
In (1788) seventeen hundred and eighty-eight first settle-
ment was begun
And Federation accomplished in nineteen hundred and one


The Federal Review.
Held by His Excellency LORD HOPETOUN, First
Governor “General of the Commonwealth.
3rd January, 1901.
LORIOUS was the pageant of those 10,000 men
Representatives of the Empire, and others in the ken
Oi our colonial knowledge, Maoris, Indians, and Sepojs,
Together with the Ghonrkas and our own brave Khaki hoys.
How w ondrously the Life Guards preserved unhrokenline,
The Household Guards and the Lancers equally as fine ; _
The Irish, Scotch, and Grenadiers (who played their
march, of course). —
The grand, machine-like movements of all the British force.
And, too, our splendid Highlanders, Mounted Rifles, Naval
Brigade,
And all the rest of the Volunteers, what a glorious show
they made !
The spirited martial music, and other popular airs
Connected with our glory, pleased braves as well as fairs.
What shouting and what cheering I what stirring of our
hearts —
How in battle now, we wondered, would all these play
their parts ?
All bravely, like our Jack Tars, would they fight for Home
and Queen,—
All colours blended in the field, Red, White, and Blue, and
Green !
India and Australia, the colonies North and South,—
Joined to federate the Empire with deeds as well as mouth.
Canada and New Zealand, little Tasmania, too.
As well as all the Colonies of the Emu and Kangaroo.
We’ve given the World a foretaste in Africa scorching
clime ;
In China as well as Africa our Colonial soldiers shine.
Then bless the Federation of Australia and the World-,
And may the flag of Peace e’er wave, no war flag he
unfurled,
And may the God of Nations and Truth defend the Night,
And lead us on to Glory and Everlasting .Light! m


New Zealand.
(Originally published in the Wellington Keening Fost.)
$/c\o thou, proclaimed by Bnlwer Lytton’s mouth
The future Britain of the rising South !
Wliose wondrous beauties one yet hardly knows
Huge mountains, capped with bright eternal snows
Sweet peaceful vales that lie land-locked between ;
Ferns, flowers, and mistletoes for ever green,
Clothing the valleys or the mountainsides—
Aye, e’en amongst the snow the flower presides.
Whose beauties words, mere words can never tell,
Or painters paint them, paint they e’er so well !
Only he who knows or has seen like spot
Can well describe thee, then but a little jot.
Thy wealth is not alone in beauty spread ;
Thy metals and riches are unnumbered ;
Rich agricultural soil lies all around,
And jewels and minerals buried in the ground ?
Strange birds, too, haunt thy wild primeval scene,
And wonders wait where man has never been.
Lytton was right! Great future is in store
For thee New Zealand : for thou hast far more
Within thy islands than most other lands,
Thy future but depends on willing hands
And honest hearts, and honoured, stainless names,
To make thee all that Bnlwer Lytton claims.
Then, rise ye sons of grandest clime on Barth .
'For Freedom strike, and show your British birth !
Ope wide your ports, with friendly, lib ral hands
To all thy brothers—though in other lands.
Let generous commerce, with her golden chain
Bind all the nations in the southern main.
Place no restrictions on thy labourers’ toil,
Nor all the efforts of reformers spoil;
Shake off Protection, red with tyrant rust,
And in full Federation boldly trust.
Rise, all ye Southerners, and as brothers should,
Strive well together for the common good !


Arise, Australia !
Land of the Rising Sun.
(BY ANGLO-AUSTRAL.)
dfpHE Sun rose gloriously and crowned
The purple hills with golden light,
Where all was naught but dark around
Now was clothed with glory bright.
The sea like one vast opal gleamed,,
The crested waves all danced with glee,
The rock-bound coast like giants seemed,
Uprearing,their immensity.
The Morning Star had long since paled,
The silver mists had passed away
Night once more completely failed
To hide the light of coming day.
So Austral rose, after long night
Of struggle towards nationhood :
The throes of birthdorn were not light;
gut nobly she the test hath stood.
We saw her in her early birth,
Struggling to be strong and fiee,
And now slm’s known in all the Earth
As the glorious home of Liberty.
Children in her turn she’s born,
Worthy of her Forbear’s past,—
And since, in battle long and stern,
She’s won a fame will ever last!
In Heavenly blessings rich she stands,—
Untold wealth within her lies, —
She has the climates of all lands,
Beneath her bright and sunny skies.
Her harbours tilled with noble fleets,—
Enriching her yet more and more,
Of Commerce and Industry, the sweets,
She gathers in t’ increase her store.
Proudly Austral stands to-day,—
Crowned with Honour, Truth, and Eight
Clad in queenly Bride’s array
Dazzling with a diamond light.


Haste ye nations, all to greet her,—
Briton crown her royally,—
A thousand of her famous warriors,—
For this act have crossed the sea,
Great Britain here in miniature, —■
World’s representatives gathered now
To help assist the Mighty Mother
Place the crown upon her brow !
Raise your anthems loud, ye children,
Rule Britannia sing with might and main,
And after the Australian Anthem,
Sing God Save our Noble Queen !
Fire your salvos all ye gunners,
All ye soldiers waiting there,
Fill the earth with your dread thunders, —
Rend in twain the nether air !
For through that rent perhaps the angels,—•
Spirits of our departed dead.
May see and hear the celebration
Of hopes for them long vanished.
See to-day the full fruition
Of their long and weary strife,
To awake to fuller manhood
Fuller freedom —Austral life
Nobly they fulfilled their mission,
The Wentworths, Parkes, and Nicholsons,
Deniehey, D alley, and many others.
Noble patriots—glorious sons !
Nobly, too, our Barton laboured
To galvanise us into life ; —-
And bravely Wise and R. O’CONNOR
Carried on the Federal strife.
Bruce Smith, Carruthers, and McMillan
Also fought for national life.
Worthy ending of their labours, —
Theirs to-day the Victory,
Aided by another Patriot, —
G, H. Reid— our great “ Georgie.”
These the men above all others
Since the day that Wentworth spoke
Of the need for Federation, —
Laboured on with ceaseless stroke.


Now the Victory’s crowned with laurel
The brows of “Austral’s Noblest Son,
The foster-father of Federation,
First Premier — Edmund H. Barton !
Crown him, too, his grateful country,
Crown him, Britain, as is just, ■
And when his earthly life is finished,
Crown his tomb with sculptured bust .
Raise again your glorious anthems,
Sing lustily now one and all,
And for our first great Governor-General,
Give a great and mighty call.
Cheer on cheer ring on the welkin,
Salvos of artillery,
Proclaim the birth of Federation
Of Australia, brave and free !
0 Father, look down in mercy now,
’On this, thy people, weak though tree,
For all must at thy dictate bow,
All bend, at last, to thee the knee,
Make us happy, wise, and strong
Rich in all that’s worth the name.
Inspire our lips with thankful song,
And fill our souls with holy flame.
So that, at the last, dear Lord,
When we come to dwell with Ihee,
All our hearts, with one accord,
Shall praise Thee through Eternity.


THE BRITISH SOLDIERS.
saw them, with heavy baggage bowed,
Pass through the waiting Austral crowd.
“ Where is the smartness of these men ? ”
We heard repeated again and again.
Scarcely a ringing cheer they got,
With few exceptions on the route,
Save the Seaforth and Cameron men,
Who were met with cheering, might and main ;
And the picturesque INDIAN in Khaki dress
’Woke dreams of Orient faithfulness,
True to their oath, their God, and Queen,
A glorious picture to be seen !
But what of Ireland’s faithful ones,
Who bravely used their swords and guns
Against the Boer of treacherous mood, —
Who loyal to the core have proved ?
Do we Australians dare forget
The wounds they suffered, the blood they let 1
Forget the glorious charge they made
At Balaclava —the blood there shed ?
Forget the noble deeds they’ve done
In ev’ry land beneath the sun ?
Forget our Wellington and Waterloo?
Forget Earl “Bobs,” the brave and true ?
May God forbid ! Three cheers, then, give
For Ireland’s Sons ! Long may they live
To fight for Freedom, Honour, Truth,
And thus, fight for themselves, forsooth !
Then let Australia honour all
Britannia’s Sons at Duty’s call !
Treat them kindly, love them well :
So that at “ Home ” a tale they’ll tell
Of the noble race they came to view
In the Land of the Emu and Kangaroo.
Three cheers for Britain’s noble Queen !
The best the world has ever seen.
Three cheers for Young Australia, too,
The land of Plenty, and Heaven’s bright blue.
Three cheers for Erin, brave and true,
And three times three for the Red, WTiite and Blue !


The Commonwealth!
MgT; AIL ! Federal Australia! In glorious splendour rise.
‘HE: To-day the Nations greet thee Queen of the Southern
skies !
In thy pride and glory, and thy youthfulness arise !
We greet thee, Queen Australia, on this thy bridal day.
God’s blessing rest upon thee in all thy future way.
May Wisdom ever mark thee, thee and all thy kin.
Go on and win the praise of all, the praise of thy God win.
Rich in ev’ry product of Labour and of Mind,
Thy valour and thy courage have astonished all mankind,
Continue as thou hast begun, thy future will be great,
Britannia’s noble second self—a glorious Christian State I
God’s blessing, then, go with thee in all thy future course,
Nor wickedness, nor war’s alarms, e’er cause thee pain or
loss.
Go on, and richly prosper, as well thou dost deserve,
Acknowledge God in all thy ways, and none but Him e’er
serve.


SYDNEY:
F. H. BOOTH, GENERAL PRINTER,
12-14 VICTORIA ARCADE.
