

1889.
QUEENSLAND.
BELLENDEN-KER RANGE (WOOROONOORAN),
NORTH QUEENSLAND.
(REPORT BY A. MESTON ON THE GOVERNMENT SCIENTIFIC EXPEDITION TO THE)
Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command.
TO THE HONOURABLE M. HUME BLACK, MINISTER FOR LANDS, QUEENSLAND.
Dear Sir, —The following is a report of the scientific expedition which I had the honour of
conducting to the Bellenden-Ker Range in North Queensland. It includes a brief article on the blacks of
the Bellenden-Ker district, with specimen words from five native dialects, an account of the freshwater
lakes on the tablelands of the Tipper Barron, and a short description of the timbers in the country
traversed by the expedition.
On the 4th of June Mr. F. M. Bailey, Colonial Botanist, and myself left Brisbane for Cairns,
where we arrived on the 9th, and were joined by Mr. Kendall Broadbent, Zoological CoHector for the
Museum. In three days all preliminary preparations were completed, and the whole outfit ready for
starting.
Special care was taken to provide for all probable contingencies. The foods selected were those
best adapted to the climate and the work to be done, and sickness and accidents were anticipated by
proper remedies and appliances. The outfit included a supply of sandshoes for the whole party, including
the kanakas, whose bare feet would never have endured continuous travel through thorny scrubs and
over weather-worn granite rocks. Throughout the whole period of the expedition ail expenditure was
economised to the extreme limit compatible with the comfort of the party, there being no waste and no
extravagance, and no article purchased beyond those imperatively required. Three guns and a rifle were
supplied for the use of the party by myself, free of cost to the Government. The only instruments
purchased were a compensating aneroid and a couple of thermometers.
On Friday, 14th June, the expedition started from Cairns. Besides Mr. Bailey, Mr. Broadbent,
and myself, there was my own son Harold, a boy 14 years of age, who gave very useful service as a
collector and assistant, a young man named Walter Beman, sent to me for colonial experience, and
four strong kanakas, one of whom was very kindly sent specially for the trip by Messrs. Swallow and
Derham.
On the night of the 15th we camped on Behana Creek, on the edge of the Mulgrave Plains, about
three miles from the Walsh Pyramid. The two plains on the Mulgrave are divided by Behana Creek, a
stream fringed on each side by a belt of scrub. This creek the blacks call “ Tringilburra,” a much more
euphonious and appropriate name than the one it bears. During this expedition I have made special
efforts to obtain the native names for creeks, mountains, rivers, and other conspicuous geographical
features, and respectfully suggest their adoption, not only for unnamed places, but to supersede many of
the utterly meaningless names already conferred by surveyors and local residents. This would serve the
double purpose of establishing an appropriate and pleasing geographical nomenclature, and perpetuating
at least one of the most intei’esting parts of native dialects, otherwise doomed to deplorably early
annihilation. The native name of Bartle Frere is “ Chooreechillum”; that of Bellenden-Ker is “ Wooroo-
nooran,” pronounced slowly with equal accent on all four syllables. The name Bellenden-Ker was
bestowed in 1803 by Captain Flinders, after T. Bellenden-Ker, a botanist of the period.
On the east side of Tringilburra Creek, the north spur of the Bellenden-Ker Range terminates on
the edge of the Mulgrave Plain. That spur rises gradually to Mount Toressa, the first peak, at a height of
2,600 feet. This is an abrupt sharp-pointed mountain falling suddenly from the crest on south and west
in precipices 300 or 400 feet in depth. From the summit you look down on the Mulgrave Valley and
the mouth of the Russell, with a clear view away to the north and west. Descending from Toressa about
600 feet, and following the crest of the connecting ridge, you come to the ascent of Mount Sophia, which
rises suddenly to a height of 4,100 feet. This is also a sharp-crested peak covered by dense rank vegeta-
tion. Descending 1,000 feet from the summit of Sophia you cross the intervening saddle which
separates it from the north peak of Bellenden-Ker, rising by an unpleasantly steep ascent to 5,000 feet.
To this peak from the starting point on the Mulgrave Plains the range is running south-south-
east. From the north peak to the centre peak the direction is nearly due south, and thence to the south
end the mountain curves gradually to south-south-west. The north peak has a huge spur running down
into broken ranges terminating in the junction of the Mulgrave and Russell, the gorge at the foot of the
C. A. 95-1889.


spur being drained by a branch of Harvey’s Creek. The total length of the Bellenden-Ker Range, from
the Mulgrave Plains to the south end, which at a height of 5,000 feet stands facing Bavtle Frere, is about
twenty or twenty-five miles. From end to end the whole range is covered on both sides by dense tropical
jungle, that on the eastern or Russell River side being the most luxuriant. There is not a bare foot of
ground on the whole extent of summit or the radiating spurs. Once on the north peak, at 5,000 feet,
you are actually on the top of Bellenden-Ker, though the centre peak rises 200 feet higher. The view is
magnificent beyond all possible description, and only bounded by the sky line on the edge of the horizon.
Further physical features will be given in another part of the report.
On the 16th June Senior-Constable Whelan came over from his camp on the Mulgrave with troopers
and pack-horses, in accordance with instructions kindly wired by Mr. Commissioner Seymour, who
requested him to afford the expedition all reasonable assistance. It is my duty to mention here that the
police assistance was of special value to the party, and saved a considerable amount of expense. Senior-
Constable Whelan did all in his power, within whatever time was not actually necessary for the discharge
of his own official duties, and he is certainly entitled to grateful mention in this report. On the night of
the 16th we camped at the head of the valley of Tringilburra Creek, beside the junction where one
branch comes down from under Sophia and Toressa, and the other from Bartle Frere and the west side of
Bellenden-Ker.
On the morning of the 17th we prepared for the start towards the mountain. We had reached
the last point accessible by horses, and thenceforth all the journey had to be done on foot. We struck
camp and crossed the creek at 8 in the morning, leaving one blackboy in charge of a tent which
formed the base of supplies. On crossing the creek, a clear, strong stream running rapidly over and
between large granite boulders, we began at once the ascent of Barnard’s Spur, a long, narrow forest
ridge, rising to a height of 1,700 feet. The timber along this spur is chiefly bloodwood, Moreton Bay ash,
and the casuarina usually known as forest oak. Only the crest of the spur is bare, and the sides for a
hundred feet, the forest ending suddenly in dense dark scrub. On the right you look down on the main
creek between Barnard’s Spur and the main range, and on the left into the branch which drains the
western slopes of Sophia. There are outcrops of quartz on several parts of the spur, but none showing
the faintest traces of gold. At 12 o’clock we reached the summit at 1,700 feet, the site of an old blacks’
camp, several of the structures still standing—large dome-shaped camps made from bent saplings, with
grass roofs. From this point we could see the whole of the Bellenden-Ker peaks, the summit of Bartle
Frere, and Cairns, and all the Inlet country away to the north.
Here was the last of the forest, there not being an acre of open country for all the rest of the
journey to the top of the mountain. The temperature in the shade at midday was 78 degrees.
We descended 700 feet along a small old blacks’ track leading down a very steep descent into the
junction of two creeks. Here is the point where Tringilburra Creek divides—one branch going eastward
draining the whole western face of Bellenden-Ker, and the other bringing down the water from the north
slopes of Bartle Frere, the west end of Bellenden-Ker, and the east side of the main range. The spur
which ends in the junction runs right to the summit of the south peak of Bellenden-Ker, and was the
route chosen for the ascent. All between this spur and one connecting Barnard’s Spur with Mount
Sophia is a vast concave basin, into which all the slopes and ridges of the mountain, from the north to the
south peaks, converge in dark gloomy ravines covered by dense tropical vegetation. We camped on the
16th at the junction named, on a previous occasion, the “ Whelanian Pools.” Here the two creeks unite
and pour their combined waters away to the north, down a long narrow gorge flanked by mountains
descending sheer down on each side, tne beautiful trees at the base hanging over the current in perpetual
shade.
We pitched our camps on the bare granite rocks, swept clean by the tremendous torrents that
rushed down those two gorges for nameless centuries of tropic rains. The temperature at night was
56 degrees; the water in both creeks 58 degrees. Elevation, 1,000 feet.
On the 18th all hands were out collecting in all directions.
About half-a-mile down the main creek is one of the loveliest scenes in Australia. From the main
range on the west side there comes a large impetuous torrent which forms a series of eight magnificent
cascades from 50 to 100 feet in height, one above the other, falling in sheets of snow-white foam, forming
a nearly unbroken line of water to a height of 500 feet, the last cascade visible in the far end of the dim
vista terminating in the dark ravines away far overhead on the face of the mountain. Dense jungle and
heavy foliaged trees hang over the torrent. Ascending the sidewalls to the crest of the first fall, you
stand facing a deep black pool between two pillars of smooth-faced perpendicular rocks. This pool
receives the second fall, and beyond that rise the others in one silver-flashing sublime staircase of
descending waters.
Mr. Bailey went down with me to behold this scene, and supplied the following notes on the
vegetation •—“ Overhanging the lower fall is the umbrella-tree ( Brassaia actinophylla) and the pine-tree
(Callitris Barlatorei). Above the water near the next fall is a large specimen of a Northern water gum
{Trisfania exiliflora), the trunk covered by a dense mass of climbers and epiphytes, conspicuous among
them being the lovely little fern Davallia pedata, TLoya australis , Soya Nicholsonia, JDioscorea transversa,
and Lygodium reticulatum. There are numerous epiphytes and a fine specimen of the ribbon fern
(Ophioglossum pendulum ) hanging from a horizontal branch, besides Dendrohium speciosum fusiforme ,
Bendrobium hispidum, and Bulbophyllum nemafopodum. In the crevices of the rocks are tufts of
JPogonatherum saccharoideum, an Indian grass only lately known to inhabit Queensland, and on the
perpendicular walls some splendid masses of Bulbophyllum Baileyi with unusually large leaves.”
The scene at this spot in the wet season must baffle the human imagination. Even in the dry
weather it was a picture of fascinating loveliness, the future paradise of the artist and the Ipvers of the
beautiful, the scenery-hunting tourists of years to come, when the lower ravines of the Bellenden-Ker
are become familiar to the outside world of amateur explorers.
To this series of splendid cascades I have given the name of the “ Morehead Cataracts,” a deserved
compliment to the Chief Secretary and Premier of a Government possessing the honourable distinction
of being the first to send out in any part of Australia a purely scientific expedition. Below these, on
the main creek, are the “ Francesca Falls.”


On the 19th Whelan and myself started up the mountain in the morning and cut a track through
thick scrub up to 2,000 feet. At a height of 2,300 feet we again found the remarkable fruit which Mr.
Bailey has named Qarcinia Mestoni, or “ Meston’s Maugosteen,” seeds of which I brought down from my
first visit to the mountain and gave to Mr. Soutter, of the Acclimatisation Gardens. On this occasion we
found it the size of a small apple, apparently not half grown, as the one discovered last trip was as big as
the largest orange. It never changes colour, being a bright olive green, whether half grown or fully ripe.
It is the first of the Qarcinia family ever found in Australia, and promises to be a specially valuable
addition to the fruits of the world. The taste, when ripe, is an exceedingly agreeable acid, and even the
half-grown fruit can be eaten with a sense of considerable satisfaction on a hot day; Whelan and myself
found it wonderfully refreshing.
On the 20th, Thursday, Mr. Bailey, Whelan, Harold, and myself started the ascent of the
mountain, leaving all the blackboys with Mr. Broadbent at the Pools, the second base of supplies, the
whole of them to follow us next day, except one boy left in charge of the camp. The ascent is through
thick scrub the whole way to the summit, there being only one small open patch, covered by ferns, at
2,700 feet. From 2,600 feet we had to resume our track-cutting, no very light work for Whelan and
myself when carrying forty-pound swags, and having not only to clear a track for the loaded boys next
day but to find out the proper route to follow. Towards evening we arrived at the first water, at 4,050
feet, or 3,050 feet above our starting point in the morning, Mr. Bailey not only enduring the journey
without serious fatigue, but making careful observations on the flora as he went along, the necessarily
slow pace we travelled enabling him to do this at comparative leisure. The point we stopped at is known
as the “ Palm Camp,” from a superb palm, beneath the spreading top of which we made our fire and slept.
About 200 feet down on the west side, and not more than 300 yards from the palm-tree, is a small running
stream of pure clear ice-cold water, completely shaded by the tall scrub and beautiful tree ferns. The
crest of the spur is not more than 50 yards wide, and falls off abruptly on each side into the depths
below. There are many very tall trees and some of considerable size, especially Kauri pines, which attain
gigantic dimensions. The lawyer vine and stinging-tree are left behind at about 2,000 feet, but all the
way up is a thick wiry undergrowth, which places track-cutting outside the pale of amusement. The
south peak of Bellenden-Ker was still 1,000 feet above us, through six miles of heavy scrub with no track
cut.
On Friday, the 21st, Broadbent arrived with five boys loaded with provisions and camp utensils.
The temperature at night was 54 degrees, at mid-day 62 degrees, and the water 54 degrees.
While Mr. Bailey was collecting round the camp, Whelan and myself cut a track on to the second
water, a stream similar to the first, about two miles further on. .
On Saturday, the 22nd, the whole party started for the summit and arrived on the south peak
about 2 o’clock. The vegetation here is one tangled solid mass, impenetrable without the cane-knife. All
hands were busy with knives and tomahawks for about three hours to clear enough space to camp on. All
around and below us were clouds and mist, the clouds breaking on the summit of the mountain and
discharging a light drizzling rain. The camp for the night was only temporary, and as heavy rain fell
and ran under the oil-cloth and we were all lying with some part in the water, and the thermometer
at 48 degrees, with an ice-cold wind blowing, it is natural to report that nobody slept very much that
night, and no one had any desire to repeat the experience. My chief anxiety was for Mr. Bailey, who,
however, bore the unpleasant ordeal and all other unpleasant privations during the trip with a cheerful
fortitude highly creditable to a man of his age, and very gratifying to myself. Mr. Broadbent was also
a hardworking, contented companion.
Sunday, the 23rd, was a wet, cold, miserable day, the thermometer at noon only 56 degrees, with a
westerly wind, bleak and chilly enough to make the blackboys crouch shivering round the fire. Whelan
and myself started out to cut a track to the centre peak, about two miles off, through indescribable
vegetation, the worst of which is a drachophyllum tree, bearing a splendid flower, with long, tough, gnarled,
wiry branches all tangled together. None of the other peaks could be seen, nor was Bartle Frere visible
across the intervening abyss, dense white clouds hiding all things beneath an impenetrable veil. We
could only guess at the exact position of the centre peak. The whole south end of Bellenden-Ker from
the centre peak broadens out to about three-quarters of a mile in width by two miles across from the peak
to the outer edge opposite Bartle Frere. This area consists of low short spurs running in all directions
covered by thick vegetation and loose granite rocks, intersected by watercourses with beds of clean
granite gravel. The trees are nearly all short and gnarled, and all, without exception, hard as bone.
Many of them vhen cut prove to be highly and pleasantly odoriferous. Conspicuous among the
vegetation is a dome-topped tree with foliage so thick that not a ray of sunlight penetrates, and the outer
top is so perfectly level that two men viewing each other from the summit of two of these trees appear
exactly as if they had protruded their heads from th« domes of two green pavilions, only the heads
visible. One beholds a strange and beautiful sight by ascending a tree and looking over the tops of the
others, which appear like a lovely leading colour in the tesseraic floor of various shades of green covering
the mountain away towards and over the centre peak. After cutting through for half-a-mile we returned
to the camp.
On the 24th Whelan started down the mountain, taking five boys and leaving one with us. A
trooper had come with a note to say he was required on the head of the Bussell, on account of some
murders by the blacks. This was another cold day with drizzling rain. Sent the blackboy to cut a
track towards the south for Mr. Broadbent to shoot over, and went away alone to continue the track to
the centre peak. Every stroke with the knife brought down a shower of water from every shrub, as an
addition to the light drizzling rain. The temperature was 54 degrees, with the usual wind sweeping
through the trees, chilling the very boqes. Cut within half-a-mile of the centre peak, and returned
about 4 o’clock. Mr. Bailey and Mr. Broadbent had done their best collecting all day under very
disheartening conditions, and Harold, too, went out daily in defiance of wind and rain.
On Tuesday, the 25th, Broadbent accompanied me to the centre peak, which we reached about
midday, and stood at last on the highest point of Bellenden-Ker, at 5,240 feet; the first men, beyond all
question, who ever put a foot on what will be shown in this report to be the highest land in Queensland.
The centre peak runs out to the eastward to a sharp steep razor-back point, not fifteen yards wide,
falling straight off on both sides. A clear and unobstructed view is obtained in all directions on a clear


day, but on this occasion we looked down on nothing but a waste ocean of white cloud, about 300 feet
below, stretching away in all directions to the horizon, all the surface rippled into motionless waves and
unsullied by a single speck, save the extreme peak of Bartle Frere, like a small black rock rising from a
limitless milk-white sea. In the evening, when returning, the air was cold and clear, with a bitterly sharp
wind blowing. The temperature fell at sunset to 48 degrees. Three of the boys had arrived during
the afternoon with provisions. At night the thermometer fell to 30 degrees, or 2 degrees of frost.
This was the severest cold during the trip, and we felt it acutely, being unable to keep sufficiently warm
at night to sleep. The boys took special care to keep a continuous fire.
Wednesday, the 26th, was the first fine day on the summit, and the coldest, being only 40 degrees
at noon, with the usual wind. After breakfast I started once more for the centre peak, taking Harold
and the blackboy “ Multarri.” On arrival at the lookout point there was not a speck in the heavens
within the circle of the horizon—only a pathless wilderness of immeasurable azure in which all objects
were marvellously distinct. To the south the summit of Mount Elliott was clearly visible, a distance of
at least 140 miles. The Cardwell and Hinchinbrook ranges were as plain as if only twenty miles away,
and to the west the view extended an incredible distance to far-off mountains of fantastic shapes, blue
and shadowy on the edge of the remote sky-line. There was a magnificent view of all the Upper Barron
and Herberton country, and the tablelands on the heads of the Johnstone, Moresby, Tully, and Herbert
rivers.
One glance conveyed more knowledge of that vast expanse of nearly uninhabited country than
could possibly be obtained by many months of weary exploration. The crest of “Peter Bott” stood
outlined beyond the Port Douglas ranges, and north-west mountains rose beyond mountains as far as the
eye could see. Below me was the valley of the Bussell, with the sinuous river winding through the rich
expanse of tropical scrub land. Behind Point Cooper were the extensive, treacherous, swampy plains
that extend from the Bussell nearly across to the Johnstone. All the plantations and sugar-mills on the
Johnstone were plain enough at a distance of about thirty-five miles. The blasting on the second section
of the Cairns Bailway was just as distinctly heard as if it were only ten miles away. Below me on the
eastward, between the centre peak and the Bussell, was a mountain, about which there appears to be a
surprising amount of ignorance even among the oldest local residents. It stands detached from
Belienden-Ker, connected, however, at the base by a spur which divides the waters of Harvey’s Creek from
those flowing towards Babinda Creek. It is a sharp-pointed razor-backed mountain, rising somewhat
abruptly in successive peaks from the eastward, and tailing off suddenly on the north and south in steep
spurs, covered by exceptionally dense vegetation. This mountain seemed to be about 1,200 feet lower
than the peak of Bellenden-Ker, and I made a note to that effect. My surprise was considerable to find,
on returning from Cairns by the “ Waroonga,” that this unnamed mountain was marked on Captain
Border’s chart, and the height given at a trifle under 4,000 feet, so that my guess at the elevation was
remarkably correct. This mountain will again be specially referred to in the report. The whole of the
eastern side of Bellenden-Ker, from the south end to the north peak, is practically inaccessible —that is,
a qualified man could doubtless make the ascent at some point, but he could carry nothing but himself,
and no one but a madman would try it. The whole face of the mountain is a sheer descent into the
gorge below, drained by Harvey’s Creek. The whole corresponding western face falls just as sheer down
into the branch of Tringilburra Creek, and is equally inaccessible. The Bellenden-Ker Bange can be
ascended at both ends and nowhere else, except as a mere foolish and useless feat of climbing, just as a
man might go to the top of a lighthouse by an outside rope, instead of ascending the staircase. From
the centre peak we descended about 200 feet on to the crest of the mountain to the north, and had to
lower ourselves down by vines and shrubs that held on by twisting their roots among the rocks. Pro-
ceeding thence along the summit at an average height of 4,900 feet, cutting a track chiefly through the
Dracopkyllum and a rank growth of the beautiful tree-ferns Alsophila Hoiertsoniana and A. JRebeccce, we
arrived at another peak rising 5,100 feet, and decided to return in time to arrive at the camp with day-
light. From the centre peak to the point of return the crest of the mountain is not 12 feet wide, and
falls on each side sheer down into apparently unfathomable gulfs, and yet all these steep slopes are
covered by luxuriant and beautiful trees and shrubs and splendid ferns. The day was intensely cold, and
“ Multarri’s” teeth were chattering as he walked behind me. Harold also regarded the temperature
with grave dissatisfaction. We arrived in camp before sunset, and found a note from Whelan to say he
would not be able to return for at least two weeks. Decided to descend next day to the 4,000 feet level,
Mr. Bailey thought we had collected all, or nearly all, of the plants flowering or fruiting at that time of
year, and there were not many specimens obtainable by Mr. Broadbent, as the birds had left the cold
bleak summits and gone down into the warm gorges and ravines. The tracks of the tree-climbing
kangaroo, called “ Mappee” by the blacks, were plentiful, and yet we never saw one, and would have
some difficulty in finding them without a dog in such vegetation as covers the south end of the mountain.
The summer is the time for the ornithologist to collect on the summit, and he could also shoot enough
birds to supply himself with food, as the pheasant-tailed and white-headed pigeons go there in great
numbers to breed. In winter not only is there but little bird life, but the severe cold makes existence
extremely uncomfortable.
On Thursday, the 27th, we all said good-bye to the south peak without a pang, and started for
lower and warmer latitudes. Arriving at the Palm Camp, at 4,000 feet, we left Messrs. Bailey and
Broadbent there with two boys and five days’ provisions, and Harold and myself and three boys went on
to the Whelanian Pools, arriving there in the evening.
On the 28th left one boy in charge of part of the camp, and took the remainder to the lower camp,
where Beman was in charge. Sent the two troopers back at once to Whelan, on the Mulgrave.
Temperature at night, 51 degrees; water, 58 degrees ; shade at noon, 73 degrees.
On the 29th sent boys back for the balance of the Pools camp, and then ascended 2,000 feet on a
mountain to the westward, and obtained some specimens for Mr. Bailey. We know this mountain as
“ Mount Harold.” Among the savage precipices on the summit I tried in vain to obtain a specimen of
what seemed to me a new species of rock wallaby, an animal that possesses a miraculous capacity to
vanish on the shortest notice down the face of precipices or along the edge of cliffs.


On Sunday, the 30th, sent Beman and a boy to the Pools for articles still remaining there, left
Harold in charge of camp, and went up the creek towards Mount Sophia on a geological tour. The
watercourses are crossed in many places by very likely looking reefs, but no signs of gold, though here
and there are traces of tin. All the creeks on the west side of Bellenden-Ker are too precipitous to hold
any loose minerals, and it is very doubtful indeed if any exist there, except in worthless quantities. The
spurs of Mount Harold appear to be composed chiefly of quartz reefs which “ blow” all over the surface.
The formation nearly everywhere shows granite, quartz and slate, a promising combination certainly, and
perhaps worthy of attention from stray prospectors. It is entirely unknown country.
On Monday, Ist July, sent Beman and “Jimmy” to the Palm Camp, to bring down Messrs. Bailey
and Broadbent.
On the 2nd Harold and myself went down the east side of the main creek, crossed over to Mount
Harold, and went to the top a second time, with the same results so far as the wallabies were concerned,
though we saw a score of them at a safe distance: dark red wallabies with long tufted tails.
On the 3rd Bailey, Broadbent, and party arrived, having camped the previous night on the crest
of Barnard’s Spur. At night the thermometer fell to 42 degrees.
On the 4th Bailey and myself went out collecting, and displayed an amicable unanimity by falling
into a creek together, and a great deal of self-possession and agility in getting out again.
On the sth Broadbent, Harold, myself, and two of the boys made a third ascent to the summit
of Mount Harold, and again failed to secure a wallaby, though we obtained a few other specimens. On
the way up I killed a carpet snake containing some animal undergoing a process of digestion. On my
return one of the boys brought it down, and we found the animal to be a fair-sized common wallaby.
How so small a snake swallowed so large a beast is a problem no one but the snake could possibly
explain.
On the Gth the whole party were out collecting in various directions. On the 7th, Whelan came
over from the Mulgrave, and we decided that he and I should make a flying trip round the whole
Bellenden-Ker Range from south to north. On the Bth, we started with three boys, who were to meet
us on the summit of Barnard’s Spur after we had followed up and explored the main creek. At night
we camped in a blacks’ camp on the spur mentioned, heavy rain falling and dripping through the roof
and down our backs all night, so that sleep had to be postponed for another occasion.
In the morning the creek at the Pools was uncrossable, so we returned to the cam]) to find the
main creek flooded. We were compelled to strip and swim across through the least dangerous channels
among the granite rocks.
On this date the Government prospecting party, in charge of James Toohey, came up and
camped on the creek beside us. While Broadbent was out to-day he found the skeleton of a black-
fellow, and brought in the skull for the Museum.
On the 10th Whelan took the, prospectors to see some reefs near Mount Sophia, Bailey and
Broadbent went up the creek, and “ Multarri ” and myself partly ascended Mount Toressa!
On the 11th we shifted camp to the edge of the Mulgrave Plain, on Tringilburra Creek, and
remained six days, making a considerable collection of plants, birds, and land shells. Game was
plentiful here; turkeys, pigeons, and scrub hens more than sufficient to supply the camp. One of the
blackboys was discharged on the 17th, and “Multarri” sent back with grateful thanks to Swallow
and Derham. On the 18th Bailey, Broadbent, Harold, myself, and the two boys went down to the
Bussell Eiver, leaving the camp in charge of Beman.
At the Russell we were again joined by Whelan, and he and myself started for Bartle Prere on
Saturday, the 20th of July.. We rode eighteen miles up the river, the track all the way through some
of the densest brush in Queensland, and stayed all night at “ Teechappa,” an old bora ground, used as a
camp forthe lower alluvial diggings on the Russell, now nearly deserted. In the morning we went on
twelve miles to a bora ground called “ Choonbine,” where we met our two boys who had gone there the
day before to meet a native black, who was to accompany us to the summit of Bartle Prere.
Pinding all three there, we started up the mountain about 2 o’clock. The ascent, as usual, was
through thick scrub, and after ascending a few hundred feet we came on old marks made by Christie
Palmerston and a band of eight myalls who had gone up there in October, 1886. We camped that
night on a narrow ridge 2,000 feet high, a running creek a couple of hundred feet down to the westward.
On Monday, the 22nd, we resumed the ascent, passing through thick heavy timber and enormous
granite rocks. At 3,000 feet we came on one of Palmerston’s camps on the edge of a landslip that
formed a precipice on the east side of the spur.
At 4,000 feet we found a small stream of delightfully cool pure water, and made some tea and ate
a few sandwiches under a cold drizzling rain We arrived on the summit about 3 o’clock, and found the
trees marked by Palmerston, and Mr. Jack, the geologist, on the 9th of February, 1888, and October 26th,
1886. The aneroid made the highest point exactly 5,000 feet, the same height as the south end of
Beilenden-Ker r and 200 feet lower than the centre peak. There is no doubt whatever in my mind that
Bellenden-Ker is at least 150 feet higher than Bartle Prere, allowing for all the barometric variations.
Strange to say, though these two mountains stand facing each other, divided only by a deep valley drained
by a few granite creeks, the vegetation of one is entirely different from that of the other. There is no trace
on Bartle Prere of the dome-shaped tree and the Dracophyllum which cover the whole south end of
Bellenden-Ker. All the crest of Bartle Prere is covered by confused masses of granite rocks, some of
the isolated boulders 20 to 50 feet high. There are bare patches covered only by loose stones and stunted
shrubs a couple of feet in length. The whole summit is a wild, savage, inhospitable-looking region, fit to
be regarded as that dismal spot “Where the Old Earthquake Demon nursed her young Ruin.” Arid
yet there are beautiful flowering trees and lovely orchids and rare and splendid plants growing among
those thunder-scarred and merciless rocks. Some specimens we collected that evening, and others were
obtained next day. We camped all night on the highest point beside a granite rock. After a couple of
hours collecting in the morning we started to descend. We saw nothing from the summit but driving
masses of clouds above, below, and around us. Once only through a “ wind-divided chasm of wandering
mist” we saw, for a few seconds, the dark peaks of Bellenden-Ker, and the closing clouds shut them out
for ever. There was a weird fascination, too, on that lone peak among the warring clouds, the spectral
mists, the black pitiless rocks, and the moaning of desolate winds, but poetry was not the study of the
moment, and we tore ourselves away without a pang.


After descending 2,000 feet, the myall —by special request —turned down another spur as a short
cut, avoiding the route round by Chooubine. It certainly did cut off a few miles, but as we went down
one place, about 1,4C0 feet in apparently not more than half-a-mile, Tabba’s short cut is not likely to
become popular as a direct route to or from the top of Bartle Frere. After emerging on the track to tho
Upper Russell diggings we walked seven miles over very rough hilly road, and arrived at Teechappa
about 6 o’clock, a solid rapid walk from the summit of about eight hours in cold misty rain.
On the 24th we returned to Harvey’s Creek at the mouth of the Russell, the journey down being
in torrents of rain from start to finish. Raining all day on the 25th. Took one of the boys and went
across the river and up the coast range. The weather not being propitious, we all returned on the 26th
to the camp on the Mulgrave. In the evening Harold shot a very fine cassowary Aveighing 186 lb., the
liver weighing 4 lb., and the heart as large as a sheep’s. This bird is now set up in the Museum.
On the 29th Ave shifted camp over to the Mulgrave, where we received all possible consideration
from Senior-Constable Whelan. The next four days Avere employed in collecting in the vicinity o£ the
Police Camp. On Priday, the 2nd of August, I went alone up the Walsh Pyramid (“ Charroogin ”), and
brought specimens for Mr. Bailey from the summit at 3,050 feet.
On Sunday, the 4th, I took Harold and three blackboys and started to explore the ranges at the
head of the Little Mulgrave. That night we camped at Jensen’s, on the Herberton road. In the morn-
ing we started up the valley of Wright’s Creek, crossing at the start a small detached hill 650 feet high.
Following up the valley through thick scrub we arrived at the head of the creek, and camped on a
small bare hill 600 feet high. Next morning, the 6th, Ave started up the range on a spur so steep that Aye
had to crawl at times on our hands and knees. In at least two places a false step meant certain
destruction; but A\ r e had to go up or go back, and I have the same contempt as Mirabeau for ‘ l that
blockhead of a word ‘ impossible.’ ” One of the boys, a Mulgrave native named Toby, out on his first
journey with me, knocked up, and I had to take most of his swag. We camped that night on the crest
of the range at 2,450 feet. Temperature at night, 56 degrees; shade at noon, 74 degrees. Next day, the
7th, we started along the top of the range through thick scrub and splendid hardwood timber, some of the
trees six and seven feet in diameter. At noon w r e were on the head of the Little Mulgrave and Fresh-
water Creek, on a mountain 3,000 feet high, commanding a complete view of a vast expanse of country.
It may be well to mention here that when Christie Palmerston was across that country about three years
ago, looking for a railway track at the request of the Government, he reported the discovery of 30,000
acres of grand country on the head of Freslrwater Creek, and induced the Minister for Lands to reserve
that area. It is my duty to report here that these 30,000 acres of grand country exist noAvhere outside
of Palmerston’s imagination. The heads of Freshw r ater Creek, the Clohcsy, and Little Mulgrave rise in
rough broken ranges and deep rocky gorges, and there is not 100 acres of level or available country on
one of them. During tho day the first nest and egg of “Meston’s Bower Bird ” — Prionodura Newtoniana
—was found by me in the fork of a small tree about seven feet from the ground. The female flew off
the nest, and the male was sitting on an adjoining tree.
Near here was found the complete skeleton of a wallaby at 3,000 feet, and 1 brought it down for
the Museum. How a wallaby ever got into such a place is a mystery to me, as no wallaby ever lives on
the crest of such a range as that. He would certainly starve to death. Passed piles of huge rocks
covered by ferns and flowering orchids, and through groves of magnificent palms, and finally camped at
3,100 feet on a densely timbered peak. Temperature at night, 58 degrees; noon shade, 72 degrees.
On the Bth we continued along the crest of the range towards the east until we reached the summit
of the mountain oA?erlooking Swallow’s plantation at a height of 3,640 feet. Descending on the eastern
slopes of that mountain we arrived at the plantation about 4 o’clock, and Avalked on, tAvelve miles the
same night to the camp on the Mulgrave.
On the 12th, still leaving Messrs. Bailey andßroadbent collecting on the Mulgrave, I started for a
final exploration of Bellenden-Ker, accompanied by Harold and three blackboys, Charley, Jimmy, and
Toby. It was a flying trip in which the endurance of all was to be severely tested. On the first night
we camped at the Whelanian Pools, and the next day reached our old camp on the summit, at 5,000 feet.
Temperature at night, 42 degrees. Found the small stream from which we had previously obtained water
was dried up, but we had brought a supply from 4,000 feet to guard against such a contingency. Next
morning was cold and wet, when Ave started round the summit of the mountain, my intention being to
traverse the whole range and descend by Mount Sophia. The entire mountain was covered by clouds,
and nothing to be seen around or below us. Reaching the end of my previous track, I proceeded along
the summit through dense wiry vegetation and confused masses of sharp rock, the crest of the range
averaging 4,900 feet, rising at times to 5,000 feet, and in some places not six feet Avide. We were all
soaking from the drip of the trees and the Avet bushes, and the boys felt the cold acutely. After five
hours of hard continuous track-cutting, Avhich nearly paralysed my right arm, we arrived close to the
base of the north peak and camped at 4,900 feet, among tall trees and groves of tree-ferns. In the
morning I left the boys in camp and went ahead to see if they could be taken on. A quarter of a mile
beyond the camp I came to piles and pinnacles of rock, with precipices on each side, and tho eternal
Dracophyllum growing from every crevice.
Leaving the gun and cane-knife behind, I lowered myself down from one rock to another, climbed
on to those above by means of vines, and leaped across from boulder to boulder where a false step meant
serious injury or death, until it was clearly seen there was no chance of going farther in that direction
and taking the boys, Avithout leaving every article we possessed at the camp. I had now been over every
foot of Bellenden-Ker, including Sophia and Toressa, excepting the north peak on the edge of which
I now stood, and decided to go back the way we came. We had but one day’s provisions left, and it was
my intention to submit the endurance of the whole party to a severe test. Leaving the blankets and all
superfluous articles, we started to return.
We retraced the whole of the previous day’s journey and reached the south peak about 12 o’clock.
Then we started down the mountain and descended 4,000 feet on the long spur to the Whelanian Pools,
arriving there at sunset. We crossed the creek and ascended 700 feet, to the top of Barnard’s Spur,
and stayed all night in the blacks’ camp. In one day we had actually covered a severe journey for two
days and a-half. That was an experience I would not care to repeat.


On the 16th of August we loft the summit of Barnard’s Spur, descended 1,700 feet, and after a
weary journey of eighteen miles arrived on the Mulgrave about 4 o’clock in the afternoon.
On the 19th the whole party returned to Cairns, and on the 21st we went out to the Freshwater
Yalley, from which we came back on the 26th, leaving for Brisbane on the 27th by the “Waroonga,”
and arriving there on the 2nd September, after an absence of thirteen weeks.
We had done all we started to do, and a little more. The period of the year was the worst for
both the botanist and the ornithologist. Mr. Bailey had to pass by a great number of trees and plants
that only flower and fruit in the summer, but on the other hand he obtained specimens of many which
blossom only in the winter.
His report, however, will show that he made a large and interesting collection of botanical
specimens, including many entirely new to science, besides others discovered for the first time in
Australia.
Geologically, there is little to report. Bellenden-Ker and Bartle Frere are composed almost
entirely of granite, interspersed here and there by quartz reefs and slate. On the west side there were
indications of tin, but careful prospecting might reveal the existence of other minerals. The creeks on
both sides of the southern slopes of Bartle Frere contain gold, and considerable quantities have already
been obtained by white men and Chinese. All the head waters of the Bussell bring gold down from
the Basalt Terraces. The alluvial gold-washing has so far been of the most superficial nature, most of
the diggers being amateurs, with very primitive appliances. Many of them were assisted by the blacks,
in whom a few reposed a blind unsuspicious confidence that cost them their lives.
The whole of the country travelled over, except the valley of the Russell, consisted of high steep
ranges and deep ravines all covered by dense tropical jungle, and drained by steep granite creeks To
show the extent to which that country is watered, it is only necessary to mention that between the bora
grounds of Teechappa and Choonbine, a distance of ten miles, there are twenty-five running streams,
some of considerable size. On the eastern face of Bartle Frere is a cataract falling sheer down over two
thousand feet, visible for the whole lengthfrom thesouth peak of Bellenden-Ker. In the wet season it would
clear a descent of three thousand feet. To that cataract I have given the name of the “ Hume Black
Falls,” in honour of the present Minister for Lands. Every ravine in all parts of the ranges has its
stream of pure cold spring water. The climate everywhere on the mountains is perfect, the fresh clear
air unsullied by gases from decomposing vegetation such as you find in the rank undergrowth of the
scrubs on the low lands of the river flats. There was no sickness whatever in camp during the whole
period of the expedition. In many places there are magnificent facilities for hydropathic establishments,
in climate and scenery unsurpassed in the world.
One year ago Cairns was visited by Dr, Alexander, health officer of Dunedin, in Hew Zealand,
who went away with the impression that it possessed the best climate in Australia for people with weak
chests or any form of throat or lung disease, "We have irrefutable evidence of severe cases of long-
continued asthma and incipient consumption, being perfectly cured by residence in the Cairns climate.
There is a wide range of temperature and atmosphere between the sea-coast of Trinity Bay and the
tablelands of the Upper Barron, or the cloud-capped summit of Bellenden-Ker.
The climate of the Cairns district on the sea level is one of perpetual heat and moisture. A seven
years’ residence on the Barron Eiver revealed an average summer shade heat of 92 with a rare maximum of
104, and an average winter shade of 81 with a minimum of 54. On the Bellenden-Ker range the
summer shade heat is about 82, the minimum temperature in winter about 29. What is called “ fever”
in the Cairns climate is more frequently far more the outcome of gross indiscretions in diet or drink, or
supreme ignorant contempt for ordinary hygienic laws, than the result of malaria or adverse . climatic
conditions.
It appears to be my duty here to settle the question of who was the first to ascend Bellenden-Ker,
and I am now in a position to decide, in a brief and snmmary fashion, so that there can be no room for
further controversy.
There are two claimants, the one being Sub-inspector Johnstone who says he made the ascent in
1873, and Mr. W. Sayer, who claims to have been on the summit in 1886. Mr. Johnstone’s official report
is before me. He started to Bellenden-Ker, from the Mulgrave River, with Mr. Walter Hill and eight
troopers. His description of the vegetation, and the point at which he turned back, shows clearly that
he reached only the summit of Mount Toressa, or the spur connecting it with Mount Sophia. He says,
“We reached the centre peak of Bellenden-Ker at noon,” when he was not within ten miles of the centre
peak, nor could he possibly have done in less than three days what he imagined he had done in one.
The fact is, he arrived there in the wet season, and all the peaks of Bellenden-Ker being under the
clouds and invisible he somewhat hastily concluded that he had reached the top.
It will only be necessary to add here that Bellenden-Ker is practically inaccessible from the
direction Mr. Johnstone says he ascended, and presents precipices five or six hundred feet high. Accord-
ing to Mr. Johnstone’s barometer, he reached a point in space far above the summit of Bellenden-Ker!
Apparently, the instrument was one of decidedly eccentric habits, or else Mr. Johnstone finished his
ascent in a balloon.
Mr. W. A. Sayer was a gentleman sent to Cairns by Baron von Mueller to collect botanical speci-
mens, and if possible to ascend the Bellenden-Ker. The account of his attempts to reach the top forms a
record of a series of ludicrous mistakes, perhaps unparalleled in the history of exploration. On the first
effort he was out six days from Harvey’s Creek and failed to reach any particular locality. The second
time he started to reach the mountain by going up the Bussell Biver in a boat, and after thirty-four miles of
navigation against a flooded river he was about ten miles farther from Bellenden-Ker than his point of
departure. This time he was out about a month without reaching even the foot of the mountain, and he and
his companions seem to have spent most of the time capsizing themselves in the Bussell and wandering
about the scrubs, with no clothes on and nothing to eat, and not the remotest idea of their locality.
He made a third start up Harvey’s Creek, this journey including a semi-subaqueous walk of “ eight
miles up to their waists in the water of the flooded creek,” to say nothing of vaulting up precipices
seventy feet high, and falling from the top of others of even greater altitude; these remarkable acrobatics
being performed after being “ four and a-half days without food of any kind ” ! Mr. Sayer’s disregard
for food and the necessities of his epigastric region appears to have equalled his contemptuous indifference
to the established laws of gravitation.


At 3,000 feet he and his party were saved in the middle of the night by “ the violent barking of their
dogs M from being murdered in cold blood by a band of hostile blacks. This is the first time blacks have
ever been seen camped at that elevation. He made a fourth effort, and on this occasion he says he
reached the summit and stayed there with a Mr. Davidson and four kanakas for eight and a-half days !
Before leaving the summit they “cut their names, date, and height on an Elajocarpus.” The whole
narrative is simply pure undiluted fiction, which one must sincerely and charitably hope is unintentional,
and merely the natural outcome of Mr. Sayer’s profound ignorance of bushmanship and the range ho was
attempting to explore. It remains for me to say that Mr. Sayer and Mr. Davidson never put a foot on
any part of the summit of Bellenden-Ker, and that Baron von Mueller has incorrectly given the name
of Bellenden-Ker to all the plants brought down by Mr. Sayer professedly from the summit of that moun-
tain. I have been over the whole crest of Bellenden-Ker from end to end, the north peak alone excepted,
without finding the remotest trace of any human being, black or white, and no mortal man could travel
there without leaving tracks that would be visible for many years. There is no such tree as an
eleocarpus on any part of the summit, and the supposition that six men could camp eight and a-half
days there without leaving visible signs is really too preposterous to discuss. That Mr. Sayer
and party were not on the north peak is a self-evident fact to me. His own account of the
trip, as given in the Victorian Naturalist of July, 1887, shows that he reached, not the top of
Bellenden-Ker, but the top of the eastward mountain previously mentioned, situated between
Bellenden-Ker and the Bussell, and forming no part of the Bellenden-Ker range. This mountain is
3,970 feet high, and called by the blacks “ Chickaboogalla.” On his return from Hew Guinea I met Mr.
Sayer in Cairns, and, referring to his alleged ascent, he said, “ When we got on top of one peak we saw
another above us, and beyond that another and another, and we did not reach the highest peaks after all,
but I mean to go back again.”
Now, this exactly describes “ Chickaboogalla,” and has no meaning at all when applied to
Bellenden-Ker. Of course, at the last he saw peaks still higher, for the centre peak of Bellenden-Ker was
1,200 feet over his highest point of ascent. And so on the summit of “ Chickaboogalla ” Mr. Sayer
collected all the plants which Baron Mueller erroneously credits to the top of Bellenden-Ker ! It remains
only now to say that Whelan, Barnard, and myself were the first who ever stood on Mount Sophia and
the south peak of Bellenden-Ker; that Broadbent and myself were the first on the centre and highest
peak; and that myself and Harold were the first to traverse the summit between the centre and the
north peaks. This statement can be safely regarded as a final settlement of the whole question and
one admitting no refutation whatever.
BE LLENDEN-KEB BLACKS.
The blacks on the Bellenden-Ker ranges are about the same in general appearance and habits as
the coast range blacks from Cardwell to Cooktown. As a rule they are short and wiry, with good chest
development, thin legs, often slightly curved, and surprisingly small hands and feet. The gins frequently
have hands no larger than those of a little girl of ten years of age. The small feet of both sexes upset
the theory that walking barefooted enlarges the feet. They possess astonishing powers of endurance,
and will walk incredible distances over rough country, carrying fifty or sixty pounds on their heads.
Their food is chiefly vegetarian, varied occasionally by the flesh of the wallaby, the tree-climbing
kangaroo, fish, birds, eggs, and three or four varieties of opossums. The koa nut, and other large nuts
not yet botanically named, are the chief articles of diet. Some of the nuts and roots they eat are
poisonous in their raw state, and these are pounded up and placed in dilly bags in running water for a
couple of days to have the poisonous principle washed out. Of edible nuts of various kinds they have
an unlimited supply. In pursuit of tree-climbing animals they display an agility probably unsurpassed
in the world, and probably not rivalled by any other Australian blacks. It would severely tax the
reader’s credulity to describe how these natives take a vine and run up the tallest trees, -walk on to others
across the branches, and descend sometimes a considerable distance from the starting point. Their
main camps are always built on some healthy dry situation, beside or very near a running stream. These
are the “ wet weather camps,” where they remain during the wet season, and store large supplies of nuts.
The blacks of this district vary in colour from a sooty black to a light bronze. Perhaps in no
part of Australia is the Semitic type so startlingly distinct as among the tribes between Townsville
and Princess Charlotte Bay. You see men and women who, apart from the colour, might be
regarded as recent arrivals from Jerusalem. This is a deep and interesting problem for the Australian
anthropographist.
We saw no camps higher than 2,000 feet, and very rarely any above 1,000 feet. These camps on
high altitudes are only temporary, and usually consist of a few bent boughs covered over by fern or palm
leaves. At certain times they go up the mountains after the “mappee,” the tree-climbing kangaroo, but
never remain long. The nuts they chiefly live on are only found on the flats and in the valleys. There
is little or no food on the mountains. On Bartle Frere we saw where tree grubs had been cut out at
3,000 feet, probably by Palmerston’s boys. The blacks appear to shun Bellenden-Ker, there not being
the faintest trace of them on any part of the mountain above 1,400 feet, except on Mount Toressa,
where a clearly defined track crosses the spur at over 2,000 feet.
On Barnard’s Spur, at 1,600 feet, there are three rows of holes dug out of the hard gravel, nine
in each row. Each hole is about three feet deep, open below, with an arch connecting them at the top.
These holes have been used in times gone by in some corroboree or religious ceremony, but I never saw
them anywhere else. All these blacks are cannibals of a particularly bad type. They kill and eat their
women and children, and occasionally they kill and eat their men. It is possible the custom arises out of
an irrestrainable craving for flesh food, in a violent reaction against prolonged vegetarianism, and all
Australian tribes have from time to time been addicted to the same practice. On many occasions
I have seen conclusive proofs of cannibal feasts. They are in no way ashamed of the habit, and will
sometimes chat about it in quite a jocular manner, and tell you what a great delicacy is a roast foot or a
grilled hand. No women or boys are allowed to witness or join in the feast. When a gin is to be
killed she is taken away to some secluded spot, one man seizes and crosses her hands in front, and
another hits her on the back of the head with a nulla or a wooden sword. Then she is disembowelled, and


cut up and roasted. Infidelity in a gin is punished by death. If a native falls from a tree or is seriously
injured, he is generally killed and eaten. Their code of morality is stringent, but their social habits arc
indescribable, aud their mode of living simply unimaginable. Plenty to eat is the one sole study of their
existence. It forms the subject of their dreams by night, and stimulates all their faculties during the
day. Occasionally they have compulsory fasts, followed by a period of excessive gormandising, and this
accounts for the abnormally distended stomachs so frequently seen in all sexes, especially the women and
children. The coast blacks have an unlimited supply of fish, and this they generally kill by the spear,
with which they are very expert. The chief weapon of the mountain blacks is the wooden sword, a
huge, unwieldy piece of flat wood, three feet long by four and five inches wide. They also throw
stones with great dexterity. A myall armed with stones is about as formidable as one armed with
spears. On the Russell Diggings large numbers of blacks have been acting as prospectors for the
diggers, aud were also very useful in carrying supplies to localities where it was impossible to take a
packhorse. About 200 have also come in from time to time and worked on the Johnstone River plan-
tations. Several diggers have been killed by the Russell blacks, who have also murdered three or four
settlers on the Russell and Mulgrave, The blacks doubtless had their own grievances, and attempted
to redress them according to their own theory of the wild justice of revenge. The whites killed were in
all cases men ignorant of the nature of the savage, and blindly and foolishly credulous in their
unreasoning faith in the wild children of the jungle. They became familiar with the blacks, trusted
them implicitly, gave them the tempting opportunity to kill, and the savage simply obeyed his natural
impulse, and allowed the demon of destructiveness to control him under the suddenly favourable
conditions.
It is the same old old story of death being the penalty too often paid by those who trust their
lives to the delusion that the human savage differs essentially and radically in his nature from that of
any other wild animal.
The tribal distinctions of these blacks are incomprehensible, and madness itself lies in the struggle
to comprehend their confusion of tongues. A space of twenty miles will separate two tribes with different
dialects. Each tribe has its own district, and dare not go beyond.
There are blacks on the Russell who never saw the sea except from the top of a mountain, aud
have lived all their lives within sixteen miles of the beach. If they cross their defined boundary they are
killed, if not strong enough to kill the other party. They are never at a loss for a cause of quarrel which
will afford a chance to kill and eat somebody. Rut in discussing the ferocity of the wild black, we
may say, with Minerva to the Euries in lEschylus, “ there being two present we have heard more than
enough from the one side.” In the debtor and creditor account of murder and outrage the balance is
decidedly against the white man. Every white man murdered by blacks is represented by at least fifty
blacks murdered by white men. The white man has, beyond all question, been the most unscrupulous and
deliberate murderer of the two. The civilised man is simply the savage with a thin and plausibly attrac-
tive veneer over the surface. The savage usually kills out of a spirit of revenge for some real or fancied
injury, past or present. Wholesale murder is yearly done by civilised men solely for the sake of gain.
The civilised ruffian has no merit above the savage ruffian in the scale of humanity. The average white
man is far above the average savage; the average savage is a far nobler animal than the lowest type of
white men. We cannot judge the savage by our own standard of right and wrong, because his mind is
moulded by different external influences operating in the direction of entirely different mental phenomena.
In all cases the strong colonising race has treated harshly and contemptuously the weak race which it
displaced. This is the history of all new countries, and the slaughter of the aboriginals by the invader
is the one monotonously conspicuous fact in all the records of colonisation. No euphemism of expres-
sion or sentimentalism of thought can conceal that from the historian or the student of ethnology.
In all human progress and the transition and rise and fall of nations we see the all-ruling influence
of the law of the survival of the strongest, a law probably synonymous with that of the survival of the
fittest, on the assumption that the strongest are the fittest to survive. The Australian blacks are moving
rapidly on into the eternal darkness in which all savage and inferior races are surely destined to disappear.
All effort to preserve them, though creditable to our humanity, is a poor compliment to our knowledge
of those inexorable laws whose operations are as apparent as our own existence. Their epoch of time is
near its termination, the shadows deepening towards the everlasting night. It is a mournful picture, that
of the old inhabitants who for unknown ages have roamed the primeval forests of this mighty continent,
now moving off silent and swift-footed into oblivion before the presence of the white strangers who
walk over the graves of a dead race with as much unconcern as the blacks themselves trod over the rock
sepulchres of the diprotodon and nototlierium on the Darling Downs.
In obtaining the native names for prominent localities we have to face a difficulty in meeting a
number of different names for the one place. Each mountain peak has its own name, and not only every
valley and river and creek, but different parts of these have their distinct and characteristic titles. There
is, therefore, a considerable amount of discretion required to avoid involving the names in hopeless
confusion. Many of their names indicate by their sound some peculiarity in that on which they are
bestowed. On the eastern side of Rartle Erere is a waterfall called “ Chickaringadingadee,” the name
corresponding in a remarkable manner with the sound of the waters. The black cockatoo is called
“karma,” in imitation of his harsh, discordant note. The Barron blacks call the dragoon bird “ derrim-
derrim,” and the Clarence blacks, in New South Wales, call the spur-winged plover “ dibbin-dibbin,” both
birds having exactly the same peculiar movement in running. Occasionally two tribes use the same word
to express an entirely different meaning. The Townsville blacks call the native companion (Grus
australasianus ) “ boganburra,” the name the Barron blacks give to the Nankeen heron. Erom the
Barron to the Russell, a distance of forty miles, there are four names for the cassowary:—“ Boondarra,”
“keendadja,” “bomba,” and “goombajan.”
Attached hereto are specimens of the dialects of the blacks of the Russell, Mulgrave, and Barron
rivers, besides those of Townsville and the Clarence River, in New South Wales ; the latter added partly
to show there is not the remotest resemblance between the languages of the North Queensland blacks and
those of the east coast of New South Wales. There is a total distinction between even those of
Townsville and Cairns. I have also added a few names given me by one of the Tanna Island boys.


BUSSELL BIYEB.
Man—banggan
Gin— yabbaroo
Old man—bokeebah
Old woman—choorgnaroo
Boy—burgnung
Girl—meetee
Hand—mulla
Arm—yeeko
Head—dinggi
Eye—kika
Nose—kohO
Moutb—jowa
Teeth—teera
Tongue—jangoola
Foot—jinna
Calf—dagool
Knee—boonggo
Thigh—kallo
Stomach—bokay
Neck—goorka
Back—jooja
Breast—obko
Beard—yoombo
Hair—moorab
Posterior—kanjan
Male privates —galloon
Female privates —bonjan
Spear—banggayi
Woomera —jarrin
Sword— banggal
Camp—meetcba
Dillybag—janjo
Water —banna
Eain —jindi
Sun—currie
Moon—kakaloom
Stars—toolabo
Thunder —keekoroo
Lightning—jalmin
Crocodile —kanyabra
Scrub hen—jerrooga
Turkey—moon garra
Snails—kooraj oon
Honey—minacheeara
Meston’s bower bird—wargandilla
Spalding’s orthonyx—chowchilla
Tree kangaroo—mappee
Cassowary—bomba
W allaby—yooree
Possums—tula, yappee, and gnoota
Sea—herring
Mountains—checta
Corrobboree—yeekurri
Bussell Biver—Mullin
Cockatoo—kyamboola
Dingo—goota
Nutmeg pigeon—kapparoom
Black cockatoo—karma
Belleuden-Ker—W ooroonooran
Bartle Frere—Choorcechillum
MULGEAYE.
Egg—churrowa
Cassowary—goombajan
Black snake—munungga
Hair—moora
Arm—kalkal
Head—woombo
Foot—boonjooroo
Hand—mulla
Toes—bigoon
Stomach—toobore
Tattoo marks—manjan
Leg—garra
Moon—kalkaloom
Stars —toolabo
Sun—currie
Water —banna
Teetb—dirra
Tongue—tanggola
Eye—kika
Ear—manga
Nose—goa
'Posterior —kanjan
Clouds—yeekan
Fire—boori
Smoke—wunjo
Tbuuder —cbikoor
Lightning—jogce
Wind—yooi
Night—goonda
Day—kappi
Grass—yakko
Bain—kappari
Cockatoo—wangolee
Parrots—kalbir
Wallaby—kangool
Sea—kilgi
Leach’s kingfisher—gooranggal
Mulgrave—Koolgibbcrah
Bussell—Kirrami
BAEEON EIVEE.
Turkey—googanggan
Sun—boonjan
Magenta-breasted pigeon—belbayan
Flock pigeon—boonboonboo
Scrub hen—boolagoo
Nankeen heron—boganburra
Wallaby—kanggoon
Alligator—kanyabra
W ater —narraji
Quartz— joboor
Heron—warrumbool
Dragoon bird—derrim-derrim
Black cockatoo —karrna
Cassowary—boondarra
Banana—joonggool
Maize—coornam
Pineapple—jargan
Leichhardt-tree—mamboora
Bean-tree—joonggoora.
TOWNSVILLE.
Old man—boonjelman
Old gin—boolnaganman
Sleep—boojoora
St ars—y ambowreega
Foot—dimbal
H and—malboora
Spear—oonburra
Head—jalbooly
Boomerang—nunjal
Shield— goolmarrie
N ulla—noogoora
Woom era—wullaburra
Camp—tunby
Gin —murbal
Girl —wangum
Boy—moorda
Bock —boojooroo
Sun—malowan
Moon —bowaree
Fire —mitta
Corobboree —teerahna
W ater —tun j an
Sea—becroo
Swimming—yoongarrana
Ground —karadna
Flying-fox—boondagoraba
Emu—gondola
Turkey—cockabin
Crocodile—tuckanang
Dog—ooda
Cockatoo—bulgena
W allaby—gargoon
Kangaroo—woorda
Duck—bornja
Boy child—ahboon
Girl child—yoongurra
Good bye—goondawya.
CLARENCE EIYER, NEW SOUTH WALES.
Squirrel —yongoo
Possum—woorarji
Native bear—wombooji
K angaroo —y eegirbi
Dingo—wongo
Bandicoot—yingum
Swan—narragun
Geese —yoonamarum
Paddymelon—howboon
Ducks—yelowul
FI ying-f ox —wolmba
E rnu —y oogon g won
Native companion—booralgum
Plover—dibbin-dibbiu
W all aby—wokoor i
Wallaroo—hoppi
Turkey—nurwhin
Black snake—muloo
Whip snake—munghine
Carpet snake—yoobool
Mouse—yoomoo
Moun tain—yarrnun
Bock—dumbam
Grass—yooravagum
Ground—wotch er
Tree—yoolecjir
Thunder—yurroway
Bain—wooloon
Water—narroo
Fire—muttunggul
Sea—cockul
Sun—nowhoon
Moon—wooralj ir
Stars—wooralgurn
Old man—yooloorie
Boy—yarganine
Young man—murrawanjin
Young wife—combunegwon
White woman—yirrarlierairgin
Ghost—wurrum
God—yoolootahna
TANNA ISLAND (PACIFIC).
Thunder— carroorawa
Lightning—lomo'ophil
Moon—mokwa
Sun—mary
Stars—cum'mahow
Ground—tenna
Bock—cab'bceil
Fire—naup
Trees—mayee
Fisk—nalimoo
Coral—bish'eea
Sky—neei
Clouds—nap'owa
Water—nooi
Mountains—dag'gooil
Pigeons—man'oo
Fivers—n ok woteuna
Man—yermamma
W oman—perran'
B oy—y oganow'ee
Girl—prenowee
Old man—yengala
Old woman—brariheema
Wind—matang'
Bain—neershan'
Y olcano—lummahook


THE HEEBERTON LAKES.
On the tablelands of tbe Upper Barron, at an altitude of 2,300 feet, are two large freshwater lakes.
One of these lies about three miles from Boar Pocket, on the Cairns-Herberton road, and the same
distance to the south of that road. The blacks call this lake “ Yeetcham,” and the one seven or eight
miles beyond, to the south-west, they call “ Boonoobagolomee.” My visit to Lake Yeetcham was during
heavy rain, and I remained there just long enough to examine the position, and no more. This lake is
about a mile and a-half long, by a mile across. It is surrounded by a circular ridge about a hundred
and fifty feet above the water, and covered by dense scrub. On arriving at the top of this ridge and
looking towards the lake, you appear to be gazing at the inverted sky, the impression being that of
having arrived at the edge of some colossal precipice, with the blue empyrean stretching far down into
bottomless vacuity. Descending the steep side of the ridge we arrived on the shore of the lake, a
magnificent expanse of beautifully calm clear water, like an immense mirror, edged by the splendid
border of rich dark-green tropical vegetation, where the “ trees sloped downwards to the brink and
stood with their green faces fixed upon the flood.”
Over all there hung a silence that was oppressive. No fish rippled the glassy surface, no bird
plumed his ruffled wings or called his mate from out the shore recesses. There was not a sign of bird or
beast, save an animal like a huge iguana that swam out from the edge, gazed at us a few seconds, and
vanished.
Apparently a perfect paradise for wild fowl, there was not a feather to be seen from shore to
shore. There may be some marine fish or animal there fatal to bird life. A surveyor who was camped
by the side of “ Boonoobagolamee ” told me that he could hear at night a ripple on the beach and the
wash of a wave made by some large animal, probably a fish, as there were no shore marks to indicate the
presence of an amphibian.
It is more than likely those lakes will yet reveal forms of life intensely interesting to science.
Their inhabitants are so far totally unknown. Around Yeetcham is a perfectly watered country of rich
soil covered by dense scrub broken here and there by open “ pockets” and low forest ridges. The
climate is not surpassed in Australia for its equable temperature and pure salubrious atmosphere. "With
villas and gardens round the shores, this lake would form one of the loveliest scenes in the world. "What
a glorious place for regattas and rowing and sailing and pleasure parties, where the spectators could stand
on the crest of the surrounding ridge, in the dress circle of Nature, and look down upon the superb
marine stage where the gay performers held high festival across the azure floor! It would excel any of
the Swiss or Italian lakes in loveliness or surrounding advantages. That lake country of the Barron
tablelands is the future tropical garden and sanatorium of Australia.
Lake Boonoobagolamee is about the same size as Yeetcham. Their depth is at present unknown,
but a surveyor went out on the former on a catamaran and fathomed in one place at 275 feet. They are
not, as at first supposed, the craters of extinct volcanoes, there being no trace of volcanic action more
recent than the formation of the tableland itself. The bottom will probably bo found level with the
surface of adjoining valleys lying outside the surrounding spur which encloses the waters of the lake ;
that is, from 200 to 400 feet in depth. The water is pleasant to drink and beautifully clear. Black sand
was visible mixed with the clay along the margin. The blacks speak of a third lake much smaller than
the others, but so far it has not been seen by white men.
TIMBERS OE THE DISTRICT.
There is no part of Australia where so little is known of the nature, the varieties, and the quantities
of available timbers. The vast scrubs of the Upper Barron, overlooked by the Bellenden-Ker Range, con-
tain a wealth of trees no less astonishing in their diversity than the apparently incalculable amount of
timber they represent. Those scrubs are certainly to be the source from which Queensland must draw
her future choicest woods.
On the coast ranges between Cardwell and Cooktown the timber-getter will be drawing the
nation’s supplies from the steep spurs and dark ravines long after the natural forests of the rest of the
colony are exhausted. There also will be found the last surviving pine and cedar. On the Bellenden-Ker
Range itself there are great quantities of valuable timber, at present presumably inaccessible, but which
in years to come, when timber is dear and scarce, will be brought down like pines from the even more
unpromising mountains of Norway and Switzerland. On all the spurs are large hardwood trees, unknown
by either local or botanical names.
The kauri pine, of gigantic size, is found up to 4,800 feet. There is no red cedar on either side of
“ Wooroonooran,” save a small patch at the foot of the north spur below Toressa. Here I may mention
one most peculiar eccentricity of nature in the distribution of this beautiful timber. Cedar grew in great
quantities along both banks of the Mulgrave and the Johnstone Rivers, but not a solitary tree has ever
been found on the Russell, which lies midway between them, and actually flows into the Mulgrave a mile
before entering the Pacific. The Bellenden-Ker Range divides the Mulgrave and Russell, but there is no
range between the Russell and Johnstone. Nor is there any perceptible cause for the remarkable total
absence of cedar on the Russell, the soil and climate being exactly the same as the rivers on each side.
Langdon’s hardwood, of the Johnstone, named Backhousia Bancroftii by Mr. Bailey, comes across
from that river and down the valley of the Russell in incalculable quantities, and up the valley of the
Mulgrave for about five miles from Harvey’s Creek, and then suddenly ceases, not a tree known to be
growing anywhere north of that point. It is a very hard tree, with fluted trunk and numerous flanges,
usually splits freely and burns well.
From 3,000 feet to 5,000 feet on Bellenden-Ker there are many timbers totally unknown, some
with beautiful grains, some tough as whalebone, and others, when cut, diffusing remarkably pleasant
perfumes, the wood and bark strongly aromatic. All the trees on the summit of the mountain, small and
large, are intensely hard, some of them rivalling even the grey ironbark {Melanophloia) .
On the forest spurs of the main range, extending down on to the flats, are large quantities of
Moreton Bay Ash (B. fesselaris ) which is there much more durable than the same tree in Southern
Queensland. The bloodwood {JE. corymbom) is also found along the face of the range, but usually small
and hollow, far inferior to the bloodwood on the rivers of the South. In the river beds of the Barron and
Mulgrave the swamp oak (Gasuarina glauca) grows to perfection—a tall, stately tree, beautifully grained.


The stinging tree of North Queensland moroides is only a bush, never growing into the trees of
four and five feet in diameter like giqas found in the coast scrubs of South Queensland and New South
Wales, but far more virulent in its effects. There is one mild species which attains a diameter of six to
twelve inches. The kauri pine ( A . rohusta ) extends from the river scrubs right on to the tops of the
highest peaks of the coast range, and grows to enormous size on the Upper Barron, in the red cedar
country, many of the trees eight and nine feet in diameter. The walking-stick palm (Ptychosperma
Normaribyi), common on the Mostnan and Daintree, is not found, so far as I am aware, south of Port
Douglas. In place of it we find the “Piccabeen” palm in great perfection, the magnificent fan palm
(.Licuala Muelleri), and on the tops of the ranges a superb wide-spreading palm which Mr. Bailey will
refer to in his report. It has a very hard stem, grows about twenty feet high with leaves ten to fifteen
feet in length, shading all beneath it like an umbrella. On the range at the head of the Little Mulgrave,
at 3,000 feet, I passed through a complete grove of this indescribably beautiful tree, all flowering and
fruiting.
This is an appropriate opportunity of respectfully suggesting to the Government the earnest
desirability of having specimens of all the Bellcnden-Ker and Upper Barron timbers collected and
classified as soon as possible, so that the colony can know the quantity and quality and value of its timber
resources. It is also highly desirable to obtain some knowledge of the medicinal value of the Queensland
flora. A competent chemist could prepare extracts and infusions, of which the properties could soon be
ascertained by our medical men in a course of judicious experiments. Already the Eucalyptus family has
proved itself one of the most valuable known to mankind, and who shall say with what splendid gifts the
Queensland flora can reward the medical science if properly investigated ? The Colonial Botanist is
satisfied there are quite as many timbers in Queensland as the whole of India, about a thousand species,
and yet so far he has only been afforded a chance of classifying a little more than one-half.
On the ranges at the head of the Little Mulgrave and Freshwater Creek, there are countless
numbers of a giant hardwood-tree that 1 never saw anywhere else. It usually varied in size from three
feet to seven feet in diameter, with a tall clean trunk going straight into the ground like a kauri pine.
On parts of the summits of all the ranges I traversed there were patches of dead trees showing no traces
of lightning, and yet standing in localities where there was no possibility of injury from fire. My
opinion is that nearly all of them had expired of old age. Their long bare gray branches stood out in
funereally mournful relief against the rich deep green of the surrounding tropical foliage. On Bellenden-
Ker there were many dead and dying specimens of the beautiful dome-shaped tree, which Mr. Bailey
tells me belongs to the myrtle family, and will probably be found to bo an entirely new species.
In the valleys of the Russell and Mulgrave, and all along the ranges up to about 2,000 feet, there
are vast quantities of Castanospermmn australis, the Moreton Bay chesnut, a tree common as far south
as the Clarence River, where its beauties as a cabinet wood were first proclaimed twenty-six years ago by
the late Robert Muir, of Nerang Creek. I am not aware how far this tree extends along the Cape York
Peninsula. The beans are fatal to stock when eaten repeatedly, but the blacks use them for food after
extracting the poisonous principle by maceration, in running water in the usual way. Samples sent home
in the log from Cairns were pronunced by the London timber merchants equal to the finest pollard oak.
Among the timbers of that district will certainly be found some not excelled in the world for
beauty in cabinet and fancy work, and there are just as surely others which will successfully answer all
the purposes for which Australia is now importing timber from foreign countries. I have no hesitation
in prophesying the discovery there of trees in all ways perfectly adapted to every object for which woods
are utilised by mankind.
And the sooner we possess a complete knowledge of all our timbers the less the sacrifice our
ignorance of the present will compel us to make for the benefit of an ungrateful future.
Yours, with respect,
ARCHIBALD MESTON.
I reproduce here my description of the scene witnessed from the south peak of Bellenden-Xer
in February, when I made my first ascent of the mountain; —All was distinctly visible, in the
perfectly clear atmosphere, in a radius of, at least, 100 miles in all directions. We were silent in
the awful presence of that tremendous picture that had lain there unaltered since Chaos and the
Earthquake painted it in smoke and flame and terror in the dark morning of the world! It was a hall of
the Genii of the Universe, the Odeon of the eternal gods, with its immortal floor paved with the green
mosaic of land and ocean, and overhead the arched blue roof flashing in diamonds and prismatic radiance
to the far sky-line on the edge of the dim horizon. Eastward rolled the calm Pacific, visible from the
Palm Islands in the south to the vicinity of Cooktown in the north. The white surf breaking on the
Barrier Reef was a long white line on the lovely azure of the slumbering ocean. The towering peaks of
Hinchinbrook looked down on the cone-shaped islands of Rockingham Bay and the valley of the Herbert;
behind them the dark-blue serrated ridges of the Cardwell Range. To the north Cairns nestled in calm
seclusion on the shores of the beautiful bay, a white oasis in the desert of blue haze. Green Island,
Fitzroy, High Island, and the Franklyns, were as emeralds set in the lapis lazuli of unruffled ocean, the
bleached coral beaches girdling them with a white zone on which the dying waves expired in long ripples
of snowy foam. Between us and the ocean was the valley of the Russell, with its reed-covered plains and
mysterious lakes, and the river winding in sinuous curves like a vast silvery serpent through the dense
dark-green tropical jungle, down to where it joined the Mulgrave, and the united waters rushed together
into the sea. North-east was the valley of the Mulgrave, ending in the beautiful plains beneath the long
evening shadows of the cone-peaked Walsh Pyramid. From where the range dipped into the sea at
Double Island, north of Cairns, away west to the hills on the head of the Gulf waters, and south to where
the eye lost itself in distance, was a vast indescribable panorama of hills and valleys and mountains of
every conceivable shape, and to the west the wavy sea of magnificent country on the Herberton tablelands,
the future garden of Australia, with its regular rainfall, rich scrub soil, and glorious climate. This site
of the volcanic lakes was marked by their covering sheets of snow-white mist. In all the ravines along
the face of the coast range were blocks of beautiful amber-cloud, reposing there like white-winged birds


weary of tossing to and fro in the combat of warring winds. Mount Sophia and the dark north peaks of
the Bellenden-Ker stood facing us in gloomy grandeur, in that dread silence which is more terrible to
the soul than the crash of thunder, the roar of breakers, or the diapason ol the cannonade. South-west,
immediately in front, stood the majestic form of Bartle Frere, divided from us by a chasm 4,000 feet in
depth, and four or five miles across from peak to peak, a wild and dismal solitude peopled by the storms alone.
Deep abysmal gorges, gloomy ravines, and caverned mountains dark as the realms of Pluto, grim rocks in
unimaginable shape; far down through the immeasurable grey void the subdued rush of falling water,
weird echoes rising from the depths below as if one could hear “ a march as of the earth-born Forms
arrayed against the ever living gods!” and around and over all, in one dark green wide-spreading mantle,
the wonderful tropical jungle, infinite in its shapes and hues, the robe of Nature woven with sun-bright
colours in the looms of God ! And then there passed before us a scene such as we never saw before and
may never see again. From behind Bartle Frere there came slowly drifting towards us a vast white
sulphurous storm-cloud charged with thunder and lightning. It entered the abyss between us and Bartle
Frere, hung suspended there at least 2,000 feet below where we stood, and we looked down from our lone
tree-tops in voiceless amazement at a thunderstorm raging in uncontrolled madness far beneath.
Lightning shot out in awful flashes downward and upward, followed by appalling thunder. Detached
fragments of spectral cloud came drifting up from the storm and shot athwart the mountain top, rushing
by us with a weird “ swish ” like a column of cold damp fog driven by a sudden blast. And then the
winds from the south-east turned the storm away along the valley to the north, and the “ Lion of the
Skies ” vanished slowly in the distance, his deep-toned voice making the mountains tremble, and his
fierce eyes flashing electric fire. We camped all night on the summit. What wonder that in such a
place, “ obscurely through the brain swept awful thoughts,”
Which through the deep and labyrinthine soul,
Like echoes through long caverns, wind and roll!
We were denizens of the upper air. With Goethe we knew the “Stars silent above us; Graves silent
below us.” The fauna and flora of this strange mountain, according to De Yis, are the oldest on the
Australian continent. It is the Ararat of the Pacific. Here are plants found hitherto only on the
summits of the Himalayas. Ah heaven ! why cannot some fossil relate to us the story of the vanished
Ages from the death silence of his stone mausoleum ? I gazed on the storm, and in imagination saw “ a
Spirit with a dreadful countenance check his dark chariot by the craggy gulf,” and some Idsean
Ganymede pour out his celestial rain of wine from an exhaustless urn upon the grateful earth! Bound
the base of this mountain once roamed the giant Diprotodon and the colossal Nototherium. Iguanas
30 feet in length crawled through the primeval vegetation on the plains below, and the marsupial lion,
Thylacoleo, crunched the bones of his herbivorous victims in the dark secluded caves. Around us was the
silence of departed Time, of voiceless Eternities, of worlds beyond the morning stars ! I seemed to see
the shadows of the unborn Centuries reflected on the azure mirror of the night, and shadows of the past
vanishing like misty spectres in the impenetrable gloom. In the tree-tops we heard the wailing of the
“ huge winds that sweep from Ursa Major to the tropics and equators, dancing their giant waltz through
the kingdoms of Chaos and Immensity.” And they play wild Memnonian music on the mountain’s grand
old iEolian harp of pines !
I have, &c.,
A. MESTON.
Colonial Botanist’s Office,
Brisbane, 7th October, 1889.
Sie, —In accordance with your instructions in a letter dated Ist June, that I should accompany
Mr. A. Meston to the Bellenden-Ker Eange, and collect and report on the Flora of the district, I have the
honour to report that I left Brisbane on the 4th June en route, and returned on the sth September,
bringing with me a large number of specimens, which will make a most valuable addition to the
Herbarium.
In the accompanying Eeport will be found a classified account of all the plants which could be
identified from the M ulgrave Biver to the summit of Bellenden-Ker, together with those of Bartle Frere,
and Harvey’s Creek; the several localities being indicated by numbers. All new species are fully described,
and descriptive and other notes given where such are required; the native or common name is also given
of the plant where such could be obtained. No purely alpine plants were met with, which is scarcely
to be wondered at, when the limited extent of the range is considered, the greatest altitude only just
exceeding 5,000 feet above sea-level. Some of the most common plants of the summit are identical with
those of the Brisbane district. The results of the expedition, however, from a botanical point of view
have proved highly satisfactory; about thirty fresh plants have been added to the known Flora of Australia,
equalling in number those added to the Flora of New Guinea by Sir William McGregor’s late expedition
to the Owen Stanley Bange, which is about three times the height of Bellenden-Ker, and proportionately
extensive in area. It being winter, a large number of the trees and shrubs were without flower or fruit,
consequently could not be identified.
In the Beport now submitted, with the exception of a few, all the Phamogams with the Ferns and
their allies are recorded. The large number of Mosses, Lichens, and Fungi which I collected will bo
arranged and forwarded to specialists with whom I am in communication for final determination ; and
amongst these I expect will be found many additional species to those already known, which will be
included in a future supplement to “The Queensland Flora.”
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Tour obedient servant,
F. M. BAILEY,
The Hon. The Secretary for Public Lands. Colonial Botanist.


BOTANY OF THE BELLENDEN-KER EXPEDITION, BY FREDK. MANSON BAILEY,
COLONIAL BOTANIST.
1, Tringilburra Creek; 2, Whelanian Pools; 3, Palm Camp ; 4, Bellenden-Ker; 5, Harvey’s Creek; 6, Bartle Frero;
7, Mulgrave River.
Scientific name and authority, locality, common name, and natural order respectively:—
Clematis glycinoides, DC. 1,5, 7. Virgin’s Bower. Banunculaceae.
Teteaceea Noebtiana, F. v. M. 1,7. • Dilleniacece.
Dillenta Aydeeana, JF. v. M. 5. „
Hibbeetia yelutina, B. Dr. On summit of Mount Harold, off Tringilburra Creek,
and Walsh’s Pyramid, Mulgrave River. „
Shrub, all parts clothed with a whitish velvety tomentum; height, 4to 5 feet, and spreading;
branches prominently angled. Leaves oblong-ovate, Ito nearly 2 in. long, 3to 7 lines broad, much
tapering towards a petiole of about a line long; midrib very prominent, lateral veins patent and
distinct, margins recurved. Peduncles axillary near the ends of the branches, flattened, to in.
long, with a narrow bract close under the calyx. Sepals Bor 4 lines long, outer ones acute, inner
ones obtuse, and wider. Petals broadly obovate, about £in long ; stamens numerous; carpels 3, at
first silky then rather echinate, 2-ovulate.
H. yolubilis, Andr. 1, 7. Dilleniacece.
WOEMIA ALATA, B. Dr. 1. „
Deimts membeanacea, JF. v. AT. 7. Northern Pepper-tree. Magnoliaceae.
Cabtanga onoEiTA, F. v. M. 7. Anonaccae.
EUPOMATIA LAUEINA, B. Dr. 1, 7. „
E. Bennettii, JF. v. M. 1, 7. ~
Caedamine iiiesuta, Linn. 7. Bitter Cress. Gruciferce.
lonidium suffeuticosum, Oing. 7. Violarieas.
Pittospoeum "Wingii, F.v.M. 3,4. Fittosporece.
P. eubiginosum, A. Cunn. 1, 7. ~
CiTEioßATtrs mulxifloea, A. Cunn. 2. „
Xanxiiophyllum Macikxyeii, F. V. M. 2. Polygalea.
Poetulaca oleeacea, Linn. 5, 7. Pigweed. Fortulacecß.
Qaecinia Mesxoni, n. sp. Meston’s Mangosteen. (After A. Meston, the leader of
the expedition to Bellenden-Ker.) ■ Guttiferce.
An erect, slender, graceful tree of 20 or more feet; branches drooping. Leaves glossy dark-
green, opposite, narrow-lanceolate, the points much elongated, 2 or 3 in. long, somewhat wavy but
with entire edges; petioles slender, \ in. or more long. Flowers (only a few very early buds
seen, and these much injured by insects) probably small, either terminal or leaf-opposed, nearly
sessile, with a few small bracts at the base ; sepals 4, small, imbricate; petals white, and seem
to be hairy. Fruit depressed, globular, a pleasing green, 2 in. diameter, but not fully grown, 8-celled;
seeds somewhat rugose; stigmatic lobes, 8 closely sessile on the fruit; the sepals closely pressed,
persistent under the fruit, and probably not much enlarged.
JETab.: Bellenden-Ker Range, at an altitude of 2,000 feet.
Fruit of this tree were gathered in the ripe state by Messrs. Meston and Whelan on their
first ascent of Bellenden-Ker, and they describe the fruit as possessing a sharp, pleasant, acid
flavour and very juicy, about 3 in. in diameter.
Malyasxeum xeicuspidaxum, A. Gray. 7. Malvaceae.
SIDA VIEGATA, EJooTc. 7. „
S. ehombifolia, Linn. 7. Sida-weed. „
Heena lobata, Linn. 1, 7. „
This plant, which is very abundant on the borders of many of our tropical scrubs, yields a strong
fine fibre, which in India is considered a good substitute for flax.
Hibiscus Manthox, Linn. 1. 7. Malvaceae.
H. beachtsiphoutus, F. v. M. 1. „
Bombay malabaeicum, DC. 7. Silk Cotton tree. „
There are two forms of this tree growing in the Mulgrave River scrubs, the one with and the other
without prickles on the trunk and branches; but having seen no flowers or fruit, I cannot say if
they are distinguishable by other marks.
Taeeieiia aegteodeydeoy, F. v. M. 1. Stavewood. ■ Sferculiacece.
T. teifoliolata, yae. peealata, Bail. 1. Red Beech of the North. „
Heeitieea littoealis, Ait. 5, 7. Red Mangrove. „
Abeoma fastuosa, B. Dr. 1, 7. Australian “Devil’s Cotton.” „
As a fibre-producing plant probably none could be grown to greater advantage. It is of rapid
growth, will attain the height of 12 or more feet in a very short time, and the fibre is very strong
and abundant and easily prepared. In several localities we found it very abundant and made use of
the fresh-stripped bark for string. Another species of the genus— A. augusta, Linn.—is known in
India as the “ Devil’s Cotton,” the fibre of which is considered nearly equal to hemp and not to
suffer injury when exposed to wet.
G-eewia polygama, Boxh. 1. Tiligcece.
The natives make use of the fruit for food, and obtain their string from the bark.
Gr. PLEIOSTIGMA, F. V. M. 7. „
This is a dioecious tree attaining the height of 40 or 50 feet; the trunk seldom exceeds Bor 10
in. in diameter, and being very light, straight, and of considerable toughness, is frequently used for.
rough fencing, &c. The bark yields good fibre ; the leaves are large, often measuring 9 in. long and
5 in. broad. The wood of this tree, on account of its elasticity and toughness, may in a few years
be in demand for the manufacture of oars, shafts, and other purposes where strength and elasticity
are required, for which many other species of this genus are found valuable in India.


Teiumfetta ehomboidea, Jacq. 5. Chinese Burr. Tiliaceas.
A pest known too well in most warm countries, now fast spreading over the Northern lands.
Supposed to have been introduced by the Chinese amongst vegetable seeds.
Aeistotelia megalospeema, F. v. M. 5. Tiliaceas.
geandis, F. v. M. 1,2. Quandong or “ Kurroogi.” „
E. Banceoftif, Bail, and F. v. M. 2. „
Kernel of the fruit edible, and timber useful.
OxAnis coeniculata, Linn. 5, 7. Yellow 'Wood-sorrel. Geraniacece.
Melicope chooeeechillum, n. sp. (Aboriginal name for Bartle Prere.) Futacece.
A large shrub or small tree, glabrous, branches thick. Leaves opposite of unequal size in each
pair; petioles Ito in. long, sulcate on the upper side; leaflets 3, obovate, tapering from a broad
emarginate end to the top of the petiole, H to 3 in. long, f to li in. broad, of a thick cartilaginous
or coriaceous texture; veins faint in the fresh leaf, but prominent in the dried specimens, the
primary ones anastomosing far within the margin, the under surface closely covered with small
dots (oil-dots). Flowers in short trichotomous panicles, length of the petioles, pedicellate ; sepals
4, obtuse, minute ; petals 4, about 4 lines long, linear, white, thick, the apex incurved ; stamens 8;
filaments broad at th 6 base, very nearly glabrous; anthers oblong-rotund; disk a yellow ring; ovary
glabrous, 4-celled; style hairy on the lower half; stigma shortly 4-lobed.
Sab. : Summit of Bartle Prere. In some respects this fresh species is allied to Fvodia Fareana ,
P. v. M.
Bvodia alata, F. v. M. 1,2, 7. Futacece.
E. accedens, Flume. 1, 7. . „
Zanthoxylum toetum, F. v. M. 7. „
Aceonychia acidula, F. v. M. 1. Scortechini’s Crab. „
This produces a pleasant acid fruit, which might be utilised in forming cooling drinks. A form
of the species is met with on the Logan, and the usefulness of its fruit was brought under notice
some years ago by the late Eev. B. Scortechini.
Miceomelum pubescens, Flume. 7. The Lasmani of India. Futacece.
Citeus inodoeus, n. sp. 5. North Queensland Lime. (Named from the flowers „
wanting fragrance.)
A tall shrub; the young branches flattened or more or less angular as in the common orange.
Spines not very numerous, about i in. long, erect, lor2 at the axils of the leaf. Leaves lanceolate
or ovate-lanceolate, with distant sinuous crenations, 3to 7 in, long, to 2 in. broad in the centre,
the apex often elongated, and tapering towards the base to a very short petiole seldom exceeding
i in. in length; substance coriaceous ; midrib and primary veins more or less prominent, the latter
rather close and anastomosing in an intramarginal vein. Flowers axillary, nearly sessile, and, so
far as observed, scentless; calyx of 5 minute teeth; petals 5, about 3 lines long, spreading
stamens free, over 30, of irregular length, shorter than the petals; ovary, with'style, scarcely
exceeding a line in length. Fruit oblong, 2\ in. long, li in. diameter, showing 8 obtuse ribs,
the divisions of the fruit; pulp a-sharp agreeable acid; seeds oval, somewhat flattened on one side,
convex on the other, 3 lines long, 2 lines broad; testa white.
Sab. : Harvey’s Creek, Bussell Biver.
This new species of Citrus is well worthy of cultivation for its fruit, which is juicy, and of equal
flavour with the West Indian Lime. In general appearance the tree resembles the orange, having
the same dark-green foliage. I have chosen the specific name on account of all the flowers
gathered being wanting in fragrance, a remarkable feature in a genus so noted for scented flowers.
Melia composita, Willd. 1. White Cedar. Meliacece.
Dysoxylon Schiffneei, F. v. M. 5. „
D. EUFUM, VAE. GLABEESCENS. 7. „
D. Klandeei, F. v. M. 1,5. „
Cedeela Toona, Foxb. 1. Bed Cedar. „
El-EODendeon melanocaeptjm, F. v. M. 7. Celastrineae.
Hypsophila Halleyana, F. v. M, 4. „
Siphonodon austeale, Fenth. 1. Ivorywood. „
The fruit seems to be larger and more globose in the tropic.
Pomadeeeis elliptic A, Lobill. Walsh’s Pyramid. Fhamnece.
It is probable that the flowers are apetalous, for in all those I have examined they were wanting.
Gquanta austealiana, F. v. M. 7. Fhamnece.
Of this extensive tomentose climber, Baron Mueller, when describing the plant in Pragm rv,
144, had no fruit. The plants were in fruit in the Mulgrave Biver scrubs, so I may add to his descrip-
tion the following:—Fruit 3-winged, 3-celled, measuring (including the wings) about 4 lines
diameter, tomentose like the rest of the plant, wings veined ; seeds glossy, light brown, a line long,
showing about 3 blunt angles.
Yrns oblong a, Fenih. 1, 7. Native Grape. Ampelidece.
V. nitens, F. v. M. 1. Native Grape. „
V. teifolia, Linn. 1, 7. Native Grape. „
Y. hypoglauca, F. v. M. 1. Native Grape. „
Y. acetosa, F. v. M. 7. Native Grape. „
Leea sambucina, Willd. 1,7, „
Diploglottis diphyllosteqia, F. v. M. 7. Tamarind. Sapindacece.
Haepullia feutescens, n. sp. 1,2, 3, 7. ~
A slender usually single-stemmed shrub, so far as observed never attaining more than 5 feet,
slightly rusty-pubescent. Leaf-rhachis prominently winged to the base, and extending beyond the
last pinnso; pinna) nearly opposite, sessile, lanceolate, with attenuated points, 4to 8 in. long, to.
2h in. wide in the centre, membranous, of a dark green and always quite entire. Inflorescence a


terminal erect panicle with but a few short branches near the base, the female or hermaphrodite
flowers near the base, the end or upper ones male, white and fragrant, on short pedicels; sepals
imbricate, 4or 5, linear-obtuse, 3or 4 lines long, rusty-tomentose; petals 4, lanceolate, 6or 7 lines
long, recurved; stamens 7or 8, nearly as long as the petals, surrounded by a ring of short, erect,
obtuse glands; capsule 2 or 3-celled, forming spreading lobes 1|- in. wide and 1 in. deep, the
outside clothed with a deep crimson tomentum, 2 seeds in each cell, enveloped in a cup-shaped
yellow arillus.
Sab.: Bellenden-Ker, at an altitude of over 2,000 feet, and very frequently met with in the
scrubs bordering the rivers on the lower lands of the district. In Fragm. ix. 89, July, 1875,
Baron von Mueller notices this plant as occurring at Rockingham Bay, as S alata, F. v. M., having
entire leaflets and flowering as a shrub. I have, however, during my recent visit to Bellenden-Ker,
made a point of hunting for any plant of the species with serrated leaflets, or that attains the size of
even a large shrub, and having failed, think it better to give this Northern plant specific rank.
H. Hillii, F. v. M. 2. Sapindaeece.
H. pendula, Planch. 7. Tulip-wood. „
Dodonjea viscosa, Linn. 7, Hop-bush. „
Blephaeocaeya involucelgeea, F. v. M. 1. Anacardiaceoe.
Semecaeptjs Anacaedium, Linn. 7. Marking Nut. „
Spondias pleiogyna, F. v. M. 1. Burdekin Plum; “Rancooran” of the natives. „
Teiciiolobits connaeoides, F. v. M. 1,2, 5. Gonnaracece.
Ceotalaeia jtjkcea, Linn. 7. Sun-hemp. Leguminosce.
This plant is extensively cultivated in India for the sake of its fibre, which is known as the
Madras hemp.
C. linifolia, Linn. 7. Leguminosce.
Inbigofeea peatensis, F. v. M. 7. Indigo. „
Tepheosia jtjncea, B. Br. 7. „
Desmoditjm eenifoeme, DO. 1. „
IJeaeta lagopoides, JDO. 7. „
This little plant is used in Hindoo medicine, but seldom alone. It is supposed to have alterative,
tonic, and anti-catarrhal properties.
Glycine clandestina, Wendl. 7. Leguminosce.
Mucuna gigantea, DC. 7. Black Bean. „
Canayalia obtusifolia, L)C. 7. Coast Bean. „
Rkynchosia Cunninghamii, Benth. 1,7, Blue Bean or Pea. „
Fleming!a lineata, Boxh. 7. „
F. inyoluceata, Benth. 7. „
Deeeis koolgibbeeaii, n. sp. (From “ Koolgibberah,” the aboriginal name for the
Mulgrave River.) „
A woody climber attaining a considerable height, densely covered by soft ferruginous hairs,
particularly on the branches and inflorescence?. Leaflets usually 7, broadly oblong, 3to 5 in. .long, 2
to 3 in. broad, rounded at the base to a petiolule of about 2 lines, very obtuse or slightly apiculate at
the point, the terminal leaflet larger, the 6 or 8 primary veins on each side of the midrib and the
cross-veins usually prominent, midrib and primary veins with rusty hairs on both sides, upper surface
somewhat glossy, under surface with a pale soft pubescence. Inflorescence in narrow panicles 10 to
18 in. long, the side branches very numerous, about 3 in. long, the upper half densely covered by the
flower; pedicels very short, bracteoles close under the calyx ; flowers singly, not in pairs or clusters
but very close together, slightly rosy; calyx campanulate, dark, velvety, with obscure teeth, 11,- lines
deep; standard orbicular, with small indexed auricles at the base on a very short claw, about 4 lines
diameter, velvety on the back; wings slightly shorter and more or less adhering to and incurved with
the keel, and densely velvety ; upper stamen shortly free at the base, united with the other in the
middle. Pod densely clothed with rusty brown hairs under 2 in. long and about £ in. wide, somewhat
pointed at each end, prominently winged along the upper suture, 1-seeded, but only immature pods
seen.
Sab.: Border of scrubs along the Mulgrave River. In some respects this Queensland plant
approaches D. ferruginea, Benth.
Pong ami a glabea, Vent. 1. Ponga-tree of India. Leguminosce.
PoDOPETALUM OeMONDI, F. V. M. 1. „
Castanospeemum austeale, A. Gunn. 1, 2. Bean-tree; native name “ Kongo.” „
Cassia mimosoides, Linn. 1. „
Entada scandens, Benth. 1, 7. Match-box Bean. „
Adenantheea pavonina, Linn. 1, 7. False Red Sandalwood. „
Acacia flayescens, A. Gunn. 1, 2. The Yellowish "Wattle. „
A. holoseeicka, A. Gunn. 7. Silky Wattle. „
Pixhecolobium peuinosfm, Benth. 7. Monkey Pod. „
Aechidendeon Yaillantii, F. v. M. 1, 7. „
Rubus moluccanus, Linn. 5. Blackberry. Bosaceae.
R. EOSiEFOLius, Sm. 1, 2. Raspberry. „
This native Raspberry produces a very much superior fruit in the tropics, and full advantage was
taken of the ripe fruit by our party.
Aegophyllum Lejouedanii, F. v. M. 1, 7. Saxifragece.
Abeophtllum oenans, SooJc. „
Poltosma ALANGIACEA, F. V. M. 5. „
Davidsonia peueiens, F. v. M. 1,2, 7. Davidson’s Plum. „
This is an excellent fruit and, being in good order for use, was very acceptable. The fruit is
an oval drupe, very juicy, of rich purple colour, and sharp, pleasant, acid flavour ; some gathered
measured 3 in. long and 2 in. diameter.


Weinmannia Biagiana, F. v. M. 5. Saxifrageae.
Myriophyllum terrucosum, Labill. 7. Warted Water Milfoil. JE Zalorageae.
Bhizophoea mucronata, Idnn. 5. Mangrove. . Bhizophoreae.
Ceriops Candolleana, Am. 5. The Kirrari of India. „
Bruguieea Eheedii, Blume. 5. Bed Mangrove. „
Caeallta integerrima, DG. 5. The Kierpa tree of India. „
Leptospermum wooroonooban, n. sp. (Aboriginal name for Bellenden-Ker.) Myrtaceae.
Trunk often extending in an almost horizontal position for several yards at from 3 to 6 feet
above the ground, 2 or 8 feet diameter, with a thick stringy bark, from which branches arise to 20 or
30 ft., thus forming a large spreading-headed tree of dense foliage. This peculiar growth is due
probably to the high winds which blow at certain seasons of the year. Leaves alternate, lanceolate,
to f in. long, 2 to 2i lines broad in the centre, midrib and a marginal nerve on each side
prominent, oil-dots numerous, with blunt, glandular, slightly recurved apex, base decurrent forming
angles on the branchlets, slightly silky when young, as are also the young shoots. No flowers seen.
Capsules solitary or 2 together at the ends of the short branchlets; calyx-tube glabrous, 5-ribbed,
corresponding with the 5 cells, nearly sessile, slightly over 2 lines diameter; the capsule prominent
above the calyx-tube.
Sab.: South Peak, Bellenden-Ker, and so far as at present known only found there. The wood
is strong, heavy, and of a reddish colour.
Callistemon liANCeolatus, IDG. 7. Bed Bottle-brush or “ Marum.” Myrtaceae.
C. paludosus, F. v. M. 1, 7. Swamp Bottle-brush. „
Melaleuca leucadendron, tar. saligna. 1, 7. Paper-barked Tea-tree. „
M. leucadendron, tar. Cunninguamii ; both the red and yellow flowered kinds. 7. „
Eucalyptus tereticornis, Bm. 1, 7. Blue Gum. „
E. platyphylla, F.v.M. 7. Deciduous Gum. „
E, tesselaeis, F.v.M. 1, 7. Moreton Bay Ash. „
E. gorymbosa, Bm. 1, 7. Bloodwood „
Tristania coneerta, B. Br. 1, 7. Brisbane Box. „
T, suateolens, Bm. 1,7. Swamp Mahogany. „
T. EXILIFLOEA, F.V.M. 1, 7. „
Xanthostemon chrysanthus, F.v.M. 1,2, 7. „
Bhodomyetus psidioides, Bent Ti. 1. „
B. TEINEURA, F. V. M. 4. „
B. macrocarpa, Benth. 1, 7. Cooktown Loquat. „
This furnishes an edible red juicy fruit.
Leptospermum scoparium, Forst. Captain Cook’s Tea-tree.
It was one of the several forms of this plant which was used by the seamen of Captain Cook’s
vessel for making tea, hence the name “Tea-tree” for this and several other Leptospermums
Melaleucas , and allied shrubs, erroneously at times written “Ti-tree,” a Maori name for a Cordyline,
Myrtus eacemulosa, Benth. 2. Black-fruited Myrtle. Myrtaceae.
A. tall shrub or small tree, with ovate acuminate leaves all under 2 in. long. Eruit a black
berry containing numerous seeds—over 25 in the fruits examined; these are borne on solitary filiform
peduncles above the axils of the leaves, but probably the subtending leaves were abortive and had
fallen.
Myrtus ? Myrtaceae.
Tree 30 or 40 feet high, trunk often crooked, Ito feet diameter, bark thick and loose on the
outside ; head spreading and foliage very dense; branchlets and leaf-petioles silky-hairy. Leaves
ovate, with long acuminate points, mostly under 1 in. long, glabrous except while very young,
coriaceous, the midrib alone showing, glossy on the upper, pale and closely dotted with minute dots
on the under side ; petioles 2 lines long.
This and the Leptospermum wooroonooran are the only two large trees on the south peak of
Bellenden-Ker, therefore of sufficient interest to mention, although no flowers or fruit were obtained.
I have placed it under Myrtus, but it strongly reminds one of some of the New Zealand Metrosideros.
Ehodamnia ' SEssiLiFLOEA, Benth. 1. Myrtaceae.
B. teinertia, Blume. 1. „
E. Blaieiana, F. v. M. 3,4, and summit of Mount Sophia. „
At Palm Camp, 4,000 feet, this attains the height of 70 or 80 feet; has an erect trunk, with a
loose almost fibrous bark.
Psidium guata, Baddi. 5. Apple Guava. Myrtaceae.
This well-known fruit is naturalised about Harvey’s Creek.
Eugenia geandis, Wight. 6. „
The leaves of this Bartle Erere form are very much smaller than usual, also thicker, and in
stature also smaller, it only forming a large shrub ; but only having unopened buds to determine by,
I cannot give characteristics to distinguish it from other forms.
E. cormiflora, F.v.M. 2,6. “Murro,” native name of fruit. Myrtaceae.
E. jambolana, Lam. 7. „
E. Wilsonii, F. v. M. 3,4, 5. „
E. oleosa, F. v. M. 2. Blue-fruited Eugenia. „
A largo straggling shrub, with broadly lanceolate leaves 2or 3 in. long. Flowers in trichotomous
panicles, bearing 3 flowers at the end of each branch ; calyx-lobes 4, minute; petals 4, slightly
larger than the calyx-lobes, very fugitive; filaments 1 in. long, capillary; anthers minute; style
slightly exceeding the stamens. Fruit globular-oblong, f in, long, and of a beautiful blue colour,
maturing a solitary seed.
ILab.: Whelanian Pools.
Barringtonia racemosa, Qaudich. 1. Myrtaceae.
b


Caeeya australis, F.v.M. 1. Native names at various places “ Go-onja,”
“ Guntha-marrah,” and “ Barror.” Myrtaceee.
Otantheea beacteata, Korth. 5, 7. Melasfomacees.
Melastoma malabatheicum, yae. polyanthum. 1, 7. „
Caeica Papaya, Linn, 5. Papaw-tree. Fassijlorees.
This excellent fruit is becoming naturalised about Harvey’s Creek.
Passifloea quad rangul arts, Linn. 5, 7. The large Granadilla. „
This fruit is naturalised about Harvey’s Creek and Mulgrave River.
P. fcetida, Linn. 7. Love-in-a-mist Passion-flower. ' „
Naturalised about Mulgrave River.
Teichosanthis pentaphylla, F. v. M. 7. Cucurbitacece.
LUFFA iEGYPTIACA, Mill. 7. „
Bryonia laciniosa, Linn. 1,2, 5, 7. „
Melotheia Cunninghamii, F. v. M. 5, 7. „
CuGUMIS TEIGONUB, Boxb. 7. „
Benincasa vacua, F. v. M. 7. „
Hydeocotyle asiatica, Linn. 1. Asiatic Pennywort. TJmbelliferes.
H. hieta, B. Br. 7. „
H. LAXIFLOEA, DC. 7. „
Poeospermum Michieanum, F. v. M. 5. Araliacees.
Mackinlaya maceosciadum, F. v. M. 1,2, 5. „
Asteotricha pteeocaepa, Benth. 7, and Walsh’s Pyramid. „
Panax Mueeayi, F. v. M. 1, 7. „
P. elegans, F. v. M. 1,5,7. Mowbulan Whitewood, or of the natives “ Greyanger.” „
Pentapanax Willmotti, F. v. M. 6. „
Beassaia actinophylla, Fndl. 1, 2. Umbrella-tree. „
Hedera austealiana, F. v. M. 5. „
Sabcocephalus coedatus, Miq. 1, 7. Leichhardt-tree. Bubiacees.
Uncaeia feeeea, DG. 7. „
Now met with for the first time in Australia, but known from Sumatra, Java, and Borneo. A
tall rusty-hairy climbing plant, furnished with hooked tendrils; the Queensland plant has rather
large capsules £ in. or even more long.
Hedyotus aueiculaeia, Linn. 5. Bubiacece.
H. C.ERULESCENS, F. V. M. 7. „
Dentella eepens, Forsl. 7. „
"Webeea Uallachiana, F. v. M. 1,2,7. „
Randia hieta, F. v. M. 1,2. „
R. Fitzalani, F. v. M. 1. „
Guettaeda tenuifloea, F. v. M. 5. „
Timonius Rumphii, DC. 1, 7. „
Knoxia coeymbosa, Willd. 1, 7. „
Ixoea timoeensis, Dene. 1, 7. „
Pavetta indica, Linn. 7. Called Pavetti in part of India. „
Moeinda citeifolia, Linn. 1, 7. „
M. HYPOTEPHEA, F. V. M. 4. ’ „
CCELOSPEEMUM EETICULATUM, Benth. 7. j>
Geophila eenifoemis, j D. Don, 1,2, 7. Ground Cherry. „
Psychoteia loniceeotdes, Sieb. 7. „
P. Uallachiana, Benth. 1,2, 3. ~
Lasianthus steigosus, Wight. 1, 2 „
Hydnophytum foemicaeum, Jack. 1. Ant-house plant. „
A most curious gouty-stemmed epiphyte,
Adenostemma yiscosum, Forst. 2. Composite?.
Agebatum conyzoides, Linn. 5, 7. Billygoat-weed.
Although a soft plant it has become a great nuisance, both in field and cultivation."
Lagenophoea Billaedieei, Cass. 1, 7. Composites.
Eeigeeon linifolia, Willd. 7. Cobbler’s-pegs. „
Pteeocaulon cyltndeostachys, Clarke. 7. „
P. sphacelatus, Benth. et Hook. 7. „
Heltcheysum elatum, A. Cunn. 2, 3. „
Siegesbeckia oeientalis, Linn. 1. „
Bidens pilosa, Linn. 1. Cobbler’s-pegs. „
Glossogyne tenuifolia, Gass. 7. „
Centipeda oebiculaeis, F. v. M. 7. Snuff-weed. „
Crepis japonica, Benth. 1, 7. „
Sonchus oleeaceus, Linn. 7. Sow-thistle. „
Stylidium alsinoides, B. Br. 7. ■ Stylidice.
S. uliginosum, Sto. 7. „
ScjEYOLa scandens, n. sp. (Referring to the climbing habit of plant.) Qoodenoviece.
A large climbing plant rambling over the surrounding shrubs to the height of 10 or 12 ft.
Leaves opposite, bordered with sharp, distant, small teeth, ovate, 3 or 4 in. long with narrow
elongated apex and short petiole. Flowers solitary, or 2 or 3on a short peduncle; calyx-
tube about 2 lines long, with minute teeth; corolla f in. long, split open on one side to the base,
the inside lined with woolly hairs, the outside glabrous and purplish, except the wavy edges which
are bright-yellow; stamens scarcely exceeding the corolla-tube in length ; style narrowly winged,*
shortly incurved at the top; indusium hairy on the back, besides the dense ring of silky-white
hairs surrounding the cup. Fruit not seen.
Hab.: Bellenden-Ker, at about 3,000 ft.


Lobelia humtsteata, F. v. M. 7. Campanulacece.
Wahlenbeegia geacilts, A. DG. 1. Bluebell. „
Agapetes Meiniana, F. v. M. 6. Yacciniaceae.
Ehododeitdeon Loch.e, F. v. If. 4. Ericaceae.
Teochocaepa laueina, B. Br. 4, 6. Epacrideoe.
This is one of the most common shrubs met with on the summit of Bellenden-Ker and Battle
Frere.
Leucopogon plueilocueatus, F. v. If. 2. Epacrideoe.
Mokotoca uneata, B.Br. 6. „
J. J. Labillardiere, in PI. Nov. Holl. i. 45, is the only one to notice that the fruit of this small
tree has 5 cells, which I found to be the case in the specimen I examined from Bartle Frere. I
think this is the first time the plant has been found out of Tasmania. The fruit of our plant is
roundish, about 2 lines in diameter, and of a rich red colour. It is strange that neither Dr. Hooker
in the Tasmanian Flora, nor Mr. Bentham in the Flora Australiensis, gives the number of cells in
the fruit; and both refer to Labillardiere’s description and figure in which the 5 cells are mentioned
and shown under his name of Styphelia glauca.
Deacophyllijm Sateei, F. v. If. 4, 6. Epacrideoe.
The following may be added to the description given by Baron von Mueller in the Australasian
Journal of Pharmacy, March, 1887. Trunk attaining a diameter of 10 in.; bracts 3 in. long, white,
shaded with deep rose. There are probably two varieties of this species, which may be distinguished
by the flowers of the one having a white tube and horizontal rose-coloured lobes, which seem to
become somewhat erect in decay. Of the other the flowers are all white, and the corolla-lobes are
closely reflexed, and remain so in decay. I found this distinction on all the plants examined,
even when growing beside each other.
Myesine yaeiabilts, B. Br. 7. Ifyrsineoe.
Aedisia psetjdojambos, F. v. If. „
jEgiceeas majijs, Gcsrtn. 5. Eiver Mangrove. „
Jasminum didtmum, Forst. 1. Jasmine. Oleacece.
Linocieea eamifloea, 80. 1. „
Caeissa ovata, B. Br. 1. Apocynacece.
Altxia etjscifolia, B. Br. 2,3, 4. „
This was very abundant on the mountain tops.
A. ilicifolta, F. v. If. 3. ~
A. spicata, B. Br. 1,2, 7. „
Ceebeea Odollam, Ocertn. 5. The “ Dabur” of Bengal. „
The seeds of this tree are said to contain crystalline poisonous glucoside. Vide Dr. W. Dymock,
Yeg. Mat. Med. of Western India, for this and most other notices on the medicinal properties of
the plants noticed.
Alstonia scholaeis, B. Br. 1,2,7. In this district often called Pine. Apocynacece.
A. yillosa, Blume. 1. „
A. YEETICILLOSA, F. V. M. 7. „
Tabeejoemojjtana oeiextalis, B. Br. 1,7. „
Hota caenosa, B. Br. 1. Waxflower or Honeyflower. Asclepiadece.
H, austealis, B. Br. 1,2, 7. „
H. Nicholsoxia:, F. v. M. 1,2. ~
H. Keysii, Bail. 2. Francesca Falls. „
Dischidia nummulaeia, B. Br. 1, 7. Button Orchid. „
I find this generally known by the above, but it is unfortunate, as it is in nowise related to the
Orchids.
Miteasacme indica, Wight. 1, 7. Loganiacece,
M. pygxlea, R. Br. 1, 7. „
Steychxos Banceoftiana, n. sp. Snakewood. (After Dr. Joseph Bancroft, who
has done so much to make known the medicinal properties of our indigenous
plants.) „
Stems climbing, terete, often reaching the height of 40 or 50 ft., diameter of lower part 2 in.
In the upper portion, especially near the inflorescence, furnished with curved tendrils, which are
curved like rams’ horns, sometimes in pairs. Leaves opposite, glabrous, ovate-acuminate, 4to 7 in.
long, H to 3 in. broad, triplinerved with often another lower pair forming an intramarginal nerve,
and prominently reticulated; texture thin, cartilaginous, petioles scarcely £ in. long. Inflorescence
axillary, racemose, or in racemose panicles 3or 4 in. long. Flowers not seen. The persistent calyx
under the fruit of 5 blunt lobes about a line long and broad. Fruit a globular brown berry,
i to 1 in. diameter, bearing the erect style ; seeds flat, orbicular, from 1 to 4 in a fruit embedded in a
mealy pulp.
Hob.: Tringilburra Creek and Mulgrave Eiver.
I gave a few seeds of this plant to Dr. Thos. L. Bancroft for examination for active properties,
and the following is his note: —“The seeds of the new StrycJmos, like those of the other two
Queensland species, are bitter ; but they do not contain strychnine or, indeed, any poisonous
substance —not at any rate in sufficient quantity, when in the form of an extract, to kill frogs,”
Coedia Myxa, Finn. 7. Sapistan-tree. Boragineae.
C. aspeea, Forst. 7. ~
Touenefoexia saementosa, Lam. 1, 7. „
IpOMiEA angustifolia, Jacq. 7. Convolvulacece.
Lepistemon ueceolatus, F. V. If. 1, 7. „
Eyolyulus alsinoides, Linn. 1, 7. „


Lycoperstcum esc ulentum, Mill. 6. Tomato. Solanaceee.
A stray from cultivation.
otX«ANUM nigrum, Linn. 5, 7. Black Nightshade. »
S. Ait. 7. »
S. Dallachii, Benth. 1,2, 5, 7. »
Capsicum fbutescens, Linn. Bed Pepper. »
A stray from cultivation.
Nicotiana Tabacum, Linn. 7. Tobacco. „
A stray from cultivation.
Yandellia Crustacea, Benth. 7. Scrophularinete.
Buchnera linearis, B. Br. 7. »
Utricularia exoleta, JR. Br. 5, 7. Water Bladderwort. Lentibulariea.
Haussmannia jdcunda, F. v. M. 2,6, 7. Bignoniacecb.
Diplanthera tetbaphylla, B. Br. 1,2, 7. »
Euellia australis, B. Br. 7. Acanthacea.
Acanthus ilicieohus, Linn. 5. Holly-leaved Bear’s Breech. ~
Eranthemum tariabile, B. Br. 1,5, 7. »
Oallicarpa longipolia, Lam. 1, 2. Verbenacete.
Yitex acuminata, B. Br. 7. »
Earadata splendida, F. v. M. 1, 7. »
Clerodendron Tractanum, F.v.M. 5. „
Plectranthus paryielorus, Willd. 1. Labiata.
P. LONGICOBNIS, F.V.M. 7. »
Coleus scutellarioides, Benth. 5. »
Anisomeles salyifolia, B. Br. »
Ajuga australis, B. Br. Australian Bugle. »
Boebhaayia diffusa, Linn. 7. Spreading Hogvveed. Nyctaginece.
This common weed has lately been highly spoken of by medical men in India as a remedy in
dropsical cases.
P r sonia Bbunoniana, Endl. 1, 7. Nyctagineat.
P. acuLeata, Linn. 7. »
Deeringia altissima, F. v. M. 1, 7. Amarantacea.
Achtranthes aspera, Linn. 1,5, 7. Chirchira of India. „
This is a rather troublesome weed on scrub land, but on the rich scrub land at Harvey’s Creek
I noticed it far more luxuriant than at any other place. However, from Dr. Dymock we learn that
in India it is considered of some medicinal value. He tells us that it is called in Sanskrit Apamalga,
or the Washerman, on account of the large quantity of alkali contained in its ashes, which are used
in the preparation of alkaline medicines and caustic pastes. In Western India the juice is applied
to relieve toothache. The ashes with honey are given to relieve cough, and European practitioners
in India have established its value as a diuretic. It is pleasant to find so troublesome a weed has
some redeeming qualities.
Chenopodium ambrosioides, Linn. 7. Ghenopodiacece.
C. carinatum, B. Br. 7. »
Poltgonium strigosum, B. Br. 7. Polygonacea.
P. subsessilis, B. Br. 7. »
P. ATTENUATUM, B. Br. 7. »
Muehlenbeckia gbacillima, Meissn. 7. _ ~
Abistolochia deltantha, F. v. M. Birthwort. Hills off Mulgrave Biver. Aristolochiacece.
Piper subpeltatum, Willd. 1,2,5. Shrubby Pepper. Piperacecs.
P. NOVyE-nOLLANDIJE, Miq. 2. „
P. Banksii, Miq. 5. »
Piper (Chayica) Mestoni, n. sp. Queensland Long Pepper. „
A large climber adhering to the stems of trees by adventitious roots. Leaves broadly ovate-
acuminate, rounded at the base, and nearly or quite equal-sided, 6 to 8 in. long, 4 to 5 in. broad, on
petioles of about i in., septuplinerved. Spikes unisexual, leaf-opposed ; males not seen ; female
or fruiting spikes of a brownish colour, formed by the firmly united fruits, nearly 2 in. long and
5 lines diameter at the base, terete, tapering towards the end; peduncles about i in. long ; styles
rather prominent, 2-lipped.
Sal.: Harvey’s Creek, Bussell Biver.
It is worthy of remark that the present plant is nearly allied to the Long Pepper of commerce.
Peperomia leptostachta, Soolc. et Arn. 1. Piperaceis.
P. reflexa, A. JDietr. 6. „
The form of this species found growing upon the rocks on the summit of Bartle Erere has more
cuneate leaves than our ordinary one; they are about £ in. long, and distinctly petiolate, with a
prominent midrib; spikes very slender, about lin long.
Myristica insipida, B. Br. 7. Nutmeg. Mynsticea.
Cryptocabta australis, Benth. 7. Queensland Curara-bark. Laurineae.
C. Mackinnoniana, F.v.M. 1. „
C. TRIPLINEBYIS, B. Br. 1. „
This and G. australis Dr. T. L. Bancroft has found to contain in their barks curarine, an active
poisonous drug.
Endiandba discolor, Benth. 1. Laurine<s.
LITSEA DEALBATA, VAR. EUFA. 1,5, 7. „
Cassytha pubescbns, B. Br. 2. Laurel Dodder. „


Peesoonia faicata, B. Br. 1. Boomerang-leaved Greebung. Froteacece.
Cyanocarptjs, n. gen. (So named from its bright-blue fruits.) „
Blowers hermaphrodite; perianth regular, in a straight tube before expansion; segments
valvate, recurved when expanded; anthers on short filaments. Hypogynous glands 4, distinct,
orbicular-ovate, equal. Ovary sessile, with long straight style; stigma terminal, clavate. Bruit a
drupe with succulent juicy exocarp and cartilaginous endocarp, 1-seeded. A slender evergreen
tree with alternate serrated leaves. Blowers in axillary racemes, pedicels connate in pairs. Bruit
a juicy bright-blue drupe.
C. Hoetohiaxa, n. sp. (After the Hon. A. Horton, who has always taken a deep
interest in Australian botany.) Froteacece.
A small tree, the branches when young clothed with dark-reddish short hairs. Leaves alternate,
broadly lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, 4 to 7 in. long, 1 to 3 in. broad, irregularly but sharply serrate,
the apex more or less elongated; petioles short, which with the primary veins are clothed with rusty
hairs like the branchlets; texture membranous, upper surface glossy; primary veins prominent,
joining some distance within the margin. Racemes axillary, 2to 4 in. long, ferruginous; flowers in
pairs, the pedicels short, connate, straight and slender in the bud, about 3 lines long, the segments
closely revolute when expanded, glabrous inside; filaments equal in length with the anther, incurved;
style erect, glabrous; stigma clavate; ovary sessile, very hairy. Bruit a bright-blue oval juicy
drupe, about in. long, more or less hairy, and bearing the persistent, slender, straight style.
Sab.: Triugilburra Creek and creeks off Russell River.
A lovely tree when in full fruit; wood red, with the peculiar grain of the order.
Helicia PEiEAi/rA, F. v. M. 1, 2. Froteacece.
H. Tounqiana, F. v. M. 3. ,
H. FEEEUGINEA, F. V. M. 2. „
H. Whelani, n. sp. 1. (After Sergeant E. J, "Whelan). „
A glabrous tree of medium size. Trunk erect, bark smoothish, not thick, seldom more than | in.
on old trees ; the branches opposite or whorled, reddish when young, wood with the usual grain of
the order and deep red. Leaves opposite or more frequently at the ends of the branches in whorls
of 3 to 6, petiolate, lanceolate, 4 to 7 in. long, 1 to 3 in. broad, the points, more or less elongated,
midrib prominent; reticulations close, prominent in the dried leaf but scarcely so whoa fresh, margins
entire. Blowers in terminal racemes of about 2 in. long, judging from the fruit specimens, but no
flowers seen. Bruit indehiscent or slightly opening along the ventral suture, slightly ferruginous,
globular, 2or more inches in diameter, over 2* in. when containing twin nuts; p itamen globular
when solitary, hemispherical when 2 in a fruit, of a light-brown, glossy and hard ; lesta dark-brown
and wrinkled like the kernel.
Sab.: Abundant along Tringilburra Creek, and thence to Whelanian Pools.
The nuts seem to be largely used by the natives of this locality for food, as we found large
quantities of the broken shells as well as the whole nuts at all their camps.
Oeites feageans, n. sp. 4. (Name referring to the fragrant flowers.) Froteacece.
A tall shrub or small tree with dense spreading head, glabrous except the inflorescence and a
slight hoariness on the young growth; the twigs or branches bearing the flowers, purplish or reddish.
Leaves alternate, ovate-obtuse, emarginate or somewhat pointed, 2-| to 3| in. long, and 1 to-2 in.
broad; the margins quite entire, pale on the under surface; texture thin coriaceous, on slender
coloured petioles of about 1 in. Spikes numerous in the upper axils, about 2or 3 in. long; at an
early stage closely covered with broadly ovate, apiculate, prominently striated, imbricate, fugacious
bracts, of a bright crimson colour; rhachis densely ferruginous pubescent; perianth 3or 4 lines
long, segments much re-curved in the expanded flower; filaments broad, attached to the middle of
the segment; anther about as long as the filament; ovary purple and silky, but less so than the
style, which is very hairy and as long as the perianth.
Sab.: The highest peaks of Bellenden-Ker and also Bartle Brere.
A most attractive plant from the rich colour and fragrance of the inflorescence.
Hicksbbachia pinnatifolia, F. v. M. Hills off the Mulgrave River. Vroteacece.
Hollandaia Saveei, F. v. M. 5. „
This is a very handsome tree of medium size, with large ovate-obtuse minutely toothed leaves,
and long racemes of purplish-red flowers usually springing from the branches below the foliage. A
most desirable tree for garden culture, but no fruit was obtainable.
Gteevillea poltstachta, B. Br. 7. Froteacece.
G-. gibbosa, B. Br. 7. Round-fruited Beefwood. „
CaENAETONIA AEALIiEFOLIA, F. V. M. 2. „
Caedwellia sublimis, F. v. M. 1, 5. „
Banksia collina, B. Br. Walsh’s Pyramid, Mulgrave River. „
IiATiFOLiA, Linn. 1,5, 7. Flceagnacece.
Lobanthus longifloeus, Desr. 2,3, Loranthaceoe.
L. altxifolitjs, F. v. M. 4, 6. „
L. exocaepi, Behr. 1. „
Yiscum angulatum, Seyne. 1. Angular-stemmed Mistletoe. „
Y. aeticulatum, Bnrm. 6. Articulated-stemmed Mistletoe. ~
Balaxophoea rtTNQOSA, Forst. 1,2, 5, 7. Balanopborece.
This root parasite was noticed to bo very abundant in all the scrubs, producing unusually large
heads, some noticed being over 8 in. diameter, and varying from nearly white to dark reddish-brown.'
Mr. Banning, of Breshwater Creek, says that “ bullocks are so eager to obtain a bite of it that it is
often difficult to drive them through a scrub where it abounds.”
Euphorbia seeeulata, Beinw. 1. Fuphorbiacece.
E. pilulifeea, Linn, 1, Asthma-herb, „


Phteeanthus Peedinandi, Muell. Arg. .1, 7. Towwar. Fupliorbiaceae.
P. MINUTIFEOEUS, F.V.M. 7. „
Beetnia stipitata, Muell. Arg. 7. „
Antidesma Daeeachtanum, Baill. 1, 7. Herbert River Cherry. „
The trees of this excellent fruit were in many localities heavily laden with fruit.
Aeeueites moluccana, Willd. 1,2, 5, 7. Candle-nut. „
Ceoton phebalioides, F. v. M. „
C. AENHEMICUS, VAE. UEEN.EFOEIUB. 5. „
CODLSUM TAEIEGATUM, VAE. MOLUCCANUM. 1,6, 7. „
Ceaoxteon Hillii, Benth. 1, 7. „
MaEEOTUS CEAOXTEOIDES, VAE. MACEOPHVEEA. 1, 7. „
M. angustifolius, Benth. 7. „
M. phieippinensts, Muell. Arg. 7. Kamela-tree. „
MaCAEANGA INVOLUCEATA, Baill. 7. „
M. Tanaetus, Muell. Arg. 1, 7. Tumkullum. ~
Ricinus communis, Linn. Castor-oil shrub. Seen as an escape from cultivation in
many localities. Fuphorhiaceac.
Teagia Muell. Arg. 7. Climbing Nettle. „
Homaeanthus popueifoeius, Grah. .1, 7. Pacific Islands Poison-bush. „
ExciECAEiA Agaleociia, Linn. 5. Milky Mangrove. „
Teema aspeea, Blume. 1. Peach-leaf Poison-bush. TJrticacece.
T. oeientaeis, Blume. 7. Gunpowder Charcoal tree of India. „
Aphananthe phieippinensis, Blanch. 7. ~
Pseudomoeus Beunoniana, Bureau. 1, 7. ~
Pious coeossea, F. v. M. 7. „
A large deciduous tree with smooth light-coloured bark, remarkable for its branches being
chosen by the Calomis metalica to build their nests upon.
P. Cunninghamii, Miq. 7. TJrticacece.
P. EUGEJIIOIDES, F. V. M. 7. „
F. EHEETIOIDES, F. V. M. 1, 7. „
P. MOLLIOE, F. V. M. 1. „
P. PINKIANA, F. V. M. 5, 7. „
P. hispida, Linn. 1. „
P. FASCICUEATA, F. V. M. 1. „
P. CASEAEIA, F. V. M. 1, 2. „
P. geomeeata, Willd. 1, 7. Cluster Pig. „
P. ceassipes, n. sp. (So named from the thick stalk of fruit.) „
A large tree with a somewhat smooth light-coloured barb, very milky, ends of the branches very
thick, marked with rings showing where the stipules were attached. Leaves alternate, very close
on the ends of the branches, the intemodes not being more than £ in. long; petioles somewhat
flattened, about 3 in. long and 3 lines broad, glabrous or slightly hoary; lamina ovate or obtuse-
ovate, with or without a short blunt point, usually rounded at the base, sto 8 in. long, 4 to in.
broad, thick, coriaceous, and deep green, the margins entire, the primary lateral veins parallel,
except the basal pair, which starting from the top of the petiole meet the other at about i up the
leaf whore, anastomosing with them, form intramarginal ones. Stipules about 2 in. long with very
fine point. Keceptacles crowded at the ends of the branches, obtusely B-angular, some showing a
fourth angle, about 2 in. long and 1 in. diameter, marked with oval purple spots, the apex beaked ;
peduncles 3-angular, often broader than long.
Hah.: Scrubs, Harvey’s Creek, Eussell River.
This fine tree resembles somewhat, in its long angular fruit, F. pleurocarpa of the Johnstone
River.
Cun E ant a javanensis, Trecul. 1, 7. Cockspur Thorn. TJrticacece.
On the plants of this shrub growing along the Mulgrave River I found the leaves to be much
affected by the parasitic fungus Ehgtisma hypoxanthum.
Lapoetea photentphteea, Wedd. Shining-leaved Nettle-tree. TJrticacece.
L. moeoides, Wedd. 1, 7. Gympie Nettle-tree. „
On the Mulgrave River the leaves of this Nettle were unusually large —some measured 19 in. by
19 in. on petioles of 15 in. long.
Elatostemma eeticueata, Wedd. 2. TJrticacece.
Piptueus aegenteus, Wedd. 5,7. Coomeroo-coomeroo. „
Casuaeixa subeeosa, Oft. JDietr. 7. Swamp or River Oak. Casuarinece.
C. toeueosa, Ait. 2. Forest Oak. • „
Caeeiteis Paeeatoeei, F. v. M. 2. Stringybark Pine. Coniferce.
Until now this Cypress Pine has not been found except in the South of Queensland. It was first
found on the Darlington Range by Walter Hill.
Podocaepus elata, B. Br. 2, 3,7. She-Pine or Kidneywallum. Coniferce.
Agathis eobusta, 0. Moore. 3. Dammara Pine. „
Ctcas media, Ft. Br. 1, 7. Cycadacece.
Maceozamia Hopei, W. Hill. 2. ~
Rowenta spectabieis, HooTc. 5, 7. ~
The rhizome of this plant is used for food by the aborigines.
Betxa Roxbueghii, Bich. 5. Hydrocharidece.


Yallisiteeia geacilis, n. sp. (Plant small and slender compared with others of the
genus.) Hydrochar ideas.
Stems slender, creeping in the mud. Leaves about 7 or 8 to a plant, very narrow like fine
grass, 3 to 5 in, long and about % line broad, the sheathing base short, tapering to filiform points,
all submerged, no portion floating on'the surface of the water. Male flowers minute; female
flowers on very fine, filiform, spirally twisted stalks; perianth of 3 ovate entire segments; stigmas 3.
Hah.: Still waters, or at the edge of the running waters of the Mulgrave River.
The above is from note made on the spot, and having but a common lens I could not fully
describe the flowers.
Musa Banksit, F. v. M. 1,5. Aboriginal name, “ Chatum.” Scitaminece.
M. Hillti, F. v. M. 1, 5. Erect-flowering Banana. „
These indigenous Bananas should be tried for their fibre, which probably might be found
stronger than that of the cultivated varieties; and they are in great abundance on the low lands of
tropical Queensland.
Elettaeia Scottiaka, F. v. M. 1, 5. Queensland Cardamoms. Scitaminece.
Alpinia Benih. 1, 7. „
A. EACEMIGEEA, F. V. M. 1,2. „
A. AECTIFLOEA, F. V. M. 5. „
Tapeinocheilos puxgens, Miq. 1,5, 7. „
Lipaeis eeflexa, Lindl. 3. Orchidece.
This plant was in great abundance on the rocks from 4,000 ft. to the summit of Bellenden-Ker,
but from my notes and the dried specimens there is nothing to separate them even as a form from
the Southern plant. However, should the plants live which I have brought down, a distinction may
afterwards be pointed out.
Miceosttlis Bebnaysiana, F. v. M. et Bail. 3. Orchidece.
It is most fortunate to have rediscovered this plant, because all the specimens and plants had
been lost which had previously been collected in the neighbourhood of Trinity Bay.
Obeeoxia pusilla, n. sp. 3. (A weak small species.) Orchidece.
A small light-green plant, thickly studding the bark of a Myrius. Leaves slightly distichous,
about 40r5 to a plant, semi-cylindric, foveolate, fleshy, not over 1 in. long and 1 line thick. Elower-
racemes slightly exceeding the leaves and bearing about 12 minute flowers, each of which is
subtended by a transparent bract. Eruit white, globular, about 1 line diameter.
Hah.: Bellenden-Ker, at about 4,000 ft. above sea-level.
No fresh flowers found on the plants; only found the plants on one tree, on which they were
very numerous. Unfortunately all the live plants became rotten before they reached Brisbane,
Dendeobium undulatum, R. Br. 1, Orchidece.
D. speciosum:, Bm. 4, and top of "Walsh’s Pyramid, Mulgrave River. „
D. speciostjm, vae, fusifoeme, Bail. 1, 2. „
D. teteagontjm, A. Gunn. 1, 2. „
D. CAXALICTJLATUM, JR. Br. 7. „
D. hispidum, vae. Tayloei, Bail. 2, 3. „
D. TEEETIFOLIUM, B. Br. 1,7. „
Btjlbopiiylltjm lichenasteum, F. v. M. 1,2, 3. „
B. Toeesse, n. sp. (After Miss Toressa Meston.) „
A small plant with creeping rhizome adhering close to the granite rocks by roots from the under
side, extending to 2or 3 in. in length, often forming radiating patches. The upper surface closely
covered by distichous, closely sessile, ovate-lanceolate, rugose leaves, which are so concave on the
upper face as to be somewhat cymbiform, 3 or 4 lines long, with a single nearly sessile flower
nestling at the base. Elowers yellowish-white, subtended by a prominent scarious bract; 3 outer
segments broad and about 2 lines long, the lateral ones forming a short, blunt, almost truncate
spur; the inner segments white, of delicate texture, and nearly the length of the outer ones.
Labellum of equal length with the other segments, 3-lobed, lateral lobes dotted with purple,
very short; middle lobe blunt and thick, bright yellow; column short and, for the size of the flower,
prominently winged.
Hah.; On the shady rocks, Whelanian Pools; in flower in June and July.
B. xematopodum, F. v. M. 2. * Orchidece.
Stipulary bract rigidly ribbed. Outer segment of flower with a purple edge, and 3 purple lines
down the centre ; inner segments about half the length of outer, say about H lines, margin and one
line down centre purple. Labellum ias long as outer segments, and very velvety, with purple hairs;
column length of inner segments. —Note from pocket-hook.
B. Baileti, F. v. M. 1,2, 3. Orchidece.
B. Peenticei, F. v. M. 3, 4. „
B. ptjepueascens, Bail. 2. „
Eeia Eitzalani, F.v.M.l. „
Pholidota imbeicata, Lindl. 1. „
Ctmbidium albuciploeum:, F. v. M. 1. Aboriginal name, “ Pongeum.” „
Cleisostoma Macpheesoxii, F. v. M. 5, 7. „
G-aleoea foliata, F. v. M. 7. „
Coeymbis veeateifolia, Beichh. 1,5, 7. „
OoODYEEA VIEIDIFLOBA, Blume. 3. „
Thelymitea longifolia, Forst. 6, 7. „
This wide-spread terrestrial orchid was only met with on the summits of Bartle Erere and
Walsh’s Pyramid.


Cueculigo eecueyata, Ait. 5. Amaryllideae.
Ceinum pedunculatum, B. Br. 5. „
Euetcles amboinensis, Loud. 7. „
Tacca pinnatiflda, Forst. 7. Taccacecs.
The rootstock of this plant furnishes the article known in commerce as “Fiji arrowroot,” which
is particularly recommended in cases of dysentery and diarrhoea.
Dioscoeea satita. 1,7. Yam. Bioscoridcas.
Smilax glycyphylla, Sm. 1, 2, 3. 4. Sweet Tea-plant. Liliaceas.
S. atjstealis, B. Br. 1, 7. Sarsaparilla. „
EIIIPOGONUM ALBUM, YAE. LEPTOSTACHYA. 1. „
Flagellaeia txdica, Linn. I, 2,3, 5, 7. „
Dianella cjerulea, Sims. 7. Blueberry. „
D. ensifolia, Bed. Lil. 1. „
Eusteephus latifolius, B. Br. 1, 7. „
Dracaena angustifolia, Boxb. 1, 7. „
Coedyline teeminalis, Kunth. 1,2, 3, 7., Lily Palm. „
The usual tropical forms of this were met with both in flower and fruit.
Borya septentrionalts, F. v. M. Walsh’s Pyramid. „
Helmholtzia acorifolia, F. v. M. 3, 4. Philydraceae.
The gullies with running water, at from 4,000 ft. to the summit of Bellenden-Ker, seem to bo
the home of this noble plant, for we here found it growing in great profusion. The stems 3to 5
feet high and over 2 in. in diameter, the upper portion bearing distichous flag-like leaves often
5 ft, long and 3or 4 in. broad, of a deep-green colour. The flowers are pure white and borne on a
terminal panicle 2or 3 feet long; bracts closely reflexed, lanceolate; flowers f in. long, of 3 segments,
outer one greenish, inner ones white and tomentose, infolding the solitary stamen, of which the
filament is short and the anther large and bright-yellow; ovary woolly; style glabrous, about as long
as the perianth ; stigma minute; capsule 3-lobed, containing numerous oblong or oblong-euneate
seeds.
It is most probable, when Sub-Inspector Johnstone mentions finding the Lord Howe’s Island
Moraea Bobinsoniana on the part of Bellenden-Ker visited by Mr. "VY. Hill and him in November,
1873, that this FLelmholtzia is the plant referred to, as one might mistake the foliage of the one for
the other when only casually examined.
Commelyna cyanea, B. Br. 1. Spider-wort. Oommely mesas.
C. LANCEOLATA, B. Br. 7. „
Aneilema acuminatum, B. Br. 7. „
POLLIA MACROPHYLLA, Benth. 1,5, 7, „
Xeeotes iongifolia, B. Br. 1,2, 3, 7. Juncaceae.
aeboeea, B. Br. 7. Grass-tree. „
X. quadeangulata, F. v. M. 7. Walsh's Pyramid, Mulgrave liiver. „
Calamus australis, Mart. 1,5, 7. Large Lawyer Cane. Balmas.
C. caeyotoides, Mart. 1, 2, 3,5, 7. Small Lawyer Cane. „
Baculaeia monostachya, F. v. M. 1, 2. Midgeen Cane. „
B. minoe, F. v. M. 2, 3. „
This is a very slender palm, 3to 6 feet high; the stem not exceeding | in. in thickness. The
leaves have numerous narrow segments, about 16, the upper one not at all or very little broader
than the others ; the inflorescence very slender erect spikes amongst the leaves ; fruit eylindric.
B. Palmeeiana, n. sp. (After Edward Palmer, M.L.A., to whom we are indebted for
much useful information as to the uses made by the aboriginal of our indigenous
plants.) Palmas.
Stem slender, seldom exceeding | in. diameter, generally much less than that; height not over
5 feet, usually 2or 3 feet when in fruit; leafy at the top, 6 to 10 forming the crown. Leaves,
sheathing bases 3 or 4 in. long, prominently striated or ribbed, with thin scarious edges which do
not form stipule-like lobes at the top; midrib forming a sharp projecting angle; petioles erecto-
patent, 6to 9 in. long, Ito 2 lines broad, semi-terete ; rhachis 4to 7 in. long; segments lor 2 pairs,
their bases broadly adnate to the rhachis and slightly decurrent, somewhat widened above the base,
thence tapering to often a long acute point, the outer edge of the upper part with prominent teeth.
Inflorescence erect, slender, numerous amongst the leaves; peduncles flattened or serni-terete, 6to
9 in. long; spike 3to 5 in. long, enclosed at first in a membranous spatha, which is affixed imme-
diately below the lowest flowers, open along one side. Flowers very small, but not gathered in a
fit state to examine ; young fruit gathered eylindric, somewhat fusiform or an elongated cone 4 to
6 lines long and lor 2 lines diameter. The whole plant more or less furfuraceous, those on the
mountain top much more so than the others. My specimens were gathered at the base of the
leading spur at about 2,000 feet, and from that to the summit of the south peak, an altitude of over
5,000 feet.
In inflorescence it resembles Bacularia minor , F. v. M., but is widely different in foliage, the
leaves being often so like Nengella Jlahellata, Becc., that they might be taken as belonging to that
plant. From Baron Mueller’s remarks, Fragm. xi. 58 and x. 121, it is probable that examples of
this new species may have been forwarded to him in association with those of the Bacularia above
referred to.
Ptychospeema Laccospadtx, Benth, 3, 4. Palmas.
Licuala Muelleei, Wendl. et Brude. 5, 7. „
Pandanus pedunculatus, B. Br. 1, 7. Screw Pine. Pandanscs.
P. monticola, F. v. M. 1,2, 3, 7. ~
Feeycinetia GAudichau dti, B. Br. 1,5, 7. ~
F. excelsa, F. v. M._ 1, 5,|7. „


Typhonium Brownii, Schott. 7. Aroidece.
Colocasia antiquorum, Schott. 5, 7. "Wild Taro. „
Dr. Dymock, the highest authority on the medicinal uses of the plants of India, tells us that
“ the tubers of these plants chopped fine, tied in a cloth and heated, are used as a fomentation
in rheumatism.”
C. macrorrhiza, Schott. 1, 7. Cunjevoi. Aroidece.
The form of this plant which we most frequently met with on scrub land was that with mottled
leaf-stalks.
Ehaphidophoea pinnata, Schott. 1,2, 5, 7. Aroidece.
Gymnostachys anceps, B. Br. 1,2, 3,5, 7. “ Boorgay” of the natives, who use
the leaves for string. „
Probably this produces one of the strongest fibres known.
Pothos Loueeiri, Hoolc. et Arn. 1,2, 3,5, 7. Koi. „
The fruit of this common climbing plant is used for food by the natives after being simply
roasted; their name for the ripe red berries is “ Coyoi ”or “ Koi.”
Lemna minor, Linn. 7. Small Duckweed. Lemnacece.
Potamogeton tenuicatjlis, F. v. M. 7. Slender Pondweed. Naiades.
Kyllinga monocephala, Boftb. 1, 7. Cyperacece.
K. cylindrica, JSTees. 1. „
Cyprus dieformis, Linn. 7. ~
C. UMBELLATUS, Benth. 7. ~
EIMBRISTYLIS BARBATA, Benth. 7. „
Scirpus mucronatus, Linn. 7. „
PuiRENA GLOMERATA, Lam. 1. • „
Hypolytrum latieolium, Rich. 1, 5. „
Gahnia psittacorum, Labill. 3,4, and summit of Walsh’s Pyramid. „
Paspalum scrobiculatum, Linn. I, 2. Ditch Millet. Oraminece.
P. pubescens, B. Br. 5. „
If I am correct in identifying the plant, common at Harvey’s Creek, as Brown’s plant, then I
think, if not allowed to rank as a species, it should undoubtedly as a marked variety. The whole
plant is softly pubescent, attains about 2 feet in height, is of spreading habit, and roots from the
lower nodes. The leaves are broad with loose sheaths, the short scarious ligula hidden in long silky
hairs; panicle of from Bto 14 somewhat erect spikes, the longest of which are about 2 in.; spikelets
orbicular, about % line diameter; glumes covered with a short purplish pubescence. The description
given in Brown’s Prodromus is insufficient to identify the plant without having a typical specimen to
compare with. This Harvey’s Creek grass, however, is so very distinct from the P. orbicular Porst.,
which —with P. polystachyum and P. puhescens of 11. Brown —Benth am, in PI. Austr. vn. 460, places
under P. scrobiculatum of Linnaeus, that I think it should be kept distinct.
P. DiSTicnuM, Linn. 1. Or amines.
P. BREVIFOLIUM, Flilgge. 7.
Eriochloa punctata, Hamilt. 7. Early Spring Grass. ~
ISACHNE MYOSOTIS, NeeS. 5. „
Panicum parvielorum, B. Br. 1,7. ~
P. semialatum, B. Br. 1. Cockatoo Grass. „
P. crusgalli, Linn. 5, 7. Barnyard Grass. „
P. indicum, Linn. 7. „
P. trichoedes, Sw. 1, 7. „
P. Mitchelli, Benth. 1, 7.' „
Oplismenus composites, Beauv. 1,2, 5, 7. „
Setaeia glauca, Beauv. 1, 7. Pigeon Grass. „
Leptaspis Banksii, B. Br. 1, 7. ~
Imperata arundinacea, Gyr. 1, 2. Blady Grass. ~
Eltonurus citeeus, Munro. 7. Lemon Grass. ~
Heteropogon contortus, Bcem. et Schult.. 7. Bunch Spear Grass. „
H. insignis, Thw. 1. Tall Spear Grass. „
CIIRYSOPOGON GRYLLUS, Trill. 7. „
Sorghum plumosum, Beauv. 1, 7. „
S. LAXIELORUM, n. sp. 7. „
Decumbent, ascending to 2 or 3 feet, glabrous, except the inflorescence and a slight downiness
about the nodes, stems somewhat compressed. Leaves narrow, tapering to filiform points; ligula
short, scarious, but almost hidden in the longish hairs at the top of the sheath. Panicle nodding,
somewhat secund, 2 or 3 in. long, of few capillary branches never verticillate, solitary or in pairs
and forked, each bearing usually 2 spikelets, the terminal one awned. Eertile spikelet scarcely
2 lines long, between two ciliate pedicels ; outer glume densely clothed with dark-brown or at times
light-brown hairs; second glume nearly glabrous, glossy, and of a very dark colour ; third glume
hyaline ; awn over 1 in. long, much twisted in the lower half.
The awns of this Mulgrave River grass remind one of the Bunch Spear Grass by the manner in
which they twist into knots, but it is a much more delicate grass. In inflorescence it approaches
Ghrysopogon, but the glumes are those of a Sorghum.
Pogonatherum SACCHAROiDEUM, Beauv. 2, 3. Oraminece.
Anthistiria ciltata, Linn. 1,2, 7. Kangaroo Grass. „
Aeistida ramosa, B. Br. 1. Three-awned Spear Grass, „
Sporobolus diandee, Beauv. 1, 7. „


Micraira subulifolia, F. v. M. Graminece.
The leaves of this plant on Mount Harold are more convolute when dry than is usually found in
the Southern specimens.
Eriaciixe ayexacea, B. Br. 7. Graminece.
An evident form of this species was met with on Walsh’s Pyramid. It is of delicate growth,
with a branching stem which attains the height of 2 feet.
Eleusixe ixdica, Garin. 1,5, 7. Crab Grass. Graminece.
Leptochloa chixexsis, Fees. 1, 7. ~
Eragrostis Browxi, Fees. 1. „
Centotheca lappacea, Besv. 1,5, 7. „
Bambusa Moreheadiaxa, n. sp. The Queensland Climbing Bamboo. (After the
Hon. B. D. Morehead.) „
A rampant climbing plant scaling the tops of the highest trees of the scrubs, and hanging in
festoons from the branches, probably the stems extending 200 or more feet in length. The largest
diameter of stem measured 2 in., the hollow or pipe about one-third of its diameter; length of
internode, under 1 ft.; the whole plant more or less clothed with dark-coloured bristle-like hairs or
scales; stem-buds hemispheric, f in. diameter; stem-leaves with a lance-like lamina 2or 3 in. long;
the leafy shoots, which are numerous from the upper nodes, are much flattened, and the lamina of
leaf measures from 6 to 10 in, long and from 1 to 2 inches broad, glabrous, with 6 or 7 parallel
nerves on each side of the midrib, ending in filiform, points, the margins entire except for a few
distant minute teeth.
Fab. : Harvey’s Greek, Russell River.
Already Baron von Mueller, in the Aust. Journ. of Pharm., 1886, drew attention to a
Queensland species of Bambusa, but the specimens and the collector’s notes he thought insufficient
to name the species; and even now, not having seen the inflorescence, by some it may be deemed too
early to have given to it specific distinction, but the uncertainty of the flowering of plants of the
genus, and that the stems are being put to many useful purposes, is, I consider, sufficient excuse;
and when the flowers and fruit are obtained the species can then be placed in the genus or tribe to
which it may prove to belong.
Lycopodium yariijm, B. Br. 3. , Lycopodiacece.
L. densum, Labill. 6. „
L. phlegmaria, Linn. 1, 2. Tasselled Club Moss. „
L. phlegmarioides, Gaudich. 2. Tasselled Club Moss. „
L. cerxuum, Linn. 1,2, 5, 7. „
Selagixella Bakertaxa, Bail. 1,2, 5, 7. „
S. elabellata, Spring. 1,2, 3,5, 7. „
S. proxiflora, Baker. 1,2, 7. „
S. pumilio, Spring. 7. „
Azolla rtjbra. 1,5, 7. The Red Water Moss. „
Tmesipteris taxxexsis, Bernh. 2,3, 4. „
PsiLOTUM TRIQUETRUM, Swartz. 1, 2. „
Ophioglossum pendulum, Linn. 2. Pendulous Adder’s-tongue or Ribbon Eern. Filices.
Botrychium teuxatum, Swartz. 7. The Grape Eern.
Lygodium reticulatum, ScTikvkr. 1,2, 3,5, 7. Snake Eern. „
L. japoxicum, Swartz. 7. Snake Eern. „
Axgiopteris evecta, Fqffm. 2. „
Marattia fraxinea, Sm. 1,2, 3, 4. Potato Eern. „
Gleichexia circixata, Swartz. 1,3, 4. Parasol Eern. „
G. flabellata, B. Br. 1,2, 3, 4. Fan Eern. „
G. dichotoma, Fook. 1,2, 3,4, 5. „
On Harvey’s Creek stems of this beautiful fern were found to have attained the length of
30 feet by climbing up the surrounding shrubs and trees.
Todea (Leptopteris) Eraseri, Fook. et Grev. 4. Filices.
Trunk, erect, 6 in. to 3 feet high and seldom over 2 or 2|- in. diameter, more or less bearing the
bases of the old fronds; the apex covered by somewhat glossy, short, obtuse scales ; the crown of
few fronds, generally under 12. Stipes 10 to 15 in. long, terete or nearly so, with few scales, slightly
stained with chestnut. Eronds 2 to 3 feet long, lanceolate in outline, bipinnate ; pinnae nearly
opposite, about 30 on each side of rhachis, the centre ones about 6 in. long and li in. wide;
secondary rhachis narrowly winged; pinnules f in. long, 2| lines broad, serrately lobed; veins
simple or forked, Ito each tooth or lobe; spore-cases minute, in masses of from 2t05 at the base
of the pinnule.
. Fab.: In a deep rocky gully or creek on the summit of the south peak, Bellenden-Ker.
The thin dark-green pellucid fronds of this fern remind one of the Hew Zealand species
T. (Leptopteris) hymenophylloides.
Triciiomaxes vitiexse, Baker. 1. Fiji Bristle Eern. Filices.
T. paryulum, Fair. 2. Small Bristle Eern. „
T. minutum, Blume. 2. Minute Bristle Eern. - „
This is the first time it has been met with in Australia.
T. proliferum, Blume. 2. „
Eirst time it has been met with in Australia.
T. johxstoxense, Bail. 2. Johnstone River Bristle Eern. „
T. Eilicula, Bory. 1,2, 3,4, 7. „
T. rigidum, Swartz. 1,2, 3, 4. Rigid Bristle Eern. „
T. paryiflorum, Boir 1,2, 3. Fennel-leaved Bristle Eern, „


T. pallidum, Blume. 4. White-leaved Bristle Fern. Filices.
This is the first time that it has been met with in Australia, and probably the summit of
Bellenden-Ker is its only Australian habitat. The fronds are glaucous on the under side, which is
unusual in the genus.
Hxmexophxllum javaxicum, Spreng. 4. Java Filmy Fern. Filices.
H. tuxbeidgexse, vae. exseetum. 3, The Bristle-bearing Filmy Fern. „
This fresh form differs in having a long bristle-like exserted receptacle; the indusium also was
longer than usual. The receptacle is also exserted in the Lord Howe’s Island specimens of this fern,
but there the plant is of much coarser growth.
H. teichomaxoides, n. sp. 4. Filices.
Rhizome nearly or quite glabrous, filiform, creeping up the stems of trees in long strings,
seldom if ever forming matted patches on old damp logs. Fronds narrow or broadly lanceolate in
outline ; sometimes the apex is much elongated, 3 to 5 in. long including the slender stipes, which is
generally less than an inch long; the rhachis is very narrowly winged but not the stipes, bipinnate,
the lower pinnules often somewhat flabelliform and more or less deeply divided, the upper pinnae of
from few to a single lobe, all linear, obtuse, with entire edges. Sori snpra-axillary, deeply sunk on
one or more of the lobes. Indusium oblong, line long, the valves entire, obtuse, receptacle always
protruding from 1 to more than 2 lines in length.
Hah.: Summit of Bellenden-Ker. The outline form of this, especially when the pinnae and
pinnules are crowded, remind of H. polyanthos of Hew Zealand, but it does not stain paper, and has
not the fragrance of that fern, besides the difference of indusium and receptacle, which latter gives
to this new species the appearance of a Trichomanes. Indeed it might be placed in. either Trichomanes
or Hymenophyllum; I place it in the latter because the whole of the exserted portion of the indusium
consists of the 2 long obtuse lobes.
Alsophila Rebecca, F. v. M. 2,3, 4. Filices.
This handsome fern-tree we found to be in greater abundance than any other. In fact, it at
times formed much of the scrub we had to cut our way through.
A. capexsis, J. Sm. 3. Wig Fern-tree.
Trunk erect, 12 feet high, reddish, slender, seldom exceeding a diameter of 2 in. Fronds 6to 8
feet long, the base of the stipes for a few inches pressed to the stem and here bearing a hymenophylloid
growth of a purplish or green and purple hue, thin as thread, and many times forked, giving a
wigged-like appearance to the crown of the trunk; stipes and rhachis more or less clothed with long,
simple, hair-like scales; centre pinnae about 2 feet long, lanceolate, acuminate; secondary rhachis
more or less covered with small fringed chaffy scales; pinnule 2 to 4 in. long, the attenuated apex
serrated, the lower half with a rounded auricle at times very prominent, upper half truncate and
parallel with the secondary rhachis; veins forked or at times simple; sori much elevated, almost
cylindrical, on the middle of the vein.
Hah.: In a deep rocky gully at Palm Camp, elevation about 4,000 feet. Never before found
in Australia, although known from South Africa, Brazil, and Java.
It seems to have been first described by the great Linnaeus as Polypodium capense , and
according to Thos. Moore, Index Filicum. Since that it has received from various authors no less
than a dozen different names. One author even, we are told, thinking that the metamorphosed
pinnae and hair-like scales at the base of the stipes were a parasitic growth, gave to it the name of
Trichomanes cormophyllum.
Alsophila austealis, li. Br. 5. Australian Fern-tree. Filices.
A. Robeetsiaxa, F. v. M. 3. Slender-stemmed Fern-tree. „
Trunk slender, smooth, 10 to 12 feet high, elongated beyond the last fronds, which latter do not
form the usual crown, but are somewhat distantly placed on the stem.
Dicksoxia Touxqie, G. Moore. 3. Hairy-stemmed Fern-tree. Filices.
Davallia elegaxs, Sw. 1, 2. Rock Hare’s-foot Fern. „
D. ptxidata, Cav. 6. Common Hare’s-foot. „
D, pedata, Sm. 1,2, 3,4, Ivv-leaved Fern. „
D. speluxce, Baker. 1, 23. „
D. teipixx at a, F. v. M. 3, 4. Hairy Fern. „
This is one of the most lovely of ferns, and until quite lately was only known from a single
frond brought by Mr, Walter Hill from the Bellenden-Ker Range in 1873.
The fronds, which are clothed with soft white hairs, form a most graceful tuft at the end of a very
shortly creeping rhizome. The plant is abundant upon the damp rocks of dark close gullies.
Vittaeia eloxgata, Swartz. 1,2, 3,4, 5, 7. Grass-leaved Fern. Filices.
Y. (Texiopsis) wooeooxooeax, n. sp. 3, 4. (Name, the aboriginal one for Bellenden-
Ker.)
Rhizome erect or slightly repent, clothed with long, light-brown, linear-lanceolate scales. Fronds
1 long, 2 or 3 lines broad, coriaceous, spreading horizontally, very obtuse, tapering to a very
short stipes, bearing minute, scattered, setose scales; veins once forked from a central costa, but both
concealed by the thick substance of the frond; sori continuous in a groove more or less distant from
the margin on the upper part of the frond, but never meeting at the apex.
Hob.: On rocks amongst moss at an elevation of from 4,000 to 5,000 ft., Bellenden-Ker.
In some respects this species approaches V.falcata and V. minor , but is equally distinct from both.
Lixdsea culteata, Swartz. 1. Filices »
Jj. Feaseei, Hook. 1. ft
Jj. exsifolia, Swartz. 1,2, 7. „
L. laxugixosa, Wall.
Adiaxtum ethiopicum, Linn. 1, 7. Common small Maidenhair. „


A. affine, Willi. 1,2, 3. Mlices.
A. diaphanum, Rlume. 1, 7. A delicate Maidenhair. „
A. hispidulum, Swartz. 7. Bough Maidenhair Bern. „
Htfolepis tenuifolia, Rernh. 1, 7. „
Cheilanthes tenuifolia, Swartz. 1, 7. Lip Fern. „
Pteris geraniifolia, Raddi. 7. Geranium-leaved Bracken. „
P. FALCATA, VAR. NANA. 1, 2. „
P. QUADRIAURITA, Retz. 1,2, 7. „
P. TREMULA, R. Rr. 7. „
P. aquilina, Linn., var. lanuginosa. The Woolly Bracken.
At between 2,000 and 5,000 feet above sea-level we found some good-sized patches of this fern .
It is a tall strong plant, very hard, but, from being closely covered with soft woolly down, has a some-
what soft appearance, and grows in intricate masses 5 or 6 feet high, very difficult to pass through.
P. incisa, Thunh. 1, 2. Mlices.
P. margin at a , Bory. 1,5, 7. „
Lomaria Patersoni, Spreny. 2,8, „
This fern was very plentiful at Palm Camp, and probably attains there a greater size than in
any other locality in the Southern Hemisphere. Some fronds measured nearly 4 feet long, and the
segments, of which there were on some fronds 14 or more on each side of the rhachis, over 10 in. long
and i in, wide. The undivided fronds were also long, but always shorter than the divided ones.
Blechnum cartilagineum, tar. tropicum. 1,2, 3. Filices.
B. serrulatum, Rich. 1. „
B. Whelani, n.sp. (After Sergt. E. J. Whelan, to whom the members of the
expedition were greatly indebted for assistance.) „
Ehizome slender and erect, from 3 to 6 in. high, densely paleaceous at the summit, with ferrugin-
ous scales, and bearing a crown of many dark-green fronds; stipes blackish, slightly scabrous,
clothed at the base with dark linear scales, about 1 ft. long and slender; the frond or leafy
portion of about equal length with the stipes, bearing about 15 nearly opposite linear-lanceolate
pinnae 3 to 6 in. long, the lowest of which are petiolulate, the central ones sessile, and one or two
of the terminal ones having their bases adnate to the rhachis, the margins serrated, teeth small
and blunt, except those of the elongated point; veins simple or once forked; sori close to the
costule on the lower half or three-fourths of the pinna.
JELah.: Bellenden-Ker at an elevation of from 4,000 to 5,000 feet above sea-level.
Doodia aspera, yar. media. 1, 7. Filices.
Asplenium nidus, Linn. 1. 2,3, 5, 7. Bird’s-nest Fern. „
A, simplicifrons, F. v. M. 1, 2. Simple-leaved Spleen Fern. „
A. attenuatum, R. Rr. 7. Attenuated Spleen Fern. „
A. paleaceum, R. Rr. 7. Scaly Fern. „
A. FALCATUM. 1,2, 3. „
A. Hookerianum, Colens., yar. 2, 3. „
Ehizome erect or shortly repent, the crown and base of stipes densely clothed with dark-
brown scales ; stipes tufted, slender, 4or 5 in. long, dark-brown and slightly scaly. Fronds
bipinnate, narrow-lanceolate, in outline attaining 8 in. in length, and not over 3 in. wide in the
broadest part; pinnules cuneate, the lower ones often divided to the base, the end inciso-dentate.
Sori usually long and narrow.
A. resectum, yar. australiense, Rail. Hills off Mulgrave Eiver. * Filices.
A. LASERPiTiiroLiuM, Lam. 1,2, 3. „
Asplenium umbrosum, J. Sm. 2. Shade-loving Spleen Fern. „
A. sylyaticum, Presl. .5, 7. Forest Spleen Fem. „
A. poltpodioides, Metten. 2,3, 4. „
A. decussatum, Swartz. 1, 5. Bulbil-bearing Spleen Fern. „
On Harvey’s Creek this species attains a great size, some of the fronds being over 6 feet long.
Aspidium cordifolium, Swartz. 1. Tuberous Fern. Filices.
A. exaltatum, Swartz. 1,2, 5, 7. Coast Bock Fern. „
A. ramosum, Reauv. 1,2, 3. „
A climbing fern, the fronds often distant, pinnae distant, over 1 in. long, the upper edge crenate
and auricled at the base,
A. ramosum, yar. lineare. 1, 5. Filices.
Bhizome pubescent, very slender, climbing like ivy up to stems of trees and shrubs, often 10 or
12 feet. Fronds crowded, linear in outline, 6to 15 in. long and seldom exceeding 1 in. broad •
pinnae 30 to 40 on each side of the rhachis, not exceeding 8 lines long in the centre of frond and
much smaller towards each end, obliquely oblong, the upper margin slightly crenulate, with a short
blunt auricle at the base, lower margin nearly straight, base parallel with the rhachis; terminal
pinna lanceolate or somewhat rhomboidal; veins once forked; sori on the end of the upper branch
usually at a distance from the margin.
Amongst the many forms of A. ramosum that have been considered distinct by botanists I cannot
find one that fully agrees with the present, so think it better to give it a distinctive name. During
the past few months, while on and about Bellenden-Ker, I have found it always the same in both habit
and form, and even when growing with the normal form, is at once detected; the fronds being always
long and narrow, and crowded so closely on the slender rhizome as to appear massed together.
A. molle, Swartz. 1, 2. Soft Shield Fern. Filices.
A. molle, var. didtmosorus. 5,7, Twin-seeded Fem, „


A. confluens, 2,3. Filices.
A. decompositum, Spreng. 3. „
A. ACUMINATUM, YAR. YILLOSUM. 4. „
This delicate fern is met with only, so far as at present known, on the summit of Bellenden-Ker.
It has a shortly creeping rhizome, more or less covered at the end with broad brown scales; the
stipes are slender, 3to 6 in. long, clothed with short soft hairs, and a few scales at the base. Fronds
somewhat deltoid, 3to 7 in. long and broad; rhachis and midrib densely clothed with rather long
soft white hairs. Sori scanty on the few fronds gathered.
Poltpodium australe, Metten. 4. Filices.
P. Hookeri, Brackenr. 2, 3. Black-haired Fern. „
P. albosetosum, n. sp. (Name referring to the white bristle-like hairs in the sori.) „
Ehlzome erect or very shortly creeping, the blunt apex covered by broadly ovate, imbricated,
light-brown scales. Fronds tufted, ail under 2 in. long and 8 lines broad, tapering from a broad
obtuse end to very short stipes, which seldom if ever exceed 3 lines in length, hairy throughout
with light-coloured fine hairs, those of the stipes short and strigose, those of the frond soft and rather
long, and all of a very light colour, nearly white; veins simple or once forked; sori orbicular, with
bristle-like white hairs amongst the spore-cases, at the apex of fork of the vein, and forming a single
row on each side of the costa on the upper portion of the frond.
ILah.: On rocks and stems of trees, Bellenden-Ker, at an altitude of from 4,000 to 5,000 feet.
This small, fern is closely allied to F. Hookeri, but separated by the form of the scales, colour
of the hairs—which do not form so decided cilia) to the margins—and general appearance.
P. pallidum, Brackenr. 1, 7. Pale Fern. Filices.
P. aspidioides, yar. tropica. 7. Shiny Fern. „
P. proleperum, Presl. 7. „
P. urophyllum, Wall. 1, 7. Tailed Fern. . „
P. PffiCILOPHLEBIUM, Hook. 1, 7. „
P. serpens, Forst. 4. Creeping Rock Fern. ~
P. conpluens, B. Br. 7. Creeping Tongue-leaved Fern. „
P. ACROSTICHOEDES, Forst. 1, 7. „
P. simplicissimum, F. v. M. 2,3, 4. Simple-leaved Folypodium. „
P. phymatodes, Linn. 5. Scented Fern. „
P. verrucosum, Wall. 1. Warted Fern. „
P. subauriculatum, Blmte. 1,2, 3. „
P. riqedulum, Swartz. 1, 2. Rock Fern, ~
P. quercefolium, Linn. 1,2, 7. Oak-leaved Fern. „
P. irioedes, Fair. 1,2, 7. Flag-leaved Fern. „
NoTHOLiENA yellea. 2, 7. Cloak Fern or Woolly Fern. „
Grammitis (Selliguea) membranacea, Blume. „
Rhizome slender, creeping, climbing up the stems of trees by the aid of adventitious roots
emitted from the under side, the upper surface densely paleaceous, with rather long dark-brown
narrow scales. Fronds membranous, somewhat distantly placed on the rhizome, simple or variously
lobed, and either form soriferous, glabrous, 6 to 12 in. long, tapering to a rather long stipes and
elongated apex, the undivided fronds attaining a width of 2 in. in the widest part, lobes on the
divided ones from 1 to 12, spreading tapering towards the point, but cut down so as to leave
but a wing on the costa in the sinus about i or i in. wide, the segments varying from 1 to 4 in.
long; venation rather open, forming large hexagonal areoles containing forked free veinlets; sori
in short lines or oblong masses, often not exceeding 2 or 3 lines on the divided fronds, and
distant from the costule, but on the entire simple fronds often reaching from near the costa to near
the margin, but these lines are frequently interrupted.
Hob.: Bellenden-Ker, at an elevation of 4,000 feet.
The habit of this fern and its variously formed fronds reminds one of Folypodium scandens , Forst.,
and further, when dry, it possesses the same fragrance as that and some allied Folypodiums. To
pteridologists, the meeting of this species, bearing its various forms of foliage, is most interesting,
as it saves the mistake being made of multiplying species, and completes the description of an old
species. G. Sayeri, F. v. M. and Baker, has been named from fronds of this species ; and in all
probability G. Wrightii, Hook., is but another form. I might here remark that probably Mr. Baker
was not far wrong when he placed the Queensland fern, G. ampla, F. v, M., under G. elliptica , for it
varies greatly in the form of the fronds. In cultivation, the fronds are much smaller and often
entire, and these as frequently bear sori as the more developed deeply lobed ones. On starved
plants, indeed, of G. ampla, the almost only distinctive mark to separate it from G. membranacea is
its broad flattish rhizome and a slight difference, perhaps, in the venation.
Grammitis ampla, F. v. M. 1,2, 7. Filices.
Antrophyum reticulatum, Kaulf. 1,2, 3,5, 7. Plantain-leaved Fern. „
Acrostichum conforme, Swartz. 3, 4. Rock or Deer-tongue Fern. „
A. sorbifolium, yar. LEPTOCARPUM. 1, 2. Climbing Fern. „
A. repandum, Blume. 1,2, 3. „
A. Taylori, Bail. 4. „
A. neglectum, Bail. 2,3, 4, 6. Frilled Fern. „
A. aureum, Linn. 5. Swamp Golden Fern. „
A. spicatum, Linn. 1. Tailed Acrostichum. „
Platycerium alcicorne, Lesv. 4. Elk’s-horn. „
P. ALCICORNE, YAR. HILLI. 7. „


ZOOLOG-Y OF BELLENDEN-KER, AS ASCERTAINED BY THE LATE EXPEDITION
UNDER MR. A. MESTON.
Queensland Museum,
Brisbane, 4th October, 1889.
Gentlemen, —There is probably no part of Australia, certainly no part of Queensland, which at
present excites the interest of the naturalist so forcibly as the district extending from Cardwell north-
wards for some distance beyond Cairns and inwards to the western slopes of the Razor-back Range. In
this limited tract of coast country we find a concentration of forms of animal life elsewhere (in
Australia) unknown. It has peculiar mammals, peculiar birds, peculiar reptiles, molluscs, insects,
and in many cases these strangers to the rest of the land are derivatives, not from the surrounding
Australian stock, but from the Indo-Malayan fauna on the one hand and the Papuan on the other.
The cause of the phenomenon is a problem of much interest in its bearing on the distribution of
the lower animals, still more in its probably being an important factor in the history of man. But
before attempting its explication it is advisable that we should know as fully as possible the extent to
which the peculiarities of this remarkable region are carried. This is an object to which, with your
approbation, long and not altogether unsuccessful attention has been paid by your staff.
In pursuance of that object, a proposal to explore Bellenden-Ker, the highest ground in the district,
made to the Government by Mr. A. Meston, in the interests of zoology and botany, and promising to
yield a valuable increase in our knowledge of the natural productions of the district, having been
communicated to me, I ventured to anticipate your approval of Mr Meston’s application for the services
of the zoological collector, and despatched Mr. Broadbent to Cairns with instructions to report himself
to the leader of the expedition on his arrival.
The expedition left Cairns on the 14th of June, and kept the field ten weeks, returning on the
26th of August. Its results, so far as they pertain to zoology, I have now the honour to report.
Possibly those results are not so plentiful as they might have been had the explorers been able to
continue their labours until the summer months. It is, of course, impossible to accept the fruits of two
or three months’ work at any season, but more especially in the winter season, as representing the total
amount of the indigenous life of a region. Birds are apt to seek higher or lower levels as their appropriate
food or temperature dictates; reptiles and the rest seek their dormitories till called into activity by greater
warmth, moisture, or provender. In estimating the value of the zoological work done during this explora-
tion we must therefore take into account the seasonal conditions under which it was accomplished. With
this allowance it is by no means unsatisfactory. The general results obtained seem to be—
-Ist. The establishment of the fact, probable in itself, that at a height of 5,000 feet in the latitude
of Bellenden-Ker no change of fauna takes place, even in a district susceptible of the introduction of
exotic forms. Not only were some of our most familiar birds, such as the Thickhead (. Pachycephala
gutturalis), seen in numbers on the top of the mountain, but the more local kinds,for example the Tooth-
billed Cat Bird, Meston’s Bower Bird, and the new Black-throated Sericorn, were found at all heights and
on the summit, over which were seen flying the Blue-mountain and Scaly-breasted Lorikeets.
2nd. The discovery of two species of lacertian reptiles, both of them additional proofs of the
statement previously made that an importation of extra Australian forms of life into this locality has,
by some means, been brought about. These lizards can only be referred to the genera Perochirm
(belonging to the Geckoes) and Tropidophorus (a genus of Seines) found in Indo-China, Borneo, and
the Philippine Islands, and not previously known to extend their range beyond those limits. Under the
methodical names of Tropidophorus queenslandiaz and Perochirus mestoni these lizards have been described
in the Proceedings of the Linnaean Society of New South Wales.
3rd. The enrichment of your stores with a considerable number of duplicate specimens, valuable
for study or distribution, and with a supply of several species which have hitherto been desiderata. The
entire collection consists of—
Mammals ... ... ... ... ... ... II specimens, 8 species.
Birds 195 „ 79 „
Lizards ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 „ 9 „
Snakes ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 „ 6 „
Molluscs ... 10 „
Insects ... 63 „ 33 „
Total ... 145
Subjoined is a detailed and, where necessary, descriptive list - of all the animals procured or noticed
by the explorers.
MAMMALS.
Aboriginals. Two skulls of the Mulgrave River tribe Charrdogin. So few skulls of Queensland natives
have been described, that it would be culpable to neglect the present opportunity of recording
measurements and characters.
Adult male skull. —Dolichocephalic, mesognathous, microseme, platyrhine. Length, 180;
breadth, 127 ; height, 133; frontal breadth, maximum 107, median 995 ; horizontal circumference
510, pre-auricular 236; longitudinal dimensions, frontal 125, parietal 125, occipital 108 ; transverse
dimensions, frontal 275, bregmatic 305, parietal 320; foramen magnum, length 34, breadth
28; orbit, width 42, height 35; nasal orifice, width 28, height 48 ; malar height 25, basi-
nasal 137; bizygomatic breadth 137; auriculo-orbital length 73, basi-alveolar 106; gnathic
index 102‘8, cephalic 706, nasal 58'3, orbital 83'3. Lamboidal suture simple; inion obsolete;
zygomata prominent, glabella moderately prominent, convex; epipteric none; sagittal suture
depressed; parietal region tectiform. Mandible, symphysial height 29, molar 25, coronoid height
58; goniosymphysial length 71; bicondylar width 111; bigoniac width 73. The upper median
front tooth absent, its alveolus obsolete.


Adult female skull . —Dolichocephalic, prognathous, microseme, platyrhine. ' Length, 185 ;
breadth, 126; height, 130; frontal breadth, maximum 106, median 98; horizontal circumference
506, pre-auricular 224 ; longitudinal dimensions, frontal 128, parietal 140, occipital 118; transverse
dimensions, frontal 266, bregmatic 296, parietal 360; foramen magnum, length 35, breadth 30;
orbit, width 39, height 30; nasal orifice, width 25, height 37; malar height 22, basi-nasal 90‘5 ;
bizygomatic breadth 123; auriculo-orbital length, 67, basi-alveolar 94 - 5 ; gnathic index 105, cephalic
68’1, nasal 70, orbital 77. Lamboidal suture simple, two wormian bones on one side; inion not
decided; zygomata not prominent; glabella very prominent, overhanging nasion ; epipteric none;
parietal region subtectiform.
Attention should here be drawn to the great dearth of aboriginal skulls and skeletons in
the national museum. Prom an ethnological point of view they are of the utmost value. They are
readily procurable in many localities, yet efforts to obtain them from public officers, and others who
have the necessary opportunities, have constantly failed.
Pteeopub scapulatus, Pet. Yellow-shouldered Plying-Fox. The range of this bat extends to the
Islands of Torres Straits.
Acanthomys leucopus, Or. "White-footed Rat. Bellenden-Ker; distributed widely over North
Australia.
Hydeomys leucogastee, Qeo. Water Eat. Eussell Eiver; common in most parts of Australia in
several varieties.
Halmatueus agilis, Old. Eed Creek Wallaby. All North Australia as far south as Eookhampton;
frequents long grass bordering creeks ; easily recognised by its colour, haunts, and generally thrifty
condition.
Halmatueus, sp. A Padymelon allied to 3. thetidis, from which, however, it differs considerably ;
possibly an undescribed species—skeleton only,
Dastueus maculatus, Shaw. Spotted-tailed Native Cat. This, the largest and most destructive of
our native cats, attaining sometimes a weight of ten pounds in the neighbourhood of Brisbane, is an
object of dread to the natives of the Herberton district; they even accuse it of carrying off their
piccaninnies. Exaggerated ideas of it have probably given rise to certain rumours of a great striped
carnivore of arboreal habits infesting the Herberton wilds. After prolonged search for the latter in
its known haunts nothing but the native cat in question could be found. The Spotted-tail extends
from Tasmania to the Cape York Peninsula.
BIRDS OF WHICH SPECIMENS WERE OBTAINED.
Palco subnigee, Or. The Black Falcon. A comparatively rare bird, and very welcome to the museum.
Hieeacidea beeigoea, Vig. et Hors. The Brown Hawk. I find no constant difference of colouring and
no real distinction of locality between this and the so-called Eastern Brown Hawk, 3. orientalis,
Schleg. Birds with the colouring of each and intermediate grades thereof occur all over Queens-
land, and during this expedition were shot in company on the Mulgrave Plains ; the name 3.
orientalis , applied to our Queensland bird, should therefore be allowed to lapse.
Astue noY-E-iiollanbl®, Om. The White Goshawk. A beautiful bird common throughout Queensland.
A. appeoximans, V. et 3. Barred Goshawk. “ Common on Bellenden-Ker up to 3,000 feet.”—
Broadbent. Generally distributed.
Accipitee cieehocephalus, Vieill. Collared Sparrow Hawk. “ Shot on the spurs of Mount Sophia;
seen on Mount Barnard at 1,800 feet.”— lb. Generally distributed.
Milvus afpinis, 01. Common Kite. Mulgrave Eiver and foot of Bellenden-Ker; common almost
everywhere.
Steps: delicatula, Old. Australian variety of the “ Barn Owl.” Mulgrave Eiver.
Ninox connive ns, Lath. Winking Owl. 3SO-feet camp, Bellenden-Ker.
N. lueida. In former observations on birds from this district I noticed this little owl as probably
a variety of N. boobook. From the present and other specimens since obtained lam now persuaded
that it should take rank as a distinct species, and therefore append the necessary description.
Broadbent remarks that “ this is a true mountain bird, found always in dark scrubby gullies. It was
heard at Palm Camp at an elevation of 400 feet.” The museum specimens are from Bellenden-
Ker, Sea View Eange, the vicinity of Cardwell, and from no other part of the country.
N. lueida, n. s.
Adult male. —Upper surface of head and neck uniform dark brown, hind neck and back coffee-
brown with a few concealed white spots on the lateral and anterior feathers of the mantle. Lower
back and upper tail coverts uniform paler brown. Tail with two central feathers uniform, the
laterals with four or five distinct or nearly obsolete pale bars on the inner web. Scapulars brown,
with one or two large white median spots or bars on one or both webs. Quills externally washed
with greyish brown, the outer webs with broad obscure subrufous cross-bars; the inner webs with a
few obscure transverse bars, the inner ends of those near the base forming a white spot. Wing
covers uniform brown, a little brighter than on the head. Lores and cheeks anteriorly white, the
plumes with black shafts; hinder part of cheeks and ear coverts brown like the head; a supraciliary
stripe over the fore part of the orbit white more or less stained with buff. Chin whitish, its median
hinder feathers with brown shaft streaks, the laterals buff with brown centre, these forming a line
behind the ear coverts. Throat rufous brown, obscurely spotted or streaked with buffy white. Breast
and abdomen deep rufous brown, largely spotted with white. Under tail coverts with a median spot
on both webs, and the tips brown or buffy brown, with one or two white median spots. Under sur-
face of tail pale brown with four or five more or less obsolete pale transverse bars. Axillaries rufous
or ochreous. Under wing-coverts rufous, edge of wing buffy white or white. Under surface of
wing silky brown with the transverse bars of the quills in strong contrast. Legs rufous. Bill
white, blackish below the nostrils. Mandible blue-black, yellow at the base. Total length 290, wing
225, tail 137, tarsus 38.
Adult female. —Like the male, but with the throat and upper breast rich chocolate brown with
fulvous stripes. The tail uniform brown above and below, the quills narrowly edged with buffy-grey,
and the bill black except the basal half of the culmen.
Localities—Herbert Gorge, Bellenden-Ker.


Peteocheltdon nigricans, Veill. Martin. Mulgrave Eiver.
Collocalia spodtoptgia, Feale. Little Swift. North-eastern Queensland, New Guinea, etc. “Common
at the base of Bellenden-Ker, and up to 1,800 feet: I have seen it catching flies till near dark, and
then fly towards the mountain ; it breeds in the rocky gorges of the coast range from the Herbert,
Eiver to above Cairns.” — Broadbent.
Meeops ornatus, Lath. Bee-eater. Bellenden-Ker to 4,000 feet; commonly distributed.
Dacelo leachii, V. et S. Blue-rumped Kingfisher. Mulgrave Eiver.
Halcyon jiacleati, J. et S. Common Bush Kingfisher. Generally distributed.
H. sanctus, V. et H. Sacred Kingfisher. Generally distributed.
Artamus lettcogaster, Val. W r hite-rumped Wood Swallow, a pretty common and widely spread bird.
Steepeea geaculina, Wht. Pied Crow Shrike. On Bellenden-Ker to 1,800 feet; all through Eastern
Queensland.
Ceacticus rufescens, De Vis. Brown Crow Shrike. Confined to the district; on Bellenden-Ker to 1,800
feet.
C. quoti, Less. Black Crow Shrike. North-eastern Queensland and New Guinea, Bellenden-Ker to
3.000 feet.
Gratjcalus lineatus, Swain. Swainson’s Graukle. Bellenden-Ker, Mulgrave and Eussell Eivers.
G. mentalis, V. et H. Varied Graukle. Common, widely spread.
Lalage karu, Less. Eed-vented Shrikeling. Fairly common and distributed.
L. tricolor, Swain. White-shouldered Shrikeling. Common, widely spread.
Pachtcephala gttttuealts, Lath. Yellow-bellied Thickhead. Common in scrubs throughout Queens-
land, to summit of Bellenden-Ker in number.
P. RunvENTßis, Lath. Eed-bellied Thickhead. Common in forests everywhere, on Mount Barnard
to 1,800 feet.
Colliteicincla BowEßi, Lam. Hissing Shrike Thrush. Peculiar to this district, in which it is a common
mountain bird. Obtained on Sea View Eange, in the Herberton scrubs, and on Bellenden-Ker at
4.000 feet.
C. EuriQ aster, Old. Eust-breasted Shrike Thrush. Common ; Bellenden-Ker, at 3,000 feet.
Dicruropsis bracteata, Old. Drongo Shrike. Mr. Broadbent notes a few stationary in the Mulgrave
scrubs as exceptions to the migratory habits of this bird.
Ehipidura albiscapa, Old. White-shafted Eantail. Common in forests of Eastern Queensland, frequent
at 4,000 feet on Bellenden-Ker, and seen on the summit.
E. eufifeons, Lath. Eed-fronted Eantail. Frequent in scrubs east and north: on Bellenden-Ker at
4.000 feet.
Aeses katjpi, Gld. Kaup’s Flycatcher. North-eastern coast to Cape York: not infrequent on the
mountain to 2,000 feet.
Miagea eubecula, Lath. Lead-coloured Flycatcher. Eastern districts to Cape York; common in
scrubs.
PiEzoEHYNcnus NiTLDUs, Old. Glossy Flycatcher. Eussell Eiver, Cape York, &c.
P. gouldii, Or. Black-fronted Flycatcher. Mulgrave Eiver.
Geetgone flavida, Lam. Yellow Gerygon. Foot of Belleuden-Ker. Known from the Herberton
district only.
Pcecilodetas CAPITO, Old. Large-headed Eobin. On the summit of Bellenden-Ker. Common at all
levels and in the Mulgrave scrubs.
Eopsalteia inoenata, Lam. Plain-coloured Eobin. Mulgrave Eiver. The vadility of this species has
been denied without sufficient cause.
Malueus amabilts, Old. Lovely Blue Wren. Bellenden-Ker, at 1,800 feet.
M. dorsalis, Leioin. Crimson-back Wren.
Seeicoenis guttuealis, De Vis. Black-throated Sericorn. A male example of the Sericorn, lately
described (Pro. Eoy. Soc. of Queens., 1889) from a female specimen taken at Herberton a few
months ago by Mr. Broadbent. “ This bird inhabits the high peak of Bellenden-Ker; shot specimen
at 5,000 feet.”— Broadbent.
Acanthiza pfsilla, Lath. Little Thornhill. Bellenden-Ker.
Pitta strepitans simillima, Gld. Northern Pitta. Beyond diminished size, this bird has no claim to
recognition as a distinct species, and where it occurs, as in this and other localities, mingled with birds
of normal size, it is even difficult to rank it as a variety.
Ailuriedus maculosus, Lnn. Spotted Cat Bird. Common on Bellenden-Ker at 3,400 feet.
ScENupanis dentieosteis, Lam. Tooth-billed Cat Bird. “ This is a true mountain bird, not or seldom
found in low scrubs. Specimen shot at 4,000 feet.”— Broadbent.
Peionoduba newtoniana, De Vis. Mcston’s Bower Bird. Found at all heights to the summit of
Bellenden-Ker and in the scrubs around Herberton at a high elevation. In connection with the
bower of this handsome bird we are indebted for an interesting fact to Broadbent’s observation, that
whereas towards the base of the mountain the bowers have the elaborate formation noticed lately in
the proceedings of the Eoyal Society of Queensland, at higher levels they gradually lose their
distinctive character, and at the top are reduced to the simple trough-like form of the bower
of the Eegent and Satin birds, for which they might be mistaken were those birds inhabitants of the
district. There is reason to believe that Mr. Meston has acquainted us with the nest and egg of
this bird. While hearkening to the call of a male he noticed a rustling in a bush by his side, and
looking in saw a bird which he says, without hesitation, was the female just disturbed from a nest
built in a fork of the bush. The nest in question is cup-shaped, and loosely constructed of fibrous
roots, lined with finer material of the same kind and decorated with a little green moss on the outer
side. The egg is 27 mm. long, 9 ram. broad, pale yellowish-grey, profusely freckled and blotched
with pale brown.
Oeiolus yieidis, Lath. Green Oriole. There is no sufficient difference between birds of the northern
and southern parts of Queensland to persuade us to adopt for the former Gould’s name of 0. affinis.
Mount Barnard at 1,800 feet.


O. flayocinctus, King. Crescent-marked Oriole. Russell and Mulgravo Rivers. This oriole is found
in New Guinea, but no specimens have been received from other parts of Queensland than the
Herberton district.
Sphecotheees flayiventeis, Old. Yellow-bellied Pig Bird. Foot of Bollenden-Ker. To this, also, the
preceding remark applies, as well as to the two following.
Caloenis metallica, Fern. Starlet. Mulgrave River.
Ptilotis geacilis, Old. Yellow-gaped Honey-eater. Common on Bellenden-Ker, at all heights to
4,000 feet.
P. MAGEE at an a, Ram. Macleay’s Honey-eater. Bellenden-Ker, at 4,000 feet. A local bird.
P. feenata, Ram. Bridled Honey-eater. Common on the South Peak at all levels to 5,000 feet; also
a local species.
Philemon buceeoides, Swain. Helmeted Friar Bird. Mulgrave River. Extends to Cape York.
Acanthoehtnchus tenuieostets, Lath. Spinebill. Bellenden-Ker to its summit. Common from Bris-
bane northwards.
Mtzomela obscuea, Old. Shy Honey-eater. Bellenden-Ker. Cape York to New Guinea.
Melitheeptus albogulaeis, Old. White-throated Honey-eater. Bellenden-Ker. Common from Bris-
bane to Cape York and New Guinea.
hieundinaceum, Shaiv. Fruit Swallow. Bellenden-Ker at 1,800 feet; generally distributed.
Zosterops westeenensis, Q. et O. Yellow-throated White-eye. Bellender-Ker. Occurs also at
Chinchilla.
Ptilorhis TicTOEiiE, Old. Victoria Rifle Bird. Peculiar to district; on Bellender-Ker at 3,000
feet.
Oethontx spalbingi, Ram. Spalding’s Orthonyx. Peculiar to district; common on Bellenden-Ker at
all levels to the summit.
Sitella steiata, Old. Streaked Creeper. Bellenden-Ker at 3,800 feet; peculiar to district.
Centeopus phasianus, Lath. Swamp Pheasant. Bussell and Mulgrave Rivers, Common everywhere.
Cacatita galeeita, Lath. "White Cockatoo. Bellenden-Ker, 4,000 feet. Common throughout Queens-
land.
Calyptoehtnchus banksii, Lath. Banks’s Black Cockatoo. Common on grassy spurs of Mount
Barnard at 1,800 feet.
C. stellatus, Wagn. Great-billed Black Cockatoo. On Bellender-Ker.
Apeosmtctos scapulatus, Bechs. King Lory. Common. Bellenden-Ker.
Plattceecus pennantii, Lath. Pennant’s Parrakeet. On summitt of Bellender-Ker.
Teiciioglossus NOViE-iiOLL ANDiiB, Om. Blue Mountain Lorikeet. Summit of mountain.
T. chloeolepidotus, Kuhl. Scaly-breasted Lorikeet, In flocks on the summit.
Ctclopsixta macleatana, Ram. Macleay’s Lorikeet. Russell River; peculiar to the district,
Megalopeepia magnifica, Temm. Fruit Pigeon. Bellenden-Ker. Common at 3,000 feet.
Chalcopiiaps longieosteis, Old. Long-billed Green Pigeon. Frequent in Russell and Mulgrave
Scrubs. The propriety of separating this from the common green pigeon is very doubtful.
Tale callus lathamt, Or. Scrub Turkey. Bellenden-Ker, at 3,000 feet. ' Common and general.
Megapodius tumulus, Old. Megapode. Bellenden-Ker, at 3,000 feet. All north-eastern coast.
Casuaeius austealis, Wall. Cassowary. The southern half of the eastern coast from Card-
well northwards is the homo of this noble bird. The female is occasionally entirely devoid of wattles.
(Edicnemus geallaeius, Lath. Stone Plover. Mulgrave River. Common and generally distributed.
(Egialitis nigeifeons, Guv. Black-fronted Dottrell. Mulgrave River. Generally distributed, common.
Caephibis spinicollis, Jam. Straw-necked Ibis. Mulgrave River.
Ntcticoeax caledonicus, Lath. Nankeen Night Heron. Bellenden-Ker, at 4,000 feet. Common
and general.
BIRDS OBSERVED ON BELLENDEN-KER BY MR. BROADBENT, BUT NOT OBTAINED.
Lophoictinia isuea, Old. Square-tailed Kite. Base of Bellenden-Ker.
Dacelo gigas, Rodd. Common Laughing Jackass. Bellenden-Ker, to 2,000 feet.
Tantsipteea stlyia, Old. Racquet-tailed Kingfisher. “ Nest in termite nests seen at 1,800 feet; lay
four white eggs, and feed their young with termites.” — Broadbent.
Paedalotus punctatus, Temm. Spotted Diamond Bird. On grassy spurs from 380 to 1,800 feet on
Bellenden-Ker.
Geaucalus melanops, Lath. Black-faced Shrike. Common on Mount Barnard at 1,800 feet.
Colluricincla haemonica, Old. Piping Shrike Thrush. Bellenden-Ker, at 2,000 feet.
Micececa flayigastea, Old. Yellow-bellied Flycatcher. Mount Barnard, at 1,800 feet.
Heteeomtias cineeeifeons, Ram. Grey-fronted Robin. Common on Bellenden-Ker, at 4,000 feet.
Eopsalteia .ausxEALis, Lath. Yellow Scrub Robin. Bellenden-Ker, at 4,000 feet.
Psophodes ceepitans, V. et S. Coach-whip Bird. Top of Bellenden-Ker.
Seeicoenis citeeogulaeis, Old. Yellow-throated Sericorn, Bellenden-Ker, at 3,000 feet.
(Egintha tempoealis, Lath. Red-browed Finch, Foot of the mountain.
Mtzomela sanguinolenta, Lath. Blood Bird. Foot of the mountain.
Zosteeops cieeulescens, Lath. "White-eye. Foot of the mountain.
Climacteeis LEUGOPHiEA, Lath. White-throated Tree Creeper. Common at 4,000 feet on Bellenden-Ker.
Cacomantis ttmbonomus, Mull. Northern Cuckoo. Seen at 3,000 feet.
Caepopiiaga noefolciensis, Lath. White-headed pigeon. This was seen by Mr. Meston in hundreds
on South Peak at 5,000 feet, nesting in the tops of tree-ferns. Common in the Mulgrave and
•Russell River scrubs.
Lophaimus antaecticus, Shaw. Topknot Pigeon. At foot of Bellenden-Ker.
Maceopygia phasianella, Temm. Pheasant Pigeon. Common on the mountain up to 3,000 feet.
The comparative scarcity of birds shown by the preceding lists is due, in Mr. Broadbent’s opinion,
to the absence of the migratory birds frequenting the mountain in summer; to the intense cold experienced
on the higher slopes, driving many of the tenderer kinds to the shelter of the gullies at the foot of the
mountain; and to the prevalence of rain and cloud during the period of exploration,
c


LIZARDS.
Geckoes— Gedconidce.
Heteronota eboeacensis, Mad. A small pimpled Ground Lizard, previously known only from Cape
York and Herberton; quite harmless, though dreaded by the blacks.
Geiiryea tariegata, Bum. et Bibr. Common, and generally distributed. •
Perociiirus mestoni, Be Vis. Unique and valuable.
. • Agavndcc.
Gonyocepitalus boybii, Mad. A crested tree lizard peculiar to the district.
Physignathus lesueurii, Gr. The common Creek Lizard.
Scincs — Scincidce.
Mocoa citablekgeri, Blgr.
Heteropus riiomboidalis, Pet. Found also at Mackay.
Tropidopiiorus QUEENSLANDiiE, Be Vis. Unique and valuable.
SNAKES,
Constrictors — Boidcc.
Liasis oltvacea, Gr. Hock Snake.
L. amethystinus, Seim. This and the preceding are harmless rock snakes, ranging over North Australia,
New Guinea, and neighbouring islands.
Morelia variegata, Gr. The common Carpet Snake.
Harmless— Cohcbridce.
Herbertophis plumbeus, Mad. Herbert Eiver Snake. A nocturnal snake peculiar to the Herberton
district, in which it is common, and generally reputed to be poisonous. As under this impression
fatal results have followed from its bite, it is important that the error should be corrected. The
snake has all the characteristics of a perfectly harmless reptile.
Poisonous— Flapidce.
Hoplocephalus nigrostriatus, Krft. Black-striped Snake. A small red snake, scarcely dangerous.
Acanthophis Antarctica, Wagl. The common Death Adder. All Australia and New Guinea.
MOLLUSCA.
The following report on the snails procured is supplied by Mr. Hedley :
“ Sir, —I beg to furnish you with the following report upon the Terrestrial Mollusca collected
during the recent ascent of Mount Bellenden-Ker. Among them I find a Nanina and a Helix which do not
agree with any published description of Queensland shells, and which I am obliged to consider as new.
The remainder contains several rarities, the animals of which have never been examined-. I have
therefore availed myself of the opportunity of dissecting and making drawings of the most important
features.
The collection consists of—
Ehytida sheridani, Brazier. Helix bipartita, Ferrusac.
E. franklandiensis, Forbes. H. bellenden-kerensis, Brazier.
Nanina, n. sp. H. macgillivrayi, Forbes.
Helicarion brazieri, Cox. Aneitea graeffei, Humbert.
Helix, n. sp. Dermatocera vitrea, Lesson.
I have, &c.,
CHAELES HEDLEY.”
INSECTA.
Mr. H. Tryon reports, as under, on the insects submitted to him for identification :
Lepedopteea.
Bhopalocera.
Papilionidce —Papilio egipius, MisJc. ... ... ... 1 damaged.
Fieridce —Delias mysis, Fabr. ... ... ... ... ... 5 „
JVgmphalidoß —Cethosia cydippe, Linn. ... ... ... ... 1 ~
Satyridcc —Mycalesis terminus, Fabr. ... ... ... ... 1 „
„ Ccenonympha infuscata, Mad. ... ... ... 1 „
Hesperidce —Apaustus agraulia, Hew. ... ... ... ... 1 „
„ Hesperia, sp. 1 „
Summaiy—7 species, 11 specimens.
Note.—This collection, which was obtained on the Mulgrave River, includes four of the seven teen species already known
-as occurring in the vicinity of Mount Bellenden-Ker.
Heterocera.
Bombyces. —Doratifera, sp. ... ... ... ... ... 1 specimen.
Zygcenidce. — # Hydrusa bicolor, Walk. ... ... ... 1 „
Lithosiidce. —Hypsa dama, Fabr. ... ... ... ... 2 „
„ Deiopeia pulchella, Linn. 5 „


Arctiidce. —Aloa marginata, Moore ... ... ... ... 1 specimen.
JVbciuidce. —Trigonodes hypassia, Gram. ... 1 „ damaged.
„ Acanlliolipes (trifasciata, Moore) 6 „
„ Hulodes (caranea, Gram.) ... ... ... 1 „
„ Gonitis, sp 1 „
Vraniidee. —Nyctalemon orontes, Linn. ... ... ... 1 „
Fyralidce. —*Siriocauta testulalis, Mubn., var. ... ... 1 „
„ *Conchylodes caberalis, Guen ... 1 „
„ Zinckenia recurvalis, Fabr. ... 1 „
„ Acharaua otreusalis, Walk. ... ... ... 9 „
„ # Phakellura indica, Sound. ... ... ... I „
„ Pachyarches (pomonalis, Guen.) ... ... ... 1 „
Grambites. —*Schaeuobius, sp. ... ... ... ... ... 1 „
Geometrites. —*Acidalia (balmsea) ... ... ... ... 1 „
„ *Taxeotis, sp. ... ... ... ... ... 1 „
Summary—l 9 species, 37 specimens (many damaged).
Note.—Those marked * have been obligingly identified by Dr. T. P. Lucas, All were collected on the Mulgrave River at
he foot of Mount Bellenden-Ker. Most of the species are common and have a wide range of occurrence.
COLEOPTEKA.
Carabidce. —Pamborus viridis, Gory ... ... ... ... 2 specimens.
Lucanidce. —Aulacocyclus edentulus, W.8.M. ... 1 „
* fi
» _ j) ••• ••• ••• u »>
Scaraboaidce. —Chiroplatys, sp. ... ... ... ... ... 1 „
Fhytophagince. —Paropsis, sp. 1 „
Summary—4 species, 10 specimens.
Note.—With the exception of *, which were collected on the Mulgrave River, the other beetles were obtained on Mount
Bellenden-Ker at an altitude of 4,000 feet.
In addition to the above, the Colonial Botanist obtained forty beetles during the progress of the.
expedition. They were forwarded by him to the Key. T. Blackburn, 8.A., who states that, like the
above, they are most of them common North Australian forms. Albeit he has detected a new species of
Ghilocorus amongst them. This ladybird is interesting as being the only new insect obtained during the
expedition.
Miscellanea.
The expedition also obtained three young cockroaches ( Panthesia , sp.), one scorpion (Sormurus
caudiculus ), one SpJicerotJierium, and one Lulus.
I have &c.,
HENRY TETON.
C. W. De YIS,
Curator.
To the Board of Trustees.
JPnce I*.]
By Authority: James C. Beal, Government Printer, William street, Brisbane.


