



Ghas. JOHNSTON & CO
(ESTABLISHED 1873).
furniture tflakers to tDe Victorian
Government.
We extend
the payments to suit the convenience of our
Customers.
We Manufacture our own Goods
Purchase or Exchange Anything
Everything.
We give Estimates and Designs Free
A TRIAL SOLICITED
MOTE THE ADDRESS
CORNER OF GERTRUDE & GEORGE STS.,
.XoX FITZROY, Ko>-


THE TRUE STORY
The Kelly Gang
BUSHRANGERS
C. H. CHOMLEY. K^x-
Melbourne;
PATER & CO., Printers, 271 Little Collins Street..




(copyright)
From Photographs.




CONTENTS.
I. —The Murders on the Wombat ... ... 5-12
ll. —Finding the Bodies ... ... ... 12-19
lll. —The Bushrangers’ Country ... ... 19-26
IV. —AVhy the Kellys “ Went Out” ... 26-80
V. —Police Preparations ... ... ... 30-86
Vl. —Mr. Nicolson in Pursuit.—The Outlawry Bill 36 - 44
Vll. —The Rats’ Castle Fiasco ... ... ... 44-52
VIII. —The Outlaws’ Lost to Sight ... 52-58
IX. —Mr. Wyatt and the Broken Wires ... 58-67
X. —The Sticking-Up of Faithfull’s Creek 67 - 75
XL —The Euroa Bank Robbery ... ... 75-82
XII.—A Change in the Command ... ... 82-89
XIII. —The Kelly Gang at Jerilderie ... ... 90-99
XlV. —The Camp at Mrs. Byrne’s ... ... 99-108
XV. —Fruitless Efforts... ... ... ... 108-116
XVI. — A Change in the Plan of Campaign ... 117-124
XVll. —Aaron Sherritt’s Death ... ... ... 124-132
XVIII.— The Prisoners at Glenrowan ... 138-189
XlX. —The Assault upon the Hotel ... ... 139-144
XX. —Fire and Flames ... ... ... 144-151
XXLt-The Last of the Bushrangers ... ... 152-159


NOTE.
While it is not claimed that no errors have
crept into the following narrative, the author, having
carefully consulted official documents, newspapers of
the time, and other sources of information, believes
that he is justified in describing it as a true stor).


THE TRUE STORY
Relly of ISusl7ran|ers.
CHAPTER I.
THE MURDERS ON THE WOMBAT.
a Sunday afternoon of October, 1878, the little
Victorian town of Mansfield was wrapped in its
usual quiet and peacefulness, when a horseman riding
through the streets attracted the attention of all residents
who chanced to be abroad. He seemed utterly weary.
His clothes were torn and mud-stained. His pale, horror-
stricken face, his whole appearance suggested that he had
undergone some terrible experience, and he was making his
way to the police-station, where Sub-Inspector Pewtress
an officer just arrived from Melbourne, was in charge.
These things excited curiosity. The man was known
to be one Constable MTntyre. But he did not stay to
be questioned, and the knot of people who gathered round
the doors of the police-station waited anxiously to hear his
story.
“They’re all killed, sir. The Kellys have murdered them
all,” were the words with which he greeted his superior
officer, and it was some time before he could give a con-
nected account of the experiences he had been through.


Gradually, however, he recovered himself, and made Mr.
Pewtress acquainted with the facts.
On Friday morning, October 25, under the orders of
Sergeant Kennedy, and accompanied also by Constables
Scanlon and Lonigan, he had set out from Mansfield in
search of the Kellys—two brothers for whose arrest orders
had been issued on various charges, of which more anon.
It was believed that they were somewhere in the neighbour-
hood of Mansfield; but in the mountainous country, heavily
forested, sparsely settled, and cut up by valleys and creeks,
whose banks were clothed in almost impenetrable scrub,
there seemed but a faint chance of discovering and arresting
them. The party looked forward to spending some con-
siderable time in the wilds. All the men were mounted.
They were furnished with provisions for three weeks, and in
a nondescript fashion they were armed, each man carrying
a revolver, in addition to which they had among them a
repeating rifle and a double-barrelled gun.
Early on Friday morning they left the police-station,
directing their course into the mountainous country which
surrounds Mansfield, itself a picturesquely situated village,
nestling among the hills in the north-eastern district of
Victoria. Though the object of their expedition was
nominally secret, and they had substituted ordinary bush
costume for uniform, it was pretty generally known in the
township that they were in search of the Kellys, whose
horse-stealing exploits, and the alleged attempted murder
of a certain Constable Fitzpatrick, had made them notorious
in the district.
On Friday evening the police pitched their camp in the
Wombat Ranges, on the banks of Stringy Bark Creek,
about twenty miles from Mansfield, and not far from a
spot reputed to be one of the Kellys' bush haunts. ()n the
Saturday morning Sergeant Kennedy, taking Constable
Scanlon with him, patrolled down the creek leaving the
other two men in camp, and directing Constable MTntyre


to do the cooking for the party. Kennedy and Scanlon
were mounted, for though the country is rough in the ex-
treme. no Australian bushman ever thinks of walking where
it is possible for a horse to get foothold, or scramble through
the trees. Wattle and sassafras scrub clothed the banks
of the creek. An open patch of ground, comparatively
free from timber, was covered with clumps of bayonet grass
six feet high, and beyond was a forest of stringy bark and
other gum trees rising above the bracken and undergrowth,
and shutting in the view on either side. The police tent
was pitched among the bayonet grass, near a huge fallen
tree.
Constables Lonigan and MTntyre had little in the camp
to occupy them, and spent much of the day in yarning over
their chances of capturing the Kellys, while MTntyre
amused himself for a time by shooting parrots in the neigh-
bouring forest. At five o'clock the sergeant and Scanlon
were still away and the other two were making tea in
expectation of their return. MTntyre was putting the
billy on the fire. Lonigan stood talking by his side.
Suddenly they heard voices calling to them; “Bail up ! Hold
up your hands!”
Looking round they saw that they were covered by the
guns of four men, who had stolen up to the camp unheard,
and evidently intended mischief. MTntyre was unarmed.
He had left his revolver in the tent, and, resistance being
hopeless, he held his arms above his head. Three or
four yards from the fire there stood a tree, and Lonigan
made a bolt for it, at the same time endeavouring to draw
the revolver which he carried slung to his belt. He had
scarcely taken a step, however, and had no time to grasp
his revolver, before he was fired upon, and fell on his face,
crying, “O Christ! I'm shot.” He never spoke again,
for lie had been shot dead by Edward Kelly, and the cur-
tain had risen on a sordid, yet exciting drama, which was
to engross the interest of Victoria for years.


When Lonigan fell the four men rushed upon M'lntyre,
ordering him to keep his hands np, lest he, too, should be
armed and show fight. M'lntyre obeyed, and stood still.
Edward Kelly searched him for fire-arms, and, finding that
he had none, asked him where he had put his revolver. It
was in the tent, he told them; and when one of the mur-
derers had secured it, Ned Kelly, the leader, told M'lntyre
that he might drop his hands and sit down upon a log.
Then he turned his attention to Lonigan, and saw that he
was dead. “ Dear, dear!” he said, " what a pity that man
tried to get away! But you're all right.” Thereupon he
lit his pipe and looked round to take stock of the camp,
questioning MTntrye as to the arms and ammunition the
police party possessed, and the whereabout of his mates.
The other men took the billy off the fire and invited their
prisoner to smoke and take tea with them, while Ned Kelly
told him of what he intended to do. Ned’s brother,
Daniel Kelly, producing a pair of police handcuffs which
he had obtained in the tent, proposed that M'lntyre should
wear them; but, significantly tapping his rifle, Ned re-
marked, “ I have something better than handcuffs here.”
He added, for MTntyre’s benefit, that, should he attempt
to escape, he would track him even into Mansfield and
shoot him down like a dog.
Meanwhile M'lntyre, with the murdered body of his mate
before him as a reminder of what further ill might happen,
was anxiously awaiting the return of his mates. Kelly
questioned him closely as to their movements. Evidently,
to MTntyre’s surprise, he knew a good deal about the camp
and party, which was, after all, not surprising, since the
sound of the constable's parrot-shooting must have guided
Kelly to the spot, allowing him to watch the police, unseen,
from the cover of the scrub, and to listen to their con-
versation before he made his attack. Asked when he ex-
pected Scanlon and Kennedy to return, MTntyre said that
he had long been waiting for them and believed they must


have got bushed. He begged Kelly not to shoot them.
Kennedy, he said, was a married man and the father of a
family, whom, surely, he could not murder in cold blood.
Kelly said he wanted to murder nobody, and would shoot
no man who held up his arms. He knew nothing about
Kennedy, but believed Scanlon was a “ flash , that
wanted taking down a bit.” However, he would not shoot
if the men surrendered.
Did he intend to shoot him? MTntyre asked.
“ No,” said Kelly. “If I had wanted to shoot you, I
could have done so half-an-hour ago.”
Then, for some time, while his mates appear to have sat
apart, or busied themselves in annexing police property,
Kelly moralised to MTntyre on the laziness and discredit of
great big strapping fellows like himself and the dead Loni-
gan leading a loafing life in the police force. They should
be ashamed of themselves, he said. He added that at
first he had believed MTntyre to be Constable Flood,
against whom he had a grievance, and that if he had been,
they would have roasted him on the fire. Constable Fitz-
patrick he alleged to be the cause of the present trouble.
He declared that there had been no attack made upon
him, and that through the constable’s perjury Mrs.
Kelly, Ned’s mother, was in gaol, and himself and
his brother driven into the bush. MTntyre listened, wait-
ing all the time for the sound of horsemen approaching.
He had experienced Kelly’s cool indifference to taking life,
and feared for the fate of his comrades. What was to
be done with them? he asked. Would Kelly give his
word that they should not be killed?
Prefacing his remarks with the suggestion that the police
had come out to kill him, which MTntyre denied, saving
their intention was only to arrest, Kelly promised mercy,
on condition that MTntyre induced Kennedy and Scanlon
to surrender and hold up their hands as soon as they
reached the camp. In that case, he said, he would hand-


cuff them all night, take their horses and arms,
and allow them to depart in the morning. “ But
you had better be sure you do make them surrender/’ he
added, “ otherwise I will shoot yon.”
Partly satisfied, MTntyre asked if Kelly would promise
that the other men should not shoot them. “ I won’t
shoot/' said Kelly shortly. ‘‘ The other men may please
themselves.” During this conversation one of the men
was hidden in the tent, the other two in the scrub, and
Kelly was just signalling them to report his arrangement
with MTntyre, when there came the sound of horses’ hoofs
and rustling bushes near by.
“ Hush, lads !” called Kelly in a low voice. “ Here they
come. Sit down on that log,” he whispered sternly to
MTntyre, who had risen in his excitement, “ or I’ll put a
hole through you.”
“ For God’s sake don’t shoot the men,” replied MTntyre,
“ and I’ll get them to surrender.” Just as he spoke Ken-
nedy and Scanlon emerged from the scrub into full view in
the open ground of the camp. MTntyre ran forward
towards Kennedy, asking him to surrender, as the camp was
surrounded. The police looked round bewildered, suspect-
ing some practical joke, but almost simultaneously with
MTntyre's appeal Kelly and his mates called out, “ Bail up I
Throw your hands up !”
Scanlon and Kennedy were both brave men. They'
sprang from their horses, Kennedy attempting to take cover
behind his, as he drew his revolver, and Scanlon making
for a tree, trying to unsling his rifle while he ran. Imme-
diately the Kellys began firing, and Scanlon fell with a
gun-shot under his arm, and blood spurting from his side,
before he could reach the tree, or raise the rifle to his
shoulder. It is doubtful whether Kennedy heard MTntyre’s
repeated entreaty to surrender. At any rate he disregarded
it and showed fight; but he, too, fell wounded before he
could fire his revolver, and dropped upon his knees.


All this time the bullets had been whistling past MTntyre.
“All right, boys, I surrender. Stop it! Stop it!” he heard
Kennedy call as he fell. But the firing still went on.
Kennedy had released the bridle of his horse, which passed
close to MTntrye. Seeing that the case was hopeless, and
knowing that if he remained he too would be murdered,
quick as thought he leapt on to Kennedy’s horse and gal-
loped away through thick scrub.
Dan Kelly was the first to notice his attempted escape.
“ Shoot that b . Shoot that b ,” MTntyre heard
him call, and several shots followed, while bullets sang close
past his ears, but none of them struck him; and soon the
sound of firing and voices from the camp died away, as he
pushed feverishly on towards Mansfield. It was rough rid-
ing through the timber for horse and man. Bumped against
the trees, his body bruised, his face scratched and bleeding,
and his clothes torn to pieces by the scrub, MTntyre pressed
forward, fearing pursuit, until dusk. Then his horse fell
heavily. He mounted again and rode on for a time till
his horse gave in; when, believing him to be wounded, the
constable took off saddle and bridle, let him go, and running
a short distance, concealed himself in a wombat hole, where
he made a short memo, in his note-book of what had oc-
curred. The notes, which were evidently written under
the strain of great fatigue and excitement, MTntyre had
some vague notion might be discovered in the future,
should the bushrangers come upon his hiding-place and
make away with him. It is obvious that unless the bush-
rangers came upon the man and his notes together, the
chance of the latter ever being found in a wombat hole
in the fastnesses of the bush was the remotest; but con-
fused thought was natural enough in MTntyre’s circum-
stances. However that be, he wrote as follows: —
“Ned Kelly and others stuck us up to-day, when we were
disarmed. Lonigan and Scanlon shot. lam hiding in
wombat hole until dark. The Lord have mercy upon me.


Scanlon tried to get his gun out.” There the wombat-
hole reflections terminate, but later on he wrote, “ I have
been travelling all night, and am very weary. Nine a.m.,
Sunday.—l am now lying on the edge of a creek named
Bridges’.”
These entries refer to the following day. After dark, on
the night of the murder, MTntyre left his hiding place and
made his way on foot through the bush in the direction of
Mansfield. Every sound startled him, for he feared the
bushrangers were on his track, and progress through the
scrub and forest, where huge fallen trees half-hidden in
bracken and undergrowth barred the way, was painful and
difficult. Resting for a time by the creek where he made his
latest entries in the note-book, he pushed on by daylight
through almost uninhabited country, meeting no one until
he reached the homestead of a settler named M'Coll, about
one and a half miles from Mansfield. There he waited a
little while, telling disconnected scraps of his story, after
which he continued his sad journey to Mansfield, where
he arrived to disturb the sleepy quiet of the township Sun-
day afternoon with the gruesome tale, which, bit by bit. In-
spector Pewtress drew from him.
CHAPTER 11.
FINDING THE BODIES.
Q \HEN MTntyre reached the police-station Sub-
J/v Inspector Pewtress was lying in bed, ill
with cold and influenza. He had arrived in
Mansfield from Melbourne, via Benalla, the head-
quarters of the district police, only the day before, and
though he knew that Kennedy and the other constables
were absent from the town on special duty, he was not


aware of its nature. The knowledge of what the police
mission had been, and MTntyre’s excited account of its
disastrous ending, quickly roused the police officer, who
forgot for the time that he was ill and left his bed to
make immediate arrangements for a search—possibly a
rescue—party. Scanlon and Lonigan, MTntyre was sure
were dead, but it was possible that Kennedy might be alive.
When the news spread through Mansfield it roused the
people to a high pitch of horror and excitement, not un-
mixed with fear, and the wildest pictures were conjured up
of the outlaws coming out of the bush to rob and burn the
town. Absurd as these fears may seem, it was, after all,
only the objectlessness of a murderous attack from the out-
laws that made them so. There was scarcely a firearm of
any kind in Mansfield, and a determined party of men
armed with rifles and revolvers might have done almost as
they chose. However, there was no difficulty in finding
hardy volunteers ready to venture out into the bush to the
scene of the tragedy. The Inspector spoke to some of the
leading townspeople, among them Dr. Reynolds, the local
medical practitioner, and a party of five volunteers was
quickly organised. Two constables, Meehan and All-
wood, were at that time on the station. The former Mr.
Pewtress despatched with a report from MTntyre and his
own notes thereon, to his superior officer, Superintendent
Sadlier, at Benalla, distant some forty miles from Mans-
field. Inspector Pewtress had tried to telegraph, but was
unable to get a message over the wires, and accordingly
directed Meehan to ride without drawing rein to' Broken
River, about half-way, and there procure a fresh horse to
continue his journey. He should have reached his des-
tination before midnight of that day, but, as showing the
excited nervous state which was engendered in weak heads
by the Kelly outrage, it may be mentioned that Meehan,
catching a glimpse of some stranger near the Broken River,
immediately let his horse go and concealed himself, believ-


ing that he was pursued by the bushrangers. As a conse-
quence of his powerful imagination he did not reach his
destination until the evening of the following day.
Inspector Pewtress, believing that he had sent the news
expeditiously, turned his attention to other affairs and acted
with the utmost promptitude. In spite of his broken-up
condition, Constable M‘lntyre pluckily insisted upon ac-
companying the search party. Constable Allwood was
also included in it, and, under the leadership of Sub-
Inspector Pewtress, the police and five civilians set out
about six o'clock from Mansfield as the sun was going down.
The party were well mounted, for the smallest bush town-
ship is never deficient in horseflesh, but they were miser-
ably armed—two rifles, which the constables had been
able to borrow, being their only weapons. The town-
ship was left, by this draft upon its resources, almost de-
fenceless.
As far as Monk’s saw-mill, distant about thirteen miles
from Mansfield and situated in comparatively settled
country, no difficulty arose about the route. On arrival
there a guide was necessary, and Mr. Pewtress called up
Mr. Monk, told him of the murders, and asked him for
direction and assistance. It was then about half-past nine.
Rain was falling in torrents and the night was pitchy dark.
Mr. Monk at once consented to guide the party to Stringy
Bark Creek, also inducing two of his men to join it; and
at ten o’clock the searchers resumed their journey, riding
in melancholy silence in single file through the forest, with
no sound but the rain pattering on the leaves, an occasional
mournful cry of a mopoke, or the crashing of a wallaby
through the undergrowth. None but bushmen born and
bred could have steered a course through such country on
such a night; but under Monk’s leadership the creek was
reached some time after midnight, and dismounting from
their horses the party began their search for the bodies.
Only the police inspector, the constables and one volunteer


entered upon this melancholy work, the other men wait-
ing with the horses about a quarter of a mile from the
camp. The bodies of Lonigan and Scanlon were soon dis-
covered where they had fallen in the comparatively open
ground. Striking matches to examine them, the police
were able to see that they had both been shot in several
places, and that they lay upon their backs; while their pockets,
which were turned inside out, had been rifled of every-
thing they contained. No signs were seen of Kennedy,
and recognising that further search by night was useless,
the police sat down upon a log—the same log from which
MTntrye had seen his comrades approaching a few hours
before —and waited for daylight. Then the other men
came up and inspected the dead bodies and the camp, be-
fore making seach for Kennedy.
Ashes where the tent had stood showed that it had been
burnt down, and all the property possessed by the police had
been either removed or destroyed by the bushrangers. The
horses, which, next to the fireams, were the prize most
coveted by the Kellys, were, of course, noKvhere to be seen.
For a long time, with heavy rain falling, the search
party diligently beat through the scrub and grass-trees
searching for Kennedy, whom they had little hope of find-
ing alive, but neither were they able to discover his body,
and at last Sub-Inspector Pewtress gave orders for a start
upon the journey home. Dr. Reynolds had examined
the bodies of the murdered men and assured himself
that by no possibility could any life be left in them, so
nothing remained but to convey them back to Mansfield
for inquest and burial. How to carry them was a ques-
tion which presented some difficulty; but the police in-
spector, who had puzzled the men at the saw-mill by ask-
ing for a rope, had foreseen the task in hand. The bodies
were roped together, and slung like packs, one on either
side a horse's back. The horse chosen to carry this burden
seemed to have some instinctive horror of travelling with


it. The weight did not trouble him; but, looking back-
ward, he could see his ghastly load; and eventually he was
only persuaded to stir from the spot where he stood when
blindfolded by Mr, Pewtress.
To Monk’s saw-mill the journey was a gruesome one. Part
of it lay through thickets of dead wattles, brittle sticks that
snap and cut, and tear with their sharp ragged edges. In
addition, therefore, to the melancholy caused by the death
of the constables, those who escorted them had the horror
of seeing their faces and inert limbs bruised and disfigured
by the trees and bushes, against which the horse bumped
them as he forced his way through the forest.
When Monk’s saw-mill was reached this painful phase
of the journey concluded; for a vehicle with four horses
was in waiting, provided at the police officer’s request by
Mr. Kitchen, a leading resident, who gave great assistance
to the police. Thence into Mansfield the cavalcade fol-
lowed the vehicle until near the town, when some of the
horsemen galloped on to tell the people what they had
discovered of the murders. The bodies were conveyed to
the dead-room of the hospital to await the inquest which
soon followed, and Mr. Pewtress was busied in dealing with
a pile of telegrams and correspondence relative to the out-
rage, the news of which, by this time, had been flashed every-
where and created a profound sensation throughout
Australia. Three or four constables, from different out-
lying districts, had arrived, under orders from headquarters,
at Mansfield, but still the inhabitants, who were possessed
with panic, were not satisfied with the arrangements made
for their defence.
Mrs. Kennedy, wife of the missing Sergeant Kennedy,
who resided in Mansfield, was the object of universal sym-
pathy and commiseration. The uncertainty as to her
husband’s fate was terribly hard to bear, and few people
dared hold out hope to her of ever seeing him again alive.
MTntyre was unable to say anything as to the seriousness of


his wound, but he was a good offcer who had been con
cerned before in the arrest of cattle-stealers —friends of the
Kellys —and they had given proof of bloodthirstiness which
left little room to hope for mercy from them to their enemies.
During the day an inquest was held upon the bodies of
Scanlon and Lonigan, in both of which numerous bullet
wounds were found, some of them apparently inflicted after
death. MTntyre, who gave evidence at the inquest, re-
peated the story which he had given to Sub-Inspector Pew-
tress. and nothing else to throw light upon the matter was
forthcoming. Some little excitement was caused in the
town by the arrest of two brothers, named “ Wild ” Wright
and “ Dummy ” Wright, friends of the Kellys, who were
well known to the police and supposed to be sympathisers
with the bushrangers. They were charged, on this occasion,
with using threatening language to members of the search
partv, and showed considerable resistance when they were
locked up.
In the meantime the police had been busy in organising a
second search party to look for Kennedy, which started
for Stringy Bark Creek on Tuesday. When the men arrived
at the camp it was late in the afternoon, and during the
hours of daylight remaining, the ground was searched care-
fully, but without success. When dusk came on the mem-
bers of the party, in spite of Sub-Inspector Pewtress' re-
monstrances, positively refused to remain for the night upon
the ground, but insisted upon returning to Mansfield. It
was useless for the police officer to remain alone, as many
men were wanted for the search; so he perforce accom-
panied the others on their return, leaving, on his way, some
of the constables at Monk’s saw-mill for its protection, since
it was thought the bushrangers might still be lurking in the
neighbourhood.
When Sub-Inspector Pewtress returned to Mansfield,
he found that other constables had arrived, and also the
chief officer in charge of the district, Superintendent Sadlier.


By this time Mr. Pewtress was almost worn out by his
continued exertion and responsibility, while M‘ Intyre had
broken down, and was ill in the hospital. Mr. Pewtress,
however, accompanied the third search party —a large one,
composed of police and civilians, which he and Superin-
tendent Sadlier had collected—and set out again as soon
as possible for the scene of the tragedy. There, about eight
o'clock on Thursday morning, the question of Kennedy's
fate was solved at last. More than a quarter of a mile from
the camp, Mr. Tompkins, President of the Shire Council,
came upon a body covered with a cloak. It was Ken-
nedy, shot through the forehead and disfigured with
numerous other wounds. Lapse of time and the attacks
of insects had made his features almost unrecognisable ,
but there was no difficulty in identifying the body; and,
like those of his unfortunate comrades, it was slung upon
a horse for conveyance through the bush to the saw mills,
whence a vehicle took it on to Mansfield. There an in-
quest was held; but necessarily no further evidence was
forthcoming than had been available in the case of the other
murders. Medical examination, however, showed that a
wound in the chest had been made by a charge from a
shot-gun fired at close range. The muzzle, in fact, must
have been held almost against the wounded man's breast as
he lay helpless, and the shot was probably fired from his
own gun.
Sergeant Kennedy's funeral, which was one of the largest
ever witnessed in the district, was attended by clergy of all
denominations, among them Dr. Moorhouse, Anglican
Bishop of Melbourne, and quantities of flowers were sent
to do honour to a brave man and testify the sympathy felt
for his widow. The Government generously recognised
her claims upon it, by deciding that the late sergeant’s full
pay should be given to her for the support of herself and her
children.
After the funeral Mansfield, gradually recovering its
18
THE KELLY GANG OF BUSHRANGERS.


equilibrium, turned its attention to the chances of cap-
turing the miscreants, and the facts connected with the out-
rage. Of the latter it was impossible to learn much, but
it was ascertained that Kennedy had been informed of the
proximity of the Kellys to the police camp. He had not
communicated that fact to MTntyre, and it was surmised
that his informant had treacherously told the Kellys that
Kennedy was going in search of them. dhey, it appeared,
had inhabited a hut, with mud walls, which was almost a
fortress, on the site of some deserted alluvial diggings, not
far from the scene of the murder. Complaints were loud
in Mansfield of the shockingly inadequate arming of the
police who, by this time, had gone in pursuit of the bush-
rangers. One party of seven police had only four rifles
between them : but these matters were gradually attended
to, and Mansfield itself was mollified by a strong force of
constables being stationed in the town, and the despatch of
twenty-five rifles from Melbourne for the defence of the in-
habitants.
CHAPTER HI.
THE BUSHRANGERS’ COUNTRY.
CIT was not onlv in Mansfield and the district immediately
CJ connected with the crime that public feeling was excited
and alarmed by the police murders, which surpassed in cold-
blooded audacity any former exploits of bushranging gangs
in Victoria. All over the colony nothing was talked of but
the Kelly outrage. The press of Melbourne and the country
towns was full of it, while there was immense activity in the
police department, which despatched heavy reinforcements
of constabulary to every township in the North-East.
For many years this portion of A ictoria had enjoyed an


unenviable notoriety as the home of cattle “ duffers ’ and
other lawless persons; and two of the most notorious bush-
rangers of former years, Morgan and Power, had both been
at home in the river valleys and heavily forested ranges
that cover much of the country. Only ten years before
Power, a solitary rover, who had terrorised a large part of
the colony by his “ sticking-up ” exploits, though murder
was a crime of which he was never guilty, had been captured
on the top of a mountain some fifteen miles distant from
the scene of the Kelly outrage. Morgan, a blood-thirsty
villain, to whom murder was rather a pleasure than other-
wise, was well known and hated by the farmers of the dis-
trict before he became an outlaw. Two or three miles
from the scene of Power’s capture he had been wounded
by a charge of shot fired at him by a squatter who chanced
upon him in the bush, but had escaped capture and hidden
himself away until, later, he was shot dead, while going
to seek his horse at Peechelba, a station he had stuck up
upon the New South Wales border.
While Power and Morgan were the men whose deeds
were most flagrant in the district, cattle-stealing and other
minor crimes were common there, and the police were kept
constantly on the alert. The popularity of cattle “duffing”
in the neighbourhood may be accounted for, partly by the
fact that it was largely settled by men of bad and lawless
antecedents, and partlv by the tremendous temptations to
criminal adventure which the conditions of the country
afforded. The King, the Ovens, and the Buffalo, the
Broken River, and a number of minor rivers and creeks,
all flow through fertile valleys, sparsely settled by farmers
and graziers, into plain country, much of which is thickly
forested; and all the streams have trackless ranges not far
distant from either bank. North of these is the Murray
River, forming the border of New South Wales and Vic-
toria, and also flowing, in its upper reaches, through a
jumble of hills and mountains, while the headwaters of


The Attack on the Police Camp.—Page 7.




all the rivers named are in absolutely uninhabited moun-
tain country, stretching east and north for hundreds of
miles.
Even the towns of some importance on the plains are all
adjacent to ranges containing innumerable hiding-places.
Mansfield lies embosomed in mountains, at the terminus of
a line (not then constructed) which branches away from
the main North-Eastern railway many miles to the south.
Wangaratta, Glenrowan, Benalla, and Euroa —stations upon
the North-Eastern and Sydney line —though they are
situated themselves on flat and open country, are all flanked
by adjacent wooded ranges. Beechworth, the northern-
most of the important Victorian towns, in what is called
the “ Kelly ” country, forms the terminus of another branch
line, and is picturesquely situated at an altitude of some
thousands of feet in the heart of the mountains. A care-
ful study of the map of Victoria and of the relative positions
of the towns and rivers named would be necessary to enable
anvone to follow the doings of the outlaws and the police
with proper understanding of the exploits of the former,
and the terrible difficulties of the latter in attempting to
capture them.
Enough has probably been said, however, to explain the
temptations and opportunities which the country offered to
cattle and horse stealers, who were encouraged in their
pursuits by the conduct of law-abiding, honest stock-owners
almost as much as by Nature. While comparatively very
little of the country was fenced, cattle and horses belonging
to different individuals were allowed to run together far
from the homesteads, in the good land by the banks of
creeks and rivers in the mountains, where their owners,
who were, almost without exception, splendid bushmen,
could periodically inspect them, and muster them when re-
quired. This casual system of grazing would have worked
better than it did but for the fact that dishonest adventurers,
who were also skilled bushmen. found it easy to muster


other people’s stock. Having done so, they drove them
away by devious mountain tracks to some distant market,
generally in New South Wales, and disposed of them, often
months before their owners knew that they had suffered
loss. A favourite plan was to impound Victorian horses
or cattle in the pounds of New South Wales border towns,
purchase them for the trifle which impounded stock usually
bring, and then resell them to innocent buyers, to whom
the thieves were able to give an apparently good title. The
police of New South Wales and Victoria, who were both
well aware of the plan of operation, were in constant com-
munication with one another, and effected many captures of
adventurous horse and cattle stealers. Until the whole of the
professional “ duffing ” population was either safely under
lock and key in the gaols, or, at least, had experienced
a term there, and so lost caste with their admirers, who
worshipped, and were only too ready to emulate unpunished
“ smartness,” the police felt that it would be futile to
hope for a full measure of law and order in the district.
The Kellys themselves were well known cattle thieves, with
whom the police had considerable acquaintance. Mr.
Nicholson, the Victorian Inspecting Police Superintendent,
on a visit to the North-East two years before the murders,
had reported specially upon the Kelly family, and had ad-
vised the removal of a police constable from the neighbour-
hood of Greta, a small township near which the Kellys lived,
on the ground that a man of superior attainments was
needed for such a responsible post. Portion of his report,
dated April, 1877, is worth quoting. The Kellys’ house,
it may be said, is about four miles distant from Greta, on
the road to Penalla. Mr. Nicholson writes as follows: —
“ I visited the notorious Mrs. Kelly’s house on the road from
hence to Benalla. She lived on a piece of cleared and
partlv cultivated land on the road-side, in an old wooden hut,
with a large bark roof. The dwelling was divided into five
apartments by partitions of blanketing, rugs. &c. There


were no men in the house, only women and
two girls of about fourteen years of age, said to be her
daughters. They ail appeared to be existing in poverty
and squalor. She said her sons were out at work, but did
not indicate where, and that their relatives seldom came
near them. However, their communications with each
other are known to the police. Until the gang referred
to is rooted out of this neighbourhood, one of the most ex-
perienced and successful mounted constables in the district
will be required in charge at Greta. Ido not think the
present arrangements are sufficient. Second-class Sergeant
Steele, of Wangaratta, keeps the offenders referred to under
as good surveillance as the distance and means at his com-
mand will permit. But I submit that Constable Thorn
would hardly be able to cope with these men. At the same
time some of these offenders may commit themselves
foolishly some day, and may be apprehended and convicted
in a very ordinary manner.”
This report is important, as showing the class of men with
whom the police had to deal, and the fact that responsible
officers well recognised the gravity of the position, long
before it culminated so tragically.
The Kellys belonged to a very numerous clan, most of
whose members had been more or less in bad odour with
the police. John Kelly, the father of the bushrangers, and
a native of Ireland, had begun his troubles in the old
country, whence he was transported for fifteen years to Tas-
mania—on his own account for no worse offence than being
concerned in a faction fig'ht at a fair. From Tasmania,
on his release, he emigrated to Victoria, and, after following
various occupations, mining among them, he settled on the
Eleven-mile Creek, near Greta, where his family continued
to reside after his death. In Victoria he received, at one
time, a sentence of six months’ imprisonment for being in
possession of beef, presumably the carcass of a stolen
bullock; but he appears, on the whole, to have led a fairly


peaceable and harmless life. His wife, and the mother
of the bushrangers, belonged to a large family of Quinns,
many of whom had a bad record. It was near their house
on the Glenmore run, on the upper reaches of the King
River, that the bushranger Power was captured by Superin-
tendents Nicholson and Hare in 1870, and it was well known
that the Quinns were in league with Power, and always
gave him warning of the approach of the police to his
haunts. Mr. Hare relates that, besides numerous dogs of
various breeds which barked loudly on strangers approach,
and could be heard by Power in his hut or “ gunyah on
the mountain near by, the Quinns kept a peacock, whose
scream was also a danger signal to the outlaw. It was
onlv because the police, who were forced, by trackless scrub
and flood-swollen creeks, to pass close by the Quinns
house, did so on a night of storm and rain that the sentries,
which had taken shelter from the elements, failed to warn
Power when the search-party was creeping up the mountain
to arrest him.
Ned Kelly, in his boyhood, spent much time with his
relatives at Glenmore, and appears to have been on intimate
terms with Power, though he was associated in none of his
robberies, never getting further than helping him to recon-
noitre the country, or taking charge of Power’s horses at
a distance. At this time Kelly was a boy of about sixteen,
of whose courage or daring Power thought very little, while
he, on his part, was afraid of Power’s ungovernable temper,
and always ready to leave him at a moment’s notice.
The remainder of the Kelly family at the time when
serious trouble began, consisted of the old lady, nee Quinn*
Dan —the second outlaw —Jim, and four sisters —Mrs.
Gunn, Mrs. Skillion, Kate, and Grace. Ned, the eldest of
the familv, was horn in 1854 ,• Dan in 1861, but though so
much vounger than his brother, he had been mixed up with
several of the former’s horse and cattle stealing exploits,
and had an unenviable reputation as being a vicious, cun-


ning little sneak, in addition to a law-breaker. James
Kelly, Ned’s other brother, who took no part in their moie
serious crimes, was arrested with Dan, when the latter was
only ten years old, for illegally using horses a step in the
apprenticeship to regular stealing; but both boys were dis-
charged on account of rheir youth. Kater on, in conjunc-
tion with a man named Williamson, he received four years
imprisonment for cattle stealing. Other members of what
were known to the police as the “ Kelly mob, were John
Lloyd, married to the sister of Airs. Quinn, and his sons,
Tom and Paddy Lloyd, who lived near their relatives, the
Kellys, and were also continually in collision with the police,
Lloyd senior, some years before the Kelly outbreak, being
imprisoned for four years for maliciously killing a neigh-
bour's horse. Steve Bart, a third member of the gang who
murdered the constables, and Joe Byrne, the fourth, had
also both been known as cattle or horse-stealers, but enjoyed
by no means so evil a notoriety as the Kellys. At the time
of the murder in the Wombat Ranges, near Mansfield, it was
not known that they were the Kellys partners in the out-
rage. and for some time afterwards suspicion rested on other
men.
Hart, who was only eighteen years old, was born near
Wangaratta, and there his family resided close by the Warby
Ranges, with the intricacies of which Hart was well ac-
quainted. Joe Byrne, three years older than Hart, a fine,
handsome young man, apparently with many good qualities,
had been at school in Beech worth, near which, at a place
called Woolshed, he resided, and he was as much at home
in the mountains of his locality as were the Kellys with the
interminable ranges behind Greta, and Hart with the W at by
Ranges. The fact that between them the bushrangers
were so intimately acquainted with an immense tract of
country, covering thousands of square miles, with sympa-
thisers and hiding-places in every part of it, was one of the
factors which enabled them so long to baffle the police.


Another factor was the frequent removal of constables from
their stations just as they were beginning to win the con-
fidence of the people and know the district. But for the in-
judicious removal from Greta of Senior-Constable blood,
who had prosecuted at one time or another the whole of the
Kelly mob, and who could find his way through the bush
almost as well as the Kellys themselves, the Kelly murders
might never have been committed, for Flood was feared as
well as hated by the law-breakers, and during his term at
Greta he had some of the Kelly family nearly always in g'aol.
At any rate, if he, and more men such as he, had been in the
Kelly district when the murders did take place, the career
of the outlaws would probably have been much shorter
than it eventually proved to be.
CHAPTER IV.
WHY THE KELLYS “WENT OUT.”
0N the 15th of April, 1878, six months prior to the
Wombat murders, Constable Fitzpatrick, then sta-
tioned at Benalla, the headquarters of the Xorth-Eastern
District Police, saddled his horse and rode quietly over to
Greta, a distance of about fifteen miles. He was bound
on a visit to the Kellys, since he had read in the “ Police
Gazette ” that Dan Kelly and John Lloyd, the members
of the family who happened to be in trouble at the time,
were wanted on a charge of horse-stealing. The warrant
was not in his possession, but that circumstance was of no
consequence, and he hoped, perchance, to find Dan Kelly
at home. The sergeant approved of Fitzpatrick’s ex-
pedition, but told him to be careful, as the Kellys were
known to be dangerous characters, quite likely to resist an
arrest, to which Fitzpatrick replied that he knew what he
was doing, and everything would be right.


When he arrived at the Kelly residence, which
was a new hut built at some distance from
the old ®ne, no one was at home except Mrs. Kelly
and some of the younger children. With them Fitz-
patrick spent a few minutes talking, but did not mention the
obiect of his visit, to which, though Mrs. Kelly might have
guessed it, since warrants were out against both her sons,
she also made no reference. Fitzpatrick was on better
terms with the Kelly family than constables were wont to be,
for on one occasion, when he had arrested Ned Kelly for
drunkenness, he did not press the charge, and this was ac-
counted to him for righteousness. Accordingly, perhaps
also being aware that a warrant for Dan’s arrest had yet
been issued, Mrs. Kelly remained talking to Fitzpatrick,
till he, hearing the sound of someone cutting wood on a
creek near the hut, rode away through the timber to see
who the splitter might be, and whether he had a splitter s
license. The man, one Williamson, who lived with the
Kellys, and who was splitting fence rails, explained that
he needed no license, since he was not working on Crown
lands, and Fitzpatrick, with apparently no police duty on
hand, was riding away towards Greta when he saw two
horsemen passing through a slip panel towards the Kellys
old hut. He rode in their direction, and when he reached
them, found Skillion, one of Mrs. Kelly’s sons-in-law, with
his own horse, leading the other from which the saddle
and bridle had been taken, while the rider had disappeared.
Asked to whom the unsaddled horse belonged, Skillion said
he did not know, which, as the rider had been Skillion s com-
panion, Fitzpatrick naturally did not believe, and study-
ing the horse attentively, he recognised it. “ A hy, that is
Dan Kelly’s mare,’’ he said.
Skillion admitted it, and when the constable asked where
he had gone, supposed that he was up at the house, that is,
the new hut. Accordingly Fitzpatrick rode back, and
called to Dan, who, with his hat and coat off, and with a


knife and fork in his hand, came out to the door.
“ Dan,” said Fitzpatrick, “ I am going to arrest you on a
charge of horse-stealing.”
“ All right,” was the answer, “ but I've been riding all
day, and I’m having something to eat. I suppose you will
wait till then?”
Fitzpatrick said he would, and, tying up his horse, went in
to join the party, where he was welcomed with abuse by
Mrs. Kelly, who said he was “a deceitful little ,” and that
he should not take Dan out of the house that night. Dan,
according to Fitzpatrick, was much more reasonable, and
went on with his meal, so far agreeing with the constable
as to sav, “ .Shut up, mother; that’s all right,” when she ob-
jected to Fitzpatrick’s assurance that there was no need
to quarrel, merely because he had to do his duty.
Fitzpatrick had scarcely been three minutes in the house,
when Ned Kelly entered suddenly, and exclaiming, “ Out of
this you fired a shot at Fitzpatrick from his revolver.
It did not hit him, but Mrs. Kelly rushed in to the fight,
and struck Fitzpatrick on the head with a fire shovel, smash-
ing his helmet down over his eyes. As Fitzpatrick raised
his arm to defend himself, Ned Kelly fired a second shot,
which struck him in the wrist, and when he turned to draw
his revolver, he discovered that Dan Kelly had taken it
while his attention was engaged, and was now covering him
with it. By this time Williamson, the rail-splitter, had
also arrived upon the scene, entering the kitchen from an
adjoining bed-room, and he too had a revolver, while im-
mediately afterwards came Skillion with another, which
he pointed at Fitzpatrick.
Any arrest was clearly out of the question for a time, and
as Ned Kelly grasped Fitzpatrick’s arm, the latter fell to
the ground, and Kelly, he says, recognising him for the
first time, exclaimed, "That will do, boys; if I had known
it was Fitzpatrick, I wouldn’t have fired a b y shot.”
After this Fitzpatrick became, for a short time, uncon-


Dan Kelly and Constable Fitzpatrick.—Page 27




scions, and when he came to himself and rose, Ned Kelly
insisted upon taking out the bullet, which was a very small
one, and not deeply imbedded in the constable’s wrist. Ned
was anxious to use a razor for the purpose, to which Fitz-
patrick, not liking amateur surgery, objected, begging to
be allowed to go to a doctor in Benalla, but Kelly was in-
sistent, and finally consented to prize out the bullet with
the penknife which Fitzpatrick took out of his own pocket.
It was about dusk when this occurred, but the Kellys and
their friends would not let Fitzpatrick depart, keeping him
in the hut till eleven o’clock, when he mounted his horse
and rode away through Winton to Benalla, and reported his
misadventure.
The above is Fitzpatrick’s version of the affair,
upon which the police and the Criminal Court acted,
for Mrs. Kelly, Williamson, and Skillion, who were all ar-
rested, received very heavy sentences for their alleged as-
sault upon Fitzpatrick. The constable’s version was, how-
ever. afterwards corroborated by Williamson, who, during
the course of his six years’’ imprisonment, was interviewed
in Pentridge by the Chief Commissioner of Police, Captain
Standish, and backed up every word of Fitzpatrick’s evi-
dence. It was, on the other hand, absolutely denied in all
essentials by Skillion, Airs. Kelly, and Ned Kelly, who swore
that he was hundreds of miles away on the occasion, and
stated that Skillion was not present either. Ned's version
of the matter, based on information from Dan, is that
Kelly advisedhim not to go unless the constable could produce
a warrant, and that Fitzpatrick thereupon drew his revolver,
threatening to blow Airs. Kellys brains out if she inter-
fered. to which the old lady replied that he would be less,
free with his pop-gun were Ned anywhere about. Dan
cunningly called out, “ Here is Ned coming now,” and as
Fitzpatrick, taken in by the ruse, turned his head, Dan
snatched the revolver from him, emptied it, returned it, and
allowed Fitzpatrick to go away unharmed. Fitzpatricks
29
THE KELLY GANG OF BUSHRANGERS.


wound, which was very slight, Dan declares was self-in-
flicted.
The fact that Fitzpatrick had been drinking, or at least
had taken more than one glass on his way to the Kellys’ that
day, and was afterwards dismissed from the force, on the
ground that he associated with the lowest people in the
township, could not be trusted out of sight, and never did
his duty, naturally inclined many people to doubt the strict
accuracy of his story. A popular theory was that he had
behaved in a blackguard way towards the Kellys’ unmarried
sister, Kate, and thus incurred the enmitv of her brothers,
but to this Ned himself gave the most emphatic denial, and,
as Captain Standish stated, one of the prisoners. William-
son, afterwards said that Fitzpatrick spoke the truth about
the encounter. The constable’s story is therefore the most
reliable of those extant, and upon its acceptance as fact
hinged the after events that make the Kelly gang’s history.
Mrs. Kelly, SkilHon, and Williamson went to gaol, and Ned
and Dan Kelly, for whose arrest the Government offered a
reward of £2OO, disappeared from sight, and were never
seen by the police again until they encountered and shot
Kennedy and his party on the banks of the creek in the
Wombat Ranges.
CHAPTER V.
POLICE PREPARATIONS.
At the time the murders were committed the police of
Victoria were under the command of Captain Standish,
a retired military officer, who held the position of Chief
Commissioner, while the officers under him who played
leading parts in the events which followed were Mr. Charles
Hope Nicolson, Assistant Commissioner; Superintendent
Sadlier and Superintendent Hare, all of the Victorian police


force: and Mr. Stanhope O’Connor, a Queensland officer,
whose services were borrowed by \ ictoria at a later date, to-
gether with those of a party of black trackers under his com-
mand. Mr. Sadlier, with his headquarters at Benalla, was
in charge of the North-Eastern police district, which com-
prised an area of nearly 11.000 square miles, much of it
mountainous and uninhabited country; w bile the total
number of police charged with the duty of keeping order
therein did not exceed 120.
On the news of the murders reaching Melbourne C_ aptain
Standish promptly sent reinforcements, not only to Mans-
held. but to Beechworth. Benalla, Wangaratta, and many
other stations in the disturbed district, and on the main line
of railway from Melbourne to Sydney. At the same time,
after communication with the Chief Secretary, he de-
spatched Spencer rifles and such other arms as the De-
partment had in stock, and obtained authority foi the pur-
chase of a number of double-barrelled breech-loading guns.
In these measures he was influenced, not only by a desire to
capture the Kellys and to protect peaceful citizens from
their raids, but by a deep distrust of many of the inhabitants
of the Kellv district, who were known to be sympathisers
with the outlaws. In giving evidence before a Royal Com-
mission on the Police horce of \ ictoria m 1881, Captain
■ Standish mentioned some facts serving to make more in-
telligible the apparently great strain which the pursuit of
four miscreants put upon the resources of the colon\. dhe
Kellvs,asis well known, he said, had an enormous number
of sympathisers in the district, and after their outiages theie
is not the slightest doubt that a great many respectable men
were in dread of their lives, and were intimidated b} a fear
of the consequences from giving any information whatso-
ever to the police. Not only the lives of those of their
families were in danger, but their sheep and horses and
cattle and property were liable to be stolen or destroyed;
in addition to which there is not the slightest doubt that there


was an enormous number of tradesmen in the district who
were so benefitted by the large increase of police, and the
consequent expenditure, that they were only too glad that
this unpleasant business was protracted for so many months.
I may also state that a great many of the local papers never
lost an opportunity of attacking the police in the most un-
justifiable manner, and on every possible occasion; and re-
marks of that kind, as I think every sensible man must be
aware, were not only calculated to do the police a great
deal of harm, but to prevent their receiving material assist-
ance from anybody.”
In these remarks Captain Standish by no means exagger-
ated the difficulty of the position from the police point
of view, while it was alleged by many civilians that some
members of the police, who received extra pay while on
Kelly-hunting duty, were not too anxious to capture their
game and go back to the inactive barracks scale of pav,
Most of them, however, undoubtedly did their duty with
the utmost zeal, even in cases where experience and in-
telligence were wanting, and the nature of the district and
the people imposed a most formidable task upon the police
in pursuit of the bushrangers.
In addition to the despatch of constables and arms, Cap-
tain Standish s first active move was the sending of Superin-
tendent Nicolson to Benalla to take command of Kelly
operations, leaving Superintendent Sadlier in ordinary
charge of his district, with the understanding that he also
was to assist in every way in his pow-er with the most
important work in hand. Accordingly, on October 28
the same day on which news of the murders reached
Melbourne—Superintendent Nicolson left the city by the
Sydney train for Benalla, and, arriving there that evening,
found the township in a great state of excitement. Two
other small police parties in addition to Kennedy’s were
at that time absent from their stations in search of the
Kellys, and considerable anxiety was felt lest they should


have suffered the same fate; but in the course of a day
or two they returned safe.
When Superintendent Nicolson arrived Superintendent
Sadlier was absent from Benalla in another part of the
district. He returned on the morning of October 29, and
rode over to Mansfield, where he gave instructions to Sub-
Inspector Pewtress regarding the search for the body of
Kennedy, and then returned to duty at Benalla. At Mans-
field Mr. Sadlier found in the lock-up Isaiah Wright, com-
monly known as “ Wild ” Wright, a noted Kelly sympa-
thiser frequently in collision with the police, whose name
indicates well enough his reputation; and the police officer
promised him £3O if he would go and find the body of
Kennedy, or bring him into Mansfield, if alive. “ Wild”
Wright started on his mission, his intention being to see
Mrs. Skillion, Ned’s sister, and learn from her Kennedy's
whereabouts; but before he could do anything in the matter,
the body was found, under the circumstances already de-
scribed. This arrangement with “ Wild " Wright was the
first instance, after the Kelly murders, of the employment
of private “ agents ”by the police —a system which after-
wards attained to considerable dimensions and importance.
Previous to this, Detective Ward, a Victorian officer, had
been travelling through the district unknown to the ordinary
police, making inquiries as to the Kellys’ whereabouts, and
it was owing to information supplied by him that the search
parties, including Kennedy’s which so disastrously en-
countered the outlaws, were put upon their tracks. Superin-
tendent Sadlier, however, wishing for more accurate know-
ledge, had proposed to Captain Standish to employ an agent
to supplement Ward’s endeavours, and on August 29 wrote
as follows: —
“ Dear Captain Standish, —I am a good deal exercised
in mind at hearing, as often as I do, of Ned Kelly being
about. He is not likely to fall into our hands by ordinary
means, and I think of proposing to a young acquaintance


of mine, of the criminal class, to spend a few weeks in the
places where he is supposed to haunt, and endeavour to
lav us on to him. lam sure, if this trap were known to
Kelly or his associates, the young fellow’s life would not
be worth much. They would not be any the wiser, unless
the young fellow himself talks about it. It would require
a few pounds to give the young fellow a start. I can only
say he is bad enough, I believe, to do anything in the pros-
pect of the reward. I should be glad to learn from you if
you would like the proposition. By letter posted on Satur-
day, or a telegram till Monday, will find me at Mansfield,
where my protege lives."
Captain Standish did like the proposition, but his answer
arrived too late for Mr. Sadlier to act upon it, and the in-
cident is only mentioned here as a further indication of the
strange sources of information to which the authorities were
driven, and the very undesirable proteges whom, to further
the ends of justice, they were obliged to take under their
wing. Without being able to take any further steps Mr.
Sadlier returned to Benalla, and during the next few days
there appeared in the Mansfield papers circumstantial and
elaborate accounts of the way in which Kennedy met his
death. These accounts doubtless filtered through from
members of the Kelly family, and were contributed to the
press by friends or sympathisers, under a pledge of secrecy
as to the informants which was scrupulously preserved.
The Kelly account of Kennedy’s shooting differed con-
siderably from that of MTntyre in so far that the sergeant
was reported to have kept up a brisk fire on the outlaws
before he fell wounded by them, but Xed Kelly admitted
that he gave Kennedy his coup de grace while lying on the
ground. It was from merciful motives, he said, since he
could not find it in his heart to leave a w r ounded man alone
in the bush; but other reports said that Kennedy had
begged hard for a chance to live as long as he could, that
perchance he might see his wife and children again before


he died. At any rate, the statements of eye-witnesses bore
out the conclusion at which the medical man had arrived by
examination of the body—namely, that the gun-shot wound
had been inflicted by a charge fired from a muzzle held
almost against the unfortunate man’s breast.
There were other mysteries in connection with the affair
which have never been wholly cleared up, and it appears now,
not only that many of the people near Mansfield had exact
knowledge of the Kellys’ position in a fortified hut near
Stringy Bark Creek, but that from some private source of
information Kennedy knew far more about the matter than
MTntyre or Lonigan. Also it seems that there must have
been an eye-witness of the tragedy unknown to MTntyre,
who saw only the four outlaws. Such, at any rate, seems
the only explanation of the fact that a mysterious traveller,
who was never identified, riding through Strathbogie on
Sunday evening, when MTntyre was wearily making his
way towards Mansfield, told people whom he met: “There
are two or three police shot in the country.” He indicated
the direction of the Wombat Ranges with his hand, and
said no more, and his statement was put down as an idle
tale until MTntyre’s report confirmed it. Sunday even-
ing is the time now accepted as that when this report
reached the ears of people at Strathbogie, twenty miles from
the scene of the murders. But Saturday, the day of the
tragedy, was the date given to an agent of Mr. Sadlier’s
by very respectable men who claimed to have heard it.
Mr. Sadlier considers that they mistook the day—the truth
of their statements he did not doubt. This may be so ;
but, on the other hand, the informant may have ridden away
at top speed; while another possible and somewhat grue-
some explanation of the mystery is that the Kellys, who
doubtless were perfectly acquainted with the movements of
the police, had deliberately planned to surround the camp
by Stringy Bark Creek, and murder its occupants. In
such a case the rumour on Saturday may have been a pre-


diction of events from one who had been in the Kellys’
confidence, and had left their society before they stained
their hands with murder.
On the evening after the Kellys had completed their
work they had a visitor in the person of one of the Llovds.
belonging to the family of friends and sympathisers already
mentioned. He, however, could not have been responsible
for the report received at Strathbogie, for, according to in-
formation afterwards received, his part in the matter was
confined to keeping guard outside the Kellys’ stronghold
while they slept for a few hours to refresh themselves, after
which they saddled up the police horses and rode away
through the ranges to their friends at Greta, some thirty
miles from Stringy Bark Creek.
CHAPTER VI.
MR. NICOLSON IN PURSUIT.—THE OUTLAWRY BILL.
While Mr. Sadlier was absent at Mansfield Mr. Nicolson
had not been idle. From Benalla, Wangaratta and Beech-
worth parties were immediately sent out in pursuit of the
outlaws, but even then it was recognised that in such an
extent of country the quest resembled searching for
a needle in a bundle of hay. Mr. Nicolson himself did not
remain at Benalla, but went on to personallv superintend
matters at Wangaratta, and afterwards at Myrtleford, a
pretty mountain township, now a great tourist resort in the
north-eastern portion of the district. Rumours of the
Kellys’ appearance came thick and fast in bewildering num-
bers. and from places so far apart —in many cases hundreds
of miles—that in spite of the bushrangers’ marvellous
celerity of movement it was clear that most of them must
be false. However, on November i it was rumoured that


a selector had been stuck up by the gang near the residence
of a man named Baumgarten, on the Murray Flats. Baum-
garten had been convicted of horse-stealing, and was a
known associate of the bushrangers, who had often visited
his house, besides which it was exceedingly probable that
they would make a break away from the district, and try to
conceal themselves for a time in the rough country in New
South Wales beyond the Murray River. Accord-
ingly Mr. Nicolson and Mr. Sadlier, after con-
sulting together, decided that this particular rumour was
worth careful investigation and action thereon, with the re-
sult that a police part]/ was immediately despatched to Wo-
donga, the border town on the Victorian side of the Murray,
connected by a bridge with the New South Wales town of
Albury on the other side. No news arrived from this
party, which was under the direction of Detective Kennedy,
and Mr. Nicolson himself therefore took the train for Wo-
donga, where he arrived on November 2 and interviewed
his men. They told him that Margery, the farmer who al-
leged he had been stuck up, was off his head with drink, and
that they placed no credence in his story; but Mr. Nicolson,
still unsatisfied, interviewed Margery himself. He had
certainly been drinking, as Mr. Nicolson thought, to drown
his fright, but he was then sober again, and gave a clear and
connected account of his experiences, describing the out-
laws in such a manner as to convince Mr. Nicolson that he
had seen them. Mrs. Baungarten also, whose house lay
about a mile and a half from the river, said she had seen the
men come out of some lagoons near the Murray close to her
house and camp till sunset some 200 yards away. Mr.
Nicolson found the camp, but the birds had flown. The
police officer had with him an aboriginal from the River
Darling, who was an intelligent tracker, and from the camp
he followed the man’s tracks southward for some distance,
but lost them when darkness came on. Thus nothing came
of the information, but afterwards, for news was never dif-


ficult to obtain when it was useless, the police learned that
they had been very close upon their men. They ascertained
too, with considerable exactitude, what the outlaws’ move-
ments had been after the murder of the police on October 26.
On the Saturday evening, with young Lloyd standing sen-
try by their hut, they had spent a few hours in sleep, and had
made a start in the small hours of Sunday morning, across
uninhabited country, to Greta. There they spent most of the
day, no doubt discussing future plans with their relatives
and friends. On Monday evening on horseback they passed
through the townships of Oxley and Everton, making north
for New South Wales; and at a public-house, known as
Moon’s Pioneer Hotel, on the Ovens River, some twenty
miles from Greta, they had purchased grog, some tins of
sardines and other provisions. On October 30 they were
seen by the farmer Margery near the banks of the Murray,
nearly thirty miles from Everton, and they appear to have
made strenuous attempts to cross the river into New South
Wales. At Bungowunnah wharf, on the Victorian side,
they found a punt, of which they had hoped to avail them-
selves, sunk in the stream, and there was no possibility of
swimming the river. The Murray, which is at times a
mere brown thread, is liable to floods, and when they come
the low lying banks on either side become one vast lagoon,
with islands peeping out here and there. The men appear
to have ventured deep into the lagoons in the hope of reach-
ing the main stream, but were forced to abandon the at-
tempt, for the river was higher than it had been for many
years, and accordingly they turned their horses’ heads
southward towards their native haunts.
On November 3 they were seen in the neighbourhood of
the Murray, and on the same day near Wangaratta, a town-
ship more than forty miles distant. They passed through
Wangaratta during the night, and were seen next day cross-
ing under the railway line at a place known as the One Mile
Bridge, after which they disappeared in the Warby Ranges,


low densely wooded mountains close to Wangaratta, with
which the Kellys and Hart were all well acquainted.
This occasion seems to have offered an excellent chance
of capturing the Kellys, for Sergeant Steele to whom the
information was brought, with 1 a description off the
tracks, was convinced that they were actually
made by the Kellys, partly from the fact that the One Mile
Creek was running bank high beneath the railway bridge,
and that no one without intimate knowledge of the place
could possibly have piloted the way along a narrow ledge
of ground beneath, while that ledge he knew was known to
Steve Hart. After the heavy rain the tracks were easy to
follow. The bushrangers’ horses must have been almost
done after their hard riding since the previous Saturday, and
Sergeant Steele considered that by an active pursuit the
men might have been captured in the Warby Ranges. No-
thing, however, was done. Mr. Brooke Smith who was in
charge of a large party of police at Wangaratta took no
action, and Sergeant Steele was under orders to proceed to
a place called Rats' Castle, in the granite hills near Beech-
worth. where the bushrangers had friends and were likely
to make their appearance.
For letting this chance go by Sergeant Steele
was severely blamed, as it seems most unjustly,
by the Royal Commission which enquired into matters con-
nected with the Kelly outbreak. On his way from Benalla
to Beechworth he stopped at Wangaratta to enquire into
the report of the Kellys’ appearance, acting according to
Mr. Sadlier’s instructions which were to the following
effect: “ . . You can halt the train for a time at Wangaratta
while you make enquiries, and if you think there is anything
in it, send word to Inspector Brooke Smith, who is in charge
of a party at Wangaratta, to follow up their tracks.” Ac-
cordingly Sergeant Steele sent word by Constable Tworney
to Mr. Brooke Smith that by Superintendent Sadlier’s or-
ders he, Mr. Brooke Smith, was to start in pursuit of the


bushrangers at daylight the following day. Sergeant Steele
proceeded on his journey to Beechworth, and no pursuit
being made by Mr. Smith, Sergeant Steele was severely cen-
sured and recommended for reduction on the ranks by the
Commission, a procedure which aroused the utmost indig-
nation in Wangaratta, where Sergeant Steele’s sterling ser-
vices as a police officer were fully appreciated.
Up to this time, though the two Kellys were
known as members of the gang of murderers,
there was doubt as to the identity of the
other two, and they were erroneously supposed to be identi-
cal with a certain William King, of Greta, and Charles
Brown, of King River, who answered somewhat to the
description given by Mclntrye of his assailants. Within a
few days of the murders the Victorian Government passed
through all its stages an Outlawry Bill under the terms of
which an outlaw might be taken by any person dead or alive,
provided he failed to surrender and stand his trial after due
notice by proclamation. By the same Act it was provided
that anyone aiding such outlaw, or withholding information
about him from the police, should be liable to fifteen years
imprisonment—a provision which, if it had been strictly
acted upon without a very liberal exception list, would have
filled the gaols for many years with sympathetic or terror-
ised inhabitants of the North-Eastern District.
Under this Act on November 4, the Chief Justice, on appli-
cation from the Solicitor-General, issued his warrant and
granted an order calling upon the gang severally to sur-
lender on or before November 12, to take their trial for
murder. Thereupon the necessary notices and proclama-
tions were published in the “ Government Gazette ” and
various other papers of Melbourne and the North-Eastern
District, of which proclamations the following may be in-
teresting as an example ;
To a MAN whose name is unknown, but whose person is
described as follows: Nineteen or twenty years of age,


five feet eight inches high, rather stout, complexion some-
what fair, no beard or whiskers, a few straggling hairs over
face, rather hooked nose, sinister expression, supposed to be
identical with William King, of Greta, in the said colony.
Whereas on the fourth day of November, one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-eight, a bench warrant was is-
sued in pursuance of the FELONS APPREHENSION
ACT, 1878, under my hand and seal, in order to your an-
swering and taking your trial for that on the twenty-sixth
day of October, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-
eight, at Stringy-Bark Creek, near Mansfield, in the North-
ern Bailiwick of the said colony, you did in company with
one Edward Kelly and one Daniel Kelly and another man
whose name is unknown feloniously and of malice afore-
thought kill and murder one Michael Scanlon.
And whereas in pursuance of THE FELONS APPRE-
HENSION ACT, 1878, I did on the fourth day of Novem-
ber, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-eight, order
a summons to be inserted in the “ Government Gazette ”
requiring you, the said man whose name is unknown, but
whose person is described as aforesaid, to surrender your-
self on or before the twelfth day of November, one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-eight, at Mansfield in the said
colony of Victoria, to abide your trial for the before-men-
tioned crime, of which you the said man, whose name is
unknown, but whose person is described as aforesaid, stand
accused.
These are therefore to will and require you, the said man
whose name is unknown, but whose person is described as
aforesaid, to surrender yourself on or before the twelfth day
of November, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-
eight, at Mansfield in the said colony of Victoria, to abide
your trial for the before-mentioned crime of which you stand
accused, and hereof you are not to fail at your peril.
Given under my hand and seal, at Melbourne, this fourth


day of November, in the year of our Lord, one thousand
eight hundred and seventy eight,
WILLIAM F. STAWELL,
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria.
The other notices are identical with the above, except that
those to Edward and Daniel Kelly are addressed to them by
name, while the third notice is addressed “To a man
whose name is unknown, but whose person is described as
follows: Twenty-one years of age, five feet nine inches high,
very fair beard, long on chin, fair complexion hair and mous-
tache, supposed to be identical with Charles Brown, of King
River, in the said colony.”
To give the bushrangers every facility of surrendering in
accordance with this proclamation, the Court House at
Mansfield was kept open all day on Tuesday, November 12,
but none of the gang put in an appearance. Thereupon
followed a proclamation of outlawry against each of the
gang individually, and a notice published in the “ Govern-
ment Gazette ” and elsewhere, to the following effect: —
THE FELONS APPREHENSION ACT, 1878.
The particular attention of all persons in the colony is
directed to the proclamations bearing even date herewith,
and to the above-mentioned Act, and especially to the pen-
alties to which Daniel Kelly, Edward Kelly, and two men
whose names are unknown, but who are supposed to be
identical with William King, of Greta, and Charles Brown,
of King River, and all persons harbouring or assisting them,
or any of them, are liable under the provisions of such
Act, which are as follows: —
Section 3.
. . If after proclamation by the Governor with the advice of
the Executive Council of the fact of such adjudication shall


have been published in the “ Government Gazette ” and in
one or more Melbourne and one or more country newspapers
such outlaw shall afterwards be found at large armed or
there being reasonable ground to believe that he is armed it
shall be lawful for any of Her Majesty’s subjects whether a
constable or not and without being accountable for the
using of any deadly weapon in aid of such apprehension
whether its use be preceded by a demand of surrender or not
to apprehend or take such outlaw alive or dead.
Section 5.
If after such proclamation any person shall voluntarily
and knowingly harbour conceal or receive or give any aid
shelter or sustenance to such outlaw or provide him with
firearms or any other weapon or with ammunition
or any horse equipment or other assistance or directly
or indirectly give or cause to be given to him or any of his
accomplices information tending or with intent to facilitate
the commission by him of further crime or to enable him to
escape from justice or shall withhold information or give
false information concerning such outlaw from or to any
officer of police or constable in quest of such outlaw the
person so offending shall be liable to imprisonment with or
without hard labour for such period not exceeding
fifteen years as the court shall determine and no
allegation or proof by the party so offending that he was at
the time under compulsion shall be deemed a defence unless
he shall as soon as possible afterwards have gone before a
justice of the peace or some officer of the police force and
then to the best of his ability given full information respect-
ing such outlaw and made a declaration on oath voluntarily
and fully of the facts connected with such compulsion.
Section 7.
Any justice of the peace or officer of the police force hav-
ing reasonable cause to suspect that an outlaw or accused


person summoned under the provisions of this Act is con-
cealed 01 harboured in or on any dwelling-house or pre-
mises may alone or accompanied by any persons acting’ in
his aid, and either by day or by night demand admission into
and if refused admission may break and enter such dwelling-
house or premises and therein apprehend every person
whom he snail have reasonable ground for believing to be
such outlaw or accused person, and may thereupon seize all
arms found in or on such house or premises, and also ap-
prehend all persons found in or about the same whom such
justice or officer shall have reasonable ground for believing
to have concealed harboured or otherwise succoured or as-
sisted such outlaw or accused person. And all persons
and arms so apprehended and seized shall be forthwith taken
before some convenient justice of the peace to be further
dealt with and disposed of according to law.
BRYAN O’LOGHLEN,
Attorney-General.
Crown Law Offices, Melbourne, November 15, 1878.
Piior to the proclamation of outlawry a reward of £5OO
per head was offered by the Government for the capture of
the bushrangers to make police and civilians as active as
possible in the pursuit.
CHAPTER VII.
THE RATS’ CASTLE FIASCO.
0N November 6 Captain Standish went up from Mel-
bourne to Benalla to talk over the plan of campaign
with Mr. Nicolson, who had just returned from his fruitless
expedition to Wodonga, and on the same day there arrived


an urgent message from Mr. Sadlier at Beechworth: “Very
positive information that the Kellys are concealed in a range
near here. My informant is not quite sober and has been
talking rather openly, but I am convinced his information is
genuine; but it may be too late a day or two. I have but
two constables here and the place is most difficult to ap-
proach. I have endeavoured to communicate with Steele’s
party of thirteen men, six of which I can be sure of coming,
but I think you should send all you can by special to reach
here before day; mounted and of course armed, and bring
tracker. Reply.”
Mr. Sadlier had just returned from a ride to some out-
lying places in the hills to give instructions to parties of
police, and on his arrival in Beechworth at half-past ten at
night found the place as he says, “over run with armed
men ” —not police for the most part, but enthusiastic civil-
ians, eager to go Kelly hunting. They had heard the re-
port mentioned by Superintendent Sadlier in his telegram,
and Superintendent Sadlier, having for his safety’s sake
placed the informant in the lock-up, questioned him closelv.
He was a bark stripper by occupation, somewhat intoxicated
at the time, but he succeeded in convincing Mr. Sadlier that
he had seen the four bushrangers two days previously not
far from Beechworth, “ somewhere in the rocks, where it
would take fifty men to get them out.” In this neighbour-
hood, known as “ Rats’ Castle,” resided the Byrnes and
Sherritts, close friends of the outlaws, and though it was
not certain at that time that Joe Byrne was one of them,
Mr. Sadlier thought the information worth vigorously act-
ing upon. Hence the telegram to Mr. Nicolson already
quoted. The answer came promptly. “We are coming up
as desired by special train. We shall leave about midnight.
Meet us. Standish accompanies me.” With Mr. Nicol-
son’s party were also, though his telegram did not mention
it, two or three pressmen eager to be in anything that might
be going.


Beechwcrth is distant by rail some fifty miles from Ben-
alla, and the special train conveying Mr. Standish, Mr.
Nicolson, the police, the tracker, and the Press, arrived at
the latter place before daylight in the early morning. A
great number of police and armed civilians were already
gathered together ready mounted, and after a start had been
made, about two miles out of Beechworth the cavalcade was
still further augmented. Both the search parties with
whom Mr. Sadlier had endeavoured to communicate had
received his message, and, thirteen men in all, they joined
the party, which moved across country, like a squad-
ron of cavalry, some fifty strong. The extraordinary part of
the affair is that no one seems to have been in command.
Mr. Sadlier had organised the party. Mr. Nicolson was
chief Kelly-officer in command of the district, while Cap-
tain Standish was head of the Victorian Police, and among
so many conflicting claims for leadership of the party, each
officer seems to have resigned his own, tacitly assuming that
the command had been taken by someone other than him-
self. All, however, apparently knew that they were pro-
ceeding towards Sherritt’s hut, and, in no particular order,
they advanced, crossing on their way some very rough
country, great ranges of granite, with the result, says Mr.
Nicolson, that “ the rumbling noise the party made was
simply just like thunder, and the people heard us a mile
off.”
This was not a, hopeful beginning for the capture of the
outlaws. Mr. .Sadlier says the noise of shod horses in
that country was unavoidable, but Mr. Nicolson, who felt
the want of discipline and the go-as-you-please nature of
the affair very keenly, regarded it as a wild goose chase,
and thought the police were only bringing ridicule upon
themselves by the proceeding.
After crossing the range the party reached low ground
again, and came in sight of a dwelling which they under-
stood to be the Sherritts’ hut. Up to this point Mr.


Nicolson did not even know where they were going beyond
that they expected to find the Kellys somewhere in the
vicinity. Mr. Sadlier and Captain Standish had been talk-
ing together. Mr. Nicolson busied himself in trying to
knock the cavalcade into some kind of shape and grumbling
about “ the confounded noise," but now Mr. Sadlier came
up to him and said, “ Mr. Nicolson, this is the house of
the Sherritts, The outlaws are said to be here.” He
continued to give some instructions, when Mr. Nicolson
took his turn at command, saying, “ You send some men
into that paddock ”■—there was a large paddock behind the
house—“ and see the men do not escape by the back.”
Then, turning to two or three men, and calling to them by
name, Mr. Nicholson ordered them to follow him, and
galloped at full speed up to the front.
The object of the expedition had been to take the Kellys
asleep. If they were still there they were doubtless by
this time wakened by the thunderous noise of the caval-
cade, and nothing was to be gained by delay. Accord-
ingly, followed by his men, the police officer charged the
house, flung himself from his horse at the door and broke
it in. One of his party, Constable Bracken, tried to go
first in the rush into the dwelling, but Mr. Nicolson, re-
senting any attempt to precede him, thrust the constable
aside, with the result that the gun carried by the latter was
exploded—the only shot fired upon the expedition, and one
which created great excitement among the cordon of police
surrounding the hut. Mr. Nicolson’s party searched it
rapidly from room to room, but found not a soul.
Disappointed there, the police, riding on, reached another
hut, which was rushed in the same manner, and though the
Kellys were not there, a man who was said that he had
heard the party coming a mile away. A little further
on, again, was the house of Mrs. Byrne, mother of Joe
Byrne, a member of the gang, and this house was empty like
the others.


By this time day had broken some time, and the scanty
population of the neighbourhood was astir. It took the
police some time to satisfy themselves that none of the
property of the murdered men was concealed in Mrs.
Byrne’s hut, and when the search was over, there strolled
up first to join the party a very fair and tall, high-shoul-
dered young man, whom Constable Strahan introduced to
his officers as Aaron Sherritt. “ Here is a man,” he said,
“that knows the Kellys well, and will be of use to you; he
knows all that is going on.”
Certainlv no one knew better, for Aaron Sherritt was an
intimate personal friend of Joe Byrne, and had been en-
gaged in several horse-stealing exploits with him and the
Kellys, besides which it was pretty certain that he had
given them aid only a day or two before, when they were
engaged, after the murders, on their attempt to cross the
Murray. For a bushman he was something of a dandy,
and physically a splendid specimen of a man. Mr. Sad-
der engaged him in conversation and presently consulted
with Captain Standish and his other brother officer. In
the meantime the men had dismounted from their horses.
Mrs. Byrne and her children appeared upon the scene, and
some miners who were prospecting and digging near by
came up and mingled with the throng. All idea of further
Kelly hunting was abandoned for the day. Refreshments
were sent for, and soon the incongruous gathering in the
tableland valley resolved itself into a great impromptu early
morning picnic. Captain Standish and Mr. Sadder, com-
bining business with pleasure, immediately entered into
negotiations with Aaron Sherritt, endeavouring to induce
him to become a police agent and to betray his friends,
the members of the gang. Mr. Nicolson, who was still in
a humour of stern disapproval with the whole affair, con-
sidered it very inadvisable to carry on conversation of such
a kind in the presence, and, as he thought, in the hearing
of constables and casual civilian spectators, and he even re-


monstrated with Captain Standish on the subject. It does
not however appear from the evidence of this officer and
Mr. Sadlier that the police, other than one or two who
were treated confidentially, or any of the civilians present,
knew anything of what was going on. They no
doubt saw Sherritt speaking to the Commissioner, but the
latter most of the people did not know, and conversation
between the police and an inhabitant of the locality was in
any case natural enough.
The conversation was of an interesting kind. Certain
proposals were made by Mr. Sadlier to Sherritt, who was
not satisfied with his authority to treat and was thereupon
introduced to Captain Standish, and soon an arrangement
was arrived at. Sherritt was very anxious that no harm
should happen to Joe Byrne, and though Captain Standish
was unable to promise that individual his liberty, he said he
was sure his recommendation would be sufficiently weighty
to secure Byrne’s life, in the event of the gang being cap-
tured through Sherritt’s instrumentality. With the guar-
antee to save Byrne’s life Sherritt seemed satisfied. He
was not to go with any party of police, but, pretending
friendship with the gang and their allies, he was to take
his own course as a secret agent —a calling which exposed
him to the greatest possible danger should he be discovered
—Which in itself goes to prove that in his talk with the
police officers he at least saw nothing compromising, in
spite of the presence of the motley crowd. No money
was given to him at the time, but it was understood that he
was to receive payment for his services, besides which he
would have shared in the large reward, ultimately reaching
iS.ooo, offered by the Victorian Government for the capture
of the outlaws. The interview with Sherritt being concluded,
Captain Standish and Mr. Sadlier then approached Mrs.
Byrne, whose hut was their temporary headquarters. They
pointed out to her that her son had got his head into
a halter, and that she could save him if she liked. How-


ever she was not amenable to argument. She probably
was not impressed with the capacity of the police for effect-
ing a capture, and her answer was, “ He has made his bed,
let him He on it/' The officers made use of all their per-
suasiveness, but entirely without effect, and they had to re-
main satisfied with Sherritt’s promise of assistance as the
outcome of their day’s work at. “ Rats' Castle.”
Here it may be remarked as a somewhat strange circum-
stance that though Byrne was evidently at this time known
as a member of the gang, even his mother apparently ad-
mitting it, the sentence of outlawry was not passed against
him for refusal to surrender at Mansfield on November 12,
but against “a man whose name is unknown,” of whom an
elaborate description was given. The same method of
address was also used to the fourth member of the gang,
who afterwards proved to be Steve Hart, and, though de-
finite knowledge of his identity was not obtained till a
later period, even then those best qualified to judge had
very little doubt about it. Two or three days previously
Sergeant Steele, then under orders to proceed to Beech-
worth, had declared that the track taken under the One
Mile Creek Railway Bridge near Wangaratta could only
have been ventured upon, in the dangerously swollen state
of the creek, by men who knew the banks well and who
were fleeing for their lives, and he had named Steve Hart
as almost certainly the daring guide who had led them.
At about eight o’clock, after having something to eat,
the police party returned to Eeechworth, sadly crestfallen
and somewhat wearied by their night and morning under
arms. The expedition had brought nothing but ridicule
on the authorities, and from the outset was doomed to
failure. Undoubtedly the Kellys had been in the neigh-
bourhood a day or two before, but it was scarcely likely
that they would allow themselves to be ridden down by a
cavalry squadron, even had they not departed; and as a
matter of fact, at the time of the expedition, sarcastically


dubbed the “ Charge of Sebastopol”—Sebastopol being the
name of a locality close by—the Kellys were already se-
curely in hiding in their familiar haunts of the Warby
Ranges. Their security in this instance seems to have
been owing less to their own activity than to the inactivity
of Inspector Brooke Smith, which was of a most extraor-
dinary kind. It will be remembered that to him, as officer
in charge at Wangaratta, Sergeant Steele had trusted for the
immediate pursuit of the men seen passing beneath the
bridge. Constable Twomey, the man who conveyed the
information to Steele, obtained it from a Mrs. Delaney, who
stated that at four o’clock on the Sunday morning she heard
horses galloping and chains rattling, coming towards her
house She had horses running on the flat near by, and
thought “ someone wanted to plant them.” “ I got up to
the window.” she said, “ to see who they were, and saw four
young men riding four horses. Two horses with two
packs were in front, and four others running ahead of the
men bareback.” The horses seemed exhausted, and the
riders were forcing them forward as best they could, being
evidently anxious to get away from the vicinity of the town
before daylight. flhey were going in the direction of
the Warby Ranges, and Mrs. Delaney’s son heard the noise
of galloping over the wooden bridge which is the shortest
way thither.
The police reported these things to Inspector Brooke
Smith on November 4. They also told him, as further ar-
gument, that the men must be the Kellys; that no other
persons would risk their lives by crossing the railway be-
neath a bridge under a dangerously swollen creek, when a
railway crossing Quite near was available for anyone not
supremely anxious to avoid recognition.
In the face of these facts, Mr. Smith remained idle until
the 6th of the month. Then he set out for the ranges with
a party from Wangaratta. It came upon the outlaws
tracks, recovered Kennedy’s pack horse, which they had


abandoned, and then, by his orders, returned to Wangar-
atta. A fresh start was to be made at 4 a.m. next morning,
but after waiting for their officer till seven the men were
compelled to set out without him. He followed, and
catching them up, caused unnecessary delay by insisting
on making detours to follow tracks; and, in short, seems
to have justified the finding of the Police Commission,
“ that he was determined that his party should not over-
take the outlaws,” and that “what renders his action all the
more reprehensible is the fact that upon no other occasion
throughout the pursuit, from the murders at the Wombat
to the final affray at Glenrowan, was there presented a more
favourable prospect of capturing the gang.”
CHAPTER VIII.
THE OUTLAWS LOST TO SIGHT.
N consequence of his feeble action in conducting the
chase after the outlaws referred to in the last chapter,
Mr. Brooke Smith was sent by Mr. Nicolson to Beechworth,
with instructions to attend to ordinary police duty and
meddle no more in the Kelly business. Mr. Smith, among
other disqualifications as leader of a search party, seemed
to have a constitutional inability to leave his bed before
eight or nine o’clock in the morning, and an unconquerable
aversion to remaining out of it under rough camp condi-'
tions at night. Mr. Nicolson himself had to rouse Mr.
Smith on one occasion and send him after the men he should
have been leading upon the tracks of the outlaws. There
were black trackers at Wangaratta, one an old man from
Corranderrk aboriginal station who still retained some of
the cunning of his early days of hunting life, and a young
man, Jemmy, whom the old one called his pupil, but who


The Euroa Bank Robbery.—Page 76




did no credit to his teaching, being a stupid, useless fellow.
In addition to Kennedy’s pack-horse, Mr. Brooke Smith s
party had picked up a ramrod, very probably dropped by the
outlaws; but owing to the delay before pursuit took place
Mr. Nicolson did not think the men were ever really very
close upon the Kellys. An examination of Kennedy s
horse led him to the conclusion that it had been abandoned
for about a week.
Having - sent Mr. Brooke Smith to remain out of mischief
at Beechworth, Mr. Nicolson took matters in hand himself,
and on November u, the day before that upon which the
outlaws were invited to surrender themselves at Mansfield,
a report came in that they had been seen crossing the rail-
way line near Glenrowan, a township about nine miles on
the Melbourne side of Wangaratta, and about five miles
from Greta, which lies to the east of the railway line con-
necting the two first-named places. The informant was a
platelayer who said the Kellvs had crossed from Greta to-
wards the Warby Ranges side, and accordingly Mr. Sadlier
and Mr. Nicolson, meeting at Glenrowan, started at day-
light on November 12, with some constables and the two
trackers already mentioned. The tracks were perfectly
plain and the blacks led the party to the foot of the ranges.
There, though according to Mr. Sadlier the tracks were still
visible going on into the bush, the blacks insisted upon turn-
ing aside and leading the party into marshy ground, where
there were thousands of prints of horse and cattle hoofs
and it was quite out of the question to follow any individual
tracks. All the cattle of the neighbourhood came to this
spot to water, but it was impossible to get the black trackers
back on to the original trail, undoubtedly because it was
leading to cover where an ambush might be expected. From
fear and cunning the blacks resolutely refused to go first,
and the police were unable to take the lead, since by so do-
ing they would spoil the tracks and make them impossible
for the blacks to follow, while the constables themselves


would be quite incapable of keeping upon them after they
left the soft ground at the foot of the ranges.
However, the police did their best, striking out in differ-
ent directions for themselves and still hoping to pick up a
good trail, until by some mistake a small party under Ser-
geant Steele got out of sight while the others were waiting
for luncheon. Mr. Sadlier heard it afterwards reported as
coming from Ned Kelly that he was concealed near by,
saw the police party, and could, if he had chosen, easily
have shot Mr. Nicolson and Mr. Sadlier from where he
sat. No proof was forthcoming of the truth or falsehood
of this statement, but at any rate it is clear that from some
source Kelly had most accurate information of the disposi-
tion of the police party, for he described how the members
of it sat in a little open space where there was water, men-
tioned some of the men present, and described the brands
upon their horses.
With good black trackers the officers believed they would
have had a very fair chance of bringing the matter to an is-
sue : but, as it was, they found it hopeless to attempt any
further move and were forced to return to Benalla.
Mr. Sadlier at this time was only just convalescent frorp
rheumatic fever, and still so weak that his medical man de-
clared it highly dangerous for him to go out upon search
parties and suffer exposure from the weather and cold night
air of the hills. Therefore, after this attempt to come up
with the outlaws, he did not personally engage in the chase
for some considerable time, but, attending to office duties,
left the more active work to Mr. Nicolson who was inde-
fatigable in his efforts. For the next few weeks there was
more searching than chasing, for no definite news came to
hand of the Kellys’ whereabouts, but all the North-Eastern
District was parcelled out into areas whereon parties of
police varying in number from six to nine were constantly
on the move, scouring the country by day and camping out
by night.


With many of these parties Mr. Nicolson went in person,
and for a man of his age the work was most arduous. All
the police officers engaged, in fact, were well on in years,
Mr. Nicolson being close on fifty, Mr. Hare forty-eight,
and Mr. Sadlier forty-five, while they all had done
active and often most severe duty for more than twenty-
five years in the Victorian police force.
Describing his general experience of the search party
work, Mr. Nicolson spoke as follows: “ After travelling
through the ranges and that country, where we would come
to a halting place, we were in the habit of camping first and
having tea and placing sentries and having supper, and
would then select a place to sleep in, leaving the fire, of
which we had very little, and moving on to another place to
sleep. I then, instead of being able to lie down to rest with
the men at that time, generally had to go with two or three
men to places from one to four miles off on foot—huts of
suspected persons, and so on. . . I would not get back
to the camp after visiting those places until about twelve or
two or three o’clock at night. I had to lie down to rest till
daybreak, which at this time (November) was very early.
This bad a serious effect upon me. It reduced my strength
It also affected the whole party; we would come in very
much fagged—horses and men. The young men used
to recuperate in a couple of days, but it took me, at my time
of life, and the other members of the force, mounted con-
stables and others, more than that, but I had to go out not-
withstanding at once.’”
In addition to the fatigue and hardship occasioned by
these expeditions, which Mr. Nicolson says were the most
severe he had undergone since joining the police force, was
the mortifying consciousness that the district residents were
ever more ready to frustrate than to forward the plans of the
searchers. They could get no guides and no assistance,
save from one man named Dickson, of Wangaratta, who
subsequently joined the force, and another named Nichol-


son, from Mansfield, who did good service. There wer£
three secret agents, more or less trusted: but these could
never show Ihemselves openly with the police, and an en-
deavour was always made to keep the starting of every ex-
pedition a secret, which, however, was difficult, and when-
ever a party left headquarters, the news of it was immedi-
ately noised throughout the district, creating a sensation
among the well disposed inhabitants and putting the out-
laws on their guard. Consequently, party after party,
having spent various times from a few days to a fortnight
in the bush or the mountains, returned wearied out to their
different stations.
Up to this time no use had been made of the Felons Appre-
hension Act, which took effect from November 12 and gave
the police very wide powers in arresting people known to
have concealed or in any way succoured the outlaws. Sym-
pathisers were known in plenty, but the difficulty was to
obtain proof of any act committed by them in contravention
of the law. It was quite certain, for instance, that Mrs.
Skillion, a sister of the Kellys, was in the habit of convey-
ing food to the gang, and it was observed that far more
bread was baked at her residence at Greta than could pos-
sibly be accounted for by the wants of her family. On No-
vember 15 the prisoner Williamson, concerned together
with the Kellys in the attack on Constable Fitzpatrick, and
then in Pentridge Prison, furnished Inspector Green with
his ideas of the localities likely to be frequented by the
Kellys and their most probable associates. The places he
mentioned were the more or less inaccessible heads of vari-
ous creeks and rivers, some of them forty miles apart, from
which places, as Williamson admitted, the outlaws could see
the police coming; so the information was not of much
value. The police themselves were aware that any one
of those places might be chosen as a hiding place, but the
trouble was to know which would be favoured at any par-
ticular time. Williamson was, however, confident that the


Nellys would obtain rations from Mrs. Skillion, and he
uentioned that she would signal to them by hanging a
white sheet, when police were about, on a sapling near ner
louse which could be seen from a great distance.
Another prisoner named Williams, also an associate of
the Kell vs, on October 29 had informed Inspector Green
that the outlaws carried with them a small tent and about a
month’s rations. He too mentioned their favourite haunts,
and laid stress on the probable endeavours of Mrs. Skillion
to assist them. In particular he described the position and
appearance of a hollo'w log near her residence in which
he expected food would be planted for the Kellys or their
associates to carry away. Search was made for this log
and it was found; but from its appearance the police con-
cluded that it was not being then used as a receptacle for
provisions, and they appear to have kept no particular watch
upon it. for which they were afterwards blamed by the Police
Commission. It is probable, however, that the log was
not then actually in use. The Kellys and their friends had
no doubt availed themselves of it during some of the numer-
ous bygone periods when they were in hiding from justice,
and the mere fact that several others besides themselves
knew of its history was likely to put them on their guard.
But whatever were the facts concerning the log, the police
had no doubt that Mrs. Skillion was conveying food, either
by herself or confederates, to the outlaws, and they tried hard
to ascertain what became of the great bakings turned out
from her oven, with the result that they soon learnt from a
reliable agent that she used frequently to ride away from her
house in the middle of the nig'ht carrying a well-filled swag.
Several attempts were made to follow her, but they all failed.
On the face of it one would suppose that here was a chance
of effecting a capture, but Mr. Sadlier insisted that to. follow
Mrs. Skillion for any distance on horseback, which would be
necessary since she rode herself, was impossible without be-
ing discovered. If she cantered she would get out of sight.


and would soon hear the hoof beats of any horse following
her when she pulled up to a walk again, at what distance
ahead of them the pursuers could not tell. Wherever Mrs
Skillion went, she went far, for according to the agents
information her horse was always knocked up when she re-
turned, and for her expeditions she constantly used fresh
mounts. Had her trail been followed by black trackers
some news might have resulted, but there were no com-
petent and trustworthy aboriginals in Victoria at that time,
and even later, when the Queensland Government offered to
send some of theirs to Victoria, Captain Standish, who had
little faith in their usefulness, refused the offer of their assis-
tance. Another alternative possible, and perhaps of value,
would have been the arrest of Mrs. Skillion under the
Felons Apprehension Act, and later, in case of her making
signals from her house as Williamson suggested she would
do. Captain Standish urged the advisability of her arrest.
Nevertheless, at this time, for several reasons nothing was
done. For one thing Mr. Nicolson did not consider there
was sufficient evidence against her to secure a conviction,
and further it was hoped that immunity from interference
would lead her and her brothers to betray themselves by more
daring undertakings beneath the noses of the police. The
agents at any moment were likely to give definite and fresh
information which might enable a sudden blow to be struck,
and therefore, fully aware that the Kellys were being pro-
visioned and interviewed almost in sight of the police, the
officers felt themselves compelled to suffer these things, and
to remain more or less inactive in the hope of some really
good chance arising for a successful attempt at arrest.
CHAPTER IX.
MR. WYATT AND THE BROKEN WIRES.
CT'OR some weeks after Mr. Nicolson’s and Mr. Sadlier’s
expedition on which the black trackers shirked duty,
although many conflicting rumours of the Kellys’ doings


•cached the police nothing authentic was reported, and the
ime was devoted to search parties on no particular informa-
ion, such as Mr. Nicolson described. The prisoner Wil-
liamson, who seemed to have access to some mysterious
'und of knowledge, gave warning to Inspector Green that
the gang might be expected to raid one of the banks in
some North-Eastern township, and mentioned in particular
Seymour, which is only about sixty miles from Melbourne,
and considerably south of the district known as the Kelly
country in which the bushrangers were most at home.
There is some conflict in the evidence as to whether Mr.
Nicolson got express notice of this warning. Captain Stan-
lish afterwards claimed that he did, and, in fact, that Mr.
Nicolson mentioned it to him. Accordingly the Commis-
sioner, leaving Mr. Nicolson to take measures on his own
account, spoke specially to Mr. Hare, who, though resident
in Melbourne, had charge of the police district immediately
adjoining the North-Eastern, and including Seymour within
Its limits. Acting on Captain Standish’s instructions
Mr. Hare took measures to give considerable extra police
protection to Seymour and all other townships up the rail-
wav line as far as Avenel, beyond which the stations were
under Mr. Nicolson’s charge, and Mr. Hare also warned the
managers of the banks that there was liKelihood of a raid
being made upon them. More police had been applied for
by Mr. Sadlier and Mr. Nicolson for the work of pursuing
the outlaws, but both of them assert that they had no word
of expected danger to the banks, and therefore no special
easures were taken to avert it.
Mrs. SkillioiTs long expeditions had led them to suppose
that the Kellys were hidden away deep in the mountains,
intent upon nothing but evading pursuit, and the police saw
good cause to believe from such reports as reached them
that the gang was about to make another attempt to escape
into New South Wales. Among the men who gave Mr.
Nicolson real or fanciful accounts of what the Kellys were


doing was one Patrick Quin, husband of Ned Kelly’s aunl
and himself a relative of the outlaws; and he claims to hay
given warning of an intention on their part to stick up on*
of the banks, but this Mr. Nicolson denies, and adds that
coming from such a source, he would in any case have givei
little weight to the information.
Thus, without any further developments, weeks passed b}
until Monday, December 9, when Patrick Quin, the mar
mentioned above, came into the barracks yard at Eenalk
just after Mr. Nicolson and party had returned from £
search expedition in the direction of Mansfield, and assertec
that he had very important information. This informatior
was to the effect that the Kellys were living in a basir
among the hills on the King River, in wild country some
seventy miles from Benalla, far beyond Glenmore, the resi-
dence of another Quin, close to which the bushranger
Power, had been captured by Mr. Nicolson and Mr. Han
many years before. Quin wished Mr. Nicolson to tree
him near this basin on the following night, but Mr. Nicol-
son, having no reason to trust the man, refused, pointing tc
the jaded state of his horses, and asking how it was possibh
to travel them another seventy miles within a few hour!
of their return. He had consulted with Mr. Sadlier, anc
believed, as after events proved to be the case, that the otfei
to meet the police on the King River was merely an attempi
to put them off the track.
Some time previously Senior-Constable Kelly had for-
warded from Hedi, an outlying station on the King Rivet
about thirty-five miles from Benalla, a letter which had
fallen into his hands, apparently revealing a plan on behall
of certain persons to assist the outlaws in leaving the district
and crossing the Murray into New South Wales. Tin
opinion of all the respectable portion of the community gave
further weight to the view held by Mr. Nicolson and Mr,
Sadlier, that the Kellys, baffled in their former attempt b)
the floods, would try again to cross the river, and the leLtei


elped them in deciding to act. This document, which was
ddrossed to a near blood relation of the Kellys and one of
heir most thorough assistants, ran as follows: “Sir* I have
)een requested by E. and D. Kelly to do what I could to as-
sist them in crossing here’’ (the letter was not dated as to
ime or place). “I am to write to you to let you know the ar-
•angements. They are to be at a time to be named at the
unction of Indigo Creek and Murray, and there is to be a
ssword, it is this—‘Any work to be had?’ ‘Yes!’
Vhere?’ On the New South Wales side one shall meet
I will have a boat ready. There must not be any
;es come to the river; if you should have horses they
;t be led by the bridge to a safe place already prepared
them. I will have four on each side of the river to
watch upper and lower side. I have a place fixed where
you will be safe. If you should want horses there will be
some got for you. There are two say they will join you
if requested. You must mind it will want money and I
lave got none. When you write, direct to Howlong for—
(the signer).”
Mr. Sadlier, after the destruction of the gang, did not
think it wise to mention the name of the writer, who was
well known and suspected in the neighbourhood, but the
envelope showed the post marks of Bungowunnah and Al-
bury —border towns —of December 3. Half believing this
information, but with a note to the effect that no action
by the writer or his confederates was to be apprehended for
a few days, unless the letter were a blind to cover other
movements, Mr. Sadlier sent word of it to the police-ser-
geant near Howlong, at the junction of the Murray and
Indigo rivers, between Albury and Bungowunnah where
the proposed crossing was to take place, and he also sent
notice to the New South Wales police.
Then, on Mr. Nicolson’s return from the search expedi-
tion, the two officers, consulting together, agreed that it
was most desirable to have a good watch kept upon all Mur-


ray crossing's in the suspected neighbourhood and decide
to go up themselves to Albury to direct matters in persoi
Accordingly Mr. Nicolson on December 10 telegraphe
to the officer in charge at Albury asking him to meet hii
that evening. He telegraphed also to the Commissione
informing him of the move, and he and Mr. Sadlier at eigl
o clock in the evening went down to the railway station t
take the Sydney train for the border. On the platform the
met Mr. Wyatt, a police magistrate for the North-Easter
District, and noticed immediately that he was in a most e?
cited state. He appeared to be concealing somethin
beneath his coat, and, calling to Mr. Nicolson to accompan
him, he rushed into the nearest room on the railway statior
which proved to be the ladies’ waiting room, he him
self said, he felt very much shocked at the necessity of ex
eluding ladies from it. However, he closed the door am
did so, also excluding Mr. Sadlier, who employed himsel
unsuccessfully in trying to discover from the railway offi
dais the cause of the excitement while Mr. Wyatt com
municated his news to Mr. Nicolson. It was to the effec
that the telegraph wires were broken down between Euro;
and Violet Town, apparently cut with some sharp instru
ment, and Mr. Wyatt believed it was the work of the Kellys
In support of his statement he showed Mr. Nicolson severa
broken ends of the wires, which he had obtained earlier in tin
day from the place where the smash had occurred. Mr. Wyat
and Mr. Nicolson presently issued from the room and for ;
minute or two the conversation continued, Mr. Wvatt ask-
ing the police officers if his news would alter their plans. H<
was in an extremely perturbed state, and his want of calm-
ness did not impress Mr. Nicolson with the weight of his
communication, more especially as the guard and the drivei
of the train assured him that there was nothing - wrong—z
circumstance arising from the fact that Mr. Wyatt, in his
zeal for the public welfare, had given them most emphatic
orders not to create any alarm. If questioned about the


broken telegraph line, they were to say, “ It looks like a
whirlwind;” and unfortunately Mr. Wyatt neglected to
make an exception of the police officers when he urged the
ailway men to preserve a calm and unconcerned demeanour
o everybody. His own evident perturbation did some-
hing to atone, but he himself also forgot in the hurried con-
versation to supply Mr. Nicolson with several important
letails which might have affected the police officer's judg-
icnt. The result was that to Mr. Wyatt’s question, “ Will
lis alter your plans?” Mr. Nicolson replied, “No; it will
ot alter them;” and with Mr. Sadlier he entered the train
id proceeded on the journey to Albury.
The w r hole conversation had taken very few minutes,
belegraph lines were frequently broken in that district. No
e but Mr. Wyatt seemed to have an inkling of anything
•ong. The police officers were on what they considered
important quest, and even had the Kellys cut the wires
it might very well have been to prevent reports of their
flight across the Murray reaching Melbourne.
It was unfortunate that Mr. Wyatt was not more explicit,
tor he had really important news beyond the breaking of the
wires to impart. Going by luggage train from Violet
Town to Euroa on that day, December 10, shortly after the
train left the station he was addressed by a telegraph re-
pairer named Watt, from Eenalla, who came along the foot
plate and told him the wares were down. Mr. Wyatt and
Watt agreed to keep a lookout on either side of the train,
and about eight miles from Violet Town, and three and
three-quarters from Euroa, which is on the south or Mel-
bourne side, Mr. Wyatt saw that a considerable length of
wire and six posts were down. This was opposite a station
homestead named Faithfull's Creek, which lies in full view
of and only a few hundred yards from the railway line. Watt
came again along the footplate to Mr. Wyatt, telling him
it was impossible to mend the line without further material
md assistance, and asking Mr. Wyatt to send a message


effectually disposed of the whirlwind theory. On again
meeting Mr. Gorman his first question was as to whether
the repairer Watt had returned. The stationmaster said,
“No whereon, remarking that the distance was only three
miles and three-quarters and that Watt could not repair
the line himself, Mr. Wyatt told his suspicions. “ Mr.
Gorman,” he said, “ there is something upj you must give
me express permission to ride upon the engine and stop the
train and get down to examine the line. Ido not believe
it was a whirlwind now, because I recollect there was not
a single tree or shrub injured anywhere about.” lie par-
ticularly enjoined Mr. Gorman to tell no one of what he
suspected, and said to him, “To anybody who enquires,
answer, ‘ It looks like a whirlwind.’ ”
Permission to ride on the engine was granted by Mr. Gor-
man, and Mr. Wyatt left shortly afterwards by the train go-
ing north towards Benalla. Though evening was coming
on it was still daylight when the train reached Faithfull’s
Creek, and was stopped for Mr. Wyatt to jump off the en-
gine. The guard of the train also alighted, and between
them, he and Mr. Wyatt finding both the Government and
the railway’s telegraph wires in a hopeless tangle, and satis-
fying themselves that they were cut and not broken, twisted
off and brought away with them a number of the ends as
evidence of the fact. To the guard Mr. Wyatt said, “It
is clear the line is cut. I believe the Kellys are about. Say
not a word to the passengers or anyone, but say as I told
the driver and fireman and Gorman to say, that it looks like
a whirlwind.” To the passengers who made enquiry, Mr.
Wyatt replied with his diplomatic formula: “The line is
down and it looks like a whirlwind.”
At Violet Town, the next station, Mr. Wyatt told the
station master to say nothing to passengers or other people,
but to telegraph to Melbourne that the line was down, which
could be done in spite of the break in the wires by sending
the message northward to Albury, whence it could go to
THE KELLY GANG OF BUSHRANGERS.


for him to Melbourne. Then, the train slowing down, Wai
jumped off the footplate and the train went on to Euro;
while the repairer walked towards the Faithfull’s Cree
homestead.
On arriving at Euroa, Mr. Wyatt gave Watt’s messag
concerning the requisite aid and material very fully to M
Gorman, the stationmaster, and informed him that the lin
was “ down through a whirlwind.’ - This was Mr. Wyatt
own opinion, strengthened by that of some passengei
whom he had heard say that no men could have pulled tl
posts down like that —that it would require at least a teai
of bullocks to do it.
From the station Mr. Wyatt went straight to the cour
house, distant about half a mile, where his business, whit
consisted in granting a few licences, was over in a quart
of an hour. Being still much interested in the question (
the broken wires, Mr. Wyatt obtained a horse and buggy-
with some difficulty, since nearly all the horse-flesh ar
vehicles of the township were under requisition for a larj:
funeral then proceeding—and drove out towards Faithfull
Creek. Near the homestead he encountered a man wl
asked him if that were the road to the station, to which M
Wyatt replied he did not know, and the stranger, makin
use of some obscene expression, rode away. Looking ;
his watch, Mr. Wyatt came to the conclusion that with h
slow going horse, which objected to any pace faster than
walk, it would be impossible for him to go further and yi
be back in time to catch the Sydney train northwards troi
Euroa, as he had to do to keep an appointment at anothi
station next day, and he therefore returned to Euroa. 0
the way a strong suspicion flashed across his mind that tl
man who had accosted him was one of the outlaws, and ;
he jogged siationwards the idea that the destruction of tl
line was the work of the Kellys gradually gained strengtl
He remembered that within hundreds of yards of the talk
telegraph posts were no fallen trees or branches, whic
THE KELLY GANG OF BUSHRANGERS.


Deniiqiiin in New South Wales, and southward by another
line to Melbourne.
From Violet Town to Benalla is a distance of sixteen
miles, and at the latter place, when the train arrived at seven
o’clock, Mr. Wyatt met and talked with Mr. Nicolson as
already described. Unfortunately he made no mention of
Watt's failure to return from his inspection, and said no-
thing of the man who had used bad language to nirn at
Faithfull’s Creek, nor did he succeed in conveying to the
police officers his own certainty that the Kellys were in the
neighbourhood, while his precautions as to secrecy had been
so efficacious that from the guard and fireman Mr. Sadlier
could get not a word beyond, “ It looks like a whirlwind.”
Later on, after some scruples as to whether he should inter-
fere with police plans, Mr. W} r att, who remained at Benalla,
wired to Captain Standish the news that the lines were
broken and that Mr. Nicolson and Mr. Sadlier had gone on
to Wangaratta. To a constable named Whelan he told his
suspicions, and finding Whelan much impressed by them,
asked if he could provide a special train to return to Faith-
full’s Creek. Whelan had no authority himself to order
a special train, but wired asking for it both to Captain Stan-
dish in Melbourne and Mr. Nicolson in Albury, and finally
a telegram arrived from the former in consequence of which
at 1.30 a.m. a train started southward, carrying Mr. Wyatt,
armed and eager for fight, and Senior-Constable Johnson
Detective Ward, Constable Whelan, one or two other con-
stables, black trackers and horses. Mr. Wyatt rode on
the engine, keeping a lookout with powerful field glasses
lest the railway line should be injured, but without acci-
dent the train pulled up opposite Faithfull’s Creek. From
the homestead two men were seen approaching, and the
occupants of the train found that one of them was Mr.
McCauley, manager of the station. They had a sensational
tale to tell of the late presence of the Kellys at Faithfull’s
Creek, which fully justified all Mr. Wyatt’s alarm. He de-


layed the train for about half an hour to take the men’s
depositions to be forwarded for the use of Captain Standish,
after which, since horses could not be taken out of the
trucks away from a platform, the train started again and in
a few minutes reached Euroa where matters were con-
sidered concerning the pursuit.
THE STICKING-UP OF FAITHFULL’S CREEK.
CT AITH FULL'S Creek Station homestead, standing
as it does in full sight of a main rail-
way. line and close to the old Sydney Road,
less than four miles distant from a busy town-
ship, was the last place at which the Kellys might be ex-
pected to make a sudden appearance, and the gang’s exploit
there was one of the most daring and picturesque in their
career. On December 9 all had gone as usual till after
midday. George Stephens, a groom, and Fitzgerald, an-
other employe, were then at their dinner in the kitchen,
where was also Mrs. Fitzgerald, the station housekeeper,
busying herself about the men’s meal, when a roughly
dressed, bearded man, coming to the door, inquired if Mr.
McCauley, the station manager, was at home. On being
told that he was not, the stranger walked away, saying he
would wait, and Stephens went down to the stables, where-
upon the man came back, and introduced himself to Mrs.
Fitzgerald as Ned Kelly. By this time he had been joined
by three other men in charge of four horses, three bays and
a grey, in excellent condition, and Ned Kelly politely in-
forming Fitzgerald and his wife who they were, gave his
assurance that he and his mates intended no harm, but must


have food for themselves and their horses. Mrs. Fitzgerald
accepted the position philosophically and pointed out the
stable to Kelly, who, going down there with Fitzgerald and
one of his mates, found Stephens and another man whom
Fitzgerald pointed out to Kelly. The bushranger stood
without speaking for a moment or two at the stable door,
where the men did not take much notice of him. Then
turning to Stephens with a smile, “ I suppose you don’t
know who I am,” he said, in evident anticipation of effecting
a sensational surprise. “ Perhaps you are Ned Kelly,”
was the quiet answer given at random, to which Kelly,
decidedly annoyed, replied that Stephens “ seemed to be a
good guesser.” At the same time he produced a
revolver, and, mollified by Stephens’ saying that he was
only joking, he explained that the horses of the gang must
be stabled and fed.
While this matter was being attended to, Kelly conversed
with Stephens in the stable, and gave his own version of the
shooting of the police, which chiefly differed from Mcln-
tyre’s in so far as he asserted that Lonigan, Scanlon, and
Kennedy had all three showed fight and fired several shots
before they met their deaths. Lonigan, according to Kelly,
had taken shelter behind a pile of log's and opened fire from
there, being shot through the head when he rose to take
aim. Scanlon had fired himself, and been shot in his turn
before dismounting, while Kennedy had taken shelter be-
hind his horse and made excellent revolver practice, one
bullet going through Kelly’s beard, another grazing his
ribs, and a third touching Dan on the shoulder. The ser-
geant had then, Kelly said, made a running fight of it from
tree to tree, till Kelly had shot him twice —once in the
shoulder and once through the chest, after which he fell.
Either from a vainglorious pride in his shooting powers
or from a desire to shield his mates, should they ever be cap-
tured, Ned Kelly asserted that no one but he had taken any
part in the killing of the police. Murder he declared it


was not, but a necessary act of self-defence against men
who had come out determined to shoot him.
Stephens was afterwards escorted by Kelly from
the stable and confined with others in the
store-room, a wooden slab building, about twenty
yards distant from the house. The plan of the out-
Iaw r s, though daring in the extreme, was very simple, and
consisted in the occupation of the station as a base of opera-
tions, where they themselves and their horses might gain
rest and food before attempting the other coup which they
had planned. The confinement of the station hands gave
them very little trouble. One by one, as they dropped in.
thev were encountered by one of the gang, who presented
a loaded revolver at their heads and told them the station
was stuck up and that they were prisoners. There was no
difficulty in adding them to the gradually increasing crowd
in the store-room, which was an easy room to guard, since
the door and windows, close together, could be watched by
one or more of the outlaws heavily armed with loaded rifle
and revolvers.
Several prisoners were collected during the day, and at
five o’clock, when the manager, Mr. McCauley, rode in
from an outstation he had been visiting, the wonderful quiet-
ness and deserted appearance of the place greatly surprised
him, but a warning word, with advice to surrender, was
called out to him by Fitzgerald as he approached the store.
His inclination to treat the matter as a stupid jest was
quickly dispelled by the appearance of Kelly with a revolver
from behind the building, and seeing no help for it, he suf-
fered himself, too, to be made a prisoner. At first the
Kellys, keeping a watch on Mr. McCauley, allowed him
freedom of movement, and he suggested that everyone
might as well be as comfortable as circumstances permitted
and have some tea. The women of the place had not been
shut up or molested, and they prepared a meal, of which the
Kellys as well as the prisoners partook, the latter taking the


precaution to make others eat first in case the food should
be poisoned. Only two of the outlaws sat down at one
time while the others stood by with their revolvers in their
hands to prevent mischief.
Towards evening- another visitor arrived, a draper named
Gloster who resided at Seymour but was then hawking
some of his goods through the country. He knew the station,
where he had previously done business, and determining to
pitch his camp there for the night, he left a young man
named Beecroft in charge of his covered waggon and horses
which had been unharnessed on the road, and went to the
kitchen to get a billy of boiling water for his tea. As he
was returning to the waggon a man called him back, saying
the station was stuck up, but Gloster took no notice and
went on to his camp, which w r as promptly visited by Ned
and Dan Kelly, the former in a very bad temper. Gloster
had just climbed into his cart to get a pistol which he kept
there, when he found revolvers pointed at his head from
either side by the outlaws and was roughly ordered to come
down, which he did, but he went on making preparations
for his supper. Ned Kelly had a pair of handcuffs in om
hand and a revolver in the other. When asked by the
hawker who he was and what right he had to interfere, the
outlaw replied in his usual modest style: “ I am Ned Kelly,
son of Red Kelly, and a better man never stepped in tw r o
shoes.”
This was by no means Gloster’s first encounter with bush-
rangers, as he had been stuck up twice before, and on one
occasion shot in the shoulder by a man named Daly. It
appears that he now ran very considerable risk of being shot
again, owing to his obstinacy and slowness in surrendering
himself. Dan Kelly was very anxious to “ put a bullet
through the wretch,” but Mr. McCauley, who had accom-
panied the outlaws to the cart, joined in urging him to bail
up, and at last seeing the hopelessness of resisting, he con-
fessed that there was in his waggon a revolver which


Kelly secured. He was then led with Beecroft to the
kitchen, where he was allowed to have supper under surveil-
lance and afterwards locked up with the other men in the
store.
There was not much sleep for the prisoners that night.
One or two of the outlaws kept guard outside and Ned
Kelly remained with them in the store, which was ill ven-
tilated and inconveniently crowded, talking much and boast-
fully of What he had done and was going to do. Many of
the men asked him questions, but they were all most careful
to avoid the w'ord “ murder ” in speaking of the death of the
police. Kellv confirmed the story that he had shot Ken-
nedy when lie was lying wounded on the ground, in order,
he said, to put him out of his misery, and he added that, hav-
ing respect for Kennedy as a brave man, he had covered the
body with a cloak. A rumour that he had cut off one of
the sergeant’s ears he protested was a lie. The police,
Kelly declared, had persecuted him and all his family, who
were innocent in the matter of Fitzpatrick, and they were,
he said, his natural enemies; but on his own showing he had
done a good deal to make enemies of them, since he con-
fessed to having stolen 280 horses in his time.
Before going to bed for the night the Kellys allowed
the prisoners out under guard to get a few breaths of fresh
air, and then locked them up again. As to the projected
robbery of the bank at Euroa the outlaws appear to have
made no secret, and very early in the morning they were
on watch for any persons who might approach the station,
and who were to be shut up with the others in order to pre-
vent their departing and giving the alarm.
The first haul made was of a shooting party of three
Melbourne gentlemen —one riding and the others driven by
a resident of the district in a spring cart which approached
the station in the morning. The sportsmen had just re-
turned from the Strathbogie Ranges where they had spent
some days in shooting kangaroo and other game. On the


road near the house they were stopped by Kelly and one of
his mates, who informed them that the station was stuck up,
and told them to turn their horses round. They immediately
got out of the cart which contained the guns, a rifle and some
ammunition, and the rider approaching, when he heard
that the station was stuck up, suggested that they should
jump into the cart and get the guns. This proposal was
sternly negatived by Ned Kelly. He saw that the party
did not know him and amused himself by accusing Mr.
Casement, the owner of the cart, of being Ned Kelly and of
having stolen the vehicle. This accusation was vehe-
mently denied by the sportsmen, several of whom were
Scotch ; and supposing the outlaws to be plain-clothes police-
men, they declared they were honest men, and asked if the
Kellys were about, to which Ned said “Yes.” They pro-
tested strongly against being interfered with, and one of
them went so far as to threaten Ned Kelly, who had said
something about putting handcuffs on him, that he would
report him to his superior officer.
Still supposing the outlaws to be particularly ill-mannered
policemen —Ned Kelly had threatened to blow Mr. Dudley's
brains out if he gave any more cheek —Mr. McDougal, Mr.
Tennant, Mr. Dudley, and Mr. Casement, the gentlemen of
the shooting party, allowed themselves to be conducted
under protest to the homestead, where the little comedy was
brought to a close by Stephens, the groom, formally intro-
ducing the outlaw as Air. Edward Kelly. Ihe prisoners
were then searched by Dan Kelly and locked up with the
others in the store-room, where Ned Kelly became con-
versational with them also, and among other favours,
showed them the go 1 d watch which he had taken from Ken-
nedy. The rifle, guns, and ammunition in the shooting
party’s cart were all confiscated, but beyond imprisonment
the men suffered no violence, while the women were still al-
lowed to remain free and were interfered with in no way,
though Dan did suggest having a lark with them —a pro-


posal promptly squelched by his elder brother.
Four trains passed the house before half-past two in the
afternoon—two each way —and when they were heard ap-
proaching, the prisoners were commanded to keep very
quiet, with the promise that anyone who raised an alarm
would have his brains blown out. About half-past two the
outlaws went on to the railway line, and worked the destruc-
tion to the telegraph lines which had excited Mr. Wyatt, and
while thus engaged they encountered four railway gangers
who were arrested and added to the squad of prisoners in
the store-room.
A little after three Ned Kelly, Dan Kelly, and Steve Hart
dressed themselves for an expedition to Euroa and made
all necessary arrangements. The capture of the hawker’s
cart was a particularly useful circumstance to them, as, mak-
ing a selection from the wardrobe it contained, they dressed
themselves most carefully in brand new clothes, and did
not even neglect such refinements as the use of scent, to
which they helped themselves liberally from Mr. Gloster’s
bottles. En passant it may be remarked that, though they
made it a boast that they never robbed poor men, and
though thev refused small sums of money which were of-
fered them by some of the prisoners, the outlaws made
Gloster no payment for some £l4 worth of wearing apparel
which they took away with them, nor for the revolver which
he valued at £3 10s.
Having got ready for the journey they requested Mr.
McCauley to write a small cheque for presentation by them
at the Euroa bank, and then taking their horses from the
stable turned them loose m the paddock. At half-past three
they set out from the station, Ned Kelly driving Gloster’s
cart which was a hooded vehicle, Dan Kelly taking the
spring cart belonging to the shooting party, and Steve Hart
riding one of the station horses, while his own was left to
graze in the home paddock.
Byrne was left behind in sole charge of the thirty prison-


ers which by this time the store-room contained. It was
seemingly a large order for one man to control them; but,
stuck all over with revolvers and with a double barrelled
gun in his hand, and two loaded rifles within easy reach,
Byrne calmly marched up and down before the door, ap-
parently in no way overpowered by his responsibility. There
was, in fact, no very ardent desire on the part of the pris-
oners to escape. They were cramped and uncomfortable,
but this, not to speak of any impersonal desire of bringing
the scoundrels to justice, was by no means strong enough
inducement to make them risk their lives in an attack upoti
Toe Bvrne. There were axes in the hut. One or two
daring spirits did suggest that they should chop their way
out and rush upon the outlaw. Doubtless he might have
been overcome and captured, but doubtless also one or more
men would have lost their lives in the attempt, which pre-
vented any enthusiasm for the idea. Among those who
might otherwise have been in favour of some bold step there
was also the knowledge that the store-room contained
strong sympathisers with the Kellys as well as bona fide
prisoners, and it was also suspected that other of the out-
laws’ friends were lurking in hiding near the station. Ac-
cordingly Joe Byrne was not threatened in any way while
he mounted guard over his prisoners.
Once, when a passing train slowed down and came almost
to a standstill in front of the station, must have been an ex-
citing time for the prisoners and an anxious one for Byrne,
who might reasonably have expected an attack. However,
he showed no sign of faltering. The train was that in which
Mr. Wyatt travelled to Euroa when he and the telegraph
repairer, Watt, first observed the break in the wires. Watt,
as related, jumped off the engine, while the train quickened
pace again and went on. After a casual examination of
the damage Watt walked up towards the homestead to ask
for information and assistance. As he approached the store-
room, Byrne, covering him with a gun, ordered him to


come forward, which he was forced to do, and he, too, was
locked up with the ever growing - crowd in the store-room.
Thus the non-appearance of the line repairer, in the event,
afforded the fullest justification for Mr. Wyatt’s suspicion
that his failure to return to Euroa argued somethinp" very
wrong at FaithfuH’s Creek. The curious matter was, that
at the very moment he was pouring forth these suspicions
to Mr. Gorman, something far more wrong was in progress
onlv half a mile from where he stood.
CHAPTER XL
THE EUROA BANK ROBBERY
<s7> ROCEEDING quietly along the road the bushrangers
<?v / reached Euroa without incident, and pulled up at the
N ational Bank, a one-storied building which lay, very conveni-
ently for their purpose, on the side of the township nearest to
Faithfull’s Creek, but of course in no way isolated from the
rest of the buildings. The principal hotel, in fact, was dis-
tant not more than forty yards, and the bank was also in
sight of the railway station. It so happened that a large
number of residents were absent from Euroa at a funeral
outside the town, while others were interested in the licens-
ing business going on at the court half a mile away, and
these things helped to account for the two carts driving un-
observed up to the bank door. Had anyone seen them
they would scarcely have attracted notice, for the gang were
all most respectably dressed. Gloster’s cart, with his name
painted on it, was well known in Euroa, and Kelly had taken
with him Gloster’s boy to hold the horses, while he pursued
his business at the bank.


He and Hart commenced operations by knocking - at the
bank door, which was shut, as the bank closed at three and
it was then after office hours. In answer to an enquiry con-
cerning their business, Kelly said that he had a cheque of
Mr. McCauley’s, which he wanted cashed. Without opening
the door one of the clerks told him he was too late, but Kelly
begged for admission, saying that he would be greatly in-
convenienced if he did not obtain the cash that night,
whereupon Mr. Bradley, the teller, partially opened the door,
and Kelly and Hart, forcing their way in, shut the door be-
hind them.
In the office they found Mr. Bradley and another clerk,
Mr. Booth, both of whom, with revolvers presented at their
heads, found themselves unable to resist. Ned Kelly men-
tioned his name and explained the object of his visit, de-
manding all the cash the bank contained. A large amount
was on the teller’s table or in the drawers, having been in
use that day, but Kelly wanted the contents of the strong
room as well, and, driving the clerks before them, he and
Hart, with a revolver in each hand, made their way into the
manager’s room, which opened from the main office. There
they found Mr. Scott, the manager, who was unable to se-
cure his revolver before he was made to hold his hands up
and to give up one key of the safe, while the other was ob-
tained from one of the clerks.
In the meantime Dan Kelly had entered the private apart-
ments attached to the bank by the back door, and was keep-
ing guard to ensure that no one should leave the house. All
the prisoners were searched for arms. Mr. Scott was
told that he must summon his wife and family and servants,
and when he had done this, they, with the two clerks, were
all put in the passage, under the eye of Dan Kelly and the
muzzles of his revolvers. Ned Kelly, going out to the
hawker’s cart, brought from it a gunny bag, into which
he shovelled all the money found in the teller’s drawers,
and the safe, mixing notes, gold, and silver pell-mell to-


gether. The total amount secured amounted to nearly
£2,000 —£1.500 in notes and the balance in sovereigns and
silver, in addition to which there were thirty ounces of
gold dust. Kelly was very much disappointed at the
smallness of his plunder, and told Scott he had expected
to find at least £IO,OOO in the bank. At first he threatened
to carry away or burn the bank books, bills, securities, &c.,
but Scott persuaded him that this would do him no good,
and finally he consented to leave them alone. The Scott
household, in addition to the manager and other officers,
consisted of Mrs. Scott, seven children, and two servants,
who were all in the power of the bushrangers, and won-
dering what was to be done with them. They suffered no
violence or indignity of any kind, but were told by Ned
Kelly that they must get ready immediately for a drive to
Faithfull’s Creek. Mrs. Scott seems to have been in no
way alarmed by her meeting with the bushrangers^button
the contrary, to have almost enjoyed the excitement of
it, and she even chaffed Ned Kelly about his personal ap-
pearance, telling him that he was a much more handsome
and well-dressed man than she had expected, and by no
means the ferocious ruffian she imagined him to be. These
compliments evidently had a soothing effect on Ned
Kelly’s Lemper. He told Mr. Scott to put the horse into
his (Mr. Scott’s) buggy, as, in addition to the outlaws’ con-
veyances, it would be wanted to accommodate the large
household from the bank. Mr. Scott refused, saying his
groom was out, and telling Kelly if he wanted the trap,
to harness the horse himself. This was not at all the
kind of language to which Kelly was accustomed from his
prisoners, but Mrs. Scott’s flattery had induced a forgiving
spirit in him, and accordingly he graciously consented to be
his own groom.
The outlaws and the banker took a glass of whiskey to-
gether, Kelly, as a precautionary measure, making Mr. Scott
drink first, and very soon afterwards a start was made for


Faithfull’s Creek. Kart rode as before; Kelly with Mr.
Scott and the plunder in the hawker’s cart brought up the
rear. Mrs. Scott in front of him drove her husband’s buggy
and some of the children, and Dan Kelly, with Casement’s
cart and more of the household, led the way. A short dis-
tance from Euroa the funeral party before mentioned was
met returning from the cemetery, and the bushrangers, get-
ting their revolvers ready, gave an emphatic warning to their
prisoners against attempting to make any sign. They were
most obedient. None of the funeralists appeared to notice
the vehicles or their passengers, and they soon passed one
another. On the way to the station Ned Kelly talked freely
to Mr. Scott. He told him something of the police mur-
ders, showed him Kennedy’s watch, and told him in a
friendly way that he had narrowly escaped being shot by
Steve Hart for want of promptitude in putting up his hands
and disrespect to himself, Ned Kelly, when the outlaws first
entered the office. During the journey one of the horses in
Kelly’s vehicle fell, and a halt was made while the outlaws
got out to put the horse on his feet and see to the harness,
but without any other incident Faith full’s Creek was reached
before dark.
Here the leader of the gang found everything just as he
had left it, with the exception that the mob of prisoners had
been added to by the capture of the telegraph repairer, Watt.
Ned Kelly questioned him closely as to his movements and
the time it would take to repair the break in the telegraph
line, and then, having allowed the women and children to
go into the kitchen, he shut up Scott and the clerks in the
store.
After this, preparations were made in a leisurely way for
departure. The horses were got in from the paddock, and
the bag containing the plunder was strapped in front of Ned
Kelly’s saddle. In addition to the money five revolvers
had been taken from the bank, and these, with Gloster’s
pistol and the rifle and guns of the shooting party, formed


a considerable addition to the Kellys’ armoury. The out-
laws determined to have tea before they left, and they also
amused themselves by giving exhibitions of their horse-
manship of which they were very proud, allowing the men
to stand outside the lock-up under guard to witness these
feats. Ned Kelly in particular is reported to have distin-
guished himself as a horseman, galloping about, lying or sit-
ting upon his saddle in all kinds of apparently impossible
positions. Some of the men on patrol duty seem to have wan-
dered a considerable distance from the house, and in so do-
ing Steve Hart must have encountered Mr. Wyatt, who, it
will be remembered, had been accosted most uncivilly by
some stranger when he drove out from Euroa to view the
broken lines. At any rate Mr. McCauley reported after-
wards that Steve Hart had asked him “ who the old buffer
was ” whom he met on the road. The description given,
and the fact that this was the day for Mr. Wyatt’s Licensing
Court in Euroa, led Mr. McCauley to say that it must have
been the police magistrate. By G—,” replied Hart; “if
I’d known that at the time, I would have popped him."
Later in the day Mr. Wyatt had another chance of being
“ popped,’’ but nothing came of it. The train upon the
engine of which he rode, and which stopped in front of
Faithfull’s Creek to allow him to examine the wires, natur-
ally caused the outlaws some apprehension. Ned Kelly
called out to the others that a trainload of bobbies had come
to arrest them, and speaking in a tone of bravado for the
prisoners’ benefit, added that it did not matter, as they
would shoot the whole lot of them. However, it
proved to be a false alarm, and in a few minutes the train
passed on without anybody from it approaching the home-
stead.
The Kellys by no means hurried themselves. Their
meal and their riding exhibition took some time, and more
they spent in conversing with the prisoners. It was evi-
dent that they wished to make a good impression, and to
79
THE KELLY GANG OF BUSHRANGERS.


that end they showed great consideration to the women and
made the servants gifts of money. To the boy who accom-
panied them to Enroa Ned Kelly also gave two pounds and
the watch which he had taken from the body of Lonigan.
The watch was afterwards handed over to the police. Ap-
parently to make up for its loss, Ned Kelly asked Mr.
McDougall for his watch, but, on being told that it was a
keepsake from Mr. McDougall’s mother, magnanimously
handed it back, robbing Mr. McCauley instead, while Byrne
appropriated Mr. Scott’s time-piece.
One of the outlaws’ acts before leaving the station was to
order some of the prisoners to burn the old clothes in ex-
change for which those from Glosier’s cart had been taken,
and this was done under Kelly’s supervision. There was
afterwards found, half-burnt, at the homestead, portion of a
woman’s hat, supposed to have been in one of the outlaw’s
swag, and this gave rise to a theory that Hart, who was
young and slight, had carried a feminine disguise with him
and sometimes worn it when travelling. Rumours had been
current of a woman, supposed then to be Kate Kelly, being
seen with the outlaws riding through the bush, and this
gave colour to the belief that Hart sometimes masqueraded
in female attire. At any rate, up to the day of the raid upon
the station, no one had indentified Hart as a member of the
gang, and though Steele and others suspected him, it is said
that only a few days before the robbery he was seen drink-
ing at the bar of an hotel in Euroa and allowed to depart
without question.
It was nearly nine o’clock and quite dark before the
Kellys actually took their departure. Ned spoke a few last
words to the prisoners, telling them they were not to stir
from the place for three hours. If they did he promised to
track them down and shoot them wherever they might con-
ceal themselves, and Mr. McCauley in particular he was
kind enough to make responsible for the good behaviour of
the rest. The theatrical return of the alleged keepsake to


Mr. McDougall and the theft of the other watches were
among the last acts of the outlaws before bidding their
prisoners good-bye, after which, Dan Kelly and Steve Hart
indulging in a little parting brag as to what they should do
when they encountered the police, they rode away in the
direction of the Strathbogie Ranges.
The prisoners, left to themselves, discussed what they
should do, and there was a great preponderance of opinion
in favour of remaining at the station for the time specified by
Ned Kelly, or somewhere near it. None of them were so
enthusiastic about giving early information as to run the
risk of getting a bullet through their heads, should the out-
laws have concealed themselves near the homestead, and
apart from this chance it was suspected that sympathisers
were near who would report their doings to the Kellys and
perhaps cause them to be murdered later on when opportun-
ity should offer. There were certainly no heroes among
those stuck up at Faithfull’s Creek as was abundantly shown
by their action, or inaction, both before and after the bush-
rangers departed ; but possibly the prisoners showed no
more regard for their lives than would the majority of men.
At any rate for some hours they waited patiently at the sta-
tion, some of them whiling away the time by playing cards.
About half-past ten or eleven, however, they thought it safe
to leave their place of confinement, and while some of them
went away to Euroa or elsewhere others remained for the
night at Faithfull’s Creek. Before midnight the news of
the robbery had been wired to Captain Standish on the in-
formation of those who ventured into the township, and in
the early morning the police train from Benalla stopped at
the station and gained the news of it there.
By this time the Kellys were far away—as far, at least, as
they were anxious to go, which may have been after all but a
few miles. At many places in the Strathbogie Ranges they had
hiding places more or less secure, and there was afterwards
reason to believe that for nearly a week they had been quietly


camped at a bush hut not more than six miles distant from
Euroa, waiting a favourable opportunity to make their raid
upon the bank. Probably, not till the last minute had they
decided what township to favour, as Mrs. Skillion. the other
sister, Kate Kelly, and one or two more of their relatives
appear to have taken up their abode at different places from
each one of which would have been accessible some haunt
in the ranges. The one chosen by the outlaws was to de-
pend on what town in the North-Eastern District they might
bolt from, with the plunder of some bank in iheir possession.
CHAPTER XII.
A CHANGE IN THE COMMAND.
CURIOUS fatality seems to have attended upon all the
police operations in connection with the Kelly
outbreak at Euroa. Through someone’s error the
bank was left unprotected; even the one con-
stable on duty was absent from the township
when the bank was robbed; the departure of Mr. Nicol-
son and Mr. Sadlier for Albury took place at the most in-
opportune moment possible. Mr. Wyatt’s well-meant effort
to detain them failed through mistakes incident to the hurry
and confusion, together with the reticence of the train offi-
cials, and finally unexpected delay took place in the pursuit.
Mr. Wyatt doubtless acted wisely in stopping the train at
Faithfull’s Creek to learn particulars from Mr. McCauley,
and at Euroa itself more time was perhaps unavoidably
wasted. No officer above the rank of senior constable had
accompanied the special train from Benalla, and Mr. Wyatt,
from his own observation and remarks made to him by Sen-


ior Constable Johnson and Detective Ward, saw good rea-
son to suppose that there was likely to be a dispute as to the
command between them. Ward asked him whether he
thought it would be wise to start immediately upon the chase
or to await the arrival of Mr. Nicolson and Mr. Sadlier, who
had been wired to Albury to return as soon as possible;
and. considering the jealousy often arising between the men
of the detective service and the ordinary police, Mr. Wyatt
gave a guarded opinion in favour of waiting for the superior
officers. If they were likely to arrive within a few hours,
he considered the value of their presence would more than
compensate for any time lost. “ I must put it thus,” he
said. “If it will delay you only a few hours, say two, or
perhaps only three, I think you would be wise to stay for
these reasons, viz., three of those men (the outlaws) are upon
grass-fed horses and only one of them is shod. On the
other hand your horses are all corn-fed, and in fine stable
condition, and they are all shod; and in a twelve or twenty-
four hours’ pursuit I do not think it signifies much, if you
get well on the tracks, if you are two or three hours behind,
compared with having your superior officer with you.”
The men, falling in with this view, went out immediately
to Faithfnll’s Creek station to pick up the outlaws’ tracks
and await the arrival of Mr. Nicolson, while Mr. Wyatt went
by train to Benalla to meet the police officer there and
acquaint him with all the news in his possession.
After leaving Benalla Mr. Nicolson and Mr. Sadlier had
thought over the broken wires, and while not believing that
the Kellys were responsible, they also deemed it possible
that the outlaws or their associates had broken them to
stop news coming down as they rode north to the Murray.
In that case, by going to the Murray and watching the cross-
ings, the police might intercept them, whereas in any case
nothing could have been done towards following tracks from
the broken wires during the night. On a small station up
the line Air. Sadlier saw a man whom he knew to be one


of the Kelly sympathisers, whose manner, which was ap-
parently excited, caused a little uneasiness in Mr. Sadlier’s
mind, suggesting that something was afoot, but he thought
no more of the matter till, at Albury, Mr. Nicolson re-
ceived Captain Standish ; s telegram sent via Deniliquin, in-
forming him of the Euroa robbery. Thereupon, with Mr.
Sadlier, he crossed the river to Wodonga in a spring cart
and returned by the same train in which he had come. At
VV angaratta a stop was made, and Mr. Nicolson went to
the hospital with the object of getting the black tracker
who had been with him on the Murray on his former search,
and who was a patient in the hospital. He was, however,
too sick to leave, and Mr. Nicolson was compelled to go
without him, while on the morning of December n Mr.
Sadlier left the train, got together a police party, and
searched for any tracks the Kellys might have made on their
way from Euroa to some of their old haunts. They did
find a track quite fresh, but after going some thirty or forty
yards, the trackers, apparently, as on the former occasion,
afraid for their lives, declared that they could follow it no
further. Mr. Sadlier went ahead into the scrub beyond
where the tracks had been dropped in case there should be
some ambush there, but found nothing. The purpose
was to get to a farmhouse near Lake Rowan in the neigh-
bourhood of Glenrowan, the residence of a friend of the
Kellys, and to watch it all night, but it was impossible to
make the tracker work; consequently the house was not
found and searched till next day when no trace of anything
was discovered.
Meanwhile Mr. Nicolson had gone on to Benalla where
he arrived in the early morning, telegraphed to the police
at Mansfield asking for two trackers, and then went on with
Mr. Wyatt, who was waiting for him, to Faithfull’s Creek,
Stopping the train there at about 8.30, he got out and met
the party of police who had ridden out from Euroa, while
Mr. Wyatt continued his journey.


(copyright).
Some Police Officers engaged in the pursuit of
the Outlaws. From Photographs.




At Faithfull’s Creek there was a good deal of confusion.
Sympathisers or busybodies, under pretence of seeking for
the tracks of the outlaws, had galloped about all round the
place, making it very difficult to pick them up. One of the
overseers gave Mr. Nicolson some trouble and caused
delay, but eventually following the directions of the house-
keeper, by whose common sense he was impressed, Mr.
Nicolson took his men in the direction—towards Euroa—in
which she said she had last seen the dust of the outlaws’
horses. There tracks were picked up and followed, the
troublesome overseer presently getting a fall from his horse
and dropping out of the party, much to Mr. Nicolson’s satis-
faction. By midday the police were in Euroa, most of them
absolutely knocked up. The majority had only just re-
turned from a search party with Mr. Nicolson before the
robbery, and he felt it necessary to allow them some rest
and refreshment. For this he was blamed in some quarters
for procrastination, but he emphatically denies that there
was anything of the kind, and declares that the men were
so overcome with heat and fatigue that they actually dropped
asleep over their food before they had eaten or drunk any-
thing provided for them. Johnson, one of the most ener-
getic men of the party, slept so heavily that the hotelkeeper,
believing he had sunstroke, poured water over him, but even
this failed to wake him. In that state Mr. Nicolson could
do nothing with his troopers so he ordered a halt until six
o’clock, during which time the men slept, and after a meal
he led them away towards Murchison, a township lying
nearly due north, in which direction, from what he had learnt
from people at Faithfull’s Creek, Mr. Nicolson thought it
likely the outlaws would be making. During that night no-
thing of them was heard or seen, and any tracks they might
have left would be impossible to follow in the darkness.
About six next morning the men returned to Euroa for rest,
and Mr. Nicolson lay down but could not sleep, as he was
ill from continuous fatigue, and suffering in particular from


his eyes, which were so inflamed as to make him almos
blind.
Captain Standish arrived from Melbourne in the course
of the morning. After discussion with Mr. Nicolson he
agreed to send a police party away that day into the Strath-
bogie Ranges; but as Mr. Nicolson was absolutely broken
down in health and unfit to accompany it the Commissioner
telegraphed for Mr. Hare to come up from Melbourne and
take command.
Mr. Hare arrived at Euroa that afternoon but he by no
means felt inclined to start with the police party to the
Strathbogie Ranges, for he knew nothing of the circum-
stances, and he told Captain Standish that, for this reason
and because he felt very unwell, it would be most unfair to
send him out. Captain Standish, who was always ready
to attach great weight—too great weight it was generally
supposed in the service—to the opinions and wishes of Mr.
Hare, very readily fell in with this view, and the police party
departed under the leadership of Senior-Constable Johnson.
They remained away for six or seven days in the bush with-
out discovering anything, and on their return reported them-
selves at Benalla.
From this day there began a new regime in the Kelly pur-
suit, Mr. Nicolson going to Melbourne to take the Chief
Commissioner’s place in charge of general and office work,
while Captain Standish made Benalla his head-quarters and
directed operations against the outlaws with the assistance
of Mr. Hare.
By these officers the system of rushing police all over the
country in search parties, which Mr. Nicolson had followed,
more and more against his own judgment, was vigorously
pursued. Just before the Euroa robbery, Mr. Nicolson, as
private letters of his witnessed, had decided, had he remained
in command, to follow a new plan, endeavouring to secure
more accurate knowledge and better espionage of the Kellys
by agents, and never sending police parties after them ex-


<ept upon the most definite and reliable information. The
vague search, he had found, broke down the strength of
troopers and horses and made the police more or less a
laughing-stock to the people of the district, who knew that
every move was watched and reported by active Kelly sym-
pathisers, who would be galloping away into the bush with
news almost before the police party had left the barracks.
Mr. Wyatt disapproved of this system; Mr. Sadlier de-
scribed it as “ fooling,” and Superintendent Nicolson,
though against his better judgment he had adopted it and
kept the police uselessly active in order to satisfy the public
opinion in the colony, had come to recognise the futility of
such measures.
Nevertheless, Captain Standish, or rather Mr. Hare who
had great influence over the Commissioner, pinned his faith
to the police-galloping system. In other cases it had had
great effect. Ben Hall and Morgan, two notorious bush-
rangers of earlier dates in New South Wales and Victoria,
had been kept constantly on the move, never getting a
moment’s rest until Morgan was reported to have said that
he would rather be dead than live the miserable hunted life
that was his, and finally he was shot at Peechelba, near the
border of Victoria and New South Wales. But to hunt
and harass the Kellys, as these solitary men were hunted,
was a far more difficult task, owing to the numerous sources
of information, concealment and supply that the number of
their relatives and sympathisers afforded them. Of blood
relations of the Kellys there were said to be seventy-seven in
the district, Avhile the number of their connections and loyal
sympathisers was legion. Doubtless the Euroa bank rob-
bery did much to add to the ranks of their friends and to
increase the loyalty and admiration of existing ones, for
the outlaws, having no chance of personally spending the
money, largelv used it for distribution among their relatives
and agents who purchased for them ammunition and sup-
plies. Kate Kelly and Mrs. Skillion were observed to


launch out into great extravagance in dress and to have
their pockets full of money immediately after the robbery.
In one respect Captain Standish and Mr. Hare were in a
better position for vigorous action than Mr. Nicolson, since,
after the Euroa robbery, not only was the strength of the
police increased but a number of the garrison artillery were
sent to townships in the district to secure their safety from
raiding, thus setting still more of the police free for
active patrol work. The expense incurred by the country
on account of the Kelly outbreak had already been con-
siderable. From October 26 to December 12 it amounted
to £3,408, of which the largest items were £l,OOO odd for
arms, ammunition and equipment, and £l,OOO for travelling
allowances to the police, the latter expense arising from the
fact that men were merely temporarily transferred for duty
in the Kelly district, and during their presence there for
months at a time received a ss. per day allowance in excess
of their ordinary pay.
The Euroa robbery threw the whole colony of Victoria
into a wonderful state of indignation and alarm. The
Government increased the reward for the apprehension of
the Kellys from £5OO to £l,OOO per head. The banks in
large and populous towns, hundreds of miles from the Kelly
country , strengthened their premises against attack and armed
the bank officials with revolvers. The outlaws were the con-
stant subject of conversation in every corner of the country.
“Police and Kellys” became a favourite game among school
children everywhere in Victoria, and a game in which the
Kellys were always victorious. Then and for many months
afterwards the policeman’s lot was not a happy one, if con-
tempt and abuse, very largely undeserved, were calculated to
make him unhappy. All the mistakes made by the police
were exaggerated, and the most absurd tales were told of
their deliberate wish to avoid the outlaws and their refusal
to venture into places where they knew them to be. Irre-
sponsible writers, who understood none of the tremendous


difficulties which the nature of the country and the people
put in the way of pursuit, spoke glibly of the disgrace
incurred by the police in not capturing the outlaws off-
hand, and assured the public that had they control of affairs
things would go very differently. It cannot be doubted
that mistakes were made. There was a want of concert be-
tween the police and other Government departments, as was
shown by the fact that no information was given to the police
of the breakage of the telegraph lines at Faithfull’s Creek,
whereas an early report might have changed everything.
But where the police were to blame the fault seems, as a
rule, to have lain at headciuarters rather than with
the officers actively engaged. The latter, with very
few exceptions, worked pluckily, intelligently, and hard;
but Captain Standish showed a certain lack of enthusiasm
and energy in the supreme direction of affairs which was
most discouraging to those under him, while his evident
partiality for Mr. Hare and his inclination almost to thwart
Mr. Nicolson were productive of anything but good feeling
and discipline in the force. Mr. Hare unfortunately, more
especially at a later date than up to the time of the Euroa
robbery, did more to aggravate than to smooth away the
jealousies occasioned by Captain Standish’s ill-advised con-
duct. Active, energetic, courageous and popular with his
men, Mr. Hare was too little inclined to credit his brother
officers with the possession of the same qualities; and his
egotism, which led him to take an undue share of credit to
himself for every good move, was both during and after the
Kelly operations a legitimate cause of soreness and bitter-
ness to the other leaders of the police associated with him.
He, however, entered upon his new duties in the North-
Eastern District with the utmost confidence and enthusiasm,
and great things were expected of his association with Cap-
tain Standish in the way of a speedy termination to the
Kelly gang’s career, •


CHAPTER XIII.
THE KELLY GANG AT JERILDERIE
/C't FTER Captain Standish and Mr. Hare had made ar-
rangements for distributing the garrison artillery in
squads of six or seven through the disaffected
district, and had added to the police strength
in many townships, M'r. Hare gave his at-
tention to more active work. Rumours, most of them ab-
solutely baseless, were arriving every day concerning ap-
pearances by the outlaws, or some of them, at places in all
corners of the district and out of it. A squatter sent word
post haste to Benalla that the outlaws were shooting par-
rots near his garden, and this with many other statements
just as absurd received enquiry from the police and kept
the men employed. Mr. Hare, however, for some weeks,
accompanied no search parties himself, his time being fully
taken up in making himself acquainted with the police under
his command and the private agents in Government employ.
This work for a long time kept him travelling from station to
station over thousands of square miles of rough, hilly coun-
try. On his recommendation some of the smartest men were
promoted to the rank of senior constable, in order to give
them authority to command the search parties which were
everywhere organised for use when they should be wanted.
From December 12 to the end of the year nothing of any
moment took place; but at the beginning of 1879 Captain
Standish, Mr. Hare and Mr. Sadlier in consultation together,
and with the approval of the Government, determined to put
the outlawry Act in operation against a number of known
or suspected Kelly sympathisers. The greatest secrecy
was preserved with regard to this intention. Had it be-
come known that arrests were to be made there might have
been as much trouble in catching the sympathisers as in
catching their principals; and accordingly, after a black


list had been made on information supplied by Detective
Ward and several of the police, about twenty men, resident
in different parts of the Kelly country, were all arrested on
one day and lodged in the Beechworth gaol.
The value of this move at this particular time was, to say
the least of it, extremely doubtful. No doubt it to some
extent embarrassed the outlaws by depriving them of the
services of many of agents and diminishing their
sources of food and other supplies, but at the same time it
roused a bitterly hostile feeling against the police in the
minds even of many who had no sympathy with the Kellys.
Had there been available evidence upon which to commit
the accused for trial the matter would have been different,
but in nearly all the cases, though everyone felt morally cer-
tain that the prisoners were well disposed to the Kellys and
were ready to help them, if they had not done so, there was
no overt act in contravention of the law that could be proved
against them. The result was that when the cases came
on for hearing a police officer appeared at Beechworth and
applied for a week's remand, which was granted by the police
magistrate. When the court sat again a remand was again
asked for, on the grounds that to call the evidence of private
people at that time would put their lives in danger from the
outlaws, and that to call the police would necessitate taking
them away from urgent duty. These excuses were flimsy.
Counsel for the prisoners protested bitterly against this in-
fraction of British justice involved in the continued imprison-
ment of persons against whom no charges supported by
evidence were disclosed, but the police magistrate, with a
hint from the Government, declared that exceptional cases
demanded exceptional measures, and granted the remand.
So from week to week the farce continued, the public grow-
ing more incensed, the prisoners more insulting and defiant,
and the police officers themselves more disgusted with the
false position in which they were placed, and the waste of time,
caused by going every week to Beechworth on their un-


popular task of asking for further illegal imprisonment oi
the sympathisers. However, they remained in gaol, and
had a larger number been so arbitrarily treated results ol
some kind might have followed; but many of the Kellys’
best friends were still at large, including their sisters and
other female relatives, while injustice was winning over
others from the side of the law to theirs.
In the beginning of February, when the Beechworth gaol
was still full of sympathisers, Aaron Sherritt, the agent en-
gaged by Mr. Sadlier early in the pursuit, came to Mr. Hare
in Benalla with important news. Mr. Hare was greatly im-
pressed by the man’s personality and honesty of purpose, and
flattered himself that his feelings were reciprocated. Describ-
ing their interview later, he wrote: “ Somehow or other T
made a most wonderful impression on him. I had some
drink with him, and saw that my influence over him was
very great.” Whether Sherritt was as greatly impressed as
Mr. Hare believed or not, he communicated important news
to the effect that on the previous afternoon at his hut, which
lay among the hills near Beechworth, midway between the
elder Sherritt’s and Mrs. Byrne’s, he had met Joe Byrne and
Dan Kelly. Dan, he said, had been suspicious and kept at
a distance; but Joe Byrne had jumped off his horse and
entered into a long conversation, during which he had asked
Sherritt to join the gang and accompany them to Goulburn,
a town in New South Wales, where the Kellys had relatives
and which they proposed to visit. Sherritt refused, where-
upon Byrne admitted he was right not to mix himself up
with them and get into trouble, and rode away with Dan
Kelly. Sherritt noted the brands of their horses which he gave
to Mr. Hare, and told him that one outlaw rode a bay and the
other a grey, both very fine animals. Giving Sherritt two
pounds for his information and advising him not to let him-
self be seen in Benalla. Mr. Hare immediately sent warning
telegrams to the Victorian police on the border and to the
police of New South Wales. News shortly arrived that


)n the evening of the day named by Sherritt men supposed
;o be Byrne and Dan Kelly had been seen riding towards
;he Murray, and a police party was sent up the river to
watch a crossing place where a chain of hills on either side
:»f the river runs all the way to Goulburn.
Nothing was heard or seen of the bushrangers till some
ve or six days later, when on the evening of February
10 a telegram arrived informing Captain Standish that they
had been at Jerilderie, a town in New South Wales some
sixty miles beyond the Victorian border. On this informa-
tion police parties were immediately despatched to watch
every crossing place in the hope of intercepting the Kellys
on their return from New South Wales.
By this time all Australia was astonished by the news of
an exploit more audacious in some respects than any.the
bushrangers had perpetrated before. Leaving Victoria
on the day they talked with Sherritt, they probably met
beyond the border; at any rate all four of them, riding
quietly together, took their way, not towards Goulburn, but
to Jerilderie, a township containing three or four hundred in-
habitants, distant about sixty miles from the Murray. The
country in its vicinity is not rough and mountainous like
the bushrangers’ native haunts, but a dead level plain,
dotted sparsely here and there with clumps of timber. The
outlaws, however, crossed over it unobserved, and late on the
night of Saturday, March 8, they called at the police station
which lies at some little distance from the township. The
two constables, Richards and Devine, and the wife and
family of Devine, who occupied the station, had all gone to
bed. They were awakened by a loud knocking at the door
and a call to the police to get up as a drunken man in the
township had committed a murder at Davidson s Hotel.
Both constables, going to the door undressed and unarmed,
listened for some time to the details of an imaginary disturb-
ance which Ned Kelly poured into their ears while he
waited to see if any other constables would come out of the
93
THE KELLY GANG OF BUSHRANGERS.


barracks. Satisfied presently that there were no more police
to deal with, the outlaws suddenly produced loaded revolvers
and bailed up the two constables, who, seeing nothing but
death before them if they resisted, gave in with the best
grace they could. Entering the barracks and closing the
door, the Kellys placed Devine and Richards in their own
lock-up for the night. Mrs. Devine, in her night-dress,
was made to show the outlaws over the premises in case
other men might be concealed there, and after Ned Kelly
had secured all the arms in the barracks she was, with
her children, allowed to go to rest. Steve Hart was left in
the house as sentry, and he let Mrs. Devine know that on any
attempt to escape she and the imprisoned constables would
be immediately shot. In the meantime the other bush-
rangers made their horses comfortable in the police stables,
after which they went into the police station to take up their
quarters for the night.
When morning came Ned Kelly and Joe Byrne
dressed themselves in the constables’ uniforms and
moved about the yard and barracks in sight of any-
one who might be passing, without attracting any atten-
tion. From Mrs. Devine they learnt that she was accus-
tomed to sweep and get ready the court-house in which a
Roman Catholic Church service was held, and to
avoid exciting suspicion she was allowed to do so
as usual, Joe Byrne in uniform accompanying her
and escorting her back to the station. In the after-
noon Hart and Byrne, both dressed as constables,
took Richards out of the lock-up and made him accompany
them m a walk through the town, that they might learn the
run of the streets and the position of the buildings. Richards
was warned that if anyone accosted the party, under penalty
of being immediately shot through the head, he was to intro-
duce the bushrangers as new constables just sent up to
Jerilderie to give the town extra protection against the
Kelly gang. On their return to the police station Richards


was reincarcerated, and the bushrangers, making Mrs. De-
vine prepare their meals, spent the remainder of the after-
noon and the night undisturbed.
On Monday morning Joe Byrne, in uniform, took two of
the horses to be shod by the police farrier, who did the work
but apparently was rendered somewhat suspicious by
Bryne’s manner, for he was careful to note the brands of the
lorses.
About eleven o’clock Ned and Dan Kelly, wearing police
costume, took Richards with them into the town, while
Byrne and Hart followed in their own clothes on horseback.
Their first move was to take possession of the Royal Hotel,
idjoining the Bank of New South Wales which they br-
anded to rob. Mr. Cox, the proprietor, was introduced by
Richards to Ned Kelly, who told him he must give up to the
gang some rooms in the hotel for the reception of anyone he
might take prisoner. Mr. Cox, who showed Kelly over
the place, was confined himself in the big dining-room as
a beginning, and the other three bushrangers, taking up
positions in the bar and elsewhere, marched off the servants
and everyone who came near the hotel to the dining-room.
When a mob of prisoners had been secured the bushrangers
turned their attention to the bank, Mr. Living, the ac-
countant, hearing someone at the back door, went to tell
him that he must not enter there, and found himself con-
fronted by Joe Byrne with a revolver in his hand. To an
enquiry who he was Byrne answered, “ the Kelly gang,”
and ordered Living to give up all firearms in the bank. Mr.
Mackin, another clerk who had been standing in the street,
on hearing the noise entered the bank, and was ordered by
Joe Byrne to jump over the counter and join himself and
Living. Since Byrne was pointing two revolvers at him,
Mackin promptly obeyed. He and Living allowed them-
selves to be conducted to the hotel next door and were con-
fronted by Ned Kelly, who asked them where Mr. Jarleton,
the manager and only remaining official of the bank, was to


be found. The clerks said he had just returned from ;
journey and was in his dressing-room, whereupon Ned Kell}
and Byrne went back to the bank but failed to find him
Ned therefore called Living away from the hotel and tok
him he must find Mr. Jarleton promptly. As it turned out, h<
was in his bath preparatory to dressing himself after a long
dusty ride. Living told him the bank was stuck up am
that he must dress as quickly as possible and surrender him
self, which Mr. Jarleton was forced to do, Dan Kelly coming
over from the hotel to take charge of him.
In the meantime Ned Kelly and Byrne were engaged ii
appropriating all the money in the bank, making Living
show them where it was to be found. When some £7OO
the teller s cash , had been taken, Mr. Elliott, the local school
master, entered the bank and was told by Kelly to junq
over the counter. He professed himself unable to do so
but the sight of Ned Kelly’s revolver muzzle gave him un
wonted activity, and after all he found it possible. Kelly
who again expected to get £ 10,000, was unsatisfied with th<
teller’s cash and demanded more from Living, who tok
some plucky though useless falsehoods, saying that no'
thing of any value was in the safe, but Kelly refused to be
lieve him and brought in the manager, getting from him tin
duplicate key. The other he had already obtained fron
Living. From the safe £1,450 was taken, and also a num
her of bank books, which, in spite of remonstrances, Kell}
burnt, probably being under the impression that he wai
thereby doing a good turn for poor debtors of the bank.
While the outlaws were in the office Mr. Rankin and Mr.
Gill, two townsmen, entered and were told to bail up, but
instead of obeying they made a bolt into the street. Rankin
was caught and very roughly handled by Kelly who took
him into the hotel, and making him stand apart from the
others against a wall in the passage, said he would shoot
him. Rankin, who was a well-known merchant and a jus-
tice of the peace, behaved most pluckily in these trying cir-


cumstances, and all the other prisoners begged Kelly not to
fire. He made a great show of unwillingness to be merciful,
one would suppose in order to inspire salutary fear, for even
his spirit of domineering vanity could scarcely induce him to
commit murder for such trifling cause as a momentary re-
fusal to obey him. Whatever his real intentions may have
been, the prisoners spent a most uncomfortable time, for
Dan Kelly and Hart, were quite anxious to fire into them
for the offence of interceding for Rankin, and Ned Kelly
declared that before he left he was going to shoot Richards
and Devine. In fact he said his object in coming to the
town had been simply to kill them, and that the robbing of
the bank was a mere incident in his visit.
After dealing with Mr. Rankin, Ned Kelly, accompanied
by Living and Richards, went in search of Mr. Gill, the other
man who had fled from the bank, but he had hidden himself
away in the bed of a creek and they were unable to find him.
This was a great disappointment to Kelly as Mr. Gill was
the editor of the local newspaper, and the bushranger
wished him to print an account of his life and great deeds,
■which he had either written himself or got some friend—
perhaps Joe Byrne who was the litterateur of the gang—to
write for him. Not being able to see the editor, Kelly
called at his house where he met Mrs. Gill and endeavoured
to persuade her to take the manuscript, saying he would pay
for the printing; but she steadily refused to have anything
to do with the matter, and, to prevent Kelly’s temper becom-
ing more dangerous, Living asked for the writing, promis-
ing that he would see that it was printed. Mr. Living kept
his word ; and the production—a bombastic eulogy of Kelly’s
prowess, with tirades against the police and some account
of the murders at the Wombat —eventually appeared in
print.
For some hours after the bank had been robbed the out-
laws held possession of the town, and though acting in some
respects with apparent rashness, they really made their


safety secure by the number of hostages they had all the
time under the revolver muzzles of one or more of them.
Ned Kelly walked about the town and entered another hotel
where there were several people, any of whom he said might
kill him, but with the result of the wholesale slaughter in the
township.
At Jerilderie it was particularly noticeable that Ned Kelly
and Byrne were the leading spirits of the gang —Ned in un-
disputed authority, but Byrne an able and trusted lieutenant,,
while the other two played minor parts and were treated by
Ned Kelly in the most contemptuous fashion. Between him
and Hart there was some temper shown, and it appeared on
one occasion that revolvers might be used. Hart had stolen
watches and other property from several of the prisoners
who complained to Kelly. The leader was most indignant,,
called Hart a “ thing,” and made him return the stolen pro-
perty. One of Hart’s prizes was taken from a Wesleyan
clergyman and, in ordering Hart to give it back, Kelly told
him if he wanted a watch to get a good one. Acting on
this principle himself, he robbed the bank manager.
While Kelly was engaged in his search for a publisher,
Joe Byrne had taken command of the telegraph office. He
bailed up the operator and ordered men to sever the wires
and cut down eight posts, after which he amused himself
by overhauling all the messages which had gone through the
telegraphy office that day, and when Kelly arrived the two.
broke a number of insulators with their revolvers. Mr. Jef-
ferson, the telegraph master, was told that if he repaired the
line before next day he would be visited later on and shot by
the gang.
After Ned Kelly had taken a blood mare from the stables
of Mr. McDougall, an hotelkeeper, and the outlaws had
completed their business in the town, the leader made a
speech to the prisoners, trying to appeal to their sympa-
thies by an account of his wrongs and a garbled account of
the Wombat murders, also telling them that the next move


of the gang would be to rob the bank at Urana, another
New South Wales town. He then took Constable Richards
back to the police station and locked him up, after which
he returned to the hotel and gave the prisoners leave to
depart, first “ shouting ” a number of them to drinks in the
bar. Before this, towards evening, he had sent Byrne away
leading a pack horse, with the money in a bag strapped to
the saddle. He himself was the next to leave, and led with
him one of the police horses. Dan Kelly and Steve Hart
■departed last, and, before they took leave of the town they
galloped up and down the streets, flourishing revolvers and
singing songs in praise of their gang. It was well for the
townspeople that no mischief happened to them after Ned
Kelly and Byrne had gone, for the other two scoundrels
seemed to take pleasure in cruelty for its own sake, and had
shown a most unpleasant anxiety to shoot someone or other
all through the day. In time, however, they too relieved the
town of their presence and the inhabitants were able to
breathe freel} r . It is to the credit of the telegraph master,
Mr. Jefferson, that undeterred by the Kellys’ threats he
immediately set to work to repair the line, and by nine
o’clock that night Mr. Hare in Benalla received a wire tell-
ing him of the robbery at Jerilderie.
CHAPTER XIV.
THE CAMP AT MRS. BYRNE’S.
<ST> OLICE parties sent out with all possible despatch on re-
*** ceipt of the news from J erilderie watched every crossing-
place on the Murray, but without the least effect. Probably
they arrived at the river too late, but at any rate it was soon
■commonly known that the Kellys were at home again in
the Strathbogie Ranges, or some other part of the mountain-


ous North-Eastern District. They may have ridden back to-
gether, for they were reported to have met at a station
twenty miles from Jcrilderie, or they may have separated
and come together again at some Victorian rendezvous.
One result of the exploit was an increase of the reward
offered by the Government for the capture of the outlaws
to £ 1,000 per head, and an offer of the same amount by the
New South Wales Government and banks, so that the de-
struction of the gang became worth £B,OOO to any man who
could accomplish it. Blood money, however, owing either
to fear of the outlaws, or to some worthier instinct, had no
apparent attractions for men who knew the Kellys’ where-
abouts. There were numbers of perfectly law-abiding resi-
dents who at various times could have told the exact position
of the Kelly camps, but they did not choose to do so. Just
after the Jerilderie affair Ned Kelly, disguised and muffled
up, was recognised by a farmer on the King River some
forty miles from Benalla at whose house he called, and
others were aware that the outlaws had a camp close by, but
they made no mention of these things. They had no sym-
pathy with crime. On the whole they would have been glad
to see the Kellys caught, but an abstract respect for the law
was not sufficient to make them rnn risks of having their
lives taken, or their stacks and fences burnt and their cattle
killed or driven away. The Kellys, they knew, would not
harm them. Except in murdering Kennedy, the outlaws
had done nothing which particularly shocked the average
bush farmer’s conscience, and even with regard to the police
murders Kelly had succeeded to some extent in fostering
a belief that the constables w r ere killed in fair fight. The
bank robberies were not altogether displeasing to poor
farmers rather inclined to regard banks as their enemies and
fair game for anyone smart enough to get the better of them.
Accordingly, while they were left alone —and the Kellys, hav-
ing soared above such small annoying tricks as stealing their
neighbours’ stock, were unlikely to harm them —a large


number of people who saw or heard of the outlaws fre-
quently decided to let the police catch them as best they
might without taking any part in the game.
On the Saturday after the robbery, Mr. Hare, whose faith
in Sherritt’s bona fides was strengthened by late events,
went to see him at Beechworth, and learnt that on the pre-
vious Wednesday Dan Kelly had been at Mrs. Byrne’s and
had breakfasted there. The gang, he said, had separated
after leaving Jerilderie and were to meet at a certain place;
but the others had not kept their appointment, and he was in
search of news of them. Sherritt believed that the whole
gang would be at Mrs. Byrne’s on the following night and
he asked Mr. Hare to bring men to watch the place. De-
tective Ward, who was present at the conversation, dis-
trusted Sherritt and told Mr. Hare that though the man
could put the outlaws into his power he did not believe that
for all the money in the world he would betray his friend,
Joe Byrne. Sherritt was at this time engaged to Byrne’s
sister, and for the credit of human nature one hopes that
Ward was right; but Mr. Hare thought otherwise, and the
evidence is inconclusive, though there is little doubt that
Sherritt cared far more for the reward money than for his
faith towards other members of the gang.
Next night Mr. Hare and Detective Ward met Sherritt
at a place agreed on, where they were to have been joined by
a party of police from the township of Eldorado, but by a mis-
chance these men did not appear, and accordingly, pluckily
determining to go alone, Mr. Hare and Detective Ward
trusted themselves to the guidance of Sherritt and set out
on a pitch-black night for a ride through the rough, stony
and scrubby mountains. After riding for some time Aaron
Sherritt halted and pointed out a glimmer of firelight
through the trees. It was the bushrangers, he said. This
was their country into which no one else ventured, and for
once they had been careless enough to betray themselves
by enjoying the comfort of a fire, instead of seeking safety


by freezing in their camp on the coldest nights, as they were
usually reported to do. On instructions from Mr. Hare,
Sherritt got down from his horse and sneaked forward to
make certain who the men by the fire might be, and in a
few minutes he returned. “ Where do you think that fire
is, Mr. Hare?” he asked. “ About 150 yards away,” was the
reply, to which Aaron answered that it was three miles or
more. Mr. Hare believed that Sherritt had sold him, but
on riding forward found that he spoke the truth, for they
reached the edge of a precipice and saw that the fire which
had looked so near was on the other side of a deep gully,
with the Woolshed diggings on the flat between.
Disappointed here, the party rode away to watch Mrs.
Byrne’s house, which lay in the gully under the lee of a steep
hill. Sherritt, crawling up to the window, listened for a
time and returned, saying that the gang were not yet ar-
rived, but he pointed out the spot where they were accus-
tomed to tie their horses, and led the two officers to a hiding-
place near a stockyard by which he advised waiting and
watching all night, as through the stockyard the outlaws
always passed on their way to the house. The police waited;
the outlaws did not come, but Sherritt was confident that
before long they would do so, and said that if the police
wanted to get them they must watch the house.
Mr Hare determined to follow this advice. Riding back
to Beechworth in the morning, he made arrangements for
a permanent camp in the gully about a mile from the
Byrnes’ hut. To this camp he brought seven men, and
placed four more in another, high above it in the moun-
tains, at a spot which commanded the gully below,
and to which .Sherritt said the Kellys often came. For
twenty-five days and nights Mr. Hare and his men under-
went severe hardships and ran considerable danger in their
watch for the Kellys, During the day they rested, exposed
to the heat of the sun and without any cover, while at night
they crept down and watched Mrs. Byrne’s house till morn-


:ng, returning half frozen at dawn to their comfortless camp.
Fires were forbidden lest the smoke should give the outlaws
warning, but all Mr. Hare’s precautions against discovery
were in vain. The Kellys did not come, and after the
twentieth day Mrs. Byrne, who for some reason suspected
police were about, discovered a piece of soap near a creek,
and a stick which a constable had been whittling to amuse
himself, while later on the reflection of the sun on a sardine
tin on the hill-side caught her eye, and, going to investigate
its meaning, she stumbled upon the police camp. Mr.
Hare’s chief concern seems to have been for Sherritt, whose
chance of life would have been small had he been seen with
the police and remained afterwards in the district. Sherritt
realised his danger and on Mr. Hare’s advice left the camp
immediately at his best speed, in order to prove an alibi, by
showing himself to other friends of the Kellys at a distance,
returning to join the police in the evening.
After this discovery Mr. Hare wished to break up the
camp, but Sherritt assured him that Mrs. Byrne had, except
through him, no means of communicating with the outlaws,
and that there was still hope of effecting a capture.
Taking a penny whistle with him that evening he ap-
proached the Byrnes’ house, on the way making music which
he hoped would bring out his girl to meet him, and enable
him to learn just what Mrs. Byrne knew. The Byrnes of
course would suppose him to come from his own hut which
was not far distant from theirs. Miss Byrne did not go to
meet Sherritt, but the old lady drew him aside and told him
she had discovered the police, rating Aaron at the same time
for his stupidity in not doing so. He expressed the utmost
surprise and some incredulity, but his mind was relieved by
feeling that he was not suspected, and on his persuasion
Mr. Hare remained in his camp for five more days.
During one of the night watches, at about ten o’clock, a
man on foot passed close by Mr. Hare and his men on the
way to Mrs. Byrne's house. Mr. Hare did not challenge or


fire, for Sberritt, he remembered, was at the Byrnes' and
could bring word back as to who the stranger was. Ac-
cordingly, though he suspected him to be Joe Byrne, much
to the astonishment of the constables Mr. Hare allowed
the man to walk through the midst of them. When Aaron
returned from the Byrnes’ about two hours later Mr. Hare
waited to see if he would make mention of any strangers
having been at the house. He did not do so, and on being
questioned upon the subject, said, yes, a man named Scotty
who came from the hills had been there. Mr. Hare was not
satisfied. He believed the man to be Joe Byrne, for if there
were any one of the gang whom Aaron might refuse to be-
tray it would be he, and it seems somewhat extraordinary
under the circumstances that nothing further was done. Mr.
Hare makes no mention of the man’s departure from the
house, and apparently the police party returned to the camp,
leaving to his own devices the stranger who Mr. Hare then
believed at least might be Joe Byrne, and whom later he still
more strongly suspected.
There is much reason to doubt whether the existence of
Mr. Hare’s camp was from the very beginning a secret to
the outlaws or their friends, though its exact position may
have been unknown. The police horses were put in Aaron
Sherritt’s paddock, where their presence was likely to be ob-
served and to excite suspicion; and it appears that almost
from the inception of the enterprise Mrs. Byrne had observed
policemen’s tracks, which the sympathisers always recog-
nised since the constables wore distinctive boots, while such
carelessness as casually leaving about soap, whittled sticks,
and sardine tins argues very badly for the intelligence with
which the ambush was conducted. Some five days after
Mrs. Byrne caught sight of the police Mr. Hare came to the
conclusion that it was useless to waste more time in the
gully and left the camp, though his men were kept there for
about a fortnight longer.
During the time Mr. Hare was in the camp Sherritt spent


his days as a rule at his own place or his mother’s, which
was near it, but he occasionally put in a few hours with the
police, when he told the superintendent much of the ways
of horse stealers generally and of himself and the Kellys in
particular. For his own part he confessed that, even if he
obtained the reward and fulfilled his ambition by purchasing
a fine stallion and some good mares to breed first-class
horses, he still would find more pleasure in stealing than in
breeding them. One of the best dodges for altering brands,
he explained, was to pull out the hair with a pair of tweezers
to add or change a letter, and to paint over the depilated part
with iodine, which made the skin appear as if it were branded
in the ordinary way, and this process, he said, he and the
Kellys had often executed with great success. For Ned
Kelly’s determination, resource, and powers of endurance
he had an almost superstitious admiration. Mr. Hare had
expressed astonishment at his (Aaron’s) ability to sleep upon
the ground when the temperature was below freezing
point, uncovered by any blanket and not wearing even a coat,
and he asked if the outlaws possessed the same iron consti-
tutions. According to Aaron, Ned Kelly had twice his
physical powers in every way, but he considered himself a
better man than any of the other three.
On March 6, when Mr. Hare was watching for the Kellys
near Mrs. Byrnes’, the forces engaged in hunting the out-
laws were added to by the arrival from Queensland of a
Queensland officer, Sub-Inspector O’Connor, a white
senior constable, and six native black trackers—Corporal
Sambo, and troopers Hero, Johnny, Jimmy, Barney, and
jack. Early in the Kelly campaign the Queensland
authorities had offered the services of some of their native
police, who did excellent work in the northern colony in
following tracks often invisible to white men, but Captain
Standish had been averse to employing them, though Mr.
Sadlier and Mr. Nicolson made use when they could of
Victorian aboriginals who possessed something of the same


skill. However, after the Jerilderie affair Captain Standish
saw the necessity of taking every possible measure against
the Kellys, and sank his own prejudices against the trackers
m so far as to allow of the acceptance of the men offered by
Queensland. On their arrival he met them and their officer,
Mr. O’Connor, at Albury, and experiments were very
shortly made of their powers of tracking. These, though
carried out under conditions which by no means satisfied
Mr. O’Connor, greatly impressed the Victorian officers,
including even Captain Standish, who nevertheless to the
last maintained that they were comparatively useless in fol-
lowing men who moved with the celerity which character-
ised the journeys of the Kellys. ■ This, however, was not
the opinion of Mr. Hare, Mr. Sadlier, and Mr. Nicolson,
who placed great reliance on the trackers, nor of the Kellys,
who feared them more than all the other police in the dis-
trict.
Very shortly after the black trackers’ arrival one of the
troopers died of congestion of the lungs, and all of them
seemed to feel the change from the warm climate of Queens-
land to the frosty air of the Victorian highlands. For a
time Mr. O’Connor, Mr. Sadlier, Captain Standish and Mr.
Hare all lived in unity together at police head-quarters in
Benalla, but before Mr. O’Connor had been very long in
the colony unfortunate quarrels arose between him and
Captain Standish, with the result that much of the usefulness
of the trackers was discounted by Captain Standish’s refusal
to employ them on certain occasions when reliable news of
the outlaws had been obtained.
To give a detailed account of the work done by Mr. Hare
during the months from December, 1878, to July, 1879,
that he remained on duty in the North-Eastern District would
be impossible without filling hundreds of pages. During
nearly the whole of that time he was constantly engaged in
search parties, and on several occasions must have been
very close upon the Kellys. The fact was, however, that


being close upon the outlaws many times gave the police no
reasonable cause to suppose that they would once actually
obtain touch with them; for, at least as well mounted as
the police, the Kellys were man for man better horsemen
and far more intimately acquainted with the country. Given
one hundred yards’ start of a constable, there was but the
remotest chance of the outlaws being captured or hit. They
could gallop through timber and down mountain-sides that
more gently bred horsemen would hesitate about attempting
at a walk, and once out of sight they might strike north,
south, east or west, leaving no clue behind them which
would be of the slightest use to the police if they hoped to
make a rapid pursuit. With the assistance of the trackers
it was no doubt possible to slowly and painfully follow the
outlaws, keeping them constantly on the move; but there
was really little chance of shooting or capturing them except
by lying in wait for them and surprising them on a visit to
their friends. This, however, was also extremely difficult,
for information of the Kellys’ intentions was only obtain-
able through spies, and with these the Kellys were better
supplied than the police both as to numbers and good faith.
Sympathy secured the outlaws much assistance; money se-
cured them much more, and it was clear that they spent
money freely, for notes which were known by their numbers
to have gone to the bank at Jerilderie were in circulation all
through the North-Eastern District.
Mr. Hare says himself that the police parties, though they
did not wear uniform, were all “ as well known as the
town clock,” and that agents of the Kellys hung about every
police station and every railway station in the district, ready
to gallop away at a moment’s notice on the police making
any move. No doubt the constant search caused some
anxiety to the Kellys, but in spite of it they enjoyed a good
deal of their friends’ society. They even, it seems, intended
to go to a race meeting at a township named Whorouly,
not far from Beechworth, and Aaron Sherritt received a


letter from Joe Byrne, asking him to ride a horse of Byrne’s
at the meeting. This letter Sherritt brought to Mr. Hare,
who sent police, disguised as three-card trick men, to the
meeting. Mr. Hare himself attended and was greatly
amused bv certain people pointing out Aaron Sherritt to him
as a notorious Kelly sympathiser, and urging that he
should be arrested for the theft of a very fine horse he was
riding, since he could never have come by it honestly —
the said horse having been purchased only a few days before
by Mr. Hare for Sherritt’s use. Mr. Hare pleaded ig-
norance of the man and his doings, and looked forward to
the developments the day might bring forth; but Joe Byrne,
who had arranged to meet Sherritt at the back of the course,
must have been warned of danger, for he failed to put in
an appearance and Mr. Hare and his constables went dis-
appointed away.
CHAPTER XV.
FRUITLESS EFFORTS.
C\ N addition to the regular police several detectives were
C/ employed by the Government in the search for the
Kellys, and they travelled the country from end to end,
never actually meeting the outlaws but occasionally ob-
taining reliable information as to their, movements. The
difficulty was, however, that, if not when the information
was received, at least by the time it could be communi-
cated, the Kellys were probably miles away from the spot
where they had been seen ; and the dangers and hardships
the detectives underwent led to no particular result beyond


the very useful one of making the police acquainted with
the character and sentiments towards them and the out-
laws of people throughout the district. The service was
certainly one of considerable danger, for any detective who
might be discovered was extremely likely to get a bullet
through him when wandering in some remote locality.
Detective Ward, who had been enquiring into the Kellys’
movements before they murdered the police, and who had
furnished the information on which Kennedy’s party set
out, was in the habit of travelling through the Kelly coun-
try in various disguises, appearing sometimes as a miner—
at others as a farm hand, a stockman, a selector in search
of land —and in all his journeys he succeeded in escaping
recognition.
Both the Kellys and the police lived and moved and had
their being in perpetual distrust of many of the men on
whom they had to depend, and the distrust on both sides
seems to have been justified. Several of the police agents
besides Sherritt played the part of friends of the Kellys.
It was, in fact, their ability to do so that gave them their
chief value as agents, but while they took money from
and professed to help both sides, there was reason to sus-
pect that they did help the outlaws at least as much as the
police. Being paid by the latter for information furnished,
thev sometimes concocted imaginary tales, and at others
gave true intelligence when it was too stale to be of any
use. They probably realised that with the capture of
the Kellys their occupation would be gone, and that, though
some part of the reward might come into their hands, it
would be impossible for them to take blood money and
afterwards live in safety in the North-Eastern District.
All these agents were known to the police by assumed
names, which were used in addressing them or conducting
correspondence. One named “Sherrington,” who offered his
services to Captain Standish/in order to prove his zeal,
promptly brought in a circumstantial tale of meeting Ned


Kelly and Steve Hart in the Strathbogie Ranges. Ned
Kelly, he said, was very well dressed, with beautifully
polished boots, and stuck all over with revolvers. He com-
pared watches with “Sherrington ” and complimented him
upon the excellent time kept by his watch. Mr. Sad-
lier believed the story to be pure invention; but it was no
use to pay agents and refuse to act upon their information,
and accordingly two or three search parties were sent out
without discovering the Kellys, or any trace of them. Other
trouble with the agents arose through the zeal of a few law-
abiding persons and some of the police, unaware of their
vocation. Aaron Sherritt, especially, was a thorn in the agents’
side, for warnings against him were constantly brought to
Mr. Hare, and once he was arrested for the theft of a horse
which he stole from Mrs. Byrne and sold to Ned Kelly’s
sister, Mrs. Skillion. To Mr. Hare he admitted the theft,
which he had committed partly for amusement and to keep
his hand in, and partly because he was not pleased with Mrs.
Byrne’s conduct towards him and felt a desire to punish
her. Tt would have been very annoying for the police
to have their most valued agent imprisoned for horse-steal-
ing, and accordingly when he was arrested at a later date
it was contrived that not enough evidence should be brought
forward to commit him for trial. To whatever extent
Sherritt kept faith with the police it is certain that he was
a most slippery customer. With one of Mr. Hare s
troopers, who was of the larrikin type, he became most
“chummy.” The trooper, not being in uniform, was sus-
pected as a dangerous character by people who saw him ride
into Beechworth with Aaron Sherritt, and Mr. Hare re-
ceived warnings against him, with a description of the fine
horse he rode and was supposed to have stolen. To this
trooper, just after the Jerilderie robbery, Sherritt proposed
a little scheme. The outlaws, he said, would be sure to
come to Mrs. Byrne’s, and Joe Byrne would be lead-
ing a pack horse with the treasure strapped upon it. When


the gang were fired upon by the police the pack horse,
Aaron said, would be certain to break away. The obviously
sensible thing for himself and the constable to do was to
follow the horse, get the pack, and hide it in the bush, re-
turning when the excitement was over to get their “ plant ”
and slip away with it. The trooper professed to fall in
with this plan and reported it to Mr. Hare, but as the out-
laws did not put in an appearance nothing came of it.
After the break up of Mr. Hare’s watch camp at the
Byrnes’ he spent his time almost continuously on shorter
expeditions, sparing neither himself nor his horses nor men
in his efforts to come upon the outlaws. To keep some
kind of surveillance over the numerous sympathisers was
in itself a formidable task, for their numbers were recruited
again by the release, on April 22, of those arrested in the
beginning of January and kept illegally in prison for nearly
three months. The women, however, who had never been
arrested, gave the most trouble. Mrs. Skillion and Kate
Kelly, well aware that they were being watched every night,
before going to bed took out their dogs, and beat the bush
for hundreds of yards round the house in search of con-
stables, whom they sometimes discovered, shamefaced and
shivering, waiting for the visitors of whose arrival there
was no further chance that night. To abate the dog
nuisance Mr. Hare ordered his men to drop poisoned baits
about the place, but the Kelly women were not to be beaten
thus, and promptly put muzzles on their dogs. On one
occasion Kate Kelly was seen riding away with a large
bundle on her saddle to her cousin Tom Lloyd’s, and was
supposed to be conveying clothes or provisions to her
brothers, who, it was reported, would visit Lloyd’s next
day. A police party accompanied by Sherritt went from
Benalla, and arrived before daylight next morning near
Lloyd’s house which they watched from a clump of trees.
Just at daybreak a boy issued from the house with dogs,
which scented the police and led the boy so close to them


that he must have discovered their hiding place. At any
rate he ran back to the house and several shots were fired,
which were probably intended to warn any of the outlaws
who might be hiding in the vicinity to defer their visit to
their cousin till the coast was clear.
While the Kelly sisters and cousins were most active in
their assistance to the gang, and were supposed to be the
chief mediums through whom news of police movements
gathered by the numerous agents was communicated to the
outlaws, Hart and Byrne also had brothers and sisters who
spent much of their time riding about the country in the
supposed interests of the outlaws. After the break up of
the watch party near her mother’s house, Miss Byrne, pro-
bably suspecting Sherritt, broke off her engagement with
him, and he informed Mr. Hare that he was going to make
love to Kate Kelly. She was well disposed towards him;
but Mrs. Skillion. who was keener sighted, strongly objected
to her sister having anything to do with Sherritt, and on
one occasion, on returning to her house and finding Kate
and Aaron had gone out walking together, she rode away to
the Oxley police station, distant about ten miles, and laid
some charge against him. She had no difficulty
in showing cause why Aaron should be arrested, and a
constable immediately set out to the Kellys’ house to cap-
ture him. Sherritt, however, bolted when he saw the
trooper coming, and though a couple of shots were fired
after him succeeded in getting away to Beechworth where
he reported the matter to Detective Ward, asking him to
get Mr. Hare to prevent the police interfering with him, and
this was done.
Mrs. Skillion appears to have shown great feminine in-
genuity in worrying the police. For a long time her mid-
night expeditions had been known to them, and in the small
hours one morning, seeing her leave the house with a large
bundle strapped to the saddle, a party followed her stealthily
on foot, and as they believed unobserved, for miles to a


gap in the hills. Day was jnst breaking as they climbed
the hill, and at the top they found Mrs. Skillion, sitting
on a log waiting for them. .She sainted the police by put-
ting her fingers expressively to her nose, and when they ex-
amined the pack upon her saddle they found it contained
nothing more incriminating that an old table-cloth, evi-
dently carried away into the bush for the express purpose
of taking a rise out of the police.
For months the police searched and re-searched the moun-
tains, sometimes acting on information, sometimes work-
ing on a chance, and an interesting volume might be written
descriptive of their experiences in the bush, but in no case
did they get a glimpse of the Kellys. Mr. Hare, who was the
life and soul of these expeditions, some years before his
death published a book, which devoted many pages to accounts
of this work, and yet he declares that he “has not given a hun-
dredth part of what actually took place during the time
that he was searching for the outlaws." He, however,
mentions very many incidents which space forbids enumer-
ating here. One occasion to which he refers was produc-
tive of more than passing effect upon the fortunes of the
police, since it caused or aggravated a spirit of ill-feeling
between Captain Standish and the Queensland officer, Mr.
O’Connor, which seriously hampered the operations of the
police. Captain Standish, as has been mentioned, had
a low opinion of the usefulness of the trackers under Mr.
O’Connor’s command, and one evening when very impor-
tant information arrived from a well-to-do farmer, describ-
ing carefully a locality where he had seen four men on the
previous evening, and where he supposed them still to be,
Captain Standish determined to go in pursuit without assis-
tance from Mr. O Connor and the blacks.
On May 24, when the letter arrived, Captain Standish and
]VIr. O'Connor were absent from the hotel in Benalla where
the three officers lived together, but Mr. Hare, who opened
all the Commissioner’s correspondence, read it, and was so


much impressed by the writer's certainty that the men
seen by him were the Kellys that he at once sent a message
to the house where Captain Standish was dining, asking him
to return. The Commissioner, who arrived within a few
minutes, also considered the information excellent and
talked over plans with Mr. Hare, telling him to at once see
the men and arrange for an early start next morning. In
the course of the evening Mr. O’Connor, too, returned to
the hotel, and, addressing Mr. Hare, asked, “ What is the
news:” Mr. Hare nodded towards Captain Standish, as
though referring Mr. O’Connor to him, and Mr. O'Connor
repeated the question, but Captain Standish refused
to tell him anything, having previously instructed
Mr. Hare also to preserve secrecy. Mr. O’Connor natur-
ally felt very much aggrieved by this rebuff, as up to this
time all the officers had treated one another confidentially,
whereas afterwards bitterness and jealousy arose, in which
Mr. Hare as well as the Commissioner became involved
with Mr. O’Connor.
Mr. Hare, however, by no means shared Captain
Standish’s poor opinion of the trackers’ value, and
on this occasion borrowed from Mr. O’Connor one
of the “ boys ” when he started away with his party at
six o’clock next morning. As for the expedition, it ended
as all the others had done, in nothing. The police on leav-
ing Benalla encountered a man named Nolan, one of the
most noted Kelly sympathisers, who watched them intently,
but as Mr. Hare was then travelling directly away from
the spot he eventually meant to visit he chuckled to himself,
believing that for once the Kelly agents were outwitted.
For the night he remained at a camping-place in the Warby
Ranges, having made arrangements for a start at one o’clock
in the morning. The men were in high spirits at the
prospect of meeting the outlaws, and cheerfully submitted
to resting on the bare ground without a fire—an experience
in the frosty highlands by no means pleasant but by this


time ver> familiar to them. The way to the hut where the
Kellys were expected to be lay across the railway line, and
there was the usual delay in opening the railways gates at
the crossing. The gatekeepers, Mr. Hare found, were al-
ways very hard to wake when police were on the move, and
their sleepiness he put down to sympathy with the Kellys,
just before dawn the police surrounded the house. Mr.
Hare knocked at the door, whereupon the owner of the
hut, a man named Cleary, appeared, and the police officer
demanded whether he had any strangers on the premises.
Very hesitatingly he admitted that he had, and the police,
t rushing in, discovered Nolan, the agent whom they had en-
countered when they were making away from the house ihe
day before. He said he had visited Cleary to give him
news of a funeral at which his presence was desired, but
seemed somewhat vague as to where the funeral was to
be. In his turn he asked what brought the police. Mr.
Hare told him the tracker had followed his tracks to
the house, and Nolan expressed polite wonder at the
tracker’s powers of working in the dark.
This expedition is typical of many others in which the
same high hopes, careful preparation, and prompt action
were followed by the •same lame and impotent conclusion;
but very often there were added great hardship and fatigue
from riding long journeys through mountainous country,
and spending days and even weeks at a time in the bush,
without the comfort of a fire on freezing nights when the
mercury was down in the twenties.
In some respects the Kellys at this period must have had
even a harder time than the police. Far out in the moun-
tain valleys of the King and the Dandongadale, where they
spent a portion of their time, they were fairly safe from at-
tack, and were able to indulge in fires and such other com-
forts as a bush camp affords, but, apart from the necessity
of renewing their stores of food, they had a craving for the
societv of their friends in the more inhabited districts round


Beechworth and Greta, which they could only gratify at
great risk. There is no doubt that they did so and that
the\ spent many a stolen evening by the firesides of their
sympathisers, but when within a radius of some twenty miles
from Benalla they lived the life of hunted animals, always
read\ to run or stand at bay when the slightest sound gave
them warning. They were younger and hardier men than
Mr. Hare and many of his troopers and able to stand the
wear and tear under which Mr. Hare’s health and spirits
at length gave way. He told Captain Standish that he
Avas no longer fit for active duty and confessed himself
beaten for the time, AA r ith the result that at the beginning of
Jula he was relieved of command in the district which Avas
reassumed by Mr. Nicolson, and almost after-
Avards he returned to duty at the police depot in Melbourne.
Very shortly before this, Captain Standish himself had gone
back to the Commissioner’s office in Melbourne. His
presence in the North-East had contributed nothing material
to any of the work done there. By his age and the fact
that he had been engaged for many years in purely office
work he w’as quite unfitted to take part in any active
operations. His quarrel with Mr. O’Connor prevented full
use being made of the services of the trackers, and by all
the officers under him, including even Mr. Hare Avh'o showed
no want of gratitude for the faA r our his chief bestowed on
him, he was considered apathetic. His heart did not
seem to be in the work of capturing the outlaAvs. He Avas
essentially a club-man, and his assumption of command
at Benalla was said to been an unwilling concession to
the opinion of Mr. Berry, then at the head of the Govern-
ment, who had declared that, in Captain Standish’s place, he
would go to the North-Eastern District and refuse to leave
it until the outlaws were taken, dead or alive.


The Death of Aaron Sherritt.-Page 130




CHAPTER XVI.
A CHANGE IN THE PLAN OF CAMPAIGN.
ONE of the first matters for Mr. Nicolson's decision when
he returned to the command at Benalla, arose on a
question from Mr. Sadlier concerning search parties sent out
on chance. Mr. Sadlier said “he hoped to Heaven Mr.
Nicolson was not going to continue this fooling any longer,”
to which Mr. Nicolson replied that he was not. Mr. Sad-
lier had frequently protested to Mr. Hare against these ex-
peditions which he thought wearied and broke down men
and horses to no purpose, but Mr. Plare refused to discon-
tinue them. Mr. Nicolson, however, was of Mr. Sadlier’s
way of thinking and the methods of the campaign were
changed. On information considered reliable and suffi-
ciently fresh parties still went out, but the general policy
adopted was, while surrounding the outlaws with spies or
agents, to lull them into a sense of false security by seldom
taking active measures against them. Mr. Nicolson hoped
that by this policy they would be tempted to show them-
selves with more and more boldness in the settled districts,
and enable him to finally make a sudden spring which would
once and for all put a stop to their career. Whether he
had favoured this change or no, circumstances to some ex-
tent forced it upon him, for he was allowed to draw upon
the war chest for his campaign by no means so generously as
Mr. Plare and Captain Standish had done. The Govern-
ment were anxious to cut down expense and Captain Stan-
dish fell in with their views by withdrawing numbers of
men from the district in spite of the protests of Mr. Sadlier,
who, having been on the spot from the beginning, was per-
haps best able to judge the necessities of the situation. A
comparison of the expenses incurred during Mr. Hare s
regime which lasted about seven months, and during that
of Mr. Nicholson which lasted eleven months, shows very


clearly how the latter officer was relatively disadvantaged
by want of money. For the former period the expenditure
was £1 1,371, and for the latter and longer one, only £6,722
—Mr. Nicolson thus having at his disposal per month less
than half the money spent by Captain Standish and Mr.
Hare.
While numbers of police were withdrawn from the district
just prior to or contemporaneously with Mr. Nicolson’s
taking charge, the strength of the military who had been
guarding townships from attack was very much reduced,
52 constables and 23 soldiers —75 men in all —being taken
away from the district. In these circumstances Mr. Nicol-
son arranged privately with certain men of the right sort,
to turn out and assist the police in case of an attack, or
occasion arising for a sudden pursuit of the outlaws. At
Wangaratta, Wodonga, Bright, and Mansfield, there were
sufficient police to defend the banks, but not enough to
make up a search party, except by combining forces or call-
ing in the assistance of civilians. On the suggestion of
Mr. Sadlier a complete search party was kept always ready
horsed and equipped at Benalla, but nowhere else in the
district. To secure places where there was treasure from
outrage and thus prevent the Kellys replenishing their
coffers, and at the same lime to have one efficient body to
pursue them, should the apparent weakness of the police
tempt them into the open, was all that Mr. Nicolson felt
himself able to accomplish with the resources at his com-
mand. At this time relations were more or less strained
between himself and Captain Standish, with the result that
Mr. Nicolson believed the economies insisted on by the
Commissioner were due. at least in part, to opposition to
himself; and the conduct of Mr. Hare, who never opposed
Captain Standish, did nothing to bring about a better feel-
ing between the officers of the police force. Air. Nicolson
saw in Mr. Hare a tendency to belittle his efforts and to
thwart him in many petty ways, such as advising Captain


Standish that ammunition was being wasted in the district,
Ivlr. Nicolson being anxious to give all the police under him
increased practice, as he found many of them quite unable
to make any good use of their firearms. Mr. Sadlier, who
seems to have possessed a fortunate faculty for keeping out
of quarrels, worked loyally and amicably with whatever
officer was for the time being in charge of operations, but he
certainly approved the methods of Mr. Nicolson far more
than those of Mr. Hare and Captain Standish, as did also
Mr. O'Connor; and when Mr. Nicolson went back to the
district the three officers gave each other their confidence
and help in a manner forming a refreshing contrast to the
state of affairs under Mr. Hare.
Being limited as to money, one of Mr. Nicolson’s first
efforts was to cut down unnecessary expense. The police
had been largely using hired horses and buggies, for ex-
ample, and in respect of the hire of one horse, Mr. Nicol-
son finding a bill owing for iiq instructed Mr. Sadlier to
try to compromise the matter, which he did by buying
the animal outright for £l5, thus saving the Government
£4 and getting the horse into the bargain. The police
stables, too, at Benalla were another useless source of great
expense, being full of highly-fed horses while there was
splendid grass in the Department’s paddock. Mr. Nicol-
son accordingly turned the horses into it, giving them an
allowance of hav every day to keep them in hard condition,
thus saving a considerable amount of money and giving
added usefulness to the horses; for when stable fed and shel-
tered, at the end of a three days’ expedition into the moun-
tains they were tucked up and useless from the cold and
change of feed; whereas under Mr. Nicolson s system they
became as well qualified as the outlaws’ horses to stand
hard wx>rk upon such feed as they could pick when hobbled
in the bush at night.
While introducing these reforms Mr. Nicolson constantly
travelled about the country himself, seeing people, making


friends with them, and endeavouring- to gain the confidence
and assistance of the fanners. The men were instructed to
do likewise, and as a result, information from good sources
concerning the Kellys began to arrive at headquarters. At
first the informants were timid, and the items of news were
not communicated until they were perhaps a month old.
Then only a fortnight would elapse before the people spoke,
and later on there was more or less constant information
coming in, sometimes not a week old. Meanwhile Mr.
Nicolson waited patiently. He had reason to believe that
the outlaws were greatly hampered by want of money, and
that their friends were urging them to make another bank
raid, which, if attempted, would probably result in their
capture. Some exploit was necessary to renew their pres-
tige and furnish them with the means of buying loyalty, and
at the same time the presence of the trackers whom they
greatly feared, and the suspicion that their doings were
watched by spies, kept them in a state of nervous unrest
which it was hoped would result sooner or later in some act
of rash stupidity.
During this time they lived principally within a radius of
twelve miles from the Kellys’ home at Greta. Police agents,
were w-atching them, but while they kept quiet Mr. Nicol-
son would not have them disturbed unless a chase were
practically certain to end in capture. Acting on this prin-
ciple he let one chance go which Mr. Sadlier thought should
have been seized upon, though as a rule he was in perfect
accord with Mr. Nicolson. In Wangaratta one day Mr.
Sadlier received information from an agent that on the pre-
vious evening five armed men, four of whom were supposed
to be the outlaws, had been seen by him near the house of
Tom Lloyd, not far from Greta. He had passed them,
he said, unobserved. Mr. Sadlier telegraphed the informa-
tion to Mr. Nicolson at Benalla and advised a search. On
instructions from Mr. Nicolson he went by train to join the
other officers at P>enalla, but was unable to take with him his


informant as Mr. Nicolson asked him to do, since the man
had been drinking and could not be found in time. On a
consultation between Mr. Nicolson, Mr. Sadlier, and Mr.
O'Connor, it was decided to send out a search party before
daybreak, and horses were saddled up and the men warned
to be in readiness for a start at one o’clock. Mr. Sadlier
then went away to rest, but on his return at one o’clock
found that Mr. Nicolson had changed his mind and issued
orders for the abandonment of the expedition. He and Mr..
O’Connor had talked the matter over in Mr. Sadlier’s ab-
sence, and, not feeling sure of that officer’s ability to find the
spot, and considering, also, that it was bad stony ground
for trackers to work in, while the outlaws being on foot,
would leave a very poor trail, they thought under the cir-
cumstances it was wiser to make no move. Mr. Sadlier
was not unnaturally annoyed/ and a good deal was made
of the incident by Captain Standish and others un-
friendly to Mr. Nicolson. He however pointed out that in
addition to other reasons for inaction was the fact that the
informant was the same man who had endeavoured to send
the police off to the head of the King River when the out-
laws were at Euroa, and one, therefore, on whom it was not
safe to rely. Information was steadily improving, and an
unsuccessful dash at the outlaws might have awoken them
from their sense of false security, and driven them away to
the distant mountain country of Tomgroggin, in New South
Wales. In the cases where Mr. Nicolson did take action,,
he made great use of the trackers, who were instrumental in
finding more than one of the Kellys’ deserted camps and on
one occasion picked up the tracks of a man near Mrs.
Byrne’s house, which, from the shape of the footprints, Mr.
Nicolson was sure were made by Joe Byrne, while other
tracks indicated that the gully in which lay the Byrnes'
and the Sherritts’ houses had been visited by the whole
gang on horseback. This evidence corroborated the in-
formation which was given from time to time by Aaron


Sherntt and one of his younger brothers, who was also in
the confidence of the outlaws and had now begun to bring
tales of them to the police. Joe Byrne, who was the literary
man of the gang, used frequently to indulge in letter writing.
One of his compositions, posted in September by young
Sherritt was a threatening letter to Detective Ward and
other police, warning them of mischief to happen before the
end of the month, and at the outlaw’s own request a notice
of the letter was published in a local paper.
During September Sherritt had other interviews with Toe
Byrne, who also called at his mother’s house and left £2
as payment to Sherritt for services in connection with the
letter. It was during this month that Mr. Nicolson aban-
doned the proposed search near Greta, after making pre-
parations for it. Again in November Sherritt was in com-
munication with the outlaws through Joe Byrne, meeting
him on one occasion in the scrubby ranges near Peechelba.
Byrne s spurs were covered with blood, and he appeared to
have ridden hard. He seemed to be troubled in his mind about
the murder of Kennedy and hinted at another projected
bank robbery, trying to persuade Sherritt to join the gang as
a scout. Shortly after this the outlaws apparently grew
suspicious of Sherritt, for Dan Kelly called at the Slierritts’
house and searched it with a revolver in his hand, but with-
out finding the agent who' was working in a paddock near
by. On hearing of Dan Kelly’s visit he hid himself until
dark, and then rode into Beechworth and told Mr. Nicol-
son who happened to be there. Sherritt was instructed
to conceal his fear of the gang and endeavour to remain on
good terms with them, which he did, and soon Joe Byrne
again visited him at his hut. He thanked him for his
services in posting various letters and putting up in different
places certain caricatures of the police, and also mentioned
that he and Ned were discussing rival plans for sticking up
one of the Beechworth banks. His own was to visit a bank
at night when the manager was in bed, and he did not care


if blood were shed over it. He looked worried and was very
thin. Their horses, he said, were poor, but his own
grey was still the best. A woman who was in the party
suggested that he should give himself up and turn informer
against the others in the hope of a pardon, but he refused,
saying that people would say he was worse than Sullivan (a
former notorious murderer and bushranger who gave
Queen’s evidence) and hunt him out of the colony.
On this information the police took special measures to
protect the Beechworth banks, and Mr. Nicolson established
a watch party in a cave above Mrs. Sherritt’s house. The
existence of this party, he believed, was an absolute secret
in the district, but Mr. Hare heard of it at the Melbourne
Depot from a constable who must have been in communi-
cation with one of its members, and Mr. Hare spoke of it to
Captain Standish, telling him that everyone knew where Mr.
Nicolson’s men were concealed. Accordingly, Captain
Standish, who frequently visited Benalla, worried Mr. Nicol-
son much about the matter, and finally ordered him to with-
draw the cave party after it had been out some weeks un-
known, so Mr. Nicolson still believed, to the outlaws, and
likely to surprise them in the gully at any time. Since
Mr. Nicolson had been in charge he was aware that the
Kellys’ sisters were constantly making purchases of stores
in Benalla, which he believed were for the outlaws' use, and
which were paid for by Bank of New South Males notes
with an earthy smell, suggesting that they had been buried
somewhere to conceal them. It was practically certain
that they were part of the proceeds of the Jerilderie rob-
berv, but nothing could be proved, and though it was also
known that Mrs. Skillion and one of the Lloyds bought
large quantities of ammunition at a leading Melbourne gun
shop no steps were taken against them. The ammunition
purchased was clearly intended for the Kellys use, as it was
of the kind needed for the Spencer rifles taken from Ken-
nedy’s party and another more modern make of rifle taken
123
THE KELLY GANG OF BUSHRANGERS.


from the New South Wales police at Jerilderie. The train
in which Lloyd and Mrs. Skillion travelled was on one oc-
casion searched, but no ammunition was found. They had
either thrown it from the window at a spot which they could
visit later, or left it behind to be forwarded by another train.
At the beginning of the new year Mr. Nicolson had good
reason lo believe that the outlaws were getting near the end
of their tether. Reports came to hand that they were
growing thin and wearied from anxiety and fatigue. Owing
to fear of the trackers they very seldom rode, but went on
foot to places where their horses were brought to them when
they wished to make a move. By day they concealed them-
selves in the long grass and rushes by the Greta swamp and
prowled about at night, in their desire to avoid recognition
seldom even carrying their rifles. Mr. Nicolson and Mr.
Sadlier were well satisfied with the work of the last six
months, and though there were complaints in the press from
lime to t’tne about their failure to capture the Kellys, know-
ing what they did, they kept their own counsel. For
many months, in spite of reduced police strength, the Kellys
had not ventured upon outrage of any kind, and the officers
saw good reason to hope that early in 1880 would come
about the downfall of the gang.
CHAPTER XVII.
AARON SHERRITT’S DEATH.
/C7Y BOLT the middle of April, 1880, Mr. Nicolson re-
ceived notice that he was to be superseded in the
•command. Naturally this information was most mortify-
ing to him, as he expected that his labours were shortly


going to have fruition, and he felt very bitter against Cap-
tain Standish, who, he considered, had belittled his efforts
and hampered him in many ways in his work, and now
recommended his recall. He immediately went to Mel-
bourne, had some warm words with the Chief Commis-
sioner, and on urgent appeal to the Chief Secretary, Mr.
Ramsay, obtained an extension of time until the end of May.
Matters were growing worse and worse for the outlaws.
H their horses were knocked up and most of them aban-
doned. Their friends, disappointed by their inactivity, were
grumbling, and urging that they must “ do ” another bank
in order to reward the faithful. They seldom dared to ap-
pear together, and their active aids and assistants were said
to be reduced to about four, while the people willing to
inform against them- were growing in numbers. During
April the watch party had been removed from the cave near
Mrs. Byrne’s and there were reports that the outlaws again
sometimes visited her. In February Mr. Nicolson had
learnt of the theft of plough-shares and mould-boards from
several farms in the neighbourhood of Oxley, about nine
miles from Wangaratta, and on May 20 he received a letter
giving a startling explanation of the theft. This letter is
worth quotation as an example of the terms in which the
agents wrote to the police whom they addressed by fictitious
names, while also using assumed signatures themselves.
This agent —usually known among the police as “ the
diseased stock ” man —since this description of the outlaws
was always used in correspondence with him, in his as-
sumed character as an inspector of stock wrote as follows r
“ Greta, May 20, 1880. Mr. William Charles Balfour,
Benalla. Dear Sir, —Nothing definite re the diseased stock
of this locality. I have made careful inspection, but did
not find (sic) exact source of disease. I have seen and
spoke to and on Tuesday, who were fencing near
home. All others I have not been able to see. Missing
portions of cultivators, described as jackets, are now being


worked and fit splendidly. Tested previous to using-, and
proof at ten yards. I shall be in Wangaratta on Monday,
before when I may learn how to treat the disease. lam
perfectly satisfied that it is wkere last indicated, but in what
region I can’t discover. A break out may be anticipated,
as feed is getting very scarce. Five are now bad. I will
post a note giving any bad symptoms I may perceive from
Wangaratta on Monday and Tuesday at latest, and will wait
on you for news how to proceed on a day which I shall then
state, before end of the week. Other animals are., I fear,
diseased.—Yours faithfully, B. C. W.”
The gist of this communication is that the stolen portion!
of the ploughs were being converted into armour for th<
Kellys. That it fitted splendidly, and was proof agains
bullets at a range of ten yards. Also that a break out or
the part of the outlaws might he very shortly expected.
When Mr. Nicolson received this news he had only about
a week longer to spend in the district and he employed it
as actively as possible, among other things arranging to
have a watch kept on the Glenrowan hotel where the Kelly
sympathisers had taken to gathering and indulging in dis-
orderly conduct. He also paid a visit to Mrs. Sherritt,
from whom he learnt that she had lately seen Joe Byrne,
and that he had told her they could go anywhere if it were
not for her sanguinary son.” Thereupon he determined on
one more effort to catch the outlaws in that neighbourhood,
and arranged that a party of police should be sent to live in
concealment in the house of Aaron Sherritt, who had been re-
cently married to a Beechworth girl and was living with his
wife at his old quarters in the gully at Woolshed.
On June I Mr. Nicolson’s connection with the Kelly pur-
suit finally ceased, Mr. Hare coming up to Benalla to take
over the charge of affairs. His supersession was a bitter pill
to Mr. Nicolson, more especially as he felt that he had been
misrepresented by Captain Standish and to some extent by
Mr. Hare. The meeting between the two officers was


therefore not particularly cordial, though outwardly friendly
relations were maintained, and at the police office in Benalla
Mr. Nicolson gave to the new leader a rough outline of what
he had been doing and what he had hoped to do. This
onversation took place in Mr. Sadlier’s presence, and when,
it a later date, Mr. Hare accused Mr. Nicolson of having
vithheld information from him, and of having treated him
in a grudging spirit, Mr. Sadlier emphatically asserted that
he considered the accusation most unjust. Mr. Nicolson,
in his opinion, had told Mr. Hare all it was possible to tell in
the time, and he himself, being perfectly acquainted with all
the work, was in a position to supply any details that had
been overlooked. , Mr. Hare, who had an unfortunately
keen eye for faults in his brother officers, also made it a
subject of complaint that Mr. Nicolson had withdrawn police
from watch parties and dismissed all the agents without giv-
ing him (Mr. Hare) notice of his action; but on enquiry, a
telegram from Mr. Nicolson to one of the senior constables
was produced, in which it was stated that all further orders
were to come from Superintendents Sadlier or Hare, and
that Detective Ward had instructions that no further
authority or supplies for the agents were available. From
this it seemed clear that Mr. Nicolson only intended, in a
business-like way, to terminate his own responsibility for
the payment of agents and the movements of them or the
police, leaving Mr. Hare unhampered, to make his own
arrangements. When the substitution of Mr. Hare for
Mr. Nicolson was first mooted, Mr. Sadlier had written
to the former, urging him, as a friend in the strongest terms,
not to accept the command in Mr. Nicolson’s place. Ho
wrote entirely in the public interest, believing that Mr.
Nicolson’s tactics were likely to soon bear fruit in suc-
cess, while he did not believe in Mr. Hare’s. To do Mr.
Hare justice, he did himself protest strongly against being
sent to take command, saying he had tried once to catch
the outlaws and failed; but he based his main objections


to undertaking the work upon the score of his age and statt
of health, and urged that there were other officers in th<
force senior to him who should be sent to try their hands
He, however, expressed himself in such an unfortunate man-
ner that to some of these senior officers it appeared thai
he was casting a slur upon their courage, and suggesting
unwillingness on their part to undertake a difficult and dam
gerous duty, while he did not rise to the generosity oi
putting in a good word for Mr. Nicolson who had begged tc
retain the command a little longer. Mr. Hare’s protests
had no effect. Captain Standish and Mr. Ramsay both
considered him the best man for the duty. He was tolc
that the public were growing more and more indignant al
the outlaws’ long unchecked career, and, with carte blanche
in everything, he went up in obedience to orders and threw
himself heartily into the work.
Mr. Sadlier, in spite of his disapproval of the change,
supported Mr. Hare loyally. Mr. O’Connor and his
trackers very shortly left the district for Melbourne,
for Mr. Hare considered that while they remained
at Benalla the outlaws would be afraid to come into
the open, and the Queensland Government, which
considered that their officer had not been particularly
well treated, was desirous that he should bring his trackers
home as soon as their services could be dispensed with.
After some days spent in reading up the correspondence
and other office work Mr. Hare personally interviewed and
re-engaged most of Mr. Nicolson’s agents, and re-estab-
lished a party of four police in Aaron Sherritt’s house.
Aaron had been somewhat under a cloud in Mr. Hare’s ab-
sence. He did not get on well with Mr. Nicolson who
showed rather contemptuous distrust of him; but he bright-
ened up on the return of his old friend, who shook hands
with him and scolded him for his past laziness and sulks.
Aaron said he would do better in future, and promised to give
his most loyal endeavours to the work of betraying his


former associates to death.
In addition to the police at Sherritt’s house Mr. Hare
sent out other parties, setting one of fourconstables to watch
the Kellys’ house where Mrs. Skillion lived at Greta, and
another of the same number to watch the Harts’ house near
Wangaratta. He was aware that the outlaws were now al-
most entirely dependent for supplies upon their blood rela-
tions who would desert them in no extremity. The watch-
ing was skilfully managed, Mr. Hare’s instructions being
that after nightfall the constables should go, one by one,
from the police stations at Wangaratta or Glenrowan to
their respective rendezvous, and keep the houses under ob-
servation all night, returning singly as they had gone in
order not to excite comment should they be seen.
While a net was thus being woven round the outlaws
there were signs of great unrest among their sympathisers.
They were all excited and some jubilant—declaring that
the Kellvs would shortly do a deed that should astonish not
only Australia but the whole world.)
Sooner even than the police expected the end came —
or the beginning of the end—and with dramatic suddenness.
On the night of Saturday, June 26, Anton Wicks, a German
miner, who lived not far from Aaron Sherritt's house, was
encountered by two horsemen just as darkness was com-
ing on. ‘One of them led another horse. He did not
know them at first, but when they spoke he recognised Joe
Byrne with whom he had been long acquainted. Byrne
and Dan Kelly, who was his companion, bailed up Anton
Wicks, and, putting handcuffs upon him, commanded him
under pain of being immediately shot to go with them to
Aaron Sherritt’s dwelling for a purpose which they would
explain to him on the way. >
Sherritt’s little house was crowded that evening. The
four constables were there, waiting till it should be time to
go upo r heir nightly watch at Mrs. Byrne’s, and in addition
there were Aaron and his wife, and her mother, Mrs. Barry,


who had come to spend an evening with her daughter.
Tea was over and it was only just dark when the in-
mates of the house heard footsteps outside, and a knock at
the door followed. Aaron asked who was there, and Wicks
answered him. Mrs. Sherritt went to the door, then turn-
ing to her husband she said, “It is Anton Wicks. He has
lost his way.”
For a moment Aaron seemed to hesitate. Then he
walked to the door, asking again, “ Who is that?” and seeing
it was really Wicks, said a word or two jokingly, before
beginning to direct him to his home.
Suddenly there came a flash out of the darkness, a report,
and Joe Byrne stepped forward from among the trees. He
had shot Sherritt, who was staggering backwards, and com-
ing closer Byrne fired again. The bullet almost touched Mrs.
Sherritt, who was standing by her husband and shrank
aside; but it struck him in the body, and he fell upon the
door without a word. A bright fire was burning in the
kitchen which formed one half the Sherritts’ hut. Three
police were in the bedroom which formed the other half,
and the fourth constable entered it through a door in the
partition just as Wicks and Byrne came to the house. Mrs.
Barry, the murdered manfs mother-in-law, knelt upon the
floor beside him and saw that he was dying, while her
daughter rushed distracted into the bedroom. ‘Joe Byrne
stood over Mrs. Barry, almost touching the body that lay by
the doorway, and he threatened to put a ball through her
unless she told him who was in the house. Apparently he
had heard the constable go into the bedroom when he came
to the entrance of the hut, but he obtained nothing from
Mrs. Barry beyond that there was a man looking for work,
and glancing at Aaron he said, “ I wanted that fellow. I
have got him now and I am satisfied.”
Meanwhile, the police in the bedroom were in a wretched
state of excitement and fear, uncertain what to do, and
doing nothing beyond clutching their firearms and whis-


pering together. A manly rush upon Byrne, when for a
few seconds he stood by the door after firing his shot, might
have settled the outlaw and saved them from disgrace, but
they let the moment go by. Their justification was that
in the hurry and the darkness they could not soon enough
obtain their rifles. Afterwards the man stepped back into
darkness, and when the police looked over the partition
dividing the kitchen from the bedroom there was no one
to be seen. Immediately after the shot was fired, they
heard Mrs. Sherritt cry out, “ Oh, Joe, what did you shoot
poor Aaron for ?” and the answer, The will never
put me away again.” They knew at last they had met the
Kellys for whom they had been seeking so long, and the
only thought among them was how best to keep a whole
skin.
Strangely enough the outlaws do not seem to have known
that there were police in the house. Joe Byrne made Mrs.
Barry open the front door of the kitchen. It was the back
to which Byrne and Wicks had come, and standing out-
side on either side of the house they called on the men,
whoever they might be, to come out and be killed “ like
dogs.” They fired several shots into the house, by wa?
of encouragement, but still the police did not stir, and still
the women who ran backwards and forwards, and were con-
stantly threatened with death unless they confessed who was
in the house would say nothing but that they were men
looking for work.
In the bedroom the constables still whispered together,
and allowed each to persuade the other that it would be mad-
ness to venture out —that if they held the place they would
do well. A rush would certainly have involved a risk to
life for the outlaws were in the darkness, and before the
constables could reach the open they would have been ex-
posed to fire through either door of the kitchen, which
was brightly lighted by the burning logs on the hearth. It
was a risk they were not prepared to run, and to further


protect themselves they hit upon a brilliant idea. Mrs.
Sherritt had been running distractedly in and out of the
bedroom, and once when she came they kept her with them
and forced her to get under the bed. She would be safer
there, they said—and so would they—for while women were
in the room they trusted the outlaws would not fire through
the weatherboard walls. Mrs. Barry, indeed, begged them
not to, saying that they would shoot her daughter, and they
fired no more, but spoke of setting alight to the house and
actually tried to do so, placing brushwood against the walls
and striking matches, which went out.
Here one would suppose came a chance for a rush, while
at least one of the murderers was engaged in trying to fire
the house, but the constables and the women believed all
the outlaws to be there, and they resorted to strategy. Mrs.
Barry was called into the bedroom, and, partly by persuasion
and partly by force, detained there, for the constables con-
sidered that the outlaws would not be such cowardly brutes
as to burn'down the house while there were women in it.
Some hours after the abortive or pretended attempt
to burn the house the outlaws departed, but at what hour
was not ascertained, for the police remained in the house till
the morning when a Chinaman who was passing' was per-
suaded to take a letter to a schoolmaster, who, in his turn,
visited the house and took information of the murder to
Beechworth. People gradually collected round the mur-
dered man’s dwelling and by two o’clock in the afternoon
a large crowd had collected, but the constables still held the
house and refused to admit anyone till the arrival of Mr.
Foster, a police magistrate from Beechworth, to whom they
shortly explained the facts of the affair.


CHAPTER XVIII.
THE PRISONERS AT GLENROWAN.
was about one o’clock on Sun day afternoon when a tele-
gram with the news of Sherritt’s murder reached Mr.
Hare at Benalla. Since the outlaws had broken out once
more they needed no longer to be encouraged by the black
trackers’ absence, and Mr. Hare therefore wired to Captain
Standish to send them up immediately by special train to
Beechworth. Mr. O’Connor and his men had then retired
from their temporary Victorian service and were to leave in
a few days for Queensland. A request by wire from Cap-
tain Standish to the Queensland Commissioner for permis-
sion to send them again on duty was refused, but Mr. Ram-
say, the \ ictorian Chief Secretary, intervened, and pointing
out the urgency of the case, obtained authority from the
Queensland Government for Mr. O’Connor to act with the
Victorian police. Mr. Ramsay therefore wired to Mr. Hare
that he would send the men up next morning, and Mr. Hare,
with pardonable irritation, replied that if they did not start
that night they need no come at all. Thereupon matters
were expedited a little and a special train, with Mr. O’Con-
nor, some lady relatives, his black trackers and several
pressmen, was despatched from Melbourne for Benalla, en
route for Beechworth, about half an hour after midnight. s
During the day Mr. Hare was kept more or less in forced
idleness, waiting for the trackers and the men. He greatly
regretted that poor Sherritt, who had been married only
six months or more, had fallen a victim to his zeal in assist-
ing the police. There was a certain retributive justice in
his suffering vengeance from the men he had betrayed, but
to Mr. Hare he had always been a faithful and active assis-
tant, and with all his faults he seems to have won regard
from many people who knew him, while his wife and his old
mother were overwhelmed by grief at his death.


Meanwhile Dan Kelly and Joe Byrne, allowing their
decoy, Anton Wicks, to slip away to his home, had left
Sherritt’s hut some time after midnight on Saturday and
ridden hard across country to the township of Glenrowan,
distant about forty miles from the scene of the murder. At
Glenrowan, which lies on the main Sydney line, nearly mid-
way between Wangaratta to the north and Benalla to* the
south, Ned Kelly and Steve Hart had already established
themselves in undisputed possession. The township was a
small one, consisting of little more than hotels and the
school-house, store and blacksmith’s shop which compose
the nucleus of so many Australian bush hamlets, but near
the railway station there were in addition the residences of
the stationmaster and one or two other railway employes.
The methods of the gang were, in the main, of the same
character as those pursued at Euroa and Jerilderie; but in this
case there was no bank to be robbed and they suited their
conduct to the particular end in view. This was the de-
struction of the railway line at a point some distance on the
Wangaratta side of Glenrowan, where a sharp curve would
hide the torn up rails from the view of the engine-driver
of a train coming from Melbourne until the locomotive was
upon them. Just there the line ran upon a steep em-
bankment, and an accident would have disastrous con-
sequences, which the Kellys intended to aggravate by pour-
ing in a hot fire upon the struggling survivors. It was a
cold-blooded and well-laid scheme, showing in its concep-
tion an accurate forecast of the probable movements of the
police. The day being Sunday no ordinary trams would
be passing along the line for many hours, and Ned Kelly
felt sure that on the news of Sherritt’s murder being wired
to Melbourne a police special would be immediately sent up.
He even seems to have calculated on Mr. Hare asking for
the return of the black trackers, for they were the men on
whom he specially wanted to wreak his vengeance for the
hunted life his gang had led so long.


Very early on Sunday morning Hart and Kelly called
at the house of the Glenrowan stationmaster, for the pur-
pose of getting him or others to tear up the rails.
Mr. Stannistreet. the stationmaster, professed that he
knew nothing of such things; therefore, leaving Hart to
keep guard over Mr. Stannistreet, his family, and other pri-
soners whom they had collected, Ned Kelly obtained the ser-
vices of some plate-layers whom he forced to do the work.
One of them, a man named Reardon, begged to be let off the
task, but Ned Kelly, saying that he soon expected a train
with police and those blacks, threatened to tickle him
up with a revolver if he did not do it, and do it quickly.
Kelly wanted four rails’ lengths of the line broken, but
Reardon assured him that one length was as good as twenty,
for he had some faint hope that if only one rail were taken
up the engine might leap it and go safely on.
When the line was broken Kelly drove the railway men
to join the other prisoners at the railway station, later on
transferring them all to Mrs. Jones’s hotel. This hotel,
which stood among trees about two hundred yards from the
railway platform, and facing it, was a weatherboard building,
with a verandah in front into which opened the bar, and
for the rest consisted of several small rooms with a pas-
sage running through from the front to the back.
Before the prisoners arrived it seems that several of the
Kelly sympathisers were in the place, which for some time
previously had been with them a popular house of call.
During Sunday the prisoners, whose number was added to
from time to time until it totalled sixty-two, made them-
selves as comfortable as they could and many of them spent
a merry time. No one appears to have noticed at what
hour Dan Kelly and Byrne arrived'from Beechworth, and
nothing was said of Sherritt s murder, but the four outlaws
were in the hotel together throughout the day. Mrs. Jones,
the proprietress of the establishment, seemed to rather relish
having such a full house, and was in every way anxious to


please her outlawed visitors. Though it was Sunday the
bar was not kept closed, and a good deal of liquor was con-
sumed, but the outlaws, on the whole, were temperate. Hart
in the morning drank too much, but the effects wore off,
and later on in the day he kept sober, while, when Dan
Kelly poured himself out a stiff nobbier of brandy, some-
one heard a warning, “ Steady, old man !” from Joe Byrne.
Among the prisoners confined in the hotel was a Mr.
Curnow, the local State-school master, who was bailed up by
Ned Kelly at eleven o’clock in the morning when taking
his wife and family for a drive. He seems to have made a
favourable impression on the outlaws who treated him
politely, Dan Kelly going so far as to seek him where he
was standing in the yard at about one o’clock in the day
with an invitation to come and dance. Curnow said he was
afraid he could not do much without dancing boots and
asked Kelly to go with him to his house to get them, sug-
gesting, also, that he should be allowed to leave his family
at home. He knew that he would have to- pass by the
police-station, where he hoped the constable, Bracken, might
be warned of the Kellys’ presence in time to ride away with
the news. Ned Kelly was inclined to consent but Dan
objected to his leaving the place, so Mr. Curnow was obliged
to dance in his ordinary boots. He had heard of the
Kelly plan of wrecking the police train, and with the object
of getting free and possibly averting disaster he worked
hard to further ingratiate himself with the outlaws. Hap-
pening to learn that one of his fellow prisoners had a re-
volver in his possession, he called Ned Kelly aside and in-
formed him of the fact. Ned Kelly thanked him, and was
gulled into the belief that Curnow was devoted to his in-
terests —a belief which was strengthened when at nine
o’clock in the evening the outlaws were about to go to the
police station to capture Bracken, the constable already re-
ferred to. Curnow had heard Ned Kelly talking of the
matter to Mrs. Jones, and he suggested that it would be


wise to take his (Curnow’s) brother-in-law, Dave Mortimer,
to the barracks to call Bracken out, since the constable
would know his voice and come unsuspectingly into the out-
law’s power. Ned Kelly approved of this idea, and on the
strength of the help he had given Curnow asked leave to
depart from the hotel and go to his home with his wife and
sister, who were then at the house of the stationmaster, Mr.
Stannistreet, which had been used as a place of detention
for some of the women. Curnow assured Kelly that there
was no need to distrust him as he was with the outlaws heart
and soul, to which Kelly replied, “ Yes; I know that, and I
can see it.”
The schoolmaster was then allowed to bring his
women-folk to the hotel, where they waited for some
time, wondering whether they would be allowed to go. Ned
Kelly and Byrne were discussing matters in a room which
they had reserved to themselves. Some of the prisoners
were gathered round a fire of logs which they had lit in
the hotel yard while others were playing cards in the hotel,
all seemingly content with their position and anxious to
amuse themselves as the outlaws had instructed them to
do. Towards ten o’clock in the evening Ned Kelly directed
Curnow to put his horse into his buggy and drive round to
the front of the hotel* telling him to take with him a little
boy, the son of the Glenrowan postmaster, as well as the
two ladies. After waiting some time, Curnow was joined
by Kelly and Byrne on horseback, wearing overcoats, with
bundles strapped in front of them, carrying rifles in their
hands, and presenting a peculiarly bulky appearance which
Curnow was at a loss to account for. They were escorting
Dave Mortimer on horseback, and two of the prisoners who
resided with the postmaster on foot, all these being intended
as hostages or decoys to assist in the capture of Bracken.
Knocking and calling failed to bring him out of the bar-
racks, and after searching the place Kelly took Alec. Rey-
nolds, the postmaster’s little boy, out of Curnow’s buggy,


going with him and Mr. E, Reynolds, another of the pri-
soners into the postmaster’s yard. Outside the yard the
Curnows had a long and anxious wait under the eye of Joe
Byrne, and it was nearly an hour later when Kelly came out
again with Bracken and the others, leading Bracken’s horse.
He ordered the constable to mount and led the horse with a
halter, remarking that he could not trust Bracken with the
bridle, to which Bracken replied that had he not been ill in
bed all day Kelly would not have captured him so easily.
Kelly then told Curnow he might drive home, directing him
to go to bed, and warning him significantly not to dream too
loud. The outlaws and their prisoners rode away to the
hotel, where a dance was in progress and everything ap-
peared to be going merrily. During the dance Bracken,
who had observed where the key of the door was placed on
the mantelpiece, seized an opportunity when no one was
looking of picking it up and slipping it into his boot, with
a view to making his escape.
The night had nearly gone when Dan Kelly told the pri-
soners they might go home, and they were all making for
the door when Mrs. Jones interfered, saying that before they
departed, Ned Kelly wished to give them a lecture. The
prisoners waited respectfully, and Ned, after a word or two
of advice and moralising to some of the civilians, turned
to Bracken and began to address him on the wickedness
and laziness of a constable’s life—a subject on which he
had talked seriously to Mclntyre on the day of the police
murders nearly two years before.
Suddenly a whistle was heard in the distance and
expectant horrified silence fell upon the crowd. Ned
Kelly broke off his discourse. Byrne came in from
the back room, saying, “ The train is coming.’’
Ned Kelly went out to join the others; Bracken seized
the opportunity to escape, locking the door behind him
when he went out, and those left in the hotel heard from the
back room the rattle of iron, for the Kellys were dressing


themselves in the armour made from stolen ploughshares,
preparing to do battle with any. of the police who might
escape from the wreck of the train.
CHAPTER XIX.
THE ASSAULT UPON THE HOTEL.
Ct N getting home after his dismissal by Ned Kelly, Mr.
GJ Curnow determined to execute a plan he had been
nursing in his mind all day to save the train, if only he
could gain his liberty in time. If possible he would make a
dash for Benalla with his buggy to warn the police before
they started and if too late endeavour to signal them upon
the line. Mrs. Curnow was almost hysterical with fear,
declaring they were watched by the outlaws and that inter-
ference with their schemes would mean death to all the
household. Her husband persuaded her to accompany him
with his sister and the baby to her mother’s house, and,
to explain their absence to the outlaws, should his home be
searched, he left a note, saying that they had all gone to
Mrs. Mortimer’s to put his wife who was ill under her
mother’s care. Scarcely, however, had they reached Mrs.
Mortimer’s house than Mrs. Curnow’s fears broke out again,
and her husband dared not leave her, lest in her distracted
state she should rouse suspicion in the outlaws and come to
harm, and he therefore took her home again. Still he
could not stand idle and see the train go to destruction.
His sister, who thought as he did, took Mrs. Curnow to her
room, assuring her that her husband was likewise going pre-


sently to bed, and he made all haste to harness, up his horse
for a race to Benalla. Suddenly he heard the train ap-
proaching. It was at some distance still. Sound travelled
far on the clear frosty night, but there was need for des-
perate haste. Leaving his buggy, Mr. Curnow snatched
up a candle, a red scarf, and matches which he had in readi-
ness, and, rushing away to the railway line, ran as fast as he
could between the rails in the direction of the approaching
train. Early in the day he had noticed his sister wearing a
red scarf. It had flashed across his mind that, with a
light behind it, the scarf might be used as a danger signal,
and now the test of its usefulness had come. Trembling
with anxiety lest the outlaws should shoot him down and
frustrate his scheme, or that the engine driver would not
heed his faint red light, he lit the candle and held the shawl
in front of it. There was a long warning whistle, the en-
gine which was bearing down upon him slowed and came to
a stop a few yards from where he stood. The danger,
to others at least, was over, and he had the exultation of
knowing that his resource and courage had saved the occu-
pants of the special from almost certain death.
The train had started that night from Melbourne with
Mr. O’Connor, his wife and sister (who meant to remain in
Beechworth), pressmen and black trackers. Due at Benalla
at 12.30, it had been delayed for half an hour by smashing
through a railway gate and injuring the breaks—a delay
which probably was the salvation of its occupants, for half an
hour earlier it would have steamed past Glenrowan un-
warned. At Benalla Mr. Hare was in waiting, with a body
of constables and horses ready trucked, while another engine
was under steam, Mr. Hare intending to proceed to Beech-
worth and await the black trackers there if the Melbourne
special should be much longer delayed. This engine it
was decided to use as a pilot, and by way of further pre-
caution against surprise Mr. Hare proposed to place a man
in front of the locomotive, strapped on as a security against


Mr. Curnow Stopping the Police Train.— Page 140




falling, with instructions to keep a keen lookout. This
plan, however, was abandoned, and with all its occupants in
the highest spirits the train steamed out of Benalla, the pilot
engine 150 yards in front carrying one or two of Mr. Hare’s
men armed and watchful.
When Mr. Curnow’s red light brought the pilot to a
standstill the warning whistles checked the train behind, and
as soon as it stopped Mr. Hare, with his gun in readiness,
jumped down from his carriage and met the guard of the
pilot engine approaching him. The signaller, he told Mr.
Hare, had gone, and the only news he gave was that the
Kellys had pulled up the line beyond Glenrowan. The
guard had said he would go on to Glenrowan station, draw
up there, and await the special which was following. Beg-
ging him for God’s sake not do so, as he would certainly be
shot, Curnow had then hurried away at top speed, saying he
must go to his wife.
Very much in the dark as to the Kellys’ movements, but
believing them to be in the neighbourhood of the torn up
rails, Mr. Hare put more armed men upon the engines and
ordered a slow advance to the station. As the trains drew
up to the platform there was no sound anywhere; no one
stirring, and not a sign of life, beyond a light in the win-
dow of the stationmaster s house, about a hundred yards dis-
tant from the station. With another gentleman, Mr. Hare
hastened to the house, where they knocked at the window,
and it was opened by Mrs. Stannistreet, the stationmaster’s
wife, who was crying, and in great distress. Only a few
minutes before, her husband had been taken by the outlaws
to the hotel. With some others they had kept him con-
fined in his own house all day, so that they might force him,
with a revolver at his head, to make any signal which the
train might require assuring safety before running express
past Glenrowan, but all chance of that happening was over,
and he also had been removed to the hotel prison house. Mr.
Hare, however, could learn nothing from the distracted Mrs.


Stannistreet but that her husband had been taken away bv
the Kellys not ten minutes before—as Mr. Hare thought
into the VVarby Ranges. Accordingly, he returned to the
station and gave orders to detrain the horses with a view
to pursuit.
1 his work was in progress when a man appeared on ihe
platform and besought Mr. Hare to g'o quickly to the hotel.
It was Bracken, who had just escaped, and he told of the
presence of the outlaws, saying unless they were attacked
immediately they would be gone. Mr. Hare did not hesi-
tate for a moment. With hasty instructions to let the
horses go, calling on his men to follow him, he ran towards
the hotel, crossing a fence and ditches on his way. The
building was in darkness, the only light coming from the
moon which was low behind the house, when suddenly there
were flashes of flame from four dimly-seen figures on the
verandah and bullets whistled among the police. All es-
caped unhit except Mr. Hare who led the party, and who
was struck by a bullet in the left wrist. The police returned
the fire, Mr. Hare using a gun with his uninjured hand, and
as the sound of the first volley died away, a voice from the
verandah was heard calling, “ Fire away, you . You
can do us no harm.”
For a minute or two a sharp fusillade continued, fifty or
sixty rifle or revolver shots being fired on either side, when
the men on the verandah retreated into or round the hotel,
and with a lull in the firing the police heard piteous screams
of pain and terror issuing from the house. Up to that
time there had been no suspicion that non-combatant r en,
women, and children were behind the walls through which
the Martini bullets were crashing, and on the sound of their
voices reaching him Mr. Flare gave the order to cease fire.
After that, telling his men to surround the house, he re-
tired to the station, faint from his wound which was bleed-
ing profusely, and which the pressmen at the train bound up
for him. Strongly dissuaded by the ladies, who had pluckily


kept their places in the railway carriage, with bullets whist-
ling past them, Mr. Hare made an effort to go back to the
scene of action, but the pain and loss of blood overcame
him. and he had to retire once more and remain upon the
platform until the train was ready to convey him with
the ladies back to Benalla. There, before having his wound
dressed, Mr. Hare despatched a number of telegrams, dictat-
ing them to the stationmaster, and made arrangements for
reinforcements of police being sent forward to Glenrowan.
Within the hotel the unfortunate prisoners were in a piti-
able state. Had the train been five minutes later they
would have been spared the horrors of the fight in which
they suffered, for, to do the outlaws justice, it does not seem
that they counted upon or wished for safety from the pre-
sence of non-combatants among them. Had they done
so they would have been sadly undeceived; but, as a matter
of fact, but for Mrs. Jones’ unfortunate appeal for a lecture
from Ned Kelly, all the prisoners would have been free be-
fore fine attack began. Dan Kelly had just given them per-
mission to depart when Ned began the address for which
they waited. Then came the sound of the approaching
train, and all chance of escape was gone, for, with the door
locked, the outlaws, went to don their armour, and, later,
the people dared not venture out in the darkness in the face of
a storm of bullets. The police were excited and little in-
clined, even were they able to distinguish friend from foe,
as some of the prisoners found to their cost, and indeed the
the only constable in the force for whom most of them had
reason to feel anything but bitterness was Constable
Bracken, who before he departed gave a warning to lie
close upon the floor if firing came. Altogether, Bracken’s
is the only name in the Victorian police force which derived
any added lustre from the events of the day. He seems
to have acted throughout with pluck and judgment, and
not long after telling Mr. Hare of the Kelly’s presence
he galloped away to Wangaratta to bring back further aid.


When Mr. Hare had left the field the police were under no
real command, for while Sub-Inspector O’Connor con-
sidered that lie held it, most of the men, not recognising l
a Queensland officer, if they looked to anybody for direc-
tion looked to Senior-Constable Kelly, and very much at
their own sweet will, throughout the remaining hours of
darkness, they continued energetically to pour lead into the
hotel.
CHAPTER XX.
FIRE AND FLAMES.
SPIELING satisfied that the train was safe, Mr. Curnow
had made all speed back to Glenrowan, where he found
his wife and sister in a state of anxious dread for his safety
and their own. Only a few minutes before, a man whom
they believed to be Ned Kelly had come to the house;
but it proved to be a stranger just arrived in Glenrowan,
and the return of Mr. Curnow relieved them of their greatest
fear. Hiding away the scarf and his clothes, which were
soaked with dew from the long grass, the schoolmaster
went to bed, telling the others to do the same, so that if
the outlaws came they should have no proof against him of
having warned the police. When the sound of the firing
began he dressed himself hastily and went over to learn the
news, but was ordered by the police to return to his house.
Up to this time, while Curnow and Bracken had won credit
for themselves, the police had done nothing in particular
to forfeit it. When the shooting began, though women and


children suffered, ignorance justified the fierce firing, and the
attacking party were not to blame. From this time on-
ward almost nothing was done which any member of the
force engaged can look back upon with bare satisfaction, let
alone with pride. An entire absence of foolish rashness is
the only commendable quality of which the police gave evi-
dence that day, and this was shown to such a strikingly un-
heroic degree that people smiled cvnically when commend-
ing it.
Matters had begun well enough with the spirited rush by
Mr. Hare and his constables, but that charge was either
begun in heedlessness, or it stopped too soon. If Mr.
Hare’s object was to avoid possible loss of life and merely
prevent the outlaws’ escape, he might have disposed his men
so as to surround the house and shut up the enemy within
it. If, on the other hand, his intention was to take the hotel
by assault, one is surprised that he was checked in this bold
design by a mere shot in the wrist. The odds against the
outlaws were four to one. With the exception of himself,
not a man of his force was wounded by the first volleys,
and a determined rush upon the house would have secured
it, putting an end one could contemplate with satisfaction
to the bushrangers’ long career.
But if the first attack was badly advised or half-heartedly
executed, it was heroism itself compared with what followed.
Knowing that non-combatants were in the house, the police,
firing more or less from shelter, continued to pitilessly riddle
it with shot, and in the early discharges one of Mrs. Jones’
children was mortally wounded. Another, a girl of fifteen
or sixteen, had been particularly friendly with the Kellys, as
had been also her mother, and the latter must have cursed
the impulse which had made her detain the prisoners tor
Ned Kelly’s interrupted lecture. Now, she turned upon
them fiercely, denouncing them as curs for not leaving the
house and fighting in the open, while she also heaped frantic
curses upon the police when after the first discharge her


little boy was heard screaming piteously in the pitch-dark
room where he lay. Everyone longed to escape, but be-
tween fear of the outlaws and the police no one dared
make a move. Presently the firing slackened, and Miss
Jones walked into the big dark room where the prisoners
crouched close together on the floor, and, speaking with
orders from the Kellys, she said “ All women and children
are to leave the house.”
Immediately there was a rush of sobbing women and
children into the open air, and their appearance was the
signal for renewed firing from the police. A challenge
came from someone, “ Who goes there?” and, in spite of the
answer, “ Women and children,” the shots still continued.
Mrs. Jones’ little boy was taken out by a man who carried
him in his arms. Miss Jones was wounded in making her
escape, but she and many others reached a place of safety
with their lives. The platelayer, Reardon, and his wife
were delayed in their exit from the hotel, for they had to
wait fo: cne of the children, whose limbs were cramped
from lying beneath a bed for safety, and they were all driven
back to the hotel by the hotness of the fire which met them
as they sallied into the open and approached the police lines.
This firing upon women and children, even in the dark-
ness and the first confusion of the fight, was bad enough,
but far more shameful is the fact that it continued after
day had broken and more police had arrived on the scene,
so that forces were ample to checkmate any possible
move by the outlaws. It was daylight, or almost day-
light, when the Reardon family made their second attempt
to leave the house. Dan Kelly had given them permission,
but said they would all be shot by the police. Dan Kelly
has always been regarded as a cruel and bloodthirsty villain,
who took a pleasure in killing for its own sake, and, on for-
mer occasions victims of the gang’s exploits certainly be-
lieved that they owed their lives simply to Dari's fear of his
elder brother. But here at least, to do him justice, he


showed a more manly spirit. According- to Mrs. Reardon,
he spoke to her a little before she left the house for the
second time. “If you escape,” he said, “ see Hare and
tell him not to let his men fire any more till daylight, so
that all these people may go in safety. When the house
is empty, we will fight for ourselves.”
Mr. Hare was then wounded, and Mrs. Reardon had again
to face the undisciplined police fire. This time she escaped
from the ferocious friends of order. A sergeant of police,
in spite of her screams for mercy, fired directly at her as
she ran, and afterwards she showed bullet holes in the cloak
with which she wrapped her baby. Her son begged her to
go back, crying that she would be shot, but she refused,
saying it would be just as well to die in the open as in the
house, and ultimately she reached the police lines unhurt.
Her husband and her son, however, were less fortunate,
being driven again to the house, the latter receiving a
bullet wound in the back as he crawled upon the ground
for safety. The senseless ferocity of the police would be
hard to believe if it were not confirmed from evidence even
among themselves, one constable swearing that he saw
Mrs. Reardon deliberately fired at, and that he himself
threatened to shoot the man who did it should he fire
again. Though normally a brave and cool-headed officer,
Mrs. Reardon’s assailant like others had been worked up to
such a stage of pitiable excitement that he seemed not to
know what he was doing.
During this time the outlaws were only occasionally re-
turning the police fire, and the prisoners in the dark house
with them knew little of what they were doing. They
were clad in their armour, during at least a part of that
time, and now and then the prisoners heard the sound of
bullets ringing upon it. While this armour, made by some
locT blacksmith, with huge headpieces quilted inside, pro-
bably by the Kelly’s sisters, gave the outlaws comparative
safety on the head, chest, back, and sides which it covered,


it nevertheless largely helped to their destruction. Each
suit, made of |-in. iron plates, weighed nearly 100 pounds.
Unhampered by armour, the Kellys might at the last
minute have made a bolt for liberty, and at any rate would
have shot down some of their assailants; but encased in
iron they could scarcely move and could not hold their
rifles to their shoulders to take aim.
It is hard to know what their plans were. Their horses
were tethered to trees near the hotel, and probably they
meant to mount and ride away, but early in the fight these
horses were discovered by the police and shot to prevent the
outlaws’ escape. They, however, could scarcely have known
this, and the three other members of the gang were probably
waiting anxiously and without a leader for the return of Ned,
who disappeared from the house into the darkness after the
first volleys had been fired. What he went for, no one knows.
Escape, at least alone, cannot have been his object, for at
eight o’clock he Was seen among the trees, a tall, grotesque
figure, stalking towards the hotel and firing with his re-
volver on the police. His blood-stained rifle had been
found in the grass not long before. A wound in the hand
made it useless to him, and now with a revolver only he
faced the nine police who fired on him as he tried to regain
the hotel. E T nder a long grey overcoat he wore his armour,
and though he staggered beneath the blows from rifle bul-
lets which struck him again and again, he tapped
his armour-clad breast and laughed derisively. Then
they fired at his legs. He wore no armour there, and
presently he fell. The police, headed by Sergeant Steele,
rushed in and secured him, wrenching away his revolver.
With many wounds in his arms and legs he lay helplessly
cursing upon the ground. His career as an outlaw over
for ever, he was presently stripped of his armour and carried
to the railway station where a doctor attended to his
wounds.
Before Ned Kelly Was taken, Superintendent Sadlier had


arrived from Benalla, and from his coming there was more
semblance of order and decency in the proceedings. Firing
upon the building still continued, but the order was given to
fire high, which it was supposed would prevent the outlaws
leaving the house or standing up unharmed to shoot, while
sparing any non-combatants who might be lying on the
floor; but of course it rendered escape very dangerous to
Ihe unfortunate prisoners still confined. Nevertheless, at
intervals a few left the building, and at ten o’clock, when
Mr. Sadlier ordered a complete cessation of firing for ten
minutes and called upon those remaining to come out,
with the exception of a man named Cherry who lay mortally
wounded in a detached building, they all did so. From the
escapees’ report, it appeared that Joe Byrne was dead, shot
in the groin, and that Dan Kelly and Steve Ftart were still
alive. Repeated appeals were made to them to surrender,
but without effect, and numbers of the police begged Mr.
Sadlier to let them rush the building. This request Mr.
Sadlier constantly refused, at this stage perhaps with reason,
as life would probably have been lost, and now there was
no longer good cause to refrain from pouring volleys into
the hotel and shooting the outlaws without danger to
police or private citizens.
Duiing the fight, if so it can be called, the press represen-
tatives were every few minutes sending away sensational
bulletins to their respective journals in Melbourne, where
the excitement caused by the affair at Glenrowan was in-
tense. Police officers and public grew somewhat hysterical.
The day was passing, and though shots came seldom, if ever,
from the building, it was feared the outlaws might yet escape
if they remained uncaptured when darkness came on. Mr.
Sadlier was induced to telegraph to Melbourne for a cannon,
and with a force of artillerymen a 12-pounder Armstrong


gun actually started by train for Glen rowan. The Govern-
ment astronomer was asked if he could send up an electric
light plant in case the siege should continue until night. It
would be scarcely practicable in the time, he said, whereupon
the Chief Secretary, Mr. Ramsay, wired to Mr. Sadlier sug-
gesting the building of huge bonfires to light up the scene,
and also recommending the construction of a great wooden
shield under cover of which the police might approach
the hotel in safety.
None of these devices were, however, needed, and the
cannon returned from Seymour without firing a shot, for
at about three o’clock in the afternoon Senior-Constable
Johnston offered to set alight to the building. After con-
sultation with Mr. O’Connor and others Mr. Sadlier con-
sented. Kate Kelly and Mrs. Skillion, who with numerous
other sympathisers had come upon the scene, were riding
about dressed in their best watching the siege, and after it
was decided to fire the house Mrs. Skillion wished to enter
and see her brother, but Mr. Sadlier refused as the fire
might not have taken, and another non-combatant in the
house would have put fresh difficulties in the way of the
attack. Mrs. Skillion, indeed, was quite capable of deliber-
ately remaining with her brother, and taking up a rifle to
assist the defenders.
All things being ready, under cover of a heavy fire upon
the windows from the police, Johnston ran forward and fired
the building. In a very few minutes the place was in
flames. Kate Kelly looked on, piteously crying, “ Oh, my
poor brother! My poor brother!” The Rev. Dean Gib-
ney, a Roman Catholic clergyman, gallantly rushed towards
the burning building". There might be wounded men
within to be saved, or dying ones to whom he could give
the last comforts of their religion. Mr. Sadlier tried to


prevent him. but could not do so, and there was then a
general rush foi the hotel. From an outbuilding was
removed the wounded man, Martin Cherry; from the house
the body of Joe Byrne. The bodies of Dan Kelly and
Steve Hart were seen by Dean Gibney, lying side by side
in another part of the house. They did not wear their
armour, which was, however, near them, and it may be that
they shot one another rather than be taken; but the manner
of their death was never known, for all of them that was
ever seen again was some charred remains, discovered in
the smouldering ruins of the hotel. These remains Mr.
Sadlier handed over to their friends for burial, while the
body of Joe Byrne was taken to Benalla, where at the
magisterial enquiry it was found that he was shot as an
outlaw. With Joe Byrne’s body to Benalla there went that
of Martin Cherry, an innocent victim of the fight, who died
shortly after his removal from the hotel, while later, in the
Wangaratta hospital, Mrs. Jones’ little boy died of his
wounds.
Over fifty police had taken part in the fight. It was not
an heroic combat, and the work was sadly botched and
bungled, with much resultant misery to innocent people.
Still, three of the outlaws were dead, the fourth was wounded
and awaiting his trial. The pestilent Kelly gang could
trouble Victoria no more, and congratulatory telegrams to
the officers concerned and to the Victorian Government
flashed over the wires one after another from every corner
of Australia.


CHAPTER XXL
THE LAST OF THE BUSHRANGERS.
three of their number dead and the fourth a
prisoner, the career of the Kelly gang ended once
and for all on the day the hotel at Glenrowan, riddled
like a sieve with police bullets, went up in flames, but for
months afterwards the sympathisers remained in sullen,
threatening mood, and while Ned Kelly lived the gang
and their exploits were a constant topic of thought and con-
versation ail through the country.
In the final stages of the Kelly drama events moved
quickly, and changing emotions rapidly succeeded one an-
other in the minds of law-abiding citizens. The horror oc-
casioned by Sherritt’s cold-blooded murder was followed by
intense excitement and eager expectation when news came
that the outlaws were surrounded at Glenrowan. Ex-
citement gave place to relief as hope was converted into the
certainty that the Kelly gang was no more, and afterwards
with reflection there came somewhat contemptuous regret
for the unheroic part that circumstances had forced upon
the police in the affair. They did their duty in the main,
and Superintendent Sadlier was undoubtedly right in deter-
mining that the lives of none of his constables should be
avoidably sacrificed, but the shooting of innocent civilians
was hard to explain away or forgive, and to friends of law
and order the story of Glenrowan was scarcely more a
source of satisfaction than of shame. To the Kelly sym-
pathisers the gang not unnaturally became more than ever
heroes with their death, and over the charred remains of


Hart and Dan Kelly, which were given to their relatives, a
wake was held at the residence of Mrs. Skillion, whereat
fierce vows of vengeance were registered. The fire had
rendered the bodies unrecognisable and no one was able to
see by what wounds they met their death; but the popular
theory was that, finding the case hopeless, they had taken
off their armour and shot one another to prevent falling into
the hands of the police. Reardon, the platelayer, and other
witnesses, who had heard Hart and Dan Kelly conversing
together in the hotel, were convinced that this was the case,
but Ned Kelly, when asked his opinion, said he believed they
were too cowardly to voluntarily accept death.
As for Ned himself, his plight was worse than that of his
associates, for they at least had the satisfaction of dying in
fight, while he was a humiliated prisoner, with almost cer-
tain death in prospect. His wounds were dressed as well as
possible, and for one night he remained in the lock-up at
Benalla where he was interviewed by Mclntyre and
others of the police, and on the following day he was con-
veyed by the ordinary train from the North-East to Mel-
bourne. His expected arrival created extraordinary excite-
ment in the city, with the result that extraordinary precau-
tions were taken to prevent any rioting or disorder among
the inquisitive crowd which thronged all approaches to the
railway station at Spencer-street when the train was due.
Elaborate barriers had been erected near the station en-
trance where uniformed police paraded, but all this de-
monstration was a mere hoax which successfully deluded
the people. The train in which Kelly travelled pulled up
at North Melbourne, the station next adjoining Spencer-
street, and a few plain-clothes police and detectives, who had
unostentatiously strolled on to the platform, immediately
approached the brake van containing the wounded bush-


ranger and his armed guards. He was quickly carried to
a vehicle which was in waiting, with a mattress on the floor,
and driven away to the Melbourne Gaol where a bed in the
Gaol hospital awaited him. He was, indeed, in a pitiable
state, suffering greatly from his wounds, while his face was
covered with livid bruises made by concussion with the
iron helmet when it was struck by the numerous bullets
from the police rifles, which flattened themselves against
it. As the bushranger was carried to the prison van a
murmur of pity arose, from the few spectators, some of whom
doubtless had their own grudges against the law, while
others merely felt involuntary compassion for a man helpless
and fallen, ruffian though they recognised him to be.
Mr. O’Connor and his black trackers, and Mr. Hare,
wounded like Ned Kelly, were also passengers by the train
which took the outlaw to Melbourne, and Mr. Hare had a
good reception at Spencer-street, where he was met by
the late Sir W. J. (then Mr.) Clarke and his wife, who
drove him in their carriage to the police depot at Rich-
mond. For weeks afterwards Mr. Hares wound was at-
tended to by Dr. Charles Ryan, a surgeon lately returned
from service with the Turkish army in the war against
Russia. Dr. Ryan sent in his bill of some four hundred
and fifty guineas to the Government, who also saw that
Ned Kelly’s wounds were attended to, though at somewhat
less expense by Dr. Shields, the Government medical officer
at the Melbourne Gaol. Over £6OO was spent on surgical
attendance upon Mr. Hare; but to prove its desire for rigid
economy, the Government, as commented on by members of
the Royal Commission which enquired into the Kelly out-
break, questioned the payment of four guineas for the treat-
ment of a black tracker wounded in the head at Glenrowan.
In the hospital Ned Kelly gradually recovered from his


A Tall Grotesque Figure.— Page 148




injuries, but frequent remands were necessary before he was
able to appear at the police court in Beechworth, where,
ultimately, he was committed to stand his trial for murder.
In the meantime, matters were going ill in the police force,
in which the smouldering jealousies and bitterness, engen-
dered largely by the Chief Commissioner’s favouritism for
Mr. Hare, broke out into fresh flame, and the public be-
came painfully aware that the affairs of the police depart-
ment were in a thoroughly disorganised and unsatisfactory
condition. Apart from the chief officers employed in the
Kelly business, trouble arose in the lower ranks owing to the
unwillingness of certain sergeants and police constables to
accept service in the neighbourhood of Greta, since they
considered their lives would be in danger from the ven-
geance of Kelly sympathisers. Black marks were put
against the names of one or two of these, a proceeding which,
in view of the extraordinary condition of affairs then exist-
ing. the Police Commission considered was not warranted.
On August 11, after a hearing extending over many days
in the Beechworth Police Court, Ned Kelly was committed
for trial on the charge of murdering the police party at
Stringy Bark Creek in 1878. Every day the court had been
crowded, for though in Beechworth the gang had not many
sympathisers, there was great curiosity to see the notorious
outlaw and his sisters and other relatives, who were con-
stants present at the proceedings and who took an affec-
tionate farewell of him when he was ordered for removal
to Melbourne Gaol. There he remained until the end of
October, when he was put upon his trial before Mr. Justice
Barry at the Melbourne Criminal Court. The trial, which
created intense interest, was not a very long one, and ended
in the only way possible, with a verdict of guilty and
sentence of death against the outlaw, who was convicted


on evidence largely contributed by himself in his boastful
conversation with his prisoners at the sticking up of Faith-
full's Creek, and on the evidence of Constable Mclntyre,
who had been an eye witness of the murders at Stringy Bark
Creek.
Up to and for some time after his conviction, Kelly
maintained an unconcerned and even defiant demeanour.
He was much in request with pressmen as a subject for in-
terviews, and his vainglorious accounts of exploits which
he did not attempt to deny made copy eagerly devoured by
thousands of newspaper readers. Facts were too clearly
proved against Kelly to make denial possible, therefore in
all his outpourings he attempted to arouse sympathy by re-
presenting himself and his family as the victims of wicked
police oppression, which had forced him, against his will, to
adopt a career of robbery and murder. With a discredit-
ably large proportion of the population his specious ap-
peals for sympathy were successful, and sympathisers, re-
inforced by many foolish people who weakly allowed feelings
of compassion to get the better of their sense of decency and
justice, made strong efforts to induce the Government to
commute the sentence passed upon the outlaw. All the
agitation, however, was in vain; and on November n Ned
Kelly was hanged in Melbourne Gaol. He met his death
with a fair amount of courage, though he could not trust
himself to make a speech as he had contemplated doing, and
when asked if he wished to say anything immediately before
his execution, he contented himself with murmuring,
“ Ah, well—l suppose it has come to this!”
Some thousands of people, mostly, as the “Argus” phrased
it, “ of the lower orders,” had gathered outside the Gaol at
the hour fixed for the execution, and they looked up ex-
pectantly as the clock struck ten, in the hope of seeing a


black flag - hoisted above the Gaol, but they were denied
this morbid satisfaction, for the authorities gave no sign
of what was occurring within the walls. Kate Kelly, with
whom much legitimate sympathy was felt in her trouble,
forfeited all claims to it by extraordinary conduct on the
day of her brother’s execution. Doubtless she had a sin-
cere regard for him, as her courageous assistance to the
gang, in defiance of law, had often witnessed; but, stronger
than love or grief, was a desire for theatrical display which
had its grimly humorous side. On the afternoon of her
brother’s execution, dressed in deep black, she held a kind of
reception in a public room hired for the purpose in Mel-
bourne, and allowed those presented to her the privilege
of shaking hands to show their sympathy and their sense
of her importance, after which they passed on in silence
and gave place, to others awaiting their turn. About this
performance there was, at least, a kind of farcical dignity;
but in the evening Kate Kelly sank to lower depths, and
gratified morbid curiosity by appearing on the stage of a
Melbourne music-hall, at the invitation of an enterprising
manager.
In Ned Kelly died the last of the Victorian bushrangers,
and with the increase of population and the improved
methods of communication, even in the still sparsely popu-
lated North-Eastern District, it is scarcely likely that he
can ever have a successful imitator. But it was long be-
fore the fear of another outbreak on the part of exasperated
svmpathisers disappeared, and those best informed upon
the matter considered the danger greatest. Several re-
ferences have been made to a Royal Commission which
enquired into and reported exhaustively upon necessary re-
forms in the police administration and all circumstances
connected with the Kelly gang’s long career. This Com-


mission began its sittings early in 1881, and after sitting
for months, during which it heard a vast amount of evidence
from members of the police and a great number of civilians,
it recommended the retirement upon their superannuation
allowances of Captain Standish, Mr. Hare, and Mr. Nicol-
son. The Commission considered that the first-named
officers were principally to blame for the jealousy and want
of esprit-de-corps which they found existing in the force ; but
Mr. Nicolson and Mr. Sadlier they also blamed for errors of
judgment in connection with the pursuit of the Kellys,
and, in fact, though the Commissioners had a word of praise
for most of the officers upon some points, blame was far
more freely bestowed than praise in their report.
Upon the best means of coping with lawlessness in the
North-Eastern District, and the anticipated outbreak of
Kelly sympathisers, the Commission took evidence with
closed doors, from witnesses familiar with the country and
its inhabitants. Under the new head of the police force,
Mr. H. M. Chomley, who was appointed Acting Chief Com-
missioner during the progress of the enquiry and afterwards
confirmed in the position, measures in accordance with the
recommendations from various sources, and approved bv the
Commission, were taken to secure the tranquillity of the
district. The Lands Department allied itself with fhe Police
Department in promoting order by refusing to grant land in
the district to any applicant who received a bad character
from the police, and the knowledge that the mounted con-
stables, by an adverse report, could prevent them from
obtaining coveted selections, had a most salutary effect upon
a number of the inhabitants. At the same time efforts were
made to get new blood into the district by inducing a good
class of men to take up land, and these efforts were largely
successful.


Finally, new police stations were established at com-
manding points where mischief might be apprehended; the
troopers were armed with regulation weapons and better
horsed than formerly, and special endeavours were made to
secure an active, intelligent class of men who would con-
stantly ride about the country, keeping in touch with one
another and with the inhabitants of every type. These en-
deavours have been eminently successful; and at the present
day—though horses and cattle may occasionally strangely
change brands and ownership in the hills—life and property
are on the whole as safe in the once notorious Kelly dis-
trict as in any other part of Victoria.
Pater & Co., Printers, 271 Little Collins Street, Veil < nc.


READY SHORTLY,
TRUE STORIES
Bushrangers
AND
Eonvicts,
Retold from Official and Private Docu-
ments, Papers and Old Books,
with
Numerous Illustrations.
ONE SHILLING. POSTED, Is. 3d.
/Dbelbourne:
PATER & CO., Printers and Publishers,
271 Little Collins Street.




Furniture Makers to the Victorian Government. V<‘
- |f
M Manufacture Our Own Goods.
Purchase or Exchange anything
or everything.
Give Estimates and Designs Free.
CORNER OF
GERTRUDE & GEORGE STREETS.
FITZROY.
162
