

RULES OF THE NEW TOWN AND
HOBART TOWN FOOTBALL CLUBS.
Rule i.—The maximum length of ground shall be 200 yards, the minimum
breadth shall be too yards, the length and breadth shall be marked off with flags,
and the goals shall be upright posts, 8 yards apart, with a tape across them 10 feet
from the ground.
Rule 2.—The winners of the toss shall have the choice of goals. The game
shall be commenced by a place kick from the centre of the ground by the side losing
the toss ; the other side shall nqt approach within 10 yards of the ball until it is
kicked off.
Rule 3. —After a goal is won the losing side shall kick off, and goals shall be
changed. In the event, however, of no goal having fallen to either party at the
lapse of half the allotted time, ends shall then be changed.
Rule 4. —When the ball is in touch, the first player who touches it shall throw
it from the point on the boundary line where it left the ground, in a direction at
right angles with the boundary line, and it shall not be in play until it has touched
the ground, and the player throwing it in, shall not play it until it has been played
by another player.
Rule 5. —When the ball is kicked behind the goal line, it must be kicked off
by the side behind whose goal it went, within 6 yards from the limit of their goal.
The side who thus kick the ball are entitled to a fair kick off in whatever way they
please, without any obstruction, the opposite side not being able to approach within
6 yards of the ball.
Rule 6.—No player shall wear projecting nails, iron plates, or gutta percha
on the soles or heels of his boots.
Rule 7. —A goal shall be won when the ball is fairly kicked under the tape
between the goal posts, not being thrown, knocked on, or carried.
Rule B.—Running with the ball shall be allowed, provided that it is bounced
on the ground at intervals of five yards.
Rule 9. —A player so running with the ball may be held by the opposite side.
Rule 10. —Neither tripping, nor hacking, nor pushing with the hand shall be
allowed; and no player shall hold an adversary unless he be running with the ball.
Rule ii.—lf a player throw the ball or pass it to another, the opposite side
shall claim a free kick.
Rule 12. —Captains to decide all disputes.
DEFINITION OP TERMS.
A place kick is a kick at the ball while it is on the ground in any position which
the kicker may choose to place it.
Hacking is kicking an adversary intentionally.
Tripping is throwing an adversary by the use of the legs.
Knocking on is when a player strikes or propels the ball with his hands or arms.
Holding includes the obstruction of a player by the hands, or any part of the
arm below the elbow.
Touch is that part of the field, on either side of the ground, which is beyond
the line of flags.
