

P6TU ffm
V- I S' 1-
H y A
PEICE 3d.
haiMs
BOX
PAUL
An Ilssay read before the Sunday Free Discussion Society hy HOKOJ2 } on Sunday
the 19 tli February , 1871, at the Masonic Hall s Lonsdale Street Melbourne „
{with additions,)
Of Paul of Tarsus—of whom I have undertaken to speak to you to-
night—l regret to have to confess that I know little or nothing. All
supposed to be known of him, consists of scarcely a word beyond those
Epistles which have come clown to us as his, and the book of Acts
which was confessedly written by an adherent—if not at the dictation—
of Paul. That the book of Acts was written by the 3rd Evangelist, is
asserted to he impossible, from the direct contradiction between the 24th
chapter of Luke, and the 3rd to 12th verses of the Ist of Acts ; the
first making the ascension take place the same day* as the resurrection,
the latter postponing it for forty days.
According to St. Chrysostomf the book of Acts was not generally re-
ceived before the sth century; —this—if a fact—seems quite incompatible
with its genuineness;—for thus it was doubted and rejected by those
who were in a far better position than we are to judge of its pretensions.
I was surprised at being unable to trace the slightest mention of Paul
by any Pagan or disinterested author before the 3rd century; which
proves decisively, that all his energy had not made him nearly so promi-
nent a parson as is generally supposed, or.as the New Testament repre-
sents him. All the information that we possess, respecting him, comes
to us through the hands and subject to the manipulation of the Fathers;—
who—as the unimpeachable Mosheim testifies, were not only ignorant
and credulous to an extravagant degree, hut did not scruple to propagate
any fiction, how gross soever, which served to promote the interest either
of Christianity in general, or of any particular rite or doctrine which
they were desirous to recommend. The holy Saint Jerome—one of the
most credible and respectable among them, —confesses it. He says of a
pious fraud—But we do not condemn an error which flows—(mark his
Christian reasons)~from a hatred of the Jews, and a pious zeal for the
* See buke sxiv. particularly verges 1,15,33,36,50 ami 51. t Diegesis.


faith !f Mosheim says that even the best of the fathers of the 3rd and
4th centuries cannot be exempted from the charge of fraud ; for they all
adopted the principle that to deceive and lie is a virtue, when religion
can be promoted by it,f and the fathers of the preceding age were con-
fessedly far inferior to them. What I wish to point out, is, the class of
men to whom the so-called oracles of God came, and from whom alone
toe received them. They did not scruple to interpolate , to falsify, or to
forge —-just what they thought proper. And we possess no New Testa-
ment writings which were not subject to their manipulations. They
say —these fathers say—that those writings were of a certain age ; —•
that is, they put the date of them fust so far hack as to be beyond the
reach of any critical test. They forgot that the books could not have
been in vogue long" before, or we should learn it from other sources;
and they so freely altered and patched them to suit their views, that they
filled them with contradictions as a necessary result.
To proceed however with the materials as they stand. Judging by
these—it appears that the leading characteristic of Paul himself—was
impetuosity . This is as conspicuous in his logic, in which it betrays him
into the most absurd and impious conclusions, as in his statements of
fact. That he was utterly careless of violating the truth, is proved
repeatedly. He repeats the story of his conversion thrice —(for Luke’s
story is his—)and as often flatly contradicts himself in matters of fact
In Acts ix. 7, he says — his companions stood speechless, heard aa voice
but saw no man; in xxii. 9, they saw a light hut heard not the o ice ; in
xxvi. 14, they were all fallen to the earth. In the first account he
says he was briefly told to go to Damascus for instructions, and that he
learnt from Ananias that he was to testify before Gentiles and kings
and the children of Israel. In the second, he is merely directed to go
to Damascus for instructions, and he says he came then to Jerusalem;
where, because the Jews would not Lear him there, he is told to go far
thence to the Gentiles. Bnt in the third account before the Roman
Gentile Governor Felix, he gives a long' conversation as having taken
place between Jesus and himself, in the course of which he is appointed
on the spot Apostle of the Gentiles;; and he says that at Damascus,
and at Jerusalem, and throughout the coasts of Judea he forthwith
fulfilled his mission. In Galatians i, 17 he says he did not then come to
Jerusalem at all for several years, but that he went away into Arabia.
Paul hesitates not to assert that he is ready not to he bound only, but
also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus (Acts xxi. 13) ;
yet to avoid it he, as readily, raises a false issue before the high priest’s
council, when he perceived that some were Sadducees and some Phari-
sees. (xxiii, 6.) The true issue was that he had brought Greeks into the
temple and polluted the holy place xxi. 28-9; —hut to sow dissension in
the council, he alleges that it was of the hope and resurrection of the
dead that he was called in question, (xxiii. 6) Again in the xxiii. 3, he
rashly reviles the high priest (in contempt of tho law by his own
confession) and when reminded of his fault, impudently denies that he
t Opera tom. iv. p. 113. See Miiiletoa’g Free Enquiry p, 159,
t.VoU J, P,


knew tho liig-li priest, thc-tsgfc lie must have known him perfectly well.
For besides the general certainty from his position and education at the
feet of Gamaliel, see ix. 1,2, where he has personal communication with
him. We know too how at one time he presumed to withstand Peter to
the face, and blamed him for tolerating and /earing them of the circumcision
(Gal. ii. 11, 12) ; while at another (Acts xvi, 3,) he himself circumcised
Timothy for the very reason for which he blamed Peter. And at Acts
xxi. 24-6 he actually underwent himself the Jewish ceremonial prescribed
to him by “ them of the circumcision” as completely as Peter could have
done it himself! !! Well might poor Peter (see 2 Pet. iii. 16) think
that Paul was, as he says, hard to he understood I After getting letters
from the high priest, and credentials and an escort to go to Damascus
for a special purpose, was it straightforward of Paul (even if his mind
had changed as to tho propriety of carrying out his engagement),
not to return to give an account of his stewardship, instead of
sneaking away into Arabia ? But as regards his precipitate tongue, I
will further only quote his own words (2 Cor. si. 8,) where he says he
rohhed —this Saint— robbed, other churches to do the Corinthians service.
If he told truth, he was a sacriligious thief; —if not—he proves what I
say to be correct. I confess I like a man who speaks out whatever
comes uppermost — because, — I always know what to think of him ; but
I infinitely prefer one in whom whatever comes uppermost is always tho
truth; — because— I must also respect and honor him.
One of the ablest men* that England ever produced, wrote a book in
which he showed that Paul was an impostor, and no apostle of Jesus;
that he never was recognised as an apostle by the real apostles; and
was only tolerated by them at last, (on condition that he should not
molest them at Jerusalem), because they found he was a far better
disciple-catcher than themselves. That Paul repeatedly endeavored to
ingratiate himself with the apostles without success; on one occasion
getting Barnabas to accompany him with mousy collected at Antioch,
for the brethren at Jerusalem ; —of which money no more appears to
have been heard (Acts xi. 29-80). That lie never met the real apostles
without quarrelling and dissension, and spoke of them —-as to them—
with contempt; and of Ms complete independence of them. And these
conclusions are arrived at by a careful comparison of the Ist and 2nd
chapters of Galatians with the corresponding passages in Acts, which
bears out this view in a surprising manner, and throws a flood of light
on passages otherwise obscure—if not unintelligible.
Peter in his Epistle evidently doubts what to think-—or rather to say
—of Paul, and is laboring under the intimidation established by him;
and this is the only mention of Paul by any of the apostles. Paul—in
Gal. 1, entirely repudiates any connection with them—asserts that his
gospel was not from them at all ; and actually says (8) of the preacher
of any gospel differing from his “ though even an angel from heaven”—
“ Let him he accursed /” Here also he speaks very curtly of having*
been to see Peter —but beside also James — no other apostle. Hq
"Jeremy Bentham— 4 * Not Paul tut Jesus,”


speaks evidently in Gal. ih, 1-8, of his disputation with Peter, James,
and John, as with u false brethren (4) unawares brought in, who came
“in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus that
Cl they might bring' us into bondage” ; —those who seemed to be somewhat,
to whom he gave place by subjection, no not for an hour; and he actually
mentions (7 and 8) the compact of antagonism then effected between
them, with the outward reconciliation (9-10), giving- the names of
James, Cephas, and John, as those —who as he impertinently says,—
seemed to be pillars f and who appear to have rid themselves of him
at last and purchased a peace, by giving him a roving commission to
the gentiles! His jealousy however, and animosity are not to be so
suppressedfor in the -succeeding verses (having got away from
Jerusalem to Antioch, where he doubtless considered Peter’s presence
an intrusion, if not a breach of agreement), he openly accuses Peter of
dissimulation, and reiterates that his (Paul’s) doctrine is the only
saving one (11-21). Read by the light of this Epistle (Paul’s own) to
the Galatians, the circumstances related in Acts, of Paul’s visits to
Jerusalem, wear a totally different aspect. It was the disciples and true
apostles—not the chief priest’s party, —that caused his danger, and
would have torn him to pieces, when he astounded them by saying that
the gentiles were to have in him , an apostle. They —in obedience
to Jesus’s commands, never thought of going, but to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel.* They were confounded by his impudent assump-
tion of their mission, and his expansion of it into such proportions as to
include all the gentiles. But his superior energy soon made them
succumb, and Christianity, which would probably otherwise have died
with them, survived by transformation to Paulanity.
Paul appears a to have justly regarded the fall of Jerusalem before
Titus, as the substantial annhilation of the Jewish nationality and
religion, and to have exerted all his energy to effect an alliance of the
latter with the growing Platonic and Alexandrian philosophy ; and he
or others seem to have unfortunately succeeded but too well. Ample
evidence exists in the New Testament to prove that the Gospels were
not written until after the fall of Jerusalem. The xxiii. chapter of
Matthew alone suffices to prove it; —and that the dates attached to
them by the mendacious old fathers, were fixed simply so as to evade
criticism. Jesus himself was possibly a purely imaginary personagef;
and his life was placed nearly half a century before —for the same
*lt noteworthy that all the stories of a contrary tenor, the mission cf seventy disciples (Luke x),
and Peter’s vision of clean and unclean beasts (Acts x) are both asserted to be by Paul’s adherent, and
have no support from the real apostles.
t The story in Josephus, of Jesus the son of Ananus, (see Wars vi., v.,-3) is evidently the basis of much
of that of Jesus of Nazareth. The similarity of their vaticinations (compare Mat. xxiii) is very striking.
The 35th verse of the xxiii. ch. of Mat. affords overwhelming proof that it was'written, long (say at least
20 years) after the destruction of Jerusalem, Zacharias, the son of BaraoMas, being killed in the temple 34
years after the reputed date of the crucifixion (Josephus, wars iv , v, 4); and sufficient time must be
allowed fer the confusion of dates to arise. The cunning reference ia the popular editions of Josephus to
3 Chron. xxiv., 21, will not satisfy the demands of the citation; Por “ from righteous Abel to Zachai’ias”
is evidently meant to include the complete series from the first to the- last notorious case of murder —and
the passage in Chron refers to a time 900 years before Jesus. The prophet Zachafiali, who has also been
suggested as the person referred to, and the manner of whose death has not been recorded and was
therefore not notorious, lived about 600 years before. The Zacharias of Chronicles also was the son of
Jehoiada not Barachias; the prophet Zechariah was the son of Berechiah, (Zeeh i., 1.)


reason. In this view, Paul, or the author of his reputed writings, was
a national and religious enthusiast, whose peculiar impetuosity of
temperament, carried by storm, the minds of the ignorant, starved, and
bewildered inhabitants of Asia Minor, Syria,f and. Greece. Bred to
superstition, they eagerly grasped, (after the common destruction of
their shrines and beliefs,) at the first- —to them—-plausible rehabilitation
of them. Hence Paul’s success. But in any' case we must give him a
much later date than is claimed for him—by 25 or 80 years at least;
which so far will account for the complete silence respecting* him of the
Pagan authorities, —which is otherwise unaccountable.
But I must now invite your attention to the writings attributed to
Paul, in which the same vice that destroys the credit of his statements,
vitiates and stultifies the principles of his teaching. The direct antago-
nism between his doctrine and that of the beautiful Epistle of James, —
which, of all the Epistles, is the truest reflection of that attributed to
Jesus, —is so obvious, as scarcely to fail to arrest the attention of the
most spiritually blind. So plain is it, that James’s Epistle, like Jesus’s
doctrine, has been quite eclipsed by Paul’s empty volubility. Paul was
a proselytiser above all things,—hence his erection of faith into a virtue ,
barely second to charity. And second —lor an obvious reason—for
though he says he lived by faith (Gal. 11, 20), the charity of his
converts certainly afforded him. a better living. But the reign of faith
is over. Men now recognise that faith is an intellectual vice, and only
theologically a virtue. The more we know, the less we believe .
But Paul not only makes salvation the reward of faith, but good
works—practical virtue—of no account “Therefore we conclude that
“ a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the law.*”
(Rom, lit, 28.) —Entitled to the privileges and rewards of virtue,
without having acted virtuously ! Bj belief in—what ? In redemption
purchased by vicarious atonement! Could anything be more immoral
or pernicious ? From this it was but a step to the infamous sale of
indulgences—the crowning papal insult to the human intellect, which
proved too great for even degraded Christianity to bear I To purchase
immunity from the natural and proper consequences of crime, is equally
immoral and pernicious ; whether with a sacrifice of money or goats or
bulls; but most of all with that of the just and virtuous, for the
advantage of the unjust and vicious. This was the crowning act of piety
and wrong ! And Paul dares to implicate God in this iniquity ! when
he says (chapter iv. 5) “ But to him that morketh not, but hdieveth on
“ him that Justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.” /
“ Even as David also describeth the blessedness of the man unto whom
“God imputeth righteousness without works I 7 “God imputeth
“righteousness without works” 111 God gives the reward of
virtue to the vicious ! ! What awful blasphemy ! Could all our ideas
t Imagine the devastation and famine caused by Ko'oan conquest and occupation in that miserable
country, and remember how starvarion produces visionaries.
Vlft the debate it was actually contended that by ’‘works of the law,” is here meant—not
natural morality—-that law unto themselves which Paul says, those have, who have not the law of God
but the Jewish ceremonial law !!! As if Paul could possibly mean what could not be understood by the
Romans and Galatians to whom he was writing ! I’Urtlief refutation is superfluous.'


of good and evil —virtue and vice—be more completely inverted and
stultified ?
But Paul also taught the doctrine of the natural depravity of man.
He explicitly teaches (Rom. chapter v., 12, 19) that by one u man gin
u entered into the world and death by sin ; and so death passed upon
“ all, for that all have sinned”—(l9) by one man’s disobedience many
u were made sinners.” “ They that are in the flesh cannot please God”
—the carnal mind is enmity against God—for it is not subject to the
“ law of God, neither indeed can be.” If man is thus bora sinful and
powerless for good, where is his proper responsibility ? Is it not des-
troyed ? or could it ever exist to be destroyed ? Paul evidently would
destroy it if he could. In the ?tli chapter of Romans he evades and
denies his own in the most barefaced and contemptible manner, (vii. 19)
“ For the good that I would, I do not; but the evil that I would not,
u that I do. (20.) Now if Ido that I would not, it is no more I that
“do it, hut sin that dwelleth in me !” was ever a more impudent
attempt made to evade or deny moral responsibility altogether 1 He
attempts to lay it on sin ! I an impersonality ! a nonentity ! Compare
this with Phillipians 11, 13. “ For it is God that worketh in you both
“to will and to do”—Sin or God ? —which ? he applies both terms to
the same thing I But Paul does not hesitate-—on lie goes ; —and at the
29th and 80th verses he actually says that man—if virtuous—is so
because God predestinated him to be so I where then is his virtue 1
annihilated—-and vice with it. Moral responsibility first, now virtue
and vice—all destroyed I What next ?
But the impetuous Paul has not yet attained his climax. Listen,
(ix., 11) (“For the children being not yet horn, neither having done any
“ good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might
“ stand, not of works, but of him that calleth;) it was said unto her,
“ the elder shall serve the younger. Jacob have I loved but Esau have
“ I hated S” Then first dawns upon Paul, what everyone of you must
have perceived as I read his words —that he has all along been blas-
phemously imputing unrighteousness to God ! and how does this
brilliant logician escape from his dilemma ? He says—God forbid I
Common sense forbid ! Then still worse (ix., 16) — <£ So then it is not
“of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but (says Paul) of God
“that sheweth mercy.”—But that is not a tithe of the consequence—ls
it not God that also remorselessly damns to hell ? creates all, and pre-
destinates all-—before they have done any good or any evil ? And now
on perceiving this dimly, what is Paul’s final resort P—(2l) “ Hath
“ not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
“ vessel to honor and another unto dishonor ?” Is that an escape ?
only into a deeper depth. Does it not simply mean this ? If God has
the power to commit iniquity, he is justified in committing it ? and if
God, why not man ? why not devil ? If God do evil, is he not devil ?
Is not all morality, and virtue and vice, thus destroyed and impossible ?
But Paul —bless you—-goes off into a rhapsody about the mercy of
saving the gentiles—-(as if Satan had created them of malice afore-
thought ;) and is called a logician ! !!


Can all the plagiarisms in his xiith chapter make this blasphemous
nonsense reasonable? No one says Paul never repeated a sensible
saying-. But if he said, (Rom. xii. 21) —“ Be not overcome of evil, but
“ overcome evil with good,” does that cancel the iniquity of the next
verse? (xiii. x.) “ Let every soul he subject to the higher powers ;
u for there is no power but of god; the powers that be are ordained of
c< God.” Here is sanction for every tyranny and iniquity. Nay—
Christians—ls not Satan one of the powers that be.
If Paul has given fifty texts unconnected with his argument—and
diametrically opposed to those I have quoted—and which form part of
his argument,—does not that prove what I say to be correct ? that his
impetuosity led him into all sorts of absurd contradictions, and that his
opinion and his word are alike worthless ?
After having thus denied moral responsibility and the possibility of
human virtue, Paul repeats even more explicitly his blasphemy against
his God, in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians ii. 11-12. “ God
“ shall send them strong delusion that they should believe a lie; that
“ they all might be damned”—ls this the God whose tender mercies
are over all his works ? But I ask all of you for a reply to this.—What
evil acts have ever been imputed to the devil, if not giving men strong
delusions that they should believe lies, that they all might be damned ?
First Paul ascribes the same function to sin and to God, and next he
attributes to God the conduct of the devil !
Now these are not mere isolated texts ; they are essential portions of
Paul’s own Epistles which are full of similar paralogisms. In
Phil, ii., 18, he says, “For it is God which worketh in you both to will
“ and to do of his good pleasure j” thus depriving man of possible virtue
and vice, and laying the entire responsibility for all his crimes directly
upon God 1 Paul says (Rom. iii. 4) “ Let God bo true, and every man
“ a liar.” I say let man be true, and let God vindicate his own veracity,
—lf man’s best attempts to do so involve the destruction or confusion
of all the ideas he has so laboriously acquired of good and evil, virtue
and vice, let him rather maintain his hold upon them, and reject that
which cannot be held consistently with them.
There is one matter to which I ought to allude—Paul’s going away
into Arabia, No plausible explanation has ever been given of this very
striking and peculiar fact. Had he returned at once to Jerusalem after
his conversion, to confer with the Apostles there, it would have been so
far consistent with the rest of the story. But why go into Arabia, and
lie by for several years ? Is it consonant with the story, or the character
of the man ? Fear of consequences of his violation of agreement with
the high priest, though partly plausible, would be an altogether inade-
quate reason to account for it. The following explanation seems to me
more reasonable. Jesus’s disciples (supposing they existed) were
paralysed and silenced by his death; and the suppression was doubtless
made complete by the measures of the chief priests, which Paul may or
may not have been employed to enforce ; or there may have been no
sect at all, and the stories of it— and of Jesus— may have been
fabrications, The silence of contemporaneous pagan history is quite


consistent with either supposition. The critical condition of his nation
and religion would naturally work upon a nature like Paul’s, and after
the destruction of the City, he, as one of its defenders would be likely to
escape if he could into Arabia. There he might learn in a few months
quite enough of the Indian Christna to enable Mm to combine it with
what he would be likely to have heard as a boy of a possible or imagi-
nary Jesus or John; who were but types of a class, which, as we know
from Josephus and Philo, was not inconsiderable in number. The
entire invention of Christianity in the first twenty years after the
destruction of Jerusalem, is a theory which accords much better than
the New Testament, with the total silence till long after that time, of all
other records; and also with the fact that the Gospel stories of Jesus
are simply paraphrases of those of Christna. To learn those stories
more fully was probably what led Paul into Arabia ; and his use of them
was-all that maintained them in existence. Otherwise his going into
Arabia is as great an anomaly, as the introduction into the story of
Jesus, among other things, of the slaughter of the innocents, which it
was impossible to adapt from the old Hindoo legend with any color of
probability. In Judea it was simply an impossibility, but is much more
plausibly related in the Bhagavat Gita,
Judged by his own writings—Paul is a striking example of the evils
of enthusiasm. His impetuosity was too great to admit of his being
either good or great—even under more favorable circumstances. In an
age of half starvation and bewilderment, it brought falsehood into Ms
morality, and blasphemy into his religion.
Why do professing Christians tolerate Paul ? nay—prefer his teaching
to that of Jesus ? Jesus—if lie taught intolerance—did so incidentally
only, or by implication, But intolerance was an essential part of Paul’s
teaching—by precept and example ; it was evidently constitutional with
him ; and if he sometimes quoted and repeated some liberal and noble
maxims, they were exceptional, and extraneous to his body of doctrine.
It is surely overlooked by Christians who exalt Paul, that they can do
so, only at the expense of Jesus. For if Jesus’s doctrine was sufficient
and perfect—as is pretended,—that of Paul—in so far as it was
different—must have been superfluous and erroneous. But I need not
here again dilate upon their obvious antagonism, Paul was essentially
a persecutor ; notoriously so before his asserted conversion, and evi»
dently would have been so afterwards—if he could. His impertinent
domineering over Peter and the other senior Apostles, (Gal. i. 7-9, and
ii. 5-14) j his ingratitude to Barnabas, (Acts xv. 89) who according to
Acts (ix. 27) first took him and negociated for his recognition by the
other Apostles as a convert; his own first Epistle to Timothy (i. 20)
where he speaks of Hymeneus and Alexander, whom he had delivered
unto Satan that they might learn — not to blaspheme I/! &c. &g. ; all
this proves his essentially intolerant Spirit; and it is therefore no wonder
that the doctrines which he preached, should in after times have produced
the merciless rancour and bloody persecutions, which hold such leading
places in Christian Church history. “By their fruits ye shall know
them,”


It is a singular, and to me so far a gratifying thing, that the bulk of
the damning evidence against Paul is recorded by himself, or rather in
the writings attributed to him. It supports my view that impetuosity
'Was his leading characteristic, and caused his striking heedlessness of
statement in fact and doctrine, which a wilful deceiver would have
studied to avoid. And thus also lam enabled to vindicate his sincerity,
though at the expense of his consistency and commonsense. Though
'on the so-called Christian principles taught by Paul, an error cannot oe
perceived without the attribution of voluntary perversity and sin to the
individual in whom constitution and circumstance conspire to produce
it ; still a careful and impartial study of the causes and effects of human
actions, enables the necessitarian to pass a more lenient judgment. He
perceives that though the result of this intolerant doctrine and example
of Paul has been the extension of religious persecution—till his time
almost unknown to all but the monotheistic Jews —into nearly every
corner of the globe 5-—still he erred not in intention. He would
probably have recoiled, with horror from hnoivingly sowing the seeds of
the most detestable scourge that ever afflicted poor humanity. Let us
at least believe it of him. Above all let us not believe—but rather
abhor—his diabolical doctrine of sin ; which would make virtue im-
possible and justify vice; which destroys both intellect and energy; and
which sanctifies hatred and all uncharitableness.
The xiith and xivth chapters of Homans are so radically distinct from
the doctrinal ones which precede them, that it seems scarcely credible
that they can have proceeded from the same hand. But on considera-
tion we shall find that however opposed the morality of these two
chapters may be to Paul’s general doctrinal theology, such antagonism
is not inconsistent with the practice of all religious teachers. Were
theological dogmas not associated —however incongruously —with good
moral precepts, the teachers of the former might spare their pains, for
ho one would listen to them. Paul says, (Pom. xii. 9) “ Abhor that
which is evil. Cleave to that which is good.” What moral or religious
teacher has not said the same in identical or similar words ? Excellent
in itself, but merely general; and—associated with his theological
doctrines—-relatively evil. For if, —as we have seen, he says,—God
gives the reward of the virtuous to the . vicious, what inducement is
there to follow his advice? unless good be called evil, and evil good »
and man’s most precious knowledge be ignorance. From,
the 9th verse to the last in the chapter, follows a string of good moral
precepts; —but mere generalitieswithout a reason for their adoption
which can commend itself to the understanding. The xiiith chapter is
decidedly immoral to the Bth verse, where Paul’s moral gene-
ralities recommence, to give place again in the 11th verse to his
accustomed theological maundering. The xivth chapter succeeds, and
contains moral teaching far superior’ to any elsewhere in the bible,
scarcely excepting a passage in Ezekiel, and James’s Epistle. Here,
theology is practically discarded; and excepting a few incongruous
doctrinal allusions wnich have the aspect of interpolations, there is
expressed the most eclightened tolerance and the soundest morality.


Were it certain that Paul was the author of this chapter alone, he would
compare favorably with any religious teacher. But if the same person
really wrote the rest of the Epistle to the Homans, the inconsistency
alone would destroy his title to respect; to say nothing of the glaring
defects which I have pointed out. Nothing can be more sensible and
true than the tenor of the 3rd, 4th, sth, 10th, 13th, 14th, 22nd, and 23rd
verses of this chapter. A spirit of the most exalted charity breathes
throughout them. I take the sth verse as a sample; “ One man
“ esteemeth one day above another ,• another esteemeth every day alike.
se Let every man be fully persuaded in his oivn mind, (13.) Let us
“ not judge one another any more; but judge this rather 1 , that no man
u put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall, in his brother’s way.”
Could refined tolerance and elevated charity find happier expression 2
(28) “ And he that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not
“of faith'; for whatsoever is not of faith—is sin.” This verse though
spoiled by the theological turn given to it, I am willing' to interpret
charitably; though if I believed that it contained the word of God, I
should not venture to be wise above that which is written. I receive it
thus. “He is condemnable who acteth otherwise than as his own con-
u viction shall.dictate. Those acts only are contemptible, which proceed
“ from imperfect conviction, from apathetic servility to the conviction of
“ another, or which are opposed to one’s own.” The value of this
saying, almost parallel to the 17th verse of the fourth chapter of James,
cannot be destroyed even by the importation into it of the horrid term
sin; which stands for an idea, of which it is hard to say whether it is
most contemptible, hateful, or pernicious. Thus does piety—or a
factitious sentiment of supernatural duty, stultify and destroy the
promptings of natural duty and intelligence. When the well meaning
Calvin burnt the innocent Servetus—alive—on a fire of green
he did so in a paroxysm of piety, which evidently was then in him in
inverse proportion to his morality. But Calvin was ordinarily a moral
man, —that is—where religion was not concerned. It was only where
She demon of piety and imaginary supernatural duty interposed between
him and his otherwise obvious natural duty, that he was betrayed into
the commission of such awful crimes; and such has always been the case.
Religion and morality are in inverse proportions to one another. When-
ever it is believed that man can have a duty—higher than that which
he owes to his neighbour, so soon as the two duties come into conflict,
(as in Calvin’s case,) so surely is the result a crime. And the crime is
always the more atrocious, in exact proportion to the strength of the
religious feeling in the individual. Assuredly Calvin believed that
burning Servetus was a holy act and that the smell of his sacrifice was
a sweet smelling savour in the nostrils of Jehovah,
Man’s ignorance and fear have always in barbarous times led him to
imagine fictitious causes of obscure natural phenomena, and to personify
them as placable or bribable; instead of discerning that his best defence
against nature, is to patiently discover her forces, and to energetically
apply them to his use ; that his duty to his neighbour is the highest he
can have—solely because it is absolutely coincident with his own self-


interest; and that it consists in the cordial concession to others of every
privilege that he claims for himself.
I should be glad to give Paul credit, if possible, for writing this
chapter (Rom. xiv.) without the greater objectionable part of the epistle.
But we have the same authority for ascribing to him the authorship of
both; and we know too little of Paul to warrant us in ascribing to him
one more than the other. These writings are in fact all we certainly
have to criticise, and if I have criticised Paul, it was solely as their
reputed author, I have also been careful in doing so, to quote the very
words of the writer, as they have come to us. They are but produc-
tions of the conditions of that age ;and country upon an impetuous
visionary ; and to blame them would be no more unreasonable than to
blame Paul himself; which I decline to do. What I have just read was
written under a deep and almost indignant sense cf the incalculable
evils which have resulted to theological aud social morality, from the
elevation into a position of respect and veneration of such a tissue of
inconsistent tergiversation as Paul’s Epistles. They have given the cue
in my opinion for all the puerile nonsense of the fathers, and the mean-
ingless subtleties of the schoolmen of tlhe middle ages, which are not yet
nearly extinct. For the sanctity attributed to Paul’s Epistles gave
popularity and credit to the analogous rubbish which emanated from the
Greek and Alexandrian Platonists, and Paul’s writings are even now the
Justification of endless equivocation and unworthy subterfuge, which
constitute the mass of theological discussion. They have even in the
present day been held up as a pattern of eloquence and logic. But the
grave advocacy in biblical criticism of the acception of words in other
than the simplest and most popular manner, too readily leads from
admiration of oriental imagery to sinister prevarication, and from
figurative interpretation to mendacious quibbling. For these reasons I
conclude that Paul’s reckless inconsequent declamation and the facti*
tious sanctity with which it has been invested, have on the_ whole—
actually lessened the usefulness of tire faculty of speech, discredited
ingenuousness, and depreciated truth.
HOKOR.
S, Bell, Printer , 97 Little Collins Street East, Melbourne.


1 508
00062142
