

EARLY
MEMORIES
OF
ALBANY.
By MRS. A. Y. HASSELL
The entire proceeds from the sale
of this Booklet are to go to the
Treneh Comforts Fund.
PRICE: ONE SHILLING.
ADVR. PRINT, ALBANY.






EARLY
MEMORIES
OF
ALBANY.
BY MRS. A. Y. HASSELL
PRICE: ONE SHILLING.
ADVR. PRINT, ALBANY.


Foundation of tie Settlement.
Vancouver's Investigation —Expedi-
tion from Sydney—Major Lock-
yer's administration
of King George’s Sound-
When Vancouver made his first voy-
age to Australia in 1792 he did not no-
tice the 'entrance to Princess Royal Har-
bor, but sailed up through King George
111. Sound, and landed a'most opposite
Emu Point. There he dug a long rec-
tangular tank, close to the beach, for
the purpose of obtaining water for the
ship. They remained there a short
time, and described the harbor as suit-
able for vessels of light draft, and men-
tioned the two small rivers which fell
into it. When he made his second voy-
age, running short of water, he decided
to make for Oyster Harbor and get a
supply. On this occasion he stayed a
longer time, and four men rowed across
the bay and landed on the opposite side,
I fancy somewhere near where the pre-
sent road comes out. I have often
wished the names of these four men
were known, but I have never been able
to find them out. However, these men
penetrated through the thick scrub,
and skirting a large marshy lake, now
known as Lake Sepping, they ascended
a-lp'vj grayelly hill, thickly wooded, and
from there saw two large hills, and de-
cided to ascend one of them, so as to
see what the country was like from the
top. They camped where they were
that night. I fancy this hill must be
either that of Mr. A. E. Morgans, .or
just above Mr. Bird’s. The following
morning they ascended Mt. Clarence,
and there, at their feet, saw Princess
R ,yal Harbor, named because it was
discovered on the birthday of Princess
Charlotte, only daughter of King
George IV. They descended the moun-
tain, somewhere near Point King, and
clambered round the rocks until they
came to Middleton Beaeh, and walked


round to Emu Point, where they rowed
across to the main camp. A party was
immediately sent out to row to the en-
trance and discover the depth. I be-
lieve, but I am not certain, they land-
ed on the opposite side and took pos-
session of the place in the name of His
Majesty King George, for that point
has always been called Point Possession.
I next find, in 1825, two French ves-
sels, the Thetis and the Esperance, com-
manded by De Bougainville and Du
Camper, were cruising about the south-
western coast of Australia, and it was
suspected they had ideas of forming
settlements somewhere on the coast.
This fear caused General Darling, then
Governor of New South Wales, to draw
the attention of the Secretary of State
for the Colonies to this possibility, and
to ask that steps be taken to avert it.
“It will not be easy, ” he wrote, “to
satisfy the French if they desire to
establish themselves here, that there
is any valid objection to their doing so
on the west coast, and I, therefore, beg
to suggest the difficulty would be re-
moved by a commission proclaiming
the whole territory as within the Go-
vernment. ’ ’
On March 1, 1828, Lord Bathurst sent
two despatches to Darling, informing
him that two French vessels were re-
ported to be sailing on a voyage of dis-
covery, and suggesting, for fear the
Frenchmen should attempt to take pos-
session of, or establish a claim, to any
part of the western coast of the con-
tinent, it would be advisable for the
Governor to send an exploring party to
Sharks Bay. The Secretary of State
was particularly careful, in a private
despatch, to draw General Darling’s at-
tention to the fact that he avoided any
expression of what might at some fu-
ture time be construed into an admis-
sion of not having been a preoceupancy
of Great Britain. This probably ex-
plains the absence of any public pro-
clamation as to the intention of the
Government to found a settlement.
On the 11th of March, Lord Bathurst


again addressed Governor Darling, in-
structing him to have an examination
made of King George’s Sound, in pre-
ference to Sharks Bay. The reasons
were given that the soil at the Sound
was reported to be richer, and as it was
situated on the tracks of vessels passing
between Sydney and London, communi-
cation could more easily be kept up
with the settlement at the locality. In
October the same year, Governor Dar-
ling, replying to these despatches, sta-
ted that, in his opinion, King George’s
Sound was unsuitable even for a penal
settlement. The country round Sharks
Bay he considered even worse. In fact,
he had been given to understand the
adjacent coast lines were frequently
under water. The French would, there-
fore, find it very difficult to maintain
themselves at either place. However,
without further loss of time, directions
were given to fit out an expedition for
the purpose of carrying into effect the
instructions of the Home l Government.
Three sites for occupancy were deter-
mined upon—at Raffles Bay, Western
Point and King George’s Sound. On No-
vember 9, H.M.S. Fly, accompanied, by
the brigs Amity and Dragon, sailed
from Sydney to establish the settle-
ments at Western Point and King
George’s Sound. The contingent for
King George’s Sound was on board the
Amity, and was under the command of
Major Lockyer, of the 59th Regiment,
who had with him Captain Wakefield
and a detachment of the 39th Regi-
ment, as well as 34 convicts. In the in-
structions given to Major Lockyer he
was told to avoid any expression of
doubt as to the whole of New Holland
being within the British Government,
any division which may be supposed
to exist under the designation of New
South Wales being merely an ideal one,
and intended with a view to only dis-
tinguishing the more settled parts of
the country. Should this explanation
not prove satisfactory, it would be pro-
per in that case to refer them to the
Government for any further informa


tion that they may require. If it should
so happen a landing has already been
effected by the French you will, not-
withstanding, land the troops agree-
ably to your instructions, and signify
that their continuance with any view
of establishing themselves or of colo-
nisation would be considered an un-
justifiable intrusion on his Britanie
Majesty’s possessions.
Major Lockyer accordingly left Syd-
ney at daylight on November 9, 1826.
The weather seems to have been fair,
with a good deal of wind. On the 20th,
being off Point Dalrymple, it was deci-
ded to put in there, for fresh water,
as the supply was declining and not
very good. The Amity and Fly ancho-
red there at 9 o ’clock, and were glad
they had done so, for a dreadful gale
sprang up; so they remained there un-
til the 23rd. They got a good supply
of water and Captain Wakefield and
Lieut. Festing went up the river in a
boat and brought back 13 kangaroo, a
most seasonable supply of fresh meat.
On the night of the 24th another gale
sprang up, and, as the weather was so
thick and hazy it was decided to run
out to Kent’s Group, to the eastward,
and round Van Dieman’s Land, as Tas-
mania was then called, to the south-
ward. They saw the east coast of
Tasmania on the evening of the 26th.
On the 28th the wind shifted to its old
quarter, and it blew such a gale ihat
the main boom was carried away and
the bulwarks stove in. The damage was
so great that it was necessary to go to
Hobart for repairs. Accordingly they
anchored in Storm Bay on the even-
ing of the 30th, and went up the Der-
went River at daylight. Anchoring off
Hobart at midday on the Ist December,
they left again on the 6th, having re-
paired all damage. The next four days
were stormy, but then the weather
changed and they had a pleasant voyage
to King George’s Sound, anchoring at
half-past 5 on the morning of December
25. The thermometer on that day re-
gistered 68 deg.


Major Lockyer mentions in Ms diary
making Bald Island about noon, and
says it is rightly called Bald Island.
He mentioned sighting Cape Manypeak,
Mount Gardiner, then the islands guar-
ding the Sound and Bald Head. During
the voyage they lost five sheep. They
apparently landed at the foot of Par-
ade-street, at the back of the present
gaol. A small stream used to run into
the sea at this point, rising in a swamp
somewhere below the present bowling
green, and they walked all over the
place to find a suitable spot for a set-
tlement. Ascending Mount Melville,
they were not at all favorably impres-
sed with the place, and returned to the
ship for breakfast. After dinner they
again landed and proceeded along the
northern shore, crossing the hills to the
bay facing the Sound, and separating
Princess Royal Harbor and Oyster Har-
bor, then crossing the country at the
head of a fresh water lake. They were
quite disappointed at th|e miserable
appearance of the soil. Next they
examined the shores of Oyster Harbor,
landing on the Green Island, and there
they found the dead body of a native.
On the 28th they had a brush with the
natives, and one man was hurt. On the
30th Major Lockyer finaßy decided to
form the settlement opposite to where
the brig was anchored. They pitched
their tents on the site of the Parade-
street recreation ground, and formed
the garden about the same place. Major
Lockyer mentioned some good timber
being there, and also excellent fresh
water.
On the 3rd of January he went across
the harbor and landed apparently be-
tween the big and little groves, noted
there was no lack of good timbers; also
immense quantities of good stone for
building and plenty of shells to make
lime, and remarked: “It is to be won-
dered that a place affording so fine a
harbor as this should so long have re-
mained unnoticed. From its being so
short a distance from Cape Leeuwin,
it affords great facilities to ships, either


returning from there to England, India,
Europe or China.” This seemed to
have been rather a disagreeable sum-
mer, for there are constant entries com-
plaining of the cold weather. On the
12th of January he started saw pits at
the Big Grove—the remains are still
to be seen —and mentioned Limeburn-
er’s Creek “as a most excellent clear
spring of running -water.” On the
25th of January he planted some maize
and various vegetable seeds on where,
I should think, is now the bowling
green, for he says: “On a spot of ground
near the western hill we had formed
our settlement of about 500 yards
square, which I have named Frederick
Town, where the store hut, barracks
and office residence are built, and on a
projecting point on the beach just be-
low the settlement, I have placed a
flagstaff, and mounted two cannonades
which is easily seen from a ship cross-
ing the Sound and the opening to Prin-
cess Royal Harbor.” This is now called
Residency Point, but in my young days
was called Point Frederick, and the
name of Point Frederick to Residency
Point was gradually changed during
the time when the late Mr. Hare was
Government Resident. My husband re-
members the flagstaff being there when
he was quite a boy, and recalls the
time when the west side of
York-street was called Frederick Town.
On the 2nd of February Major
Lockyer visited Breaksea Island, and
considered the top and north-east side
would grow excellent potatoes. Ho
mentions the number of fur seals he
saw on the rocks. On the sth he estab-
lished another saw pit at the Little
Grove. On the 10th he interviewed
some sailors who arrived in a boat, and
had with them 100 fur seal skins, and
told him they had about 700 stored on
an island. These men described the
coast from Middle Island to Mandurah.
On the 13th Major Lockyer men-
tions being disgusted with the
vegetables making no progress to-
wards growth. On the same day


he explored the French or Kalgan
River, landing on Green Island to catch
some mutton birds. He rowed up the
river until he was blocked by a ridge
of rock; then camped for the night and
explored all around, noting it would do
for grazing cattle, but not for sheep.
The locality was also proclaimed un-
suitable for growing grain. Major
Lockyer speaks of the quantity
of wild fowl and almost regrets having
started the sett’ement where he did.
On the 29th he again explored the two
rivers and considered the land very bad,
except along the banks, but again con-
sidered the advisability of changing
the site of the settlement to the Kalgan
River. He spent four days over this
trip.
In April Major Lockyer tried ano-
ther piece of land for a farm, and des-
cribed it “as good soil capable of
growing wheat, but not of any great
quantity, with some nice timber grow-
ing on it, and a large fresh water lake
a mile in length, which ends in a
marsh (Lake Sepping).” This place
was afterwards the residence of Sir
Richard Spencer and is now occupied
by Mr. Bird. Major Lockyer commen-
ted strongly on the coolness of the cli-
mate and considered, with drainage,
and suitable cultivation, most things
could be grown. He laid great stress
on the importance of settling King
George’s Sound, saying: ‘‘The impor-
tance of King George’s Sound as. a
place necessary to occupy must strike
every person acquainted with this
country. An enemy holding it would,
with his cruisers, completely cut off all
trade, except by convoys, to Van Die-
man’s Land, Port Jackson, from Eu-
rope, Cape of Good Hope, Is’e of
France and India, and it is probably
one of the finest seaports in the
world. ’ ’
The same month Major Lockyer re-
ceived information from some sealers
that a French vessel had been seen off
the Swan River, and he started to walk
overland, accompanied by three sol


filers of the 29th Regiment, and two
convicts, each individual carrying his
blanket and provisions for seven days.
Major Lockyer had not proceeded very
far when one of the men fell sick, and
the party had to return. He reported
the country greatly improved as he
proceeded inland. On his return he
found a vessel from Sydney had put
in to the Sound, with the news that
Lieutenant Stirling had gone to the
Swan River. This trip was ultimately
made in 1830, by Captain Bannister
and a small party. He reported that
about 30 miles from King George’s
Sound he passed over 90 miles of luxu-
rient pasture land in one continuous
tract, with abundance of water.
In 1829 a Dr. Wilson was at King
George’s Sound, and in his journal he
describes an exploring trip in the direc-
tion of the Hay River. He mentions a
large swamp, about 11 miles from here,
where he camped for the night, after
what he considered a good day’s jour-
ney, and after a long trip he at last
arrived at Mt. Barker hill, which is
called after a Captain Barker, of the
39th Regiment. Mt. Barker in South
Australia is called after the same man,
who was afterwards killed by natives
at the mouth of the River Murray. In
1832, a Mr. Lukin accompanied Sir
James Stirling on an expedition to
King George’s Sound, with a view to
establishing a whaling fishery.


The First Government Resident
Sir Richard Spencer's Regime—Real
progress begins—Napoleon's wiU
low trees —Farming experiences—
First wool and wheat exported—
Original harbor improvements-
In 1833 Sir Richard Spencer, with
his family, arrived in Albany to take
up the position of Government Resident,
which in those days was almost equal
to that of Governor now. Between the
time of the departure of Captain Wake-
field, who succeeded Major Lockyer,
and Sir Richard Spencer’s arrive!, very
little is known of the early history.
There is mention of a Lieut. McLeod,
who seems to have administered affairs,
and a Dr. Colley, who did a lot of valu-
able botanical work. I am sorry I have
been unable to find the exact date when
the first white woman landed in King
George’s Sound. Prior to Sir Richard
Spencer’s arrival, there were but few
settlers and very little cultivation.
American whalers and fur sealers used
at intervals to call for fresh water and
vegetables, but these visits were very
irregular. At one time stores were so
short that the women and children were
put on Green Island and provided with
a small rowing boat. Tents were secu-
rely pitched and all the remaining sto-
res were placed there. A flagstaff was
planted and the women were instruct-
ed to keep a lantern burning by night
and a flag flying by day and to arm
themselves. They were also told to
row over to Vancouver’s well for water
after dark, for the natives rarely mo-
ved about at night. The natives used
to come down to the shores of Oyster
Harbor and hold up strings of fish to
them, but they were unable to get to
the island because none of them had
boats and they could not swim. There
are still the remains of some of the
stone fireplaces that were made upon


the island. The ship the men were in
was becalmed and made a longer voy-
age than was expected. One can ima-
gine the anxiety of the women, parti-
cularly as a baby was born during
their residence on the island. The rea-
son they were not put on Breaksea or
Michaelmas was the difficulty of get-
ting water.
Sir Richard Spencer brought a quan-
tity of stock, stores and servants, which,
with his family, numbered 22 people.
And in an official letter it is stated
that his expenses amounted to £I,OOO.
At this time the Government cottage
on the site of the present gaol was
occupied by Mr. Hillman, surveyor, and
the Government farm by Mr. Morley,
who was superintendent of the farm.
Sir Richard Spencer took over the farm
as soon as he landed, with all improve-
ments, valued at £ls 3s Bd, and every-
thing was handed to Sir Richard by
Lieut. McLeod. I may mention one
little item of interest. Sir Richard
Spencer, on his way out, stayed a short
time at St. Helena, and brought away
with him a bundle of cuttings from the
willow trees planted on Napoleon’s
grave. All the willow trees about Al-
bany came from those famous trees. At
the time of Sir Richard Spencer’s arri-
val there were only three private hou-
ses, one on the beach near Residency
Point, occupied by Mr. Geake, and ano-
ther near the present Town Jetty, oc-
cupied by Mr. Cheyne, after whom
Cheyne’s Beach was called. I have
not been able to find out the name of
the occupant of the third, which was
a little further off the beach between
the other two. There were then in the
settlement only 17 people, exclusive of
a few soldiers; three cows, two horses
and a good many poultry. All the sheep
imported by Major Loekyer had died.
In 1834 I find potatoes were import-
ed from the Swan River and were sold
at 30s per cwt. Flour was sold by one,
John William Andrews, at £27 per ton.


The same year Sir Richard Spencer
brought 292 sheep from Tasmania,
which were kept about the old farm,
and the sandhills around Middleton
Reach, but in November only 70 were
alive. In December the first bees im-
ported into Western Australia were
landed at King George’s Sound, but I
have not been able to find out the name
of the importer. In 1835 Governor
Stirling started to explore the district
between the Hotham River and King
George’s Sound, with the intention of
pushing on further on horseback to
Doubtful Island Bay, “with the idea
that if there be a good tract of land
and a suitable harbor it would proba-
bly come into repute at once and the
settlement should be moved to there.”
He does not seem to have had a very
pleasant trip. He saw considerable
tracts of fine grazing ground, but no big
rivers. I do not think he could have
gone on to Doubtful Island Bay, for I
cannot find any further mention of the
place.
Towards the middle of 1835 the first
public house was established in Albany,
in a two storey wooden house, painted
light green, and situated on the beach
a little distance from Residency Point.
Tenders were also accepted for fresh
meat for the military at Is 6d per lb.
Kangaroo was sold at lOd, fish at 2d,
and flour at Bd. In December the Go-
vernment Resident ordered flour to be
sold from the Government stores at 6d.
This year 'Lady Spencer started a smad
school for native children, and a num-
ber of charitable ladies, headed by the
Duchess of Kent, sent her a parcel of
red flannel garments for the women and
children. The natives sieieim to hav'e
been of a very peaceable disposition,
for beyond the small fight which occur-
red a few days after Major Lockyer’s
landing, and for which he blamed the
aggressive and cruel conduct of fur
sealers, who had for many years at in-
tervals visited King George’s Sound,
I find no mention of any trouble with


them, either in Sir Richard Spencer’s
journal, or various letters written in
the early days. That year 14 bales of
wool were shipped from King George’s
Sound for London, via Mauritius, from
sheep pastured on the Hay River. The
wool fetched Is 8d per lb. In 1836
there was a drought in New South Wa-
les, and flour was very scarce, so a
cargo of wheat, grown, I believe, near
Guildford, was sent over and realised
from 12s to 16s per bushel.
In 1837 the first Albany jetty wa3
completed. There had been considerable
controversy over the site. Major Lock-
yer, or Captain Wakefield, had made a
small landing stage at the foot of Pa-
rade-street, but the water was very
shallow, so it was decided to place it
at the foot of York-street, which was
to be the main street of the town. A
number of piles were driven, when a
tremendous storm washed a quantity of
sand down and almost buried the piles.
It was then decided to place the jetty
where such a thing would, not occur, so
it was placed almost on the site of the
present municipal baths. This was,
however, found to be very inconvenient,
as everything had to be hauled along
the beach, and the depth of water was
only 12 feet. So in 1859, the present
Town Jetty was commenced. It was
quite a short jetty, at first, only 480 ft.
but it has been lengthened several
times since.


Union with Swan River.
Communication extends—Perennial
source of discontent —Botanists'
delight Historical landmarks —
Residential changes.
When King George’s Sound was first
settled it was not under the jurisdic-
tion of the Swan River, for Fremantle
was not settled until 1829, and they
eaeh had their own Government. King
George’s Sound was considered a mili-
tary outpost, but in 1833 it was united
to Perth, and both settlements were
placed under Sir James Stirling. Soon
after, in 1836, military posts were es-
tablished on the main road between
Perth and Albany while it was survey-
ed and made. A regular month 1 y over-
land mail service was established in
1841, which was continued without in-
terruption until the train service was
established in 1889. In 1852 the first
P. and O. steamer called at Albany,
and an oversea monthly service was
established between Europe and the
Eastern States, which continued with-
out interruption until 1900, when the
boats were transferred to Fremantle.
Albany has never taken kindly to being
governed from the Swan River, and
about 1862 an agitation was started to
alter the boundaries of South Austra-
lia so as to include Albany, but it fell
through because there were no other
settlements on the South Australian
border in the direction of Albany. In
1873 the dissatisfaction at the small
amount of public money spent became
so great that the member was asked to
call for a return of the money received
and spent, and it was found* after the
Albany district had paid all its own
expenses there was still a considerable
sum over. In 1890, when it was deci-
ded to give West Australia responsible
government, the late Mr. Be Hamel
suggested that a line should be drawn


taking in Bunbury and Norseman, and
extending to the South Australian bor-
der, and this portion should remain for
a little longer a Crown colony, while
Perth, the Coolgardie goldfields and
North-West should have responsible go-
vernment. No one seemed to think he
had influence to carry this through, and
great regret was felt in Albany when
it became known the matter was seri-
vously discussed in the Imperial Parlia-
ment, and was turned down because it
could not be shown it was the wish of
the people.
Albany has always, from the early
days, been beloved by scientists, for it
has many curious features found no-
where else. Botanically, there are
plants found in no other part of the
world. Another peculiarity is the quan-
tity of blue flowers growing in the vici-
nity, a color which is very rare in other
parts of the world. Another flower,
the Southern Cross, in its flower and
seed formation is most curious. The pit-
cher plant lives on small insects, and
secretes a digestive fluid similar to a
human being. This remarkable pecu-
liarity is not known to exist in any
other plant in the whole world.
Very few of the old sites of the ear-
lier buildings remain in Albany. For
instance, at Lawley Park was the old
stone gaol, built in 1836 for the sum or
£2OO. A large peppermint tree used
to stand near the building and a staple
was driven into this tree, to which the
natives used to be chained as a punish-
ment, and there was a flat s’ab of rock
for them to sit on. Near the rocks on
the point below was the Government
school, a quaint-looking white-washed
building, with niches in the walls to re-
present windows and doors. This build-
ing was originally thatched, but after-
wards the thatch was replaced by shing-
les. In about 1872 the school was re-
moved to where the present courthouse
now stands. A pretty building was put
up and a school board formed. Just
about the same time the present gaol
was built. On the point beyond the
school, towards the entrance of the har-


bor, were the remains of an old build-
ing which had been built sometime in
the ’3o’s, I think, for Mr. Morley, who
was harbor master after Sir Kichard
Spencer took over the Old Farm. This
cottage was built of bricks imported
from England, and was called Stirling
Castle, but in 1848, the cottage was
bought by Dr. Henry Wollaston, a son
of the Archdeacon, and pulled down.
Dr. Wollaston had the bricks taken by
boat to the Parade-street landing, and
then erected the many gabled house op-
posite the Parade-street recreation
ground. Another quaint o’d building
stood on the beach where Millars’ tim-
ber yard is now. That consisted of
the court house and bonded store. The
court used to be held upstairs, and the
store was down below. A flagstaff and
two cannons, with a little heap of can-
non balls, stood just outside the door.
On the right hand side of the court
house were two small cottages which
were the policemen’s residences. The
court house was afterwards removed to
where the present post office is. Then,
as the town grew larger, the school was
moved to its present site and the pre-
sent court house was built.
For many years there were some
thatched buildings on the Parade-street
recreation ground, which were part of
Major Lockyer’s first settlement, but
these were destroyed by fire. Soon after-
wards it was determined by various
settlers that it was a suitable place for'
a village green. The decision seems to
have been arrived at because “there
were a group of fine grown trees, some-
what like a weeping willow, which
would afford shade for the elders while
they -watched the sports of the young
folk.” Near these trees stood a pair
of stocks, but I have never been able
to find out what became of them,
though I can well remember them. Ano-
ther interesting place is the Old Farm,
the present residence of Mr. Bird. This
was built by the convicts, and first
started by Major Lockyer, and con-
tinued by Captain Wakefield. The mid-
dle part of the wall was made of


wattle and dab; the rest of brick and
stone. This part of the house was after
wards destroyed by fire, but a curious
thing happened to this wattle and dab
portion. Sir Bichard Spencer, when he
went to reside there in 1833, was alar-
med at the apparent frailty of the
building, and called in the assistance of
a man-o’-war’s crew, who hauled it in-
to position with ropes and stayed it.
The front was then built on. I doubt
if any of the portion built in Major
Lockyer’s time now remains.
Though there were never many con-
victs in Albany sti'l it was under con-
vict laws, and at 10 o’clock a bell used
to be rung and anyone out after that
hour was challenged and had to give
a reason for being out so late. The old
convent bell is now used at the State
school. The convicts were housed in a
row of buildings on the site of the pre-
sent gaol, and this bell used to be also
rung for the men to start and leave off
work.
Spiritial Development.
Initial mixed effort-Building of St.
Johns Church-Planting of the
ivy Roman Cathofc
tion-
-0
In 1837 also the building called the
Octagon was opened for Divine services,
which were conducted by Mr. T. B.
Sherrat. I have been told that Mr.
Sherrat reserved to himself the sole
right of conducting service, but this
cannot be true, for my husband and
Mr. P. Wellstead have told me that the
late Archdeacon Wollaston preached in
it and they have mentioned christen-
ings and marriages of various old set


tiers which took place in this building.
It was situated on the top of the hill
where Mr. A. H. Dickson now lives, and
had a fine peppermint tree by the side,
where the Sunday morning gossips used
to take place. Towards the middle of
the year Sir Eichard Spencer wrote ask-
ing that a clergyman be sent out, but
he was told no clergyman was willing
to come, and was advised to apply to
the friendly societies. In 1838, Sir
Eichard wrote asking for aid in build-
ing a church, stating there were 45
houses and 180 inhabitants. At that
time church matters, as far as West
Australia was concerned, were under the
care of the Bishop of Bombay, and the
Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel agreed to contribute £2OO to-
wards building the church. I believe
this was the only outside assistance
given. The church was built by volun-
tary labor, under the superintendence
of Archdeacon Wollaston. I am not sure
as to the exact date of Archdeacon
Wollaston’s arrival in Albany, but the
present church was consecrated by
Bishop Short, of Adelaide, on October
25, 1848. Two year 3 after a barrel or-
gan was sent from London, and hymns
were sung to the music. In the nave of
the church were some round brick sto-
ves, r,nd in the winter time fires were
made in these and attended to by Sun-
day school boys. My husband is not
sure as to the exact number, but thinks
there were three or four.
The rectory was only a four-roomed
cottage, but in the grounds was a sun-
dial, which I can well remember. It
stood on the lawn near the corner fac-
ing York-street. In 1857 the Bev. Mr.
Mead, with great trouble, got some ivy
p ants from England and they were
planted on the right hand side of the
church, and on Sundays after service
there used to be quite a procession to
see how the ivy was growing. It was
also during his time a small harmonium
was purchased and for many years was
played by a native mission girl, called


Bessie Flower. The harmonium was
placed in the gallery which ran along
the end of the church over the entrance,
and a stairway ran up near the wall,
and Bessie kieipt, time with her head.
Bessie would wear red ribbons in her
hat, to the distraction of the congrega-
tion, for her hat was the only thing
seen in the gallery. Her brother lived
and died on our station. She was after-
wards sent to the Alexandria Mission
Station, in South Australia, and married
a native carpenter. When one of my
sons was at school in South Australia
he went to see the Alexandria Mis-
sion, and there met this girl. When she
found out who he was, and he was able
to tell her about her brother and his
children, her joy was so great that she
hugged and kissed him before everyone,
to his great embarrassment, for he was
14 at the time.
During Archdeacon Wollaston’s resi-
dence, a Mr. Henty arrived and assis-
ted him to bukd a native mission house
on the Middleton Beach road —a brick
or stone house, a little way up the hill
on the right-hand side. This mission
was afterwards removed to Annesfield,
and then Camfield was built and named
after Mr. Henry Camfield, who married
Misg Henty. Mr. and Mrs. Camfield
resided at Annesfield, and the native
children were housed in Camfield up to
the time of Mr. Camfield’s death, when
they were removed to the Swan River,
and Mrs. Camfield went to South Aus-
tralia.
Mr. P. Wollaston, the Archdeacon’s
grandson, told me, when the church was
completed there was not sufficient mo-
ney left to put in glass windows, so
canvas ones were nailed up. Several
gentlemen decided to present the Arch-
deacon with a piece of plate, in recog-
nition of his untiring efforts towards
the bui’ding of the church, but this
coming to his ears, he asked them in-


stead to put the altar window in, and
this was done. There was some diffi-
culty in selecting a design that would
not offend the religious feelings of any
of the subscribers, and finally one was
chosen which had no figures on it. This
window was pulled down a few years
ago and the present one put in its
place. The church was the first con-
secrated Anglican Church in West Aus-
tralia. The late Mrs. W. G. Knight often
told me hov her father used to take her
mother and the children for a week’s
camping up the Ka’gan River while
he split the shingles for the roof, and
her father-in-law, Mr. Stephen Knight,
put nearly all of them on, working at
odd times when his office work was
done. The church then only extended
to the steps of the chancel, but in 1878
the Rev. Wardell-Johnson called for
subscriptions to enlarge the church, by
building the chancel, and also to put in
the present pews. Up till then there
were wooden benches; those up at the
top of the church had backs, but those
at the bottom had not. When the chan-
cel was completed the gallery was pull-
ed down.
After Dr. Henry Wollaston left Al-
bany he gave up medicine and followed
in his father’s footsteps by entering
the church. Ha had a large diocese in
East Melbourne, and by his exertions
built a nice church called Holy Trin-
ity. There he preached and worked
for many years, and finally retired. A
strange thing happened his successor,
who never preached in tbsi church
Henry Wollaston built, for it was de-
stroyed by fire the Saturday before ho
was to conduct his first service. An-
other church was built, but not on the
same site. Henry Wollaston took a
great interest in the building of the
new church, and lived to see it finished.
He died at the ripe old age of 84, and
there is a tablet erected to hi.s memory
in the present Holy Trinity Church, at
East Melbourne.


In 1839, I find a mention of the
cemetery on the ground just above the
Town Hal 1 , and I fancy, also, on part
of the road above it. The same year
Mr. Dunn was appointed to take charge
of the gaol, and Mr. T. B. Sherrat was
made postmaster, both at a salary of
£ls per annum. Hops, sugar-cane and
cotton were planted. The sugar-cane
was planted in three places, on the
sites of the National Bank, the Town
Hal 1 , and Mr. Cull’s residence on Mid-
dleton-road, but though it grew the
climate was not hot enough to develop
it. The cotton and hops were planted
at the Old Farm. The former grew well
during the summer, but was killed by
the rains in the winter. I find no fur-
ther mention of the hops.. In the same
year mention is made of a small ship
in the course of being built on the
slips at Torbay. Two small vessels
were a’so built on tire Kalgan River,
and one on the King Hive., between
1848 and 1855.
I am sorry I have not been able to
get the exact date the first Roman
Catholic priest arrived in Albany, be-
cause it was an interesting event. A
vessel anchored at Albany and had on
board a French priest, who, on landing,
found there were members of his flock,
so an open-air service was held on the
side of the hill just above the Deep-
water Jetty, and .the first Mass was
celebrated within the shadow of the
two round rocks, one on top of the other
at the corner of Brunswick-road. This
occurred some time towards the end of
the ’3o’s. On the 4th of November,
1843, Dr. Brady, Father Justeens and
Father Patrick O’Reilly arrived in
Albany. Mass w T as celebrated three
times during their stay, on one occa-
sion at the same rock, when small
black boys held the candles. After this
a priest used to come at long intervals
to Albany and hold Mass. The first
priest remaining any length of time
was Father Caubb, a Spanish priest,


who arrived between 1850 and 1852,
and built the old chapel, a quaint-
loOKing low building, with a dark
shingled roof, and two arched windows
at the side. It was only a small build-
ing, and stood north and south, the
altar window facing Norfolk-street. It
stood close to the road beside the tall
rock opposite the present chapel. The
outer walls were regularly white-wash-
ed, while round the windows was
painted black. Father Caubb had a
small room at the end where he lived
and kept his medicines, for he was a
good chemist, and physicked all his
congregation, charging a small sum for
the medicines. The Eev. Father Mate
also a Spanish priest, arrived in 1874,
and took up his permanent residence,
building the present chapel. The old
chapel was then turned into an alms
house and finally pulled down. Nearly
opposite the chapel stood a small high-
pitched roofed cottage, which was about
the last thatched cottage in Albany,
l ean well remember it, with a small
pink cluster rose climbing in among the
thatch, but it was pulled down on° ac-
count of the danger of fire. In 1878
Father Mateu founded the Albany Con-
vent. In April of that year Mother
Josephine Smith and Sister Mary Don-
nelly, with Miss Nicolv, travelled by
coach to Albany, arriving on April 8.
They were accompanied by Mother
Therese, of the Fremant’e Convent,
and were first accommodated in th?
house at the top of York-street. Mother
Therese then returned to Fremantle and
sent Mother Julio Oabagnol to Albany
as Superior for the new branch. The
present convent was commenced at once
and finished in 1881. The Fresbytery
was completed a short time after Fa-
ther Mateu’s arrival in Albany.


Physical Features of the Town.
Watercourses and marshes —Wild
duck on Town Hall site —Difficult
ties of early road construction
The contour of the town of Albany
is not a bit like what it was when Ma-
jor Lockyer first saw it, judging from
the few sketches he made, which are
in the museum in Perth, nor is it like
when Sir Richard Spencer arrived. Va-
rious streams and marshes have disap-
peared. A stream used to flow down
Mount Clarence, and over the cliff near
Lawley Park into the sea, where Mil-
lars’ timber yard is now. The old seal-
ers dug a large round w r ell to catch the
flow, so there should be plenty of wa-
ter for their ships, but it did not run
well during the summer, and then they
watered from a small stream which ran
down into the sea at the foot of Parade-
street.
In after years, when the American
whalers used to water their ships, a
good deal of smuggling was carried on
in rather an ingenious way. About sun-
set the boats used to be rowed ashore,
towing a long stream of empty casks.
These used to be filled and the men
would spend the evening in the settle-
ment-, returning home about-10 o’clock.
As it was much harder to tow a quan-
tity of full casks, about half would be
left behind. A few marked ones would
contain rum or tobacco. The word wo-
uld be passed during the evening and
the casks would be taken away or hid-
den in the thick scrub until wanted.
Just below the present hospital a
large well was dug, called Phillips’
well, after Mr. Phillips, who succeeded
Sir George Grey as Government Eesi-


dent. A stream ran from this well in-
to the sea below the present gasworks,
and was peculiar because it was the
on’y permanent white water, all the
other "water about being brown, very
soft, but with an earthy taste. Start-
ing from just below the York Hotel,
and extending towards the National
Bank, was a large swampy bog which
drained into the sea near the foot of
Yorlc-street, and extended along the
site of the present railway station. The
late W. G. Knight and two other boys
shot the last wild duck on the site of
the present Town Hall in the winter of
1858, when they killed five. In 1859 a
small footbridge was put across Stir-
ling-terrace, in front of the National
Bank, and another near the Empire
Theatre, while a road was carried down
below to the sea and a low stone wall
kept the sides of the road up near the
town.
The building of York-street was a
serious matter, and undertaken in
1863 by the late Sir Alexander Camp-
bell, Government Resident, with the
assistance of some engineers belonging
to the sSth Regiment, who were housed
in a row of wooden buildings near the
Residency, where the present railway
runs. Residency House was the offi-
cers’ quarters, but it has been altered
and en’arged since then. Most of the
work was done by convict labor. Quan-
tities of stone and brushwood were
carted and laid down between the
York Hotel and the Empire Theatre,
so as to get a firm bottom. This street
was an expensive piece of work, but
it was well and thoroughly done, and
has stood the test of over 50 years. The
wide portion of Frcderick-street, from
the corner of Aberdeen-street to the
corner of Melville-street, was laid out
with the intention of being the market
of the town and the most central place,
but it was never used as a market,
though I have been told that when the
P. and O. steamers first commenced to
call at Albany they generally stayed
about twenty-four hours, and' for two


years, on steamer days, an enterprising
old dame, named Jenny Eobertson, had
a stall on one of the triangles in York-
street and sold fruit and cakes. I
believe it was the one opposite the
Church of England, for that was then
considered the business side of the
street. The other was to be the resi-
dential side. Apparently it did not pay,
for she gave it up after the second
year, and that was the only attempt
at market stalls in Albany.
The first gravel road ran from near
the present Town Jetty and along the
terrace as far as the Empire Theatre.
Then a small piece was made from the
top of York-street to the large rocks
opposite the cemetery, as this was very
heavy sand. There were only two
streams on Mount Clarence, but there
were five or six that drained Mount
Melville, and when wells were dug
white water was much more easily got
on Mount Melvi’le than on Mount
Clarence. All along the foreshore, from
near the railway station to Lawley
Park, was an immense grove of large
peppermint trees, but Mt. Clarence was
never so well wooded as Mount Mel-
ville, wdiich was a forest of large gum
trees. The plain at the back of the
town -was described as a morass, which,
if drained, would grow good vegetables.
There were numerous sand hummocks
running through the town, traces of
which are still to be seen.
Another old landmark which has now
disappeared was what us -d to be called
Geak’s Island, the small hill jutting
out into the sea at the end of the
quarantine station. In the olden days
it "was a small island with a strong cur-
rent running between it and the main-
land. It was pretty deep at high tides,
but in low tide I have frequently pad-
died ankle deep across from the main-
land. It got its name from an old man
ca'led Piggery Geak, w T ho was blown
on to it during a gale, and, going
aground, had to wait until the tide rose
®o that he could float his boat off. He


thus passed the greater part of tire
on that small spit, of land. When
the quarantine station was .established
a quantity of rubbish was banked up
on this narrow neck, and the sand
gradually silted up, forming a bank.
Then a powder magazine was built on
the little hill, at the time so much
blasting material was being imported
to build the Great Southern railway.
It was considered a menace to the safe-
ty of the town if it was stored on this
side of the harbor. When the dredge
first startied a few loads were deposited
at the bank, which was gradually form-
ing, but this was not allowed to con-
tinue. However, sufficient was dis-
charged to finish the work begun dur-
ing the building of the quarantine sta-
tion. Geak’s Island -is new a portion
of the mainland, aud I doubt if many
remember it ever being an island.
A quaint old custom in my young
days may interest present-day brides.
There were- no local jewellers’ shops,
and engagement rings Were ram The
wedding rings wtere made by the local
blacksmith. He was given a sovereign
by the bridegroom and a shilling by
the bride. Out of these coins he made
the ring and took his pay. The bride
always walked to the church with her
parents and bridesmaids, and was met
there bv the bridegroom and his man.
After the ceremony they walked to the
home where the breakfast was given.
The bride made her first public appear-
ance by going to church in her wed-
ding dross and veil, accompanied by
her husband, bridesmaids and grooms-
man in their bridal array, and they all
sat together in the church. After that
visits were made to the young couple
i.n their new home.
I must not close without mentioning
one curious custom, which lasted for
many years. The P. and O. steamers
used to take supplies of meat and vege-
tables, but they only called once a
month, and the steamer from England


and that from the East arrived in the
same week. A few head of cattle used
accordingly to be driven in from the
country, the week the steamers were
due, directly the steamer was signalled
from Break&ea, which was done by a
gun fired from the only coal hulk, call-
ed the Larkins. Then when the vessel
entered the narrows a gun was fired
from the shore. At night time a gun
was fired, one rocket thrown up and a
blue light burnt, and when she entered
the narrows tw T o rockets were thrown
up after the gun was fired, for their
arrival w'as very uncertain. Two bu 1 -
locks w T ere immediately killed, and
w T hen the vessel had taken what they
required the surplus was sold to the
townfolk. A large red flag was hoisted
from a flagstaff in the butcher’s
grounds, with the word “beef” writ-
ten on it in big white letters. That
was the only time we could purchase
any beef, the other three weeks we had
to be contented with mutton.






