

Reprinted from “The Western Morning News,’’ Tuesday, January 30, 1928.
GREAT AUSTRALIAN EXPLORER.
GRAVE AT WHITCHURCH, TAVISTOCK.
(By Rev. ALEXANDER SHARPE, M.A.)
On the map of the great State of South
Australia no name is so conspicuous as that
of Eyre. In the north are Eyre Lake and
Eyre Creek, in the south is Eyre Peninsula,
in the south-east Eyre County, as large as
Dorset, in which there is a little Truro, and
on the west coast there is Port Eyre.
Remembering all this, it is with peculiar
feelings that one comes across the grave of
the man whose name has been thus given to
those places in the far-away Southland, in
the rural churchyard of Whitchurch, near
Tavistock. A grey granite cross marks the
spot, with the iniseription: “In loving memory
of Edward John Eyre, born Aug. 15th, 1815,
died Nov. 30th, 1901, Australian Explorer and
Governor of Jamaica. He did his duty in
that state of life unto which it pleased God
to call him. ,,
The life of Edward John Eyre was a, notable one
in the great Victorian era in more ways than one.
He was born at Hornsea, in Yorkshire, the son of
a clergyman, and went to school at Louth and at
Sedbergh. His intention was to enter the Army,
but imipatient at the delay in getting a commission,
at the age of 17 he emigrated to New South Wales
to farm. Soon after he moved into the Lower
Murray region, being one of the first Overlandera.
or drivers of cattle from the old Colony to South
Australia, which was founded about that time.
FASCINATION OF MYSTERY.
But the vast unknown interior of the Continent
had a strong fascination for him, and he determined
to explore its mysteries. Accordingly, on June 18,
1840, escorted by a party of horsemen, with five whit*
companions and two blacks, he rode out from Adelaide
into the (great silent lone land to the North. Pass-
ing over wide grassy plains, with welcome streams,
the party at length entered a dreary parched region,
and traversed it for some hundreds of miles. Leav-
ing Lake Torrens, which Eyre had discovered, a
huge sia.lt swarrip, as all the other “ lakes ” in that
part are, the still larger Lake Eyre was reached,
which was believed to be a continuation of Lake
Torrens. The country now was so forbidding that it
seemed that nothing could be gained by going
farther, and so Eyre decided to explore in another
direction. He would follow the coast of the Great
Australian Bight to Albany, in Western Australia,
1,500 miles away, and so cross the Continent fr<.m
east to west
Accordingly ne made for the coast, and from
Streaky Bay, in November, started out om his
great journey, one of the famous ones of the nine-
teenth century. For eight months Eyre heroically
pursued his way, with much countermarching, over
the great, almost waterless tablelands of alternate
sand bills and dense scrub, (accompanied for a time
along the coast by a little ship, to land supplies at
intervals. Fowiler Bay was passed, the head of
the Bight wa s turned, and the edges of the great
Nullarbor Plain and the Hampton, and other dreary
were traversed. The hardships and
dangers were many and great; fearfully scorching
days, cold nights, sand storms, thirst, hunger,
swarms of big biting flies, and threatening bands of
natives. All the white companions had, in turn, to
be sent back, save the brave Baxter, who with three
natives were Evre’s sole company. Then poor
Baxter was murdered by two of the blacks, and he
was left alone with but the faithful native Wylie.
GREAT JOURNEY OVER.
A French whaler, with an English captain, was
a welcome sight one dav on the shore, and Eyre
stayed with it a fortnight. Resuming his journey,
in time a pleasant country was reached, soon after
the mountains of King George’s Sound were joyfullv
seen, and at last Eyre and his black entered the
welcome little town of Albany. The great journey
w'as over, and Eyre, the youth of 25, was thus the
first white man to cross the length of Australia. A
great ovation was given him on his return by sea
to Adelaide, and he settled down as a resident magis-
trate and protector of aborigines in the new
Colony. For his great feat he was awarded the
Founder’s Medal of the Roy ail Geographical Society,
His stay in South Australia, however, was short.
On account of his kind treatment of the natives
he wa, s appointed by Sir George Grey, the Governor
of New Zealand, Lieutenant Governor of the South
Island of that new Colony in 1848, which post he held
for five years. The Eyre Mountain®, by the beauti-
ful Lake Wakatipu, give him a mounment in Now
Zealand. In Western Australia also, it should be
mentioned, there is the little coast town of Eyre,
named after him.
A very different part of the world was next to be
the scene of his activities, the West Indies. Her©
he administered the government of St. Vincent, and
was for a time Governor of Leeward Island®. _ In,
16'62 he was appointed Acting Governor of Jamaica,
becoming full Governor in 1864. In the following
year Eyre had to deal with the most serious in-
ternal crisis in the history of the British West Indies*
the Port Moirant negro rebellion. His action in sup-
pressing it raised a great controversy in England,
almost dividing the country. One party, led by
John Stuart Mill, bitterly denounced it, while
the other, including Carlyle, Ruskin, Tennyson, and
Kingsley, defended Eyre as the saviour of the white
population of Jamaica. He was recalled and tried,
but the prosecution could not be maintained, and)
the Government eventually refunded him his law
expenses and pensioned him. There can be no
doubt that Eyre fully believed he was doing his duty,
as his epitaph suggests. This, however, was the end
of his public life.
DEVONSHIRE HOME.
After living in other parts of England he came to
Devonshire in 1895, and made his home at Walreddon
Manor, in the romantic-looking olldi-world mansion,
in the parish of Whitchurch, a mile or so out of
Tavistock, one of the properties of the Earl of
Devon, over which I was kindly shown recently by
the present occupants. Here be lived a quiet, un-
eventful life, greatly esteemed, and liked by his
neighbours, until his death in 1901, at the age of
86.
Geographically Eyre will ever be chiefly associated
with South Australia, which he did so much to
open up. This was first settled in 1836, The first
Governor, Captain, afterwards Sir John, Hindmarsh,
sailed from Plymouth with a group of Colonists in
H.M.S. Buffalo in that year, and at Glenelg, under
the famous gum tree, still standing, proclaimed the
new British Colony. The youthfulness of South
Australia was particularly impressed upon me last
summer, when I received a kind letter from Miss
Marianne Fisher, of Adelaide, the last survivor of
the party of H.M.S. Buffalo, acknowledging one from
me congratulating her on her attaining her 100th
birthday. Miss Fisher died, however, before the
year was om.
South Australia i? an extensive section of the
Commonwealth of Australia, having an area of
580,000 square miles. It is as large as France and
Germany combined or Texas and New Mexico to-
gether. While there are vast arid regions there are
also great areas of good land, and the empty spaces,
like those in other countries of the Empire, are cry-
ing out for British settlers. Let us hope the cry
-will be properly responded to. The population,
loyally British, is under 600,000, while there is room
for millions. The climate is very healthy, and
resembles that of Italy or Spain. The State is
already a great wheat producer, with a harvest of
about 30,007,00$“ bushel? a year, its rich vineyards
yield 10,000,000 gallons of wine, and its olive orchards
furnish thousands of gallons of oil. As a fruit
country it is first class. In Bible language it may
well be termed “ a pleasant land,” a land of corn and
wine, and of oil olive,” Extensive new areas _ are
just now being opened up for settlement, especially
in the great Eyre Peninsula. The mineral wealth
is not fully known, but, at any rate, is considerable.
There are 3,500 miles of railway. One line is being
carried northwards to cross the Continent that way,
while the big express trains rush over the great
Transcontinental line between Adelaide and Perth,
to the north of Eyre’s weary track. Adelaide, with
300,000 people, is one of the beautiful cities of the
Southern Hemisphere, and Port Pirie has one of
the world’s largest silver-dead smelting works. There
is much lovely scenery, the Mount Lofty Range s and
the beautiful lake district near Mount Gambler being
well known in this respect.
Other names associating this fine, prosperous
British land with our Western counties, besides that
of the brave pioneer of the Empire who lies beside
hi s wife in Whitchurch Churchyard, might be
mentioned, but space forbids me to mention more
than two; that of Sir Samuel Way, a worthy Chief
Justice of South Australia connected with Devon,
and that of Sir Langdon Bonython, of an old
•Cornish family, one of the most notable living South
Australians.
national übf
OR AUSTRA
