

.-'fuel CiJQ tMM&




THE
WESLEYAN
■yL'TunniQT miiDfE
iMnUJJIoI UnUIvUL
IN AUSTRALASIA,
AND ITS
PROPOSED SCHEME
LAY REPRESENTATION.
FEANK PINKEETON’S STEAM FEINT, LYDIAED STEBBT, BALLAEAT,
IQ'ZS.




PREFACE.
The Wesleyan Methodist General Conference, held in May last, prepared
for the approval of the Home Conference a new Constitution for the Church
in Australasia ostensibly having for its main object the granting to the
laity an honorable part in the highest councils of their Church, but owing
to the too restrictive character of that Constitution and the uncomplimentray
language used by certain ministers when speaking of laymen a spirit of
dissatisfaction was created in Ballarat as elsewhere, resulting in action
being taken as hereinafter stated.
While Conference was in session the following memorial was forwarded—
“Ballarat, 27th Mat, 1875.
“ To the President of the Wesleyan General Conference, Melbourne.
“ Honored Sir—We most respectfully forward you the enclosed memorial,
and sincerely hope you will give it a favorable consideration.
“ The seventy five signatures attached are those of such gentlemen as
could be easily seen during the latter part of to-day, and include 14 local
preachers, twenty-three class-leaders, and past and present officers.
“ The greatest eagerness to sign is observable on every side; indeed we
are sure eight-tenths of our people here would readily subscribe to the
terras of the memorial.
“We have the honor to be, honored sir, yours obediently,
JAMES RUSSELL, Chairman.
WILLIAM LITTLE, Secretary.’
“Ballarat, 27th May, 1875.
“To the Reverend President and members of the Wesleyan Methodist
General Conference of Australasia, assembled in session in Wesley
Church, Lonsdale Street, Melbourne.
“Honored Sir and Brethren—We, the undersigned office-bearers, mem-
bers, and adherents, of the Wesleyan Society in Ballarat, respectfully
address you on the subject of lay representation in Conference, and in doing
so are wishful to express our loyalty and attachment to our Church, and
further, to assure you that our present action in protesting against the too
restrictive character of your recent legislation, results from a desire to
advance the real welfare of the Church, and to promote that cordiality
which should exist among all her various agencies.
“We are deeply impressed with the importance of having the new con-
stitution which is to be given to Wesleyan Methodism in Australasia at once
sufficiently liberal and acceptable to the Church, that further agitation may
be prevented, and peace and harmony secured. Conference, while admitting
the principle of lay delegation, has so limited its operation as will make the
scheme distasteful to the laity and to a great extent inoperative in practice
and baneful in result.
“ From unofficial information we are led to understand that laymen are
to be excluded from Annual Conferences while the business arising out of
the following questions is settled, viz., (1) the election of president, secre-
taries, and chairmen of committees; (2) the status of members; (3) the
stationing of ministers; (4) the first thirteen questions of Conference of 1873;
also, that the public press is excluded.


“ We respectfully but firmly submit that ministers and lay representa-
tives should have co-ordinate powers throughout the entire business of Con-
ference. This we sincerely believe to be both our Scriptural and reasonable
right.
“ Further, we contend it is very impolitic to exclude the Press, and thus
leave vast numbers of our people, as well as the public, in entire ignorance
of the transactions of Conference.
“ We would, therefore, respectfully ask you to favorably entertain our
protest, and reconsider the decisions you have arrived at.
“ In conclusion, permit us again to assure you of our fidelity to the cause,
and our desire to advance the temporal and spiritual interests of our Church,
in which many of us have so long laboured, and in which we hope still to
work with increased zeal in promoting the extension of Christ’s kingdom.
“We have the honor to be,
“ Honored Sir and Brethren,
“ Yours obediently,
“James Russell, Mayor of Ballarat East; James Oddie, Richakd
Tkegaskis, J. T. Phillips, William Little, William Thomas Dimsey,
Richd. Kent, Thos. Taylob, Edwin Curtis, Alfred Yates, James Long,
David Ham, JAin Little, J. S. Kelly, Charles Salter, Thomas Rogers,”
and sixty others.
Conference having sent a courteous but unsatisfactory reply to the above
(See Spectator , sth June), a meeting of some of the local preachers and
office-bearers of the Church was at once convened to consider that reply,
when a series of resolutions was adopted expressing our demands in detail.
These resolutions appeared in the Spectator of the 19th June, together with
an Editorial article criticising them in severe terms, so much so that we
found it imperatively necessary to defend ourselves in a number of letters
which were obligingly inserted in that paper.
At a meeting of some representative men of our Church here, held on 24th
ultimo, John James, Esq., M. L. A., in the chair, the following resolutions
were adopted viz:—
“ That the Lay Representation scheme as prepared by the last General
Conference is a reflection upon the intelligence and social status of the laity
and that no scheme should be considered satisfactory which excludes lay
delegates during any part of the sittings of annual conferences or which
renders them ineligible for any position therein.”
« That the letters written by “ Ballarat ” (in defence and explanation of
our resolutions) which recently appeared in the columns of the Spectator and
Methodist Chronicle together with the Speeches made at last General Con-
ference as reported in the New Zealand Wesleyan respecting “ Open Doors ”
and “Lay Representation” be printed and circulated for the following
reasons— (l) That our views may be rightly understood and false impres-
sions corrected; (2) that reliable information may be afforded the brethren
respecting not only the polity of our own but also that of other Christian
Churches, so that the reasonableness of our demands may be seen and the
defects of our system made more apparent, and thus by calmly appealing
to the judgment in respectful language show that our motto is “ Educate,”
not “ Agitate ”; (3) that all may see by the intemperate language of some
of our ministers about trifling concessions that we had good reasons for our
past action, and that there is ample evidence of the necessity for continued
effort on the part of all who really love our Church until the laity are
permitted to have a fair and honorable part in the management of the general
affairs of their Church.”
WILLIAM LITTLE, Hon. Sec.
Ballarat, September, 1875.


LAY REPRESENTATION.
To the Editor of the Spectator and Methodist Chronicle.
Sir—
With your permission, I will calmly review your last week’s
article, written by way of reply to the Ballarat Resolutions. This
I will do in a friendly spirit, which it is important should be
observed throughout this discussion. First, I observe you write
“ not proven ”to our first resolution —“ That
the rights claimed by us are Scriptural
and reasonable, and were enjoyed by the early Christian Church.”
It is clear, from this, you do not intend to depart from generally-
recognised rules, by disproving our unsupported statements. We
accept this reasonable position, and will, therefore, at once advance
our arguments.
What are the rights claimed by the laity who hold our views ?
They claim that their u leading requests should be granted, and
embodied in the new constitution—such as the right to vote in
Annual Conference for president, chairmen of districts, and secre-
taries ; also, to vote on questions affecting the expulsion and intro-
duction of members and ministers, and to be present at the
examination of ministerial character.”
In supporting these claims, and in referring to the privileges
of the laity in the primitive churches, I will be as brief as the
subject and its importance will permit.
I will confine myself to facts and early church history, and
will affirm (1) that the term “ church ” in the New Testament
expresses either the whole body of the faithful—irrespective of
nation or sect —who had in their hearts accepted, by the Holy
Spirit, Jesus as their Saviour— as in Heb. xii. 23, and Ephes. v.
23, 25 ; or a society of believers in any one place—as in Acts viii.
1, xi. 22, xiii. I, &c.; but never the pastors exclusively. Such a
society alone the Apostles designated a Church ; (2) that the
Church, as a congregation of believers, is to do the very things we
claim—see Matt, xviii. 16-17, 2 Cor. ii. 6-10, and also in the case
of “ that wicked person,” referred to in 1 Cor. v. Paul says—
“ When ye are gathered together .... deliver such an
one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh ” —not find him
guilty, and the pastors deliver him unto Satan; nor, on an ap-
peal, none but pastors in Conference assembled, to try the case.


The same Church was also directed to forgive and restore him.
Again, the letters to the seven churches, mentioned in Revel-
ation, recognise amongst other things, the right and duty of the
church to try even ministers. The Ephesian Church “ tried them
which said they were apostles, and were not.” The church at
Pergamos is blamed “ because it had there them that held the
doctrine of Balaam.” The church at Thyatira is condemned for
“ suffering that woman, Jezebel, to teach and seduce.” See
Rev. ii.
Further, let us quote the opinions of admitted authorities, as well
as their testimony respecting the practice of the early church, and
begin with Mosheim, who is reckoned by all a reliable church
historian: — u In those primitive times,” he says, “each Christian
church was composed of the people, the presiding officers, and the
assistants or deacons. These must be the component parts of every
society. The highest authority was in the people, or whole body
of Christians; for even the apostles themselves inculcated, by
their example, that nothing of any moment was to be done or
determined on but with the knowledge or consent of the brother-
hood. (Acts i. 15 ; vi. 3; xv. 4; xxi. 22.) The assembled
people elected their own rulers and teachers, or received, without
constraint, those recommended to them. They also, by their suf-
frages, rejected or confirmed the laws which were proposed by
their rulers in their assemblies; they excluded profligate and
lapsed brethren, and restored them ; they decided controversies and
disputes which arose; they heard and determined the causes of
presbyters and deacons. In a word, the people did everything
which belongs to those in whom the supreme power of the com-
munity is vested. All these rights the people paid for, by supply-
ing the funds necessary for the support of the teachers, deacons,
and the poor.” Another, writing of the early church, says :
“ If anyone proved unworthy, and did unchristian acts, it was not
by bishop, presbytery, or synod, that he was excluded, but by the
judgment of the Church (the members) assembled in one place.
The procedure of exercising discipline is plainly laid down by the
Apostle Paul, in his letter to the church at Corinth (Ist Epistle,
v. 4). 1 When ye (the members) are gathered together,’ he says
then pronounce the exclusion of the offender. Our Lord Jesus
Christ had also committed to every particular church the final
decision in cases of difference between members. If a brother
offended another, the latter was to speak to him; and, if that
failed, he was to take another brother or two with him; and if the
offender then refuse to acknowledge his faults, our Lord said,
‘ Tell it unto the Church; and if he will not hear the church, let
him be to thee as a heathen and a publican.’”
C. Worboys writes : “In the first church meeting, which
elected Matthias to fill the place vacated by Judas, it was not the


apostles alone who elected, but the disciples—that is the whole
church. The number of names together were about 120, and they,
as we read, appointed Joseph (called Barsabas) and Matthias;
and they—that is, the church, not Peter or the apostles—gave
forth their lots, and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was num-
bered with the eleven apostles.”
Then, respecting the contention about Judaism, mentioned in
Acts xv., Wesley, in his Testament notes, has— the
brethren, determined that Paul and Barnabas .... should
go up to Jerusalem on this question.”
Another intelligent writer offers some valuable and pertinent
information, whose remarks I regret to have to abridge. Referring
to Wesleyanism, he writes—“ Man has departed from the simplicity
and purity of the faith delivered to the saints. No unprejudiced
mind can read those passages in the writings of the early fathers,
which bear upon the policy and discipline of the primitive churches,
without being forcibly struck with the great disparity which ex-
ists between the ancient and modern privileges of the laity; and
without perceiving that they have dwindled to the shadow of a
shade—if we may use such an expression. The laity had the
power of choosing their own bishop. . . . So, upon the death
of Anterus of Rome, all the people met together in the church to
choose a successor, and unanimously elected Fabianus, (Apud
Euseb. lib. vi.); and, after the decease of Fabianus, Cornelius
was chosen bishop of that diocese, by the suffrages of the clergy
and people. (Cyprmn Epist. 67.) Pontius, in Vita Cypriani,
says ‘ that Cyprian was elected bishop of the diocese of Carthage
by the favor of the people;’ and Cyprian himself acknowledges
he was so chosen. (Epist. 55.) Clemens Eomanus also says that
such a mode of election was in accordance with the practice of the
Apostles and apostolic preachers, who, in the infant churches,
ordained bishops and deacons with the consent of the whole church.
The people were unquestionably the best judges of the qualifica-
tions of a minister, especially as the choice generally was made
from among the presbyters of their own church. Their choice,
also, was free and independent. Such a regulation was admirably
adapted to prevent corruption and favouritism. The African
Synod, held a.d. 258, determined that 1 the ordination of ministers
ought to be done with the knowledge, and in the presence of the
people; that the people being present, either the crimes of the
wicked may he detected, or the merits of the good declared; and
so the ordination might be just and lawful, being approved by the
judgment and suffrage of all.’ ( Apud Cyprian Epist. 68._)
In another place Cyprian is still more explicit, for, 1 from the
first time I was made bishop,’ says he, C 1 determined to do no-
thing without the consent of my people.’ (Epist. 6-17. ) Observe
the wide difference which subsists between modern and ancient


churches in this particular. In the latter, the laity were admitted
to he the church, and to possess a voice in all matters of church
government; in the former, the state of the case isjust the reverse.
Here the ecclesiastics are the church, investing themselves, per
jus divinum, with legislative, decretal, and judicatorial power;
suspending or deposing its ministers, Ac. . . . Another great
privilege which belonged to the laity was that in case any bishop
acted in any way unworthy ot his high vocation, the people had
the power of virtually deposing him from office, and choosing
another in his place; as we may see in the case of Martialis and
Basilides, two Spanish bishops. (Epist. 68, Apud Cyprian.)
All the laity of a church were present at church censures, and
concurred in the excommunication of offenders as Ongen, in
his commentary upon St. Matthew, describes an offender as ap-
pearing before the whole church. The same practice may be
inferred from a passag’e in Clemens Romanus (Epist, 1 ad Cor.
69) in which he calls the censures of the church ‘ the things
commanded by the multitude.’ Indeed, the laity appear to have
taken partin every matter of church polity, from the most triflng
to the most momentous ; for we find that even letters of salutation
to other churches were written with their sanction and agreement.
* As to the ecclesiastical courts in primitive times,’ says Lord
King, c the judges before whom offenders were summoned and
by whom censured, they appear to have been the clergy and the
laity—not one without the other, but both together. The period
under review, namely, from the first to the third century, may be
considered in many respects as the golden age of the laity.’ ”
If further evidence is needed in support of the claims of the
laity to be present throughout all our church assemblies, we may
find it in the General Church History, by Dr. Augustus Neander,
vol, 1, p. 258. “ Clement of Rome ”he says “ cites the follow-
ing rule, as one which had been handed down from the Apostles
refative \o the appointment of Church officers ;— ‘ That they
should he filed according to the judgment of approved men, with
the consent of the whole community.'' . . • Again, as regards
the relation in which these presbyters stood to the communities,
they were not designed to exercise absolute authority, but to act
as presiding officers and guides of an ecclesiastical republic; to
conduct all things with the co-operation of the communities, as
their ministers, not their masters.” He further shows that sub-
sequent changes in the constitution of the church were a gradual
dgygiopnjgnt; of the monarchico-episcopal church government the
distinction of the clergy from the laity, and the formation of a
sacerdotal caste, as opposed to the evangelical idea of the priest-
hood. Davidson, in his Ecclesiastical Polity of the New Testa-
ment, remarks that pastors “ have ncKright to admit or exclude
members without the knowledge and consent of the people. .


Rather should he carry into effect the sentence of the church,
appearing as their organ or representative, nof their lord. . . .
The very nature of frqe communities involves a power to manage
their own affairs.” Bennett writes, in his Theology of the Early
Church —“ The whole congregation chose deacons. . . .With
the deacons the bishops are here joined, as appointed in the same
way. . • That the church was accustomed to choose or elect
persons ... we learn from a letter of Ignatius to Poly carp—
‘ Since the church at Antioch is in peace, through your prayers
it is proper to convene a council worthy of God, and to elect some
one, who may be called God’s messenger, and go into Syria.’ ”
Here Polycarp, the bishop, is not advised to do this of his own
authority, hut a council is called and a person is to he elected. *
I think enough has been advanced to prove that laymen of the
early church did possess u the right to legislate and act on equal
terms with ministers.”
It is pleasing to note you do not deny the sufficiency of our
proofs—at least, so far as principles are involved. You, however,
take exception to our claiming to do in our united Annual Con-
ference what the laity not only had the right to do in apostolic
times in their “ independent ” societies, but have the right to do
now in all the sister churches.
I must plainly state that, since we are contending for principle,
not detail, I fail to see why laymen are to be deprived of their
rights because there is an Annual Conference of ministers. Is
it not simple justice that the laity should have the same right of
access to a Supreme Court that they have to a local -one ? It
seems to me immaterial, so far as principle is concerned, whether
a single church or a Conference possess supreme power in exer-
cising discipline, &c. All we ask for is, that where that final
authority is exercised, there lay representatives may be present,
on the basis of one layman to one minister —not in the proportion
of a whole congregation to one minister, as is the case in some
non-Methodist bodies.
The fairness of our demands will be more apparent when I
prove that
Laymen are admitted into the highest courts of other Churches.
I regret that the limited space allotted me prevents me doing
more than barely summarise the information I would like to give.
Let us commence with the
Episcopalian Church.
In that, our mother church, the laity have a direct influence
in the management of its affairs. There is no court at which
* The Editor refused me the opportunity of replying to the adverse but fallacious letters
of “ A Looker on ” and “A. F. Irdiston,” and what is worse, since that refusal he has
adopted the ungenerous expedient of quoting only them as authorities against the above
arguments.


they are not present —not even excepting the court in which a min-
ister is tried for an offence; and instead of this mixed tribunal
being considered unrighteously constituted and degrading to sub-
mit to, it, on the contrary, gives the greatest satisfaction to clergy
and laity ; indeed, one of the former expressed to me his decided
preference for the mixed jury by saying “he would not be tried
by any other,” thus exhibiting a confidence in the laity worthy
of imitation. The Diocesan Synod, or Annual Assembly, is
made up of three interests, viz., bishop, clergy, and lay delegates.
Parishes have the right to send to it from one to three lay repre-
sentatives. In the colonies, the Panel of Triers is created by
the vote of the Assembly, from which a jury is formed of clergy
and laity. It investigates charges preferred against minis-
ters. The appointment of ministers is exercised alternately by
bishop and congregation. (See Statute 18 Viet., No. 45.)
The Presbyterian Church
courts embrace the Session, Presbytery, and Synod or Annual
Assembly. (Vide “ Rules and Forms of Procedure,” &c., of
United iPresbyterian Church, adopted by Synod, May, 1848.): —
“ The Synod is the supreme court of the Church, and is composed
of all the ministers having charges, with an elder from each session,
holding a commission for that purpose.” A member tried for an
offence, feeling’ aggrieved “by the decision of a session or pres-
bytery, is entitled ”to an appeal to the Assembly. In like
manner, a minister against whom a charge is preferred has the
right of appeal from Presbytery to Assembly, which is final.
The rule respecting candidates for the ministry is that they must
first be examined by the Presbytery, and then passed on to the
Theological Hall Committee (a mixed committee, mark you)
under whose direction students pursue a course of studies, and
are eventually referred to the Assembly for final approval ; after
which candidates are licensed. “ The right of electing elders is
vested solely in the members of the congregation.” After elec-
tion they are examined, much as our local preachers are, only
not so fully. (See Field's Student's Hand-book of Theology.)
They are then ordained, and, in the most important respects,
perform duties analogous to those of our local-preacher and class-
leader —such as having to assist in the general spiritual work of
their particular church. These elders, of course, follow their
daily secular occupations—as do other laymen—but are not each
required to preach fifteen or twenty sermons every quarter, as
some of ours have, who for that reason are entitled to more con-
sideration. For instance, in Ballarat East and West there are five
ministers and sixty four local-preachers. The former preach 146
Sunday sermons; the latter, 667 per quarter. Need I add
another word to show that our “ preaching layman ” does at
least as much pastoral work and has as good claims to possess


privileges as the “ ruling elder.” These mixed courts deal with
all those questions which certain laj'men of our church claim to
participate in—such as voting for moderators (indeed, in two
cases at least, laymen have occupied that station), voting at the
final examination of candidates for the ministrjq and at the trial of
members and ministers. As to the stationing of ministers, we
all know that congregations alone invite them.
The Congregational
or Independent system of Church government limits the juris-
diction of each church to its own members, duly convened in
“ church meeting,” including ministers and office bearers. This
is the “supreme court” of the church, and while members
yearly relegate to the ministers and deacons the ordinary admin-
istration of the church’s affairs, they nevertheless retain the
power of traversing their acts, of electing minister and deacons,
or of deposing them —in fact, dealing with all matters.
The order and discipline of the
Baptist Church
are almost identical with those of the Independents. I need not
refer to the well-known polity of the Primitive Methodist Church
(which, by the way, was not a body that seceded “ owing to
their very difference on this point ” — i.e., the present demands
of the laity), nor to the other Methodist bodies. Hence I trust
I may fairly conclude that in requesting the right to legislate
and act in all our church courts on equal terms with ministers,
we seek for only what is granted the laity of other Christian
bodies, including the Episcopalian, Presbyterian, Congregational,
Baptist, Primitive Methodist, Bible Christian, United Free
Methodist, &c.
Your article of the 19th June contains statements and im-
plications calculated to lead your readers to infer that you deny—
(l) that the laity of the Episcopalian, Presbyterian, Congrega-
tional, and Baptist Churches are admitted to their highest courts ;
(2) that the laity in those churches are present at the investiga-
tion of charges preferred against ministers; (3) that laymen
have any voice in considering appeal cases of laymen against ex-
pulsion j (4) that laymen have any vote in the election of
Moderator of a Presbyterian Assembly, of chairman of the Con-
gregational Union or Baptist Association; (5) that laymen have
anything to do in deciding on the expulsion of a minister from
any of the three last-mentioned churches ; and (6) that laymen
have any voice in the final introduction of candidates into their
ministry. Undeniable evidence has been already advanced in
direct opposition to these expressed or implied denials.
Further, you affirm that “ the resolutions assume that all the
members and ministers of our Church agree in opinion with the


framers of them.” Have the kindness to point out in our resolu-
tions any such assumption ?
You also assert that “ the discipline which I agreed to, and to
which my ordination vow pledg’ed me, did not permit laymen to
be in Conference in any shape.” Now, sir, laymen are
not answerable for all the new yows
created by ministers —without tbe consent of the Church—since
Wesley’s death. The one alluded to could not have been in ex-
istence in his “ United Pastorate ” day ; else how was it that
laymen were admitted into Conference during- his lifetime, and a
resolution passed six years after his death agreeing- to exclude
them ? While I admire the candid opposition of an opponent, I
despise the transparent subterfug-e of one of your correspondents
who—after making- a serious charg-e —coolly says he “may or
may not he correct.” I will support my asertions with recog-
nised authorities. That various
laymen were admitted into Conference
during- the days of Wesley is a matter of history, and recorded in
The Life and Times oj Wesley by Tyerman (vol. 1, p. 441) —
“ The Conference began on Monday, June 25th (1744) . . .
and consisted of the two Wesleys and four other clergymen . .
, also of the four lay preachers, Thomas Richards, Thomas
Maxfield, John Rennet, and John Downes.” The laity were also
admitted at the Conferences held on Ist August, ’45; 13th May,
’46 j and 16th June, ’47. (See Wesley's Works, published at
the Conference Printing-office, vol, viii., p. 281, &c.)
Tyerman likewise says (vol. ii., p. s)—“The number present
(at Conference, 1748) was 23, including about half-a-dozen
clergymen, three stewards, some local preachers, and Howel
Harris.” Again, respecting the ’55 Conference—“ There were
not fewer than 63 preachers present, being seventeen more than
the entire number of itinerants then employed.” Also “ Others,
besides itinerant preachers, were admitted to Wesley’s Confer-
ence in ’7B. Again, I suppose as a tribute to Wesley’s sagacity,
and as an evidence of his living far in advance of his immediate
successors, Tyerman (vol. 2, p. 610) says—“ Besides the itin-
erant preachers there were present many stewards and local
preachers, showing that Wesley was wise enough to avail himself
of the counsels of laymen as well as of those who were wholly
devoted to the ministerial work.” Is further proof needed that
laymen are now without privileges which were accorded to their
forefathers ? Having shown that certain laymen were present
at some of Wesley’s Conferences, I will now quote Peirce (by
the way, a favorite authority with ministers) to show that
the laity are not excluded by the Deed Poll, as stated;
he remarks (in his Principles and Polity , p. 471) respecting
the exclusion of laymen after Wesley’s death, that “the Deed


itself does not expressly forbid the admission of lay officers or
delegates.” Further, as stated, a resolution was passed in the
year ’97 not to admit laymen. Hence it must be patent that
laymen are not excluded by that Deed; otherwise, why pass
a resolution —which makes no reference to it—if that Deed
is sufficient of itself to shut out the laity, who certainly have
as much legal right to enter the sacred precincts of Conference
as ministers outside the “legal hundred” have ?
Therefore in the absence of proof to the contrary, may I not
reasonably conclude that the vow you speak of either was not in
existence in the days of Wesley, or, if it was, it did not bear the
interpretation you put on it ?
Your leader contains very pronounced objections to “ laymen
from fifty or more circuits ” being present at the investigation of
charges against ministers. On the other hand, you see no objec-
tion to laymen being tried by ministers from fifty or more circuits.
Is there not here “ a reciprocity which is all on one side ?”
You state that we are “at least inaccurate ” in saying “ the
ministers, in settling the conditions of the new constitution, have
taken care to protect their own interests (respecting the introduc-
tion, trial, and expulsion of members and ministers), by putting
it beyond the reach of the laity to secure the rights alluded to.”
In refutation you say “ it is the existing rights of trial and appeal
of members, and of admission and expulsion by ministers, that are
reserved;” and that “at present these are qualified by such guards
and regulations as our rules provide ; ” and that “ General Con-
ference has power to repeal, vary, or amend those rules and
regulations.” Sir, all this is not very intelligible, but I suppose
it means that the rules and regulations may be altered, provided
that laymen are not admitted to the final courts of appeal to sit
and vote with ministers. Anyhow, to set all doubts at rest, and
to test the correctness of our fifth resolution,* tell me, in your
reply, could the existing rights, guards, and regulations be here-
after so altered (after our constitution is legalised) as to permit
laymen to vote on equal terms with ministers in a final appeal
court respecting the introduction, trial, and expulsion of members
and ministers ? If you reply in the negative, then our fifth
resolution is correct, and the “misapprehension” is not on our
side; if in the affirmative, then we are clearly wrong in our con-
clusions, and which we will not hesitate to acknowledge.* You
likewise speak of the
“ accrued and existing rights v
of our 26,503 members, and 191,763 adherents, but, by a strange
oversight, you omit to name those rights. Let me record some
of them. (1.) Members have the “accrued” right of providing
* The Editor declines to reply.


the church income, without a knowledge of its expenditure.
Certainly the officers of the church know, but nine-tenths of the
contributors are never treated to a statement of receipts and ex-
penditure as in other churches. (2.) Members (exclusive of
officers) have no voice whatever in the management of the various
affairs of the church, in the election of a single officer, or any
other detail. (3.) Another accrued right is that an offending
brother appealing, must be brought before, and judged by, a
secret and ministerial Vatican. I will not attempt to name the
accrued rights of the adherents, as they are simply nil.
All these members and adherents, you assert, “ as far as can be
ascertained, were content without lay representation.” This is
simply incomprehensible. The laity have been demanding these
rights ever since Wesley’s death, and the withholding them has
been the main and fruitful cause of all the Methodist schisms to
the present day. Besides, you surely remember, seven or eight
years ago, the subject being introduced by laymen at quarterly
and district meetings, and that it has been discussed and written
about more or less ever since.
You add another statement equally unaccountable—viz., that
the laity “ are well satisfied with the new constitution.” What
are the facts ? Stawell circuit plainly demanded what has not
been granted. The same may be said of the Ballarat East circuit;
also, of the New Zealand Conference, of the South Australian
Conference, since confirmed by the strongly expressed dissatis-
faction of the Pirie-street circuit —a circuit second to none in the
colonies; and, lastly, of the 76 Ballarat memorialists (which
latter include 14 local preachers, 23 past or present office-bearers,
and whose signatures were obtained during one afternoon). Is
it surprising, therefore that
the new constitution “ sham,” as it was called,
should give such general dissatisfaction outside Conference; since
it was well understood, and safely prophesied by friends and op-
ponents within its doors, that such would be the result ? One
says “he should feel humiliated before the people.” Another,
that “he did not believe that any layman who had any self-
respect would accept the scheme proposed, fenced round as it was
with restrictions and reservations ; ” also, u that the whole scheme
was an insult to the laymen, and that the recommendation of the
committee made lay representation a sham.” The reasons for
these plain assertions will be better understood by referring to a
well-known minister, who, in reviewing the transactions of Con-
ference, writes —“ Laymen will have no larger share in (the
annual) Conference business than they have had hitherto, but what
they do will be done in the supreme administrative court itself,
instead of in committees subordinate to it. In the General Con-
ference, laymen are to share legislative functions on equal terms


with ministers ; but the scope of legislation itself is limited by
restrictions which forbid Conference to meddle with the itiner-
ancy, the laws determining the status of ministers and members,
the society rules, and some other subjects.”
You likewise assert that “ the scheme, substantially as it has
been passed, has been before the church since November 73.”
Sir,
that scheme has never been before the church at all,
if you call the people the church. True, it has been before some
quarterly and financial district meetings; but what layman was
authorised to speak for the church, or what class-leader ascer-
tained the views of his members ? Again, what about the dis-
puted preamble; was it ever submitted to a single layman ? And,
finally, was the scheme, or any part of it, ever laid before the
quarterly or financial meetings, or any other kind of meeting in
New South Wales ?*
“ Personally (you say) we should have been glad if, in the
Annual Conferences, laymen had been admitted to .'vote for pres-
ident, secretary, chairmen of districts, and in the stationing of
ministers. Yet, beyond these minor details we are not prepared
to go.” Minor, indeed! It is creditable, sir, that you should
rightly consider them such.-
Without your assistance,
and that of the Revs. Fitchett, Reid, Morley, and a few others
(who will be held in grateful remembrance in years to come by
“ the people called Methodists,”) it is impossible to say what
would have become of the whole business. There would not, I
fear, have been even “ the ridiculous mouse ” to be thankful
for. That these and other items were not considered minor, by
an overwhelming majority, is easily seen in the reported speeches
of some of those gentlemen.
Evidence has been advanced to show that what we demand
as our right is scriptural, reasonable, and is in the possession of the
laity of all other Christian churches as far as their diversified
systems will admit. It is very worthy of remark, however, that
whatever be the diversity in their polity, the grand principle—the
right of the laity to be present in any and every church court —is
recognised; the correctness of which statement I am glad to see
you do not now question. Nevertheless,! to all this you have in
substance asserted —“ Granted, only that the entire polity and
organisation of other churches differ radically from ours; hence
» The Editor makes no reply.
t A reference to our article will show we were speaking, not of “ Presbyterian ” but of
“ Congregational ” churches, and closed our argument with these words— “ The simple truth
is, that it is not possible to apply the principles of Independency to Connexionalism.
Neither can claim divine appointment, each has some advantages not possessed by the
other, while there are also disadvantages peculiar to each system. We must, therefore, be
content to take the disadvantage with the advantage.”—Bd. <S. &l M. C,


your proofs will not apply, since no society outside Methodism
exercises the functions of the United Pastorate.
Now it is important to ascertain how far this is correct.
The United Pastorate of Ministers
I suppose means ;— (1.) That the Conference has an absolute and
united jurisdiction over all its churches within its limits; (2.) that
it locates its ministers, as far as possible, among- the congregations
that invite them ; (3.) that it exercises discipline over all its
members—lay and clerical —within its boundaries; (4.) that it
has vested rights in common funds supported by the general
church—such as the Worn-out Ministers’ Fund, the Educational,
the Children’s and the Missions’ Funds, Ac.; (5.) that it has
authority to legislate and act in all the spiritual, as well as the
temporal, affairs of the church.,
Astonishing though it be, it is nevertheless true, and is easily
seen, that all these functions are exercised by at least one
non-Methodist Church —viz,, the Presbyterian; and since the
laity of that church are in possession of all the rights and privi-
leges we seek (and in some respects more), it must be manifest
and beyond dispute that the United Pastorate—at least, as far as
these items are concerned —is in no way improperly interfered
with by the presence of laymen in the highest councils of the
church; consequently, objecting ministers must seek other reasons
than the unexplained and mysterious ones respecting the United
Pastorate for withholding from the laity their rights; for insulting
their intelligence and repelling their sympathy by shutting Con-
ference doors, four days or more, in their face while the cream
of the business is transacted; for handing the laity the husk and
retaining the kernel—a piece of legislation that is likely to bear
bitter fruit when the season arrives. For be assured, Mr. Editor,
few gentlemen will sink their self-respect so low as to submit to
act the delegate on the humiliating conditions provided.
Some ministers say, because they are entrusted with pastorate
authority from heaven over the church, the laity must not part-
icipate ; at the same time they carefully abstain from naming the
difficulties. No such difficulties found in the United Pres-
byterian Church, which is “ the largest section of the Protestant
Church,” and possesses as much United Pastorate jurisdiction as
ours does.
(1.) The Annual Presbyterian Assembly
(which, like all the lower courts, is composed of laymen* and
clergy) has absolute authority over all the churches and presby-
« The Editor denies the sufficiency of our evidence, and advances the novel plea that lay
representatives of this church are “ ordained ” men, a sentiment I trust our local preachers
and class-leaders will show their appreciation of by at once demanding ordination. Still I
fail to see its importance since even Wesleyan preachers were not ordained by imposition of
hands till the year 1836.


teries within its limits. See Rules and Forms of Procedure of
the Presbyterian Church of Victoria , p. 7 :—“ The General
Assembly is the supreme court of the Church, and is composed of
all the ministers of the several presbyteries, with a representative
elder from each of the sessions. It belongs to the General As-
sembly to exercise authority over presbyteries; to divide or unite
them, or to erect new presbyteries, ... to give advice or
instructions when required; to judge of complaints or appeals
against their sentences; to’affirm, reverse, or vary their sentences;
to advise or rebuke presbyteries when necessary.” (There are in
Victoria 140 ministers, in charge of 160 churches, subdivided
into 10 presbyteries.)
(2.) The Assembly being the supreme court, it may confirm or
disallow the appointment made by presbyteries. The well-known
method is, congregations invite ministers as our quarterly meet-
ings do. A call having been made, it is referred to the presby-
tery in which the church is situate for approval, and no minister
can accept a call unless it be there sustained; so that your
statement that a minister in other churches can go from one
church to another u without let or hindrance ”* is incorrect. It
sometimes happens, as in our church, that a popular preacher re-
ceives more than one call at one time, and although he may ex-
press a preference for one in particular, it rests with the Presby-
tery (and in case of appeal the Assembly) to decide which of the
nnmber he must accept. So tenaciously has the Assembly pre-
served this power that important results have followed some of its
decisions, and which are very worthy of our consideration. I
will cite two cases by way of illustration. The first has reference
to the notable Rev. Jas. Whyte, who, in addition to a number of
calls, received one from Queen Anne-street, Dunfermline, and
another from the South Congregation of Perth; the former he
desired to accept, the latter he declined. ( Vide Minutes of the
United Associated Synod, September , 1822, p. 6.) The Synod,
however, had other views, and determined he should accept the
call to Perth or leave the church— i.e., u sell or sail.” He elected
to “ sell,” and —as may be seen from a violent letter to the Synod,
dated 13th April, 1824—he abandoned the church. A second in-
stance is given in the History of the Secession, by M‘Kerrow,
Vol. 1,, p. 335, of Rev. Andrew Bunyon, who refused to go as a
missionary to Pennsylvania, for which obstinacy the Synod de-
prived him of his license; but afterwards he repented, and “re-
ceived a suitable admonition from the Moderator,” and was sent
across the Atlantic to the field selected by the church. Perhaps
you say —Ah, but the Assembly cannot take a minister away from
* We are sure our correspondent did not mean to misrepresent us ; but we have nowhere
made any such statement or admission as that attributed to us, nor have used—in form or
substance—what is put within inverted commas.—Ed. S. & M. C.


a congregation without consulting members or minister. Yes it
can. I refer you to the United Presbyterian Magazine for last
June, page 264, where Dr. Cairns is taken away from his con-
gregation without anyone being consulted, that he might devote
his whole time as professor at the Theological Hall, Edinburgh.
The same may he said of the Rev. Mr. Tait, who was removed
from his South Yarra Church by the last Assembly to take charge
of the ladies’ college—only in his case he was a consenting party.
(3.) It is well-known that the General Assemby exercises dis-
cipline over all its members, lay and clerical. Ministers can he
removed from a charge for misconduct, or be censured, as the case
may require. See Peport of Proceedings of General Assembly
(Victoria) 1872, pp. 8 and 11. (4.) The Assembly has likewise
control of the general funds of the church, including the “Infirm
Ministers’ Fund,” “Widows’ and Orphans’ Fund,” “ Sustentation
Fund,” “ Home and Heathen Missions’ Funds,” &c. (5.) The
Assembly has power to legislate and act in all the spiritual and
temporal affairs “ of common concern to all the church ; to issue
pastoral addresses; to superintend the missionary operations of
the church • to make rules for conducting its own proceedings,
and the proceeding of inferior courts,” &cq and, what is more to
the purpose, it belongs to the General Assembly to consider mat-
ters “ whether respecting her doctrine, worship, discipline, or
government,” model, or any other kind of deed; but which we
(who are to stereotype in Australasia the doctrine, discipline, &c.,
of John Wesley for all ages to come) will not be able to do if the
new constitution, in its present form, be legalised. Fancy, in the
nineteenth century
the conditions of membership
being regulated by the following and other out-of-date unobserved
and unenforced rules : —“ Putting on of gold and costly apparel
“speaking evil of magistrates and ministers “buying or sell-
ing spirituous liquors, or drinking them, unless in cases of extreme
necessity “ softness and needless self-indulgence “ laying-
up treasure upon earth “ using too many words in buying and
sellingand which, with others good enough in their way, are
said to be so good and needful for this unparalleled age of
education, tolerance, and progress as to necessitate their being
protected by Act of Parliament, and put beyond the reach of the
General Conference to meddle with in any particular. The rules
and regulations alluded to were drawn up by the Brothers Wesley
on Ist May, 1743 —the year before their first Conference—when
Methodism was crude and unshapen, and before the societies had
taken the definite form they have since assumed. What folly
that our great grandfathers had to submit to these human
mandates ; but how much more apparent is that folly when it is
noted that we, and our children’s children also, will have to


submit! Hereafter let us forbear condemning' the ancient system
which obtained among 1 Medes and Persians, and that perpetuated
by the followers of Confucius, for accepting the creeds, teachings,
and philosophy of bygone ages.
I think I hear you say —But what about the doctrine we
adopted that
“ the ministry derives its existence from Christ,”
and that upon Christian ministers u devolves the solemn respon-
sibility of enforcing godly discipline and administering the
pastoral government of the Church, and which, you say, cannot
be shared with the laity ? ” I reply briefly (for want of space)
that ministers of other churches consider themselves as much
appointed by Christ as any of ours are; yet they find no diffi-
culty in sharing with the laity the pastorate as regards discipline
over laymen and ministers —that is, laymen are allowed to be
present in the supreme courts of other churches, and to join in
their decisions, and under whose direction the pastor performs
certain duties of his office. This is all we claim. Where have
we contended that laymen should perform the duties of the pastor
in executing' the decisions of the Church, in ordaining, in admin-
istering’ sacraments, or in any way acting' the executive ? No,
we are content to leave these duties to the ministry.
All we ask on this subject is that neither member nor minister
(iii case of appeal) shall be admitted, tried, or expelled, except by
consent of a mixed court. All this is granted in the church
last-mentioned, viz. the Presbyterian ; the same may be said of
the Congregational and Baptist Churches, to say nothing of
numerous Methodist and other bodies. Since ministers of these
churches share the government and pastorate with the laity, it
follows that they (ministers) either have not “ derived their
existence from Christ ” to the extent that ours have, or that the
pastors of those churches have misunderstood their rights and
duties, and disobeyed the will of God. Why should our ministers
claim more divine rights than others claim, and how is it that so
much divinity has been reserved for any Wesleyan Methodist
minister ?*
It is comforting, however, to remember that this—shall I say
Infallibility-
question was adopted only after a smart struggle, and was less
generally subscribed to than was that notorious and not altogether
dissimilar one at the Oecumenical Council at Home a short time
back, for the Conference resolution was carried only by a major-
ity of twelve votes. But why was there any division at all if
the doctrine is so plainly laid down in Scripture as some would
have us believe ?
* The Editor is silent.


In drawing- to a conclusion, we may safely say we have
successfully defended the resolutions
and have advanced g-ood and sufficient reasons why laymen
should feel insulted by being- shut out of Conference when the
principal business of their Church is being transacted, and at the
unalterable reservations created by ministers in the new con-
stitution j and, permit me to note, I think we are now justified
in observing that your foot-note to my first letter will hardly
bear the reflection which must follow the reading of the entire
correspondence; and of the additional observation that “ the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments are the rule of faith,
morals, discipline and government in the Presbyterian Church.
See Presbyterian Calendar, edited by D. Macdonald, D.D., page
67. (The italics are mine.)
I intend, certainly for the present, that this correspondence, on
my part, shall close at your request; but before taking leave,
Mr. Editor, I must offer you
the hearty thanks,
I believe, of the entire “ opposition ” here for your past courtesy
and kindness. Although we differ on some points, yet I believe
we “ agree ”to do so, and that we part good friends. Our only
motive in this discussion has been the promotion of God’s glory
and the interests of our Church, and I need hardly say our attach-
ment to her will prevent any disruption on our side ; nevertheless
it will stimulate our sincerity to improve her polity and govern-
ment by every legitimate and fair means. Would that the
ministry had such confidence in the laity as to give them a fitting
and honorable place in the councils of their Church. Then would
she increase her borders, and secure such peace, harmony, and
prosperity as has never in our past history been known.
BALLARAT.
August 4th, 1875.


THE
a\do .Tcnlanb OOUslcmu.
Edited by the
Rev. A. ROBERTSON FITCHETT.
JULY Ist, 187 S.
THE GENERAL CONFERENCE.
AS we are under no obligation to burden our columns with a full official
report of the late Conference, we shall give only what is likely to be
of interest to New Zealanders. Our readers will find below a general view
of the proceedings, in which the leading incidents of debate are noted, and
the New Zealand representatives reported in full.
The Conference opened in Wesley Church, Melbourne, Wednesday, May
13th. The Annual Conferences were represented in the following propor-
tion :—New South Wales and Queensland, 15 members, 4 of whom (Messrs.
Curnow, Martin, Tait, and Brentnall) did not attend; Victoria and Tasmania,
15 members; South Australia, 7 members, 1 of whom (Mr. Casely) did not
attend; New Zealand, 6 members : total present, 38. New Zealand was
entitled to send 8 members, but from considerations of expense sent only 6.
The Presidents of the Annual Conferences—the Revs. S. Wilkinson, New
South Wales ; J. Harcourt, Victoria; J. Bickford, South Australia; and
J. Buller, New Zealand—presided in turn. The Rev. J. B. Waterhouse was
elected Secretary, and the Revs. S. Williams and J. B. Stephenson Assistant
Secretaries.
OPEN CONFERENCE.
THE question of opening the Conference to the public was the first
business taken. Mr. Symons submitted a motion to admit members and
adherents, and a debate ensued which lasted for the greater part of the day,
and was then adjourned for the arrival of the New Zealand representatives.
The New Zealanders were in the Conference at its opening next morning,
but the Connexional Committees were appointed for that day, and the
subject was not resumed until the sixth day of session, when, after a sharp
debate, the motion was carried by 19 to 17. The minority then proposed
that the resolution should come into effect on Saturday, the tenth day of
session. After one or two divisions Thursday was agreed to, the delay
being thought necessary by some in order to arrange an Order of Business.
We give the gist of the discussion.


Mr. Symons moved —“ That the Sessions of this Conference be
open to the members and adherents of our church ; the members
upon showing- to the door-keeper their quarterly tickets, and ad-
herents by showing notes of admission (not transferable) from
the minister of the congregation with which they worship. The
Conference will, at any time when they may deem it desirable,
conduct any business with closed doors.” He said that he was
not in favor of opening the doors of Annual Conferences, because
they were administrative and executive —the mode of conducting
them was by conversation, and not debate, except on special
occasions. This Conference was legislative. He hoped to see it
conducted according to the usual method of debate, and he
thought the members and adherents might reasonably be admit-
ted as spectators. He did not regard any principle as involved,
hut he thought the time was come when they ought to depart
from their previous usage. He was not prepared to ask for open
doors except to members and adherents; there he would draw
the line. He did not think many persons would avail themselves of
the privilege of being present at their deliberations—they would find
it exceedingly dull work; hut there was all the difference
between saying you may and you sha’nt. Of course it was said
that there must be some . underhand work done, of which they
were unwilling for the people to be witnesses. They could afford
to laugh at that, only that many persons believed it. He be-
lieved that nothing at present would do more to popularise the
Church than the adoption of his resolution. He would sacrifice
no principle to popularity, and would not be doing so in this
instance. He felt the "gravity of the question, and trusted that
the Conference would adopt the motion.
The arguments used against the motion were that the people did not
want it, or if they did, that the Conference ought not to yield to popular
clamour; that “the time had not come;” that “all difficult questions”
ought first to be settled; and that Conference was incapable of enduring the
criticism to which it would be subjected if visitors were admitted. We
give two or three examples:—
Mr. Spencer Williams met with a great many Methodists, and
he did not find any number who would have the Conference
open. They said if you open it in any way you do the very
worst thing that can be done. Letters in the papers did not
trouble him ; they came not from friends but enemies. It was
an old tale; our fathers had heard it, but, like wise men, they
put their fingers in their ears and went on. Some things that
had been said were tantamount to saying that their people had
no confidence in them, but this he did not believe. What would
they think if they did some business with open, and other parts
with closed doors ?
Mr. Knight, who delivered an excited speech, said that if a
wrong had been done by keeping out the people, they had be-


come used to it. But there was no wrong or right in the matter.
A concession was demanded without reason. They ought to
make their people feel that they would not yield to club-law,
(oh !oh !) and that threats would be powerless. If they con-
ceded this Jihey conceded everything. There were men whom it
would be impossible to satisfy however much was yielded, and
who would find fault to the end. They might liberalise and lib-
eralise in deference to clamour, and yet get no better. If they
admitted strangers to the Conference he looked for most injurious
results. There were members of the Conference who could not
submit to a public defeat ; their temperament was such that they
could not endure it. (Oh !, and laughter.) Already they (the
Conference) were under too much strain, too much public criticism.
It was impossible to endure it. There had been a loudness, a
want of repose (laughter) about their proceedings in the recent
committees owing to the presence of laymen. (No, no, and
laughter.) There were men there whose nerves were strung, and
whose hands were shaking as they spoke, because of those lay-
men. (Laughter and confusion.) 'To admit members of the
Church as proposed would be putting too much strain upon them
altogether. He would rather die like a man than submit to such
demands. (Cheers and laughter.) He warned the Conference
that the clamour that frightened and forced them there would
do the same for the Annual Conferences. The end would be
the sacrifice of effectiveness in all their Courts. Their fathers
had not adopted this course,, neither should they. (Applause.)
In the adjourned debate the representatives from New Zealand all spoke
in favor of the motion. We give the remarks of Mr. Reid: —
Mr. Reid said that the amendment (making the motion applic-
able to future Conferences only) would be a proclamation of
their weakness, ignorance, and incompetence. After their long’
discipline in the conduct of business, he thought they ought to
be able to appear in public, and to conduct public business like
Christian gentlemen. (Hear, hear.) They ought to hail the
prospect of criticism, and even to invite it. They needed it, and
it would do them good. (Hear, hear.) In New Zealand
they had opened the sessions of the Connexional Committees
with the best results. Numbers were present, and there was
general satisfaction at the publicity thus afforded. It was high
time that the mistakes and prejudices which were current about
the extreme conservatism which was to be expected in the Gen-
eral Conference were dispelled. A gentleman had remarked to
him, when he was leaving New Zealand to attend the Conference,
that it was useless to go, as the Australians were too conserva-
tive to accept improvements. By adopting the resolution they
would give members of the Church the opportunity of correcting
their misconceptions about them.


In reply to the last remark, Mr. Watsford said that “ New Zealand might
fear their conservatism, but there were many in the Conference who looked
with more alarm upon New Zealand radicalism ” —a sentiment which re-
ceived abundant exemplification on almost every question discussed.
LAY REPRESENTATION.
AT the close of the proper business of the Connexional Committees, it
was proposed to introduce the subject of Lay Representation, in order
to afford the laymen present an opportunity of expressing their views upon
it. Hereupon arose a tumult, the fellow of which not the oldest Conference
veteran there could recall. New South Wales, in the person of its President,
was in the chair, and, in response to appeals for a ruling, gave judgment that
the discussion could not be taken whilst laymen were present. This ruling
the majority vehemently disputed, and sought in various ways to evade or
over-ride. Motions —“ thick as leaves in Yallambrosa ” —rained about the
President’s head,—motions to set aside the ruling, motions that “ we do now
adjourn,” motions to ask the President to consult his colleagues, motions to
permit the laymen to remain as auditors only—the Conference had found
out the secret of perpetual motions. Pathetic in his look of imperturbability
sat the President, as for about the space of two hours the storm surged and
eddied round his chair, oscillating continually between tragedy and farce.
His efforts to explain or vindicate his ruling had the unfortunate effect of
exciting irreverent laughter. The Presidential deliverances unquestionably
had a ludicrous involution and mal-appropriateness which would have tried
the gravity of a less electric assembly than the Conference, and which made
an utterance from the chair sound like the propounding of a conundrum.
At length came the climax. The laymen gathered themselves, took counsel
together, and announced by one of their number that they were about to
retire, “ not in pique,” but in obedience to the ruling of the chair, and to
enable the Conference to go on with its business. They withdrew to the
door, pursued by some of the “ fathers ” who besought them to remain. In
the midst of indescribable confusion, the obnoxious ruling was declared to
have been put to the Conference and negatived. How or by whom it had
been put was not very clear; but let that pass. The “scene” was over.
The laymen returned to their places, and business was resumed.
The first clause of the Melbourne Committee’s plan having been moved—
Mr. Waterhouse brought up a recommendation of the Sydney
Conference, to the effect that the whole subject of lay represent-
ation should be postponed. He said it appeared that the English
Conference had not legally made them an affiliated Conference;
that, in fact, we had no existence. The Poll Deed provided
that some delegate should be sent from that Conference to author-
ise their proceedings ; this had not been done. The British Con-
ference, even, could not legally appoint to circuits those ministers
who had been received only into the Australasian connexion; and
he quoted the Poll Deed in support of this opinion. If the pro-
perty were settled—and it certainly was notin New South Wales
—then, but not until then, should he be prepared to support this
motion.
Mr. Eggleston, Mr, Crouch, and others urged that, for the
very reasons assigned by Mr. Waterhouse, such constitutional
changes as were necessary should be made at once. It was


evident that the legal position of the Conference and the Church
properties was as had now as it could be. It could not be made
worse by the legislation proposed.
Mr. J. Scott urged that there should he no delay in carrying
this motion. They now had peace and harmony, and this most
important change be made now, and it should be done in
a generous manner. He was old enough to remember two terrible
agitations, and hoped that in the future the Church would be
saved from these disasters. He hoped the question would be
promptly settled in a liberal spirit. It should not be said that
this was done under pressure.
Mr. Symons agreed with Mr. Waterhouse as to the unsatis-
factory state of their affairs; but he held this to be the most
powerful argument why this resolution should be carried at once.
The settlement of the properties of the Church was most import-
ant. In Victoria they had been considering this with great care ;
and he held in his hand a draft of a new model deed which would
provide for the introduction of laymen into Conference, and the
legal settlement of the Australasian Conference and its properties.
A draft Act had also been prepared which in due time would be
submitted to the Conference which would, if adopted, give valid-
ity to the new arrangements.
Mr. W. F. Stephenson proposed a lengthy amendment, the purport of
which was that lay representation should be delayed for the present, and
offering as a compromise the opening of the doors of Conference to the
public:—
Mr, Stephenson, after reading his amendment, said that he
approved of the principle of lay representation. We had no right
to exclude laymen on the ground of priestly or pastoral preroga-
tives, As individual ministers they had certain pastoral preroga-
tives, but as a corporation they had none. An appeal to Scripture
would warrant the inclusion of laymen in their counsels. But
there was a law of Providence as well as a law of Scripture. In
the providence of God the Church was entrusted to them in its
present form. They had to consider this law of providence work-
ing through the wisdom of their fathers. The constitution of their
Church had worked with as little friction as that of any other.
The history of the Churches which admitted laymen to the pos-
ition proposed for them was not more peaceful than theirs. Nor
were those Churches more efficient. He would challenge com-
parison. It was dangerous to meddle with such a constitution.
He shrank with fear from such meddling, (hear, hear.) Theoret-
ically he approved of lay representation, but as a matter of ex-
pediency he thought they ought not to adopt it. Mr. Stephenson
then referred to the plan submitted by the Melbourne Committee.
He did not wish to use words that would seem harsh or unpolite,
but must say that the recommendations of the committee made
lay representation a sham. (“Yes!” “No!” and applause.)


There were great professions of liberality, but so many reserva-
tions and guards, that the whole scheme was an insult to the lay-
men. (“ No!” and confusion.) Any laymen of spirit would de-
cline the honor. If laymen were to be admitted at all, he should
vote that they come in on equal terms. (Hear, hear, and dissent).
The report of the committee was another illustration of the fable
of the mountain in labour. They had produced a most ridiculous
mouse. (At this point there was considerable confusion, owing
to interruptions by Mr. Eggleston and others who contended that
Mr. Stephenson’s remarks were disorderly.) He desired, above
all things, spiritual efficiency and success, but those who thought
these reforms would secure that were mistaken. Those Churches
which had adopted a more republican form of government had not
been more spiritual. There was no general or strong desire on
this subject in the colonies until recently. It was attributable
now to a few who had fostered these views. He did not blame
them. If they felt strongly on the subject they had done right.
For his part, he had felt bound, by moving this amendment, to
deliver his soul. (Applause.)
Mr. Rigg said that the legal difficulties were the same whether
laymen were in or out. Mr. Stephenson had warned them not to
meddle with their Constitution. The fact was, they had no Con-
stitution. In their present unsatisfactory legal position they
could not afford to incur the risk of an agitation on this question.
Friction meant to them a great amount of damage.
Mr. Waugh said that Mr. Stephenson’s sentiments were out of
date. Lay Representation was accepted in Ireland, America and
elsewhere, and they could not safely drop behind the Methodist
world generally.
The motion was put and carried. After some matters of detail
had been considered—
Mr. S. G. King moved, and Mr. Crouch seconded, that the
further consideration of this question be remitted to the Con-
ference.
RESUMPTION OF DEBATE IN CONFERENCE.
For the sake of convenience we depart from chronological order and bring
together all the proceedings that relate to lay representation.
The subject was resumed on the eighth day of session, the first day on
which members and adherents were admitted.
A long discussion occurred on the clause requiring that lay representatives
to the Annual Conferences should be residents in the circuits which they
represented.
Mr. Fitchett urged that the clause should be struck out. To
require representatives to be resident would make the whole
scheme inoperative for a large part of New Zealand. What
would be thought of a system of parliamentary representation
which forbade the constituencies to elect any but a local
resident ?


Mr. Rigg argued for the retention of the clause. Otherwise in
the case of a Conference held at Auckland the laymen of Auckland
would be the Conference. Those laymen would be their hosts,
and it would be impossible for ministers to resist the social press-
ure brought to bear on them. (“ Oh !”) Their whole administra-
tion would fall into the hands of rich men in the leading towns.
The argument from the analogy of Parliament was misleading.
It went on the supposition that Christ’s kingdom was of this
world.
Mr. Reid did not doubt that the New Zealand circuits would
be able to find suitable local men ; but many of them would not
be able to bear the expense of both a lay and a ministerial rep-
resentative, and would send the minister only. He strongly de-
precated the attempt to restrict the free choice of the circuits. It
would be regarded in New Zealand as tyranny, ( a No, no.”)
Why should they deal thus ungenerously with their people ? The
clause as proposed was carried by a large majority.
DECLARATION OP PRINCIPLE.
ON Friday, the ninth day of Session, began the real tug of war upon
the lay representation question. The Plan of the Melbourne Committee
proposed to limit the functions of laymen in Conference to the secularities
of the Church. The ministerial members were to meet apart during the first
four days of session, and as often in addition as they might deem necessary,
“ for the consideration of the questions reserved to be dealt with by the min-
isters alone.” In opposition to this, the New Zealand Conference had recom-
mended that laymen should come in on an equal footing with ministers.
The discussions which followed turned entirely upon this fundamental dif-
ference of opinion. It will be seen that the advocates of the New Zealand
policy were beaten at every point.
Mr. Waugh said that before going further with the subject of
lay representation, they should gather their strength round some
fundamental principle which would govern details. He would
move the following as a preamble to the plan under discussion :
“ Whereas it appears to be advisable to alter our constitution so far as to admit lay
representatives as members of the Wesleyan Methodist Conferences in Australasia,
and whereas those courts have hitherto consisted of ministers only, the General Con-
ference shall be hereafter composed of ministers and lay representatives in accordance
with the following plan. The General Conference, however, in adopting this plan,
distinctly asserts its maintenance of the New Testament doctrine, that the ministry
derives its existence from Christ, and that upon Christian ministers, to whom is en-
trusted the duty of taking ‘ heed to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost hath made
them overseers, to feed the Church of God,’ devolves the solemn responsibility of en-
forcing godly discipline and administering the government of the Church. This prin-
ciple the General Conference regards as being essential to the scriptural fulfilment of
the ministerial oiflce, and as vital to the constitution of Wesleyan Methodism.”
He need not say much in advocacy of this resolution. The
principle affirmed was in accord with the teachings of the New
Testament, in which the functions of the pastoral office were so
stated. This principle was interwoven with our entire constitu-
tion. They acted as pastors in admitting and excluding members,
and they presided in Church meetings, notin virtue of their office
as chairmen, but in virtue of their order. They could not, with-
out being unfaithful to Christ, impair or surrender this principle.


It was cherished by the great mass of the Methodist people, who
held it as faithfully as they (the ministers) did. He hoped that
no great body of tiieir ministers would be found to oppose this
principle. He was sorry to think that even amongst ministers
there were some scandalous instances of unfaithfulness to this
principle. Even Wesleyan ministers had presumed to advocate
republican principles in Church Government, They were not at
liberty to hold whatever views they pleased about Church Gov-
ernment. The Church of Christ was not a republic, but a king-
dom. They must take care to guard this principle. It was
possible that in future years men might rise who would attempt
to revolutionise Methodism if this principle were not asserted now.
For his part, rather than abandon this principle, he was prepared
to abandon the whole attempt at lay representation, and to seek
a refuge and shelter in some other Church where it would be held
sacred and inviolable. (Applause.)
Mr. Rigg seconded. (Cries of “Vote, vote,”)
There were members of the Conference (as a writer in the Spectator re-
marks) whose strength lay in their voting rather than in reasoning. They
did not succeed, however, in hurrying Mr. Waugh’s resolution to the vote
without debate. A discussion arose first about the meaning of some of the
terms employed, next about the expediency of making such an affirmation
at that stage, finally about the soundness of the vaunted principle itself,
Mr. Quick thought that Mr. Waugh’s resolution would be “ a landmark in
after years and after ages;” but “ what was meant by the statement that the
* government of the Church ’ belonged to ministers alone ? How would
that square with the fact that they were taking laymen into their supreme
courts ? Should not the term be spiritual government ?” Mr. Morley ob-
jected to affirm a “ principle ” so indefinitely stated, and which was intended
to prevent full discussion. Mr. Lloyd thought the resolution was either too
soon or too late. It seemed to him inconsistent with the whole project of
lay representation. Mr. Fitchett recommended that the resolution should be
withdrawn. Their principles would be better expressed in the details of
their legislation than in an abstract declaration drawn in terms so vague.
Mr. Eggleston said that the resolution exactly represented
their principles. When he first mooted lay representation years
ago, he never dreamed for a moment that the principles which
had guided them from the beginning could be called in question.
The government of the Church was a kingdom, not a republic.
The Church was created by the minister, and was naturally gov-
erned by the minister. (Hear, and cries of dissent.)
Mr. Fletcher approved of the resolution. It was a misfortune
to have to be often asserting the authority of their office as min-
isters, hut it was right to lay it down as a terminus a quo in the
constitution. They abhorred the idea that the minister was a
priest, but equally avoided the low and degraded notion which
made him a church officer only, the superior of the chapel-keeper.
(Hear, hear.)
Mr. Fitchett enquired whether, supposing the resolution were
carried, the recommendations from New Zealand about the powers
to be given to laymen could be considered.


Mr, Waugh replied that, in his opinion, those recommendations
ought to be scouted in that Conference. ( “ Oh, oh ! ” and
applause.)
Mr. Fitchett thought that it would be a misfortune if they
committed themselves to such a principle. As interpreted by Mr.
Waugh and Mr. Eggleston, it was opposed to the whole constitu-
tion of the Methodist Church (“ No, no”) ; and those who held
it should indeed, as Mr. Waugh had threatened, seek a refuge
where they could consistently hold this principle, and live by it.
These were the pretensions of sacerdotalism or quasi-sacerdotalism.
(“ No, no,” and interruption ) The gentlemen who were crying
“ no ” should contrive some better argument than a mere negative.
(Hear, hear.) In theory those who introduced this resolution
repudiated sacerdotalism, yet they were making claims which
were the logical accompaniments and consequences of sacerdotal-
ism, and which were inconsistent with any other theory of the
ministry. He admitted that this was a continuation of the Wesley
tradition. Wesley had never been able to emancipate himself
from his High Church prejudices. Wesley would not have
recognised the ministerial character of the members of that Con-
ference. He declared that he would not separate from the Church
of England, that none who regarded his judgment would separate,
and that he died a member of it. But Providence was stronger than
Wesley, and had constrained him to call into existence a form of
Church life which was the very negation of his most cherished
prejudices. In the Methodist Church the work of the evangelist
was shared with the local preachers, that of the pastorate with the
class leaders. These facts were fatal to the pretensions of a separate
priestly caste. Three-fifths of all the Methodist preaching in the
world was done by those whom they called laymen. Three-fifths
of the whole work of the pastorate in its incidence upon the people
was also done by laymen—that is, by the class leaders. These
were patent facts, and he asserted that consequently the whole
constitution of the Methodist Church was practically opposed to
the principle laid down in the resolution.
Mr. President Buller said that if the resolution implied sacer-
dotalism, he should object to it. He regarded that principle as
the root of some of the most mischievous errors of the day. At
the same time, they as ministers claimed to be something more
than mere hirelings and u speaking brethren.”
Mr. Rigg heartily approved of the resolution, and he was per-
suaded that the great majority of their ministers and members in
New Zealand would approve. He did not agree with Mr.
Fitchett’s view. It would be a great calamity if the principle
were not affirmed.
Mr. Buddie thought that the resolution should be deferred
until the recommendations of the Annual Conferences were read


and considered. He objected strongly to tbe terms in which Mr.
Waugh had spoken of the New Zealand recommendations. He
thought that the expression “ scouted ” should be withdrawn. He
would urge that the resolution should be referred to a com-
mittee, in order that its terms might be amended, or made less
vague. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Reid said that Mr. Waugh’s resolution tied their feet and
then bade them run; it gagged them, and then invited them to
talk. They were told that the proposals of the New Zealand Con-
ference were to be “ scouted.” He thought the respect which was
due to the New Zealand Conference had been forgotten. He be-
believed as conscientiously as Mr. Waugh that ministers were
“ overseers,” but he interpreted the term differently. To shut
themselves up as proposed would be to prevent an honest discussion
of the matters which were coming before them. The principles
of Methodism were inherent in their Church Constitution. They
did not need to parade them in a resolution. They were part of
their very being as a Church. The business of the Conference,
as he viewed it, was to consider how these principles might be
worked so as to admit the laity to their due share of labour and
responsibility for Christ.
Mr. Quick differed totally from Mr. Fitchett as to the sacerdotal
principle. Sacerdotalism was the denying a proper Church
character to other communions (No, no), which the resolution did
not do. He repudiated the notion that class leaders had any
share in the pastorate. Their position was the result of a mere
prudential arrangement. (Mr, Fitchett: —Which, nevertheless,
carried with it the whole principle.)
Mr. Waugh was sorry that Mr. Fitchett had referred to sacer-
dotalism. He repudiated that. But neither, on the other hand,
would he admit laymen to share in the pastoral office. His re-
solution went between the two extremes.
The amendment to refer the resolution to a committee was
carried by 20 to 16. At a later stage the committee reported
that they had amended the resolution by inserting the word
“ pastoral ” before u government.” As thus amended, the
resolution was adopted by 20 to 12.
ANNUAL CONFERENCES.
RESERVATION OF POWERS. —1. ELECTIONS.
The Conference proceeded to consider the details of the Mel-
bourne Committee’s Plan of Lay Representation in the Annual
Conferences.
It was moved “ that there be reserved to be dealt with by
ministers alone—
Ist. The election of President and Secretary.”


The New Zealand Conference recommended that this be
struck out.
Mr. Fitchett urged the New Zealand recommendation. The
President and Secretary were officers of the whole Conference,
and the lay members ought to take part in their election.
Mr. Buddie moved, as an amendment, that the whole Confer-
ence should elect.
Mr. Rigg seconded. This was a point upon which laymen al-
ready felt strongly.
Mr. Binks said that at the opening of the Canadian Conference
a layman was put in the chair. He was prepared to follow that
example. He shonld like to hear what reason could be assigned
against the amendment.
Several members having spoken against the amendment,
Mr. Reid said no reason whatever had been assigned why this
reservation should be made. There was no court, sacred or sec-
ular, which would insist upon depriving in this way one-half its
members of their natural right. What pastoral function was
invaded if the laymen took part in this election ? (Hear, hear.)
Mr, Knight would ask what right had Mr. Reid thus to de-
mand reasons ? (Oh ! Oh !)
The amendment was negatived, and the clause as read passed
by 22 to 13.
RESERVATION 2.—“ FIRST THIRTEEN QUESTIONS.”
Reservation No. 2 was moved, viz., “ All the matters com-
prised in the first thirteen questions of Conference business.”
The New Zealand Conference recommended that this clause
be struck out.
Mr. Fitchett considered that Mr. Stephenson was right when
he said that the laymen whom they proposed to admit to Confer-
ence would feel themselves insulted by these reservations. A
principle had been affirmed by resolution that morning with
which he would not now quarrel. He would claim the right,
however, to interpret this declaration of principle, and he held
that it must be interpreted by the actual facts of their Church
organization and discipline. The questions of Conference busi-
ness which it was now proposed to reserve related to the making
of ministers. But in the lower courts the laity already had to
do with the making of ministers. (No, no.) Well, no man
could become a Methodist minister without the approval and
recommendation of a quarterly meeting. (Hear, hear.) It was
plainly not contrary, then, to Methodist principles that the laity
should take part in the making of ministers, and why should
that be forbidden in the higher court which was allowed in the
lower ? It was much to be desired that the “ fathers ” of the
Conference, who had contended that the recommendations of the
New Zealand Conference were opposed to the principles of Meth-
odism, would make themselves acquainted with the authoritative


literature of the Church. (Laug’h.ter.) He had been accused of
advocating’ Plymouth Brethrenism, but he would read an extract
or two from a work recently published by the Conference Office,
which would show that he was not so bad a Methodist after all.
Mr. Fitchett then read the following 1 extract from Gregory’s
Holy Catholic Church, the Fernley Lecture for 1873 : —“The
official ministry ... is not intended to supersede, nor even
to supplement, but to set agoing, to direct and keep in full
operation, the individual and universal ministry which belongs
inalienably to all and every member. Christ ‘ gave some apostles,’
&c., (Eph. iv. 12), ‘ for the perfecting of the saints, for the work
of the ministry ’ —that separating comma has no business here;
it diverts and distorts the sense. . . . The natural and
straightforward translation is —‘ for the perfecting of saints to
the work of ministry or edification.’ ” (p. 67.) The drift of this
exegesis was that all Christians were to be ministers, and to take
part in ministerial work according to their capacity. On page
70 Gregory continued, “ All believers have equal Church rights;
the dignity of each being so lofty that none can posssbly overtop
another, all being sons, heirs, kings and priests unto God. There
cannot be any difference of order, since each holds a rank than
which there can be no higher ; still there is a difference of office,
a diversity of function.” They had been told by Mr. Waugh
that morning that the minister presided in Church Meetings in
virtue not of his office, but of his order.
Mr. Waugh denied that he had made this statement.
Mr. Fitchett had taken the words down as Mr. Waugh uttered
them.
Mr. Buddie and Mr. T. Williams said that the terms had cer-
tainly been used.
Mr. Fitchett said that, at any rate, it was satisfactory to find
that Mr. Waugh now repudiated the idea that the ministry was
a separate order. The whole scope of Gregory’s work was
directly in the teeth of the pretensions of caste and privilege
which-had been made. He (Mr, Fitchett) contended that the
recommendations of the New Zealand Conference embodied the
very spirit of Methodist polity and principles.
Mr. Waugh would like to correct some of Mr. Fitchett’s mis-
takes, and let some light into Mr. Fitchett’s mind, if he could.
The passage he had read from Gregory did not touch the ques-
tion under consideration, but was a criticism as to the meaning
of a particular text, and in applying this to the case in hand, it
was taking it out of its connexion. He was surprised that so
intelligent a man as Mr. Fitchett should have said that the lower
courts of Methodism had part in making a minister. Mr. Waugh
described the action taken by the quarterly meeting in regard


to candidates for the ministry, and contended that this did not
bear the construction which had been put upon it.
Mr. Symons said they, in retaining- this proviso, were only
adopting- the well-understood practice of all professions. He
held the Christian ministry to be more than a mere profession ;
but, for his present purpose, he would put that aside. Who ever
heard of a lawyer being examined, received, or expelled, except
by lawyers ? or of a doctor being examined, licensed, or re-
moved from the list of practitioners, but by doctors ? And the
same, in fact, with all professions. They, then, were only in
this instance carrying out this universal practice; and he had
not met with any laymen who wished to take part in these
matters.
Mr. Hurst had no disposition to interfere with the rights of
the laity. As much as Mr. Fitchett, he was prepared to give
them all their rights; and he did not think this resolution took
any of their rights from them. It must not be forgotten that we
were g-iving greatly more than the Methodist Churches of Canada
and America —they had no laymen in their Annual Conferences.
Mr. Fitchett had suggested that the fathers of the Methodist
Church should turn their attention more to Methodist literature.
He had done that, and believed he understood it as well as
Mr. Fitchett. He had read Mr. Gregory’s book carefully ; but,
from the remarks made, he did not think Mr. Fitchett had done
so. He feared very much that Mr. Fitchett’s reading had been
to little purpose. *.
Mr. Reid said that no satisfactory reason had been given for
excluding laymen while these questions were considered. Mr.
Waugh’s statement that the quarterly meetings did not take
part in making- ministers was altog-ether contrary to the fact.
In truth, the principle and usage of Methodism was that a min-
ister could not be made without the voice of the laity. Mr.
Eggleston referred to the New Testament, and it was refreshing
to be directed to it; yet the references made did not, in his
opinion, affect the question. Mr. Symons had referred very
pertinently to the course pursued in other professions, but the
great difference was that the lawyer, or doctor, or other profes-
sional men had to support themselves ; but with us ministers once
received had to be provided with circuits and maintenance, their
widows and children had to be sustained by the people. (Hear,
hear.) He should feel humiliated before the people if this reserva-
tion should be carried ; should feel that there was some truth in
what some people say, that a man must become less than a man
when he becomes a Methodist. (Oh ! Oh!) Mr. Reid referred to
the election of Matthias, of the deacons, the settling of doctrines
for the Gentile converts, and other acts in which the people took
part with the Apostles, in proof of his position. If the laity


were admitted to participation with apostles in the choice of
ministers and the government of the Church, what reason could
there he why they should not be admitted to similar rights in
their Church courts ? (Hear, Hear.)
Mr. Watsford could scarcely believe that Mr. Reid meant all
he had said. A hook had been quoted —Gregory’s Holy Catholic
Church —he, too, would read from it: “He (the minister) holds
directly from Christ a free, an independent, a rightful, because
a responsible oversight and administration.” This was the view
they held.
Mr. Cope was filled with utter amazement that such a brother
as Mr. Reid should make so much of the election of the deacons
bv the people in apostolic times. We had deacons in the form
of leaders and stewards, who were elected by laymen. As to the
election of Matthias, he thought that an unfortunate illustration,
and it would not be difficult to prove that it was one of the
greatest blunders that bad ever been made in the early Church.
Mr. Morley held that Mr. Waugh’s attempt to show that the
laity in quarterly meetings had no part in making ministers
was" unsatisfactory. It had not been shown that the recommend-
ation from New Zealand would interfere with any principle of
their Church economy, and no adequate reason had been given
for the reservation.
The reservation was carried by 29 to 7.
RESERVATION 3. — THE STATIONING.
The next reservation was moved, viz., “ The stationing of the
ministers.”
The New Zealand and South Australia Conferences recom-
mended that this be struck out.
Mr. Symons proposed an amendment, constituting a Stationing
Committee composed of an equal number of ministers and lay-
men. He contended that laymen should have a voice in deter-
mining the appointments of the ministers. Unless they gave
laymen some real power, their admission to Conference would
be to a great extent a sham.
Mr. Gaud would oppose the striking out of this reservation
with all his might. He should object to receive his appoint-
ment at the hands of laymen.
Mr. Kelynack thought the rights of laymen were already fully
provided for. To admit them to the business of stationing
would greatly increase the difficulty of it. Worthy men would
often be thrust into unsuitable appointments by popular clamour.
Mr. Hurst objected to laymen meddling with him and his
family, as would be the case if laymen took part in stationing,
because he would have no corresponding power of meddling with
them and their families. It was different when ministers
stationed each other, for if he was wronged by his brethren he


had the opportunity of dealing with them in the same way.
(“ Oh ! ” and laughter.)
Mr. Waugh said that, although no principle would be affected
by admitting laymen to the stationing, he should oppose it as
inexpedient. In the off-shoots of Methodism experience was
not in favor of it.
Mr. Fitchett would make one more appeal to the moderation
and generosity which he still thought must be latent in the
Conference. (Laughter.) Mr, Waugh allowed that no question
of principle was involved. Why, then, not seize the opportunity
of showing a generous confidence in their laymen by conceding
this point ? Could any one doubt that it would have to be con-
ceded in the end ? The Conference was preparing humiliations
for itself. They were entering upon a contest like that of Mrs.
Partington with the Atlantic Ocean, attempting to resist a
perfectly resistless tide. The checks and restrictions they were
contriving would all have to give way, and would serve merely
as the evidences of their distrust. He urged the admission of
laymen to the stationing in the interest of ministers themselves.
At present the circuits were not invited to consider general
interests. Each looked out for itself, and hence often made the
most reckless and impossible demands. If its wishes were not
met, the officials were accustomed to send blustering and offensive
telegrams as the only way open to them of getting what they
wanted. Every year they were inundated by telegrams and
memorials which were degrading to both senders and receivers,
and often exceedingly painful to individual ministers. The only
cure for this was to give the circuits representation in the Con-
ference during stationing, and make them share the difficulties
and the responsibility of it.
Mr. Watsford, on the contrary, would keep these blusterers
out. There were New Testament principles involved in this
question. Laymen had already all that they required in the
right of invitation and of protest. What could the laymen in
Conference know of the circuits generally, or of the ministers
generally ? Ministers did know. It would be a serious thing if
laymen were called upon to speak against the qualifications and
efficiency of ministers. They would even have one layman
arrayed against another in dodging and scheming. The city
circuits would gain and the country circuits lose. A few laymen
of wealth and leisure would have the control of all appointments.
He waited to see the issue of this with deep feeling. If the
reservation were struck out it would seriously damage the
Connexion.
Mr. W. F. Stephenson would vote for the amendment to secure
the dignity and consistency of the Conference. If laymen come
in at all, let them have full and equal powers. Anything less


would be an insult to them. He was amazed to see that Mr.
Watsford, Mr. Eggleston, and others who had advocated lay
representation were afraid of the consequences of their own action.
Already he learned that laymen were feeling aggrieved. They
were to be excluded from voting in the election of President and
Secretary, and now they were to be excluded from the stationing.
It was being said outside that lay representation was a delusion.
If laymen came in at all, they could not possibly maintain these
limitations. He agreed with Mr. Fitchett that they were
attempting to resist the ocean.
Mr. Piddington had thought over the matter carefully. They
already recognised the right of the people to voice and vote in
appointments by allowing invitations and protests. They had
some trouble as the result, but he thought that by recognising
this principle in the Conference they should really be consulting
their own dignity and safety. Appointments made by the whole
Conference would be peacefully accepted. Laymen were not
likely to be so ignorant as was represented. At any rate they
were less likely to be harmful inside the Conference than protest-
ing and threatening outside. As reasonable and godly men they
would help them if admitted to a share of the work. He had not
found the laymen of Methodism so evil and so dangerous. He
did not regard a layman as his natural enemy. (Hear, hear.)
He did not forget that it was laymen who bore their financial
burdens and erected their churches, colleges, and schools. He
urged that the Conference should deal with them magnanimously
and generously. (Hear, Hear.)
Mr. Lloyd said that in this reservation they were taking from
the laymen the principal business of the annual Conferences.
How could they expect laymen to travel long distances for the
small amount of real work they proposed to leave to them ?
There was no partnership in the world such as they designed.
Laymen were to be responsible for all the debts, yet were to
have no voice in appointments. If the ministers were on the
other side of the proposed partnership they would exclaim against
its unfairness.
Mr. Buddie said they had either gone too far or not far enough.
They were asked to act most inconsistently. He wished now
that they had not taken the steps they had if all these reserva-
tions were to be made. It seemed that what was proposed was
merely to make the Connexional Committees a part of the Con-
ference. (No, no.) That was what it amounted to. Mr. Watsford’s
argument from the ignorance of laymen concerning ministers
applied with equal force to the present system of invitations.
He believed that when the laymen came to know the practical
difficulties of stationing, their sympathies would be excited and
these difficulties would be greatly relieved.


Mr. Millard opposed any further concessions to the laity.
There were some members of the Conference who were rushing 1
with blindfold fury on destruction.
Mr. Rigg said the laity were better represented by the min-
isters than they could be by themselves. To admit them to the
stationing was more than the laymen themselves wanted. He
{Mr. Rigg) would never have entered the Methodist ministry on
such terms. Some in that Conference seemed determined to go
the whole length of the New Connection. The next thing to be
demanded would be that a committee should make the circuit
plan, and so, in effect, put the ministerial office into commission.
It had been said that the Church owed everything to the laity.
It would be as fair to say it owed everything to the ministry.
They were compelled now to say things in the Stationing Com-
mittee which never could be said in the presence of the laity.
In New Zealand there was no desire amongst the laity for the
concession proposed. At the Auckland Conference laymen told
him that the best thing was to leave the stationing in the hands
of the ministers.
Mr. Morley thought the question was not what this or that
man had said outside, but what was right in itself. He did not
want to rush in the matter. He felt its extreme gravity and
that feeling led him to advocate the striking out of the reservation.
Mr. Watsford had spoken of the heart-burnings and other evils to
be expected if this were done. But were there no heart-burnings
now ? Often, through the violent protest* of circuits against the
appointments made, affairs at the end of Conference were in the
utmost confusion. (“ No, no!”) He asserted that it was so.
As to the ignorance of the laymen about ministers, he thought
they knew as much about them as the ministers themselves. The
laymen likely to come to Conference were reasonable men, able to
make a fair estimate on every question that might arise. It had
been said that the effect of allowing them a part in stationing,
would be that certain ministers would obtain a monopoly of city
circuits. He thought that they should allow natural selection to
operate. Men suitable for cities would be appointed to them
under any system. He thought that laymen would be found more
conservative of ministerial rights than the ministers themselves.
At present they suffered because the laymen did not know the
difficulties of stationing. It had been said that it would be diffi-
cult to speak freely about the relative merits of ministers in the
presence of laymen. But it would be better to do that than to
receive such telegrams as were commonly sent from the circuits
to the Stationing Committee. What had to be said by the laymen
had better be said by them in the presence of the ministers con-
cerned.
Mr. Fletcher would oppose the amendment. As ministers they


had a greater stake in the annual appointments than the people.
The spiritual interests of the people were involved, but in the
case of the ministers domestic interests as well. Possibly some
advantage was given to the ministers by leaving the stationing
in their hands, but there was no injustice in that. The advantage
was balanced and held in check by a very powerful public opinion
He hoped, notwithstanding the remarks made to that effect, that
lay representation would not be a sham. (Hear, hear.) If at
the first Conference it was found to be so, further concessions
would be made, but the time for them had not yet come.
Mr. Reid said that the ministers were to be regarded as repre-
senting themselves, and the laymen the circuits. Both were
necessary in making appointments. The loyalty and conscien-
tiousness of the laymen were equal to their own. It had been said
that laymen would overlook Connexional interests, and consider
only their own circuits. But the ministers also had personal in-
terests. Could they alone arrive at just and sound conclusions ?
Every interest involved should be represented. Had they the
right to exclude the laymen ? He held that such exclusion was
wrong in principle, and could not commend itself to an unpreju-
diced judgment. If this right were withheld from the people, he
was somewhat consoled by the reflection that lay representation
would in the end prove no sham, since laymen were to come into
Conference, and would sooner or later secure their rights. But
be would like to anticipate what they will do when admitted.
The laymen would by and by drag from them by the strong hand
what should never have been withheld. (Hear, hear.)
The amendment was negatived, and the reservation carried by
25 to 10.
GENERAL CONFERENCE.
THE Conference proceeded to the consideration of that part of the Plan
which related to the powers of the General Conference. It was agreed
that the General Conference should be composed of equal numbers of minis-
ters and laymen, to he elected in a certain proportion by the several Annual
Conferences. Then followed another sharp debate upon a series of clauses
which provided that the General Conference should not have power to alter
the present system of itinerancy, to revoke the Rules of the Societies, to do
away with the class-meeting test of membership, or to change the doctrinal
basis of the Church. The New Zealand Conference recommended that
these clauses should be struck out.
Mr. Eggleston said that the New Zealand recommendations
were revolutionary. As an example he referred to the proposal
to remodel the class-meeting, which, if carried into effect, would
practically be to annihilate it.
Mr. Fitchett said that the view of the New Zealand Conference
was that these reservations amounted to a proclamation that “ we
are the people, and wisdom will die with us.” It was a declara-
tion that finality had been reached, and that further progress was
either impossible or undesirable. The central principle of Meth-


odism as an organisation was freedom of adaptation to changing
conditions. To stereotype it whilst circumstances were in con-
stant flux and change would he to kill it. He asked the Confer-
ence to consider what would have been the result if any earlier
generation of Methodists had succeeded in stereotyping Meth-
odism. If Wesley had done it they would not have been minist-
ers ; if his immediate successors had done it, they would not have
been a Church ; if Dr. Bunting and his contemporaries had done
it, they would never have had lay representation. (Hear, hear.)
Moreover, this attempt to tie the hands of the General Conference
was a distinct vote of want of confidence in laymen. The present
General Conference, composed of ministers alone, had these pow-
ers, but as soon as laymen were admitted they were to be taken
away. He contended that they had as much reason to believe in
the loyalty of future Conferences to Methodist principles as in
their own.
Mr. Gaud pointed out that they were binding themselves as
well as the laymen.
Mr. Wells said that in the constitution of the Methodist
Episcopal Church they had these reservations, and others still
more stringent.
Mr. Symons said they were merely putting into the Constitution
what was already provided for in the Poll Deed. (“ No, no.”)
That deed was found to be worthless, and a new one would have
to be prepared. It was necessary, therefore, to set these matters
forth in the Constitution.
The reservations proposed were all affirmed by large majorities with the
exception of that relating to the class-meeting, which was postponed in order
that a resolution in favor of the recognition of communicants, of which notice
had been given by Mr. Quick, might first be considered. This brought the
long business to an end; and after some verbal alterations had been made, it
Avas agreed that the plan of Lay Representation as adopted should come into
operation in the several colonies as soon as it is known that the British Con-
ference has not disallowed it.
Before, however, the Conference had got its scheme fairly complete, the
mutterings of discontent outside, which had been audible all through, devel-
oped into articulate protest. A memorial was presented, signed by 76
officers and members of the Church at Ballarat, complaining of the restrictions
by which lay representation was to be hampered, and urging the Conference
to devise more liberal things. The memorial was received, and a reply duly
sent, iu which the Conference remonstrated with the remonstrants, and urged
them to cultivate the virtue of contentment. What came of this advice may
be learned from the report of a meeting held at Ballarat, which we publish
in another column.
Prank Pinkerton’s Steam Print, Ballarat.




. " In |4M 1)9 »


THE BALLARAT TOWN MISSION.
As the Ballarat Town Mission will hold its annual
meeting on Monday next, a few words about its his-
tory, constitution, and work, may interest subscribers,
and at the same time awaken a still greater desire for
its welfare. There is no difficulty in showing it to be
worthy of the practical sympathy of all classes,, since
its leading object is to extend help, consolation, and
counsel to the destitute, sorrowful, and wayward,
quite irrespective of creed or color. Bespeotability,
nationally, and high-falutin notions have no value in
this concern; indeed the lower in the social scale the
outcast is, the better the case. The more friendless
the gutter child, the more necessity is seen for friendly
oversight. The dying despised, the naked poor,
fatherless waifs, “ run-in” vagrants, andheart-bruken
widows are all alike viewed as proper objects for
mission influence and attention—to perform which
delightful duty there is a small army of cheer ul
toilers, who feel themselves ampiy repaid in realising,
with Burns, that
“ Affliction’s sons are brothers in distress :
A brother to relieve—how exquisite the blis !”
When Knickerbocker commenced his famous history
of Hew York (says the Eev. 0. H. Spurgeon), he felt
it essential to begin with the creation of tne world.
Luckily for me, there Is no such necessity ia the
present instance. Hor am I troubled about the
exactions of vain-glorious claimants belonging to the
large—and, I think, increasing-family of JDio-
trephes, but have to deal with plain humble men,
who in honor prefer one anotner. No flou.ish
of trumpets announced the Mission’s advent. Its
promoters were unsung and unknown. It was
born, so to speak, in lanes and bye-ways, cradled in
gutters and back slums, and ultimately struggled into
positive existence after an incubation of three or four
years by becoming organised on the 29th March,
1870, since which date it has been governed by a com-
mittee made up of representatives from various
Christian churches in onr midst, and elected annually
fey the subscribers. The details are concisely ihese:
About the year 1866 a few Uhristian men and women,
including Mr Matthew Morgan, Mr Costlet, Mr Etchells,
Mr Jones, Mr Hash, Mr Oostain, Miss Kitch.n,
Mrs Whitriok, and Mrs Burton formed them-
selves into s band of worke.s, Mr Morgan and
others taking their stand on Sunday afternoons in the
lower part of Esmond street to try and check the current
of vice which was then at full blast, to stay the pro -
gress of hydra-headed sin, and to offer friendly ad-
vice to the thoughtless and reckless, who at that time
held on the Sabbath a kind of bacchanalia. To suc-
cessfully prosecute the work, a meeting-room was
needed, to meet which emergency the common-school
building in Esmond street south was hired from the
Ballarat East Town Council at a nominal rental, until
in January, 1868, Mr Morgan purchased it for £3O, and
in his generous way handed it over to the mission.
Subsequently the materials were used up in adding a
vestry to the present ball in Eureka street. These
men, as stated, bravely kept the cause alive by taking
up their cross—preaching Christ in Esmond street,
the market sheds (the present site of the Mission Eall),
and elsewhere enduring “ hardness,” occasional scoffs
and inconveniences, the expected and usual outcome
of daring to enter upon Satan’s preserves. The little
band certainly demonstrated to the world that it
was not of “ such stuff as dreams are made off,”
but rather of something akin to that devotion
and endurance which signalised the defence of Ther-
mopylae. There was no “ hanging their harps on
the willows” at the first non-success. Ho, they were
united and persevering, so that success followed, until
they resigned their trust into the hands of a com-
mittee of management elected, as before stated, on
2Sth March, 1870, consisting of “ Messrs Smith,
Savage, Saoh, Trease, Buttimer, Gribble, and Wain,
with p® sver to add to their number,” when a few simple
rules were agreed to for the guidance of what was
then known as the Open-air Mission.
In this way matters continued till the 10th Novem-
ber, 1871, when a large meeting of ministers (whose
active identification was now solicited) and laymen
was held in the Prince’e-room at the Alfred Hall,
“ for the purpose of discussing and adopting such
means as would enable the society to maintain an
efficient missionary for this important work.” This
action, which gave a great impetus to the Ballarat
United Town Mission, as it was now designated, re-
sulted in the happy selection of our present missionary,
Mr Martin Hosking, on the 9th Eebrnary, 1872, at a
weekly salary of £2 10s. The mission friends con-
tinued to preach in buildings of assorted shapes and
sizes, including an “ upper room,” an iron store, the
Circassian cafe, Star of the East lodge-room, lent or
hired for the purpose ; sometimes from the saddle of
Mr Morgan’s well-known grey Bess, and very fre-
quently al fresco in Nature’s church elsewhere, whose
covering is said to be “ a celestial canopy of divers
colors.” This nomadic life had its obvions disadvan
tages, and a permanent citadel as a centre for action
was felt to be a positive necessity, so that our friends
again put their shoulders to the wheel, purchased and
removed the Bose Hill Wesleyan Chapel in June,
1874, and re-erected it at a total outlay of £lco, which
building was auspiciously opened by Mr Matthew
Burnett, that generalissimo of home missions, and
who may be regarded as the father of the mission
since its origin was the immediate result ©I his three
weeks’ services in the old Charlie Napier. So much
for the history of the present organisation, which,
with all its defects, is the better from the fact that it is
the outcome of necessity and experience, and not of
Jiseory.
FROM THE BALLARAT COURIER, APRIL
In reviewing the work of the Mission, I may say it
gives one the heartache to see the squalid misery
and undisguised immorality among so many, young and
old, the outcome of the violation of moral laws If
anyone doubts the existence of this depravity, let him
take a tu n round with the town missionary, or inter-
view that most obliging of police sergeaits and helper
in mission work, Mr Lamer, and he will find, without
the aid of an Aesop’s midday lantern, enough material
for a Tenier’s brush or a Hogarth’s pencil, or sufficient
to enable him to endorse without hesitation Pope’s
couplet—
“ Vice is a mon-ter of so frightful mien,
As to be hated needs but to be seen.”
And here let me note that my remarks apply to Bal-
larat i ast only. Were they to extend to'the West, I
fear as bad things would have to be written against
it,, for I have reason to b lieve that prostitution, like
larrikmism, now abounds as much in the City as in
the Town, that in the City being of a more insidious
kind, since living by concealment, and affect-
gentility, it traps the unwary, and suits
those who would be ashamed to be seen in Esmond
stieec, where everything fortunately appears on the
surface, ard where the devil does not present vice in
quite so artful a shape. Of these unfortunates I need
hardly say the procuress is the vilest, and should be
rooted out bag and baggage, but for her victims, and
others who have left tneir homes from bad training
harsh treatment, or an evil tendency, reasonable con-
sideration should be offered that they may find a fair
opportunity of retracing their steps, as in numerous
Oises they are “ more sinned against than sinning ”
many being what theyaie through no other fault of
their own than that of having had misplaced con-
fidence in the vile seducer or viler deserter, the real
culprits being oftimes _either unknown and behind
the scenes, or by virtue of their money and
influence protected, yes, and fostered too, by
society or a section of it which is sometimes cen-
sorious and virtuous enough to break down the
bridge by which the guilty ones might return
and damn their frail sisters, forgetting that “Sweet
mercy is nobidty’s true badge,” and thus it comes
aoout that blushes to fee that u Justice is lame
as jwell as blind among us.” The missionary, his
assistants, and the police have successfully checked
the spread of this plague-spot as far as the Europeans
are concerned, but not as regards the Chinese. " The
missionary’s humanity is uniformly appreciated, and
he like another “Joshua Davidson,” is often success-
ful in reclaiming an erring Magdalene, and In in-
ducing her to return to the guide of her youth or to a
home at the refuge. Of course many are without
douot wanton, hardened, and seemingly beyond the
reach of kinaness and the pale of redemption, and as
impossible to reclaim as to wash a. blackamoor white
Domiciliary visits, tract and Bible distribution among
the fallen are as a whole beneficial; so are occasional
free suppers, which, did funds permit, would be made
more frequent. As a single instance among many
done dy the latter, X may mention that an “ unfortu-
nate,” far advanced in vice, attended one ©f these
gatherings a short lime ago, and afterwards confessed
she could never shake off the influence of that meet-
ing, nor quiet the voice of conscience. She sin oe died at
a public institution, and by her bedside was found after
death the good old book, the Bible, with turned down
leaves that her soul had evidently drawn comfort
from as it approached the boundary of the invisible.
In this and other ways are found evidences of p-ood
done.
Other abominations in onr midst are Chinese im-
morality and gambling, and present a big field for
police and mission enterprise. It seems like tempting
Providence to permit the baser of these Mongolians to
colonise and band together in their wretched hovels
in the Camp as they do, setting at defiance the
social laws _ which knit the bulk of English
society together, and to exist like a harmful ex-
cresoene spreading vice-tainted malaria all around.
Why are they not compelled to bring their wives and
families, instead af being permitted to carry shame
and misery, by means of their disgusting pagan in-
stincts, to the firesides of so many European homes P
Their contrivances, which are almost reduced to a
science, for securing young females are infamous.
Their opium-smoking dens with terraced bunks are a
scandal on respectable society. They are undisguised
opponents oi social progress and the current of com-
mei oial advancement,and need displacing as much as do
the “Bitch, and Seven Pups’’’-the dangerous hidden
rocks of the Murray river ; and no system or efforts
oi morality will ever succeed in that part of Ballarat
until such is accomplished, or until they are made to
have some respect for decency. To tolerate their
existence in its present aspect is like propagating
cholera morbus. Sanitory and social conditions should
be enforced with Plutarchan energy, with the alterna-
tive of leaving the country whose religion and laws
they scorn, and of returning to their Canton “ flower
boats” and other Celestial sinks of iniquity. Then we
would deal with the root of this growing* evil—the
spring of this increasing vice—and not waste money
and energy in trying to sweeten the waters away from
their source, and thoughtlessly exhibit ourselves as
the vainly-toiling Lanaides of modern days.
Turning from the vice of prostitution to that of
gambling, which the missionary in his peregrinations
meets with in its many aspects, I may say that among
the Chinese is very harmful to public morals, and
especially to the youth of town and city. It is no
uncommon thing to see, on all nighls of the week,
Sundays not excepted, numbers of Chinese and
1877.
European nondescripts staking at the tables their
hard-earned or ill-gotten money, showing themselves
to be good imitators of the vices of the descendants of
Confucius, but not of the virtues of that distinguished
sage. Would to heaven the youth of this town ceased
these fascinating practices, so blasting in their results
to themselves and conm ctions ; for many, too late, by
bitter experience have realised the fact that
“ Gaming, that direst felon of the breast,
Steals more than fortune from its wretched thrall,
Spreads o’er the soul the most devouring pest,
And gnaws, and rots, and taints, and rums all.”
It is a vice more deadly, i believe, in consequences
and general in practice than hard drinking; and, as
far as the Chinese are concerned, must sooner or later
receive legislative attention, for the epen, barefaced
gambling on Sundays and week days cannot be much
longer tolerated. Let the novice pause an in-
stant, and consider what Cumberland says on
the subject. 1 say novice, because it is
almost hopeless to address the hardened game-
ster, whoso volition is manacled hard and fast as
ever was lie Quincy’s opium-eater. “ 1 look” (says
he) “ upon every man a suicide the moment he lakes
a dice box in his hand, and ail that follows in his
career from that fatal moment is only sharpening the
dagger before he strikes it to his heart.” The fan-tan
is an il.egal and proscribed game put down by the
authorities. Tor it a game has been substituted,
called Dowdell, and so resembles the former in effect
as to make it very lijse a distinction without a differ-
ence. Like all such questionable proceedings, the
chances are calculated vastly against the investor and
in favor of the bank.
Our Sunday-school is directed by the indefatigable
Mr Whitehead, and is a flourishing feature in the
Mission organisation. There are on the books
twenty-four teachers and officers and 260 scholars—
the number of wnom might be largely increased were
there more accommodation. As it is, much incon-
venience is felt from the over-crowded state of the
building. Like young people generally, the school-
folk are much given to singing, which is greatly
encouraged and cultivated, lor thereby pretty and
effective sacred songs are sung, and me Gospel
preached in many a dissipated blighted home, result-
ing in the occasional reformation of some members of
the family. There are among the scholars about sixty
fatherless or deserted ones; and many others there
are who would be better off without such paternal
appendages, and of whom there is reason to believe
some in luture years will honor the Mission by illus-
trating, in good and useful lives, that
“Just as the twig is bent the tree’s inclined.”
There are other departments of usefulness too nu-
merous to enter into particulors about—such as the
crowded fortnightly Band of Hope meetings,thronged
Sabbath-day preaching services in the hail and “ way-
side,” exhortations without, house to house visitation,
Young Men’s Debating Glass, Lorcas Society, ana
(during the winter months) Saturday night Iree enter-
tainments and popular lectures by well-known gentle-
men. In this way the mission may be regarded as a hive of
industry, each i ne having ana doing his allotted work,
Hot withstanding, there is plenty of employment left
for volunteers. Any willing to do and receive good
will be warmly welcomed and speedily inducted into a
field of usefulness.
Can it be then doubted that this cause, founded as
it is so largely on the broad basis of “ brotherly
love, relief, and truth,” is worthy the practical sym-
pathy of all classes, and is a good investment for
anyone’s charity. The indefatigable secretary, Mr
Bummerscales, the treasurer, or members of the com-
mittee would thankfully receive donations, which are
really much needed, anu which would be juoiciously
spent. The only salary paid is that of the worthy
missionary (his assistant, Mr Smith, being engaged
by a local and modest philanthropist), and which is at
a rate barely sufficient to keep body and soul together,
after satisfying tue numerous claims on his liberality,
for he has “ a Hand open as melting charity,” which, is
practical evidence to those he works among that his
labors are disinterested, and that, besides knowing well
how to pity, he illustrates the saying “ happy for him
to whom God has given enough with a sparing hand.”
He is the obliging servant ot the public, and is from
morn till night engaged in acts of mercy, and is oft at
midnight disturbed by importunate demands on behalf
ot the sick and dying. That the subscribers may
have a small conception of what they get for their
money, let me give a synopsis of one day’s work,
taken at random from his diary Tuesday, Saw
little Miss ; found her much better, purging
ceased, fever gone; gave her sufficient for beef tea.
Waited on widow about getting one of her chil-
dren into the Orphan Asylum. Hound Mr very
ill, severe pains; made and applied two mustard
plasters. Paid 10s for ——~’s maintenance. Solicited
and delivered four pairs boots and shoes. Attended
to ——.’s hand; washed it with diluted carbolic
acid and used my green ointment. Shaved Mr
-——’s head and applied a fly blister; prayed with
them all, asking uod’s blessing on my remedies.
Good Band of Hope meeting in the evening.”
Ho commission is paid on subscriptions collected, or
on anything else ; in fact no one is pecuniarily profited
by identification with the Mission, but rather very
much to the contrary.
In conclusion, let me say that the foregoing is not
written “ by authority,” but is the unofficial and inde-
pendent action of your correspondent. Lambda.


