

CHINA AND THE
FAR EASTERN QUESTION.
A Study in Political Geography
REV. DR. EITEL, M.A., Ph.D.
BEING
' A LECTURE
Delivered before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia (S.A. Branch),
The President, Mr. Robert Kyffin Thomas, in the Chair,
AT THE
STOW LECTURE HALL, ADELAIDE,
MONDAY JULY 2j, igoo.
ADELAIDE :
W. K. Thomas & Co., Grenfell Street.


Royal ißeographical Society of
Australasia.
The object of this Society is to diffuse a knowledge of
Geographical Science, the study of Physical Geography, and
especially the completion of the Geographical Exploration of
the unknown and imperfectly known parts of Australia ;
i. By Lectures given during the winter months by its
own members or by others competent to speak with
authority on the subjects considered;
2, By the collection in its Library of Geographical
Literature from all parts of the globe ;
3. By the publication from time to time of its Proceed-
ings, containing Reports of the principal Lectures.
The Annual Fee of 10s. 6d. entitles a Member of the
Society to daily access to the valuable Library at the rooms
in Pirie Street, which are open from 9.30 a.m. till 4 p.m.
As no charge is made to the public for admission to the
Lectures, and there are considerable expenses in carrying on
the operations of the Society, the Council earnestly ask for
the interest and co-operation of the public, who can effectively
forward the general aims of the Society by becoming Mem-
bers.
Adelaide,
3 State Bank Chambers,
Pirie Street.


CHINA AND THE
FAR EASTERN QUESTION.
A Study in Political Geography
REV. DR. EiTEL, M.A., PhD.
BEING
A LECTURE
Delivered before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia (S.A. Branch),
The President, Mr. Robert Kyffin Thomas, in the Chair,
AT THE
STOW LECTURE HALL, ADELAIDE,
MONDAY JULY 23, i 9 oo .
ADELAIDE :
W. K. Thomas & Co., Greheell Street.




Cl\ii\k kqd tl\e S<k£tefi\ Question.
£5 study in Politidkl Gj-eo^fkpl^y.
By the Rev. Dr. Eitel, M.A. Ph.D.
I have to thank the President and Council of the South Aus-
tralian branch of the Royal Geographical Society, for the honour
they have conferred on me, in requesting me to address the
Society once more on the subject of China. But I must repeat
what I told your Secretary, when he conveyed your invitation
to me, viz., that I do not feel competent to deal with the subject
of China, which the Council suggested, with the confidence of an
authority or expert. I have lived among the Chinese 35 years.
I have, all that time, been engaged in studying the language, the
literature and philosophy of ancient and modern China, but I
am neither geographer, nor politician, nor Chinese expert suffi-
ciently to teach the members of the Royal Geographical Society.
If 1 have learned anything at all in China, it is this, that we
Europeans, when we have learned of China all we can learn,
know after all very little, that is reliable, about the Chinese as
a people. The subject is inexhaustible. The difficulties are im-
mense. Their intellectual genius is different from ours ; their
moral temperament is different ; their civilization is different ;
their social organization is different. There is a mental, moral,
and social gulf, unbridged at present and perhaps unbridgeable,
between the Chinese on the one side and all European nations on
the other side—a gulf which makes a true, full, and accurate
understanding extremely difficult for both parties.
I make this confession of ignorance, not merely as a matter
of modesty, but particularly also to caution you not to judge the
Chinese nation and their doings without making due allowance
for the fact that we know very little about the inner workings
and motives of this strange people. In view of this imperfection
of our knowledge of China, I must likewise ask you to accept the
observations I am about to offer, as suggestions intended to
furnish matter for debate rather than a solution of that problem
in political geography which is involved in the subject of this
lecture, viz., China and the Far Eastern Question.
*i 6 3 53/r 9vog


The first point for consideration, therefore, is China, that is to
say, the country, the people, and the Government of that Central
Kingdom which poses before the world as the Celestial Empire.
From a Chinese point of view the territory of China Proper
forms the centre of the inhabited world, specially created and
designedly laid out by Providence as that part of the world where
the sun rises, that is to say as the focus, from which were to
radiate the concentrated luminous rays of civilization and good
government, that were to illumine the benighted barbarian coun-
tries in the remaining portions of the world. The central portion
of this favoured land, the country between the two great rivers
of China, the Hoang-Ho in the north and the Yang-tsze in the
south, forms the terrestrial reflex of the Milky Way in the
heavens. The five sacred mountain peaks of China are the
earthly counter-types of the five planets of the universe. The
Emperor of China is on earth what the sun is in the heavens, and
his officials are the stars of the mundane firmament. Now, for-
th e purpose of aiding the fulfilment of this great world-wide
mission, China was securely walled in on all sides by nature : by
the Pacific Ocean in the east, by chains of well-nigh impassable
mountains in the south and west, and by steppes and deserts
in the north, which latter boundary the First Emperor had to
supplement, by Heaven's command, by building in the north the
so-called Great Wall. Thus, say the Chinese, the very situation
assigned by Providence to China, as heaven’s vicegerent on earth,
emphasized the Divine injunction, that strict isolation, rigid ex-
clusiveness, was to be the primary law for China. Prom China,
as the central kingdom of the earth, were to go out all those
civilizing influences on which the weal of a benighted world
depended, but this centre of celestial light and government itself
was to be jealously guarded against any unhallowed intrusion of
influences emanating from the surrounding fringe of outer bar-
barians.
This is a view of political geography that may appear ridiculous
to most of you. And yet, I must say in passing, I have never yet
met a typical Englishman who had not virtually the same notions
regarding his own country, viz., that England is the centre of
the world’s civilization, that its insular position has, in God’s
Providence, made Great Britain what it is, determined the national
character, and given the Divine command to Britannia to rule
the waves. Be that as it may, to the Chinese mind at any rate,
it is perfectly reasonable to assume that, as the peculiarities of
the physical frame of each man determine, to a large extent, the
course and events of his life, so the geographical situation and
structure of their own country formed the leading elements in


the evolution and historic progress of their nation. To the Chinese
geographer, neither the heavenly bodies nor the earth are mere
dead matter, set in motion some how from without, but they are
all uniformly pervaded and carried on by the continuous force
of the vital breath of living nature : they are all working out
their several destinies, so much so, that the individual oceans,
rivers, mountain ranges, and so forth are in reality as many dis-
tinct organs of nature, each endowed with its own appropriate
functions, to be utilized by the nation in working out its destiny.
Thus China’s mission is to act as steward over the natural en-
dowments of the central kingdom, for the purpose of enlighten-
ing and governing the rest of the world, and jealously to guard
against desecration by the outer barbarians the sacred precincts
of the Celestial Empire. When, therefore, foreigners come and
knock at the gates of China in any other capacity than as loyal
tribute-bearers, or as humble seekers of light, it is a sacrilegious
violation and reversal of the fundamental laws of nature, which
touches the Chinese nation on the raw.
I have spoken of the country. Let me add a few words as to
the national characteristics of the people. When the ancestors
of the Chinese, some 5,000 years ago, first took possession of
this country, and entered upon their celestial mission, they
brought with them from Central Asia a peculiar politico-religious
system tinged with Semitic ideas, and based on the conception
that, what heaven is to the earth, that is the prince to his people,
the prince being both the son of heaven and the father of men.
To them the laws of nature formed the unwritten laws of the
State. According to this patriarchal way of thinking the Chinese
people are but children, minors under the perpetual tutorship
of their ruler. But we must not run away with the idea that this
curious patriarchal system, giving the ruler virtually Divine
authority, involved anything like that absolutism of autocratic
government which the European mind so readily associates with
the Divine right of kings. Far from it. If the law and con-
stitution of the State are but a transcript of the laws of nature,
it is equally criminal for the ruler as for the people under his
rule, to violate these laws. If it is a divinely imposed duty of
the people to obey the Government, that duty implies also, as
its natural corrollary, the divine right to be governed in accor-
dance with the mind of heaven. Right government evidences
itself, according to this Chinese system, by the happiness of the
people, flowing from the personal character of the ruler. Con-
versely, unhappiness of the people is a clear proof that the person
of the ruler has incurred the condemnation of Heaven. In such
a case it becomes then the divine duty of the people to depose


him unless he resigns. This divine right of rebellion, which is
plainly taught even in the elementary school books of China,
makes of course the ruler responsible to the people, and gives to
the constitution of the Empire a markedly democratic aspect.
But, while it exalts the people as a whole, it merges the indi-
vidual in the family, and the aggregate of families in the state,
to an extent which destroys the growth of individual self-con-
sciousness. This tendency to suppress individual spontaneous
activity, and to build up in place of it a loyal national conscious-
ness, is the leading element in the whole system of Chinese
education. This peculiar educational system seeks principally to
impress each scholar with a solemn sense of his own atomic in-
significance as but a mite in a grand scheme in which heaven
and earth, the state and the family are the only real factors ; a
scheme in which there is no room for individual rights or per-
sonal liberty ; a scheme in which originality is vice, in which
individuality is but a subordinate modest expression of filial piety
and loyalty. In short, self-abasement, coupled with reverence
for parents and elders, with submissive devotion and fidelity to
the State, is the whole duty of man in China.
As a natural result of this peculiar system of training in a
people isolated for thousands of years, we find the national mind
of China differs widely from the ways and habits of thought
common among European nations. The European mind,
sharpened by successive crossings of different nationalities, and
tutored by a variety of opposing philosophical systems, has
attained to a feverish state of intellectualism in thought, and to
a disintegrating condition of individualism in morals, entirely
foreign to the Chinese mind. The Chinese are mentally, morally,
and socially what they were 3,000 years ago. It is a case of
arrested development. The Chinese nation is a child whose
growth in mind and feeling has been stunted. But we must not
forget, that physiologically the grown-up man is really not any
more perfect than the child. The adult form ig not more highly
developed than the infantile form. From the point of view of
adaptation to environment, it is undoubtedly true that the grown-
up man is better fitted to make his way in the world, but from
a physiological point of view we witness in the adult, compared
with the child, anything but progress. Let us apply this com-
parison to the case of infantile China. Compared with European
nations the Chinese are on a low level of intellectual and moral
activity. True, but the Chinese are nevertheless not lacking in
brain power, nor in liveliness of conscience, and they excel
Europeans in muscularity. China is brimful of mental and moral
energy, a tremendous multitude of 250 millions of beings whose


muscles and sinews are toughened by toil, uncorrupted by drink,
unaffected even by opium, people whose nervous fibre and brain
is not lacerated by the European habit of living at high pressure.
It is true that the Chinese national character is weighed down
by a dead level of uniformity, that an outward maintenance of
traditional etiquette covers atrocious sins of Inward corruption
evidencing a very low level of morality. It is also true that the
universal reign of utilitarianism in China stifles the growth of
all ideal tendencies. But this defect of character is, to a large
extent, balanced by an assimilative power, by a strong organizing
instinct of co-operation, by a national feeling of clannishness,
which gives to the Chinese nation its cohesiveness, and enables
the Chinese, wherever they be, to present a united front against
opponents. It is owing to this force that the 250 millions of
Chinese are all one compact coherent organism. The individual
is nothing. The family is the unit of society. And the families
and clans of China are all bound together by the one creed of
their ancestors, by the oneness of blood and descent, by the unity
of language, literature, feeling, and thought. They have no
patriotism in our sense of the word, but they have a strong sense,,
sadly wanting in Europeans, a sense of corporate unity and cor-
porate responsibility. They care not who rules them, provided
they can believe that their ruler is appointed by Heaven’s decree,,
but they hang together by joints and bands which defy misrule
and tyranny. Their country has been invaded and overrun by
almost every nation of Eastern Asia, but, bending meekly under
the rule of the invaders, the Chinese nation has in each case
swallowed up and assimilated their foreign rulers, and remained
integrally one as before. Apart from the Jews there is not
another nation in the wmrld that has preserved its homogeneity
unimpaired for the last 3,000 years, as China has done by mere
passive resistance. Compared with China every existing nation
on earth is but of mushroom growth. That singular isolation,
that passive exclusiveness, and that very want of heterogeneity
which constitute the principal characteristics of Chinese na-
tional life, has been the cause of the apparent atrophy, of the
stunted growth, of the arrested development of the nation. But
it is not a case of decrepitude. There is no corruption of the
vitals of the nation. However corrupt its officialdom, admini-
stration and executive government may be, the nation itself is.
sound to the core.
That the mass of the people is in a healthy condition, abound-
ing in life and vigour, is evidenced by that assiduous persistence
in labour, combined with a minute fidelity in details, which forms
such a strong contrast between the European and Chinese work-


iug man. It is true that this passion for work deprives the
Chinaman of all sense for the poetry and refinements of life. It
is true that this absorption in details prevents his attaining to
any originality of inventive thought. But this character trait of
plodding industry has largely contributed to make China the one
great nation in the world which, after outgrowing the nomadic
and the purely agricultural stage, has reached the industrial
stage, and has hitherto remained there content, refusing until
quite lately to enter the next stage, in which all European nations
that now thunder at the gates of China are entangled—that of
militarism. And, mark my words, the Chinese are not far wrong
if they regard this boasted glory of European civilization, this
rampant militarism of ours, as the commencement of degene-
racy, as a return to barbarism.
I have given you my thoughts about the Chinese people. I
will add a brief sketch of their recent political history. The last
native Chinese dynasty, called Ming, that ruled the destinies of
the Celestial Kingdom collapsed in the year 1644. Since that
time China’s millions and her tributary States have been
governed by Manchus. The successive reigns of nine Manchu
sovereigns cover the whole of this long period of 256 years, for
the reigns of two of them exceeded in duration even the reign
of Her Majesty Queen Victoria. This Manchu dynasty, named
Tsing, has successfully maintained its hold upon the Chinese
nation through continued collisions of central and local interests.
Introduced by native feuds, the Manchus obtained the mastery
by playing off one political party in China against the other,
by accommodating their policy to the sway of the leading prin-
ciples of the Chinese body politic and by organizing the best
possible form of government, by means of an equitable division
of all the higher offices between the two races, Manchu and
Chinese, and by a wise treatment of all traditional Chinese cus-
toms and titles. Becoming thus thoroughly Chinese, as regards
their mode of governing, while retaining in the privacy of their
own homes distinctly non-Chinese, i.e., foreign habits of life,
the Manchu rulers, supported by Manchu garrisons located in
the centre of every large city in the Empire, rapidly pacified the
conquered empire and successively consolidated the State. Never-
theless, throughout this whole period of 256 years of stable
government, the Chinese Empire has never been free one single
decade from local disturbances and rebellious upheavals, fomented
by an irrepressible network of secret societies, which would have
been the ruin of any Empire of less cohesive power. But the re-
markable thing is that these rebellions and secret associations,
which continually assailed the Manchu government, never aimed


at a change in the political constitution, never sought national
disunion. All they strove for was to substitute a Chinese for
the Manchu ruler, but not to abolish imperialism. On the occa-
sion of the last rebellion the rebels had for years almost entire
possession of the southern half of the Empire, and the leader
of the Taiping rebels had already established his throne in the
central part of China, in the ancient capital of the Empire, at
Nanking, in the year 1852, when, through European interference,
the Manchu dynasty was saved from its plainly impending doom.
It Avas chiefly through the help given to the Imperialists by
General Gordon and his Ever-Yietorious Army, a composite force
consisting of foreigners of all nationalities, that the Taiping re-
bellion was suppressed. There was at that time a conflict of
opinion among Europeans in China. The missionaries looked
upon the Taiping rebellion as the means of the regeneration of
China. The European merchants saw in the Taiping rebel-
lion only an unbearable interference with trade, and accord-
ingly they petitioned their respective Governments to dis
countenance the rebels and to support the Manchus. General
Gordon, subsequently, regretted his share in the transaction,
as he told me himself, and declared that he had come to the
conclusion that the Manchu Government is the ruin of China.
But this European interference with a popular revolution has
worked irreparable mischief. The opium Avar of 1841, the treaty
of Nanking forced upon China at the point of the bayonet in 1843,
the Arrow War of 1856, the North China War of 1859 including
the capture of Peking and the Tientsin Treaty of 1860, and the
opening of an increased number of maritime ports to foreign
trade, all might have been forgotten and forgiven by a long-
suffering nation. But the defeat of the national cause through
the suppression, by European arms, of the Taiping rebellion, con-
tinued to rankle incessantly in the breast of all Chinese patriots
and filled the national mind Avith increased hatred against all
foreigners, whether merchants or missionaries, as impious poli-
tical agitators and mischief-makers, Avantonly interfering AA T ith
China’s sacred law of isolation.
While the European poAvers, by countenancing the Manchus in
preference to the Taiping rebels, drew upon all foreigners in
China the wrath of the Chinese nation, and especially of the
secret societies, the Manchu Government showed no gratitude
whatever for the saving hand extended to them in their hour
of peril. On the contrary, recourse to arms aauis necessary, and
Peking had to be occupied by an Anglo-French force, merely to
induce the Manchus to abide by their treaty stipulations. Now,
Avheu on that occasion, in the year 1860, the Emperor Hien Fung


fled from Peking, and died shortly afterwards, in 1861, a remark-
able woman came to the front, who is at the present day more
talked of than any one else in China. Possessed of the most
cunning duplicity and of a wonderfully strong will, she has, ever
since 1861, directly or indirectly, guided the affairs of State, and,
until the present moment, with apparent success, and so far with
personal impunity, carried on the old Manchu game of devilry,
playing off one Chinese political party against the other, and work-
ing upon the mutual jealousies of the several European Powers,
to set them at loggerheads one with the other, on the principle of
“ divide et impera.” I mean that august lady, who so amiably
accepted the present of a Bible and who is chiefly responsible
for the Peking Massacre and its unspeakable horrors, that terror
in petticoats, the Empress Dowager Tszu Hsi. The history of
Peking politics since the last forty years is her history. In that
political crisis of 1860 and 1861 it was this redoubtable woman
who, in concert with the widow of the Emperor Hien Fung, and
assisted by the latter’s brother, Prince Kung, effected a brilliant
coup d’etat, by which the two ladies became joint Empresses
Regent, with Prince Kung as Prime Minister, while the infant
sou of the famous Dowager Empress, Tszu Hsi, was proclaimed
heir to the dragon throne under the style of Tung Chih. It was
under her government that the notorious Tientsin massacre, the
gentle prelude of the recent blood bath of Peking, occurred in
1870. She succeeded in glossing it over, sent Ambassadors to
Europe and America, and pretended to be favourable to European
intercourse with China. When Tung Chih attained to majority,
she nominally permitted him to assume the government, and
when thereupon the foreign Ambassadors clamoured for an Im-
perial audience, she allowed them to make their humble obeisances
to the Son of Heaven—her son, you understand—but significantly
appointed as the scene of this farcical ceremony a hall outside the
palace usually employed for the reception of tributaries. Shortly
afterwards her son, the quasi-Emperor Tung Chih, was induced
to declare himself too ill to continue the onerous duties of govern-
ment, and to request the Dowager Empresses to resume the
regency. The ex-Emperor conveniently died in 1875, and his con-
sort, who was pregnant, disappeared also, nobody daring to say
how she and her child came to their death. The two Empresses
Regent selected thereupon once more an infant, a child of Prince
Chun, who is a younger brother of Prince Kung, called Tsai Tien,
born in 1871, and proclaimed him heir to the throne under the style
of Kuang Hsu, in the year 1875. But the cunning Empresses
secured their lease of the regency this time not merely by the
selection of an infant, but of one who should have a flaw in his


title, a flaw which would at any time afford a convenient handle
to revoke his claim to the throne. Kuang Hsii being like Tung
Chili a nephew of the former Emperor Hien Fung, and therefore
of the same generation as Tung Chih, could not, under the laws
of Chinese ancestral worship, offer the needful sacrifices to the
spirit of his deceased predecessor, Tung Chih. But the latter’s
eternal rest and the fortunes of the dynasty depend upon these
sacrifices, which, however, can only be offered by one of a
younger generation. Accordingly Kuang Hsfi could not, with per-
fect legality, act as successor to Tung Chih. In 1881 the widow
of the Emperor Hien Fung died, and left the Dowager Empress,
Tszu Hsi, sole regent. When Kuang Hsii came of age, in 1889,
she allowed him nominally to ascend the throne. She also
granted to the foreign Ambassadors an Imperial audience, but
again coupled it with the infliction of an admixture of humilia-
tion. When Kuang Hsii showed a strong inclination to favour
reform and to make friends with European Powers, the Dowager
Empress tightened her hold upon the reins of government, which
she had virtually retained in her hands all along. In 1894 and
1895 the Manchu Government forfeited the respect of the nation
at large by the crushing defeat of the Chinese army in the war
with Japan. Secret societies, aiming at the subversion of the
Manchu dynasty, under the pretext of seeking to expel all
foreigners from China, now sprung up like mushrooms in all parts
of the Empire, and a cry for reform resounded from one end of
China to the other. But the courage of the Dowager Empress
defied the coming storm. In September, 1898, she broke up the
reform party which had gathered around the young Emperor,
and its members were executed or banished. From that time the
Emperor Kuang Hsii practically ceased to reign. He was declared
to be ill. In December, 1899, the Dowager Empress produced a
document signed by the Emperor in which he requested her to
relieve him of the care of the government. It is said that the
Emperor voluntarily signed that document, after he had in vain
appealed to several European Powers to rescue him from the
clutches of the Dowager Empress. But Peking rumours are
not reliable. As a matter of fact, the Dowager Empress formally
resumed the regency in January last, and on 25th February she
once more resorted to her favourite trick of selecting a minor as
heir-apparent to the throne, who is to be the successor of Tung
Chih. Her choice, which was forthwith ratified by the Imperial
clan, fell on a youth said to be 13 years old, called Pu Chun,
a grandson of Prince Tun, the fifth sou of Hien Fung’s predecessor
(the Emperor Tao Kwang). The Dowager Empress made this
move on the plea that Kwang Hsii had no son (as yet), and that


Tung Chib must have some one to offer sacrifices to his spirit ;
but it is plain that this measure once more gives the Dowager
Empress a legal renewal of her lease of the regency. The more
recent events are known to you.
Having thus given you my views of China, its country, its
people, and its present government, so far as it was necessary
to lead up to the consideration of the second half of my subject,
viz., the Far Eastern Question, I think I have already indicated
by my foregoing remarks what, in my opinion, the kernel of
the Far Eastern Question really is. The Far Eastern Question,
as I understand it, is in its main point not one that any particular
individual has propounded, nor a question that has accidentally
cropped up ; but it is a question which the whole history of the
relations of China with foreign nations has continually brought
forward, viz., the question, which on the Chinese side is this—
What right have you foreigners to demand that China shall sur-
render that isolation by which she has become great ? All other
questions are but derivative or supplementary to this, which is
the root and matter of the w’hole problem as I understand it.
China’s claim to the right of isolation, and its endeavour to
justify its pretended exclusiveness, on the ground of natural laws,
goes for nothing. All nations are, as much as China, stewards
over the natural endowments of their respective countries, and
their character, their mission, their destinies are also determined
by the same natural law which operates in China. Bach nation
has, as much as China, the sacred duty to safeguard the palladmm
of its own peculiar national character, and to illumine, by its
own specific achievements in culture, all surrounding countries.
But the point is that the very law of nature, on which the
Chinese base their claim to isolation, is a law of impartial uni-
versality. According to the same law of nature which forbids
an individual in China to stand alone, and consolidates the
Chinese tribes and clans in one nation, all the individual nations
are prohibited from standing aloof from each other, and are, by
instinct as well as by necessity, tending to become more and more
an organized confederacy of nations, for the benefit of the general
interests of humanity. China’s wilful isolation and pretended
exclusiveness is, in reality, the grossest violation of that primary
law of humanity to which the Chinese appeal.
But look at the facts of the ease historically, and you will see
that the whole talk of isolation and exclusiveness is a mere
fiction. The desire was all along there, but the reality nowhere.
Not only has China from the beginning of its history gone outside
its natural and artificial walls of isolation, overpowered Corea,
given its civilization to ancient Japan, conquered and fleeced Man-


'•churia, Mongolia, Tartary, Turkestan, and Tibet, but it has from
■the most ancient times carried on trade relations across the China
Sea with Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and Further India, yea, with
the old Roman Empire. Not only has China for many centuries
in the past sent hordes of emigrants and settlers to Cochin China,
Siam, and Burmah, but it has, in the seventeenth century
especially, as of late, again and again sent, through Central Asia
as well as by sea, the black death, bubonic plague to Europe,
for the plague bacillus has its original habitat in China’s filth.
Talk of exclusiveness, when China sent to India 1,700 years ago
for teachers of Buddhism, and established numbers of Sanskrit
•Colleges and monasteries full of Indian priests, from the sixth
to the ninth century in all parts of the country ! Go to-day to
the Temple of the Five-hundred Gods in Canton, or to the Lama
Temple in Peking, imitations of which you find in every large
'city in China, and you will see, among the portrait statues there,
a goodly number of foreign saints, Indian and Tibetan, idolized
by the common Chinese people. No, the Chinese have never been
really isolated. They have never been truly exclusive except
in the sense of exclusive devotion to their own interests, always
ready to abandon their isolation when, and so far as, they could
profit by it. They have always welcomed embassies from abroad
when they came as tribute bearers. They admitted a Jewish
■colony ages ago. They recognized Nestorian Christians more
than a thousand years ago. They embraced Mohammedanism to
a very large extent in South-Western China. They received
with open arms the Jesuit missionaries because they tacitly
admitted China’s claim to universal suzerainty, and the Chinese
treated the Jesuits w r ell so long as they consented to cast canons
for them, to survey the empire trigonometrically, to regulate the
calendar, to teach astronomy and mathematics, and to foretell
eclipses for the benefit of the Peking Board of Astronomy. The
Manchu Emperor Kanghi invited foreign trade to Amoy and
TFoochow. His successors systematically encouraged foreign trade
at Canton, and even the so-called opium trade which, for centuries
before that time, had been carried on by Chinese caravans through
Tibet. The Chinese imperial officials at Canton used every means
in their power to further European trade, so long as foreign mer-
chants would submit to the most degrading tyrannies, and pay
exorbitant secret bribes to the individual mandarins, over and
above the customary tariff duties. Things went on well enough
as long as the East India Company submitted to this system of
corruption, and claimed no exterritorial jurisdiction. But further
I ask, has not in more recent times, the Chinese Government per-
mitted and virtually sanctioned the emigration of Chinese to the


Straits Settlements, to the United States, to Australia ? Has not
the Chinese Government sent embassies to every great foreign
Power in the world, claimed and unfortunately obtained admis-
sion into the comity of nations, as if China were a civilized Power
itself ? Has not the whole Chinese nation recognized as the
greatest financial benefit ever secured in China, the establishment
of the imperial maritime customs service under English direction?'
Has not of late China gone again and again into the money
markets of Europe and borrowed large sums for the benefit of
the national exchequer on the security of those customs returns ?
Has not China engaged large numbers of foreign drill instructors
to organize an army and navy on the European model ? Has
not China found it impossible to build its railways otherwise than
by means of foreign capital, because native capitalists have not
sufficient confidence in the honesty and stability of their own
government to make those advances ? Has not China again and
again thankfully received foreign charity on the occasions of
dire famine in North China ? I feel sure I need not add another
word to secure your approval of my contention that China’s,
claim to isolation is a mere subterfuge of mean selfishness, with-
out any foundation in natural law or in the facts of history.
But then the Far Eastern Question confronts us with the-
demand to explain why the Chinese, if they really after all seek
for their own selfish interests intercourse with foreign nations,
are so full of hatred against all foreigners whatever. For the
Boxer movement and the latest bloody events in Peking and in
other parts of China are a clear symptom of a deep-seated wrath-
ful animosity of a large part of the Chinese nation against all
foreigners, ambassadors, officials, merchants, and missionaries,,
without any discrimination. I have already indicated in my re-
marks on the character of the Chinese people and on the policy
of the Manchu Government the principal causes which pro-
duced this bitter feeling of Chinese patriots against foreigners.
I need not do more than summarize and point out the conclusions,
to be derived from what I have said already.
The causes of the anti-foreign feeling in China lie, in the first
instance, in the uniform unwillingness of foreign merchants
and missionaries in China to recognise China’s ridiculous, claim
to supreme suzerainty over all nations and princes in the rest
of the world, and more especially to the steady refusal of all
foreigners in China to submit their lives and property to the
jurisdiction of Chinese law courts as at present constituted. The
claim of exterritoriality of jurisdiction set up by foreign trade
in China since the year 1834, after the break-up of the servile
East-India Company’s monopoly in China, is historically the first


and deepest cause of Chinese hatred against foreigners. I believe
I have irrefutably demonstrated this proposition in my book en-
titled “Europe in China, or the History of Hongkong,” published
in 1895. It was this claim to exterritoriality that was the true
cause of the so-called opium war. The national self-respect of
both the Chinese and foreign nations came first into irreconcilable
conflict over this question.
I pass over the question of the opium trade and the Anglo-
French wars with China as of secondary importance, because
the Chinese people were not unanimous in their view of these
matters, and a considerable section of the nation approved some
of these proceedings. But I would point to the above-mentioned
European interference with the Taiping rebellion in 1852, and the
consequent defeat of the national party in China, as the second
strong force of national hatred against foreigners in China.
Next I see a third and even stronger current of continuous
ill-will against foreigners arising from the oppression, the trucu-
lence, and the corruption of the foreign Manchu Government,
and from the consequent fomentation of anti-foreign secret poli-
tical societies, taking their stand upon that divine right of re-
bellion which, as I have stated above, it becomes the duty of
Chinese patriots to exercise, when their rulers have, by their
misrule, brought the nation to the verge of ruin and manifestly
forfeited the favour of Heaven. Shortly before I left Hongkong,
some three years ago, I was told by some Chinese scholars then-
implicated in the abortive attempt to upset the Manchu Govern-
ment in Canton, that an agreement had been made among the
leaders of the principal secret societies of China to aim hence-
forth not directly, as hitherto, against the Manchu Government,
but against foreigners, so as to irritate the Foreign Powers suffi-
ciently to pull down the Manchu dynasty themselves, and then
would be the time for the national party to agitate for the re-
establishment, by foreign arms if necessary, of a new Chinese
dynasty on the ruins of the decayed Manchu fabric. I am sure
this is the real aim of the Boxer movement. Their cry is for
the present. “Down with all foreigners,” because they know that
cry, followed up by the deeds of an infuriated mob, will embroil
the Manchu Government with all foreign nations. It suits their
deep-laid scheme to expel the Manchus from the Chinese throne,
to enlist the Imperial troops in their animosity against foreigners,
and to make a catspaw of the very Manchus, soldiers, and princes
of the Imperial family, whom it is their ultimate aim to subvert.
Chinese secret societies are as expert hands in the Manchu game
of devilry as the Empress Dowager herself.
But a fourth, and perhaps the strongest cause of the excessive


degree of hatred entertained by the Chinese nation at large
against all foreigners, a hatred which has only since the last four
or five years reached boiling point, lies in the overwhelming
national disgrace involved in the last Chinese war with Japan in
1894 and 1895. The Chinese hate Europeans and Americans, but
they hate and despise with even greater intensity the Japanese,
because they, after being nurtured by Chinese culture, abandoned
native and adopted European civilization. When the Japanese
invaded Corea and Manchuria, drove the Chinese armies before
them like a herd of sheep, established themselves in the Liaotung
Peninsula, and calmly prepared to march against Peking after
having administered a series of crushing defeats upon the Chinese
army and navy, the sight of the utter impotence of the Manchu
Government and the extreme weakness of the Chinese nation,
exposed in view of the whole world, inflicted the heaviest wound
upon the national consciousness it had ever received. All Chinese
stood aghast. It was so unexpected, it seemed so incredible,
and yet it was so undeniable. A terrible cry of indignation and
mingled rage and shame rang through the whole length and
breadth of China. And in that hour of impotent rage the wrath
of the nation settled not only on the Japanese who, unrighteously
baulked by Russian interference of their just reward, had to be
satisfied with the annexation of Formosa and some minor con-
cessions, but the wrath of the Chinese nation now settled on all
foreign nations that had stood by and watched the struggle with-
out doing more than staving off for a while the doom of the
Manchu dynasty and allowing Russia to reap the fruits of the
Japanese victory in the Liaotung Peninsula.
It has been said that the evangelistic work which has of late
years, with ever-increasing success, and to an ever-increasing
extent, been carried on by Christian missions in the Far East,
is largely responsible for the troubles in China. I am quite
willing to admit that, side by side with the ever-increasing volume
of trade pouring into China from all parts of Europe and America,
the gradual expansion of mission work in the interior provinces
of China shares with European commerce in the responsibility
for breaking down China’s great wall of isolation, and for the
consequent troubles that have arisen. But I ask you this ques-
tion : If it is fair and justifiable for European and American
merchants to introduce their merchandise into China at the risk
of offending the susceptibilities of Chinese exclusivism, why
should it not be fair and justifiable for European and American
Christians to introduce that which is more precious to them than
merchandise, that eternal truth of salvation in Jesus Christ,
which is more calculated to benefit the Chinese than all the


world’s merchandise put together ? And let me direct your at-
tention to a few facts. There was a time in my own recollection
when the missionary in China was looked upon as a mad-hrained
fanatic, whose endeavour to christianize the Chinese was abso-
lutely hopeless. Things have changed since then. A hundred
thousand Protestant Chinese Christians testify to the fact that
mission work in China is largely welcomed by Chinese. The
very protest of the Chinese Boxers against the spread of
Christianity in China, and the accusations hurled by narrow-
minded foreign merchants and newspaper correspondents against
Christian missions as the principal cause of all the troubles in
China, emphatically testify to the hold wdiich Christian missions
have gained upon a section of the people. And further let me tell
you one additional hard fact. The attitude of the best and most
intelligent commercial men in China, in Europe, and in America
has of late years changed in relation to Christian missions. In
the first instance they have come to recognize the fact that the
persistent and ever-extending peregrinations of thousands of
European and American missionaries throughout the length and
breadth of the interior of China is an indirect but potent adver
tisement of foreign merchandise, of which the varied goods and
chattels in the possession of the missionaries are fine samples,
and that the peaceful operations of missionaries in China are a
powerful lever, gradually prizing open the interior of China by
the very troubles these missionaries undergo at the risk of their
lives. In the second instance, an ever increasing number of
merchants in China, in Europe, and America have a soul above
dollars. Evangelical Christianity, Puritanism if you like to call
it so, has after all tinged public feeling in all highly civilized
countries that have to do with China. The millions of pounds
sterling that are annually subscribed for mission work, the ever-
increasing crowds of missionaries of all classes of society that
swarm to China from year to year, like the crusaders of old to
the Holy Land, testify, with the irresistible logic of hard facts,
that it is the fixed determination of an increasingly large section
of the Christian public of all lands, as well as of the native
Christians in China, that the Gospel shall be freely preached in
the Celestial Kingdom at all hazards. And so the missionary,
formerly looked upon by European merchants in China first as
a mad-brained intruder, then as a detestable nuisance, has now
become as legitimate a representative of Europe or America in
China, as the foreign merchant himself. The lamb-like missionary
impulse of all Christian countries, Protestant and Catholic alike,
unconsciously but irresistibly demands exactly what the in-
dustrialism of all foreign countries necessitates : the opening of


tte gates of China to peaceful intercourse with the rest of the
world.
Having thus explained the causes of that recent outburst of
popular wrath against all foreigners in China, and endeavoured
to remove a misunderstanding existing in some quarters as to
the connection of Christian missions with that outbreak, the
next question I have to consider is, what the Foreign Powers are
now bound to do in the matter.
Apart from the temporary military interference which is abso-
lutely necessary to restore order, to stop further outrages, and to
protect foreign life and property in China, which can be done on
the basis of an international agreement, such as lately proved per-
fectly effective in the delicate matter of the Cretan insurrection,
I think the first duty of the allied Foreign Powers is to depose
all the leading officials of the reactionary court party and to bring
those high personages who were personally responsible for the
prevention of the outrages which have occurred under condign
personal punishment. The treatment which was accorded to
Arabi Pasha is the least that can be expected to be meted out
to those Manchu and Chinese officials who are really responsible
for the outrages in China. Who these officials are it is not difficult
to say. That the Empress Dowager is, in spite of her temporary
Bight, personally and primarily responsible for the whole distur-
bance there can be no doubt whatever. And as to the officials
who are responsible under her, she has herself, in an Imperial
■decree dated 30th May last, expressly specified the Individuals.
That decree runs thus :
“It will be hard to root out those who have thus incited the
ignorant country people. We hereby command Ch’ung Li (Im-
perial Clansman), Commandant of the Peking Gendarmerie, the
Governor of Peking, the Police Censors of the Five Cities of the
Capital, and the Viceroy of Chihli, as well as those holding mili-
tary commands, to combine and arrest the real disturbers of the
peace, and all who heartily desire to commence a rebellion against
the Government, and to punish all such to the severest extent of
the law.
“ Let there be no more shirking of responsibilities and delay
or attempt at whitewashing the matter at a time like this, and
if there be failure in obeying our commands the responsibility
will rest on the said Ch’ung Li, and the civil and military officials
above noted ; we are determined that there shall be no leniency
this time.”
Next to the question of personal retribution, comes the question
-»f national retribution and reorganization. I do not apprehend


;any serious international complications, but I am not a politician,
and you will have to take my views for what they are worth.
One thing, I think, is clear. China needs a thorough reorgani-
zation, executive, administrative, and especially educational, for
from the education of the individuals only can we expect a re-
generation of the mass of the people. For such a thorough reform
the existing Manchu Government is a hopelessly useless inter-
mediary. On the other hand a partition of China among the
different Foreign Powers would, in my opinion, make matters
worse, for each nation undertaking the reform of the government
of a part of that tremendously large country would have to
reckon with a hostile populace whose pacification would swallow
up all the military forces of all the Foreign Powers combined.
In my opinion a feasible plan would be to satisfy Russia by the
entire cession of Mongolia and a part of Manchuria, and Japan
by the cession of a part of Manchuria and of Corea, leaving
it to these two Powers to conquer and administer these territories
as they please. It will be merely an extension of their respective
frontiers, and these Powers have a natural facility of dealing
with such people as the Coreans, Manchus, and Mongols. Then,
as to the eighteen provinces of China proper and Tibet and
Turkestan, I should say the reinstatement of the Emperor Kuang
Hsu, with an International Council of State, to administer the
government of the Chinese eighteen provinces and of Tibet and
Turkestan on the principle of a combination of the methods
originally employed by the Manchus in the organization of the
Chinese Empire and of the methods employed by the British
Government in relation to Indian Tributary States, would answer
ail purposes. This measure would leave the Chinese nation intact
as a whole and would satisfy the people. For in their eyes such
a measure would merely put foreign officials in those high offices
which were hitherto occupied by the Manchus, whilst all the re-
maining part of the machinery of the Government would be
worked through Chinese officials under foreign, instead of as for-
merly under Manchu, supervision. Special concessions of coast
ports and adjoining territory to individual Foreign Powers accord-
ing to the system already in existence, as for instance in the case
of Hongkong and its newly-acquired Hinterland and in the case
of the German concession of Kiao Chow, would be quite in
harmony with such a scheme. The extension of the organization
of the present international maritime customs service to the
collection of the land tax, which has in past years repeatedly
been proposed even by 'Chinese reformers, would no doubt com-
mend itself to the Powers. Of course China would in the above
case be open to all nations on the principle of the strictest equality.


In conclusion I venture to add a few words as to the future..
I have no doubt the opening- of China, so long hoped for, is now
at hand. It will afford an immense fillip to the trade and manu-
factures of all civilized nations. It will give to Christian
missions in China and Tibet all the facilities and freedom they
now enjoy in India. The building of railways, the construction
of roads and bridges, the opening up of the mineral riches in
China, the organization of an international army and navy, will
not only lessen the emigration of Chinese to foreign countries,
but it will offer remuneration and satisfactory employment to
the unemployed multitudes of Australia and all other foreign
countries.
On the other hand, I apprehend also, for the more distant
future, some dangers that may arise. In the first instance I fear
the opening up of the entire China to the commercial enterprise
of the whole world will cause a rush of foreign capital to China.
That capital will find in China a specially remunerative field,,,
owing to the extraordinary cheapness of Chinese labour, in the
working of industrial machinery. Just fancy 250 millions of
people, sound in limb and brain, taught under competent European
foremen, supplied with all modern tools, looms, and machines
of technical manufacture, and these men working for twelve
hours every day at one-tenth of the ordinary wage of a European
workman. What a revolution that may work in the industrial
world outside China. AYhy, in twenty-five years China would
drive many European, American, and Australian products out of
every market in the world, and supply the universe with its pro-
ducts. “ Made in China ” may have a more effective sound then
than “ made in Germany.” Of course, the extent to which China
will then increasingly consume other goods which foreign coun-
tries can produce cheaper will, to some extent, balance the evil
outlook. But still, so long as the employment of human labour
is exclusively subject to the economic laws of value and exchange
of commodities, the industries of Europe, America, and Australia
will be seriously affected by the competition of China as a manu-
facturing centre.
As to the other fear, which has been expressed in various
quarters that the millions of China coming under military training
of an international government, equipped, drilled, organized, say
on the mode of the Prussian military system, would be a menance,.
by their big battalions, to the rest of the world, I do not
think much of it. I think, indeed, that, owing to the strong
muscularity of the Chinese, there is in China as good material
to be found to make fine soldiers of as anywhere else in the
world. But the Chinese are on the whole a peace-loving people.


and have a contempt for military employment. Their passion
is agriculture, and industry, and pedling trade. So long as good
employment is open in these walks of life the Chinese will eschew
the recruiting sergeant. And as to the rest, the Foreign Powers
interested in China will see to it that the Chinese are not armed
to a larger extent than it is necessary and compatible with safety.
I have said what I could say on a vast and intricate subject.
I only hope that I have, with my imperfect knowledge, con-
tributed a little to supplement your knowledge of a people whose
■doings have lately shocked our feelings terribly. I should feel
amply rewarded for my trouble in preparing this lecture if I
have helped you to feel as I feel, viz., that to know the Chinese
is to pity the Chinese.
W. K Thomas & «0., Printers, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.


