



INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION OF NEW SOUTH WALES
STANDARD OF LIVING
AND
LIVING WAGES FOR ADULT MALE
AND ADULT FEMALE EMPLOYEES
Judgments and Declarations
24th April, 1936
1st June, 1936
[Reprinted from Industrial Arbitration Reports, Volume XXXV.]
SYDNEY
DAVID HAROLD PAISLEY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER
1936
15845




INDEX.
PAGE.
Judgment, 24th April, 1936, Male and Female Employees 3
Judgment, 1st June, 1936, Female Employees 30
15845




[INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION.]
In re STANDARD OF LIVING AND LIVING WAGES FOR
ADULT MALES AND ADULT FEMALES.
Living ivagc—Adult male and female employees—Standard of living —
Determination of—Public inquiry—Act No. 14 of 1926, s. 7 (1) (6) as
amended.
Pursuant to the provisions of section 7, subsection (1) (b) of the
Industrial Arbitration (Amendment) Act, 1926, as amended, the
Commission, after public inquiry, determined a standard of living
and, based upon such standard, declared the living wage for adult
male employees to be £3 9s. per week on the requirements of a man
and wife and one dependent child under 14 years, and the living wage
for adult female employees to be £1 15s. 6d. per week.
Public inquiry by Industrial Commission.
Kingsley Newell for the Employers’ Federation of New
South Wales; Chamber of Manufactures of New South
Wales; Master Builders’ Association of New South
Wales; New South Wales Wholesale Paper Merchants’
Association; Warehousemen’s Association of New South
Wales; Oversea Shipping Representatives’ Associa-
tion; New South Wales Country Cordial Makers Asso-
ciation; New South Wales Wholesale Hardware Asso-
ciation ; Patent Medicines and Proprietary Articles Dis-
tributors ’ Association; New South Wales Cartridge
Convention; New South Wales Wholesale Tobacco As-
sociation; Retail Traders’ Association of New South
Wales; New South Wales Brickmasters’ Association,
Bradley, K.C., with him Flynn for the Public Service Asso-
ciation of New South Wales; New South Wales Public
Service Professional Officers’ Association; Metropolitan
Board of Water Supply and Sewerage Employees’
Association; Hunter District Water Supply and Sewer-
age Board Employees’ Association; Sydney Harbour
Trust Clerical and General Officers’ Association;
United Bank Officers’ Association.
Bradley, K.C., with him Richards for the New South Wales
Public School Teachers’ Federation.
O'Mara for the New South Wales Railway and Tramway
Officers’ Association.
1936.
Sr'
April 24.
Brotvne, J. t
President,
Cantor and
Webb, JJ,


1936.
W-'
In re
Standard
or Living
and Living
Wages fob
Adult Males
and Adult
.Females.
Mr. F. H. Corke on behalf of the Sydney and Suburban
Timber Merchants’ Association and the Newcastle-
Timber Merchants’ Association.
Mr. G. Lewis on behalf of the New South Wales Flour Mill
Owners’ Association.
Mr. J. Donaldson on behalf of "he Commissioner for Main
Roads.
Mr. H. W. Simpson on behalf of the Hospitals’ Association
of New South Wales.
Mr. 0. Schreiher and Mr. 0. Bryant on behalf of the Union
Secretaries ’ Association,
Mr. L. W. Lodge and Mr. G. Edgcumhe on behalf of the-
New South Wales District of the Australian Journal*
ists’ Association.
Mr. G. F. Allman on behalf of the Local Government En-
gineers’ Association- of New South Wales.
Mr. J. Hammerton on behalf of the Now South Wales
Dredge and Navigation Employees’ Association.
Mr. H. L. Denford on behalf of the Federated Ironworkers*
Association of Australia, New South Wales Division.
Mr. J. A. Cranwell on behalf of the Amalgamated Engineer*
ing Union, Australian Section.
Mr. W. Fletcher on behalf of the National Union of Rail-
waymen of Australia, New South Wales Branch.
Mr. A. Watson on behalf of the Amalgamated Society of
Carpenters and Joiners M New South Wales.
Mr. A. G. Bagnall on behalf of the Motor Omnibus Em-
ployees’ Association.
Mr. A. E. Evers on behalf of the Federated Clerks’ Union
of Australia, New South Wales Branch.
Mr. T. G. Rose on behalf of the Firemen’s and Deckhands*
Association of New South Wales.
Mr. B. Wright on. behalf of the Actors? Federation of Aus-
tralasia, New South Wales Branch.


The judgment of the Commission was delivered by the Pre-
sident (Browne, J.).
Upon the application of the Public Service Association of
New South Wales, an industrial union of employees, this Com-
mission determined to hold a public inquiry under section
7 (1) (b) of the Industrial Arbitration (Amendment) Act,
No. 14 of 1926, as amended, for the purpose of determining a
standard of living for adult employees and declaring living
wages based upon that standard for both adult male and adult
female employees throughout the State. {ln re Adult Male and
Adult Female Living Wages (No. 3) [1934] A.R. 333).
After the public inquiry had been opened, it was decided,
with the assent of the representatives of all parties appearing,
that, for convenience, evidence should, in the first instance, be
called by the employees and employers relating to the require-
ments of adult female employees and argument heard thereon.
This course was taken, and subsequently attention was directed
to the requirements of the members of the statutory family. At
the conclusion of the hearing with respect to female employees,
application was made on behalf of the employees’ organisations
that the living wage for adult female employees should be de-
clared before proceeding with the case of male employees. The
Commission declined to do this, on the ground that it would not
be in a position to determine a standard of living or fix the
female living wage until the parties had placed before it all
the evidence and material they desired relating to both male
and female employees.
The public inquiry has been held, and it now falls to us to
determine a standard of living and declare living wages for
adult male and adult female employees employed throughout
the whole State based upon that standard.
The question of the policy contained in the statute under which
we function is one for the Legislature; our duty is to administer
the law. But we desire again to emphasise that definite limits
have been set by the statute to the discretion of the Commission
in declaring living wages. To quote the words used by us in
this regard on the 25th October last year:
“Firstly, the Commission is directed to determine a
standard living as a preliminary to the fixation of
the living wages; secondly, the living wages must be
T 9 36.
In re
Standard
of Living
AND LIVINO
Wages fob
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.


1936*
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages fob
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.
based upon that determined standard and not other-
wise; thirdly, when fixing the living wage for adult
male employees the Commission is directed to pay regard
only to the requirements of a family unit of a man,
wife and one dependent child under 14; fourthly, each
living wage must be a single wage for the whole State,
the Commission has no powder to determine different
living wages for separate divisions of the State.”
([1935] A.R. 217-218.)
P urthermore, with regard to the female living wage, it should
be noted that the standard of living to be fixed by us under
the statute, and upon which that living wage is to be based, must
not only be a single standard applicable to both male and female
employees, but that also the female for whom the living wage has
to be fixed is an adult female without any dependants.
Now before determining a standard of living and living
wages, consideration must be given to the type of employee to
which regard should be paid. On this point, the object of the
inquiry, as expressed in section 7 (1) (b) of Act No. 14 of
1926, as amended, is material. It is to determine a standard of
living and declare living wages “for the purpose of this Act and
of the Principal Act,” that is to say, for the purpose of the
Industrial Arbitration Act, 1912, as amended. Under that Act
a living wage when declared is the irreducible minimum that
can be included in an award or industrial agreement as a wage
for adult employees, and, further, upon a declaration being made
during the currency of an award or industrial agreement, all the
terms thereof affecting rates of pay are deemed to have been
varied to accord with such declaration as from its date, though
power is conferred upon the Commission to exempt any award
or industrial agreement from the effect of the declaration, to
such extent and subject to such conditions as it may direct.
The effect under the statute of a declaration of living wages
was fully dealt with by the Commission in its declarations of
1929 and 1932.
The question of the type of employee to be considered when
fixing a living wage has been before industrial tribunals since
1907. Mr. Justice Higgins in the Harvester case of that year (2
C.A.R. 1, and see also 15 C.A.R. 304); Mr. Justice Heydon
when determining the living wage in February, 1914 ([1914]
A.R. 22); the Board of Trade throughout its existence; and the


Age.
Number of Children.
Census, 1921.
Census. 1933.
Thousands.
239
233
165
Thousands ..
230
262
200
6 and under 10 years
10 and under 14 years
Total under 14 years
637
682
Average age
6'8 years.
7*1 years.
Industrial Commission in 1929 and 1932, all decided that the
employee to whom regard must be paid, and for whom a stan-
dard must be determined, is the lowest paid employee in the com-
munity whose working conditions may be regulated by an award
or industrial agreement, that is to say, the unskilled labourer.
We re-adopt that view.
In the case of female employees, the first declaration of a
living wage was made by the Board of Trade in 1918, and in each
subsequent declaration, the type of employee considered by the
Board was the employee who corresponded to an unskilled male
worker. The Commission has, up to the present time, fixed the
living wage for females at a percentage of the wage declared for
male employees, and we think that in an inquiry into the itemised
cost of living of an adult female employee, attention should be
paid to the requirements of the unskilled employee.
Although we hold that in determining a standard of living
for the purpose of basing thereon male and female living wages,
regard should be paid to the lowest paid employees, it does not
necessarily follow that they are to be awarded no more than the
living wage. The only obligation imposed by the statute upon
award-making authorities and parties to industrial agreements,
is not to award or agree to wages lower than the declared living
wages. Higher rates may be awarded even to the lowest paid
employees in an industry, but that is a matter to be considered
„and determined in each case by the tribunal making the award.
As we have said, the statute directs and requires the Commis-
sion when fixing the male living wage to consider the require-
ments of a family consisting of a man, wife and one child under
the age of fourteen years. The numbers of children whose ages,
were stated as under fourteen years at the Census of 1921 and at
the Census of 1933 are as follows: —
j nre
Standard
or Living
AND Living
a^^Males
and Adult
Females.


1936.
In re
Standard
OF Ltog
and Living
Waqbs fob
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.
The increase in the average age, .3, from 6.8 years to 7.1 years,
is due to the reduced proportion of children under the age of
5 years, which has resulted from the decline in the number of
children born annually in Australia.
The needs of children vary within limits according to age.
Various methods of calculating the cost of the requirements of a
child under 14 years of age suggest themselves. It would not be
proper to take a child of one year, of age, nor, on the other hand,
a child of the maximum age, 13 years. Upon the whole, we have
come to the conclusion that in fixing the living wage for male
employees, attention should be paid to the requirements of a
child about 8 years of age.
It is to be observed that, since the passing of the Industrial
Arbitration (Amendment) Act, 1926, and before the present
public inquiry, no inquiry into the itemised cost of living of
female employees had been held.
In June, 1927, the first living wage declaration of the Indus-
trial Commission for female employees was pronounced. The
judgment of the Industrial Commissioner accompanying the
declaration, after laying it down that 54 per cent, of the male
living wage should then be adopted for female employees, pointed
out that that percentage had been adopted in lieu of about 51 per
cent, which previously had obtained in declarations of living
wages for women in the State. But in view of the fact that no
inquiry into the itemised cost of living had then been held by the
Commission, the Industrial Commissioner left it “open to any
parties before the next declaration of this living wage to ask for
an inquiry into the itemised cost of living of adult female em-
ployees, and such request will receive consideration. ’ ’ ([1927]
A.R. at page 204).
The next public inquiry was held by the Commission in 1929,
when the Commission was directed by section 3 ("4) (now spent)
of the Industrial Arbitration (Living Wage) Amendment Act,
1929, No. 40, to fix the amount of the female living wage on that
one occasion at such percentage of the living wage for adult
male employees as it should deem proper. The Commission, after
referring to what had been pointed out by the Industrial Com-
missioner in 1927, that prior to the passing of the amending Act
of 1926 about 51 per cent, had obtained as the proper proportion
of the male living wage to be adopted in fixing the amount of the
female living wage, and to the right given to any parties to ask


for an inquiry into the itemised cost of living for women, stated
that no such inquiry had been asked for or held, and came to the
conclusion that the 54 per cent, adopted in 1927 should be adopted
again. ([1929] A.R., 515.)
A further public inquiry into the living wages was held in
1932, but again no material was placed before the Commission
relating to the itemised cost of living of adult female employees,
and once more we followed the previous course of fixing the cost
of obtaining the means of living at the determined standard by
an adult female employee at a percentage of the cost of obtain-
ing the means of living at the same standard by an adult male
employee. The percentage we adopted was 54. ([1932] A.R., 91.)
In 1934 the Public Service Association of New South Wales
made the application to which we have already referred, and
then for the first time the Commission was requested to hold an
inquiry into the itemised cost of living of adult female employees.
The Commission decided that the association was entitled as a
matter of right to a full inquiry and that it should be held,
though, as we stated at the time, nothing had been suggested
during the hearing of the application of the association to lead
us to conclude that the existing female living wage was inade-
quate ([1934] A.R. at pp. 344 and 345).
One other matter remains to be dealt with at this stage. As we
have pointed out, living wages applicable to employees through-
out the whole State must be declared. To give effect to this
statutory direction, it is necessary to apply a weighting ratio to
costs derived for the metropolitan area and provmciaL urban
areas of the State respectively. Since the census of 1921 the
weighting ratio has been 12:7, that being the ratio of total popu-
lations in these areas disclosed by the 1921 census. The ratio at
the census of 1933 of the population in the metropolitan area to
that in the provincial urban area is 1,235,267 : 565,440, or ap-
proximately 13 ;6. This weighting ratio will now be used m
lieu of the ratio 12 : 7.
Having dealt with the general principles to be followed and
other necessary matters, it now devolves upon us to consider the
material that has been placed before the Commission m order to
determine the proper standard to be allowed and the cost of
procuring the requirements of an adult male employee Ins wie
and one child, and of an adult female employee, throughout the
whole State.
1938.
v -v-'
In re
Standard
or Living
and Living
Wages for
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.


1936.
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages for
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.
Food and Groceries.— ln the living wage declaration for male
employees of 1929 the Commission followed the standard for
p°° a ‘ K g rooeries originally laid down by the 1920 Federal
Koyal Commission and adopted by the Industrial Commission in
December, 1926 ([1929] A.R. at pp. 436 and 437). In deter-
mining the food proper to be allowed, regard was paid to a
number of prime factors, which may shortly be re-stated as
o ons; (1) that it should be sufficient in food values; (2)
that it should contain a proper proportion of the three main
constituents of food, namely, proteins, fats and carbohydrates;
(3) that the supply should permit of a sufficient variety of foods
or the preparation of palatable and digestible meals; and (4)
wt the vanetuss of food should conform generally to the eating
habits of the community. Each of these elements was fully
investigated and every effort made to ensure that all proper
requirements were fully met.
, In ‘ he P" blic inquiry eemmenced by us in June, 1932, counsel
tor the Public Service Association and other employees’ organi-
sations challenged the sufficiency of the food values allowed
a ough, it is to be noted, it was not seriously contended that
the regimen of food adopted failed to provide a sufficiently
balanced diet from other points of view. But after the evidence
ill that inquiry had closed, counsel for the employees intimated
that he no longer pressed for an alteration of the standard of
food values for the man unit, though he still advanced the con-
tention so far as the other members of the statutory family were
concerned. J
The subject of food was exhaustively reviewed and re-consid-
ere yus on that occasion, and for reasons which are fully set
orth m the judgment accompanying the declaration (119321
W 6 d6Cided t 0 folloW the determinations
reached by the Federal Royal Commission, and by this Commis-
sion in both 1926 and 1929.
In the present inquiry the adequacy of the allowance of food
an groceries made by the Commission in 1932 was not challenged
i behalf of the employees, though it was asked that the money
allowance should be increase TiViriQnn . .
nf tTio nmu ! r mcreasecl - hividenee was given by witnesses
the amount of money actually expended for their families
on food and groceries. The size of their families varied, and in
most instances was in excess of the statutory unit to which
ef m 7 T,‘, li ? ited ' A m,mber of «■*« witnesses made
-stimates of the outlay for food and groceries claimed to be


necessary for a man, wife and one child. These estimates weie
greatly in excess of the amount hitherto allowed by any living
wage tribunal for food and groceries. Finally, relying mainly
upon the testimony of one particular witness, it was suggested
that the sum of £1 4s. per week allowed by the Commission in
1932 on the then purchasing power of money, should now be
increased to £1 ss. or £1 4s. 6d. But these suggested amounts,
as we pointed out at the time, were not related to items, quan-
tities or prices.
For the employers, it was contended that the standard
allowed by the Commission for a man doing moderate muscular
work was too high, and authorities were quoted in support of
that view.
Having given consideration to the various contentions placed
before us, we adopt again the standard and requirements laid
down in 1932 for the family unit of man, wife and one child.
The indicator lists of food and groceries illustrating the
requirements of a man, wife and one child are attached io the
judgments of the Commission of 1926 and 1929, and we are
satisfied that they constitute a proper standard of living in the
State of New South Wales at the present time.
It may be once more pointed out that such indicator lists
are not intended in any way to state or suggest what we think
the statutory family unit should eat. They merely illustrate
one rational way in which a family may provide itself adequately
with food, and so enable us to arrive at the sum of money which
would permit the statutory family unit living in the normal
average manner proper in such a community as this to have
adequate nourishing and appetising meals.
So far as the cost of food and groceries is concerned, we have
considered all the statistical information available to the Com-
mission, and, after having priced the indicator list of require-
ments and considered the whole of the material before us, are
satisfied that the requirements of the family unit can be obtained
by the expenditure of £62 Is. 6d. per annum.
The same amount of money might be spent in other ways, some
perhaps providing a better dietary and some, one not so good.
Different families will have all sorts of different meals accord-
ing to their tastes, but we are satisfied that if a family of man,
1936.
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages for
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.


1936.
v -v^
In re
Standaed
or Living
and Living
Wages fob
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.
wife and one child is provided with the amount of money re-
quired to purchase the existing regimen of food and groceries
it will have sufficient, in the absence of eccentricity or undue
extravagance, to obtain an amplitude of nourishing food.
In the view that we take it does not become necessary to con-
sider what sum is required to provide adequate food for an adult
female employee. The evidence shows that a very large majority
of such employees live at home. A small minority live in rooms
and provide their own food, either by cooking it themselves or
by obtaining it from a restaurant or similar places, while a small
proportion of such employees live at ordinary boarding-houses
or with private families.
A great deal of evidence was called, and much discussion
arose before us regarding the proper basis of dealing with the
adult female employee, both on the question of food and on the
closely connected question of shelter. Should she be provided
with the necessary money to obtain a room or rooms in which
to live with an added sum to enable her to obtain meals in some
one of the various available methods, or should she be
provided with board and lodging either at home or elsewhere?
If board and lodging was to be provided, should it be on the foot-
ing that she would board either at home or with relatives or
friends, and probably pay less than if she were living in a
boarding-house? Should an endeavour be made to arrive at a
sum necessary to compensate her parents, relatives or friends
for the additional food, fuel, light, house-room, etc., largely
debitable to her, or should a sum be provided which would
enable her to obtain adequate board and lodging at a boarding-
house ?
For the employers it was submitted that if board and lodging
was to be provided, it should be on the footing that she would
live at home. We have come to the conclusion that the proper
course for us to take with regard to the adult female employee is,
as was claimed by counsel on behalf of the employees, to provide
her with a sum of money which will enable her to obtain ade-
quate board and lodging at a boarding house.
We now deal with the matter of the proper sum to be allowed.
Evidence was tendered on behalf of both employees and em-
ployers relating to accommodation available for single women
and the cost thereof. In the case of the employees evidence
was given embodied in a return showing, it was contended, that


full board and lodging, including cut lunches and provision for
baths, laundering and the use of an iron, was available at prices
ranging from £1 to £1 10s. per week, which averaged £1 65. . 6 .
per week. Returns on similar lines were also tendered on behalf
of the employers. The evidence of the employers was analysed
by counsel for the employees who, after rejecting a number o
houses which he contended were unsatisfactory, submitted that
apart from laundry (though some accepted by him included
soft washing), the average charge was approximately £1 Os. 9d.
per week, the range of charges being from 17s. 6d. to £1 ss.
The submissions of the employees was ultimately based upon
these several returns, and it was claimed that the sum of £1 Is.
should be allowed for board and lodging, including cut lunches
when necessary, with the addition of an appropriate amount for
laundry. For the employers it was submitted that 19s. 3d.
should* be allowed. We are satisfied that £1 Is. is a proper
amount to allow to adult female employees for board and lodg-
ing, including cut lunches on working days. For this amount
some laundry service will usually be included.
The employees submitted that 3s. per week should be allowed
in addition for laundry. We think that some allowance should
be made on this account, though the amount suggested is too
high, and the item has been considered and provided for amongst
miscellaneous requirements.
Clothing.— On this aspect of the inquiry a mass of evidence
was placed before the Commission and the whole subject has
been exhaustively investigated and reviewed. Both employers
and employees called witnesses, some being trade witnesses, and
others employees and household witnesses, who gave us t e
benefit of their own experience and views, and a large number o
garments and many other articles of clothing were placed before
the Commission by the parties.
In the judgment accompanying the declaration of the male
living wage in December, 1926, the Industrial Commissioner
observed that, while not doubting the sincerity of the witnesses
called, he had formed the opinion that the standard being borne
in mind by the employers’ witnesses on that occasion was a
mistaken one, and, in the case of the employees’ witnesses, that
their standard erred through a desire to see adopted ideals as to
character of clothing which were beyond the proper standard
“£•
OF living
amUrore
AdultMale3


19 3H.
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages for
Adult Males
and Adult
Females,
mem e mayTe d ai U D lfff 8 ‘ '“'T WagC ' Exaet ly the same com-
ment maj be applied to a number of the witnesses called
inquiry, though we acknowledge that considerable assistance
has been derived from the material placed before us
We have proceeded upon the view that the employees to whose
recrements attention must be directed should T prov Med
with current wk? 8 ”?™ 11 ] *° purchase clothin K in accordance
manship And tfat ,f 'T“ g q " ality and sound ™*-
“ine. h3t 18 the S ‘ andard and now
m J,“ . ord< | r to ascertain the amounts that will enable an adult
e emp oyee, lis wife and one child under the age of 14 years
and an adult female employee respectively, to attain that'stan
dard we haye found it necessary to in consfderfb
detail the various kinds and articles of clothing which it wa
suggested should be allowed, their quality, probable life and cos
In its previous declarations for adult male employees’indicat.
lists or detailed schedules of clothing have been published by th
Commission indicating one way in which the determined sten
InMMfhe Co attamed b ‘ V , * he expenditure oi the sum allowed
n 1928 the Commission adopted in substance the indicator list
published by the 1920 Federal Royal Commission, and in 190
ndicator lists of clothing for a man and wife were formulated
Iso indicator lists of clothing suitable for adult female employees
thTsSe bCen PUb,iBhed by any tribunal
ncet its reasonable requirements as to clothing. But widely
they have been understood as incorporating decisions of the
Commission as to what articles of clothing people should wear
them ° n C y of° ‘" e " ° rn - aml h °* ” Ueh sh "“ ld »e paM for
, . rbat ’ °f conrse - 18 a complete misapprehension, and one
which, we are fully satisfied, has led to much
the work of living wage tribunals. Despite the fact that on
sevcial occasions the exact purpose of indicator lists has been
pldinly pointed out, the misunderstanding still persists.
m "“ b 7 ° f artiClCS ° f dothing are common to
almost all men, and some articles of clothing are com-
mon to almost all women, but individual taste, as well as other


-considerations, plays such an important part in the selection
-even of those particular articles, that it is practically impossible
to formulate an indicator list of clothing anybody will either
actually wear or will be likely to purchase. Some people pur-
chase garments of a superior quality, knowing that with ordin-
ary use they will have a relatively long life, while others prefer
to buy lower-priced articles that are not so durable and which
they are prepared to replace more frequently. Either of those
methods of replacing clothing might be followed with an average
annual expenditure of about the same sum of money. Instances
of that kind of thing might be multiplied many times. The
evidence shows, as is only to be expected, that no two of the wit-
nesses dressed alike or would ever be likely to do so, and that
there was great variety in their experience of the duration of
clothing. It is perfectly clear that the determined standard
may be attained by the expenditure of practically the same sum
of money in a great variety of ways. In these circumstances, we
have decided on this occasion to express the determinations of
the Commission in another form.
Another general misapprehension with which we must deal
is that, when declaring living wages, the Commission’s duty is to
provide a sum sufficient to purchase an entirely new outfit of
clothing. The report of the 1920 Federal Royal Commission and
the judgment of the Commission itself accompanying the de-
claration of 1929 dealt with that view, and again we adhere to
what has been previously pointed out, namely
“In all estimations of the requirements by way of
clothing, close attention is necessary to the position
that what has to be determined is not the cost initially
of an outfit or wardrobe, but of the replacement of
articles as a recurring expenditure.” ([1929] A.R. at
page 435.)
One other matter must be noticed before we proceed to deal with
the question of requirements. It was not disputed by any of
the representatives appearing on this inquiry that prices of
clothing have fallen considerably in recent years. Since the
declaration of the Commission in 1932 the fall in prices of both
men’s and women’s clothing has continued; in the case o
women’s clothing the fall has been particularly marked. It
was contended, however, that in the great majority of cases the
fall in price has been accompanied by a loss in quality. The
In re
Stamped
AND Lmno
‘
and Adult
Fjmalbs.


1936.
Sr-'
In re
Standa&d
of Lrvnro
and Lrvnro
Wages foe
Adult M at.tea
and Adult
Females.
same contention was also advanced on behalf of the Public Ser*
vice Association in 1934, when moving for the holding of a
public inquiry by the Commission. In the course of our judg-
ment acceding to that application we pointed out that the con-
tention was not a new one, that it had been dealt with by the
ommission in its declaration of living wages of 1932, and was
one to which the Commission had given and was continuing to
give close attention ([1934] A.R. 333). On the present inquiry
we have again given careful consideration to this aspect of the
matter.
Littie evidence was called in support of the contention on
behalf of the Association. Amongst the witnesses called on its be-
half was a trade witness who had had a life-long experience in the
drapery trade, and had been in the retail drapery trade on hi
own account for some twenty-four years. He has two shop
in Parramatta, one at Ashfield, and another at Blacktown Hi
practice has been to visit about 1,000 of the homes of his cus
tomers regularly in connection with his business, and he claimed
to be particularly well acquainted with thousands of them (wh
were, he said, mainly lower paid employees), their needs, methoc
and standard of living. This witness was questioned at some
ength regarding the nature, types and quality of clothing bough
or men, women and children at his establishments, the suit
ability of the clothing being offered, its wearing quality and
cost, both at the present time and as compared with what was
being offered and bought during the period 1928-1930. From
his evidence it is clear that not only are articles of at least equal:
quality available to-day at lower prices, but in many instances
the quality is actually superior; particularly is this so with
women’s clothing. Strong corroboration of this view was sup-
plied by trade witnesses called on behalf of the employers. It is
not necessary, however, to deal further with this question of
alleged depreciation in quality, because when calculating the
amounts proper to be allowed for clothing, we have taken into
account articles of clothing of a satisfactory quality that are
now actually available, their durability and cost.
The trade witness referred to called by the Association was
tendered to the Commission as a business man in the retail
drapery trade of great experience, peculiarly fitted to express
reliable opinions upon the subject of employees’ clothing. We
found his evidence of material assistance. From his experience
he was able not only to refer us to and describe the articles of


clothing which are in fact available and being bought, but to
indicate, when necessary, with considerable detail the range of
those articles, their prices, quality, wearing capacity, and general
suitability. We found his evidence useful as a check to place
against both the evidence given by employees and household
witnesses on the one hand, and on the other hand the evidence
of the trade witnesses called on behalf of the employers.
In 1932 the adequacy of the standard of clothing determined
by the Commission in 1929 for a man, wife and child was not
challenged by the representatives of employees, and the Com-
mission decided to re-adopt it and to measure the cost of attain-
ing it by the application of the appropriate index numbers.
On this occasion the standard of 1932 was attacked, both by
employers and employees, the former alleging that it was ex-
cessive and the latter that it was inadequate.
In the case for the male living wage, both the employees and
employers departed from the indicator lists hitherto published,
and many schedules of clothing were placed before the Commis-
sion. They showed that a great diversity of opinion existed
regarding what was considered necessary in the case of all three,
man, wife and child, constituting the members of the family
unit. The witnesses who were called for the employees differed
very greatly amongst themselves. The employers’ claim, as
illustrated by their lists of clothing, was that the existing stan-
dard was too high. In the case for adult female employees, an
itemised list of clothing requirements was submitted on behalf
of the employees, and was the subject of evidence called by both
interests.
It has therefore been necessary on this occasion in each branch
of the inquiry, to consider most carefully all the material placed
before us for the purpose of determining the requirements of
each unit of employees and of calculating the proper amounts
to be allowed to ensure a reasonable standard of comfort in
clothing.
There was a great divergence in the various amounts which
it was suggested should be allowed for clothing. We ha\e
already said that the standard of living in the minds of many
of the witnesses called erred through a desire to see adopted
ideals as to clothing which were clearly beyond the proper stan-
dard to adopt in fixing a living wage, and that to some extent
the standard borne in mind by others was not adequate. Much
of the evidence tendered can be reconciled when this is realised.
1936.
In re
Standard
of Living
AND LIVING
Wages for
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.


Average
yearly
cost.
£ s. d. £
s.
d.
Man—
Outerwear (including hats)
4 0 0
Underwear (including pyjamas and working
flannels)
2 5 10
Footwear (including repairs)
2 4 7
Other clothing (including umbrella and swim-
ming costume)
118
9
12
I
Wife—
Outerwear (including hats)
4 9 4
Underwear (including stockings and night
wear)
2 9 10
Footwear (including repairs)
1 14 10
Other clothing (including umbrella, handbag
and bathing wear)
2 2 5
10
16
5
Child (about 8 years)
4
0
Total
12
6
1936.
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages foe
Adult Males
and Adult
Females,
We have considered fully many alternative ways of attaining
the determined standard, and thus have reached our conclusion
regarding the proper amount to allow for clothing in each living
wage now to be declared. The decision of the Commission will
be best expressed by grouping clothing requirements under
’ various headings and stating the amount allowed in each case.
In the case of clothing for the male employee and his wife
and for female employees, we have adopted the following group-
ings:—Outerwear, underwear, footwear, and other clothing,
Regard has been paid to the reasonable clothing requirements
both for summer and winter, to the requirements of employees
at work, the married woman at household duties, children at
school, and of all during leisure time. The amount allowed in
each case is the cost of articles of clothing in accordance with
current usages of good wearing quality and sound workmanship
that may now be purchased in the community, and it has been
necessary to average the cost over a number of years so that
proper allowance may be made for garments that last more than
a year.
For adult male employees the following sums, making a total
of £25 12s. 6d. per annum, have been allowed, being the average
yearly cost of the clothing requirements of a family of man, wife
and one child about eight years of age:—


Average
yearly
Outerwear (including hats)
cost.
£ s. d.
6 19 0
Underwear (including stockings and nightwear) .
2 13 9
Footwear (including repairs)
2 5 8
Other clothing (including overalls, umbrella, hand
bag, and bathing wear)
2 19 9
Total
£14 18 2
For adult female employees the sum of £l4 18s. 2d, per annum
has been allowed, made up as follows:
1936.
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages for
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.
Rent. —ln the inquiry held by us in 1932 we decided to adhere
to a house containing three rooms and kitchen in sound tenant-
able condition as the proper standard for a man, wife and one
child. This size and description of house was adopted by the
New South Wales Board of Trade and has been the standard of
the Commission since 1929. In the present inquiry it was con-
tended on behalf of some, though not all, of the associations of
employees represented before us, that the standard house should
be a house with four rooms and kitchen. Having considered a
mass of evidence regarding houses, their condition and avail-
ability, and having ourselves inspected large numbers of houses
containing three rooms and kitchen, many containing four
rooms and kitchen, and some with two rooms and kitchen, we
think the standard adopted by the Commission in 1929 and
adhered to by it in 1932, namely, a house of three rooms and
kitchen in sound tenantable condition, is a proper and adequate
standard for a family of three, and we again adopt it. We do
not think it necessary in defining the standard to make any
special mention of bath and laundry accommodation any more
than it is of sanitary conveniences or ventilation. These things
are, of course, essentials in all houses of three rooms and kitchen
in sound tenantable condition.
It was further contended on behalf of the employees that
even if a house with three rooms and kitchen in sound tenant-
able condition was adopted as the standard house, a higher
amount should be allowed for housing than previously allowed
in the current wage as few, if any, of such houses at the amount
allowed were in sound tenantable condition. In support of this
contention a number of municipal inspectors were called on be-
half of the Public Service Association to give evidence with
regard to the houses of three rooms and kitchen in their re-
spective municipalities.


1936.
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages fob
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.
Charles Thompson Trickett, Chief Health Inspector and
Building Surveyor for the municipality of North Sydney, where
he had been, he said, for twenty-three years, stated in evidence
that there were some 3,225 houses of three rooms and kitchen
in the municipality, and that the majority of them were not in
sound tenantable condition. He gave details of the condition
of many of such houses, stated that they were all occupied,
some of them by more than one family, and that the rentals
were from £1 to 255. a week. He further stated that nearly all
the houses of three rooms and kitchen in North Sydney were
very old places, scarcely any of such houses having been built
in recent years. He described the condition of some of these
houses, and, as an indication of wdiat some of them are like,
mentioned the fact that a number of such houses had recently
been demolished at Milson’s Point. This is his language regard-
ing the demolished houses: “ . . . when the bricks in them
and mortar got damp the stench was abominable, because over
a period of years those places had been densely occupied by
people so that the walls had become so permeated with vapours
from the breath, from the body and from cooking, and so forth,
that they were not fit to live in. That is the position to-day
with quite a lot of the old places. They are really not fit to
live in.”
Amos Harold Pritchard, the Health and Building Inspector
for the municipality of Leichhardt, gave evidence as to housing
conditions in that municipality, where he had held his position
for twenty-three years. Of 6,300 residences in the municipality
he thought about 25 per cent, had three rooms and kitchen.
They were scattered all over the municipality, he said, but when
asked whether any of such houses in sound tenantable condition
could be obtained at a rental of 18s. or thereabouts, he said,
“There would be very few.” There were houses with three
rooms and kitchen, he said, obtainable at a rental of 18s. a
week, but they were in very bad condition; “badly lighted,
badly ventilated, dirty walls, vermin infested, rat infested, de-
fective sewerage system, and inadequate water supplies and
things like that.” He supplied a list which, he said, was a
selection of the best of the three-roomed places. He had “picked
them out from different parts of the area”—“the modern ones”
that he “would term fit for human habitation and accommoda-
tion for a man, wife and child.” The rentals of these cottages
ranged from 20s. to 315., and the majority of them were rented
at either 225. 6d. or 255. The purpose of this evidence evidently


was to prove to us that a cottage with three rooms and kitchen
in sound tenantable condition could not be obtained in Leich-
hardt at less than 205., and, in most cases, would cost either
225. 6d. or 255., or even 31s.
Martin Francis Gallagher, the Health and Building Inspector
of the Municipality of Paddington, gave evidence regarding the
housing conditions in that suburb. Of about 5,000 residences in
the municipality he said about 1,000 had three rooms and kit-
chen. Not more than twenty houses of that size had been built
in Paddington for many years, so that any such houses avail-
able there were very old, most of them over thirty years old,
he said. The rentals of those twenty ranged from 255. to 30s.
a week. Dealing with the older houses he said: “Taking the
older 1,000, the range of rents in these is from 12s. 6d. to 17s.
6d. In relation to this 1,000 not more than 3 per cent, would
comply with the description that they are in good order and
living condition. They are all very old and the important part
such as the roofing, flashing, guttering, downpiping, they are
generally leaking and decayed, the walls are damp and several
of them have no dampcourse, there are others where the damp-
course has perished. The construction is bad, in some the ex-
ternal walls are only 4| inches brickwork and that has been
treated at various times with either paint or tar to prevent
drifting dampness, and as these things perish, of course, when
the rain follows the water still goes through. In some cases the
floor is a little lower than the ground level, and the water flows
into the house. The woodwork of windows and doors and wea-
therings are decayed, frames have moved and allow water to
get down through cracks around the window frames. Many of
them have only one connection to the sewer and there are con-
tinual chokages, and in carrying out repairs pipes get broken
and instead of being renewed a piece of tin is put over it and
that brings about further chokages. In several of them, the
waste water, instead of being connected to the sewer, is con-
nected to the stormwater and the downpipes. Those are illus-
trations. Some are rat infested.” “If a workman,” he stated
later, “wanted to live in Paddington it is almost impossible to
get a proper place to live in.”
Evidence of the bad condition of the majority of houses with
three rooms and kitchen was given with regard to Waterloo by
Mr. Baldock, and as regards Marrickville by Mr. Brownell.
1936.
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages fob
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.


1936.
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages for
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.
It was claimed that this evidence showed that in the suburbs
mentioned there are very few houses with three rooms and
kitchen except those in the unsanitary and filthy condition
described.
All parties united in requesting us to make inspections of
houses of the standard size, and we determined to do so.
We first inspected a number of houses in North Sydney,
selecting some at random from the list of houses in that suburb
the subject of returns to the Statist to the Commission, but a
much larger number were selected by ourselves when actually
making the inspections. In making such selections we en-
deavoured to select houses representative of every class of dwel-
lings at or near the standard size and as widely distributed as
possible in the suburb.
The result of our first day’s inspections disclosed a condition
of things so vastly different from that described by the local
government officer, that we thought it advisable to make inspec-
tions in a number of other suburbs, which we accordingly did.
We made a detailed inspection of a very large number of
houses in Paddington, Leichhardt, Petersham, Newtown, and
St. Peters, choosing the dwellings to be inspected in the same
way as we had done in North Sydney, and in all cases the
examination included sanitary conveniences, baths, yards and
general surroundings. The result of our inspections satisfies
us that the evidence given in the inquiry with regard to the
existence of houses of three rooms and kitchen in sound tenant-
able condition in the suburbs of North Sydney, Paddington and
Leichhardt is quite unreliable.
House after house that we inspected in many streets in all
the suburbs we visited we found in quite good tenantable con-
dition, let at rentals ranging from 15s. to £l, and while they
were not always in a perfect state of repair, were clean and
sanitary and quite fit for habitation. We certainly found houses
that were not in sound tenantable condition, some far below that
standard, but they were usually let at rentals which were well
below that allowed by the Commission. We also found houses
of three rooms and kitchen let for rentals from about £1 up to
255.
In the judgment accompanying the declaration of 1932 we
dealt at some length with the data available to the Commission
on the cost of housing. It is not necessary on this occasion to
repeat what was there stated, except to point out that under


statutory authority both the Commonwealth Statistician and
this Commission collect particulars of actual rents of four-
roomed houses in New South Wales and that these collections
are made independently and, it is believed, to a large extent
from different sources.
The Commission again has before it a great deal of statistical
and other information. There are the figures of the Common-
wealth Statistician and of the Statist to the Commission, the
result of the Commonwealth Census of 1933 relating to dwel-
lings in this State published in Census Bulletin No. 17, Govern-
ment returns showing the cost of private dwellings erected dur-
ing the half-year ended 30th June, 1935, in a large number of
metropolitan municipalities and shires, and the evidence adduced
on the inquiry. The statistical information collected, to which
the Commission pays regard, relates to four-roomed tenanted
houses with walls of wood, brick or stone (thereby excluding
dwellings with walls of galvanised iron, hessian or other inferior
material) ; houses constructed of these inferior materials con-
tained in the census results have also been disregarded.
In 1932 the Commission determined upon the amount to be
allowed for housing, after taking into account not only the
weighted average of the actual rents of tenanted houses, but also
the proper amount ascribable to rent which would be paid by
purchasers of houses in process of being acquired under the
rent-purchase system. In the result a higher sum was allowed
for housing in the male living wage than the amount deter-
mined by the Commission to be the weighted average of the
actual rents paid in the State ([1932] A.R. at pages 110-113).
By the last living wage adjustment of October, 1935, the housing
allowance declared in 1932 became, approximately, 17s. 6d. per
week.
The Commission, as we have said, must declare living wages
operative throughout the whole of the State of New South
Wales, there being no power to declare separate wages for sec-
tions of the State. Thus we are bound by the statute not only to
ascertain a housing allowance, but a housing allowance duly
averaged for the whole of the State.
The results of the 1933 census show that on 30th June, 1933,
the average weekly rent of tenanted private houses with walls
of wood, brick or stone in the metropolitan area was 17s. 3d.,
and in the provincial urban area (thus excluding rural areas)
13s. 9d. The weighted average weekly rent of these tenanted
houses throughout the State was 16s. 3d.
1930.
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages fob
Adult Males
and Adult
Females,


s.
d.
s.
d.
1931 —4th qr. ...
. .. 16
11
1934-
-1st qr. ...
. . . 16
0
1932-
—1st qr. ...
... 16
9
2nd qr. ...
1
2nd qr. ...
... 16
7
3rd qr. ...
.. . 16
2.
3rd qr. ...
. .. 16
5
4th qr. ...
. . . 16
2
4th qr. ...
. . . 16
4
1935-
-1st qr. ...
. . . 16
4
1933-
-1st qr. . . . ,
, . . 16
2
2nd qr. . . .,
. . . 16
5
2nd qr
. . 16
2
3rd qr
, 16
8
3rd qr
. . 16
2
4th qr
. . 16
9
4th qr
.. 16
1
1936-
-1st qr
. . 16
11
1936.
In rt
Standard
or Living
and Living
Wages for
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.
The returns of rents made to the Commission and the figures
of the Commonwealth Statistician relating to rent have again
been carefully considered and read and adjusted in the light of
the recently published result of the 1933 census. The evidence
( before us, the results of our own inspections, and the cost of the
erection of dwellings of a standard type and size, have also been
taken into consideration.
In determining the housing allowance in 1932 the Commission
had regard to, inter alia, actual rents paid in the metropolitan
and provincial urban areas throughout the State during the basic
period of that declaration, namely, the six months ended the 31st
March, 1932. In spite of an upward trend since the beginning
of 1934, the cost of housing at the date of the last adjustment
of the living wages, October, 1935, nevertheless remained lower
than it was during the basic period of the 1932 declaration.
The following are the weighted average weekly rents from the
basic period of the 1932 declaration to the Ist quarter of 1936
for the metropolitan and provincial urban areas of New South
Wales:—
These figures are based upon the results of the 1933 census,
including the new relative populations of the metropolitan and
provincial urban areas there disclosed.
After consideration of the whole of the material before us, and
of the fact that the trend of rents is upward, we are satisfied
that 17s. 6d. per week is a proper and adequate sum to enable
the lowest paid employees to secure housing accommodation of
the prescribed standard throughout the State during the ensuing
six months.
The local government returns showing the cost of private
dwellings erected are furnished to the Industrial Commission
in accordance with regulations made under the Industrial


Arbitration Act. The tabulation of these returns placed in
evidence covers the details of detached dwellings erected during
the half-year ended 80th June, 1935. No semi-detached dwel-
lings or dwellings connected with shops, or terraces, or flats have
been included. The return covers those erected, during the half-
year mentioned, in the metropolitan area, Le., in all metropolitan
municipalities and the shires of Hornsby, Sutherland and War-
ringah. Examination of the details of houses with four rooms,
i.e., three sleeping or living rooms and a kitchen, shows that 403
were erected at an average cost of £520; the average cost of the
allotment was £132 and of the fencing £lB. The total average
cost was therefore £670. The lower quartile cost was £336; that
is to say, that one quarter of all the 403 dwellings cost not more
than £336 each. The lower quartile cost of allotment was £7B,
and the fencing about £l2. Thus the total lower quartile cost
of four-roomed dwellings in the metropolitan area, including
allotment and fencing, was about £426. If only those dwellings
provided with laundry, bath, kitchen stove, copper and set tubs
are considered, the lower quartile cost increases to £3BO. Adding
to this £9O for cost of allotment and fencing, a sum of £470 is
reached as representing the lower quartile cost of four rooms with
the accessories and conveniences mentioned erected in the metro-
politan area during the half-year ended 30th June, 1935. A sum
of, say, £5OO would be somewhat higher than the proper sum to
allow as the cost of an adequate four-roomed house for the
lowest paid employees in the metropolitan area, undoubtedly
conforming in every respect with the standard of housing
adopted by the Commission. The cost of a similar house in the
provincial urban area would be lower.
In view of the cost of the erection of dwellings of the standard
type and size to which we have referred, the sum of 17s. 6d. now
allowed for rent will be quite adequate to cover the amount of the
rent purchaser’s payment ascribable to rent. This sum will cover
the rent payment of employees who have entered into contracts
during recent years, and by reason of the reduction in interest
and other costs it will also ©over the payment ascribable to rent
of the employees who entered into contracts to purchase before
interest and costs fell to lower levels. There is thus no need on
this occasion to consider further that aspect of the matter.
Once more it is desirable to emphasise that in fixing the
liousing allowance (as with other component sections of the
living wage), the Commission is, by force of the Act under which
1936.
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages fob
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.


1936.
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages for
Adult Males
and Adult
Females,
ItfrTtn in y , COn ° ern / d Wlth Providing a statutory safe-
,uard for the needs, not, for example, of skilled or even partly
lied employees or of public servants, but of the lowest paid
employees in the community. This should by now be obvious
enough, but in no branch of the living wage is this predominant
and important fact more widely or more persistently overlooked.
tus heading u was eiaim «>
r „ Servlce Association that the sum of £2 12s. sd. should
mtoedT' th° r T T”’ Wife a “ d Child ' In 1926 the amount deter-
ned by the Industrial Commissioner for the requirements of
a man wife and three dependent children was 17s. lOd. per
week. In 1932 for a man, wife and one child 17s. 4d. per week
was allowed by the Commission.
A considerable amount of evidence was directed to the miscel-
aneous requirements of employees, and here again the Commis-
sion has made a complete review. Several of the items claimed
ave been before living wage fixing tribunals for many years past
and have invariably been disallowed as being quite outside the’
scope of living wage requirements. Again they must be re-
jected for the same reason.
We have made provision under this heading for fuel and
ight; groeenes-not-food; renewal of household utensils, drapery
and crockery; union subscriptions; lodge dues; medicine and
dentist; hospital contributions; newspapers; recreation, amuse-
ments, and library; smoking; barber; toilet requirements; school
requisites and fares. We see no reason to depart from the
previous determinations of the Commission covering fares bar-
er, recreation, amusements, library, and the replacement of
household drapery, utensils and crockery. There was no real
dispute with regard to the allowances hitherto made for fuel and
ight, smoking, union subscriptions, and newspapers. Lodge
dues are provided for, and an allowance has also been made to
cover medicine and dentist.
On this occasion it was claimed that provision of 6d. per week
s ould be made in the male living wage and 3d. per week in
tj 6 female llvm g wage as contributions to the Metropolitan
Hospitals Contribution Fund of New South Wales. The pay-
ment of these weekly amounts entitles contributors to valuable
hospital service in the event of illness. For a contribution of
. per week a male employee becomes entitled to benefits for
nmself, his wife and children under the age of 17 years, and


Estimated
Eevenue.
Membership.
£
1932-1933
48,000
31,757
1933-1934
101,000
75,301
1934-1935
156,250
125,200
for other family dependants. The benefits include free treat-
ment in the public ward of a public hospital for a period not
exceeding twelve weeks in any one year; if admitted to a private
or intermediate ward of a public hospital credit is given of 7s.
per day towards the cost of accommodation up to twelve weeks
in any one year. Other valuable benefits are also available to
a contributor and his family. A female contributor may enjoy
similar benefits by the payment of 3d. per week, but they are
limited to herself alone. The fund is mainly a metropolitan
organisation, but schemes of the same character, we were in-
formed, are in operation through local hospitals in a large
number of country districts.
The annual report of the Metropolitan Hospitals Contribution
Fund of 30th June, 1935, discloses that since its inception in
July, 1932, the membership and revenue have been steadily
growing. The following are the relevant figures:—
1936.
'-v-'
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages for
Adult Males
and Adult
Females.
Of the membership of 156,250 approximately 50,000 were adult
women contributors. In 1934-1935 no fewer than 25,900 ob-
tained treatment, and the sum of £109,462 was disbursed for the
purpose in that year. The great value of the service provided
by the Hospitals Contribution Fund has only to be stated to be
realised. The scheme appears to be firmly established, and we
think that provision for employees becoming contributors should
now be made in the living wages; accordingly, we have allowed
6d. per week in the amount of the male living wage and 3d. per
week in the amount of the female living wage.
Other additional items which have been allowed on this occa-
sion are toilet requirements and school requisites.
The miscellaneous requirements of an adult male employee,
his wife and one child under the age of 14 years, may be pro-
perly provided for at a cost averaged over a year of £45 12s. 2d.
In the female living wage provision has been made for union
subscriptions, lodge dues, medicine and dentist, hospital con-
tribution, newspapers, recreation, amusements and library, bar-
ber, toilet requirements, household expenses (including laundry
allowance, etc.), and fares. The Public Service Association
claimed that £1 Is. Id. per week should be allowed in all for
miscellaneous requirements, but here again several items were
outside the range of living wage requirements, while others


Food and groceries ......
Housing
Per annum.
£ a d.
Clothing
Miscellaneous
Total
In re
orLrvrao
wSiesTb
Aiwjxt Males
Aim Adult
Females.
raised questions for the attention of award-making tribunals.
The employers’ submission was that the allowance for miscel-
laneous requirements should be ss. 9d. per week. The con-
Clusion we have reached is that the sum of £22 155., averaged
over a if ear > will enable an adult female employee properly to
meet the miscellaneous requirements indicated
The result of the foregoing findings is that the expenditure
necessary to procure for an adult male employee in the State
of New South Wales the requirements of a husband, wife and one
child under the age of 14 years at the determined standard is
as follows:
The Commission, therefore, determines that the standard of
living for adult male employees in the State of New South Wales
is the standard of living indicated in this judgment, and the
Commission declares that the living wage for adult male em-
ployees in the State of New South Wales, based upon such stan-
dard in accordance with the provisions of section 7 (1) (b) of
the Industrial Arbitration (Amendment) Act No. 14 of 1926,
as amended, is £3 9s. per week.
An illustration of the effectiveness of the living wage for adult
male employees just declared, and of the definite improvement
that has taken place in living wage standards, is provided by a
consideration of the living wage declared in 1914 by the Court of
Industrial Arbitration of this State. In that year Heydon, J.,
fixed the living wage for adult male employees at £2 Bs. per
week, based upon the requirements of a family consisting of man,
wife and two dependent children under the age of 14 years. The
1920 Federal Eoyal Commission compared the cost of living as
regards all items of household expenditure in November, 1914,
and in November, 1920. These figures have been adopted by
the Commonwealth Statistician, and in combination with his own
index numbers he has continued the series to date as the All
Items Index Numbers ( C” Series). They show the variations in
the purchasing power of money in respect of all items of house-
hold expenditure. Comparing the index numbers of this series


Board and Lodging
Per annum.
£ s. d.
54 12 0
14 IS 2
Miscellaneous requirements
22 15 0
Total
£92 6 2
r.r
for Sydney in November, 1914 (712), and in the first quarter
of 1936 (863), it is seen that the commodities and services pro-
vided by the Court in 1914 for a family of four, costing in that
year £2 Bs., may be purchased at the present time for, approxi-
mately, £2 18s. The living wage to-day for a family of three
is £3 9s.
So far as adult female employees are concerned, the result of
the foregoing findings is that the expenditure necessary to pro-
cure their requirements at the determined standard is as fol-
lows :
1936.
W-'
In re
Standard
of Living
and Living
Wages fob
Adult Mams
and Adult
Females.
The Commission, therefore, determines that the standard of
living for adult female employees in the State of New South
Wales is the standard of living indicated in this judgment, and
the Commission declares that the living wage for adult female
employees in the State of New South Wales based upon such
standard in accordance with the provisions of section 7 (1) (b)
of the Industrial Arbitration (Amendment) Act No. 14 of 1926,
as amended, is £1 15s. 6d. per week.
The terms of section 7 (1) (b) of the Act of 1926, as amended
by Act No. 39 of 1932, require the Commission within twenty-
eight days of the end of the month of March in each year, that is,
the 28th day of April in each year, to adjust the current
declared living wages at such amount as will, in the opinion of
the Commission, accord with the increased or decreased cost of
maintaining the determined standard. As only four days will
elapse from the date of the declaration of living wages just made
to the 28th April, it is obvious that no adjustment thereof will be
necessary.
T. A. Ferguson and Vine Hall, solicitors for Employers'
Federation of New South Wales and others.
Shipway and Berne, solicitors for Public Service Association
of New South Wales and others.
D. Lynton Williams, Ellis and Co., solicitors for Tvew South
Wales Public School Teachers’ Federation.
Landa and Lamaro, solicitors for New South Wales Railway
and Tramway Officers’ Association.


[INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION.]
In re LIVING WAGE FOR ADULT FEMALES.
1936.
Sr-»
June 1.
Browne J.,
President,
Cantor and
Webb, JJ.
BeCU r^u,T~^ wa G e Adult female employees—Wage, fifty-four ver
n 'f*™ 9 wag * f° r adult employees—jAct No. 14 of 1926
*• 7 C 1) ( & ) as amended—Act No. 14 of 1936, «. 7 ’
Section 6 of the Industrial Arbitration (Amendment! Act IQ3fi
Iriafcormi B^onT/n tio -^ 0 - n 27th May ’ 1936 > P rovides fhe’lnS
Act, declare the living wag? fT SS Wlf emp^ee?'Tfifty'fSr
tol adult "Inal?
Industrial Arbitration (Amendment) Act, 1926, on 24tf April,"igse^
Pursuant to this section, the Commission, on Ist June
w^ATrfV°6 r d.^vr ,e employees in the state ' ° f s »"‘ h
Declaration of Living Wage.
The judgment of the Commission was delivered bv the Presi-
dent, (Browne, J.):
, 1 0n , 24tt * ril > 1936 ’ pursuant to the provisions of section 7
' ' ' °* ™ e Industrial Arbitration (Amendment) Act, 1926,
the Industrial Commission, after public inquiry, determined a
standard of living, and declared the living wage for adult male
employees in the State of New South Wales based upon such
standard, and on the requirements of a man and wife with one
child under the age of 14 years, at £3 9s. per week, and the
ivmg wage for adult female employees in the State, based upon
such standard, at the rate of £1 15s. 6d. per week (see ante,
page 3).
secUon 5 ° f the Industrial Arbitration (Amendment) Act,
1936, which Act came into operation on the 27th day of May’
1936, section 7 (1) (b) of the Industrial Arbitration (Amend-
ment) Act, 1926, is amended by inserting after the words “four-
teen years” the words:
The Commission shall declare the living wage for adult
female employees in the State at fifty-four per centum
(calculated to the nearest sixpence) of the living wage
declared for adult male employees on the requirements of
a man and wife with one child under the age of fourteen
years.”


By section 6 of the said amending Act of 1936, it is further
provided:
“(1) The Commission shall, within one week after the
commencement of this Act, declare the living wage for adult
female employees at fifty-four per centum (calculated as
aforesaid) of the living wage for adult male employees in
the State, as declared by the Commission under the Indus-
trial Arbitration (Amendment) Act, 1926, on the twenty-
fourth day of April, one thousand nine hundred and thirty-
six.
“ (2) The living wage for adult female employees declared
under this section shall, for all purposes, have force and
effect as if it had been declared by the Commission under
the Industrial Arbitration (Amendment) Act, 1926, on the
twenty-fourth day of April, one thousand nine hundred and
thirty-six, and as if the amendment made by section five of
• this Act had come into force immediately before such date.”
The Commission now, pursuant to the Industrial Arbitration
(Amendment) Act, 1936, declares the living Avage for adult
female employees in the State of New South Wales at £1 17s. 6d.
per week, being 54 per cent, (calculated to the nearest 6d.) of
the living Avage for adult male employees in the State, as de-
clared by this Commission under the Industrial Arbitration
(Amendment) Act, 1926, on the 24th day of April, 1936.
1936.
'-v-'
In re
Living Wage
for Adult
Females.
Sydnov ; David Harold Paisley, Government Printer —1936.






