

Honorable Gentlemen of the Legislative Council,
Gentlemen of the Legisiatiye Assembly,
I should have called you together at an earlier period, but had I
done so, (owing to the unusual length of the last Session, which was pro-
longed until the 17th March of'the present year,) a sufficient interval would
not have been afforded to the Government for the preparation of the business
about to be brought before you, neither would a sufficient recess have been
granted to those Members who were withdrawn for so long a time from
attending to their private affairs. The delay which has taken place will, I
feel assured, be conducive to the ultimate despatch of public business, as it
has enabled the Government to mature many measures of great importance
to the welfare of the country, which, together with the Estimates for the
year 1858, will be immediately brought under your consideration. To the
following measures of reform and social progress, I would more
particularly invite your attention.
2. Experience has already shown that the change in the system of
Government requires a corresponding change in the system of representa-
tion. A Bill will therefore be immediately laid before you to increase the


number of Members of the Assembly, to remove the disabilities to vote
arising from change of residence or qualification, to introduce the
Ballot, and to bring the Electoral distribution in harmony with the
changes among the population indicated by the late Census. This Bill
will be accompanied by another for the purpose of regulating the proceed-
ings at Elections, diminishing the expenses of candidates and providing
more effectually against the evils of bribery and corruption.
3. A Bill will be laid before you on an early day, to provide for
the future management and disposal of the Public Lands, which, while
preserving the good faith of the Crown, will render the acquisition of
Land in fee simple more easy to all who are likely to bring it into
profitable use, and thus facilitate the permanent settlement, and, at the
same time, increase the productiveness of the Country. One of the most
important objects of the measure will be to augment the means available
for public improvement, and more especially for those great works of
internal communication which are now so much desired, without unduly
pressing upon any class of the community.
4. The Municipalities Bill of last Session, modified and improved
in some important particulars, will be immediately submitted for your
consideration.
5. The Bill for the establishment of District Courts, will be again
brought forward in an amended form. The object of this Bill is to facilitate
and expedite the administration of Justice in the interior, and to relieve
the Supreme Court from the present excessive pressure of business. The
criminal law requires simplification and amendment, in order to make the
punishment of crime more certain; and in connexion with this subject, I
propose to bring under your special notice, the important question of
Secondary Punishment.
6. The subject of Education has received the most anxious con-
sideration from the Government; and it is my intention to lay before you
a measure which, while it will not in any way interfere with the religious
convictions of a single individual will supply adequate means of instruction
for the whole community.
7. Regulations have been established to facilitate the introduction
from the United Kingdom of useful Immigrants under private engage-
ment. The opportunity thus afforded for the selection of Immigrants
by means of private agency, and of providing them with passages in
private ships, will, I trust, be productive of great public advantage.
It is proposed also to grant Remission Certificates in the purchase of
Land, to persons introducing Immigrants of the laboring classes, under
such regulations as may be found desirable. The latter object can only
be effected by Legislative enactment, and the necessary measure for the
purpose will, accordingly, be brought forward at an early day.
8. Arrangements have been made by which it is believed the
efficiency of the Railway Department will be materially increased. The
officer for whom, at the request of the Legislature, I applied in 1850, has
lately arrived in the Colony; and I trust to be able to lay before you,


shortly, such a Report from him upon the general question of Railway
construction and management, as will greatly facilitate the determination
of the measures necessary for the extension of Railways into the interior.
9. The unprecedented continuance of heavy rains has made com-
munication hy the ordinary roads of the Colony almost impracticable, and
has hitherto unfortunately impeded the beneficial expenditure of the sums
voted for their repair. It is intended to apply to the liberality of Parlia-
ment for a much larger amount than usual for the maintenance and icpair
of the leading thoroughfares of the Colony, and to place them under a
more satisfactory system of management.
10. Contracts have been entered into for the construction of a Line
of Electric Telegraph from Sydney to Albury. The progress of this work,
and of those undertaken for a similar purpose by the Sister Colonies,
justifies the expectation that the galvanic circuit between all the Chief
Cities of Australia will soon be completed.
11. I have to congratulate you upon the successful operation of the-
Act of last Session for the Amendment of the Laws relating to the manage-
ment of the Gold Fields, and upon the orderly conduct and gradually
increasing prosperity of the population at the Mines.
12. The important questions of an inter-Colonial character which
are constantly arising, suggest the establishment of a Federal Legislature,
possessing power and authority for their discussion and determination in
the interest of the Australian Colonies generally. I recommend this,
important subject to your early consideration.
13. The Legislative Assembly having asserted the principle that
all Legislative bodies should be elective, it will be necessary at the earliest
period consistent with its deliberate determination that the subject of the
constitution of the Legislative Council should be taken into the consi-
deration of the Legislature, and it appears to me that a fitting opportunity
for this purpose will be afforded when by the intended revision of the
Electoral system, the opinion of the Country upon this fundamental
question can be clearly ascertained.
14. It is desirable to separate the political duties of the Attorney
General from his office of Grand Jury, and in order to carry out this
reform, a Bill will be introduced to authorise the appointment of a Public
Prosecutor.
15. The recent proclamation of the coinage of the Sydney Mint in
Victoria, will I believe be of great advantage to that Colony and to New
South Wales. And I venture to hope that Her Majesty’s Government
may be induced to make current the Colonial coin in all parts of the
British Empire.
Gentlemen of the Legislative Assembly,
■ 16. The Financial condition of the country has, during the recess,
received my most anxious attention. It is a subject of congratulation,
that the deficit in the Revenue existing at the commencement of 1856,
has been diminished by economy and the improved state of the Public
0


ncome, and that, up to the present time, I have not been compelled to avail
myself of the authority to borrow any portion of the sum of one hundred
and fifty thousand pounds, placed at my disposal to cover this deficit. It
is not my intention at present to propose any alteration in the Customs’
Tariff, nor to increase the amount of Revenue raised by indirect Taxation.
1/. The Estimates of Expenditure are prepared, and will be
immediately laid before you. The utmost economy consistent with a
desire to provide for the growing wants of this rising Country has been
observed in their preparation.
18. The collection and distribution of the duties on goods entering
the Colony by way of the River Murray has been the subject of corres°
pondence between the Government of New South Wales, Victoria and
South Australia, which will be laid before you. It is hoped that this
correspondence will lead to the completion of a temporary arrangement
satisfactory to all parties, and ultimately to the adoption of one Tariff of
Customs Dues common to all the Australian Colonies. A Bill will be
submitted to you for the purpose of legalizing the contemplated arrange-
ment. °
19. The temporary and varied character of a considerable portion
of the public Debt and the inconvenience which is felt in some instances
from the want of a desirable mode of permanently investing trust and other
moneys, has rendered it expedient to fund the Debt of the Colony on certain
conditions. A measure for this purpose has accordingly been prepared,
and will be laid before you.
20. It has been thought advisable to modify the present system of
receipts and payments at the Treasury by relieving the Minister of Finance
and Trade from the anomalous position of combining a political office with
that of a public Accountant, responsible for the custody and expenditure
of the public money—A Bill to give effect to this measure will be
presented to you.
21. A Bill to establish the office and define the duties of the
Auditor General will be re-submitted to you on an early day.
Honorable Gentlemen of the Legislative Council, and Gentlemen of
the Legislative Assembly,—
22. The great importance of making adequate arrangements for
the management of the Light Houses and Harbors on the Coast, and the
supervision and regulation of the Pilot Establishments, has suggested the
propriety of appointing a Board, whom it is proposed to incorporate and
entrust with the performance of these duties; the necessary measure has
been prepared for this purpose.
23. I shall lay before you important correspondence which has
led to the establishment of Banking and Commercial Agencies for New
South Wales in London, upon terms advantageous to the Colony.
24. A provisional arrangement has been entered into with the
Royal Mail Steam Packet Company, for a monthly Postal Communication
between Southampton and Sydney, via Panama and New Zealand. Should


. , • , u will give to these Colonies the
this scheme be carried into eilcct, » . , ,
you,"and I
earnestly recommend the measure to your consideration and approval.
25 The Colony has been visited during the past few months by
attended with any serious loss of life.
26 The commercial and monetary state of the country is sound and
satisfactory, and X am most thankful to, be able to state, that prosper, y
attends all interests in the community.
27. Various important
allude, Will also be p TttTnL consideration,
those to which I have ,*** and
I again assure you of my earnest rf my for fte public
ccrdially with the of your deliberations may
good; and I y God) conauc e to the happiness and
prosperity of the important community whose interests are committeu to
your charge.


BifcUO
