

’33 Sn nß’jss **., aia u e P . NS
Boa | I
TO TflE JEWS
VICTORIA,
ON BEHALF OF THEIR PERSECUTED RUSSIAN BRETHREN.
PUBLISHED BY
THE ANGLO-JEWISH ASSOCIATION
(Melbourne Branch).
1882.
Walker, May & Co., Printers, g Mackillop Street, Melbourne.


MELBOURNE BRANCH.
President:
EPHRAIM L. ZOX, ESQ., M.L.A.
Hon. Treasurer:
ISAAC JACOBS, Esq.
Hon. Secretary:
NAHUM BARNET, Esq.
ISAAC BARNET, Esq., J.P.
PHILIP BLASHKI, ESQ.
REV. E. BLAUBAUM.
WOLF DAVIS, Esq.
ABRAHAM LEVY, Esq.
EDWARD MARKS, Esq.
MARK MARKS, Esq., J.P.
NELSON S. MARKS, Esq.
MOSES MOSES, Esq., M.A.
AARON WAXMAN, Esq., J.P.
Collector:
MR. MOSELY HYMAN, Mackenzie Street.
BALLARAT BRANCH.
President:
N. F. SPIELVOGEL, Esq.
Hon. Treasurer:
J. BERNSTEIN, Esq.
Hon. Secretary : Hon. Correspondent:
L. COHEN, Esq. REV. I. M. GOLDREICH.
L. L. MEANOWSKI, Esq. | W. FLEGELTAUB, Esq.
L. FLOHM, Esq.
SANDHURST BRANCH.
President:
SINA MAX, Esq.
Hon. Secretary
CHARLES COHEN, Esq.
NOTE.—The Victorian Branches of the Anglo-Jewish Association
have resolved upon united action, in consolidating the fund
raised in Melbourne for the Emigration of the persecuted
Russian Jews.
K u o ’tSUil \ jU.Vt


VICTORIAN RUSSO-JEWISH EMIGRATION FUND,
APPEAL TO THE JEWS
VICTORIA
You are doubtless well aware of the monstrously unjust and cruel
treatment which the Jews of Russia have been for some time, and
are still, receiving at the hands of those from whom they have a right
to seek protection rather than hostility—their fellow-countrymen. The
facts of this shameful persecution are known —at least, in outline—to
the inhabitants of the whole civilized globe, who have not failed to
raise their voices in emphatic protest against outrages for which not the
shadow of a justification can be alleged. The commonest feelings
of humanity must indeed be shocked at the sight of a mighty
European nation degrading itself below the level of untutored
barbarians. Nor can it be believed that these manifestations of
intolerance are but the symptoms of a momentary aberration. From
all accounts, it clearly appears that a cessation of these enormities, to
say nothing of redress and compensation, is not to be looked for.
Nay, it would seem that the efforts of the advisers of the Russian
Government are being exerted to bring into force such restrictive
and vexatious enactments as will render life for the Jewish inhabi-
tants of Russia a permanent and hopeless misery, if not altogether
an impossibility.
Under these lamentable circumstances, the only way left to them
for escaping from a bondage worse than Egyptian is to abandon the
land of their birth and settle where they can at least breathe the air
of liberty and call their lives their own. The distressed and
impoverished condition into which pillage and riot have plunged the
great majority of them renders impossible their emigration without
external assistance ; and it is to establish a fund to provide this
assistance that we, the Melbourne Branch of the Anglo-Jewish
Association, issue this appeal to our co-religionists in Victoria. The
more precious our privilege of being citizens of the freest and most
enlightened empire that ever existed, the more keenly must we feel
commiseration for the unhappy lot of those who are our brethren in
creed and race, with whom we have in common the history of an
unexampled past and the hopes of an illustrious future. It would
be our duty to lend a helping hand even to our enemies in their
affliction ; it should be our eager impulse to succour, even at a
sacrifice, those of our own blood.


The extract from the powerful and eloquent appeal from the Rev.
A. Lswy, secretary of the Anglo-Jewish Association, London, and
which is given in another page, renders it needless for us to dilate
further on this point. The object of the Russo-Jewish Emigration
Fund is to assist the persecuted Jews to emigrate to America and
those other lands where exist humanity, freedom, and tolerance. Of
emigration the London Jewish Chronicle rightly observes :
“ Emigration blesses both him that emigrates and his brethren who
remain. The emigrant finds a new scope for his energy and at the same
time removes some social pressure at home. While the Russian Jews
are refused freedom of locomotion, while they are cooped up within a
limited number of provinces, the pressure of population must become
greater each year, the difficulty of gaining a livelihood by each indivi-
dual Jew the more stringent. Every Jew removed by emigration lightens
the pressure of the struggle for existence, while he forms a nucleus of a
centre where other of his old friends may join him, where in a few years
he may be enabled to aid some of his relatives to rejoin him. The
prosperous condition of the Irish in America, when compared with the
Irish in Ireland, may serve as an illustration of the way in which Jewish
emigrants from Russia may help to aid other immigrants to follow them
without any appeal to charity or to any organization.”
Already some 50,000 Russian Jews, assisted by influential English,
French, and German committees, have found a welcome in the
United States of America. Can we imagine their inexpressible joy
and relief at having their prison fetters at length removed from their
limbs, and can we refrain from doing our utmost to assist in this
work of true charity ?
Signed, on behalf of the Committee,
EPHRAIM L. ZOX, President.
ISAAC JACOBS, Hon. Treasurer.
NAHUM BARNET, Hon. Secretary.
Melbourne, March , 1882.
SUBSCRIPTIONS RECEIVED BY THE FOLLOWING:—
MELBOURNE:
E. L. ZOX, Collins-street East. | I. JACOBS, 72 Queen-street.
N. BARNET, 48 Queen-street.
BALLARAT:
N. F. SPIELVOGEL, Armstrong-st. | J. BERNSTEIN, Main-street.
SANDHURST:
S. MAX, Hustler’s Buildings. | CHARLES COHEN, Pall Mall.
Note. —A Subscription Form is enclosed ;it is desirable that it should be filled
in and returned as early as possible, as it is to be understood that the horrible
persecution of the Jews of Russia still exists, and it is to remove at
ONCE the victims from the scene of misery that these moneys are collected.
Subscriptions will be acknowledged in the Jewish Press.


THE PERSECUTIONS OF THE JEWS
IN RUSSIA.
(From the London “Times” of iith January, 1882.)
It is time that the English public should be made aware of the
character and extent of the persecutions which the Jews of Russia
have undergone during the past year. The Warsaw riots have come
merely as the last term (as yet) of a series of similar outbreaks which
have ravaged the South and West of Russia to an extent of which
people outside that country have not the faintest conception. The
news which has crossed the borders has been of the most meagre
description, chiefly in the form of telegrams announcing that anti-
Jewish riots had occurred at such and such a place. Coming at
various intervals, they have altogether failed to strike the imagination,
and it is due solely to this cause that the public opinion of England,
so ready to undertake the cause of suffering humanity, has not given
vigorous expression to its feelings of abhorrence. During the past
eight months a tract of country, equal in area to the British Isles and
France combined, stretching from the Baltic to the Black Sea, has
been the scene of horrors that have hitherto only been perpetrated
in mediieval days during times of war. Men ruthlessly murdered,
tender infants dashed to death, or roasted alive in their own homes,
married women the prey of a brutal lust that has often caused their
death, and young girls violated in the sight of their relatives by
soldiers who should have been the guardians of their honour —these
have been the deeds with which the population of Southern Russia
has been stained since last April. In the face of these horrors loss
of property is of little moment, yet they have been accompanied by
the razing of whole streets inhabited by Jews, by the systematic
firing of the Jewish quarters of towns in Western Russia, and by the
pillage of all the property on which thousands of Jewish families
were dependent for existence.
In addition to all this, many Russian towns have heartlessly seized
the occasion to expel from their limits crowds of Jews, who have
been left, by this inhuman and deliberate measure, homeless amid
masses infuriated against them. And during these scenes of carnage
and pillage the local authorities have stood by with folded arms,
doing little or nothing to prevent their occurrence and recurrence,
and allowing the ignorant peasantry to remain, up to this day, under
the impression that a ukase existed ordering the property of the
Jews to be handed over to their fellow-Russians. So far from
publicly expressing reprobation of these outrages, the Minister has
issued a rescript clearly betraying that the Russian authorities fully
share the prejudice of the mob, and contemplate adding to the
burdens and inequalities which have been the direct cause of the
embittered feeling that has led to these disorders.
Ever since the German anti-Semites had raised an outcry against
their Jewish fellow-citizens, it had been feared that the movement


would spread to Russia, and there take a form more adapted to the
less civilized state of the country. When, therefore, the assassina-
tion of the Czar on 3rd March of last year had roused all Russia to
the highest pitch of excitement, it was confidently predicted that the
approaching Easter would see an outbreak against the Jews. It
was said afterwards that the prediction was aided in its fulfilment by
Panslavist emissaries from Moscow, who planned all the subsequent
troubles. It is at least certain that rumours of a rising had reached
Elizabethgrad, and caused the heads of the Jewish community, who
form a third of its 30,000 inhabitants, to apply for special protection
from the Governor. No notice was taken of the appeal, and on
Wednesday, 27 th April, the dreaded outbreak took place. A reli-
gious dispute in a cabaret led to a scuffle, which grew into a general
melee , till the mob obtained possession of the dram shop, and rifled it
of its contents. Inflamed by the drink thus obtained, the rioters
proceeded to the Jewish quarter, and commenced a systematic
destruction of the Jewish shops and warehouses. At first some
attempt was made by the Jews to protect their property; but this
only served to increase the violence of the mob, which proceeded to
attack the dwellings of the Jews, and to wreck the synagogues.
Amid the horrors that ensued a Jew named Zolowenski lost his life,
and no fewer than thirty Jewesses were outraged. At one place two
young girls in dread of violation threw themselves from the windows.
Meanwhile the military had been called out, but only to act at first
as spectators, and afterwards as active participators. One section of
the mob, formed of rioters and soldiers, broke into the dwelling of an
old man named Pelikoff, and, on his attempting to save his daughter
from a fate worse than death, they threw him down from the roof,
while twenty soldiers proceeded to work their will on his unfortunate
daughter. When seen by the correspondent who narrates this fact,
Pelikotf was in a state of hopeless madness, and his daughter com-
pletely ruined in mind and body. The whole Jewish quarter was at
the mercy of the mob till 29th April. During the two days of the
riots, 500 houses and too shops were destroyed, whole streets being
razed to the ground. It may be added that the property destroyed
and stolen was reckoned at 2,000,000 roubles.
The evidence of pent-up anti-Jewish passion displayed by these
scenes encouraged the foes of the Jews to wider and more systematic
attacks. In the excesses that followed, the masses soon got to
recognize professional ringleaders from Great Russia. These dis-
tributed placards, found afterwards to have been issued from a
secret printing-press at Kieff, in which it was declared that the Czar
had given his orthodox subjects the property held by the Jews. In
most cases the very day on which a riot might be expected was
announced beforehand, Sundays and saints’ days being chosen, as
the days when the lower orders were at liberty. After a week’s
pause, a whole series of riots broke out, commencing on 7th May,
at Smielo, near Czergassy, where thirteen men were killed and twenty
wounded, and 1,600 were left without homes. Next day, Sunday,
Bth May, a most serious riot broke out at Kieff, once the capital of
Russia, and still an important town, containing 20,000 Jews in a


population of 140,000. Here the riot had been definitely announced
for the Sunday, and the Jews sent a deputation to the Governor,
requesting him to call out his soldiers to prevent disturbance. He
bluntly refused, saying that he would not trouble his soldiers for the
sake of a pack of Jews. During the riot, which broke out on the
day fixed, the police and the soldiers again acted the same part that
they had at Elizabethgrad. The first procedure of the mob had
been to storm the dram-shops, and, staving in the brandy casks, to
wallow in the spirit. During the period of licence that followed,
four Jews were killed, twenty-five women and girls were violated, of
whom five died in consequence, as was proved at the subsequent
trials. At the house of Mordecai Wienarski, the mob, disappointed
in the search for plunder, caught up his little child, three years old,
and brutally threw it out of the window. The child fell dead at the
feet of a company of Cossacks who were drawn up outside, yet no
attempt was made to arrest the murderers. At last, when several
houses were set on fire, the military received orders to make arrests,
which they proceeded to execute with much vigour, making 1,500
prisoners, among whom 150 were Jews arrested for protecting their
lives and properties. No less than 2,000 Jews were left without
shelter by the dismantling or the burning of their houses, and for
the relief of immediate necessities a Kieff committee soon after-
wards had to disburse the sum of
Next day similar scenes of violence occurred at Browary, in the
neighbourhood of Kieff, in the province of Czernigow. On the
same day still more disgraceful deeds were enacted at Berezowka,
in the province of Cherson. Here lust seemed more a principal
motive than plunder. While the Jews of the village were at
synagogue a mob attacked the Jewesses and violated many of them,
causing the death of three; others who escaped the worse evil were
driven into the river, and nine ultimately died from the effects of
the exposure. When the Jews came to the rescue, two of them were
killed and a young lad stoned to death.
The neighbourhood of Kieff was again visited on the next day,
10th May, at Konotop and at Wassilkov. At both places the attacks
had been planned; at the former, wooden crosses were placed before
the doors of Christians that their houses might be spared, while at
the latter the day of riot had been announced, and the report
diligently spread about that the Czar had given the property of the
Jews away. At Wassilkov and in the neighbourhood eight lives
were lost, seven at one fell swoop at the inn kept by a Jew named
Kykelmann. He was forced to admit the mob to his wine cellars,
and, during his absence in search of assistance, the drunken rioters
cut the throats of his wife and six children.
By this time the chief towns and villages of Southern Russia were
ablaze with violence and riot. Throughout the whole of the provinces
of Cherson, Taurida, Ekaterinoslav, Poltava, Kieff, Czernigov, and
Podolia the notion spread as fast as wildfire that the Jews and their
property had been handed over to the tender mercies of the populace,
a notion that seems almost justified in the face of the inertness of
the Governor-General in checking the riots at Elizabethgrad and


Kieff. At Walsigin the mayor even read a copy of the supposed
ukase to the citizens, and a riot would have ensued had not the
village priest done his duty and declared his belief that no such
ukase existed. At Alexandrovsk, on the banks of the Dnieper, the
operatives carried out what they thought to be the will of the Czar,
on 13th May, rendering 300 out of the 400 Jewish families of the
place homeless, and destroying property to the amount of 400,000
roubles. As usual, the riots were previously announced, and the
appeal to the Governor to send for additional troops proved fruitless.
Even after the riots had commenced, a telegram despatched to the
capital town of the province, Ekaierinoslav, was delayed for four
hours by the Governor before it was sent off. At Ekaterinoslav
itself a projected riot was happily prevented by the issue of a
proclamation by the local authorities declaring the Jews to be true
subjects of the Czar and entitled to protection of their property. At
Polonnoze, near Kieff, a disaster was averted by the forethought of
the mayor, who changed the market-day to Saturday, and on the
peasants complaining, he read them a lesson on the utility of the
Jews as middle-men, and induced them to promise not to molest
their Jewish fellow-citizens.
From Alexandrovsk the instigators paid a visit to the Jewish agri-
cultural colonies in the province of Ekaterinoslav, which have now
been established for more than forty years. The chief centres,
Gulaypol, Orchejow, and Marianpol, were visited in turn, and though
no violence seems to have been done to the persons of the Jews,
their farms were almost entirely destroyed. At Orchejow the insti-
gators who led the mob were dressed as police officers, and produced
a document falsely professing to be the proclamation of the Czar.
The farming implements were all destroyed, and 500 cattle and 10,000
sheep were driven off. At Kamichewka, the Jews adroitly turned
the supposed ukase of the Czar into a safeguard. Hearing that the
rioters were advancing to attack, they brought the keys of their
houses to their Christian neighbours, saying that if the ukase were true
it would be better that their neighbours should have their property
than the rioters, and if the ukase proved to be untrue, of course
their good neighbours would return the keys. The Christians of the
village accordingly repulsed the rioters, and in a few days the Jews
of Kamichewka were again in possession of their property.
Up to this time the riots had chiefly arisen among the urban popu-
lations, but they now spread into the rural districts, and reached
every little village where even a single Jew resided. A Jew was
murdered at Rasdory, a few miles south-east of Orchejow, and at
Znamenka, near Nikopol, on the Dnieper, a Jewish innkeeper named
Resser was murdered and his wife dishonoured, after which both
were cast into the river. At Balka, also on the bank of the Dnieper,
there was only one Jew, Allowicz by name. A band of ruffians went
to his house on 17th May, and, finding him absent, they violated
his wife, and to conceal the crime set fire to the house while the
poor woman lay helpless in it. All this was witnessed by her little
daughter, crouched in a ditch hard by. On the preceding day
another tragedy had occurred at Kitskis, where the house of one


Preskoff was set on fire, and he, with two little children, left to roast
in it, while the wife and mother looked on, vainly appealing for
mercy to the ruffianly perpetrators of the crime. At Gregorievk a
Jewish innkeeper named Ruff man was cooped in one of his own
barrels, and cast into the Dnieper. Again, at Kanzeropol, a man
named Enman was murdered brutally, and his wife violated and
afterwards killed. Such were the deeds that were done on the banks
of the Dnieper during the month of May.
Meantime the seaport Odessa had likewise been the scene of an
anti-Jewish riot. Originally announced for 13th May, it was post-
poned till Sunday, 15th May, without, however, any precautions
being taken by the Governor, who had, as usual, been duly warned
of the impending outbreak. Though only lasting for six hours, the
riot resulted in the death of a Jew named Handelmann, and n cases
of violation are reported, one resulting in death. Here the Jews
seemed to be most energetic in their resistance. Of the 800 arrests
made, 150 were of Jews, 26 of whom were afterwards charged with
carrying revolvers without a permit. The police estimated the
damage done at 1,137,831 roubles, while those more immediately
concerned raised the sum to three millions. Similar scenes took
place on the same day at Wolvezysk, on the borders, where a riot
had been announced for the Sunday. A week afterwards the lower
orders of Berdyczew rose against the Jews, and on 24th May a
riotous disturbance occurred at Zmerinka, in Podolia.
Thus, within a month of the first outbreak, almost every town of
importance in Southern Russia has seen such horrors as we have
described. Apart from the influence of ringleaders, the rioters
had no cause to incite them to rapine except the force of con-
tagion and the impression that the Czar had really transferred
all Jewish property to his orthodox subjects. If once this im-
pression had been officially removed, the epidemic would have
been checked. In many cases it was distinctly shown that the
peasants liked the Jews, and only pillaged because they thought
it had been ordered. At Bougaifka, for example, a few days
after the peasants had destroyed the property of the Jews, they
became contrite, and gave their Jewish neighbours 800 roubles as
some compensation for the damage they themselves had caused. In
the face of such a fact, it is tolerably certain that if the supposed
proclamation had been energetically and officially denied the riots
might never have reached the extent that they eventually did. The
contagion spread as far as Saratov early in June, and thence to
Astrakhan ; it even reached a town near Tomsk, in Siberia, and
caused an anti-Jewish riot there. The only bright spot in all this
gloom was the condition of Poland, where Jews and Poles have
always lived in amity. This continued till General Ignatieff directed
the Governor of Poland to appoint commissions of experts to
consider how the Jews should be dealt with, to which fact persons
on the spot attribute the rise of anti-Jewish feeling that culminated
in the Warsaw riots. But outside Poland these outbursts of popular
prejudice placed a population of nearly two millions in perpetual
dread of their lives and property. At times they dared not remove


their clothes night or day, fearing that they might have to flee at any
moment. Ever since last April that feeling of fear and insecurity
has ruled the lives of all Russian Jews.
Not a month, scarcely a week, has passed since then without some
outbreak or other occurring to confirm these fears and render them
the more acute. After the Saratov affair, on Bth June, in which
thirty Jews were wounded, there was a comparative lull in the more
violent forms of outrage. But early in July the neighbourhood of
Kieff and the banks of the Dnieper were once more visited by scenes
which recall the horrors of the Middle Ages. On Sunday, the 12th,
open rioting took place at Penjaslaw, which was characterized by the
fact that the mob were led to the attack by the sons of the merchants
of the district. Commercial rivalry adding its sting to religious and
social differences, the struggle was here of a more violent nature than
usual, and, while thirty of the mob were wounded, no less than 200
of the Jews received serious injuries at the hands of their neighbours,
and three died in consequence; 176 houses were destroyed, some
by fire. At Borispol, on 2rst July, scenes occurred during the riots
worthy of the worst days of the Commune. Women, for almost the
first time, made their appearance on the scene as assailants, and
added to its horrors. During the rioting they encouraged their
friends on to the fight, and were seen to assist them to violate the
Jewesses of the village by holding down the unfortunate creatures.
A curious petition afterwards sent from this neighbourhood, demand-
ing, among other things, that Jewesses should not be allowed to wear
silks and satins, may throw some light on the motives of these
viragos.
The reader will be by this time satiated with the horrible crimes
which have been laid before him. The imagination may now be
able to take in the’ full meaning of the bare statement, so frequent
during last year, that anti-Jewish riots had taken place in such
and such a district of Southern Russia. Suffice it then to add that
the month of August saw riots at Njezin on the 2nd, at Lubnyon the
Bth, at Borzny on the 18th, and at Itchny on the 28th. If September
was comparatively free from disorders, the cessation must be
attributed rather to the needs of the harvest than to the quieting of
the popular mind, for early in October the mob attacked the Jews
of Balwierzyski, in the government of Su\valki. 3rd October was
the Day of Atonement, the most sacred day of the Hebrew calendar,
and the mob took the occasion to destroy the synagogue and wreck
the Jewish quarter, where one Jew was killed and twenty wounded.
Even as late as November, the myth of the spoliation ukase imposed
upon the peasantry. On the 15th of that month a band of 100
peasants at Czarwona, near Zitomir, pillaged the property of the
Jews under that pretext. Lastly, to show the excitable state of the
popular mind, the Sarah Bernhardt riots at Kieff on 18th November,
and at Odessa on 27th November, proved that a mere suspicion that
the actress was a Jewess was sufficient to arouse once more the fury
of the mob, and cause them again to attack the Jewish quarter of
those towns.
Finally, this catalogue of horrors must be concluded by a reference


to the riots at Warsaw on Christmas and the following days. The
detailed events of those days, when 300 houses and 600 shops were
pillaged and devastated and thousands of victims rendered homeless
and reduced to beggary, are doubtless fresh in everyone’s memory,
but certain facts must be again referred to, owing to their typical
character. In the first place, the riot was clearly planned, the alarm
of fire being simultaneously raised in at least two churches, and the
mob being directed by men who spoke Polish with a Russian accent.
The culpable neglect of the military authorities of Warsaw in
refusing to make use of the 20,000 men forming its garrison, finds its
counterpart in the similar behaviour of the governors of Kieff,
Elizabethgrad, and Odessa earlier in the year. The behaviour of
the police, who are described as only interfering to prevent the
Jews from protecting themselves, exactly tallies with their behaviour
elsewhere. And, finally, the attempts that were made by telegraph
officials and others to prevent the true state of the case from reaching
the rest of Europe, may serve to account for the extraordinary fact
that the enormities of the past nine months have only found the
faintest echo in the Press of Europe. Thus, while outrages on
women were openly committed, the knowledge of this fact has
hitherto been kept from crossing the borders.
The outrages we have recounted above, though, no doubt, the
most important, are far from including all the similar events that
have occurred during the past year. They have been selected from
a list of over 160 towns and villages in which cases of riot, rapine,
murder, and spoliation have been known to occur during the last
nine months of xBBr. Out of these information was collected from
about 45 towns and villages in Southern Russia. In these alone are
reported 23 murders of men, women, and children, 17 deaths caused
by violation, and no fewer than 225 cases of outrages on Jewesses.
Such have been the horrors that throughout the past year have
assailed the 3,000,000 Israelites who inhabit Russia. Nor is there
any indication that the atrocities will cease during the present year,
unless the Russian Government will intervene in the sacred cause of
civilization and humanity.
Extract from Appeal made by the Rev. A. Lowv, Secretary
OF THE AnGLO-JeWISH ASSOCIATION, LONDON.
“ Stealthily but straightly, stealthily and continually there comes
across the Russian frontier an entreaty to the humane and com-
passionate hearts of the Jewish brothers and sisters. 1 hey appeal
to us : ‘ O Jewish brothers and sisters, you who are daily rejoicing
in the Divine gift of freedom ; you who have never seen a rich man
punished for being rich, a labouring man punished for being indus-
trious, a religious man punished for adhering to the creed of his
fathers—o, brothers and sisters, think of the Russian Jews who are
perishing on account of the sins of those who ought to defend the
innocent and who ought to curb the crime of malefactors ! O
