





EIGJHT LETTERS
PASTOR D. ALLEN,
Which have appeared in The Wltnkss.
[reproduced by request].
A*-
THE NEW VERSION
‘VIEWED in the light of the
History of the New Testament
foi 1800 Years.
S. E. Lees , Printer, 134 Pitt Street, Sydney.


LETTER. CONTENTS?.
I —The English Bibles for 500 years past.
ll—The New Testaments at the Reformation.
Ill—The Arian Corruptions.
IV—The Bishop of Melbourne’s Lecture.
V—The Commentaries and Fathers.
Vl—The Ancient Manuscripts.
VII- —The Learned Protestants of England.
VIII— Bishop Horsley upon 1 John 5-7.
DEDICATION.
To Thee, Most Holy Trinity, Three Persons in
One Godhead, I commit this feeble attempt to
vindicate the truth of the New Covenant of Thy
Mercy to mankind.
0 Jehovah, bless this little book to that end ;
and to Father, Sox, and Holy Spirit my whole-
heart shall give all the glory, honour, and praise
for ever and ever. Amex.
DANIEL ALLEN, Pastor.


Series of Letters to the Editor of
“The Witness” on the Revised
Version of the New Testament.
NO. I.
Dear Sir, — Will you permit me to say a
few words relative to this new version of
the New Testament, of which so much
is said and written just now in, various
ways ?
I think it is a very New Testament—-
too new to be good. Having drank of the
old one, no wise man will choose the new,
I presume, lam provoked with it. It
offends the religion of my heart, it dis-
honours the Deity of Christ, and it in-
sults the Holy Trinity. To these three
things I will calmly attend, by your kind
permission—l. It offends the religion of
my heart by omitting this solemn demand,
“ If thou believest with all thine heart,
thou mayest,” &c. 2. It dishonours
Christ by omitting the believer’s solemn
confession of His Deity and Sonship, “ I
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God,” The whole of Acts viii, 37 is


entirely omitted. 3. It insults the Holy
Trinity by omitting, “ For there are three
that bear record in heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and
these three are one.” The whole of 1 John
v. 7is entirely omitted. There are other
omissions also.
Simply to state this fact will be enough
with the God-fearing man without harsh
words, therefore I will refrain from them.
Nevertheless, my spirit is provoked
within me by this taking away of God’s
Word. If the Master looked round upon
the people with anger, so may I, and not
sin, I hope. Ido not see how the masters
of this very New Testament are to escape
the sentence in Rev. xxii. 19, “And if
any man shall take away from the words
of the book of this prophecy, God shall
take away his part out of the book of life,
and out of the holy city, and from the
things which are written in this book.”
I do not believe they can escape this sen-
tence only by repentance and doing works
meet for repen lance, by giving us back
these portions of God’s Holy Word which
have never been absent in any one of the
thirty versions and additions of versions
in our English nation from 1385 to 1881.
What a daring presumption in these


modern half-taught men to tell us they
know bettter than Wycliffe, Tindal,
Coverdale, Matthews, Cranraer, Taverner,
Tonstal, Heath, Gaultier, Hill, Grafton,
Harrison, and all the learned hosts of
men who assisted them in giving to our
fathers, and from them to us, the whole
Word of God ! Not only did all the
above true scholars give us these parts I
have named, but all the blessed bishops of
Queen Elizabeth’s reign did the same in
the “ Bishop’s Bible,” a copy of which I
have before me now, as also of Wycliffe’s.
And not only did all these truly learned
men give us all these portions omitted in
this “ new thing ” under our British sun,
but all the blessed scholars of James 1., in
1611, gave us the same in our present
authorised version. Now, Sir, I say it is
a piece of daring presumption to pretend
to know better than all these wise men of
our nation for 500 years past—and all this
without a reason why.
This may seem so strange to some that
they will not believe a little man like me;
hence, like all other small men, I must
prove all I say by chapter and verse;
whilst great men may say what they
wish, and, true or not true, they are
believed. Well, then, my proof is the old


Bibles themselves, to which I refer. Some
of them are before me, and I have read in
them the places to which I have referred.
Again, I refer to T. A. Horne, 8.D., in
his “ Introduction to the Critical Study
and Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures,”
vol. iv. p. 457, seventh edition. He was
of St. John’s College, Cambridge, and
devoted his whole life to this study
very diligently. Now, he says what I
have thus affirmed relative to our English
Bi' le.
Thus, Sir, I say this very New Testa-
ment is a new thing under our British
sun. We may be asked—From whence
came this new thing ? So far as I can
judge, it came out of that sea into which
the swine ran and were choked. Of
course I may be wrong, but still it has
that appearance. They fled into that sea
from His face, of whom they said, “We
know Thee who Thou art, the Holy One
of Cod.” They fled from the Deity of the
Son of God. So does this Book. These
omissions were never from our seas ; they
were from seme foreign sea. Why not
then from the sea into which the swine
ran 1 I will prove that the omissions
came from the Arian sea of Alexandria.
I will pro"e tl at these omissions were


unknown until “ all the world wondered
to find itself Arian ’’—until it was
“ Athanasius against all the world, and
all the world against Athanasius.” For
the present, let your readers study the
Athanasian creed, in order to understand
the nature and character, the why, where-
fore, and when, these omissions began.
If your readers wish to look into the
working of this foul spirit, which gave
rise to these omissions 1500 years ago,
they can do so by reading Dr. Cooke’s
struggles with it in Ireland fifty years
ago ; Ambrose Series, Esq., in England,
100 years ago ; Dr. Owen, 250 years ago;
and Athanasius, 1550 years ago. Each
of these had their hosts of colleagues in
their striving for the faith once delivered
to the saints; but these were the centre
men, the captains in that holy war, with
those beings that x*an the swine into the
sea from the Holy One of God. Now,
Sir, it must thus be remembered that the
great English and Scotch scholars, who
gave us the Holy Bible with all these now
omitted portions from 1385 to 1881, were
fully aware of when these parts were first
called in question ; they knew why they
were called in question ; they knew the
MSS., before Arius arose to blast the


world, contained them; they knew the
MSS., imm diately after the Arian age,
contained them ; they knew that much of
the MSS. of the Arian period had the
omitted parts restored by a new hand-
writing after the Arian persecutions were
past ; they knew that the Fathers, further
1 ack than any existing MSS., used these
omitted portions; they knew that Jerome’s
vulgate Latin New Testament in 382 was
by the authority of both Bishop and
Emperor of Rome, and from and agreeing
with the Apostolic MSS. which then
existed and to which he had access, or to
MSS. taken from them ; they knew that
Jerome gave the now omitted portions in
his vulgate Testament; they knew all the
polyglots had them. Almost all the 469
codexes, or small Greek MSS. called cur-
sive, contained these portions during the
periods of linen and cotton paper, from
1000 to 1500 years. They knew also that
many of the uncial, or large Greek MSS.,
of the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
centuries, during the period of calfskins,
sheepskins, and leaves of the paper-tree
for writing upon, contained these portions.
There are only about thirty-four of this
kind of MSS. known (see Horne’s second
volume). 1 say our translators of our


dear old Bible knew also that, in the
omissions of some of these portions in the
uncial MSS., they were written in the
time of the Arian rage throughout the
world that then was, and hence they fall
back upon Jerome and other ancient
Fathers who had the MSS. of the Apos-
tles, and spoke and wrote of these omitted
portions of the Word of God in the first,
second, and third centuries. Therefore,
our translators in 1611 concluded that
these portions were in the Apostolic
MSS., or these Fathers immediately after
them could not have referred to them, as
they certainly did. Not only did the
translators of James I. know all this in
1611, but all our Bible translators and
Bible publishers in England, as far back
as Wycliffe, in 1381 ; therefore, they gave
to us the whole Bible in the fear of God
and in their love to man. I know they
knew about Wetstein’s, Griesbach’s, and
Luther’s omissions, and some others ; but
they knew these were only the opinions of
private persons, and not to be followed.
They took the great evidence of the whole
testimony of the Apostles, Fathers, and
the very best MSS. from their days to the
days of the mighty Press in the fifteenth
century, and thus gave us the whole


of God’s Word from 1385 to 1881, And
shall we be robbed of it now ? God for-
bid.
Some may say that I have given to our
old translators more knowledge than can
be proved to be true. Well, be that as it
may as to what foolish persons may say.
I now stand prepared to give proof of
what I have now written. I will proceed
to do so in my next (d.v.) The history of
the Word of God must be of great import-
ance and interest to whomsoever it is
more precious than gold, yea, than most
fine gold, and sweeter than honey or the
honeycomb. These
“ Take the whole Gospel,
Not a part, and hold the fear of God.”
I remain, tic.,
DANIEL ALLEN, Pastor.


I have before said that all our English
versions for 500 years have had the pas-
sages in them which are now omitted in
the new version. I need not state what
all ought to know, namely, that before
Wycliffe in English we had only small
portions of the Old and New Testaments,
such as the Psalms, the Gospels, the
Acts, and small parts of the Epistles, by
Bede, Alfred the Great, and others. All,
I suppose, have heard of the good man
who gave a load of hay for one portion
of one of the epistles of Paul. Most of
the MSS. in Greek, from the days of the
Apostles to the twelfth century, were in
this broken form, so that out of the 500
or 600 MSS. known, but very few are
entire. There are none known that ex-
isted before Jerome’s vulgate Latin. All
known Greek MSS. have been written
since the rage of Arianism; and that
which modern critics have most depended
upon for these omissions and alterations
have been the MSS. of the Arian kind.
What dependence is to be placed upon
Arian MSS. with the absence of whole
books—twenty, ten, five, four, two, and
one chapters in some places, verses and


half verses in other places ? For proof
of these omissions in the Greek MSS.
from the fifth to the fifteenth centuries,
I refer to the account of them all in
Horne’s second volume. What is the
use of Griesbach in 1796, and Tischen-
darf in 1850, objecting to texts in oppo-
sition to thousands of greater men than
they ever were, by bringing up some, or
even many, of these very defective MSS.
to justify the omissions I have pointed
out ? Against these monstrosities I set
my face. I know that Horne and others
have been led to give up 1 John v. 7
through the above investigators of all
these defective MSS. from the Arian
period. I know also that these say with
the Arians, since the Reformation, that
the translators and publishers of the
thirty versions or additions of our Bible
during the last 500 years—that is, ever
since we have had it—have expressed
their doubts about the passages named.
I deny this, and appeal to the Bibles
themselves as proof that this is untrue.
Wycliffo makes no hint of any such
thing, nor do the greater number of the
others ever refer to such a thing. Crau-
mer and others knew of their absence in
the Arian and defective Greek MSS., and


pointed out this fact. But that they
never doubted of the inspiration of these
passages is evident by their putting them
always in the text. Then it is a known
historical fact that, when King James’s
six companies, of six learned men in
each company, had translated the differ-
ent parts assigned to them, they all met
together, and one of their number was
appointed to read their translation verse
by verse, and all the others would have a
copy each of other translations, versions,
and manuscripts from all the nations
where the Bible had been known and
found. So that one would have
Wycliffe’s, another Tindal’s, another
Cranmer’s, another the Bishop’s Bible,
another Beza’s, another Peter Weld’s
French, another Calvin’s, another
Luther’s, another the vulgate Latin,
another the Spanish version, another the
French, and others the Greek versions
and manuscripts from all parts of the
w r orld. Thus every man had a different
version, translation, or manuscript,
when the reader read our version verse
by verse to be passed by their unanimous
vote. If any one of these men saw any-
thing important in his version, transla-
tion, or manuscript not agreeing with


their new version then in manuscript, he
called out “ Stop.” He then pointed
out what he saw, and it was considered,
determined upon, and passed.
Now, here was a collection of all the
evidences of manuscripts, translations,
and versions then known upon the earth
concentrated into one united testimony
to the accuracy of our authorised ver-
sion, and therefore to the absolute in-
spiration of those holy testimonies, to
the Deity of the Son of God and the
Holy Trinity, in those passages omitted
in the new version. Now, I think a man
must have a small mind if he can per-
mit such a private opinion as that of
Griesbach and Tischendarf to nullify the
vast body of evidence from all parts and
ages of the world like that brought to
bear upon the truth of our authorised
version. Especially do I think so, as I
know that their opinions were formed by
their investigations of very incomplete
MSS. written after the Arian rage had
set in, without the least regard to MSS.
which Jerome must have had access to
in 382, and from which he gave us his
vulgate Latin New Testament. If Horne
can allow doubt upon such flimsy
grounds, I cannot j If Dr. Kitto can half


give up these holy inspirations upon such
trifling cavilling, I can but pity his
weakness. I have the learned Dr.
Bloomfield with his invaluable eight
volumes before me, and the evidence of
many better men than those two before
named, and all the standard Greek
Testaments of 400 years past, to substan-
tiate the correctness of our authorised
version.
Well, then, let this suffice for the cer-
tainty of the omitted passages being in
our English Bibles for now 500 years, or
ever since we have had the whole Bible
in our mother tongue wherein we were
born, and in which our forefathers have
read of the wonderful works of God rela-
tive to salvation, creation, and provi-
dence, by goodness, mercy, and power,
wisdom, love, and truth.
Let us now step back into what is
called the dark ages, and may God give
us light in that darkness by the lamp of
His truth. Let it be well understood
that, between Wycliffe’s and Tindal’s
Bibles, or between 1385 and 1525, there
was a great stir in Germany and else-
where about the New Testament, &c., so
that Tindal and others had all the ad-
vantage of that commotion before they


gave the ploughboys of England more
knowledge of God’s Word than the
priests of Rome ever possessed, as Tindal
said he would do. Yet with that ad-
vantage they all gave the now omitted
parts as Wycliffe had done before them,
all just the same. Calvin had given
them in his translation, Beza had given
them in his also; Luther had omitted
them in his, but the people demanded
them after his death, and had them.
Luther also denied the inspiration of the
Epistle of James and the book of Revela-
tion. What confidence, then, could be
put in his private opinion ?
Erasmus left them out, or at all event 8
he left out 1 John v. 7 in his New Testa-
ment in 1516 and in 1519, but in his
third edition, in 1522, he had all put in.
He had been expostulated with by the
great scholars in Europe for his omis-
sions, which omissions arose from his
attentions to the Greek MSS. of the
Arian period and the defective MSS.
which had existed and were written dur-
ing the dark ages without reference to
Jerome, who had translated from the
Greek MSS. of the Apostles’ period, to
which our English translators gave heed,
as we have shown. When Erasmus was


expostulated with by the learned men of
Europe for his omissions, he said -
“Mine is a Greek translation, not a
Latin ; find me a Greek MS. with the
texts, and I will put them in.’’ Well, a
Greek MS. was soon found with 1 John
v. 7, and thus Erasmus did put them in
his third edition in 1522. This did more
for the deep rooting of the Reformation
than any other instrumentality used by
the Lord in that age.
This was the New Testament which was
read by Lord Cromwell on his way to the
Continent, which God so blessed to his
soul that he interceded with Henry VIII.
upon his return to have the Bible pub-
lished in England by Royal authority ;
and it w y as so in 1539 by Coverdale’s,
Cranmer’s or “ The Great Chained
Bible ” (chained to the old church desks
for the people to go to them and read as
they desired). Blessed be God for that
precious gift to our fathers. This was
the first time the whole Bible was pub-
lished in England by the authority of
our throne, sceptre, and Crown. Now,
here was a peculiar providence towards
our nation in connection with this Testa-
ment of Erasmus, both as to the purity


of the text and as to the publishing of
the Bible in the nation in 1589.
Now, let us take another step into the
dark ages. 0 our God, give us light,
Thy light, to see these dark deeds of men
who seek to take away Thy holy bread
from our souls.
The Arian spirit has forged a lie upon
the MS. from which Erasmus supplied
omitted texts in his third edition, which
were not in his first and second editions.
What will not the powers of darkness do
in their hatred to the Deity of Christ and
the Holy Trinity ? They have said that
this manuscript was made for the occa-
sion in order to mislead Erasmus, and
get him to supply 1 John v. 7 according
to his promise. Was there ever a
greater insult offered to a man’s com-
mon sense than this ? A man like
Erasmus, born and brought up in Greek
manuscripts with an eye like an hawk and
a perception as sharp as a needle, and he
not see whether this Greek manuscript,
upon the authority of which he alters his
New Testament, is an imposition or not ?
Not see whether it was made to mislead
him or not ? The man who can believe
this of Erasmus is too much in the dark
for me to shed light upon his midnight


path ; I must leave him to God. Such
a slander is an insult upon our Protest-
ant Reformers. Who of them would
have forged a lie like that to mislead this
man in publishing God’s most Holy
Word ? How could any one have done
it in the time ? It was impossible. The
manuscript is still in existence, and has
been under inspection for 360 years, and
no one has been able to prove that it was
or is an imposition.
In my next I will further notice this
manuscript (n.v.), as I do think to that
Greek manuscript we are much indebted
for the purity and perfection of our
Greek Testaments now in use, and also
for much of the certainty of our author-
ised version relative to its accuracy. I
have five Greek Testaments before me,
all by different publishers, and all have
without the slightest alteration 1 John
v. 7, Acts viii. 37, and the other texts.
“ Holy Bible, Book Divine,
Precious treasure, thou art mine.”
P. S. —I fear that I really shall impose
too much upon your obliging courtesy
by intruding upon your valuable columns
these long letters, but my knees tremble,
my hands shake, my eyes flow, my heart
breaks, and my spirit burns, by reason of


the horrible monstrosities of the New
Version. I must speak and write, or
die.
I have before me Dr. Moorhouse’s lec-
ture on the New Version, which appeared
in the Melbourne Argus of July 23. He
says he has read every word, and exults
in getting from it the following “ Doc-
trinal Effects.” I have numbered the
different parts of the lecture, and will
point out any part to any person who
may think that I have unfairly stated the
Bishop’s propositions. I can only say
that I have honestly transcribed this
synopsis of Dr. Moorhouse’s lecture :
‘‘ DOCTRINAL EFFECTS OP THE NEW VER-
SION,” BY DR. MOORHOUSE, BISHOP OF
MELBOURNE.
1. That hell is almost removed, and
that hell-fire should be entirely removed.
Texts considered, Matt. v. 22 ; Rev. xix.
20.
2. That there is no bottomless pit.
That the beast and prophet are not per-
sons, but principles, godless force, and
godless wisdom (Rev. xx. and xxi.)
3. That eternity does not mean eternity
only an age. That aion does, but aionas


does not (Luke i. 88 ; Rev. iv. 9 ; Eph. i.
21 ; 2Tim. i, 9 ; Titus i. 2; 1 Tim. vi. 19).
4. That there is no damnation, only a
little condemnation in the conscience.
And as there is no damnation, there
should be no hell (Rom. xiv.; 1 Cor. xi,;
John v. 28). That “ dives ” in Luke
xvi. proves nothing (1 Peter iii. 18) ;
probation,
5, That there is a future time of pro-
bation beyond this world for unbaptised
children and the heathens (1 Peter iii.
18 ; Eph. i, 10 ; Rom. v. 15); all saved.
6. That God’s people are not crucified
subjectively, only objectively; not sin
crucified in them, but Christ crucified for
them (Rom. vi. ; 1 Cor. vi. 11 ; 2 Cor. v.
14 ; Titus iii. 5); no inward holiness re-
quired.
7. That baptismal regeneration is
taught in the New Version (Titus iii. 5);
no faith required for it.
8. That justification is by faith and
works conjoined—by a righteousness so
made up, and not by “ the righteousness
of God ” (Rom. iii, 21; Gal. ii. 16 ;
James ii. 14).
9. That faith may be lost, and that
there is no predestination to preserve it
(Luke x. 6).


10. That there is no salvation by elec-
tion. Acts ii. 47 is now “ are saved,”
not “ should be saved,” as if they were
the elect.
11. That the Gospel is not foolishness
to any because they are destined to per-
dition (1 Cor. i. IB).
12. That the New Version modifies
the Divinity of our Lord by omitting 1
John v. 7, and altering 1 Tim. iii. 10,
turning “ God ” out and supplanting His
place with “ He was,”
13. That the Lord conciliated the
Pharisees by not “ purging ” their
meats, but by His “ purifying ” them for
them (Mark vii. 19).
14. That separation from an ungodly
world is not taught in Col. ii. 28, as
ascetics suppose.
15. That the miracle in John v. 4 is
as an interpolation justly turned out.
16. That the New Version robs the
one-sided preachers of their name.
“ The Peculiar People ” are turned out
of 1 Peter ii. 9, They are with “ God ”
excommunicated, as in 1 Timothy iii.
16.
17. That it omits Acts viii. 37, and
alters Acts xxvi. 28 ; makes Paul small
and Agrippa great.


18. That insisting upon “ conversion ”
is a fallacy. “ Conversion ” is done
away with. “ Turning about ” has come
in its place (Acts xv. 3; Jas. v. 19;
Matt, xviii. 3). We must turn to the
east now.
19. That God’s love is universal, and
gives probation in Hades. No texts for
this.
20. That there is no evidence for
eternal punishment. He gives no texts
for this.
21. That the language of the New
Version is inferior to the old one in 1
Cor. xiii. 1, by “ love ” having come, and
“ charity ” being sent away.
22. That all these things are healthful
and truthful, and he hopes that men will
become more perfected in knowledge by
them.
I will just now only say this : Dr.
Moorhouse in these twenty-two monstrosi-
ties, drawn with exultation from the New
Version, is opposed to nine-tenths of all
the Universities of Europe for 1800
years. That these twenty-two infamies
are violently in opposition to the thirty-
nine Articles of his Church, which he
took a solemn oath that he would main-
tain in the name of God. As he now


condemns what be was sworn to defend,
is he not guilty of apostasy ? Would
Freemasons or Orangemen allow persons
to do this ? Does not such conduct en-
courage fraud and deceit in the commer-
cial world ? Would not honesty prompt
him to leave his Church ? “ Like priest,
like people.”—D. A.
I remain, &c.,
DANIEL ALLEN, Pastor.


No. 11l
THE ARIAN PERIOD.
l promised to give your readers a further
iccount of the manuscript from which
Erasmus took his texts (which are now
imitted in the New Version) and gave
hem in the third edition of his New
lestament in 1522, and in the Complu-
;ensian Polyglot about the same time.
It is numbered sixty-one in the cursive
manuscripts, which are said to number
169 by Horne in his second volume, page
L4l. Sixty-one, Codex Montfortianus,
from having belonged to Dr. Montfort.
tt is in Trinity College, Dublin, and was
presented to that College by Archbishop
Usher. It has the now omitted pas-
sages in it. It is called “ Codex Britani-
sus ” also. Here is a fac-simile of the
writing in 1 John v. 7, B before me,
which any gentleman can see by calling
at my house. It is from Dr. A. Clarke,
who was of opinion that it was written
in the thirteenth century from the simil-
arity of its writing to that of other man-
uscripts of the same period. He had no
loubt of its existence before the inven-
tion of printing.


Now, this is the manuscript from
which Erasmus supplied his before
omitted texts. I again affirm that, as
one of the greatest Greek scholars then
living, he was the best judge of the
genuineness of the writing, &c. He had
read many manuscripts for his polyglot,
and it is impossible to think that he
could have been imposed upon by a
forged copy ; neither could he have im-
posed upon all the great scholars of
Europe. Some would like to make us
believe that this is the only manuscript
in which the Greek gives the passages in
dispute ; but I know this to be untrue,
for I have a printed copy of the “ Novum
Testament Greece.” The copy I possess
was printed in Glasguae, 1822. Now,
Horne gives a full description of this in
his second volume, page 196, and gives
its date, October 11, 1368. He says that
1 John v. 7 is wanting in the manuscript;
but if so, why have the printers of it
supplied this and all the other passages ?
I think there is more said upon these old
manuscripts than is true. Horne does
not say that he had seen it, but gives
some other authority. However, all the
texts are in my printed copy, and were
reproduced by good authority. Now, we


are gone back into the dark ages, when
we have very incomplete copying—hooks,
half-hooks, Gospels, the Acts, Epistles,
and such like, some in one place and
some in another.
We have our good brother, Peter
Waldo of Lyons, in France, w 7 ho was
saved by God’s grace in a wonderful
way, so that he straightway left his rich
merchandise and went about preaching
the Lord Jesus. He gave the south pro-
vince of France a translation of the
Holy Bible in 1180 or 1178, viz., 200
years before Wycliffe. He also found it
necessary to fall back upon Jerome for
the full quantity of the text, though he
was no doubt governed by the Greek for
manner and method of expression in the
New Testament. What has become of
Waldo’s version is not certainly known.
A copy of it was presented to the Pope
at the Lateran Council and to that of
Toulouse in 1179 and 1229, where the
work was condemned and prohibited on
account of its being written in the ver-
nacular tongue. It is not known that
any copy has reached our times, but Dr.
Gilly has shown that the text of his ver-
sion is most probably preserved in the
six romance manuscripts of Scripture


which still exist in the libraries of
Dublin, Grenoble, Munich, Lyons, and
Paris. This blessed brother Waldo and
his companions in labour and tribulation
spread this version everywhere in France
and Bohemia, some writing chapters,
some a Gospel, some an Epistle, some
the Acts, and so on.
This is another instance of the way
and manner in which God blessed man-
kind by Jerome’s vulgate Latin version
unto the preservation of all the Scrip-
tures for their publication in all the
world. There was but 800 years between
Jerome’s and Waldo’s New Testaments,
The circulation of this version of the
Word of God so damaged the Church of
Rome that for the first time on record,
at the Council of Toulouse in 1229, it
was ordained that no “ laymen should
have the books of the Old and New
Testament.” This version being from
Jerome’s, contained the now omitted
passages. God be praised for that mul-
tiplying of His Holy Word.
The annihilation of all the manu-
scripts of this version of the Word of
God by the burning of them from this
decree of Rome will give us some idea of
the vast destruction of Greek and other
28


nanuscripts by the Church of Rome, the
loths, the Mahometans, the Arians, and
he Pagan persecutions. All these burnt
jod’s Word wherever they found it.
Chus in 200 years all the manuscripts of
Waldo’s version was gone, excepting
vhat has been before named. Not only
vas there this wholesale burning by these
)owers of darkness, but there was such
carcity of parchment and vellum that
people used to obliterate the writing of
Re Word of God upon the sheets, and
ise them for deeds and legal documents
)f that kind. Just think of men like
Bright, Bradlaugh, and Dr. Vaughan
vanting £2O worth of parchment, and
leeing it with Bible manuscripts. How
;oon the ink would be out of it, and a
leed made. And after this manner the
nanuscripts of Matthew, Mark, Luke,
lohn, Paul, Peter, and James were soon
lestroyed, so that the only point of time
vhen we can think of their existence
vith certainty was in 880, when Jerome
ranslated from them into the vulgate
liatin New Testament.
In this rage of burning and destruc-
tion upon the Word of God there were
(ome few incomplete copies preserved in
Jreek manuscripts, but the perfect were


very few indeed. There is not one
known manuscript that dates from the
other side of the Arian age in Greek—
not one. As all the uncial manuscripts
are belonging to the period of the rage of
Arianism, that accounts for the absence
of the disputed texts in them. I think
your readers had better here consider
that point of history. The Bishop of
Alexandria, about 315, had discoursed to
his ministers upon the unity of the God-
head, when Arius charged his Bishop
with teaching Sabellianism, and urged
that the distinction between the persons
of the Father and the Son were as in
nature ; that the Father was before the
Son, and the Son less than the Father,
and such like blasphemy. Then a Coun-
cil of 100 bishops was held in Alexandria
to consider this matter. These con-
demned Arius. In 825 a great Council
was held at Nice, at which 318 bishops
and 1600 ministers were present. At
this Council Athanasius defended the
Deity of Christ and the doctrine of the
Trinity, as set forth in the following
Creed. Arius was sent into banishment,
but Cflnstantine’s sister received his
heresy and interceded for him, and he
was released, and his blasphemies flew


like wildfire through the world, bo that
soon “ all the world wondered to find
itself Arian,” as the historians tell us of
that time. From this hot-bed of Arian-
ism we have the defective manuscripts
upon which so much dependence is placed
for the omissions now in the New Ver-
sion. In the light of these facts read the
Creed :
“ Whosoever will be saved ; before all things
it is necessary that he hold the Catholick Faith
[not the Eoman Catholic],
“Which Faith except every one do keep
whole and undefiled : without doubt he shall
perish everlastingly.
“ And the Catholick Faith is this: That we
worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in
Unity ;
“Neither confounding the Persons : nor divid-
ing the substance.
“ For there is one Person of the Father, an-
other of the Son, and another of the Holy
Ghost.
“But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, is all one : the Glory
eqrral, the Majesty co-eternal.
“ Such as the Father is, such is the Son : and
such is the Holy'Ghost.
“ The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate : and
the Holy Ghost uncreate.


“The Father incomprehensible, the Son in-
comprehensible : and the Holy Ghost incompre-
hensible.
“ The Father eternal, the Son eternal : and
the Holy Ghost eternal.
“ And yet they are not three eternals : but one
eternal.
“As also there are not three incomprehensi-
bles, nor three uncreated : but one uncreated,
and one incomprehensible.
“ So likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son
Almighty : and the Holy Ghost Almighty.
“ And yet they are not three Almighties : but
one Almighty.
“So the Father is God, the Son is God : and
the Holy Ghost is God.
“And yet they are not three Gods : but on e
God.
“So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son
Lord ; and the Holy Ghost Lord.
‘ ‘ And yet not three Lords : but one Lord.
“For like as we are compelled by the Chris-
tian verity : to acknowledge every Person by
himself to be God and Lord ;
“So are we forbidden by the Catholic Reli-
gion : to say, There be three Gods, or three
Lords.
“ The Father is made of none: neither cre-
ated, nor begotten.
“ The Son is of the Father alone : not made,
nor created, but begotten.
“ The Holy Ghost is of the Father and of the


Son : neither made, nor created, nor begotten,
but proceeding.
“So there is one Father, not three Fathers ;
one Son, not three Sons ; one Holy Ghost, not
three Holy Ghosts.
“ And in this Trinity none is afore, or after
other : none is greater, or less than another.
“ But the whole three Persons are co-eternal
together : and co-equal.
“So that in all things, as is aforesaid: the
Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity in Unity is to
be worshipped.
“ He therefore that will be saved : must thus
think of the Trinity.
“Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting
salvation : that he also believe rightly the In-
carnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
“For the right Faith is, that we believe and
confess : that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, is God and Man ;
“ God of the Substance of the Father, begot-
ten before the world : and Man of the Substance
of his Mother, born in the world ;
“ Perfect God, and perfect Man : of a reason-
able soul and human flesh subsisting ;
“Equal to the Father, as touching his God-
head : and inferior to the Father as touching his
Manhood.
“ Who although he be God and Man : yet he
is not two, but one Christ ;
“One, not by conversion of the Godhead into
flesh : but by taking of the Manhood into God ;


“ One altogether ; not by Confusion of Sub-
stance : but by unity of Person.
“ For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one
man : so Cod and Man is one Christ;
“ Who suffered for our salvation : descended
into hell, rose again the third day from the
dead.
“ He ascended into heaven, he sitteth on the
right hand of the Father, God Almighty : from
whence he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead.
“ At whose coming all men shall rise again
with their bodies : and shall give account for
their own works.
‘ ‘ And they that have done good shall go into
life everlasting : and they that have done evil
into everlasting fire.
“ This is the Catholick Faith : which except a
man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved.
“ Glory be to the Father, &c.
“ As it was in the beginning, &c.”
Jerome with Athanasius accounted
Arianism an horrible blasphemy, and
therefore from the manuscripts of the
Apostles in Greek he gave us all the texts
of these inspired manuscripts upon the
Deity of Christ and the doctrine of the
Trinity, which the Arian Greek writers
omitted in the rage of Arianism. This
will explain the difference so evidently


running down time’s lines between the
Greek and Latin manuscripts and ver-
sions of the New Testaments, from
Jerome in 382 to Erasmus in 1522.
The nearer the Greek manuscripts go
back to the Arian period, the more dan-
ger from corruption and omission. Yet
still they have their use. They have
given the proper nature, character, style,
or quality to our Greek Testament.
Thanks be to God for that. Though
Jerome has not always given us the best
quality, he has certainly given us the
right quantity; and I thank God for
that.
Thus I have stepped back a long way
in the dark and will leave your readers
to think for a week, and then further ex-
amine the Greek and Latin lines of man-
uscripts down from 382, after which I
will go on to the one Greek line from
the year 50 to 382. I will try and keep
very calm and steady, prayerful and care,
ful, whilst I thus walk through these
dark ages of the past. But oh, how de-
lightful it is to thus gaze upon the path


of the Holy Book and its story. Ob,
bow many celestial stars and lamps we
need to direct our course aright in these
dark nights of ages gone, for ever gone.
“ Engraved as in eternal brass,
The mighty promise shines ;
Nor can the powers of darkness rase
Those everlasting lines.”
I remain, &c.,
DANIEL ALIEN, Pastor.


No. IV.
THE BISHOP OF MELBOURNE’S LECTURE.
I have very carefully gone through the
Bishop of Melbourne’s lecture again, and
have drawn a more enlarged outline of
it. As it exhibits the whole nature and
character of the New Version, about
which so much is thought, said, and
written just now, it may be desirable for
your readers to know the great Bishop’s
mind more fully than I gave it before.
The examples of irony in the following
texts justifies its use in this case :
“ And it came to pass at noon that Elijah
mocked them, and said, Cry aloud : for
he is a god; either he is talking, or he
is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or
peradventure he sleepeth, and must be
awaked ” (1 Kings xviii. 27). “So he
came to the king. And the king said
unto him, Micaiah, shall we go against
Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall we for-
bear ? And he answered him, Go, and
prosper: for the Lord shall deliver it
into the hand of the king. And the king
said unto him, How many times shall I
adjure thee that thou tell me nothing
but that which is true in the name of the
Lord ? And he said, I saw all Israel
scattered upon the hills, as sheep that
have not a shepherd ; and the Lord said,


These have no master ; let them return
every man to his house in peace. And
the king of Israel said unto Jehosbaphat,
Did I not tell thee that he would pro-
phesy no good concerning me, but evil ?”
(1 Kings xxii. 15-18).
Dr. Moorhouse and the New Version.
Have you heard of the New Version—
The Testament quite new ?
Oh, have you heard of its great powers
With Gentile and with Jew ?
Oh have you heard the Bishop’s speech
Upon its themes so great ?
Have you heard of the changes now
In heaven and hell of late ?
The Bishop thought hell’s flames too hot,
And quench’d that awful fire ;
The fiery lake is made a swamp
By his most kind desire.
If men will now offend the Lord,
To Bateman’s Swamp they go.
’Tis freezing now, instead of fire,
For sinners here below.*
* The Bishop said that the Gehenna fire was
to Jerusalem what Bateman’s Swamp used to be
to Melbourne ; that the Lord’s meaning -was,
when he threatened to send offenders to Ge-
henna tire, the same as saying to an offender in
Melbourne, “If you go on in that way, you
will be sent to Bateman’s Swamp,


Gehenna's fire had deathless worms,
And never was put out ;
Therefore no hell can now remain,
The learned have found out.
Poor Dives, old Abraham’s lost son,
Was only in a fit;
For all he said, in glory now
The Bishop saw him sit.
Good Abraham, too, quite wrong was he
To say his son was lost.
The gulf is bridged ; his son has crossed,
And join’d the heavenly host.
No parables can teach us now
A doctrine bad or good ;
The tales of Christ have passed away,
And nought is understood.*
The pit, so bottomless before,
Is bottomed quite anew ;
And when the Bishop fixed the floor,
To heaven the devils flew.
“ Damnation’s gone, and hell must go,”
The Bishop shouts aloud.
“Well done, well done, 0 learned seer,”
Then cried the listening crowd.
What joy in hell to devils now
The Bishop has conveyed ;
From torments sad to heaven they fly
By his most learned aid.
* The Bishop said that the parable of the rich
man in Luke xvi. (Theologia Parabolica non est
demonstrativa) did not demonstrate theology.


Oh man, so vain, how can yon dare
To trifle thus with hell ?
Oh stop and think, before you sink
In flames of wrath to dwell.
More changes still come up to view,
In heaven as well as hell ;
Angels now quite speechless stand,
And altars speak quite well.
The Father loves all creatures now,
Poor Cain and Judas too,
Egypt and Sodom, Nero —all
In Heaven and Hades below.
Old Hades will be unpeopled soon,
Old Heaven’s coasts enlarged ;
The Son of God will clasp them all,
And Death will be discharged.
Proud fiends shall crowd the heavenly land,
The infernal ranks be there ;
All made alive, and made to rise
From regions of despair.
Deluded seer ! the tree must lie
Where God has cut it down,
Heaven can’t be peopled with the damned,
Nor Satan wear a crown.
More changes still come up to view ;
The Holy Three are gone—
Both Father. Son, and Holy Ghost
Are sent away from John.
“ God,” too, from Timothy has gone —
A godless mystery is left ;
Of God in flesh to die for man
The Pastor is bereft,


Bear Phillip’s great demand is gone,
The eunuch’s faith is gone ;
An excommunication now
Is passed on (rod’s dear Son..
Gone.? Yes ! But where ? Ah, think again ;
They all are gone from you ;
Gone from your Book of base deceit—
Not from the chosen few.
The Holy Three in one are gone,
The holy people too ;
Gone from your company and your Book,
In fellowship they go.
Oh, union sweet ; oh, how divine,
For worms of earth and sin !
One with incarnate Deity,
With Him cast out—“ shut in.”
Then take your Godless, Christless book ;
Be gone, thou saintless thing.
We clasp the Book of endless truth,
And Christ as God we sing.
Bishop’s Palace, East Melbourne,
Argus , July 23, 1881.
Pastor Daniel Allen, debtor to the Bishop
of Melbourne and the New Version.
July 23, 1881. £ s. d.
To Turning Hell into a Swamp 110
~ Putting out Hell Fire
(Matt. v. 22) ... ... 2 2 0
~ Killing Deathless Worms
(Mark ix. 13) ... ...550


To Quenching Quenchless Fire
(Mark ix. 45) ... ...5 5 0
~ Bottoming the Bottomless
Pit (Rev. xx. 3) ... 10 10 0
~ Killing the real Live Beast
(Rev. xix. 20)... ...110
~ Annihilating the Live Pro
phet (Rev. xix. 20) ... 1 1 0
~ Striking an Angel Dumb
(Rev. xvi. 7) 110
~ Making an Altar Speak
(Rev. xvi. 7) 110
~ Giving Probation in Hell
(1 Peter iii. 18) ... 10 10 0
~ Letting Unwashed Babes
out of Hell (Rom. v. 19) 10 10 0
„ Letting the Heathen out
also (Rom. v. 19) ... 10 10 0
~ Making God Love Cain and
Judas (no proof) ... 2 2 0
„ Putting God out of 1 Tim.
iii. 10 110
~ Excommunicating the Tri-
nity (1 John v. 7) ...3 8 0
~ Carting away the Eunuch’s
Whole Heart (Acts viii.
37) 110
„ Putting a New “ Laver ”
into Titus iii. 5 ... 52 10 0


Removing the Righteous-
ness of God from Rom.
iii. 21 • ...105 0 0
[Saving the Old Man from
Death (Rom. vi. 6) ... 10 10 0
Putting out the Peculiar
People from 1 Peter ii. 9 110
Taking away Election from
Acts ii. 47 ... ...110
Excommunicating Predes-
tination from Rom. viii.
29 110
Casting away Damnation
(Mark xvi. 16) ... Ill)
Washing in the Past and
for Filth in the Present
(1 Cor. vi. 11) .. ... 2 10
Taking away from the
Lord’s Prayer the King-
dom, Power, Glory,
Eternity, and Amen,
(Matt. vi. 13) ... ... 5 5 0
Making Paul small and
Agrippa very large, in
Acts xxvi. 28 ... ...2 2 0
Taking away the Angel
and the Waters, and all
who stepped into them,
from Bethesda’s Pool
(John v. 4J ... ... 2 2 0


To Removing a Very Bad Wo-
man away from Sove-
reign Mercy ... ... o 5 0
~ Putting in chains eleven
verses of John viii.,
already for Transporta-
tion at the next Assizes 11 11 0
Making a New Belief (Rom.
i. 17
10 10 0
Marrying Paul and James
in Rom. iii. 21 and Jas.
ii. 19 ... ... ... B 8 0
Mending the Command-
ments (Rom. iii. 21)... 110
Removing Healing from
the Broken - Hearted
(Luke iv. 18) ... ...110
’ Total ... £289 9 0
Truly Settled,
The New Version,
Per Melbourne
£ s. d.
The Bishop’s Private Account
for Delivering the Rich
Man from Hell, Cooling
his Parched Tongue,
and Correcting his Great
Mistakes
10 10 0


To Bridging the Awfal Gulf,
teaching Abraham more
than he knew before,
and proving to him that
our Lord did not mean
anything by His Dis-
course in Luke xvi. ... 10 10 0
~ Delivering the Rich Man’s
Eyes from Hell Fire,
and closing them very
peacefully, and giving
him Absolution ... 10 10 0
~ Saving Abraham from all
Further Disturbances,
and restoring him to all
the Joys of Paradise... 10 10 0
Total £42 0 0
The Pastor begs to inform the Bishop
that, as he is in rather straitened circum
stances, he must see Abraham and his
rich son, to ascertain the facts in con-
nection with this account before this
liability can be discharged. His Lord-
ship may be fully assured that, as soon
as ever Abraham will certify that his
son’s eyes and tongue are quite well, this
account will be settled.
All truly Protestant denominations


believe in the salvation of all who die in
infancy, whether they have been baptised
or not. Whether the sentiments con-
tained in the following verses are not
better than the Bishop’s method of send-
ing to Hades ninety-nine children out of
every hundred that die, in order that
they may have a time of probation in
hell, I will leave bereaved parents to
say :
Infant Salvation.
Dear babes our Jesus takes away
To dwell before the throne,
Then dry your tears, ye parents dear,
Ye kindred, cease to mourn.
Sin stung and stained the human race,
And let great sorrows in ;
The Lord that sting and stain removes,
And pardons alb their sin.
Their little cries, their moans and tears,
At death all pass away ;
Their spirits take their whiling flight
To realms of endless day.
Far from this wretched world of woe
How soon they’ve passed away ;
Before the throne of Christ they stand,
And blooming look as May.
No sprinkled face, or body bathed,
They need to make them clean ;
For where the blood of Christ has cleansed
No spot or stain is seen.


How horrid must those doctrines he
Which curse the infant race,
Because they’ve had no priestly aid,
Nor water in the face.
Let pagan, Roman customs cease,
And God’s salvation shine ;
Let babes’ and sucklings’ mouths proclaim
Its doctrine most sublime.
Parents, like David, dry your tears,
Let sorrow cease to flow.
Your babes are now before the throne,
Where all the ransomed go.
I remain, dm.,
DANIEL ALLEN, Pastor


THE COMMENTATORS AND ANCIENT FATHERS.
I will now give you the evidence of some
of our best English commentators upon
these portions of God’s Holy Word, which
are now with God and His “ peculiar
people,” excommunicated from the New
Version.
The first is Dr. Gill, who read and
wrote, equivalent to twelve hours per
day, for seventy years. The great im-
mortal Toplady affirms that his literary
labours would have destroyed the con-
stitutions of six ordinary men. His
readings of old Greek, Hebrew, and
Latin manuscripts, versions, and trans-
lations exceeded all that one man ever
attained unto. If any person in his native
place, when he wasyoung, wished to affirm
anything indisputable, they would say,
“ As sure as young Gill is at the book-
stall, it is true.” And when he was old,
they would affirm or swear by him all
over London, “ As sure as old Dr. Gill
is in his study.” They said “he toiled
and toiled to stow his lumber in his
brain, and then he wrote and wrote to
get it out again.” His learned labours
were so esteemed by the university


World that one of the best of them
heaped upon him D.D., when he said,
“ I neither sought it, bought it, nor
thought it.”
He gave the Church of God fifty-five
years’ pastoral services, with the same
church all the time. During this time
he wrote a commentary consisting of ten
large volumes, a body of divinity in two
volumes, and a large volume of extracts
from the ancient fathers upon the five
points of the Synod of Dort, which was
held in that city in 1618.
Here followeth his comments upon the
texts. Let it be noticed that the copies
here named in which the text is not were
written at the time and in the place of
the Arian rage. Alexandria was the
place, and the end of the fourth century
was the time. The Syriac and Etbiopic
were from Alexandria. With this fact
in view, let us hear Dr. Gill upon Acts
viii. 87 : —“ This whole verse is wanting
in the Alexandrian copy, and in the five
Beza’s copies, and in the Syriac and
Ethiopia versions; but stands in the
Vulgate Latin and Arabic versions, and
in the Complutensian edition, and, as
Beza observes, ought by no means to be
expunged, since it contains so clear a
49


confession of faith required of persons
to be baptized, which was used in the
truly Apostolic times.”
I have had access to Beza’s Bible.
There is the full verse truly given in it.
From whence did Jerome and Arabia and
Beza get it if not from the Apostolic
manuscripts ? If not from these, then
they forged it. One of these two things
must have given us this text. Dare any
man charge Jerome, or the Arabian ver-
sion, or Beza, with forgery ? Forgery
in the Holy Bible too. It is impossible
to think so. Then we are sure they got
it from the Apostolic manuscripts.
I have Bloomfield’s eight volumes
upon the Greek Testament before me.
He spent a lifetime upon these investiga-
tions, and gives the same results as Dr.
Gill, viz., that it is absent from the
manuscripts of the Arian period. But
he says :—“ As to the verse, since it is
contained in so many manuscripts, and
is found in the Vulgate and Syriac ver-
sions, it should, I think, be retained.”
Now, we have the same question again
-—Did the writers of the Syrian version
(there are two Syrian versions—Gill re-
fers to one, and Bloomfield the other)
and of these many manuscripts forge


this verse, or take it from the Apostolic
manuscripts ? It must be one or the
other. That which demonstrates the
fact of the verse being in the Apostle’s
manuscripts is, that the fathers for 200
years before Jerome constantly used it.
In 150, Justin Martyr, in giving an
account to the Roman Emperor of the
Christians with himself, says :—“ As
many as are persuaded and believe that
these things which are taught by us are
true, we bring to some place where there
is water,” &c. This is a plain reference
t to the verse now omitted.
T In 400,, Augustin said : —“ Persona
'ought to be catechised before they re-
ceive baptism, that they may know how
vain a thing it is to think of being saved
without holiness, as in the case of the
eunuch who was catechised before he was
baptized ” (Miles’ History of the Church,
c. v., c. 7). Now, here was one of the
fathers who used and taught from the
Apostolic manuscripts, therefore this
verse must have been in them. I can
find many more of the fathers before
him who did the same. Are the makers
of this very New Version prepared to say
that all these ancient fathers who lived
further back than the date of any known


manuscripts were all forgers of lies, and
that by such forgery they added to the
Word of God and to themselves the
plagues which are written in His Book ?
Dr. Gill upon 1 John v. 7. You must
still keep in view the Arian manuscripts,
and that much that they say is untrue,
as I have proved some of the following
affirmations to be. Dr. Gill says;—
“ The genuineness of this text has been
called in question by some because it is
wanting in the Syriac version, as it is in
the Arabic and Ethiopia versions ; and
because the old Latin interpreter has it
not; and it is not to be found in many
Greek manuscripts, nor cited by many
of the ancient fathers, even by such who
wrote against the Arians when it might
have been of great service to them.”
This is the case against this holy verse—
half of this evidence is true, and half un-
true.
Now for the evidence for the inspira
tion of the text by John. “To all which
it may be replied, that as to the Syriac
version, which is the most ancient and of
the greatest consequence, it is but a ver-
sion, and a defective one. The history
of the adulterous woman in the eighth
chapter of John, the second epistle of


Peter, the second and third epistles of
John, the epistle of Jude, and the book
of Revelation, were formerly wanting in
it till restored from Bishop Usher’s copy
by De Dieu and Dr. Pocock, and who
also has supplied this version with this
text from an Eastern copy. As to the
old Latin interpreter, it is certain it is
to be seen in many Latin manuscripts of
an early date, and stands in the Vulgate
Latin edition of the London Polyglot
Bible ; and the Latin translation which
bears the name of Jerome, who, in an
epistle of his to Eustochium, prefixed to
his translation of these canonical epistles,
complains of the omission of it by un-
faithful interpreters. And as to its
being wanting in some Greek manu-
scripts, as the Alexandrian and others,
it need only be said (many chapters are
not to be found in it) it is in an old
British copy, and in the Complutensian
edition, the compilers of which made use
of various copies; and out of sixteen
ancient copies of Robert Stephens’s, nine
of them had it; and as to the ancient
fathers, it is cited by many of them.
Fulgentius, in the beginning of the sixth
century, quotes it against Arius without
any scruple or hesitation ; and Jerome,


as before observed, has it in bis transla-
tion made in the end of the fourth cen-
tury ; and it is cited by Athanasius about
the year 350 ; and before him by Cyprian
in the year 250 ; and is referred to by
Tertullian about the year 200, which was
within a hundred years of the writing of
this epistle. This may be enough to
satisfy any one of the genuineness of
this passage—and besides, there never
was any dispute about it till Erasmus
left it out of the first edition of his
translation of the New Testament.”
This is the result of the researches of
one of the greatest readers that ever
lived. I have still to ask —Were the
nine out of the sixteen of R, Smith’s
manuscripts and all these fathers, with
Jerome, forgers of lies, or was this verse
in John’s manuscript ?
As I have directed your attention to
the infallible evidence of its inspiration
by the Holy Ghost in John from these
fathers, it may be as well to give you a
passage or two from them, so that you
may judge for yourselves. I am the
more desirous thus to do because I know
that such men as the New Version men
and Dr. Moorhouse say that these pas-
sages of the fathers do not refer to the


text as we suppose they do; therefore,
dear reader, you judge between us, and I
am sure you will give your issue with
us.
In 200, Tertullian said :—“ ‘ The
Comforter,’ said Christ, ‘ shall take of
Mine, as the Son Himself had taken of
the Father’s.’ Thus the connection of
the Father in the Son and the Son in
the Paraclete makes three coherent Per-
sons one in the other, which three are
one” (Tertullian adv., Eaxeam c. 25).
In 250, Cyprian said:—“lf any one
could be baptized by an heretic, and
could obtain remission of sin; if he has
obtained remission of sins, and is sancti-
fied, and become the temple of God—l
ask of what God ? If of the Creator,
he cannot be His temple who has not be-
lieved in Him ; if of Christ, neither can
he who denies Him to be God be His
temple; if of the Holy Ghost, since the
three are one, how can the Holy Ghost
bo reconciled to him who is an enemy
either of the Father or of the Son ?”
(Cypriani Opera Fell, p. 208, folio, Oxon.
1682 ; see Horne’s vol. iv., p. 460). Again
Cyprian said : —“ The Lord saith, I and
My Father are one ; and again it is writ-
ten of the Father, and of the Son, and


of the Holy Ghost, and these three arc
one.”
In the fifth century there was a Con-
fession of Faith drawn up by Eugenius,
Bishop of Carthage, and presented by
nearly 400 bishops to Huneric, King of
the Vandals, an Arian, and a bitter
enemy to those who professed the ortho-
dox faith. In this Confession, which is
recorded by Victor Vitensis, the following
passage occurs :—“ That we may further
show it to be clearer than the light, that
the Divinity of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit is one, we have the testi-
mony of the evangelist John, for he
says, ‘ These are three which bear record
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Spirit, and these three are one.’ ”
These 400 bishops drew up this solemn
Confession about the time of the writing
of the oldest manuscripts that are now
known, upon which old manuscripts the
New Version men found their reasons for
omitting the passages we refer to. Now,
are these New Version men to be allowed
to brand these 400 bishops as forgers of
a lie, and then with taking that lie in
their hands to a tyrant Arian king, who
was ready to kill them for believing the
very lie they had just made ? Such an


idea would become a lunatic, but it
would be unworthy of a sane person.
We can understand the Arians omitting
it to please the tyrant, but not this con-
fession of it to provoke him.
Thus I have given the evidence of the
ancient fathers, that the passages now
omitted in the New Version were in the
Apostolic manuscripts without the least
dispute or contradiction by any man then
living. I have before affirmed that for
500 years our Bible translators not only
in England, but in all Europe, have
known this, and given the nations the
whole Word of God. Who are these
half-taught, half-read men, who seek to
rob our souls of the bread of life ? I
blush that they should be so daring as
to make the attempt. I am sure if old
Dr. Gill was on earth, he would shake
his great big whig, and knit his great
broad forehead, and take up his old goose
quill with which he wrote all his com-
mentary, and drive these new upstarts to
Jericho, until their theological beards
should be full grown. I hope there are
a few small quills of the old Bohemian
goose left yet. One of them shall not be
still. “So help me, God.” I could
have given the commentaries of Trappe,


Scott, Matthew Henry, Doddridge, and
others, but they all give the same evi-
dence. Who are these New Version
men. that they should veto all this evi-
dence of the greatest Bible scholars that
ever lived ? I protest against this con-
duct as a daring assumption. Dr. Watts
says :
“ Should vile blasphemers with disdain
Pronounce the truths of Jesu’s vain,
We’ll meet the scandal and the shame,
And sing and triumph in His name.”
I wish my readers clearly to under-
stand that I do not approve of Jerome’s
quality of text in his Vulgate Latin
Testament, though I have appealed to
him for the right quantity in the passages
under dispute. lam also aware that in
some places he has an omission, as in
John x. 26, which is absent also in the
Nonnus ; but it is present in the Greek
copies and Oriental versions. We must
ever keep in mind also that the Roman
Catholic versions have very greatly cor-
rupted and mutilated Jerome’s text.
I remain, Ac.,
DANIEL ALIEN, Pastor.
P.S.—Permit me say to a word to the
editor of the Presbyterian, relative to his
unmanly and ignorant attack upon me


in his issue of the 27th ultimo. In my
letter of August 20 I stated that the old
translators “ knew about Wetstein’s,
Griesbach’s, and Luther’s omissions,
with others.” In my letter of the follow-
ing week I asked, “ What is the use of
Griesbach in 1796, and Tischendorf in
1850, objecting to texts in opposition to
thousands of greater men than they
were ?” &c. Yet, notwithstanding this
plainness, this editor could descend to
the low, unmanly meanness and false-
hood of representing me as ignorant of
the fact that these men lived after 1611.
I wrote of their omissions with Luther’s,
not of them, which omissions, I stated,
were known to all the translators from
1525 to 1611. This is plainly stated
in my letters. Now, what can I think
of the editor who could thus falsify me ?
If this editor had not been ignorant of
the whole history of the Bible, he would
have known that Cranmer pointed out
these omissions in 1539, and that other
writers had done the same. This editor
knows nothing at all of Cranmer, nor
anything else upon this subject about
which he writes (see Cranmer’s Bible
upon 1 John v. 7). I had supposed that
no editor would have written upon this


subject until he had read Bloomfield and
Horne, but this editor has not done so,
for Horne has pointed out these facts in
his fourth volume, page 457. I have
enjoyed the friendship of many Presby-
terian ministers for these past thirty
years, and do still very highly esteem
both them and their Church ; but I must
isolate this editor from them, and hold
him in too much contempt to read ano-
ther line from his pen.—JD. A.


THE ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS.
Having gone through the history of the
manuscripts and versions of the New
Testament, I think it will be instructive
to your readers to have a condensed out-
line of the manuscripts upon which some
foolish people have said that the New
Version is founded. They lay special
stress upon the Sinaitic for the changes
in the New Version, to which folly I
answer—l. All these manuscripts re-
ferred to were written in the period of
corruption and deprivation. 2. The New
Version do not follow these manuscripts
in many particulars, but Eoman versions.
8. Tischendorf, the finder and owner of
the Sinaitic manuscript, who brought it
out to the world, and gave his work upon
it in seven editions, says of it and the
other manuscripts of that period, “ It is
manifest that none of our surviving wit-
nesses is higher than that age (fourth
century) when a certain universal variety
and depravation of the sacred text
already existed.”
That you may have a clear view of the
immense, learned, and extensive research
at the Keformation by the greatest scho-
lars that ever lived, in order to get a


perfect Greek text from which to translate
the New Testament into all the languages
of the nations, I will- here give you the
description of this w T ork by Dr. Kitto
(Cyclopedia, “ Criticism Biblical ’). He
says: “ The whole of the New Testament
was first printed in the Complutensian
Polyglot in 1514, though not published
till 1517. The first published was that
of Erasmus, at Basle, in 1516. Both
were issued independently of one another,
and constitute the basis of the received
text. No less than five impressions were
published by Erasmus, into the third of
which 1 John v. 7 was first put. In the
last two he made great use of the Com-
plutensian Polyglot. The third place
among the early editors of the Greek
Testament has been assigned to Robert
Stephens, w'hose first edition was printed
in Paris in 1549 (12m0.), chiefly taken
from the Complutensian, and generally
styled the Mirifica edition from the com-
mencement of the preface. His second
edition was published in 1549, the third
in 1550, in folio. In this last he fol-
lowed the fifth of Erasmus’s, with which
he compared fifteen manuscripts and the
Complutensian Polyglot. In 1551 ap-
peared another edition, accompanied by


the Vulgate and the Latin translation of
Erasmus. It is remarkable for being the
first into which the division of verses is
introduced.”
Now here was a far more perfect ex-
amination of the old Greek line of manu
scripts than our late revisers have attained
unto. Independent of the Latin line of
manuscripts, these great scholars found
a great number of Greek manuscripts
which had survived the Arian corruptions,
from which they produced all the Greek
text from which our did English Bibles
and the Authorised Version has given us
the whole Word of God, a great portion
of which the New Version seeks to de-
prive us of. In the name of all this
Greek authority, from which the Greek
Testament of the Reformation was taken,
I protest against this great deprivation
and gross depravation of the Word of
God, which is so daringly manifest in the
New Version.
Dr. Kitto proceeds to show that our
London Polyglot was drawn from the one
just now described. He says :—“ Bain
Walton, the learned editor of the London
Polyglot, gave a more copious collection
of various .readings in the sixth volume
of that work than had before appeared,


which was further enlarged by Dr. Fell
in his edition published at Oxford in
1675, and reprinted by Gregory in 1703.
Dr. John Mill, encouraged and supported
by Fell, gave to the world a new edition
in 1707. The text is that of Stephens’s
third edition. In it the editor exhibited
from Gregory’s manuscripts a greater
number of readings than is to be found
in any former edition. He revised and
increased the extracts formerly made
from ancient versions. Nor did he neg-
lect quotations from the fathers. It is
said that the work contained 30,000
various readings. This important edi-
tion, so far superior to every preceding
one, cost the laborious editor the toil-
some study of thirty years, and excited
the prejudices of many who were unable
to appreciate its excellence. It com-
menced a new era in the criticism of the
New Testament. Ludolph Kuster re-
printed Mills’s Greek Testament at
Amsterdam in 1710, enriching it with
the readings of twelve additional manu-
scripts,”
These are the great authorities to
which Dr. Gill and other commentators
refer for the proof of the inspiration of
the now omitted texts, &c. I ask again,


who are these New Revisers that they
should dare to seek to overturn all this
immutable and God-given and Holy
Ghost-inspired authority ? I must reject
them with disdain, and embrace the re-
sults of the investigations of far better
men.
The author of ChroniconAlexandrinum
in the fourth century affirms that the
originals of St. John’s writings were then
preserved at Ephesus (Dr. Hales on the
Trinity, vol, ii. pp. 196, 197).
How Horne, in vol. iv. p. 408, could
have reproduced the malicious mocking
and scoffing of the rabid infidel Gibbon,
I do not know (see Decline and Fall, vol.
i. p. 613. In the body of his pages he
gives the historical facts relative to
Christianity. Then he seeks as an infi-
del to mock away those facts by blas-
phemous foot-notes. The New Version
and its advocates have taken up his posi-
tion, and justified his mocking. He
says :—“ The three witnesses have been
established in our Greek Testament by
the prudence of Erasmus; the honest
bigotry of the Complutensian editor;
the typographical fraud or error of
Robert Stephens in placing a crotchet;
and the deliberate falsehood or strange


misapprehension of Theodore Beza.”
Again, when he records the facts given
by Victor relative to the horrible perse-
cutions which the Trinitarians suffered
from the hands of the Arians, just the
same as Fox has recorded the sufferings
which the Protestants received at the
hands of the Papist Gibbon, sneers at
his records. This Victor Vitensis was a
wealthy citizen of Adrumetum, and pro-
consul of Africa. As Fox, he wrote
what he saw, heard, and knew on the
spot, and no one of his time denied his
true records, any more than Fox was
contradicted in the age when the events
he records took place. Why should
Horne then say, “ He has excited the
sneers of infidelity by recording some
ridiculous miracles, the truth of which,
notwithstanding, he solemnly pledged
himself to prove ”? Have not the pro-
phets, apostles, and Fox, yea, the Lord
Jesus Himself, been sneered at in the
same way ? And what has this historian
recorded that he should be sneered at by
rabid infidels, as the prophets, apostles,
and Fox has been sneered at ? This is
the record at which infidelity scoffs and
mocks. “ When the Arian king Hun-
neric conquered Africa, thousands of the


Trinitarians fled to Spain and elsewhere,
so that they might worship God accord-
ing to His Word —just as many left Eng-
land when bloody Queen Mary ascended
the throne. But some stayed in Africa,
as some stayed in England, and these
dared to hold their illegal assemblies, as
Hunneric called them. A military count
was dispatched to collect them to the
forum, and in the presence of the whole
province deprived the guilty of their
right hands and their tongues. But the
holy confessors continued to speak with-
out tongues ; and this miracle is attested
by Victor, an African bishop, who pub-
lished a history of the persecution within
two years after the event. ‘lf anyone
should doubt of the truth,’ says Victor,
‘ let him repair to Constantinople, and
listen to the clear and perfect language
of Eestitutus, the sub-deacon, one of
these glorious sufferers, who is now
lodged in the palace of the Emperor
Zeno, and is respected by the devout
Empress.’ iEneas has accurately de-
scribed his own observations on these
African sufferers. He says : —‘ I saw
them myself; I heard them speak; I
diligently inquired by what means such an
articulate voice could be formed without


any organ of speech ; I used my eyes
to examine the report of my ears ; I
opened their mouths, and saw that the
whole tongue had been completely torn
away by the roots, an operation which
the physician generally supposed to be
mortal.’ The Emperor Justiman declared
the same in a perpetual edict; so did
Count Marcellinus in his ‘ Chronicle of
the Times.’ ”
Now, these are the authorities which
Gibbon gives for the truth of this won-
derful interposition of God’s power
who has often made the dumb to speak,
and the deaf to hear, and the blind to
see. These witnesses of His power and
love in these sufferers appealed to the
facts then before the whole world, and
no man then living could or did deny
them. No ; that denial was left for the
blasphemy of infidelity in after ages, and
the advocates for the same omissions and
alterations as we find in the New Ver-
sion. My reader may be disposed to ask
—Who disbelieves and sneers at the his-
tories just given? I answer—Gibbon,
who gives them ; Horne, who refers to
them; and the New Version advocates
have practically endorsed the sneer by
denying their testimony. The exact


words of Gibbon’s sneer are these:—
“This supernatural gift of the African
confessors who spoke without tongues
will command the assent of those, and
of those only, who are ready to believe
that their language was pure and ortho-
dox. But the stubborn mind of an in-
fidel is guarded by secret, incurable sus-
picion ; and the Arian or Socinian who
has seriously rejected the doctrine of the
Trinity, will not be shaken by the plausi-
ble evidence of an Athanasian miracle.”
Thus as Erasmus, Stephens, andßeza
are mocked as false and fraudulent for
giving these now omitted Scriptures at
the glorious Reformation, so are these
ancient fathers -who contended for them
when the Arian manuscripts were omit-
ting them, and the Arians were putting
to death all who retained them. It is
most heartrending to see the New Re-
visers and their admirers thus taking the
position and part of sneering infidels,
Arians, and Socinians. On the sixth
page of the New Revision the Revisers
say that the translators of 1611 were led
in some things by the fathers. Certainly
they were; they relied upon their evi
deuces for these texts. But what have
the New Revisers been led by ? The


sneering of infidels, Arians, and Socinians
in rejecting them.
The advocates of the New Version urge
upon us this fallacy—that three old
manuscripts have been brought to light
since 1611, and that these demand the
alterations to which we have referred.
1 answer that they do not in any wise,
and I will proceed to prove it.
1. These three manuscripts are of the
Arian period, and bear evident marks of
the Arian and Roman Church corrup-
tions.
2. They have too much and too little
to be of much authority.
3. The Revisers have not clearly said
that they have been directed by them in
these alterations.
Let us now prove these facts.
I.—Let us take the Codex Yaticanus,
as described by Horne in his second vol-
ume, page 100. Professor Hug says it
was written in the latter part of the
fourth century; but Bishop Marsh says
at the end of the fifth century. This
was the time of the Arian persecutions.
This, then, was the Arian period.
The Old Testament wants the first
forty-six chapters in Genesis, thirty-two
Psalms, &c, The New Testament wants


half the Epistle to the Hebrews, Paul’s
Epistles to Timothy, Titus, and Phile-
mon, and the book of Revelation. Some
of these latter books have been supplied
by a modern handwriting in the fifteenth
century. This modern writer “ has ven-
tured to erase with a penknife.” Now, I
ask, what authority can this old relic of
the Popes, with all these omissions, late
additions, and penknife scratching?, give
to our Holy Bible ? I blush with shame
that Protestant scholars should attempt
to thus impose upon the simple-minded
who have not the means to examine
these questions ; and therefore they im-
pose upon them these lying fables as if
they were the most solemn truths. Can
any good thing come from the Vatican ?
ll.—Let us now look at the Codex
Alexandrinus (Horne, vol. ii. p. 91).
This the New Version advocates urge was
given to Charles I. in 1628 by Cyril of
Constantinople, seventeen years after our
Authorised Version was published; and
therefore being so old, it is of overwhelm-
ing authority enough to strike us all
dumb. I answer—Oh, horrible imposi-
tion upon the credibility of the simple !
Let us now see what is its authority.
The great Greek investigators give the


date of this manuscript variously, from
the end of the fourth century to the be-
ginning of the tenth century. Those
who praise it most gives the time of its
writing, the Arian period. It is affirmed
that it came from an old monastery at
Mount Athos—Eome again. Dr. Woide,
who transcribed it for stereotyping,
affirms that it was written by two hands,
and not alone by the Lady Theda, as it
professes to have been. It has the
Apocryphal Book, the Apocryphal Psalms,
and the Epistle of Clement. It thus
adds to God’s Word. Now, mark what
it takes away. It wants all St. Matthew
up to the 25th chapter and 6th verse,
from John vi. 50 to viii. 52, and from
2 Cor. iv. 13 to xii. 7 —all this omission.
The Psalms are preceded by an epistle of
Athanasius to Marcellinus, which Gudin
affirms to be a forgery, and that such
forgery could not have taken place until
long after his death. Luke i. 46 to 55 is
entitled “ The Prayer of Mary, the
Mother of God.” This at once stinks
of the scarlet harlot. Now, I ask
again—Is this old relic of Eome, with
all its omissions, additions, and corrup-
tions, to govern what should he and what
should not be in our most Holy Bible?


Away with such fraudulent imposition
attempted upon the simple‘because they
do not know any better.
lll.—Let us notice the Codex Sinai-
bicus, found by Tischendorf in St. Cath-
erine’s Convent, near Mount Sinai, about
IHso —Rome again. Wonderful is the
authority of this old convent relic.
Here I blush again for the monstrous
impositions of pretended scholars upon
the simple, who have no means of test-
ing their affirmations. This manuscript
has the Epistle of Barnabas and the
Shepherd of Harmas too much also. If
any person wish to see an outline of the
abovenamed Greek scholar, with the
various Greek manuscripts he examined,
they can see it by Dr. Kitto, as before
noticed. This great scholar says that
this old manuscript was written in the
first part of the fourth century, which
was the Ariau period again. What is
more wonderful still, this gentleman
urges upon us the very opposite to what
the New Revision gentlemen have done
in the seventh edition of his Greek Testa-
ment. After he had spent a lifetime in
investigating these old manuscripts, he
came to the same point as our Old Bible
translators in England had done during


all the past 500 years. He also came to
the same conclusion as that which I have
laid down, viz., that the period when
these manuscripts were written was a
period of variation and depravation.
His own words are these :—“lt is mani-
fest that none of our surviving witnesses
is higher than that age (fourth century),
when a certain universal variety and de-
pravation of the sacred text already ex-
isted.” This is the fact I have insisted
upon from the first, and this fact the
finder of the Siuaitic Codex; and he who
has transcribed it and has written his
comments upon it has thus declared.
This great man Tischendorf solemnly
advises revisers not to be led by these
old manuscripts, but to take the general
evidences of inspiration. This is what
our translators did. Now, what can we
think of the advocates of the New Ver-
sion, who plead for the mutilation of our
blessed New Testament upon the autho-
rity of these three Arian and Eoman
corruptions. I think shame upon them.
I would have these triflers and tamperers
with God’s Word remember what He did
with Arius and his shameful colleagues
who first started these deprivations and
depravations now revived in this New


Version.
Such was the unblushing villainy of
the men who commenced this tampering
with the Word of God, that when Atha-
nasius and Hosius had overmatched them
at the Council of Nice, they charged this
good man with murdering Arsenius, a
bishop, and with cutting off one of his
hands. They put this bishop into a
secret place whilst Athanasius was being
tried for this crime. The officers of the
Emperor found the man, and when these
tamperers with God’s Word had sworn
that Athanasius had killed him he was
brought into court and both his hands
were exhibited, when Athanasius asked
from whom they had cut off the hand
they had brought as evidence to take
away his life. Thus Arius and his party
were put to great shame and confusion,
and the blessed defenders of the Deity of
Christ and the doctrine of the Trinity
were delivered. They honoured God, and
God honoured them.
Again, when Constantine had been in-
duced by Eusebius of Nicomedia to send
Arius back to Alexandria, and ordered
Alexander, the Bishop, to give him his
church again, this good man prayed day
and night that he might be delivered


from this wicked deed of putting such a
monster into one of his churches. And
now mark the hand of God again. I
will give the exact words of the historian
Milner (Church History, c. iv. c. 3): —
“ The next day seemed to be a trium-
phant one to the Arians. The of
the party paraded through the streets
with Arius in their midst, and drew the
attention of all towards them. When
they came nigh the Forum of Constan-
tine, a sudden terror, with a disorder of
the intestines, seized Arius. In his
urgent necessity he requested to be
directed to a place of private retirement.
Agreeable to the information he received,
he hastened behind the Forum, and there
he poured forth his bowels with
effusion of blood.” Thus he died.
I will leave the reader to his own re-
flections upon this historical fact relative
to the Lord’s righteous! judgments upon
those men who started these manuscripts
of depravity referred to by Tischendorf.
I can but think that it is an awful crime
to tamper with God’s most Holy Word.
I see in the reasoning and subtle conduct
of the Arian party a great resemblance
to the Bishop of Melbourne, Mr. Strong,
and Mr, Stewart.


These, then, are the manuscripts upon
the authority of which foolish people
have said the text of the New Version
has been formed. This fallacious idea is
directly opposed to the judgment of
Count Tischeudorf, who found the last
of the three, and who transcribed it and
wrote so much upon it. His declarations
of its being written in a time of variation
and depravation I need not repeat.
The Greek line of manuscripts from
the Apostles to Jerome has long been de-
stroyed, unless some of them have been
amongst those found in Syria some time
ago. As I have found some advocates of
the New Version who have seen the folly
of trusting to the manuscripts last, re-
ferred to, resorting to the Syriac Version
to justify the mutilations and omissions
of the New Version, let us attend to this
department for a moment. The book
entitled “Theßible in many Languages,”
and published by the Religious Tract
Society, says, from page 45—That Jude,
with the King of Edessor, procured as
much of Scripture as they could from
Jerusalem in the first century ; that they
had four or five versions of parts of
Scripture; that these were sent to
Venice in 1552, and a New Testament


was printed in Syriac from them (to
which Dr. Gill has referred); that since
then great pains have been taken to
obtain Syriac manuscripts of the Scrip-
ture ; that Mr. Eich found fifty-nine ;
that Dr. Buchanan found many more
in 1806, and was long engaged in col-
lating them, and died in the midst of
that work ; that Dr. S. Lee finished what
Dr. Buchanan left undone; that Dr.
Grant and Dr. Wolfe had created much
interest in the same direction. Now,
mark the conclusion of all this labour.
The Tract Society says:—“ Two results
have followed the recent discovery of
copies of this ancient version. They
have confirmed in a remarkable way the
accuracy of our present text —that is of
the Authorised Version. The present
text of both Testaments is found to agree
in its readings with that of manuscripts
which have been brought from the dis-
tant East, where they have been buried
for centuries. At the very time when
the nations of Europe were throwing off
old bonds, and were peculiarly exposed
to the danger of abusing their liberty,
Providence was providing fresh evidence
of the truth of Scripture from the very
ends of the earth.”


From these facts I am sure the follow-
ing is correct, which I take from the
Bock of July Bth :—“ It is a significant
fact, that one of our great societies the
Religious Tract Society—which stands
on the same neutral ground as the Bible
Society, has already come to the conclu-
sion that ‘the Revised New Testament
is a failure.’ A leading article in the
Leisure Hour of this month thus expres-
ses this conviction ;— ‘ Whatever may be
the judgment of the learned, the great
voice of public opinion has already de-
cided that the New Version will not
supersede the old.’ * Taken as a whole,
the New Version is inferior in diction to
the old.’ ‘lf we ask why it has failed
in this great design of being “ the
people’s Bible,” the reasons are not far
to seek.’ ” Thus, then, there is no au-
thority in the Syriac manuscripts or ver-
sions for the mutilations and omissions
of the Word of God, which are so mani-
fest in the New Version. The correct-
ness of the dear old heavenly Book is
thus confirmed.
Before I close this letter, I would like
to say another word upon the Latin line
of manuscripts from Jerome, who trans-
lated from the ancient Greek manuscripts


so long destroyed. That the reader may
understand how much the Church of
Rome has corrupted these, I take the
following from the forty-fourth page of
the same volume :—ln 1546, the Council
of Trent declared the Vulgate Latin to
be the only standard of faith. In 1590,
Sixtus V. corrected it in many places,
and pronounced excommunication upon
any who dared to alter it. In 1592, Cle-
ment VIII. did alter it in many places,
and pronounced curses upon him who
should dare to alter his or doubt his au-
thority. Both these contain gross errors
and omissions. The Sextine omits
Judges xvii. 2, 3 ; Prov. xxv. 24 ; Matt,
xxvii. 35. The Clementine omits 1 Sam.
xxiv. 8 ; 2 Sam. viii. 8 ; Acts xiv. 6 ;
xxiv. 18, 19. They contradict one ano-
ther in Ex. xxxii. 28 ; Joshua ii. 18 ; xi.
19 ; 1 Kings ii. 28; iv. 22, and in many
other places—Dr. James says in 2000
instances ; Lucas Brugenses says 4000 ;
Cardinal Bellarmine says “ many mis-
takes were passed over for Just reasons.”
So much for the infallibility of Rome.
All this is sufficient to prove that
Jerome’s Latin Version must not be
judged of by the corrupt versions of the
Church of Rome. In my future letters


I will give my readers the judgment of
the great Protestant scholars of England
upon the New Version. Satan revised
Psalm xci. 11, and left out seven words
in the middle to tempt the Lord (Matt,
iv. 6). He omitted the following words,
“To keep thee in all thy ways.” Let us
rejoice in the immutability of God’s most
Holy Word.
“ How firm a foundation, ye saints of the
Lord, ,
Is laid for your faith in His excellent Word.
I remain, etc.,
DANIEL ALLEN, Pastor.
The following notice of the Rev. Dr. Tal-
mage’s service on a recent Sabbath, appears
in the New York Tribune: —An attack by
Dr. Taltnage upon the Revised Version of
the New Testament drew great applause
from a large audience in Brooklyn Taber-
nacle two Sundays ago. He began the at-
tack by stopping abruptly in the Lord’s
Prayer, after the petition “ deliver us from
the evil one,” and observing, without the
formality of an “ Amen,” I shall have to
stop there for the New Version has struck
out the “ doxology.” When he took up the
Bible for the morning lesson, he said ;


“ I will read from the fifth chapter of
John.” Then he turned over the leaves,
and stopped as if disappointed and as-
tonished, and continued—“ No, the Revi-
sion has done away with that.” Then he
turned to another chapter and began to
read, but stopped again saying, “ No, that
has perished too.” He did the same with
the third selection, and finally said—“ We
shall have to take to the Old Testament,
The Old Testament Company has not re-
ported, and will not for two years. I will
read from the 19th Psalm.” In his sermon
Dr.Talmage began by reading the story from
2nd Samuel of the smiting of Uzziah for
touching the ark. After a trenchant criti-
cism on what heconsidered blemishes in the
New Version, Dr. Talmage proceeded—“l
pronounce the revision a literary botch. It
will never be adopted in this country if the
fearless criticism of the people speaks out
its mind. I reject this revision because it
is a mechanical failure ; because the verses
and headings have been abandoned. Here
is a paragraph a column and a half long,
in the middle of which are buried the
blessed words ‘ Jesus wept,’ instead of
standing out in solitude with all their
grandeur, pathos, tenderness, and omnipo-
tent meaning. I reject the New Version


because of its amazing triviality. You
remember Christ’s sermon, whereHe speaks
of putting new wine into old bottles. The
New Version substitutes the words skins,
as if they could not explain bottles as well
as skins. (Laughter.) ‘ Show Me a penny,’
said Christ. The revisers say, ‘ Show me
a denarius.’ (Laughter.) The old trans-
lation was too much for the delicacy of our
American part of the New Testament
Company where it says ‘ for he was naked.’
The American Committee chose that it
should read ‘ had on his undergarment
only.’” (Laughter.) “Hands off the
Word of God ; remember the fate of
Uzziah,” Mr. Talmage shouted again. He
said if the revision should be received there
would soon be a Baptist revision, a Metho-
dist revision, and so on, “ until possibly,’’
he said, “ I shall issue a revision.”
83


No. VII.
THE LEARNED PROTESTANTS OF ENGLAND.
I think it will be proper now to state that
all the world of learned Protestant in-
vestigators in England have pronounced
upon the New Version as we have done.
The following extracts will prove this to
he true. The learned editors of the
Rock , in their issue of June 10th, 1881,
says:—
“ The revision of the Greek text was,
as the revisers tell us, a necessary part
of their work—the foundation, in truth,
on which they have raised their super-
structure, and as such it becomes not
merely a matter of supreme importance
to carefully examine the strength and
character of this foundation, but such an
examination becomes absolutely neces-
sary with a view to pronounce on the
merits and demerits of the Revised Ver-
sion which the revisers have set forth as
an improvement on the Authorised Ver-
sion. Now here we have several com-
plaints to make. 1. We feel ourselves
constrained to complain that the revisers
have not dealt with us candidly and
openly, either in their preface to the
Revised Version itself, or in their preface


to the Greek text, or in the text itself
either of the English or the Greek. A
textual scholar will see at a glance in
most instances which text has been fol-
lowed, or what consensus of texts, and
‘ many ancient authorities ’ and ‘ some
ancient authorities,’ indefinite and un-
satisfactory as such terms may be to the
general reader, will be sufficiently defi-
nite to him, though to no one else. It
is, to say the least, anything but com-
forting to find that the continuous and
complete Greek text published as a com-
panion and explanatory volume to the
Revised Version leaves the general reader
utterly in the dark as to the source,
character, and value either of the read-
ings relegated to the margin or the new
readings adopted into the text, and, what
is more painful still, the readings which
have altogether disappeared. 2. Our
next charge against the revisers is that
they have yielded too implicitly to the
readings of the two oldest Greek manu-
script authorities, the Sinaitic and the
Vatican, and, in some cases of import-
ance, to the Roman Catholic Vulgate of
St. Jerome. In the following instances
the revisers have followed the Vatican
and Sinaitic and the Vulgate :—(1) Eor


the received reading in Matt. i. 25, * ner
first-born son,’ they now read ‘ a son.’
(2) Luke ii. 14, for the received reading
and rendering, ‘on earth peace, good
will towards men,’ they read ‘ on earth
peace amongst men, in whom he is well
pleased.’ (3) They have omitted the
Doxology in the Lord’s Prayer, as given
by Matthew. (4) In 1 Cor. xiv. 27 the
received reading, ( whosoever shall eat the
bread or drink the cup,’ * or ’ becomes
* and.’ A Roman Catholic contemporary
calls attention, with evident exultation,
‘ to the decided approximation in a mul-
titude of instances to the rendering of
the Catholic Yulgate,’ and adds— ‘ In
the version of the Lord’s Prayer con-
tained in the 11th chapter of St. Luke,
the New Revision almost exactly follows
the Yulgate and the Rheims translation,
differing thus extensively and materially
from the former Anglican version, while
the new version of the Prayer in Bt.
Matthew omits, as the Catholic versions
do, the Doxology at the end,’ Again,
the value of ‘ ancient authorities ’ be-
comes most deteriorated as an evidence
when we bear in mind the words of
Tischeudorf, the facile princeps of textual
scholars, as he lays it down in the


* Prolegomena ’ of the seventh edition. ‘ It
is manifest that none of our surviving
witnesses is higher than that age (fourth
century) when a certain universal variety
and depravation of the Sacred Text al-
ready existed.’ If then a reading comes
to us on the authority of manuscripts
belonging to an age remarkable for its
tampering with the Sacred Text, and
that reading contradicts the context of
the passage, or the tone and tenour of
Holy Writ, and further is contradicted
by translations clearly made from the
original—made in the Apostolic age and
existing in the second century—it is not
merely good sound criticism, but good
common sense, to reject such a reading
at once, though found in two of the most
ancient of our manuscript authorities.
The canon of St. Augustine we hold still
remains true that assigns the chief au-
thority to those Greek copies found to be
not the most ancient, but in the Churches
most distinguished for care and learn-
ing.’ Now, the text of Tischendorf
(based for the most part on the readings
of the Codex Sinaitian and Vatican)
underwent many changes in many edi-
tions, and it is remarkable that his ex-
tended experience as a critic, and his


multiplied resources as a researcher and
textual scholar, led him back more and
more to conservative principles of criti-
cism, and to a fuller avowal of the un-
equalled merits of Erasian editions, from
which he had departed only to retrace his
steps. In his seventh edition, Tischen-
dorf acted upon a sounder principle than
that of servile submission to antiquity
in dealing with the Sacred Text, and de-
clared that henceforth the question was
no longer which text is * the more an-
cient, but which is pre-eminent by its
own proper force and reasonableness.’
Such considerations and admissions
ought to have restrained our revisers
from much of the unhallowed mutilation
of which they have been guilty.”
A learned correspondent in the Rock
of June 17 says ;
“ My former letter contained a refer-
ence to etymology that may require some
comment. The explanation shall be as
brief as I can make it.
“ I suppose we all agree that on politi-
cal and other worldly subjects the lime*
is wise enough in its generation. I hope
also that on spiritual questions we dread
alike its oracular utterances. A day or
two ago we had an elaborate defence of


the New Translation. Into the quibusdam
rebus I will not plunge. One short sen-
tence was unique. It speaks of ‘ Paul’s
swift and subtle mind struggling with an
imperfect vehicle of expression.’ Shades
of Demosthenes, of Plato, and of Aris-
totle ! This, of your marvellous con-
ductor for the electricity of thought and
feeling ! ‘ 0 Tempora What next ?
“ But enough. I am not morose ; I
am not disrespectful ; I do not ignore
certain incidentals in our Authorised
Version that confessedly invite amend-
ment. But Ido shudder at the whole-
sale new-fangling of the one whose every
phrase is like an echo of departed tunes,
with what musicians would call the har-
monics ever solemnly rising within our
bosoms. Ido resent this merciless tear-
ing off whole portions of skin under plea
of removing an occasional pimple ; and
cutting down trees of paradise to the
fashion of a quickset hedge. I am no
worshipper of antiquity ; yet I cannot
but love ‘ the old, old story ’ to the good
old tune ; and I have a strong presump-
tion that I am very far from being alone
in the feeling that ‘ the old is better.’ ”
In the same paper we have the follow-
ing


“ The Bishop of Lincoln, writing to
the Lord Chancellor upon the legality of
reading the Revised Version of the New
Testament in churches belonging to the
Establishment, remarks that there seems
to be a presumption against the practice
of using the Revised Version in churches
‘ad ivconvenienti ,’ as ‘ the new Revised
Version, however valuable in itself, is not
distinguishable as to authority from any
private venture of the kind. It has re-
ceived no sanction from the Crown, from
the Church, or from Parliament. If a
clergyman may use it in the public ser-
vices of the Church, why might he not
use any other revised version, such as
Archbishop Newcome’s or Dean Alford’s
or the revised version put forward not
long ago by “ Five Clergymen,” or even
a revised version framed by himself ?
And so, in fine, might we not have as
many “ revised versions ” as clergymen
or churches ?’ In his reply, the Lord
Chancellor says : ‘ I agree generally with
what you say. If any clergyman reads
in his church the lessons appointed for
the Sunday and other services from the
“ Revised ” Version before it has been
recommended or authorised by some
sufficient public authority, he will, I


think, incur a serious risk of being held
to be an offender against law.”
On this subject the Record says :—“ It
is believed in well-informed quarters that
at a late meeting of the bishops the sub-
ject of the Revised Version came some-
what fully before them, with the result
that certainly no encouragement was
given to a departure from the Authorised
Version of the Holy Scriptures in public
worship. It is also said that a legal
opinion has been taken informally by the
Bishop of London, which seemed, like
that contained in the Lord Chancellor’s
published letter to the Bishop of Lincoln,
to show that the law is against any de-
parture from the use of the Authorised
Version in the public services of the
Church of England.”
The editors of the Gospel Standard, one
of the leading journals of my denomina-
tion, are scholars of high standing, and
very godly men. In their review of the
New Version, which appeared in their
issue of July last, they have expressed
their minds in a similar way to what I
have done. All my little book was in the
hands of the printer days before I re-
ceived their periodical; and I have begged
my printer to add this most thankfully


received testimony from them. Their
article refers to the same deprivations of
texts and depravations of other texts as
those to which I have referred, therefore
I need not repeat them. They conclude
their article thus : “ Our advice is, keep
to the Old Book, and in no wise allow the
new one to be introduced in the Sabbath-
schools or places of worship.” Christian
gentlemen, accept my heartfelt thanks,
tendered to you in tears of gratitude, for
this good and most godly counsel.
The editor of the Earthen Vessel, also
another of our leading journals, says :
“We have seen enough of it to feel
grieved; but at present we must be
quiet. We shall stick to the Authorised
Version the little while we are here.”
This dear brother knows how much love
I have for him. He will therefore per-
mit me in that love to ask him these
questions :
Why did you not say what it was that
grieved you ?
Why must you be quiet when deadly
poison was being given to your 10,000
readers ?
Why did you allow the Orator to praise
what grieved you so, when he could not
have known what he praised ?


Why did you allow Mr. W. Winters to
praise it in its autography, &c., when its
“ deprivations and depravations ” of
texts grieved you so much ?
Why should I care whether we have
“ sonne ” or “ son,” so long as the Son
of God is there ?
My unfeigned love to this dear brother
will justify this my public interrogation
of him upon what is now before the
world.
The Christian's Monthly Record is edited
by my very dear friend and brother, Mr.
John Gadsby, who is an author of very
high standing, his works having been
read by her Majesty the Queen. He has
an article in his number for July in
solemn protest against the New Version.
Its heading alone will tell us of its nature
and character. It is: “ The Revised
Version of the New Testament—Compro-
mises and Contradictions of the Revi-
sers.” This will be quite enough to show
that my dear friend has done as I have
tried to do, warned his hearers against
using this New Version. Ido also thank
him from my whole heart for strengthen-
ing my hands in this my protest against
the same.
Mr. Spurgeon complains that having


had a text impressed upon his mind
from which he was led to preach, and
that he turned to the New Version and
it was not there, this was enough to
satisfy him and his 7000 hearers. The
text was Luke iv. 18—“ He hath sent me
to heal the broken-hearted.”
“ 8.,” in the New Zealand, . Christian
Record, says :—“ We are accustomed to
consider nothing more certain than the
Unity of God; and when the questionis
raised in the 3rd of Romans, whether He
is God of both Jews and [Gentiles, our
Authorised Version reads, ‘ Seeing He is
one God and by the best authorities it
might be expressed more strongly,
‘ Since truly God is one.’ But the re-
visers are not so sure, and they alter this
important doctrine into, ‘ If so [be that
God is one ’ (Rom. iii. 20). Can we
feel confidence in the alterations made
by men who can insert this [doubt as to
the unity of God ? Must we not look
into the other changes ? Many words,
and some whole verses, are[omitted on the
authority of some ancient manuscripts.
May we not think, ‘ If so be the revisers
are not in error ’? Several passages may
be pointed out where the Revision is
not so correct as the Old Version.”


Mr. J. 0. Phiipot, once a Fellow of
Oxford University, and for many years
the most spiritual and scholarly editor of
the Gospel Standard, said, in the year
1857 (pp. 120-8), relative to the antici-
pated New Version :—“ Is it desirable to
have a new, or, at least, a revised trans-
lation of the Scriptures ? We fully ad-
mit that there are here and there pas-
sages of which the translation might be
improved; as, for instance, * love ’ for
‘ charity ’ all through 1 Cor. xiii.; but
we deprecate any alteration as a measure
that for the smallest sprinkling of good
would deluge us with a flood of evil. It
would unsettle the minds of thousands
as to which was the Word of God, the
old translation or the new. What a door
it would open for the workings of infi-
delity, or the temptations of Satan !
What a gloom, too, it would cast over the
minds of many of God’s saints, to have
those passages which had been applied to
their souls translated in a different way,
and how it would seem to shake all their
experience of the power and preciousness
of God’s Word ! If the revision and re-
translation were once to begin, where
would it end ? It is good to let well
alone, as it is easier to mar than mend.


The Socinianising Neologian would blot
out ‘ God ’ in 1 Tim. iii. 16, and strike
out 1 John v. 7,8, as an interpolation.
The Puseyite would mend it to suit
Tractarian views.”
Dr. Talmage says ;—“ I join with nine
hundred and ninety-nine out of every
thousand of the unpretending Christian
people of America in looking upon the
Eevised Version as a desecration, a pro-
fanation, a mutilation, and a religious
outrage.”
Thus I am thankful to see we have the
learned Protestants of England on our
side, whatever others may say against
us.
As to the scholarship of the New Ver-
sion, I think it very shocking. It speaks
of the Holy Persons in the glorious God-
head as of mean things—“ it,” “ that,”
and “ which” (see Matt. vi. 9; 1 Peter
i. 11; 1 John i. 2). The grammatical
lines of genders were not so well defined
in 1611 as they have been since. These
are the alterations I expected to have
seen. “ Outos ” is rendered “ the
same ”in John i. 7. Why not have
rendered “ta” the same in 1 Peter i.
11. Donnegan says “ta ” is equivalent
to “ outos ” sometimes, and to “ho ” or


Churches in the colonies I would affec-
tionately say—Dear brethren and sisters
in Christ, as the following is the founda-
tion of the faith of the Church of which
I have the honour to be the pastor, a
declared approval of the New Version as
a correct version of the New Testament
is a declared disbelief in the words of
God, upon which the constitution of the
Church is built, inasmuch as the New
Version apostatises from these words,
which are as follows :—“ We believe in
the Unity of the Divine Essence, or
oneness of Deity: * Hear, 0 Israel, the
Lord our God is one Lord ’ (Mark xii.
29). That there are three distinct per-
sons or subsistences in the one Jehovah,
* There are three that bear record in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these three are one ’ (1
John v. 7).” If any one should say,
“ Oh, we do not agree with this omission,
but we like the book,” I have to ask,
Can there be a greater crime under
heaven than that of taking away God’s
holy words from His precious Bible ?
And can these persons like a book that is
guilty of this crime ? All who believe
our Ist and 10th Articles of Faith must
justify my protest against the New Ver-
sion.


An espousal of the New Version is also
a departure from the 10th Article of our
Faith, which is founded upon Acts viii.
37, but which is discarded in the New
Version. Let it be remembered that a
demand for faith before baptism is not
found in any other part of the Bible like
that in Acts viii. 37. True, there are
many examples of faith before baptism
which are New Testament authorities
also, but this is the one direct command
for faith immediately before baptism,
upon which our Baptist Churches have
relied for our 10th article. Shall we give
it up ? God forbid that we should do so.
It is an established law in bibliology that
marginal readings are without canonical
authority. Dear brethren and sisters in
Christ Jesus, I entreat you to stand fast
by the good old Word of the Lord.
It has been thought by some persons
that I have been too severe in the use of
harsh language in this my review of the
revisers of this new book. The editor
and correspondents of the Rock are some
of the most scholarly gentlemen in Eng-
land, such as Dr. Ryle, the Bishop of
Liverpool. Compare their censures
with mine. In their issue of May 20th


they compare the New Revision to the
following ridiculous nonsense : “ Strange
and unaccountable as it may appear,
there have been more than a hundred
different attempts to improve this incom-
parable and unapproachable version of
King James. One of these ‘improvers’
actually rendered ‘ Jesus wept,’ so simple
in its beauty, and so beautiful in its sim-
plicity, by ‘Jesus burst into a flood of
tears.’ But of this host of bombastic
improvers of the Authorised Version,
Mace, who published his ‘improved New
Testament ’ in 1729, bears the palm.
A few specimens of his improvements
will suffice. 1 Cor. vii. 36, ‘lf any man
thinks it would be a reflection upon his
manhood to be a stale bachelor ’ ; 1
Thess. v. 5, ‘ You inherit the advantages
of meridian light: we are not involved
in the obscurity of night ’; 13, ‘ Don’t
form any brigues against them ’; 14,
* Comfort the pusillanimous ’; Jas. ii. 3,
‘lf you should respectfully say to the
suit of fine clothes, Sit you there, that’s
for quality ’; iii. 5,6, ‘ The tongue is
but a small portion of the body, yet how
grand are its pretensions. “ A spark of
fire,” what quantities of timber will it
blow into a flame! The tongue is a


brand that sets the world in a combus-
tion ; it is but one of the numerous
organs of the body, yet it can blast whole
assemblies; tipped with infernal sul-
phur, it sets the whole train of life in a
blaze/ ”
A gentleman past eighty years of age,
having known the Holy Scriptures from
his youth, in the Rock of May 27, says ;
—“ I call it the new-fangled translation
of the New Testament.” “lean scarce
open a single page of this nondescript
without blank amazement and some-
thing more.” “ Downright nonsense.”
“ Wholesale violation.” “ Something
little better than buffoonery in long
clothing.”
In the Rock of June 10th, George
Bartle, D.D., Principal of Freshfield Col-
lege, Liverpool, points out very many
gross perversions of many texts when
compared with the Greek and the Au-
thorised Version. He also says that the
most ordinary rules of English grammar
have been ignored. I think these gen-
tlemen have outdone me in severity of
language.
In the issues of the same journal on
June 3rd and July Bth, it is fully proved
that the law for the Authorised "Version


was thus ; —“ 4. That care be taken that
one uniform translation of the Bible be
printed and read in the churches, and
that without any notes.”
The following is from the Evening News
of the Ist instant:—“ An interesting
lecture was delivered last night at the
Temperance Hall by Pastor Allen, the
subject being ‘History of the New
Testament for 1800 Years.’ The chair
was occupied by Mr. John Eoseby,
M.L.A., and a tolerably large audience
was present. The lecturer stated that
Origen wrote a polyglot of fifty volumes
of the Holy Scriptures before Jerome,
and that the latter, by direction of the
Bishop of Eome, collated and translated
from the Hebrew and Greek manuscripts,
into one, the whole of the books com-
prised in the Old and New Testaments.
A great number of the Fathers used in
their writings the texts, now omitted in
the New Version, before Jerome. The
omissions commenced in the Arian
period. The lecturer next touched on
the translations by Waldo in the South
of France in 1180, Wycliffe in England
in 1384, Tyndale in 1525, Cranmer in
1639, Queen Elizabeth’s bishops from
1558 to 1608, and lastly the Authorised


Version in 1611. In all these we find
the texts now absent from the New
Version. The principal omissions were
Luke iv. 18 ; Eom. viii. 1 ; Matt. vi. 13;
Mark ix. 44, 46; John v. 4; 1 John v.
7 ; and the word ‘ God ’ from 1 Tim. iii.
16. The manuscripts of Sinai, Alexan-
dria, and the Vatican, contained much
that was not the Word of God. They
also had serious omissions, and could not
be relied upon. These omissions were
for the purpose of furthering the dogmas
of particular sects. The lecturer quoted
from Count Tischendorf:— ‘ They were
written at a time of universal variety
and depravation of the sacred text.’
The Bible issued in James’ time was the
only authorised version in the English
language. The men who collated and
translated the Scriptures of 1611 were
far superior in scholarly attainments to
those of the present day. A hearty vote
of thanks to the lecturer and chairman
closed the proceedings.”
Let it be distinctly remembered that
all the English Bibles have been just the
same in sense and quantity for 500 years.
No change whatever only in orthography
and grammar, which has grown out of
the improvement of our language.


In the Guardian it is said the altera-
tions number 30,191. The Bishop of
Gloucester says there are 30,000 altera-
tions in the New Version. In the four-
teen verses of the 2 John there are fifty ;
in Jude, 100 ; in Revelation, 2467, &c.
(see the Rock of July 22nd). This is a
most wanton mutilation of the blessed
New Testament of our glorious Lord
Jesus. All these 80,000 changes were
made in the face of, “ It was agreed that
we should make as few changes as possi-
ble.” In the whole history of Jesuits, is
it possible to find anything more mons-
trous than this ? •
It will be seen that there was no
omission of texts in the books of the
New Testament until Arianism com-
menced. It will be evident that fifty
years after it did commence Jerome com-
plained that unfaithful transcribers
omitted 1 John v. 7, &c. At the same
time, Augustine apologised for some who
omitted John viii. 1-11. In like manner
it will be evident that after Arius many
manuscripts omitted the texts, and
many others retained them. This fact
is declared by Tischendorf, therefore it is
evident that the Arians excluded and the
Trinitarians retained these holy words of


God.
“ What more can He say than to you He has
said,
You, who unto Jesus for refuge have fled.”
I remain, &c.,
DANIEL ALLEN, Pastor.


No. YIIL
BISHOP HORSLEY AND THE ANCIENT FATHERS
UPON 1 JOHN V. 7.
THE THREE HEAVENLY WITNESSES.
I. John wrote this epistle against Corin-
thus and Basilides. The one denied the
proper humanity of Christ, and the other
His glorious Deity. It is recorded in
history that John seeing Corinthus in the
bath one day when he was bathing,
leaped out, saying, “ I will not be seen
in the company of a man so wicked
and upon John leaving the building, it
fell in and killed the blasphemer Corin-
thus, and John’s life was preserved.
11. The history of this text I have
before given. I would especially notice
the 400 pastors who took it to the Arian
tyrant king of the Vandals as their con-
fession of faith relative to the doctrine
of the Trinity in the fifth century, when
they feared death would follow that con-
fession.
1. We have the Father’s witness that
the Lord Jesus is the Christ (verse 2).
(a) At His baptism, Matt. iii. 16 ; xii. 18.
( b ) At the holy mount, Matt. xvii. 6; 2
Peter i. 19. (c) At Bethany, in Simon’s


bouse, or in Jerusalem, John xii. 28 ;
Matt. xxvi. 6. (Gadsby’s Hymns, 329,
11 s., 73, 1.)
2, We have the witness of Christ that
He is the Son of God (verse 9). (a) By
His works, John ix. 32 ; xiv. 11. (b) By
His words, John x. 36; viii. 18. (c) By
His death, &c., Matt, xxvii. 50 ; Eom. i,
4. (Hymn 268, s., 763 c.)
3. We have the witness of the Holy
Ghost that Jesus is the Christ, Matt.xvi.
6. ( a ) At His birth, Luke i. 35 ; ii. 26.
(fc) At His baptism, Matt. iii. 16 ; Isa.
Ixi. 1. (c) At His resurrection, Eom. i.
4; 1 Peter i. 11. (Hymn 24, c. 29,
8.8.6.)
4. We have the unity of the witnesses.
( a) In the unity of the Godhead, Beut.
vi. 4. ( b) In the unity of their testi-
mony, 2 Sam. xxiii. 2, 3 ; Num. vi. 22-27.
(c) In the unity of our worship, Matt,
xxviii. 19. (Hymn 33, 1., 34 1.)
5. We have the place where the witness
is declared “ the excellent glory,” 2 Peter
i. 19. (a) It is the dwelling-place of
God, Isa. Ivii. 15. ( b ) Out of this place
He speaks and looks, Isa. Ixvi. 1. (c)
Out of this place He blesses His people,
Eev. i. 4, 5. (Hymn 357, s., 367 c.)
6. We have the precious character


contained in the testimony “ Beloved.”
(a) He (Christ) is beloved of the Father,
Isa. xlii. 1. (6) He is beloved of the
angels, Heb. i. 6. (c) He is beloved of
saints, 1 Peter i. 8; Eph. i. 6. (Hymn
20, I, 162 Bs.)
Thus all the New Testament demands
this 1 John v. 7 as the triune foundation
upon which all the walls of Gospel truth
are built. This was spiritually meant by
Solomon’s building the temple upon
three great rows of stones (1 Kings vi.
36). Shall this New Version be permitted
to rob us of this foundation ?
I will now give Bishop Horsley’s expo-
sition of this much loved and greatly
hated verse. Pie says:—“There are
three in heaven that bear record—record
to this fact, that Jesus is the Christ,
‘ the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Gbost.’ The Father bears witness by
His own voice from heaven, twice declar-
ing Jesus His beloved Son—first at His
baptism, when He came up out of the
river, and again at the transfiguration.
A third time the Father bore witness,
when He sent His angel to Jesus in
agony in the garden.
“ The eternal Word bear witness by
the fulness of the Godhead dwelling in


Jesus bodily, by that plenitude of
strength and power with which He was
supplied for the performance of His
miracles, and the endurance in His frail
and mortal body of the fire of His
Father’s wrath. The Word bear witness
-—perhaps more indirectly, still the Word
bear witness—by the preternatural dark-
ness which for three hours obscured the
sun while Jesus hung in torment on tha
cross ; in the quaking of the earth, the
rending of the rocks, and the opening of
the graves, to liberate the bodies of the
saints which appeared in the holy city
after His resurrection. For these extra-
ordinary convulsions of the material
world must be ascribed to that power by
which God in the beginning created it,
and still directs the course of it—that is
to the immediate act of the Word, for
4 by Him all things were made,’ and
‘ He upholdeth all things by the word of
His power.’
“ The Holy Ghost bear witness by the
acknowledgment of the infant Jesus,
made by the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost; by the mouths of His servants
and instruments, Simeon and Anna;
and, more directly, by His visible descent
upon the adult Jesus at His baptism, and
upon the ascension of their Lord.


“ Thus the three in heaven hear wit-
ness ; and these three, the Apostle adds,
are one—one in the unity of a consistent
testimony, for that unity is all that is
requisite to the purpose of the Apostle’s
present argument. . . . And there
are three in earth that bear witness —the
Spirit and the water and the blood—and
these three agree in one ” (Bishop Hors-
ley’s Sermon, vol. i. p. 193).
What a solemn difference between this
Bishop’s exposition of this glorious text
and the Bishop of Melbourne, who says,
“ Our Lord’s Divinity is modified by the
removal of 1 John v. 7.” 0, all ye who
fear God and love His Word, hear His
command about keeping it entire—
“ Diminish not a word” (Jer. xxvi. 2).
“ To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
The God whom we adore,
Be glory as it was, is now,
And shall be evermore.”
There is one more point, and I will
close the subject for the present. The
Arians, Socinians, Unitarians, Sweden-
borgians, &c., have affirmed that 1 John
v. 7, and other texts like it, have been
introduced or tampered with since the
Council of Nice, in the year 325, by the
Trinitarians. The Arians and Unitari-
ans say the same of 1 Tim. hi. 16, Acts


viii, 37, &c. These have said that the
ancient Fathers before that Council did
not refer to these texts, nor teach the
doctrines of the Trinity and the Deity of
the Lord Jesus. As far as the New Ver-
sion makers have dared, they have justi-
fied these false imputations upon the Old
Version. To such false imputations I
answer that I have already given testi-
monies from ancient Fathers who lived
before the Council of Nice; and I have
shown that they did use these texts, and
that therefore such texts must have been
in the manuscripts written by the
Apostles, from which Jerome took them.
“As Divine revelation developes
Jehovah’s Unity of Essence consociate
with community of Subsistence, all good
authorities, both primitive and subse-
quent,” says Waterland, “ so understood
not the Father to be one God, as to ex-
clude the Sou from being one God with
Him in nature, substance, and perfection.
Nor have they scrupled to call the Father
and the Son one God.”
“ Those interpreters of the Old and
New Testament that I have seen,” says
Augustine, “ who wrote before me on the
Trinity, which is God, teach conformable
to Scripture that the Father, Son, and


Holy Ghost do, by the inseparable equal-
ity of one and the same substance, make
up the Unity Divine.”
The primitive writers designated the
incarnate Redeemer as “ The Lord,”
“ The Lord God,” “ The Almighty God,”
“ The Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob,” “ The Jehovah,” “ The Lord of
Hosts,” “ The Mighty God,” “ The God
of Israel,” &c.
R. Bourne, Esq., in his “ Mirror of
Christianity,” from page 191, has most
scholarly and demonstratively met these
imputations by large extracts from the
ancient Fathers, who lived and wrote
before the Council of Nice. Here is a
word or two :—“ Ireneaus, 200 years be-
fore Nicene, received from the Apostles
the belief in God the Father and in
Christ Jesus the Sou of God, who was
incarnate for our salvation ; and in the
Holy Ghost, who preached by the pro-
phets ; that, according to the will of the
invisible Father, every knee should bow,
of things in heaven and things on earth,
to Jesus Christ our Lord and God and
Saviour and King.” Again he says :
“ The Spirit has diligently signified His
birth, that it was of a virgin ; and His
substance, that He is God and that He is


man—as man feeling our infirmities,
and as God having mercy upon them.”
Here is the Trinity and the Deity of the
Lord Jesus Christ.
Classical Lucian was born a.d. 90, at
Antioch; died 180, aged ninety years.
He pourtrays the Christian instructing
Critias, a Pagan, in the knowledge of the
mighty, immortal, heavenly God, who
reigneth on high, the Son of the Father,
and the Spirit proceeding from the
Father—“ one of three, and three of
one.” Here is the Trinity and Christ’s
Divinity given.
Athenagoras, in 177, demands “ who
is he, then, that will persist in asserting
that Christians are without a God ; who
preach the Father to be God, the Son to
be God, and the Holy Ghost to be God;
who manifest their power in unity, and
their distinction in order. ... To
know what is the unity of the Son with
the Father, what the community of the
Fatter with the Son ; what is the unity
of this plurality; and what is the dis-
tinction of these that are one—the
Spirit, the Son, and the Father—which
cannot have a parallel.”
Tertullian, in 200, said:—“TheDivine
three are one in unity of substance, not


in singularity of number. Though each
is God, yet, when mentioned together,
we call the Father God, and Jesus Christ
Lord. But speaking of Christ singly, we,
with Paul, call Him God over all, blessed
for evermore.” Here is the Trinity and
Jesus’ Deity again.
Origen, in 250, said;—“l believe there
is one God, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost. This blessed Trinity is of one
substance, and inseparable. To know
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
is the perfection of science ; it is the pin-
nacle of science to know the Trinity.”
Here we have the same truth again.
Cyprian of Carthage, in 250, said :
“ For in giving command to baptise all
nations in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, sig-
nifies all nations should be baptised in
the Trinity; therefore baptism is the
confession of the Trinity.”
Gregory, in 265, said : —“ The Father
was never without the Son, nor the Son
without the Spirit; but the Trinity
abides the same, unchangeable and in-
variable for ever.”
Gregory Nazianzen said:—“l cannot
think of the one but I am immediately
surrounded with the splendour of the


three ; nor can I clearly discover the
three hut I am suddenly carried back to
the one ” (see Galvin’s Institutes, vol. i,
ch. xiii. c. 17).
Now from all this and volumes more,
it is evident that it is monstrously untrue
for the New Version people to say that
the texts now omitted in it were not in
the manuscripts written by the Apostles,
that they were not taught by the ancient
Fathers, but that they were introduced
at and after the Council of Nice by the
Trinitarians in their conflict with the
Arians. Such imputations are a base
calumny upon the Word of God, the
Bible, given to our nation in its fulness
and purity for these last 500 years, I
think shame upon the Bishop of Mel-
bourne glorying in the omission of these
texts in the New Version, “ to modify
the Divinity of our Lord.” It is his
Lord, not my Lord.
Thus I have cleared my conscience of
the guilt which must have rested upon
my heart had I not have entered this my
protest against this New Version.
Before I had it in my hands five minutes
I saw that it was what some of the great
Protestant scholars of England has de-
clared it to be—a gross deprivation and


a great depravation of the Word of God.
This immediate conviction in my mind
arose from my having for years past
studied diligently the history of the
sacred manuscripts, books, and versions
of the Holy Bible, Book Divine. I knew
the texts upon which the contest between
the powers of darkness and the powers
of heaven had been held for 1550 years.
I turned to them ; I saw some gone—a
“ deprivation ; ” and I saw others altered
—a depravation ; and ray heart burned
with a justifiable indignation at this
most wanton spoliation of God’s Holy
Word.
I thank God from my heart that the
Lord Chancellor, with the Protestant
Bishops of England, have publicly
declared that the New Version has no
sanction from the throne, nor from the
Parliament of England; and that if a
clergyman reads it in his church, he will
be guilty of an offence. This ought to
rebuke the presumption of those who
have unthinkingly taken it into their
pulpits in the colonies with all its depriva-
tion and depravation.
What with vain philosophy seeking to
rob us of the five books of Moses, and
much more; and a base theology relative


'
C- ''llB
to the texts upon the Trinity and the
Deity of Christ, upon hell, the devil, and
a heartfelt religion, it will soon all go.
Bold Infidelity says, “We have now
driven the Christians to get a new Bible.”
Let us hear and obey Heaven’s command,
“ Diminish not a word.”
‘ Thus Cod the Father, God the Son,
And God the Spirit we adore ;
That sea of life and love unknown,
Without a bottom or a shore.”
I remain, &c.,
DANIEL ALLEN, Pastor.
£. Lees, Printer, & PvltH-i Stamp Manufacturer, 134 PUI-St.


- ■


