

t j. •
■X
WITH THE PALETTE,
SHOTGUN I RIFLE
ON THE BLUE MOUNTAINS.
N. S. W.
By Sid. R. Bellingham.
A complete guide to the shooting and
fishing to be obtained on the
Blue Mountains.
ce One Shilling.
'°*NY,


EASTWAY IT"
Complete Fishing' Tackle
FURNISHERS
We set Fish-
ermen up as
complete An-
glers no ma-
tter what they
fish for, in
either salt or
fresh water.
Hand line or
Bod men
should write
\to us for the
'‘'Catfsh” Bud-
get, a small
paper entirely
devoted to the
interests of fi-
shing, which
we issue every
Friday morn-
ing free.
Every Mail Steamer brings us all the
latest specialities in Eods, Reels, Elies,
Baits, Lines, Casts, and the thousand and
one articles necessary to equip a fisherman.
BASTWAW
409 & 41 1 George St, Sydney.


THE
CHILWORTH GUNPOWDER COMPANY,
LIMITED.
Contractors to the English War Department and Admiralty,
the India Office, Colonial Office, do.
MAKERS OF EVERY KIND
MILITARY, SPORTING, AND
BLASTING POWDER.
The Chilworth Company were the introduces ai.d first
makers in England of the celtbrated “cocoa” or Brown
Prismatic Powder for heavy Guns. They were the first other
than the Government, to make Military Ballistite and Cordite
in England.
The Mills at Chilworth, Surrey, are the oldest in Great
Britain ; the porvder was made there for the ships which fought
and defeated the Spanish Armada.
It was largely Chilworth PoAAder which was used by
Marlborough, by Wellington, and in the Crimea.
With this record behind them the Chilworth Gunpowder
Company gives constant care and attention to maintaining the .
high quali'y and reputation of its manufactures.


,, Stocking's ,,
99
16
6
Wading Boots, [Knee] ,
99
18
6
[Hip] ,
99
22
6
Wading Pants ,,
9 9
47
6
Knapsacks ,,
each
12
6
Holdalls ,,
99
14
6
Game Bags ,,
99
18
6
Gun Covers. (W.P.) „
99
3
0
Scull Handle Covers per pair
2
6
Rubber Bat Handle Covers
9 9
1
3
Driving Rugs
9 9
10
6
99 99
9 9
12
6
•1 9
20
0
SPORTING & CAMPING
Accessories.
PRICE LIST.
W. P. Camp Sheets 6ft. x 3ft. ... 7 6
Swimming Belts 36 x 6 ... each 6 6
„ „ 40x6 ... „ 7 6
„ 40x8 ... „ 8 6
Pishing Trousers from per pair 24 6
„ .. , 20
Bubher Soled Shoes, &c.
INDIA-RUBBER GOODS
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION.
Shvertownßdbberco.
279 GEORGE-ST,, SYDNEY,
Near Hunter-street.


BY APPOINTMENT.
MILITARY TAILOR TO HIS LATE EXCELLENCY, SIR ROOT. DUFF, K. C. M. 0,
CHAS. ANDERSON,
Civil, Naval TAILOR and Military.
Contractor to the Military Forces of N S W.
CARRINGTON HOUSE,
30 & 32 OXFORD ST., SYDNEY.
ft. .. p. Show Goods from all the Best
UlVll Department Manufacturers imported each
r season direct.
Naval and Military Officers’ «»"
' Lowest Prices.
BADGES AND ACCOUTREMENTS OF ALL KINDS.
Band Uniforms of every kind at Contract Prices.
Cycling Costumes a Speciality.
Hats and Caps Made to Order on the Premises.
PATTERNS & SELF ■ MEASUREMENT FORMS FORWARDED ON APPLICATION.
Telephone No. 1185.




(lera Bears.
WITH THE PALETTE,
SHOT GUN & RIFLE
ON THE BLUE MOUNTAINS.
N. S. W.
By Sid. R. Bellingham
A complete guide to the sport and
game to be obtained on the
Blue Mountains.


6


CONTENTS.
Page
’reface. ... ... ... ... 9
An Interlude; The Blue Mountains ... 11
he Pleasures of a Hunter’s Life. ... 17
Sport and adventure at Jenolan Caves 20
Solitary exploring*excursions ... ... 30
Shot Gun and Rifle. ... ... ... 35
amp life. ... ... ... ... 44
Where to go Shooting. ... ... 51
rom Wentworth Falls to Cox’s River. 53
he Coach Road to Jenolan Caves. ... 54
he Bridle Track to the Caves. ... 56
rom Camden and Picton to Burragorang. 60
Kanangara. ... ... ... ... 63
he River Cox. ... ... ... 65
possums. 68
Wallabies. ... ... ... ... 73
Rock Wallabies. ... ... ... 77
Wallaroo ... ... ... ... 80
Native Bear ... ... ... ... 82
Wombat. ... ... ... ... 84
Dingos. ... ... ... ... 88
Platypus ... ... ... ... 90
Snakes and Death Adders ... ... 93
Other Animals. ... ... ... 96
Birds of the Mountains. ... ... 98
Lyre Birds. ... ... ••• ... 102
Fishing. ... ... ... ... !0 5
Walking Sticks, Woods, &c. ... ... 113
7
t I r j




PREFACE.
It is not the writer’s intention to attempt to
describe the Blue Mountain scenery along the
ordinary tourist’s routes
His object is to give to sportsmen and others,
full information concerning the wild and unexplor-
ed parts of the mountains, and the game to be
found there.
The author has obtained this information, not
by hearsay, but by personal experience, during
ten years exploring into the fastnesses of the
Blue Mountains.
SID R. BELLINGHAM.
1899.




AN INTERLUDE.
; he fountains ;
An Artist’s Delight and Despair.
HE most remarkable scenery in Australia,
and perhaps the best known outside the
colonies, lies in the Blue Mountains of
New South Wales.
They are flanked by a steep and precipitous
cliff line, with here and there a gap, where a
track has been made, zigzaging and winding about
into the valley below. In parts there is no
break in the cliffs for miles, and in these
places the country below, is a veritable Terra
Incognita, rich in timber and dense undergrowth.
Tree ferns and other curious vegetation grow in
great profusion under the shelter of the cliffs.
The country below is a great contrast to the
barren table land on top, where the ground is
sandy and stony, supporting wind-smitten low
shrubs, and trees stunted in growth.
For the most part the valleys are useless for culti-


vation, and as no roads can be made into them,
they remain in their primitive state, the haunt
of the Lyre bird and native game.
There are miles of country that a white man
has never trod, waiting to be explored.
Pictures of Blue Mountain scenery are as a
rule painted in blueish grey tones, and there is
a coldness about these paintings not by any
means like the scenes they are supposed to
represent.
Originally educated as an artist, the present
writer, who was always fond of sport and a
nomadic life, preferred for many years to make
his living by the gun.
This I boldly chose instead of trusting to the
precarious existance to be eked out by following
art in the cities, where it is only possible to
make art pay by teaching it.
It is not to be inferred from this, that I
altogether neglected my profession. On the con-
trary, I would sometimes be following my vocation
as a hunter, shooting in some wild region where a
delightful bit of landscape would be exposed
to view, quite making me forget everything
except the beauty of the scene.
I would not be satisfied until I had shifted
camp to the spot, and by patiently painting
away at the same hour every day, endeavoured
to produce a truthful representation of the


chosen subject.
These attempts to begin and finish pictures
from nature out of doors were always a failure.
I was most particular to select the same hour
each day, and as nearly as possible choose the
same effect. These pictures thus painted never
conveyed the same feeliug that the scene itself
did when first observed.
The result would be so unsatisfactory that it
was quite a relief to give up painting and
return to shooting.
Thus I could enjoy any scenery I passed
through when in search of game, without being
harassed by trying to reproduce it.
These painting fits were recurrent during my
whole shooting career, and although I would
determine that each attempt should be the last,
yet such was the beauty of the scenery, that I
would again be tempted to copy it, fail, and
return once more to the hunter’s life.
I have time and again camped out without
blankets, suffered from hunger, and undergone
various hardships, yet none of these experiences op-
pressed me so much as painting from nature.
The view at first seems beautiful. After painting
for an hour it loses its charm, one’s eyes fairly
ache, and into the soul enters the sadness
which is inherent in an Australian landscape.
Added to this is the misery of sitting in one,


position for a long time, tormented by flies, ants,
and mosquitoes. A variety of these latter, known
to busbmen as “ Scotch Greys,” generally bring
things to a climax!
I mention these things because I hear many
people unacquainted with the subject talking
glibly of pictures “ painted from nature,” and
the pleasure an artist is supposed to enjoy, while
painting them on the spot.
Every close observer of nature knows, that
some of the most beautiful effects are so fleeting,
that they are gone in less than a minute.
Studies taken from nature direct, with the
greatest skill at the command of the artist are
the true foundation of his work. Erom these
let him build up in his studio, with all the tech-
nical knowledge he may possess, the pictures he
hopes to make a name by.
Such works will in the end get far closer
to the heart of nature than any wild attempt
to paint finished pictures in the open air.
This opinion I state in the face of the great
Charles Eead, and many another enthusiastic
but mistaken philosopher.
These men no doubt were deceived in the
studios of artists, who showed them excellent
pictures “ painted on the spot,” which won their
visitors admiration.
The artist and the philosopher both spoke


half-truth. By “painted on the spot” the artist
meant “ the spot ” where the visitor then stood,
and the visitor thought he meant the spot re-
presented on the canvas on the easel.
When once an artist has mastered the various
details which go to make up a landscape, by
painting bits out of doors, he must trust much
to a retentive memory, and be able to make
rapid colour notes.
He must also have constant intercourse with
nature, both to sketch and to study the changes
that are constantly going on around him.
I can only liken that peculiar blueish haze,
with w'hich everything is suffused on the Blue
Mountains, to the bloom on a bunch of ripe
purple grapes.
The colouring is rich and varied, although a
blueish tinge pervades the whole scene. “Weird,
wild, and wonderful,” are the constant excla-
mations of the spectator, as he stands on the
edge of the cliffs, and looks across a vast
panorama of mountains and valleys, cliffs and
gorges.
It is like standing on a high cliff near the
seashore, and gazing across a sea of foliage.
So deep are the chasms in places that the
waterfalls are lost in mist, before they reach
half way to the bottom, and the trees below,
though of gigantic proportions, appear like dwarf


plants.
When a passing cloud throws one of those
peculiar blue shadows across these valleys, or
the sun breaks through the mist lying below,
some of these effects are delightful. The artist’s
difficulties are however formidable. The horizontal
cliff-lines, the mysterious shifting lights and shad-
dows, the weird blue tones, the high horizon
line, in fact the whole surroundings strike him
with despair. Nevertheless, in this case the battle
is to the strong An artist with power, pluck,
and determination, will have reason to rejoice that
he visited this wonderland.


The Pleasures of a Hunter’s Life.
xL HE wild and romantic scenery with which
the hunter and sportsman after game in
T its native state, is constantly brought into
contact, forms one of the principal charms of a
sportsman’s life on the Blue Mountains.
At one time he will be hunting the Wallaroo
along the rocky ridges which crown the mountains,
gazing in awe at the ever changing panoramic
views “ where broods the sleep which is among
the lonely hills.'’ At another time he will be
traversing some secluded glen or fern tree gulley,
amid a profusion of shrubs and towering gums,
where the wild loud song of the Lyre bird
re-echoes through the forest. The pleasing whistle
of the Satin bird is heard. The twittering of
the numerous family of Honeysuckers which
frequent the gum trees overhead, and the cry of
the Coach Whip bird.


This chorus is relieved occasionally by the
sharp screech of a Parrot or Cockatoo, or the
soft cooing of a Wonga Pigeon in the distance,
and a host of other sounds, which are heard
where the game is not disturbed, and one is face
to face with nature. By way of a change, a
turn will be taken about the more open country
in the valleys among the kangaroo, and great
sport ensues. Or at night the sportsman may
wander in the moonlight among the ringed timber
after opposums. Occasionally fishing trips will
be made to the river, and as the angler sits
near some deep still waterhole, listening to the
wind sighing through the swamp oaks which
fringe the banks, he is startled by the quick
flight of the wild duck up and down stream.
Or again he may watch the vagaries of a Platypus
bobbing up and down in the water before him.
Although sport is the first object, he is, if of
open heart, imbibing unconsciously beauties of
nature of which to dream when far away.
This sort of life grows on him. Keen sports-
man though he be, he will at times plunge into
some wild gorge, beguiled by nature’s witchery,
till even sport is forgotten.
The writer was at one time acquainted with
several professional hunters on the Blue Mountains,
who were born and bred to this hard life, and
were practically without education. Yet, let a


man once win their confidence, and he would
find, that they were keenly sensitive to the
beauties of nature, and in some instances attempt
to express their feelings in verse. In fact the
Blue Mountains have many “ Bush Poets.” Their
poetry is necessarily of the crudest description,
and might rightly be considered a cruel infliction
by the hearer ; nevertheless, it is prompted by a
noble impulse, and inspired by the beauty of
the scenery amid which they dwell.


Sport & Adventure at the Jenolan
Caves in 1883.
X like to remember the Caves as I first knew
X them, before so many roads and tracks had
' been made. Everything then was in it’s
natural grandeur.
At the time of which I speak, a slab hut
containing a few rooms and a kitchen, was the
only accommodation available. A isitors were then
driven out principally via Oberon, and had to
take with them both provisions and a cook.
Sometimes the guide and myself were the sole
inhabitants of the Cave district for a week
or more at a time.
The whole country was teeming with game.
The Grand Arch and other outside caves were
simply the camping place of rock wallabies.
Lyre-birds could be heard all day long on the
hillside, and in the creeks, and Wonga Pigeon
and Satin Birds came right down to the cave


The stillness at night was broken by the
cries of Opossums and Flying Squirrels, with
the occasional howl of a Dingo.
Much exploring of new caves was being
carried on. There was a fascination about
opening up a new cavern and exploring the
various passages for the first time. This sen-
sation was totally different from that experienced
when going through them now. Tracks have
been made, steps cut in the rougher parts,
the stalactite formation protected by wire
netting, and the whole lit up with the electric
light
The road from Mount Victoria to the Grand
Arch did not then exist. All that side of the
Arch, where the Mount Victoria road first termin-
ated, was a magnificent patch of shrubs and
ferns. Here, from under a large moss covered
rock, the subterranean river rose bubling up,
and greeted the sunlight in a beautiful crystal
stream. A little below this spot a fine view
is obtained of the barrier of limestone, in which
the caves occur, stretching across the valley,
an immense wall some 400 ft. high.
The view always reminds me of some old
castle, and the resemblance is further enhanced
by the peculiar opening known as the Carlotta
Arch.


At evening a flood of warm sunlight shines
through this opening, which is reflected in the
river at one’s feet, and forms one of the most
beautiful scenes about Jenolan.
Looking down through the Carlotta Arch into
the valley is entrancing, and the view to be
obtained from the huge cavern some 300 ft.
high, which is called the Devil’s Coach House,
has a wild and romantic interest, unlike any
other scenery I have seen.
The interior of the Caves is wonderful, but
these three outside views are picturesque, and
possess a charm which never fails to arrest
even the attention of persons who have seen
the marvels of the world.
Let us take our guns and some lunch, and
follow up the creek leading out of the Devil’s
Coach House.
At first the travelling is very rough: huge
boulders, some of these blocks of black marble,
have to be got over, and care has to be taken
not to slip. The bed of the creek is dry, the
water having found another level, and now flows
under ground for a distance of three miles.
Farther along, the creek is hemmed in with
steep cliffs, and we are here on the look-out
for a shot at rock wallabies. Some of these
can be seen high up, and out of reach of our
guns, but as we turn an angle of the creek


several jump off the rocks in front of us, and
some shots are obtained. A delay occurs while
one of the party climbs up the cliffs to obtain
a wallaby, which he has shot high up on a
ledge of rock.
About a mile from the Devil’s Coach House
the creek opens out into a nice grassy flat, with
numerous gum trees growing on it. The number
of scratches to be seen on the bark of these
trees show, that opossums come here to feed at
night.
One of our party is anxious to see a native
bear, so we look about and at last one is found
asleep in the fork of a mountain ash tree.
Some Lyre-birds are singing on the hillside.
My dog sent into the bush, drives some scrub
wallaby down to us, which are shot.
We now emerge from the flat, and enter a.
narrow pass with limestone cliffs on either side
of it. In these cliffs there are caves. I station the
shooters outside one of these caves, and enter
with a lighted candle.
As I penetrate the interior, I disturb the
rock wallabies, which rush out, and some lively
shooting ensues. This is repeated in other caves,
and we finally enter another flat with high
mountains on both sides.
This flat is known as MacKewin’s Hold.
We halt here to boil the billy and eat our


lunch.
In this spot MacKewin the bushranger was
captured in 1841. Close by is a cave in which
he ground the corn, which he grew in the flat.
After lunch we stretch ourselves out on the
grass, and while we smoke our pipes, we talk
of the solitary life McKewin must have led in
this wild spot, and many other things, until
we are warned that it is getting late, and it is
time to return.
I have had several experiences in exploring
caves, which nearly ended fatally.
On one occasion I was out shooting with a
visitor to the caves, about two miles from
Cave H ouse.
In our rambles we came across a cave which
we decided to explore.
Now in those times it was usual to carry a
candle nearly everywhere in the vicinity of the
caves. So having cut the one which I possessed
into halves, we took a piece each, and having
lit our candles, started to explore the cave.
After we had traversed the main passage
for a short distance, we descended through
a narrow cleft in the rock into another passage.
Here I noticed for the first time, that some one
had been here before us.
There was a piece of cotton hanging down
the side of the rock.


Whoever it was who had explored this care,
had evidently taken a reel of cotton in with
them, which they had unwound as they pene-
trated the passage, so that they would have
something to guide them in finding their way
out again.
After we had explored some of the numerous
passages of this cave, and had admired the
stalagmite formation, we sat down for a while
to have a smoke and yarn.
I may mention here, that the darkness in the
far interior of these caves, is so intense and over-
powering, that to have to endure it even for a
short period, would drive most persons mad.
In order that my companion might get an idea
of what this darkness was like, I asked him to
blow out his light.
We both blew out our candles, and were left in
total darkness, a darkness that seemed to weigh
on one, and produce a stifling sensation.
It was not many minutes before my companion
lit his candle and said ; “ I could not endure it.”
Such an effect did this slight experience have
on him, that he seemed anxious to get out of the
cave. This feeling was intensified when I re-
marked, that our candles were short, and we had
barely sufficient candle to enable us to see our
way out of the cave.
As we hurried along on our way out, the rapid


motion of our flight, caused our candles to flicker
and almost expire, casting at the same time weird
and uncertain shadows on the stalaclites around us.
We reacted about the spot where I knew we
had to ascend a narrow opening, but as there
were so many similar looking places, we could
not find the right one.
My candle, which had previously burnt too low
to hold in the fingers, and which I carried on a
piece of stone, expired. We had now only the one
bit of candle about a quarter of an inch in length,
which my companion carried, and as this flickered
out an involuntary groan escaped him.
We were caught like rats in a cage, and had
now, to take turn about, to strike matches for a
light. While searching round with the aid of
this uncertain light, I at last caught sight of the
thread we had noticed on entering the cave.
With this for a guide, we were not long in finding
our way outside, and were very thankful to
see daylight again.
On several occasions I had shot rock wallabies
on a limestone cliff at the head of MacKewins
Creek, but could never find the wallabies I had
shot, although I was certain I had killed them.
At last one day I was determined to find out
what became of the game; for this purpose I
made a careful search about the rocks in the
vicinity of the spot to which I refer, and found


crevice in the limestone.
I felt my way down this fissure a short dis-
tance, hut as it was difficult to see where I was
going, I jammed myself between the two sides of
this crevice, by placing my back against one side,
and pressing with my feet against the other. In
this way I had the free use of my hands to
strike a light. I struck several matches, which I
dropped into space below me. I then dropped a
small piece of rock, and after some seconds
duration, heard it splash into water. This satis-
fied me, that I was stretched across an opening
into some big cavern.
I reported this discovery at the caves that
evening, and although a party of us went to
explore the place on the next day, with a rope,
no one ventured below.
The whole of the limestone belt at Jenolan,
which extends a distance of about six miles,
is honeycombed with caves and subterranean
passages, and there are enough caves at present
discovered to keep the most enthusiastic ex-
plorer occupied for months.
I once chose subject for a painting,
a scene in the far end of the Imperial
Cave. The view consisted of various semi-
transparent drapery-like formations hanging from
the roof, and a great variety of stalactites
and stalagmites, of various colours with masses


of glittering crystals here and there.
The whole scene when properly lit up formed
good still-life study.
I had the full run of the caves at this
period, and was in the habit of getting the
key of the iron gate, securing the entrance
to the Imperial Cave. Taking my paints, I
would proceed to the spot and paint away
at the scene for about an hour.
After being alone in the far interior of any
of these caves for an hour, the stillness becomes
so oppressive, that one is glad to get out-
side. It was my custom to pack up my
painting gear and clear out when I felt the
solitude of the cave become unpleasant.
While painting in the cave alone, I once
got a great scare ; I had locked the gate
after me as is the custom, and had been
painting at my picture for about an hour, and
was just thinking about leaving, for I was
begining to feel the silence oppressive, when
I heard a faint breathing. Now as I knew
there was no other person in the cave, and I
possessed the only key to the entrance, which
I had locked, I was utterly at a loss to
account for the noise.
At first I attributed it to a fancy. For a
while there was stillness, an awful solitariness,
which produces a singing in the ears; I could


hear nothing, save the occasional fall of a
drop of water off a stalactite and the beating
of my heart. Again I heard this breathing.
There could be no mistake about it this
time, it grew louder and seemed to be approach-
ing me from the gloom of the dark passage
behind.
I was now in a “blue funk,” the breathing
grew louder, and I gradually saw two eyes
approach out of the darkness.
The strain on my nerves however was of short
duration, for as the animal quicky approached,
it assumed the shape of one of my dogs.
This one was sometimes in the habit of
accompanying me into the caves.
On this occasion someone had let the dog
off the chain during my absence, and it had
taken up my scent, and got through the iron
bars of the gate of the cave, and finally gave
me the fright I have related.
29
SPOB.T AND ADVENTTEE AT JENOLAN CATES.


Solitary Exploring Excursions.
mY knowledge of the country in the vicinity
of Jenolan, and other parts of the Blue
Mountains, was principally obtained by
making frequent walking excursions, of some days
duration, into any district I was unacquainted
with, or concerning which I could obtain no
information.
On these occasions I would only take such
provisions, as were easily carried, and a gun
or a rifle, but did not encumber myself with a
rug or blanket.
Accompanied by my dog I would start off
into the country I wished to explore, camping
at night in a hollow log, under a ledge of
rock, or any other convenient shelter I
could find, where I happened to be when night
came on.
Wild country, traversed for the first time,


where every description of game is plentiful, has
a fascination about it, which only those who
have experienced it, can understand.
Sometimes I would get bushed for a couple
of days, but that did not matter, as there was
always plenty of water in the numerous creeks
and gullies, and game to be shot for food.
Many yarns were told by old settlers about
Hairy Men or Gorillas, that were supposed to
haunt certain places on the Cave Mountains,
and I have conversed with men, who solemnly
declared they had seen such animals.
The idea that Gorillas inhabited the moun-
tains, was at one time so prevalent, that I
have known bushmen who would not camp where
these animals had been seen.
Whether there is such a thing or not I do
not know, but during my many solitary rambles,
I have never seen anything of the sort.
Neither have I ever heard any noise that I
could not account for, although I have camped
alone in the wildest and most inaccessible parts
of the mountains.
I have at times come across places in some
deep gorge, hemmed in with steep cliffs, which
have presented such a weird and ominous appear-
ance, that I have been instinctively on my guard,
but I never saw anything beyond a dingo slinking
off. I would often select a spot to camp for


the night under the shelter of some of the cliffs,
which cap the mountain in many parts, and which
commanded a good view of the surrounding hills
and valleys. After picking some ferns or leaves
to lie on, and gathering a supply of firewood
sufficient to last all night, I would light my fire
and have supper, then lie down and watch
the landscape gradually fade from view, as night
set in. After dark I would lie by the fire
thinking about what I had seen during the day,
and arrange my plans for the morrow until
tired out, sleep would gradually overtake me.
This sleep would have been an unbroke]
rest until morning, if I were comfortabl;
wrapped in a blanket. But on these walkinj
trips a rug cannot be conveniently carried.
The fire has therefore to be depended upo
for warmth.
Now however big a fire is built up before
one goes to sleep, it nearly always burns low
before morning, and when this happens, you are
awakened by the cold. In a half-sleepy condition
you will make up the fire again, and perhaps
sit in front of it for a while, warming your-
self, until sleep again overtakes you. Sometimes
this operation has to be repeated several times
during the night.
This lying out in front of a fire ail night
without blankets is one of the most trying


rdeals to undergo.
The cold in winter seems to penetrate to one s
ery bones, you are cold on one side and warm
n that nearest tbe fire, unless a fire is
lade on either side, as I have sometimes done,
if ter several nights of this sort of life, under
arious conditions, and a lot of hard walking,
comfortable nights rest in tbe blankets is
loroughly appreciated.
I remember camping once after a long days
■amp across the mountains, under a rock
lower strata of which, was composed
slaty-shale formation. I lit a big fire
;ainst a slab of this slate, and lying down
front of it soon fell asleep, from which
was shortly awakened by a series of loud
iports, accompanied by pieces of shale flying
>out in all directions. This was caused by
le action of the fire on the slate, which
•acked and flew about to such an extent, that
had to seek shelter elsewhere.
I have several times been asked the question
what do you think about when out alone for
weral days, and no one to talk to ?”
Now for the benefit of anyone, who may feel
iterested in this matter, I will endeavour so
r ar as I can remember, to answer this question.
When exploring new country the mind is
mnstantly occupied, in examining the various


objects of interest, that are continually croppin;
up, there is also the excitement of garni
unexpectedly crossing one’s path. At night you ar(
generally too tired to think about anything, an<
sleep soon overpowers you.
I have however at times—when walking througl
unintersting country, where there is litth
or no game —been worried by the constan
dinning in my ears, of the air of some song
or a bar of music. At another time souk
sentence, or certain words, will keep recurring
to the mind, and are very annoying—as it ii
impossible to eradicate them.
I am satisfied from these slight experiences,
that any person who leads a solitary life, and
is confined to one spot —where nothing fresh be
seen to divert the thoughts, and without the
excitement of sport—must experience a very
miserable time.
34
SOLITARY EXPLORING EXCURSIONS.


Shot Gun & Rifle.
I" P to about tbe year 1890 the shot gun
\SI. was principally used by sportsmen. But
as the game got harder to approach from
being constantly shot at, the rifle was gradually
introduced.
In a shot gun, what is of primary import-
ance, is a good, close shooting pair of barrels,
and the stock of sUch length and bend, as will
suit the reach of the shooter; one that can be
brought to the shoulder, and sighted with ease.
My experience of hammerless guns is that the
shooter is apt to get confused in the excitement of
some keen sport, and not know when he has
got the gun at ‘ safe ’ or the full cosk.
Sportsmen, who have been used to the exposed
hammers, should never take a hammerless gun
out where they expect to get good shooting.
It is better to get well accustomed to the


change.
Many a good shot have I seen baulked, when
using a hammerless gun for the first time.
I like the hammers exposed ; a small neat
pair, which when at full cock sit snugly below
sight, and of course rebounding locks.
The modern guns by known makers, are
perfect models of the gunsmith’s art, and leave
nothing to he desired for those, who shoot for
pleasure and do not reload their empty cases.
For a hunter who shoots for profit and re-
loads his cases, the old fashioned underneath
lever grip is the most servicable. But in a first
class top action gun the breach fits so tightly,
that I have often found it impossible to close
it on a cartridge case that has been reloaded.
I have been olit with sportsmen from various
parts of the world, and have handled and shot
out of shooting sticks of every description.
Every sportsman has his pet shooting weapon,
and will tell you of some wonderful shots he
has made with it.
The older and more antiquated fhe gun, the
more extraordinary has been the distance at
which it has killed ; that is the owners’
statement.
The number of old muzzle loading guns that
will kill at a hundred yards, is legion.
Everywhere one goes about the back blocks of


the Australian bush, you hear of these record
breakers.
One old fellow living on the mountains, at
whose house I used sometimes to make a call,
would point with pride to an old single
barrelled musket, hanging up over the piece of
bark guttering which did duty as a mantelshelf,
and relate to me how he used to go out
kangaroo shooting with it. The gun had no
hammer, but that did not matter.
He used to go out shooting with his boy,
who carried a fire stick, and when the old
fellow had covered his game, by a prearranged
signal, the boy would touch the nipple with the
firestick, and down would come an old man
kangaroo.
So accustomed had he become to shooting in
this way, that I believe he had got to consider
hammers, a useless piece of mechanism.
I would recommend anyone contemplating buy-
ing a gun, to go to a respectable gunsmith,
and get a good pair of barrels, and accessories
to suit him.
There are a lot of guns on the market, got
up for show, that will scatter the shot in a
wide circle at twenty yards.
It is quite distressing to be out shooting with
a person using this class of gun, as they only
scare the game, and seldom grass anything.


The 32 Calibre Winchester single shot is the
rifle that the writer has used, and found answer
all the requirements of a. person shooting for
profit.
The reason I choose a single shot in prefer-
ance to a magazine rifle, is because when reloaded
cartridges are used in the magazine they are
apt to get jammed in it, and are very difficult
to remove.
A magazine rifle is also heavier than a single
shot, and not so well balanced, as a matter of
fact the weight of a magazine rifle varies,
sometimes the magazine is full, and at another
time nearly empty.
A single shot rifle has very little mechanism
to get out of order.
If a shell should break, and part remain in
the breach, which often happens when cartridges
are reloaded many times, the broken part of
the cartridge case can be easily removed from
single shot rifle.
The advantage of a magazine rifle of course
is the rapidity with which a number of shots
can be fired. But it is surprising how quickly
the single shot may be loaded and fired when
one gets accustomed to its action.
The action of the single shot rifle ejects the
empty shell after being fired, and the action of
closing the breach pushes home the fresh


cartridges, and at the same time brings the
hammer to the full cook ready to fire.
Many kangaroo shooters use a 41 Calibre
Winchester, and I used a rifle of this calibre
for some time.
I then tried a 38 calibre, and at last experi-
mented with a 32 calibre single shot rifle, and
finding I could do just as much execution with
this as I did with a 44 calibre, have used this
rifle ever since.
By using pure lead in bullets with which you
reload the empty shells, they flatten out when
they strike any game, and from this have
great stopping power.
I have frequently obtained the bullet with
which I have shot a kangaroo, on the pelt,
when skinning the animal.
Another advantage of the 32 calibre is, that
there is less weight in the cartridges to be
carried about, less cost, and very little recoil.
This latter is an item of importance, when
you have to shoot on sight in a rough country,
after a stiff climb and are somewhat shaky.
It has been my custom to test the sights of
every fresh rifle I get.
Por this purpose I set up some target on a
tree, and take perhaps half a day practicing,
or until I am satisfied the sights are accurate.
Having satisfied .myself that the sights on the


rifle are perfect, I scratch a mark on the barrel,
in such a manner, that I may at once be able
to see, if by any chance the sights should get
moved.
It is as well to keep an eye on the sights
occasionally, for if they should get a knock
sufficient to move them, you will make probably a
lot of bad shots.
The Eocky Mountain back sight I have found
an excellent one. A fine vertical line drawn
down the centre of the crescent shaped opening,
which can be scratched with a needle, is a great
aid in guiding the shooter on to his sight in
dull weather.
For a front sight, one is required, that will
show up well towards evening, for it is towards
dusk that the greatest number of shots are
to be obtained.
In practice, I have found it quite unnecessary
to use the sliding bars, which raise and lower
the back sight to the different distances.
For sporting purposes it is better to accustom
oneself to draw a fine and full bead in sighting
game at various distances, and not trouble
about moving the sight up, this latter operation
causes delay, and often baulks the shot.
To the hunter shooting for profit, it is not
only more economical to reload the shells, but
fresh loaded shells are more to be depended


upon for accurate shooting. I saw a combination
of gun and rifle in a gunsmiths shop in Sydney
once, which much took my fancy.
It was a double barreled shot gun with a
rifle underneath, the whole beautifully finished
in every way, and not much heavier than an
ordinary shot gun.
I never yet used a weapon of this sort, but
if I were going to shoot for profit again, I
would like to get a firearm of this description
built to order.
With a combination of gun and rifle like this,
it would be possible to make a much larger
bag than by using either the shot gun or rifle
separately.
Often a close running shot may be got with
the shot gun, which could not be taken with
the rifle. And then much of the game, such
as Opossums and other furred animals, are too
much damaged when shot with a rifle. There
is a firearm in which the left hand barrel is
rifled, and the right a shot barrel, but I dont
like it, for the reason that I consider when
using a shot gun, a double barreled one is
invariably required.
In concluding my remarks about the gun and
riflle, I shall say a few words about gun accidents.
When a “ sportsman ” is out shooting and has
his gun full cocked and pointing at another


person, he is generally offended when reminded
of the fact, and will excuse himself by saying
he was “quite aware of it,” was “just going to
half cock it,” or some other paltry excuse.
When the number of gun accidents that are of
almost daily occurance is taken into consideration,
carelessness will generally be found to be the cause.
I consider it the duty of every person, who is
out shooting with others, and sees any breech
of the rules relating to firearms commited, to
speak out at once, whether he offends the person
at fault or not.
The breaches of the rules relating to firearms,
to which I refer are Carrying the gun pointing
in the direction of another person.
Leaving the gun loaded and full cocked
leaning against a tree, or thus bringing it into
camp.
Getting through a fence, or going through
thick bush with the gun full cocked.
Pointing a firearm at anything which you
do not deliberately mean to kill ; and
Hammering a cartridge into the breech.
I am rather severe about any carelessness in
regard to firearms, as I have had many narrow
escapes from being killed.
I was out on one occasion shooting with two
Irishmen, who were staying at a farm where
we expected to get some opossum shooting at


night, and were returning home in the evening.
The evening was cold and frosty. We were
walking along a narrow track, single file, onr
hands in our pockets, guns under our arms,
smoking and talking.
I was ahead.
Suddenly I felt a great shock, and heard the
report of a gun immediately behind me. For a
minute I did not know whether I was shot or not.
It appears the man walking immediately behind
me, suddenly remembered his gun was full cocked,
and in attempting to put it to the half cock,
his finger being cold, slipped off the hammer,
and exploded the charge, which just grazed my
coat, above the hip, half an inch to the right
would have blown a hole clean through my back.
As it was, the concussion of the shot at such
close quarters gave mo a severe shock.
I could easily multiply instances, but enough
has been said, if I have convinced the youug
sportsman that with firearms, carelessness is crime.
43
SHOT GUN AND BIFLE.


Camp Life.
firj S much of the pleasure of a shooting
excursion into the bush, is derived from
haying a good camp to return to at night,
where a comfortable meal can be enjoyed, and
a sound nights sleep secured : it follows
that too much attention cannot be devoted to
the camp, provisions, etc.
A great deal of the unpleasantness which
some parties experience when camping out, is
caused by total ignorance on the part of those
going on an excursion, as regards camp life.
Should the weather be fine, things are not so
bad, but it is distressing to see some of the
camping out parties when rain comes on.
It is surprising with what ease, and in how
short a time, a party of bushmen, arriving at
some wild place at sundown, will knock up a
camp and make themselves comfortable. It may


be raining and they have no tent; one will
strip some bark from a neighbouring tree, while
another gets some forked poles, and with those
they make a shelter, while another one of the
party lights a fire and boils the billey.
By the time supper is ready, a bark shelter
has been made, under wdiich they sit in front
of a good fire, laughing and talking while the
rain patters down all around them.
Contrast this with the unnecessary amount of
exertion which a new chum undergoes when
trying to light a fire; what a lot of fanning
and blowing is done, in order to make the
damp, sodden wood, which he uses, burn. Then
the billey will probably be placed on the logs,
which as the fire burns down, causes the billey
to upset, just when it was on the point of
boiling.
This is no fancy sketch, but illustrates one
of the many inconveniences which those camping
out are often subjected to, when in company of
anyone who had no experience of bush life.
There is something to be learned about even
such a simple operation as lighting the fire and
boiling the billey.
It will now be my endeavour to give a few
useful hints, which if followed will add greatly
to the pleasures of camp life, which under
certain circumstances, is not all beer and skittles.


The most convenient form of kit in which to
carry the few personal belongings, that each
person requires when going on a trip into the
country, I have found to be, one -of those
waterproof hold-alls. The gun taken to pieces,
and rolled up in a rug, with a suit of clothes
and other effects, can be packed into this,
which forms a neat looking swag, and can be
stowed under the seat of a coach, strapped in
front of a saddle, or carried on the back.
When in camp the hold-all may be spread on
the ground to lie on, and prevents the damp
striking through from underneath.
My advice to any party going on an ex-
cursion, where they intend camping out, is to
elect from among their number someone most
qualified to act as captain, and who will allot
to each of the others their duty in camp; one
to light the fire, while another gets water, and
the third prepares the meal &c. Turn about
should be taken to wash up and cook, and
everything should be kept spick and span about
the tent. There are duties for each individual
to perform, even on a pleasure trip, and the
more cheerfully they are gone through, the
more enjoyable will the life be for everyone of
the party. A sullen or disagreeable companion
in camp puts a damper on everything.
Select a period for the projected excursion when


the moon is about full.
As the best camping places are off the beaten
track, it is advisable to engage a bushman to pack
tent, provisions, etc., to the camping ground.
After many years experience of conducting
shooting parties, I have found that the first night
in camp is the worst to get over. The sudden
change from town to camp life, and the extra
exertion which the shooters have undergone, often
makes them inclined to be unreasonable ; they
return to camp tired, hungry and irritable, and it
frequently requires great tact on behalf of the
person in charge, to preserve harmony. But once
your sportsmen have had a good supper, and are
sitting round the campfire smoking and yarning, the
ice is broken, and the most trying ordeal of any
camping out trip is over.
Choose a spot to pitch the tent on slightly
rising ground, so that if the weather is wet, the
spot on which the tent is pitched will remain dry.
Never camp under dead leaning timber, or over-
hanging branches. Camp near to where there is
a plentiful supply of good dry fire wood ; such as
a recently fallen dead tree, the limbs of which
will be broken up into convenient lengths ready
for the camp fire.
Don’t camp too far from water. Strip a couple
of sheets of bark from the neighbouring trees
with which to make a shelter in front of the spot


where the camp fire la to be, ao that should rain
come on, a dry comfortable place may be had
under which to cook, dry clothes, etc.
For a safe in which to keep food, place a piece
of bark on the inside of a bag, and hang it up
on the end of the ridge pole of the tent; place the
provisions on the bark shelf, and tie up the end
of the bag. This will keep the food free from
ants and flies, which in summer are troublesome.
The sides of the tent should be well fastened
down at night to prevent a draught.
Many bushmen make a very comfortable bunk
to sleep on, by stretching two bags on a couple
of poles, and resting the ends of the poles on
four forks driven into the ground. In winter the
cold strikes through this form of bunk from
underneath, unless one has plenty of blankets,
which is generally not the case when travelling.
I don’t think there is any warmer place to sleep
than on the ground, providing something damp-
proof is placed underneath —and plenty of ferns
and leaves are obtained for a bed.
As these remarks are intended for the inex-
perienced, I will say something about lighting a
camp fire, and boiling the billey. In wet weather
some dry material for lighting a fire may generally
be obtained from the bark of the messmate, or
stringy bark trees, which are of frequent occurence
throughout the mountains. The fibre, of which the


bark of these is composed, when rubbed apart,
forms a material which ignites into a quick blaze.
Never use any wood lying about, as it is generally
sodden with damp and will not blaze, but pull
down any small dry standing saplings, which are
mostly dry inside and burn well. Do not put the
billey on the fire, to boil it, but rest it on a stick
supported by two forks.
Always keep som-e dry wood and bark in the
tent ready for kindling a fire at any time.
The swamp oak and box trees which grow in
the vicinity of the Eiver Cox, are splendid burning
woods, and when the end of one of these logs is
thoroughly alight, it will smoulder away for days.
Don’t light a fire too near the tent, as the wind
is apt to blow the sparks on to the canvas, and
burn holes in it.
As regards what provisions to take, this is of
course much a matter of taste.
Fresh meat is always difficult to pack and keep
fresh.
I recommend a sausage machine, some dried
herbs and suet, or bacon to be taken. A piece
of steak off a wallaby or kangaroo, when put
through the mincer with herbs, bacon and bread
crumbs, and then fried, forms a savoury nourishing
food. I have used sausage meat made from
kangaroo in this manner, during the hot weather
when other fresh meat was not procurable, and


found it excellent. Corned beef is the favourite
bushman’s fare, it is not damaged by packing,
and keeps well; it also has good staying-
properties, but is very indigestible. Parrots,
Cockatoos, and many other birds, when stewed
with the addition of an onion, make a nice dish
for a change.
Before leaving camp, have everything ready for
supper; so that on returning to camp tired and
hungry—the evening meal may be prepared with
as little trouble as possible.
Take careful notice of the position of your
camp, and any peculiar shaped mountain, or other
conspicous landmark in the vicinity of it; for
it sometimes happens that one of a party gets
separated from the others, and is bushed.
When traveling through the bush without a
guide, where there are no tracks, a tomahawk
should be carried, and a “blaze” made along
the route followed, by chipping a bit of bark off
the trees; the blazed line thus made will act as
guide when returning.
A compass is of little use to anyone who does
not know the lay of the country.
If by any chance a person should get bushed,
it is best for him to stay about the spot where
he first discovered he had lost his way.
Your friends when they miss you will first
search the locality where you were last seen,


and if you don’t wander away, they will soon
find you.
Where to go Shooting.
{©) VERY year the native game of Australia
is getting less, from being constantly shot at.
In places where a few years ago Kangaroos,
Wallabies and other marsupials were numerous,
very few are now to be seen.
Australia is fast arriving at the same condition,
as regards game, as America, Africa, and other
countries now are, where long and tedius journeys
have to be made into the interior of the country,
before any shooting can be obtained. Even after
going up the country in Australia, the sports-
man after native game is often dissapointed, for
in nearly every district Kangaroo shooters will
be found, who make a living by sending
marsupial skins to the market.
Taking these facts into consideration sports-
men after native game must be content, if in
the course of a days shooting, they get a few
shots at wallabies, wallaroo, rock wallabies, an
occassional kangaroo, and pigeons, parrots, gill
birds, with a few opossums at night.
Person’s going on shooting excursions in this
country are often led to expect to much from


hearing of the tremendous slaughter that was
made among the marsupials years ago. Instead
of walking into the bush after sport in a
haphazird manner, the sportsman should keep his
perceptive faculties on the alert, to pick up
any clue that will lead him on to the game he is
after, and look for tracks, working up against
the wind when after wallaroo, and those animals
that can scent your approach. The habits of the
game should be studied, so that the most likely
places may be selected to search for it, and the
game stalked in a manly and sportsmanlike manner,
as followed in other countries.
These remarks apply to fishing also. For years
in Australia the rivers have been netted, and
other means resorted to for making big catches.
G( nerally speaking on the rivers, the method
adoped for catching fish, require none of the
skill that k is necessary in fly fishing and other
methods, as practiced in Europe.
I have traveled over a lot of country both in
New South Wales and Victoria, and have come
to the conclusion, that the Blue Mountains
contain a greater variety of game, than is to be
found about the plains up country. When I
speak of the Blue Mountains, I mean the whole
of that Mountainous country between Wentworth
Falls and Mt. Victoria on the Great Western
line, and Picton and Bowral on the Southern


line—The game has been hunted from the more
open country, into the wilds of this mountanious
region. Good hare shooting can be obtained
about Tarana, Oberon, Marsden Swamp, and
also about the open country along the southern
line. But the sportsman after native game will
have to get well off the beaten track. —I have
mentioned a few of the roads and tracks about
the mountains, but I wish it to be understood that,
sportsmen after native game, should make
excursions off these tracks and roads well into the
bush, and that it is advisable to take a pack
horse, tent etc. and a guide.
From Wentworth Falls to
Cox’s River.
AKINQ- Katoomba as the centre of the Blue
Mountains, towards the South lies the
Jamieson Valley, through which flows the
river Cox. In this direction lies the wildest and
most Mountainous country —very little inhabited
and into which no roads have been made. Every
description of native game is plentiful, and there
is good fishing to be obtained on the Cox’s river.


5 4s FROM WENTWORTH FALLS TO COX’s RIYER
From Wentworth Falls to Cox’s river is about
fifteen miles. The route followed, is along the
Kings Table Land for about six miles, from
thence a descent is made by a track which
zigzags down a narrow path cut in the face of
the cliffs, to Kedumba Creek. This is a fishing
stream, which takes its source at Katoomba
Falls. “ Kedumba ” is the aboriginal name for
falling waters, and is pronounced Ked-um-ba.
Katoomba is a corruption of this word.
Some giant mountain ash trees grow about here.
From Kedumba Creek to the River Cox is
about six miles along a good track
This part of the river is mentioned under the
heading of Cox’s Biver.
I would advise anyone who contemplates
taking a trip in this direction to take a horse,
as the river which has to be crossed several
times is often difficult to ford.
A good bridle track leads from Grundy’s Select-
ion on the Kiver Cox, to Kanangara.
The Coach Road to Jenolan Caves.
HE two main shooting routes on the Mountains,
are along the Coach Road to Jenolan, and by
way of the bridle track leading to the same place.


Deviations are made off these routes, at
different places into the bush.
After passing Mount Victoria on the coach
road to Jenolan, a descent is made to the pictur-
esque village of Hartley. Fiom thw place to
Hampton the country is more open, with numerous
farms dotted about.
As their are many accommodation places and
farms at intervals along the whole distance to
Hampton, it will be found best to make one
of these places head quarters, and after making
inquiries as to the lay of the country and the
game, work off into the hush shooting, returning
at night to bead quarters again.
The principal game to be obtained along this
route —is wallaby, oppossura, and hares parrots
etc. An occasional native bear may often be
seen sitting in some of the trees along the roadside.
Some first class all round shooting was to be
got in the valley below Hampton.
I was out shooting in this part once with a
couple of Englishmen, who had never seen an
opossum before, and they shot ninety-six during
one night on Mick Kelly’s farm. and
wallaroos were also plentiful. There is now some
fair shooting about there, and plenty of back
country for those who have time to make
excursions into it.
Good hare shooting is always to be relied upon.


There is plenty o£ country between Hampton
and the caves into which excursions after game
may be made—as the greater part of this end of
the route is uninhabited, it is beat to obtain a guide.
At Grady’s farm, near where the bridle track
from Katoomba joins this route —information can
be obtained.
The Bridle Track to the Caves.
(tX track bearing to the left, branches off the
main Coach road about a mile from
Katoomba, near what is known as the
explorers tree.
This is bridle track to Jenolan, which at
about a quarter of a mile from the explorers
tree, passes through a narrow gap in the cliffs,
and descends one of the beauty spots of the moun-
tains.
The track through this glen zig-zags or turns
nineteen times before reaching the bottom.
It has been the writers experience on many
occasions to be descending here with a riding
party, bound for some remote part—on a shooting
excursion. Our horses loaded up —singing laughing
and talking.
The cavalcade forming a pretty sight to the
person riding last—who would be many times


on the track higher than the first horseman, and
could thus overlook the whole party as they
zigzaged, and wound about into the valley below,
Here and there a gleam of sunlight would
penetrate the glen, bringing out a bit of bright
colouring in a red blanket strapped across one
of the saddles, or shining on the barrel of one
of the guns; and I fancy I hear the rattle of
the hilley against other cooking utensils, strapped
on the top of the swag with which the pack
horse brought up the rear —and which rolled
from side to side —as the old horse descended
with an unwilling sort of gait. It was as if
he were thinking all the time of the climb up
again, on the return journey.
After having descended Nellies Glen, and got
well away from the cliffs, some fine open
grazing country is passed through, known as
Medlow.
It is a granite country we are now in, and
big boulders of this rock will be met with all
the way to Cox’s river. Kangaroo were very
plentiful here at one time, and many other
varieties of game; but as of late years it has
been much settled upon by residents of Katoomba
and others, the game has been driven back. It
will be necessary to get well off the track in
order to obtain good sport. There is a track
which branches off the main bridle track to the
57
THE BUIDLE TRACK TO THE CAVES.


caves, when about six miles from Katoomba and
trends south, and eventually reaches the river
Cox near Cedar Creek. All along this route
there is plenty of sport to be obtained.
At twelve miles from Katoomba on the Bridle
track to the Caves, Cox’s river is reached. This
is a lovely spot to camp, there is good fishing
and excursions may be taken both up and
down stream. After crossing the Cox the bridle
track ascends a cutting along the banks of a
creek, and about half way up this creek, another
track branches off to the right.
This branch track leads to Marsden Swamp, a
sheltered valley in which are several farms, and
where good hare shooting may be obtained.
At about 4 miles from the river Cox en
route to the Caves the Little river is reached,
where there is a small patch of cleared land
and a homestead.
There is good shooting all round about this
place. Wallaroos and Rock Wallabies are to be
got among the surrounding mountains also plenty
of scrub Wallabies and Opossums.
I shot a specimen of the large grey flying
Phalanger here once, which is of rare occurence
on the Mountains.
Some years ago the owners of this selection
planted some Indian corn here, for the use of
their horses when riding out this way.


When the corn was ripe it was cut and
stored about twenty yards from the living hut.
The opossums soon found out the corn, and used
to come down from the ranges at night, and
although the shed containing the corn was se-
curely fastened up, the opossums found their
way into the corn.
I was camped cue night at this hut with one
of the owners.
At about 10 o’clock we went quietly down to
the shed, opened the door quickly, and entered
with a candle, closing the door after us.
The opossums inside ivere taken by surprise,
and getting confused by the light, could not
find their way out before we had killed a good
many of them. The roof of the shed was low,
and in the confusion sometimes the light would
go out. We made several raids like this during
the night, and altogether obtained about fifty
opossums.
This selection occupies an isolated position,
surrounded by high mountains. It is the last
sign of civilization met with on the track, until
its junction with the coach route. The last of
the cliffs will be seen capping a mountain on
the north side of the Little River. These cliffs,
though of similar appearance to those about
Katoomba, are of a slightly different formation.
Alum in its native state occurs in the shape of


a fine crystaline powder. The numerous cavities
formed by the overhanging ledges of rock, are
the favorite camping places of the rock wallabies,
of which there are a great number about here.
The country at the back is all wild bush, and
a great place for dingoes. A few eagle-hawks
are generally to be seen hovering around here.
From the Little River the bridle track ascends
a high mountain, and thence continues six miles
along the top of the Black Range until it joins
the Coach Road from Mount Victoria. All the
latter part of the country through which the
bridle track passes is wild bush, with here and
there a native bear, and an odd wallaby, &c.
From Camden and Picton to Burra-
gorang.
BURRAGORANG is distant twenty-one miles
from Camden, and about nineteen miles from
Picton. There is a good coach road from
these towns to Burragorang; the latter
part of this road zigzags down a cutting made
in the face steep cliff, at the bottom of


which is the valley of Burragorang. The views
to be obtained while making the descent down
the zigzag are varied and picturesque. The
zigzag itself is a piece of road engineering well
worth seeing. In places, walls of perpendicular
cliff almost overhang the road, and the huge
boulders balanced on some of the projecting
pinnacles, look as if they might at any moment
come crushing down below.
The valley of Burragorang is watered by the
Wollondilly River, which peacefully flows among
numerous farms and homesteads scattered along
its banks. Steep mountains enclose the valley
on either side, at the summit of which, is a
broken cliff line. The sides of the mountains are
in their primitive state, the haunt of a few Rock
Wallabies, Wallaroo and scrub Wallabies, and the
note of the Lyre-bird is frequently heard. About
the cultivated land near the river side—especially
when the corn is ripe—King Parrots, Satin-birds
and Pigeons are numerous, and Quail may be
obtained in season. This locality being easily
reached from town, the game has been much shot
at. I would therefore recommend any sportsman
visiting here to make tours into the ajacent
country, where there is plenty of native game.
Accommodation may be obtained on several of the
farms along the valley, at a reasonable charge.
At the bottom of the -zigzag a road branches off


to the left, up the Wollondilly, while the main
road continues on down stream to Cox’s river.
Prom the point where the roads branch off, to
the junction of the Cox and Wollondilly rivers,
is eight miles. Pair shooting may be obtained
in this direction up the river Cox to Kedumba
creek, mentioned under the heading of “ Cox’s
River.”
The road which branches off up the Wollon-
dilly passes through upper Burragorang, and
from thence to the recently-discovered silver
mine* and the new caves. The silver mines are
about nineteen miles from the zigzag. There is
plenty of wild country in this direction for the
prospector and sportsman, especially towards the
head of the Kowmung river, where alluvial gold
was obtained some years ago. On the western
side of the Kowmung river, is situated the
celebrated Kanangara Scenery, originally known
as the Kowmung Walls. The Kowmung River
flows into the river Cox a few miles above
Kedumba creek.
62
FEOM CAMDEN AND PICTON TO BUEEAGDUANG.


Kanangara.
KAN ANGARA occupies an isolated position
in the heart of the wildest scenery, on
the Blue Mountains. It lies about half-
way between the Southern and Great Western
lines, and is distant about twenty miles from
the Jenolan Caves, from which place there is a
coach road. There is also * a bridle track from
Burragorang to Kanangara, along which some good
shooting may be obtained. Kanangara might justly
be called the show-ground of Australia, so far
as scenery is concerned. The views to be ob-
tained here, are of greater magnitude than any
other part of the Blue Mountains. The Cliffs
are higher, the Gorges deeper, and there is a
Waterfall which rivals the celebrated “ Govett’s
Leap.’'
The geological formation of the country is
remarkable. The upper portion of the Sandstone
Cliffs which flank the table-land on the right
of Kanangara Creek is unconformable to the
lower strata; while on the opposite side of the
gorge some terraced peaks of Quartzite rock
rise to great height. The views to be obtained
from the high table-land are vast and extensive,


range after range of mountains can be seen
stretching away into the distance, where they
are gradually lost in a blue haze. Isolated
peaks capped with fragments of cliff, like ruined
castles are seen. There are deep and awful-
looking chasms, which almost take one’s breaih
away in the endeavour to penetrate their depth.
Here and there on the summit of the table-
land huge disconnected masses of rock rise ab-
ruptly up, assuming all sorts of fantastic shape.
The grandeur and extent of the views about
Kanangara are so vast, that it is a while
before the eye can grasp the details, and the
impression left on the mind is one of awe and
mystery. In the springtime, when the numerous
wild flowers which grow on the mountain tops
about this part are in full bloom, the sight is
a lovely one; but in winter, when the cold
wind sweeps over the table-land, and the mists
curl up from ihe valley below, it is a wild
and desolate-looking place. There are some re-
markable drawings on the south side of the
chffs, executed by the aboriginals years ago,
and coloured with a red ochre. Under an over-
hanging ledge of rock, which forms a large open
cave, a wooden platform has been erected for
the use of visitors to camp on, and close by is
a clear stream of water.
A large forest reserve has been made around


Kanangara, to preserve it as a tourist’s resort,
and there is no doubt before long, some accom-
modation may be obtained there. A good round
tour of the Blue Mountains may be made, by
leaving Sydney via the southern line to Picton
or Camden, and thence to Burragorang by road.
From this latter place a good shooting trip can
be made to Kanangara. and from thence to
the Jenolan Caves. From Jenolan Caves the
usual tours through the mountains can be made,
returning via the Great "Western Eailway to
town.
The River Cox.
that point where the bridle track to
Jenolan Caves crosses the River Cox, until
it reaches Burragorang, towards the south-
ern line, the Cox’s River flows through a wild
and uninhabited mountainous country. In places
the course of the stream is intersected by steep
and precipitous cliffs, rendering traffic up and
down the side of the river difficult, and in
those places where a waterfall occurs, the course
of the River is altogether impassable, and a
tedious detour has to be made round the moun-


ain side. In dry weather the riverside can be
followed on fool for a long distance, as at such
times, the stream can easily he crossed, where
any cliffs bar the way, and the opposite side
taken. These crossing places are patches of
soft sand in some places, in others, the fords
have a smooth pebbly bottom, very trying to
the ball of the bare feet, vv bile in parts, huge
boulders, with rounded surfaces, and slippery as
glass, have to be jumped. The river Cox, is
altogether, a dangerous place to get caught, in
flood time. The water rises to flood height, in
wet weather, in a few minutes. I got caught
in a flood here once, when on a walking trip
with a well-known Sydney sportsman, and we
had to cross the river when it was running a
banker, three times; twice by swimming it, and
the last time I nearly got washed down the
rapids. The scenery along the river is varied,
and interesting. I know of no more wonderful
and romantic spot, than at the junction of the
cave and Cox’s river. At this place, high mount-
ains and precipitous cliffs enclose the valley.
Along the banks, the trees grow to a great
height, and trailing vines, hang in festoons from
their branches; while below, the undergrowth is
dense and varied. At the junction of the Cave
river, are some beautiful clear pools of water,
hollowed out of the granite rock. In these


pools the fish can be clearly seen swimming
about, and although I have tried on several
occasions, every bait I could think of, I never
succeeded in catching any. They would come
up in shoals and smell the bait, and turn away
again. The water is always icy cold in the
Cave river, both in the summer and winter, but
it is not so in the river Cox—in this latter
stream, the water is quite warm, in summer.
At mid-day in smmmer time, the sun shines
down into this gorge, making it very hot, but
towards evening, it is pleasant and cool. About
this time the wild ducks are on the move, and
the Lyre-birds are in full song, about the hillsides.
Platypi are numerous about the various water-
holes. Snakes are common, and the only Death
Adders I ever saw were killed near here.
About a mile below the junction of the Cave
and Cox’s river, the country gets more open,
and nice patches of yellow sand stretch along the
banks of the water. There used to be some
good fishing holes here, but after every heavy
flood, the geography of this river is altered;
some of the waterholes get filled up with sand,
and new places are washed out. Native cedar
grows plentifully up the Kowmung River; a stream
which flows into the Cox, about a couple of
miles above where the Kedumba Creek empties
itself into the River Cox, on the route from


Wentworth Falls, some nice open grassy flats
occur below this part. At Mr. Grundy’s the
first selection is reached, and from here to
Burtagorang, several homesteads occur. Fruit
grows well about Burragorang, and when it is
ripe, large numbers of Flying-foxes visit the
orchards and do great damage. Opossums are
plentiful, hut the fur is of inferior quality.
Opossums.
aTa
X Z\ HE Opossums to be found about the more
elevated pirts of the Blue Mountains
grow to a large size, and though not
numerous, the fur is thick and of good quality,
the colour being silver-grey. There are none of
the large brown opossums met with in Gippsland
and elsewhere, known in the market as “ Mount-
ain Opossums.” In the valleys, and warmer parts,
the colour of the fur is inclined to be reddish
towards the neck, and the fur is not so thick.
Opossums travel long distances at night to
where there is a farm or selection, congregating
towards midnight about the ringed timber. If
a person wishes to shoot enough opossums to
make a rug of the skins, the best way is to
get fixed up at some farm where they have not


been shot out. Mid-winter is the best season,
as the fur is then thickest. A period when the
moon is at the full should be selected, and
about a couple of hours after dark will be soon
enough to start out shooting. A good close
shooting gun is required, as an opossum takes a
lot of shot to fetch him off some of the high
branches. A few lightly loaded cartridges
should be taken, for close shots, as it often hap-
pens that you cannot see an opossum at a
distance, which you can bring down at short
range, with a light charge, without damaging the
fur. Some of the hunters who shoot for profit
use muzzle-loading guns, in order to economise
their ammunition, but the gun soon fouls, owing
to the heavy dew, and makes bad shooting;
when this is the case, two shots have often
to be taken at one opossum. I have always
found it best to use a good breechloader, and
load the cartridges well, so that one shot is
sufficient to bring down each opossum. When
fleecy clouds are about, or a white haze obscures
the sky, opossums are easily seen, and can be
shot without what is known as “ mooning” them.
To “ moon ” an opossum, you move about, until
you get the animal exactly in a line with your
eye and the moon. It thus presents a lumin-
ous outline, and the light of the moon shining
down the barrel of the gun enables the shooter


to draw a bead on tbe opossum, and make a hit.
From constant practice, a good opossum shooter will
bring down his quarry from any position, without
mooning it, and thus save a lot ol time and trouble;
for while keeping your eye on an opossum, and walk-
ing backwards to moon it—you often trip backwards
over a log, or other obstruction—and if the moon is
low, the opossum will be out of shot, before you can
get it in a line with the moon.
Among the ringed timber, opossums can be easily
seen and shot ; and about midnight, after they have
been feeding on the gum trees —they will generally
be found playing about the dead timber.
It often happens that a person who is not
accustomed to opossum shooting will fire at a knob on
the branch of a tree, in mistake for an opossum, and
I saw a man one night, fire at what he thought was
an opossum, and bring down two Laughing Jack-
asses, which were roosting together.
A good dog is very useful, one that will work
ahead and give tongue at any tree, where there may be
an opossum in. Some dogs belonging to the farms,
are particularly good at this work, as soon as they
find one, and you have shot it! they will work
ahead, and find another. Many opossums are obtained
in this way, that would, otherwise, not be seen.
There is one great fault —most of these dogs have—
which I would warn shooters about; they are apt to
worry an opossum, as soon as they hear it fail and


thus destroy the fur. If not brought down the first
shot, or when badly wounded, opossums will hang by
their tail, and remain suspended in this manner from
the branch of a tree, after they are dead, for a day or
more. It is a frequent occurence to see one hang-
ing in this way, in the morning, when going round
skinning; you then pelt away at it with sticks, a slight
knock being sufficient to bring it down.
Opossums should not be skinned immediately after
being shot, as the wool easily comes off while they are
warm. It is best to leave them in bunches of four,
or six, along a fence—or in the fork of a tree —and
go round in the morning and secure the pelts.
Some shooters, skin them as they are shot, by a
process known as “ bagging,” but they require very
delicate handling, and it is not a commendable practice.
If there are any willow trees growing where
opossums are plentiful, this is where they will be
found. They eat the leaves of the willow, and will
travel long distances to feed on these trees. In the
winter when the leaves have fallen, they can be dis-
tinctly seen, and repeated visits should be made
during the night, to the same trees.
I once shot forty off two willow trees, during one
evening, at Dwyer’s Farm, on the Duckmaloi River.
Very often an opossum will drop to the ground
after being shot at, but is not dead, and care should
be taken as to how it is picked up, as they bite and
scratch severely. It is always best to catch hold an


oppossum by the tail, until a stick can be obtained to
bit it over the head, in this way the fur is not damaged.
Where opossum are numerous the bark on the trees
will be very much scratched by their claws.
In the day time, opossums camp in holes in dead
trees, hollow logs, &c. The Aboriginals and others,
cut them out of the trees, where they are
plentiful, accompained by a dog to find them out,
and a good many may be chopped out in this manner.
Trapped opossums always fetch the highest price,
as the fur is not damaged by shot. The favorite and
least expensive method of snaring opossums,is with a
wire noose. A stout pole is leaned against any gum
tree showing opposum scratches on its bark, and on
this pole the noose is fixed, in such a manner, that
any opossum passing up the pole will be caught
by tbe neck —when an opossum is caught in this way,
he will attempt to jump off the pole, and is at once
hung. They are often found hanging from the
pole —caught by the foot, or tail.
Opossum skins should be pegged out as square
as possible, and in the shade. Any skins exposed to
the sun turn a yellow colour, and are not easy to tan
into leather. To make a first-class rug, with nothing
but the backs of the skins, it takes about sixty
skins.
Opossums may be shot when there is no moon, by
making a big fire of leaves, Ac., under the tree where
the opossum is, and standing with your back to the


fire. The light of the fire in this way shows up the
white belly of the opossum. I have shot them at Jenolan
by the aid of the Magnesium lamp, which is used in
lighting up portions of the caves.
Opossum ihooting can hardly be called sport;
you are walking about looking up in the trees, until
your neck aches, and you are constantly falling over
logs or other obstructions, and if you stay out until the
small hours of the morning in midwinter, you will be
glad to get home, and warm yourself before a good
fire.
Wallabies,
CltUB wallabies are common throughout the
Mountains. They camp in the day time
(5) among the low bush and undergrowth, feed-
ing in the evening about the more open glades*
They were very numerous up to about 1890, and did
great damage to the farmers and graziers, coming
down from the bush at night, and eating the grass and
other vegetation. On this account, for some years,
the Stock Board gave sixpence for every wallaby
scalp. The sclap consisted of the two ears, connected
by a piece of the skin of the wallaby. Many of the
settlers, and others—who had a taste for sport, and
who posessed ahorse they could shoot off—would ride
about the scrub all day and shoot them with a shot


gun, while on horseback, merely securing the scalp,
and leaving the skin.
Wallabies can be approached much closer on
horseback than on foot, and a person riding com-
mands a better view over the bushes, under which the
wallabies camp during the day. About the period
to which I now refer, wallaby drives were of con-
stant occurence. Parties of settlers and farmers
would muster at certain places, and those who
possessed guns would be stationed at intervals in a
line, while the remainder on horseback would en-
circle a section of the bush, and by dint of much
shouting and cracking of whips, drive the frightened
game towards the shooters. Hundreds of wallabies
would be shot during the day in this manner.
My experience of wallaby drives is, that it is often
a dangerous sport on account of the reckless manner
in which some of the shooters explode their firearms
in the direction of their neighbours. It is no un-
common occurence for a shooter to get peppered
with a few grains of shot.
Gradually the price given for wallaby scalps was
decreased, and was finally abolished as the price
of the skins increased. About 1890 when high
prices were being given for all marsupial skins, large
Scrub Wallaby skins fetched as high as 2s. 6d. each
wholesale in the market, and the smaller sized ones
at proportionate rates. It is not to be wondered then,
that about this period, many men took up shooting


for a living, and if they struck a part were the game
was plentiful, they soon knocked up a good cheque.
As the game got harder to approach from constantly
being shot at, the shot gun was superceded by the
rifle, and it is only with the latter weapon that a
sportsman can do much execution at the present
time. Early morning or in the evening is the best
time for shooting, as the game is then on the move,
and does not require to be hunted up so much as it
does in the day time. In dry seasons, when water
is scarce, a watch should be kept towards evening
about any isolated waterhole. A favorite haunt of
Scrub Wallabies is among what is known to bush-
men as Peppermint Scrub, a low bush of the Euca-
lyptus family, having a pungent peppermint taste,
they are also very fond of the leaves of the Wild
Cherry tree, and may be trapped by setting some of
this as a “ bait ” near a trap called a “ Springer.”
A springer is made by bending over a stout sapling
stuck in the ground, to the end of which is attached
a stout running noose. By an ingenious arrange-
ment, when the wallaby treads on a piece of wood
the sapling flies up, and at the same time draws the
noose tight round the wallaby which is thus caught
and suspended in the air. These snares are also set
on the tracks or pads they make through the bush.
Wallabies are very tenacious of life and unless
hit in a vital part, or a leg is broken, will travel
a long distant before they drop. Many Wallabies


+hat are fairly hit, get away, and are never found.
r ason, a good dog, well trained to keep to
Leei, while stalking, is very useful in tracking up a
wounded animal. The head of a "Wallaby or Kangaroo
is vital; but at a long range, this is rather a fine point
to aim at. I prefer as a rule, to aim low down, about
the hind quarters, and butt of the tail. Scrub
Wallabies are infected with a tick, which when carry-
ing the skins, are transferred to you, and although
they will not live long on a man, they make things
pretty lively, during their short stay. When Wallaby
shooting, the young are obtained in the pouch, in all
stages of growth. Prom those just born, to those
sufficiently grown to jump off into the bush, when
liberated. I have often taken one into camp, to rear
as a pet ; but have found them easily frightened, and
when once they get a scare—although they may have
been previously quite tame—are never afterwards so
docile. Wallaby tail makes excelent soup. Other
portions of the animal, are dry and insipid eating,
but makes very good sausage meat, when put through
a mincer with herbs etc., When skinning, it is onlv
necessary to take about 3 inches of the tail, and the
skin should be pegged out as square as possible, in the
shade. Wallaby skins are utilised principally, to
make into leather; but those skins obtained in winter,
will make good serviceable rugs. They do not seem
to posess the keen sense of smell, that Kangaroo or
Wallaroo have, and do not detect the approach of the


shooter by scent, although they are otherwise on the
alert. They do not stand up to fight among themselves
like Kangaroo but will spar away at each other like
two men. I once saw them fighting together in this
manner, among some Peppermint Scrubs, towards
evening, and was able to get within twenty yards of
them; finally one of them withdrew from the combat
and became an apparent interested spectator
of the other two, who continued to scratch and bite
at each other, using the hind legs occassionally
as a Kangaroo does, by jumping up and striking
with them.
Rock Wallabies.
OCK Wallabies frequent cliffs of rock, and steep
sides of mountains, and are often to be found
\S) about the same place that the Wallaroo haunt.
They camp in the day time in crevices, and under
over-hanging ledges of rock; feeding towards evening
in the more open county.
Eock Wallabies are very quick in their movements,
and jump from rock to rock with great rapidity, and
somewhat resemble monkeys in their movements. It
is wonderful to watch them ascend, and descend the


steep sides of a cliff and I have on several occasions
seen them, when pursued by a dog, ascend a leaning
tree, and sit out on the end of a overhanging limb.
Nature has provided them with a soft pad
under the hind feet, which enables them to obtain
a firm grip, where a goat would fear to tread, and
renders their movements over the rocks almost
noisless. In some portions of the Jenolan Caves,
where the Wallabies at one time were plentiful, the
surface of the limestone rock is beautifuly polished, by
the continual traffic of the Eock Wallabies. The
numerous cavties in the limestone cliffs afford good
shelter for them, and the larger outside caves were
full of them and their bones. Many of the bones in what
is known as the Bone Cave, are the remains of Eock
Wallabies. These bones have a thick incrustation
of lime on them, and are in the far interior of one of
the Caves. I have frequently found the remains of
a Wallaby not long dead, in some of the outside Caves,
and heaps of their bones are to be found in many
other caverns, and it is evident they seek these re-
tired spots, to die in. The Eock Wallabies have been
protected at Jenolan Caves, for some years—and
consequently visitiors can enjoy seeing them hopping
about the caves and rocks. They have a beautiful
head, and eye like a Gazelle, and a graceful motion.
They are easily tamed, and make nice pets. They
are often afflicted with a red parasite round the eyes?
which I have not noticed in other Marsupials.


Eock Wallabies afford good lively shooting, and
often puzzles a good shot to- grass, when hopping
about the rocks. There are some good Eock
Wallaby cliffs on the Cox’s Eiver, about four miles
below where the bridle track crosses it, and I have
often had good sport here with a shooting party.
My method of proceeding was to station the
shooters at intervals along the top of the cliffs, and
work with the dogs from below, shooting at the same
time. In this manner the game was driven towards
the shooters stationed above, who generally obtained
good sport. A dog is required for Eock Wallaby
shooting, to hunt the game out of the fissures and
crevices of the rocks. A large boulder rolled from
the top of a cliff of rocks down the hillside, when
once it gets good way on—will crash its way down-
wards making a great noise, and tearing down every-
thing along its course. The noise made by a boulder
crashing its way into the valley below, like this—will
be sure to frighten up any Eock Wallabies on the
hillside. To watch one of these big boulders, which
has been loosened, and set rolling, is a sight in itself,
and often brings up all sorts of game.
Eock Wallaby skins do not fetch a high price in
the market. The fur being much longer towards the
tail than it is near the neck, does not join together
well for making into rugs. The fur is not thick, or
of even colour; grey towards the neck, and reddish
brown about the hind-quarters.


Wallaroo.
7XY ALLAROOS though not so great in size as
111 kangaroo, are heavier in build; the tail
being short and thick, the ears of greater
size than a kangaroo, and the fur much longer. The
colour of a male Wallaroo is black, that of a female
light grey. They frequent the steep and rocky sides
of the mountains, and are often found on the rocks
in the day time, being similar in their habits to
Rock Wallabies. They like to bask under a ledge of
rock, on the sunny side of a mountain, in the winter,
and where any rocky bosses occur, they are most
likely to be found.
Wallaroos have a keen sense of smell, and can
scent the approach of anyone, for this reason they
require to be stalked with great care, working up
against the wind, if possible. I consider stalking
Wallaroo the best sport on the mountains, it is the
Deer stalking of Australia, and considerable judge-
ment is required in approaching the quarry. What
is of primary importance, the sportsman after this
sort of game requires to be a good rifle shot, because
when climbing about the steep side of the mountains
one is apt to get shaky, and often have to shoot on
sight.
Wallaroos are not easy to drive, on account of their
keen scent, and I think it best to stalk them, especi-
ally if the country is rough. A dog is not much use


in pointing out game, as the scent of Wallaroo is
frequently crossed by that of Hock Wallaby. In
tracking up a wounded Wallaroo a dog is useful.
Wallaroo do not travel nearly so fast as Kangaroo
or Wallaby, and soon bail up, when pursued by a
dog, and show fight. On one occasion 1 shot
a big Black Wallaroo, and wounded it, and as I
could not get another shot in before it disappeared
I let my dog go on its trail, following down the hill
after them, as quickly as I could. At last I heard
the dog bay from the river, which at this place, had
very steep and rocky banks. After some difficulty I
reached the stream, and found the Wallaroo stand-
ing in the middle of a waterhole, holding my dog
which it was trying to drown with its front legs,
while the dog had hdld of the Wallaroo by the ear.
1 had to wade into the water before I could kill the
Wallaroo, and rescue the dog. I had great difficulty
in getting the Wallaroo out of the water, as it was a
very large one, and the spot being a deep basin
hollowed out of the rock, with steep and slippery
sides. It is a common occurence for a Wallaroo to
pick up a dog, and make off to the nearest water and
try to drown it. When a Wallaroo is wounded high
up on the side of a mountain, it will generally make
down the hill, and your object is, to try and stop it
as soon as possible; for of course you have all the
distance to ascend again. It is surprising the
distance they travel sometimes, after being shot.


The claws o£ a Wallaroo are worn down consider-
ably from constantly travelling over hard and rocky
ground, and they cannot do so much damage with
them as a kangaroo does, but they use their teeth
more. I have seen them bite very savagely —first at
myself—and then at the dog, when I have been try-
ing to overtake a wounded one.
The flesh of a Wallaroo is much better eating than
either a Kangaroo or a Wallaby, a piece of steak off
the hind-quarters being a very good substitute for
beef steak. The skins of Wallaroos make a good
warm rug, somewhat heavy, but one that will stand a
lot of hard wear. The young Wallaroo is easily-
tamed, and makes a good pet.
Native Bear.
T do not consider it any sport to shoot these
T animals. They are generally to be found in the
y day time asleep in the fork of some gum tree,
or towards evening munching the leaves, and are
entirely at the mercy of anyone with a shot gun or
rifle. With a shot gun, if the bear is high up, a
whole bag of ammunition can be expended on them,
before they are killed. Native Bears have a very strong
scent, and if there is one about in the trees overhead
you will most probably smell him. They are
generally slow in their method of climbing about
the tree, but if they are disturbed when on the


ground, will ascend quickly They make a great
noise for so amall an animal, and one would
sometimes imagine at night, it was the growl of some
big bear. They make a pitiful noise occasionally,
like a human being in distress, > and I have two or
three times, taken a light at night and made a search ?
thinking the noise proceeded from someone who was
hurt; although I had for years, been accustomed to
hearing them cry out, around the camp. They carry
their young on d;be back, and pretty little things they
look, I was walking along the road near Hampton
once, and there happened to be a Native Bear, with a
young one on its back half way up a cutting on the
side of the road. I was enabled to lift the
young one off the old ones back, and the mother
followed me for some distance after its young, growl-
ing quite savagely, when I allowed it to get near me.
The fur of the Native Bear is close and warm, and
makes a good rug. The colour varies, some being a
reddish brown, while others are a light grey, and
these latter are the best. Native Bears are very
hard to skin, and have a disagreeable smell. The
flesh is no good to eat, neither will dogs eat it, al-
though Dingoes kill them. Natives Bears are dying
out very fast, in some districts. I have seen them
lying about the bush day after day, in place s. They
may be tamed and made to live in captivity in Austra-
lia, but so far as I am aware, no one has succeeded in
getting one alive, to Europe. They live principally


on gum leaves, and frequent mostly the variety of
eucalyptus with white bark— such as Moun-
tain Ash and White hum, &c.
Wombat.
SHE main dividing range and the spurs leading
off it, are the principal places where Wom-
bats are to be found. They are very
numerous about the mountains, in the vicinity of
Jenolan Oaves, and the bush is full of their warrens.
They burrow long distances underground, where
they lie during the day, coming out to feed at night.
They may often be seen lying at the entrance to
their hole—but are difficult to approach, and very
hard to shoot. When a dog is sent into one of their
warrens, the Wombat continues to growl, and the
locality of the Wombat can be ascertained by listen-
ing above ground, until the exact spot above where
the dog is barking is located. I have tried to dig
them out, by sinking a hole down on top of them*
and although I have had several tries to dig them
out, was never successful. It is about the stalest
game I ever attempted.
Myself and three others, were digging fer two days
and a night once, to get a Wombat, which ultim-
ately escaped. It was a long time, before I shot a
Wombat. I have waited for hours, about a hole where
I have known there to be a one but, never
84
NATIVE BEAR


obtained one in this manner. The first and only one
I ever shot, out in the open, I obtained one evening
I was returning to camp, after a day’s Srub Wallaby
shooting. It was moving among some ferns, and
when I fired at it, about 100 yards distant, I thought
it was a Wallaby, and was very much surprised on
walking to the spot, to find a fine large Wombat, shof
through the heart. I skinned it whole, and a tough
old job it was ; the skin had literally to be cut away
from the flesh. The hair is coarse, and the hide is of
no value, except as a curiosity. They have a fine big
head, like that of a large bear, but, otherwise, are
more of a Badger in their habits : they feed on roots
and grass, and the butt of the trees, in the vicinity of
their haunts, generally have the bark torn off them.
The hams of the Wombat are excellent eating, and
in flavour, resemble the ham of a pig, but are not fat.
The first two Wombats I ever obtained, were got by
setting aspring gun, in such a way, that they shot
themselves. I had never seen a spring gun set, and
had tried various wajs of trapping them, without
success. So I thought out, and put the following
scheme into" excution. Having selected a hole near
my camp, in which I knew there was a Wombat, I
took an ordinary steel spring rat-trap, and fastened
it securely to a heavy piece of wood, and fixed it at
the entrance to the Wombat hole. I then fastened
a double-barrelled gun to a log, about twenty yards
from the trap; sighting the gun, to about the position


a Wombat’s head would be, immediately over the
spring trap. I then took some copper wire and
fastened it to one of the teeth of the trap, taking the
other side of the trap off altogether. The wire
was then passed under a reel fixed on the wood that
the trap was nailed to, and stretched across the log,
on which the gun was fixed, and passed under two
more reels, and then connected with the trigger of the
shot gun. After experimenting, with no cartridges
in the gun —until I had got the right strain on the
wire so, that when the steel trap was sprung, it
pulled the wire attached to the trigger of the gun
sharp enough to drop the hammers—l put a cartridge
in the right barrel, and left it. Nothing happened
the first night, but on the second night, about mid-
night, I was awakened by the report of the gun, and I
and another well-known shooter on the Mountains,
named James Inglis arose, took a lantern, and
walked down to the Wombat hole, to see what had
happened. We found my scheme had worked first
rate: —a Wombat lay at the entrance to the hole
quite dead, shot through the forehead. The shot at
so short a range, had made a hole, like a large bullet.
I set the trap again the next morning, and put
another cartridge in the gun on the chance of getting
another Wombat, as there are generally two, in the
same warren. The following night I obtained another
one; in this case the charge peneterated the eye, and
death was instantaneous.


Dingoes, destroy a great many Wombats, and I
have frequently found the skin of a Wombat, turned
inside out, by the Dingoes, and the carcase com-
pletely eaten.
Wombats are usually infected with a bush tick,
which hurries its head in the skin. These insects
often occur on other marsupials, and I have seen
them on the Platypus. They produce a festering
sore on the animal, and I have seen dogs, that have
been in a Wombats hole, infected with them. They
are most frequently met with under the fore
shoulder of the animal. They also get on human
beings, and work into the flesh. I had a dog, in-
fected with them, so badly, that the skin was a mass
of sores, but eventually got rid of them, by rubbing
the infected parts, with carbolic acid and oil. Wom-
bats are very strong and I have seen one, that was
caught alive and roped—as much as a strong man
could hold, all the time growling and snapping, at
anyone who ventured near.
Should any person wish to secure a specimen of a
Wombat —the quickest and surest way of doing so,
is to procure a large double spring steel Dingo trap,
which can be bought at any of the large iron-
mongers, at a cost of 12s. Gd. One of these traps
carefully set at the entrance to a hole —and securely
chained to the root of a tree, or a stake, driven into
the ground, will hold a Wombat.


Dingos.
'*7 I” NDER this heading, it will not be necessary to
say much; as it is a very rare occurence to
shoot a Dingo, either with a shot gun, or
rifle. The real Dingo can soon scent the vicinity of
man, and slinks off among the bush. The howl of the
Dingo, is often heard at dawn, and towards night,
and sometimes, in the wilder parts of the Mountains,
several of them will come howling round the camp,
making a most doleful noise. There are a great
many half-bred Dingos about the Mountains —these,
are a cross between tame dogs, and Dingos, and are
often tame dogs, that have got wild, and joined
the Dingos, and might be more properly termed,
wild dogs. They are of all sizes and colour, and are
by far the worst enemies to the squatter, and
farmer in the outlying districts. They come down
at night, from the neighbouring ranges, and will kill,
tind worry, sheep and lambs. It is owing to this, that
a price is given, for every Dingo destroyed; the sum
paid, varies fromlOs. to"3os. according to the district.
The part of the Dingo that has to be secured, in order
to obtain the reward, is the tail, and a strip of
skin along the back, and the sclap, or two ears. The
usual way of destroying Dingos, is by setting baits


about poisoned with strychnine, but the Dingos get
very cunning, after a few have been killed in this
way, they will not touch the bait. The result very
often happens that some favourite tame dog gets
poisoned. I have seen Dingos caught by nailing a
bird to a tree, and setting underneath two small
ordinary rat traps. The Dingo in attempting to
reach the bird gets caught first in one trap, and then
in the other and is held, but if it should only get
caught in one trap it can easily get away. The
pure Dingo resembles in its habits the Pox, and
those I have seen reared from puppies, never seem to
get properly tame, and will kill fowls if they get the
slightest chance. I have shot Dingos on two
occasions only—once with the shot gun, and an-
other time with the rifle.
A shooter with whom the writer was acquainted,
was sitting in a gully one day taking a rest, when he
saw a Dingo with a piece of Wallaby in its mouth
making towards a hollow log. He shot the Dingo,
and at once began to search the log, for puppies,
which he naturally concluded were somewhere about.
While searching the log the old dog came up and
made straight for him, which he shot at close
quarters with a charge of Nof 8 shot, the last car-
tridge be had. He afterwards obtained the puppies,
which were pure bred ’Dingos, and brought them, and
the skins of the two old ones back to camp.
This proves that Dingos will attack a man in da-


fence of their young. In some parts of the Moun-
tains the Dingos are very numerous, and after a fall
of snow their tracks can be seen quite thick.
Very few tame dogs will follow up a Dingo. I
have known an instance on the plains, where a stag-
hound was set on to the track of some Dingos, and
when one of their number was caught by the stag-
hound, the other Dingos came to the rescue of their
mate, and when we rode up the staghound was so
badly bitten that it could not walk.
Platypus.
PLATYPUS may be found on all the rivers
throughout the Mountains. Towards the
evening or in the early morning they are
most likely to be seen, rising to the surface of the
water, were they will float motionless for about a
minute, and then dive. They are graceful and seal-
like in their motions The best way to get a shot at
one is to walk quietly along the banks of a river in
the evening, keeping a good look out both up and
down the stream, and more especially watching any
deep still waterhole with overhanging trees. If there
is a disturbance of water, as if anything is swimming
underneath—or any eddies—as if something had
dived, proceed to where you can command a good
view of this place without being seen, taking advant-
age of the cover afforded by any tree or foilage.


Platypi are very shy; the mere action of bringing
the gun to the shoulder will cause them to dive in-
stantly. I have generally lound that when a Platypus
has risen once in a waterhole, it will after the
lapse of a minute come to the surface again, not far
from the spot where it was first seen, and by
steadily waiting with the gun to the shoulder, when
he next rises you can cover him, and pull the trigger
without moving sufficiently to disturb it. When a
Platypus is shot at, it will generally dive, but
if it is hit hard, will rise again to the surface,
and when dead, floats on the water. It is diffi-
cult to get a dog to retrieve them, and a long
sapling often has to be obtained, with which to
get them out of the water. After heavy rain,
when the rivers are flooded, Platypi appear to
get drowned out of their holes in the banks ; for
they are to be seen swimming about the surface
of the water all day. 1 have shot Platypi on
the rivers by moonlight. At this period, water
rats are very busy; a variety of these with a
red belly, has a fine fur. When the longer
hairs of the Platypus and water rat are plucked
off, a fine down-like fur is exposed, similar to
sealskin.
The male Platypus only, has a sharp spur on
each hind leg, but I never had an opportunity
of observing for what purpose they use them.
Although Platypi lay eggs I have never met


anyone who had found any, neither have I ever
seen any myself, except in the Museum.
From my own personal observation, I con-
clude, that Platypi live together in pairs, as I
have never seen more than two in the same
waterhole. The fur of the Platypus almost rivals
that of the seal, but the skins are so small,
and it takes such a number of them to make a
rug, that I consider it a pity to shoot them
for this purpose.
92
PLATYPUS.


Snakes and Death Adders.
are numerous throughout the
Mountains, especially in the enclosed valleys,
such as the valley of the Cox, which is
warm and sheltered. Although I have constantly
seen them during the summer months, when I
have been shooting about the bush ; my ex-
perience has been, that they will generally get
out of ones way, if possible. The greatest
danger occurs when stepping over a log, and I
have several times nearly put my foot on a
Black Snake, which has been coiled up near a
fallen tree. The most vicious snake, and I
think the most dangerous is the Tiger Snake.
This snake when disturbed will at once show
fight. The commonest snake on the Mountains
is the Black Snake, red underneath. The next
moat frequently seen is the Tiger Snake. The
Diamond Snake, and the Carpet Snake, grow to
a great size, in the vicinity of the Jenolan
Caves, and the Eiver Cox, and I saw a Diamond
Snake, that was killed at the Jenolan Caves in
1895, which measured 13ft. The other snakes met
with on the Mountains are —the Brown Snake,
the Black Snake, yellow underneath, and the
Copper Headed Snake.


I have mentioned elsewhere, that I am of
opinion, that the Laughing Jackass does not kill
the number of snakes it is supposed to do, and
I have met very few bushmen who have seen
instances of it.
On one occasion I saw a Laughing Jackass,
sitting on the limb of a tree with a dead Black
Snake in its beak ; but this is the only case of
the sort, I have witnessed.
I have no snake yarns to tell, but I once
had a fishing and shooting trip spoilt by the
presence of Death Adders, the first I ever saw,
or heard of on the Mountains.
They had a corrugated horny point at the
end of the tail, different to any Death Adders,
in the Museum, or elsewhere. I will give the
names of the gentlemen, who accompained me on
this trip, and other particulars. In February,
1889, I was engaged to lay out a trip to the
Gateway Cliffs, on the River Cox, for Mr. H.
Darlet, and Capt. Frank Osborne. A small
tent and provisions had been sent on ahead—
packed on horseback to a spot where I had
proposed to camp ; while we walked from Ka-
toomba, shooting en route. On the second day
out, as I and Mr. Darley were walking down
the side of the river, about 500 yards, from the
camp, I noticed my dog make point at some-
thing among the rocks, which I had just stepped


over. On looking down to see what it was, I
saw what I at first thought was a snake, but
which proved to be a Death Adder, which I at
once killed. Mr. Darley remarked at the time
that he had heard if you kill a Death Adder
it’s mate would follow you.
When we returned to camp in the evening,
I saw another Death Adder come out from
under a bag, close to the tent, which I shot,
and should like to have perserved it, but Capt.
Osborne, wished me to burn it for safety. Our
prospects of a comfortable nights rest were now
throughly disturbed. The inside of the tent was
filled with dry ferns, on which our rugs and
blankets were spread to sleep on —and although
everything was turned over, and carefully ex-
amined, in case there should be any more
Adders about, I don’t think, any of us slept
well that night. The next morning Captain Os-
borne proposed that we should clear out, which
we did, although it was our intention to have
camped there, for several days.
95
BNA-KES.


Other Animals.
BESIDES the native game about which separate
chapters have been written, there are
other animals, which are occasionally seen,
such as the Porcupine, Bandicoot, Kangaroo,
Eat, Native Cat, Tiger Cat, Plying Squirels,
and Plying Poxes. A small variety of the Ply-
ing Squirrel, known to busbmen as the Sugar
Squirrel, is common throughout the Mountains.
It is grey in colour, with a black stripe down
the head, and possesses a fine soft fur. Two
other varieties though not common, are some-
times met with at night, when out Opossum
shooting ; these are a large black Plying Squirrel
and a large Grey variety. They make a noise
at night like the cry of an Opossum, which
when once heard cannot be mistaken. When the
sound is located, the best method of procuring a
shot at them, is to proceed to the place where
they were heard and stand still for a while,
keeping a good look out among the branches of
the trees. The Plying Squirrel will generally be
seen moving quietly along the limbs of the tree,
or a “ pat ” will be heard, as it flies from the
top of one tree to the butt of another. On
hearing the slightest noise, it crouches down on


the branches, and is difficult to see ; but when
once it is spotted, it can be ‘ mooned * and
shot, in the same manner as shooting Opos-
sums. Native Cals are often seen at night on
the dead limb oi a tree, on which they crouch
down, and remain motionless, with their tails
hanging down. Besides the numerous family of
small Lizards, there is a large Iguana, which frequents
the warm parts of the River Cox. They are great
thieves about a camp, and will walk off with
game, meat, or anything eatable that is left
about a tent. "When disturbed they run to the
nearest tree which they climb. They kill a great
many Opossums, by climbing a dead tree where
there is an Opossum camped during the day,
and drag it out of its hole. As soon as an
Opossum hears an Iguana climbing about the
limb of a tree where it is camped, it commences
to squeal, and thus reveals its presence to the
Iguana. Some of the large Iguanas, are like
young Alligators, and will bite a dog very severely.
The Aboriginals' eat them. Iguana oil is said to
make a good linament for the cure of rheumatism.
Wild horses are sometimes seen on the Moun-
tain Ranges, and were so plentiful at one time,
that one man I know, used to shoot them for
their hides and hair, and he told me once, that
he had shot, and skinned over a thousand Wild
Horses. It is a fine sight to see a mob of


Wild Horses, with their long manes, and tails
sweeping the ground. When disturbed, they wheel
around you, snorting and tossing up their heads,
and will then dash down the mountain, making
the stones rattle after them.
Birds of the Mountains.
a few years ago plenty of Black Duck and
Wood Duck were to be found along the
entire length of the Diver Cox and the
numerous streams flowing into it ; but now
these birds are only occasionally met with about
the least frequented parts of the rivers. Much
depends upon the seasons. In dry weather up
country, Wild Ducks come down to the Mountain
streams and waterholes, when some good sport
may be got.
Stubble Quail are to be shot about many of
the farms, especially towards Burragorang and the
Wollondilly Divers.
A few Snipe may occasionally be bagged about
the swampy ground near Oberon.
Among the Parrots and Cockatoos, the Dosella
and White Cockatoo are most plentiful; the


latter doing great damage to the farmers crops.
The Gang Gang Cockatoo is constantly met with
throughout the Mountains.
The Black Macaw, also known as the Black
Cockatoo is seen in flocks at odd times; they
are fine large birds with a yellow tail, and possess
a very powerful beak, with which they tear great
holes in the trees, in search after white
grubs, which is their favourite food. I have
never seen their nests, neither have I met anyone
who had. Another variety of the Black Cocka-
too is the Bank’s Cockatoo, which has a red tail
barred with yellow; it is of rare occurence on the
Mountains, and the only specimens I have seen
were obtained about the Gateway Cliffs, Cox’s
River.
King Parrots are common, being numerous
about Burragorang. Pennant’s Parrot, generally
known on the Mountains as the Blue Mountain
Parrot, is common. Plocks of Parrakeets will
occasionally be seen flying from tree to tree.
One of the finest eating birds on the Mountains
is the Wonga Pigeon, which is generally to be
found where the Forest Oak and Wild Cherry
trees grow. The Bronze-wing pigeon seems to be
gradually disappearing, as it is now seldom met
with. The Turtle Dove I have seen about the
Swamp Oaks on the River Cox, but it is rare.
The Hawk family is numerous; the following


varieties occur, white fronted Falcon, Brown
Hawk, White Hawk and Sparrow Hawk. lam
of opinion that the Laughing Jackass does not
kill the number of snakes it is supposed to do,
as I have only seen one instance of it. On that
occasion I saw a Laughing Jackass sitting on a
tree with a small Black Snake in its beak. The
Snake was to all appearances dead, and I did not
witness the killing of it. Two other varieties of
the King Fisher family are—a small brilliantly
plumaged bird which haunts the streams, and the
Sacred King Fisher which frequents the bush.
Satin Bower birds are common, and when the
fruit is ripe towards Burragorang they may be
seen in great numbers. A case of these birds
stuffed with life-like fidelity, and showing the
Bowers which they construct, is to be seen in
the Sydney Museum. The male Satin Bower
bird is dark blue in colour, with a sheen on
the plumage like satin. The hen bird is of a
speckled greenish colour. When young, both
birds appear to be of the same greenish tint,
as I have shot the cock bird in different stages
of change, from the green to the dark blue.
They have a pleasing whistle, something like
that of an English Starling. There is generally
one male to several hens; the former is espec-
ially shy, concealing itself at once on being dis-
turbed, among the leaves and branches. The


Nankeen Heron is met with occassionally on
Urey Cranes are com-
Black Swan come down
the rivers, hut is rare,
mon at certain seasons,
from up country to
often seen on the
Oberon and Marsden
Plover, Stone Plover,
the Eiver* Cox. Ibis are
swampy ground near
Swamps. Spur Winged
Peewit and Curlew are
common about many of the farms. There is a
very pretty bird called the Spotted Eock Thrush
which frequents the tops of mountains; it is a
ground bird, and rises with a whirr; it is
known to bushmen as the Mountain Dove. Other
birds met with are the Black Paced Cuckoo
Shrike known to bushmen as the Blue Jay. The
Pied Shrike known as the Mutton Bird. The
Grey Magpie, Black and White Magpie, white
Throated Tree Creeeper, locally called the Wood-
pecker. Harmonious Thrush, Ground Thrush,
Bell Bird, Butcher Bird. Coach Whip Bird.
Superb Warbler, also called the Blue Wren.
Flycatcher, Fan-tailed Cuckoo, Eobins, Land-rail,
More-Pork. Great Owl, Brown Owl, Grey Owl.
The Honey Sucker family are numerous, chief
among which is the Gill Bird, and Leather Head.
I have only mentioned the principal birds; but
there are many which I do" not know the names
of; a complete list of which may be obtained
by referring to any of the standard works on
the Birds of Australia.


Lyre Birds.
BIRDS are common throughout the
7 [ Mountains, and are called by bus hmen
Phe ants. They are very shy birds, and
haunt the glens and gullies, where the under-
growth of shrubs and ferns, is thickest, and as
they posess sharp eyes, are difficult to approach.
When disturbed they run through the bush,
and seldom fly except when hunted by a dog.
They are superb whistlers, and their note is
loud and piercing.
They can imitate with surprising accuracy, the
note of every other bird and animal in the bush,
and where woodcutters have been at work, they
will imitate the noise made by chopping and
sawing timber. I have often watched Lyre Birds
when they have been imitating, Parrots, Laugh-
ing Jackasses, Whip Birds, &c., also the howl
of a Dingo, and other noises in quick succession.
They sing chiefly in the winter months, during
the morning and evening. Where they are
numerous, mounds of earth about 3ft. in circum-
ference will be seen scratched up about the
bush, which resemble flower beds, these are very
neatly rounded off, and kept clear of stones,


slicks, &c. These mounds are their principal
singing places, and while singing the tail is
spread out to the full, and a slight tremulous motion
is imparted to it, while it is fanned backwards and
forwards. They are often lying on their breast
on these mounds, with the tail thrown over the
whole bird. On hearing any strange noise they
are on the alert at once, and if they see any-
one, they run off into the bush, and are im-
mediately lost sight of. Where a Lyre Bird is
heard whistling in the bush, by imitating some
of their notes, they may be called, and will often
come running up to the person calling them,
but it is necessary to keep well under cover
while doing so.
At certain seasons of the year f have noticed
that all the male birds congregate together in
one part of the bush, and only hen birds will
be seen in other places.
The male birds have fights among themselves,
and are very pugnacious.
There is very little difference between the tail
of the male and female bird when young, but
as the male bird gets older the feathers of the
tail gradually get more skeleton-like, until at
about two-years old, the bird has a perfect
Lyre-like tail. When about three-years old the
Lyre Bird sheds its tail, and the feathers
can often be seen lying about the bush.


The growth of the tail again takes place from
large quills, out of which the feathers quickly
grow in a perfect state, and not gradually as-
suming the skelton appearance, as they do in
the young bird. The nest of a Lyre Bird is a
large one, and is usually found on the stump
of a tree, or a ledge of rock, not far from
ground, it is round in shape, with an entrance
at the side, and is built with small sticks, and
beautifully lined with the soft feathers of the
bird itself. The young bird in the nest, is like
a young Emu in appearance, and is covered with
a soft down. I have never seen more than ope
bird in a nest, although the hen bird frequently
lays two eggs. Lyre Birds are provided with
large feet and long claws, with which they
scratch up the ground in search of small insects.
The flesh of the young Lyre Bird is good eating,
but the old birds are very tough. ]
Some years ago I was standing in the bush on
the Cave Mountains, and saw a hen Lyre Bird
closely followed by five full grown eock birds ;
they ran across the ground within twenty yards
of where I was standing, but did not appear to
take any notice of me.
The Lyre Bird is remarkable in its habits, and
to watch one when it is singing on one of the
mounds which I have previously alluded to, is a
sight to be remembered. .


The beautiful tail which they possess, and
their loud wild note, and remarkable imitative
powers, rank them king of Australian birds.
Fishing.
HEREVER one travels on the Mountains,
I| I beautiful little steams of water are seen
rippling along over a smooth pebbly
bottom —rushing over huge boulders —and gliding
peacefuly under steep banks, and overhanging
trees, where are deep still waterholes. Just those
sort of waters that any angler would naturally
associate with Trout. These streams unite and
form small rivers, which are tributaries of the Cox,
Cox’s River is the main watershed of the Blue
Mountains, and is on the eastern fall of the
main dividing range, which seperates the
Eastern from the Western rivers. This river
after passing through the Mountains, emerges
into the plains, and is called the Nepean ; which
is crossed by the Great Western Railway at
Penrith.
Trout have been turned into some of the Moun-


tain streams, and about 1890 Mr. Hjatn put a
fine lot of these young fish into a stream flow-
ing at the bottom of Nellies Glen, about six
miles from Katoomba, on the Bridle Track to
Jenolan Caves. An occasional Trout is caught on
the Eiver Cox, but on account of the methods
adopted generally for catching fish on the Moun-
tain streams and rivers, not many of these fish
are hooked.
Angling is a fine art, which is only in its in-
fancy in the greater part of Australia.
Many people associate fishing, with a worm and
a hook, attached to a rod, which has merely to be
dropped into the water, where the fish are. If
no fish are caught in this manner, they put up
their rod and go home, and vote fishing dull
work.
These people have no knowledge of fly-fishing,
and numerous other methods adopted by expert
anglers to tempt fish, when they won’t take the
ordinary ground bait. Neither have they any
idea of the skill and judgement required to land a
big fish, when using the finest of tackle, when
the least mistake made in playing the fish would
snap the leader. Every old fly-fisher has some
fancy fly or other artificial bait, with which he
has caught fish, when all other means have failed,
and the number of artificial flies, and other
devices that are made for catching fish, is be-


wildering to the tyro.
These artificial baits when used in the proper
method, and at the right season, are most deadly.
The usual method of catching fish on the
Mountain streams, is by ground fishing. The rod
is often cut from the riverside, to which an
ordinary line, hook and float is attached, very
often a piece of string, and a cork are used, and
I have often seen fish landed with a bent pin.
A simple and lazy means of catching fish is to
fasten the line to a sapling, growing on the
banks of the river, and by tying a small bell
or tin to the bough, warning is giving when a
fish is caught. By fishing in this manner, the
angler can lay back and read, or, otherwise, amuse
himself, and when he hears the bell ring has merely
to go and haul in the fish. There is no sport in
this style of fishing, but if they can be caught in
this manner, why go to any unnecessary exertion ?
There are times, however, when the fish are not
to be caught like this, neither will they take
ground bait, and this is the time when artificial
flies and other things might be used with success.
What is attributed to good luck on the part
of those anglers who make big catches of fish
with the rod and line—is generally superior skill
on the part of the successful angler. To be a
good angler, a person requires to have a knowi
ledge of the habits of the different varieties of


fish he wishes to catch, so that he may be able
to select the most likely parts of the river to fish
in.
The fish that are to be obtained along the
entire length of the River Cox, and its numerous
tributaries are —Perch, Black Pish, Black Bream,
P'resh Water Herrings and Eels. I have proved
that Presh Water Herrings, which are a small
fish, and very plentiful, will take a fine hook
baited with common flies, and I have caught
Perch with “ Spoon bait,” & the “ Devon ” 2| inches.
Grasshopper, grubs, crickets and worms are generally
used for Black Pish and Black Bream. Perch weigh up
to 7 and 8 pounds, and are usually caught by
“ dabbling ” for them, with frogs for a bait at
night. The darker the night the better. A long
pliable rod is required for “ dabbling,” and a good
supply of frogs should be obtained before dark;
these may be caught by turning over the stones
and boulders along the riverside. A waterhole
ahould be selected, which is free from snags and
other obstructions. After dark the angler takes
his stand in such a position that he can com-
mand a wide sweep of the water, with his rod;
and having baited his hook with a frog he throws
out his line, and by a series of jerks imitates
the action of a frog jumping on the water. The
Perch if they are in the humour will rise very


fiercely at the bait, and some heavy catches are
often made.
Eels are usually caught by setting night lines.
Those who fish for Black Bream and Black Fish
after dark, light a fire on the river bank, which
they consider attracts the fish.
I have mentioned the method of fishing
adopted by the people living in the vicinity of
the rivers on the Mountains; but I feel confi-
dent that any skilled angler will find that the
baits used in other rivers and countries, may
be employed with equal success on Cox’s River
and its tributaries.
Small Black Fish and Eels re to be found
in the Subterranean River, which flows through
the Jenolan Caves. These fish, I conclude, have
access to the light as they have not lost the use
of their eyes, which is the case with the eyeless
fish of the Kentucky Caves of America, which are
confined to total darkness.
The fishing season in Australia is during those
months, that are spelt with the letter R in them.
The Neapean River—which as I previously stated
is the same river as the Cox—is a favourite fish-
ing place for Sydney anglers. At Penrith, on the
Western Line, good accommodation can be obtained
at Rowes boatshed. The baits principally used on
this part of the river are —for Perch, the Spoon-
bait, the Devon and all spinning baits have been


found successful. Black Bream and Black Pish
are usually caught by bottom fishing, with worms
&c , for bait.
The principal fishing places on the Mountains
are at the Kedumla Creek, which is reached from
Wentworth Fails, and is mentioned under the head-
ing: “Prom Wentworeh Palls to Cox’s River.”
There are plenty of Black Pish, Black Bream, and
Herrings to be caught along this creek at it’s
junction with the Cox, and big Perch are to be got
about the junction of these two streams. Gfood
fishing is to be obtained from this point down
the Cox to its junction with the Wollondilly
River, and accomodation can be obtained at
several farms en route.
Another fishing place is about that portion of
the River Cox, which is crossed by the bridle
track from Katoomba to the Jenolan Caves,
distant 12 miles from the former place. The
track follows a short distance alongside the
stream into which Trout were put some years
ago. Messrs, Peck man Brothers, the livery stable
proprietors, of Katoomba can give every informa-
tion about this part, as they have a selection
near this Trout stream.
The other fishing place is the Wollondilly
River, at Burragorang. This is a locality I rec-
ommend to anglers, as it is within easy distance of
Sydney, being 19 miles from Camden and 21 miles
110
fishing.


from Picton. These two places are railway
stations on the Southern Line, and the ordinary-
fare to Camden is Bs. 3d. first-class return. This
route is mentioned under the heading—“ From
Picton and Camden to Burragorang.” Visitors can
get acoramodation close to the Wollondilly River,
at the rate of 4s. per diem. Q-ood Black Bream,
Black Fish and Perch fishing can be got about
this part.
For full information concerning the many other
fishing places in New South Wales, 1 refer anglers
to Messrs. Eastway Bros., of George-street, Sydney.
This well-known firm, keep the most complete
stock of fishing tackle, and artificial flies and
baits, to be found anywhere in Australia. They
are well posted up in all matters relative to fish-
ing and angling, and issue a small weekly paper
called “ The Catfish Budget,’’ a periodical entirely
devoted to fishing.
I think the Acclimatisation Society should
stock the Mountain streams with Trout, because
small creeks, that are nearly always running,
are well suited for these fish —where they
would not be molested by the natiye fish of the
larger streams.
As the fish grew they would gradually find their
way down stream into the Cox, where they would
then be of sufficient size to take care of them,
selves.


I am told that in Victorian waters, the Trout
destroy the native fish; this may be the case when
the Trout attain a large size; but when small
quantities of young Trout are turned into rivers
containing native fish, I feel confident they are
preyed upon by the other fish.
There are no laws relating to fishing, that I
am aware of on the Mountain streams ; neither
is there any close season, like there is in the
other colonies. Netting is done on the remote
parts of the Cox, and night lines are set. Al-
though there is good fishing at present about
the Cox and its tributaries, unless the rules and
regulations in regard to fishing, that are observed
in the other colonies, are enforced here also,
anglers with the rod and line cannot hope to
obtain much sport in a few years hence.


Walking Sticks, Woods, &c.
‘HE majority of the "Walking Sticks that are in
use in Australia are imported ones, al-
though there is a choice variety of woods
growing on the Mountaics of A ustralia, from which
sticks may be cut, equal to any of those, that
come from other countries. Cutting walking
sticks is a hobby with many men, and I know
of no more interesting souvenier of a trip into
the bush, than a good stick, which was cut in
some remote part, Eor cutting sticks a small
saw is best, as it does not split the wood,
like chopping with a tomahawk does ; a good sharp
pocket knife is also required for trimming the
stick after it has been cut.
There are miles of virgin bush where walking
sticks can be cut, without destroying any of the
reserves, and a pleasant day may often be spent,
hunting for sticks in those parts. One of the
best places I know of, within talking distance
of Katoornba, is below the cliffs under the Narrow
Neck of Land. The timber about this part attains
gigantic proportions, and there is a great variety
of shrubs and saplings, with a profusion of vines,
hanging in festoons from tree to tree. These vines


are plaited, twisted and knotted into every con-
ceivable form, and wind around the saplings and
trees, embedding themselves into the wood as it
grows —sometimes it is a delicate tendril encircl-
ing some young sapling, at another time a vine
of immense thickness will be seen coiled like a
huge Python around some giant of the forest.
Occasionally two varieties of vines are twisted
around one piece of wood in alternate layers, or
crossing each other in opposite directions. Re-
markable growths of wood are met with, and a
freak of nature often seen about this locality,
is the branch of a tree bending over and grow-
ing into itself again, and thus forming an irregular
circle. About the more sheltered parts—where the
rays of the sun seldom penetrate, and the trees are
covered with moss and lichens—beautiful white
orchids grow on the branches of the trees. The
lover of nature will be interested with the natural
pictures, which often will be seen on the bark
of the Coach Wood Tree. In these pictures are
Jakes, trees and mountains, formed by variously
tinted lichens and encrustations, growing on the
bark. The young Coach Wood saplings make good
tough sticks, which take a fine polish when dry.
Sassafrass is a straight growing wood, but does
not polish well.
Myrtles, Maples and Hickory are plentiful
from which good sticks are to be cut; besides


a number of other shrubs, which have no com-
mon name beyond their true botanical one. Green
Wattle saplings polish up a rich olive colour, but
the wood is brittle. T have often heard the
expression “as straight as a gum sapling,” but
have seldom seen one straight enough for a
walking stick.
The heart of a thin Fern Tree makes a very
handsome stick, but it is difficult to find one of
the required size. The Fern Tree wood itself is
well adapted for ornamental purposes, but on
account of it being composed of a soft pith in-
terlaced with a hard ebony-like wood, it is diffi-
cult to work. I believe there is a great industry
to be opened up in this wood.
Sometimes, when a Fern Tree is lying on the
ground in the process of decay, the pithy portion
of the wood will be found to have entirely
rotted away, leaving a skelton-like cylinder formed
of the harder portion of the wood. This ebony-
like cylinder is pierced with holes, where the
stems of the fern originally grew, and forms a
very interesting curio.
Some good sticks are to be obtained from
among the .Waratahs growing on the Table
land.
I saw a fine stick which was cut by a keen
old Sydney sportsman, when on a walking trip
over Mt. Solitary. It was a young Banksia,


nicely tapered and possessing a good handle. The
only one of the sort I ever saw; the Banksia
being a wood seldom to be found growing straight.
I have occassionaly cut good straight sticks
from Ti-tree —which is a tough wood. Care should
be taken when cutting sticks not to bruise the
bark, as the beauty of a stick depends much upon
the colour and texture of the bark. Thorns and
knots should be carefully cut and trimmed.
I have found the best method of drying sticks,
is to hang them up in the position in which they
originally grew, and in a place where there is a
current of air continually passing through. When
dry the handles may be shaped up by the aid
of a wood rasp, and ultimately lightly sand-papered
and polished.
THE END.
Printed by I*. OFFER,
41 Queen Victoria Markets, Sydney.


CURTIS’S I HARVEY’S
AMBERITE
The Premier Smokeless
Powder,
Contains no Nitro-Glycerine.
Anyone can load.
Rifle Amberite
For RIFLES.
Sold by all Gunsmiths
and Dealers in Ammunition.


F. JOYCE&Co. Ltd.
LONDON.
Manufacturers of all kinds of
Ammunition and Accessories.
Ask for JOYCE’S ROYALTY
CARTRIDGES
A SPECIAL HIGH CLASS LINE.
Any Importer will procure them for you.
Wholesale Agent:
EDWARQ PARRY,
71 CLARENCE STREET,
SYDNEY.






THORPES
DOG BISCUITS,
Cheapest & Best.
Telephone 124,
Factory: George St. Parramatta.
MEAT
SHEAS
Tor all
KINDS
BONES.
SOBS.
We all like Thorpe’s Biscuits, we do !”
SOLD BY ALL THE PRINCIPAL
STOREKEEPERS
In Bags 14, 28, 56 & 112 lbs.


COWLES & DUNN,
72 King St., Sydney,
PRACTICAL
Gunsmiths and Importers.
Good, Solid, Reliable Guns.
ENGLISH MAKE
Every gun the best of its hind, and the price consistent with sound
construction and good workmanship. Double B.L. Guns, £3 10s ; with
bar lochs, £!/.. Our IDEAL gun, with Greener’s cross bolt, treble
wedge-fast grip, latest model, has no equal for price and quality, No. 1,
£6; No. 2, £6; No. 3, £7. Carriage paid to any Railway Station in
N.S.W. We carry the largest stock of Superior Firearms in the Colony
and offer them at prices that cannot be beaten. Get our Illustrated I
Catalogue free and prove it. Cartridges, 12 gauge, Eley’s loading, 616 /
per 100. All other ammunition equally cheap.
Shooting Coats. (Nine Pockets in each.)
Game Bags, Gun Cases, and
Target Shooters’ Requisites.
Ventometers, Verniers Slings,
Pencils, Orthoptics, &c., &c.
Send for our New Catalogue.
Telephone 1751 U Address 72 king ST., SYDNEY.
