

The Proposed Boycott of Japanese Goods
My subject is a very serious one —the proposed boycott of Japanese goods,
intended to bring pressure to bear upon Japan to force her to abandon her enterprise
in Northern China. There can only be one end to that course, if we elect to start
upon it, and that is war! If President Roosevelt is rightly interpreted as having said
that the United States will co-operate in a plan to help the forces of the Kuomin-
tang, or Nationalist Party in China and their Communist allies, to defeat Japan and
drive her out of Manchoukuo and Manchuria back into Japan, then he is pledging the
United States to take part in a war. If Britain joins in the plan she must be prepared
for war, and since Australia is linked with Britain, and cannot stand alone, she, too,
will have to get ready to enter the lists.
How many of you are ready to face these grim possibilities, and how many of
those who write the leading articles in the Press and become eloquent at meetings, or
over the radio, are ready themselves to take part in another war?
It is easy to say that we can cut off war supplies, but to do so would make
war inevitable. Secret diplomacy was blamed for the last war, and it was complained
that the people were not given an opportunity to speak before the statesmen plunged
the nations into conflict; but you will notice that this time the clamour is coming
from popular newspapers and public meetings, and the object of the war-mongers is
to drive the statesmen into war by inciting the public feelings.
But what does the public know about Japan or China and their economic and
political situations, or about the Allies with which we are to enter this terrible enter-
prise? Have those who are moving and passing war-like resolutions ever read a book
about China or Japan—do they know anything about the treaties which Japan is
charged with violating or the circumstances in which they were made?
I beg you before you join your voices to those who are urging Britain into
war, to try and get at the facts, and consider them in the light of reason. It is not
a question, now, of Australia being dragged into one of Britain’s wars; it is much
more a danger of the Government of Australia being forced, by public clamour,
into action against Japan, which will bring wars to our shores and compel Britain
to come to our assistance. Let me make this clear: What is proposed is an economic
boycott, but there is another and more serious word for it —it is blockade.
It is suggested that, with the co-operation of the United States, Britain, as the
chief sea power, shall cut off war supplies from Japan, and enable China to get them.
The result, so we are told, will be to enable China to defeat Japan and drive her out
of the Northern provinces she has invaded. Cut off supplies of oil, it is said, and
Japan will have to capitulate to China. But do those who talk that way know where
Japan’s oil comes from?
I do not, of course, know all her sources of supplies, but I know a great deal
of it comes from the island of Saghalien, which is a Russian possession close to Japan,
and whose oil wells are worked by Japan as a concession, and at this moment those
wells are supplying the Japanese fleet. To stop supplies from this source, the Red
Army would have to come into action, and, therefore, the armies of the Powers sup


porting the boycott would have to support the Red Army. Are those Labor unions,
Trades Hall councils and left wing newspapers ready to organise an expeditionary
force from Australia to support the others? And will the Communists go to the war
themselves with the leader writers? And, again, would they support conscription
in Australia and Great Britain if the volunteer forces are insufficient?
"Well,” say those who are calling for the boycott, "let us in Australia cut off
supplies of iron.” But does Japan really rely on Australian iron? If she does, and if
the lack of it were to endanger her safety in Northern China, she would certainly
come and get it —and the horrors of war would be extended to Australia. Britain and
the United States would then have to come to our rescue.
But it seems most unlikely that the loss of Australian iron would make any
difference to the situation, except to embitter it and force Japan to make even more
determined efforts to gain control of supplies, independent of the boycotting nations.
I do not propose to give you a detailed survey of Japan’s sources of war sup-
plies, though it would be easy enough to expose the ignorance and bias of those who
are urging the nations to war, by showing that so long as Japan is entrenched in
Northern China, only military and naval action by Powers as well equipped with
men and materials as herself could venture to dislodge her. Also, it is clear that
Britain and the United States would have to control the commerce of the nations
outside the group concerned in the blockade and be ready for a general war with
them —thus bringing into play all the piled-up armaments, including the air fleets
and explosive bombs, which are capable of making so much havoc.
Again, take President Roosevelt’s speech. If it means that he is offering the
support of the United States in a plan to defeat Japan in this present conflict, then it
means that he is offering the "last man and the last dollar”; but is he speaking for his
people, or merely voicing the views of a noisy minority with investments in China,
who can, for pay, find newspaper writers and so-called Labor leaders to start an
agitation and force politicians to take action against their better judgment?
President Wilson acted for such a minority—with interest in munitions —but
was repudiated by an overwhelming majority when they realised that war came in
with flag-waving and shouting hurrah, but brings death and suffering and leaves
mourning and poverty behind it.
But I hear someone saying: "We only propose to boycott Japanese goods and
cut down her trade.” But there would be no object in doing that if it were not to
make Japan suffer —and suffer so acutely that she would prefer to be defeated rather
than continue.
And what sort of suffering does a blockade inflict? You all ought to know
from our experience in the last war —it is the suffering of hunger; it is a means of
driving the civilian to revolt against the Government by depriving his children of
food. A blockade is primarily a war on women and children to break the morale of
the troops and destroy the authority of the Government. Let us be clear about what
this boycott business really is.
First. —It is proposed to cut off Japan’s war supplies so that the Chinese armies
may defeat her.


■■■ 111 l 11l I 'lll ■ II ■ ll■l■ll ■ ■ -
Second. —It is proposed to cut off her trade, and thus deprive her people of
their means of livelihood, condemning them to such cold and hunger that they will
compel their Government, by revolt, to withdraw their forces from the field.
Now, why should we do this thing—providing always that we are able to ac-
complish it —immense and terrible as the undertaking is?
I will summarise the arguments as they have appeared in the Press and been
repeated on platforms and over the wireless.
First. —To punish Japan for resorting to war as a policy of expansion.
Second. —To defeat Japan because she is a potential danger to Australia.
Third. —To punish Japan for using aerial bombardment against women and
children, suggesting that if that had not been done there would be no reason to enter
the conflict at all.
Now as to Point 1. —Nations do not stand pat in the squares allotted them by
Nature, looking on the other squares as a sort of Tom Tiddler’s ground into which
they ought not to cross. That is an ignorant and childish conception. The world’s
people are in a state of continual movement —not static. Has not our own race spread
from the British Isles over the whole world? The British Empire was not founded in
the distant past, but has been acquired mostly in the last 150 years, and much of it in
the lifetime of the people who now govern it. It did not grow; it was not given us; it
was built up on invasion and conquest. The same is true of all European Powers
which have extra European possessions.
The causes which led to the expansion of Britain, of France, of Russia, or any
of the others, still operate in the world, namely, that populations outgrow their
territories, or new wants arise which require new material to satisfy them. Japan’s
68,000,000 men and women and children are fed and clothed by supplies from lands
beyond her own borders, particularly from Russia and China. Japan has organised
and ordered Northern China, as Britain organised India and Africa, because it was
neither organised nor ordered by those who lived in it, and has done it so well that,
within 30 years, more than 30,000,000 Chinese have left Southern China and made
their homes under Japanese rule.
Do you feel disposed to undo all the construction of the past 30 years, and
extend over Northern China the same state of civil war from which the Chinese them-
selves have fled?
Now for Point 2. —Do you want to help China to defeat Japan because she
may endanger Australia? The fact is that, though we are newcomers to this part of
the world, Japan has not displayed an aggressive spirit, or objected to our pre-empting
a whole continent for a handful of Europeans. Japan accepted Australia’s exclusion
policy, despite the insulting words in which it was couched. Though in 1900 Australia
lumped Japanese with kanakas, negroes and Pacific Islanders in a contemptuous
fashion, Japan entered into an alliance with Great Britain in 1902.


This pledged Japan to help Britain against Russia, in the event of the latter
attacking India, but it also recognised Japan’s special interest in China, and tacitly,
but actually, our White Australia policy. This alliance was renewed in 1905, and
again in 1911. In 1914 Japan showed her good faith by convoying Australian troops
to Europe in the Great War. During the war Great Britain and her allies not only
agreed to Japan further consolidating her interests in China, but encouraged her
to undertake the supply of all Oriental markets, to save allied shipping. In that
period Japan’s labour was diverted from agriculture to secondary industry to an
enormous extent, and Japan accepted foreign capital to set up machinery, thus making
herself far more dependent on foreign markets than she had ever been.
When the war was over, two important changes occurred. One was that the
Allies wanted to come back into the market, particularly North and South America,
and the other was that India, developing economic nationalism, began to exclude
Japanese products. The Chinese market then became still more vital to Japan.
But the Russian Revolution had by this time removed the Russian menace,
and Britain was not so anxious for Japanese support. The Anglo-Japanese Alliance
was not renewed. Moreover, the Chinese Nationalist Party at Nanking, which had
not exercised any authority over Northern China, had entered into negotiation with
Soviet Russia. The present leader, Chiang Kai-Shek, is son-in-law to Sun Yat Sen, who
visited Moscow and arranged for Soviet money, guns and propaganda to organise
Communism in China to overthrow, not only Japan, but even more, Great Britain.
During the disorders which this policy brought about, Japanese troops loyally co-
operated with the British to safeguard European lives in China. A split occurred
between the Nationalist forces and the Communists, but the propaganda went on,
and a strong boycott of Japanese goods, as well as an aggressive policy towards Japan,
was forced on Chiang Kai-Shek.
Now the Communist forces have united with those of the Nationalists, and
claim authority over North China, which means that the present campaign is designed
to destroy Japanese interests there completely and drive her back into Japan. If this
should happen, would it be not necessary for the 68,000,000 to find some other source
of supply? What moral support would there then be for Australia’s policy of exclu-
sion against Japanese economic penetration and settlement? Do you really think
that those Powers who are now suggesting that Britain and Australia should help
to defeat Japan in China would fire a shot on behalf of Britain or Australia?
Would it be reasonable to go to war to prevent war’s atrocities, particularly
when aeroplanes have been responsible for them? Everyone knows that the speed
of the aeroplanes and their altitude prevent discrimination in bombing. We know
that in the last war bombs fell on schools and hospitals as often as they fell on troops
and guns. We all know —and have always known —that the nations intended their
air arm to intimidate the civilians in the great cities, just as we all know that a
blockade is intended to bring pressure to bear on non-combatants. No war was ever
settled by the armies in the field only; it is always a matter of using terrorism against
the body of the nation engaged.
Peaceful policies and economic co-operation and not violent action can
bring about an ending of the atrocities of warfare.
MRS. ADELA PANKHURST WALSH.
October 10th, 1937.
The Lanclea Printery Ptt. Ltd., 433 Kent Si., Sydney
