

C-Ck/IGiOUS
~riT
SERMON
Rev. THOMAS BINNEY,
PREACHED ON BEHALF OF THE
FUNDS OF THE MELBOURNE HOSPITAL, &c.,
WESLEY CHURCH,
LONSDALE STREET.
Brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh.”—ift>»i.viii. 12.
MELBOURNE:
A. J. SMITH, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
30 SWANSTON STREET, NEXT BANK OF VICTORIA,
AND NEAR ST. PETER’S CHURCH, EASTERN HILL.
CASTLEMAINE : VALE. BALLARAT; A. TAYLOR.




SERMON
PREACHED BY THE
REV. THOMAS BINNEY,
IN AID OF THE
BENEVOLENT ASYLUM,
AND THE
BUILDING FUND OF THE LYING-IN HOSPITAL,
m WESLEY CHURCH,
LONSDALE STREET, MELBOURNE.
HHbonm:
A. J. SMITH, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
30 SWANSTON STREET, AND NEAR ST. PETER’S CHURCH, EASTERN HILL,




SEEMOH BY BEY. THOMAS BIYYEY.
“ Brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh.”—
Romans, viii. 12.
A geeat and peculiar importance attaches to great cities, where
men are congregated together in large masses, where there is a centre
of influence and a source of power, where, by a collision of minds
sparks are struck out which reveal the errors of the past and show a
path for the future. Great cities are the levers and the wheels by
which society is raised and propelled, and the apostles always directed
their attention first to the great cities and popular places. The
apostle Paul, I doubt not, had this feeling in his anxiety to see
Borne. He understood its importance, as the centre of the empire
and the world; and, amongst secondary influences, feelings and
thoughts arising out of this consideration, may have in some degree
modified the particular letter which he wrote to the church in that
city—an epistle which is more like a book than a letter—which is
the most regular, connected, and systematic of all the apostle’s writ-
ings ; in which he gradually lays the foundation, and erects the
superstructure by a large and comprehensive process of thought ;
beginning by showing from the moral condition of the world the
necessity for some Divine interference, and advancing to describe the
nature of the particular interference which Christianity reveals; ex-
hibiting first to the intellect the objective truth, and then coming
down to the practical inference, and pointing out what ought to be
its issues in Christian character. And so we have in that particular
portion the verse which I have now read : “ Brethren, we,” —we
Christians, we who profess to have received God’s truth—“ we are
debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh.” Whatever the flesh
may be to which the text refers, it is not explained, but it is some-
thing to which we stand so related that it is to have power over us :
we owe it nothing; we are not under any obligation to it, to regard
it or to obey it. But we are debtors to something else, by which
there ought to be wrought out in us a divine, godly, and holy life ;
directly antagonistic to the flesh, and manifesting, ; t}i,at we do not
obey it,
I wish to put this matter before you to-night, and to seek to leave
upon your minds, by God’s help and blessing, some deep moral im-


pression of what it becomes you men and women to be, who profess
and call yourselves Christians : “We are debtors, not to the flesh, to
live after the flesh,” And I shall first endeavor to show you what
the Scripture means by the flesh, and to point out on scriptural au-
thority, and describe its different sjflieres of operation ; and then, in
the next place, I will endeavor to point out how antagonistic to all
this is our Christian faith, and how in the very system of the truth
which we profess there are reasons why we should not obey nor be
subject to, but continually stand at enmity with, the flesh.
In explaining the term you will understand that it is very pecu-
liarly a scriptural term. I can conceive that some persons with a
taste over fastidious, and especially if their minds have not been
educated by the Scripture, and they are not acquainted with, and
familiar with its phraseology, may say that there is something in the
term to them offensive. But it is a scriptural term, and it is one
for which we cannot easily find a substitute, and one which in its
different forms of import and meaning, if I mistake not, will be
seen to have its roots deep in a correct idea of humanity.
The term flesh is sometimes employed in Scripture in a sense
which may be said to be indifferent; and sometimes in a good sense,
as indicating what is good —as when we read of the heart flesh.
But in general the term is used to express what is bad, and especially
in the phrase the flesh in the argument before us ; and in that par-
ticular form in which we are about to bring it before you, it stands
for the dislocation, disorder, and depravity of our injured and dislo-
cated nature. I suppose that the term flesh has come to be employed
to express, in relation to us, moral depravity and what is bad, from
the circumstance that we are moral intelligences, living in a body,
associated with an animal structure, of the derangement and evil of
which the flesh is the seat; and thus the term has come to be em-
ployed as representing the seat of moral disorder generally. But
there may be moral disorder—intellectual and spiritual disobedience
without that. You can conceive of simple spiritual natures
unconnected with the material structure; you can conceive of them
being disobedient, unholy, opposed to God, and violating law and
order ; and though, in a certain sense, according to our understanding
of the term, we might say that they were fleshly and in the flesh, yet
I apprehend that this particular term would not be found in any
language as meaning moral disorder, if it had not been used as asso-
ciated with animal nature. Now, coming from this idea, let me point
out to you how the Scripture seems to me to exhibit three different
spheres in which the depraved principle operates. The first is the
lower, indicated by the Scripture term “ fleshly luststhese are
the exorbitancies and disorders of the appetites. I sometimes think
that it is among the mysteries of the universe that a spiritual nature
as such having high capacities, glorious aspirations, panting after
God, capable of knowing,, and loving, and being like him in moral
and spiritual nature —should actually be incorporated and be identi-
fied with an animal structure and its affections—things which are in


common with the inhabitants of the stable and the sty. And yet it
is so, for in our nature there are these two extremes. There is our
lower nature, resting upon the earth, and associated with and like the
animals, with their appetites and affections ; and there is our higher
spiritual nature, capable of panting after God. And yet it is possible
for that nature, so constituted, so combined, to be perfectly holy and
godlike, for it was so in Adam before the fall, and in Christ after it.
The appetites and impulses of that nature, simply considered in
themselves, are not bad; it is their irregularity, and the disorder and
dislocation of our nature, consequent upon the fall, and the introduc-
tion of moral apostacy and sin, by which innocent desire has become
irregular lust ; and hence self-indulgence, and intoxication, and other
low forms of the appetite. This is the lower sphere, in which,
according to the Scripture, you are to see the operation of that
depraved element which is generally denominated “ the flesh.”
There is a second sphere, which is a step upwards; and which
brings us from the animal to the man. This is indicated by the term
“ fleshly wisdom ”; and the Apostle sets it before us thus, saying
with respect to himself: “In simplicity and godly sincerity; not
with fleshly wisdom ; but by the grace of God, we have had our con-
versation with the world.” Instead of looking simply at the inward
man with his separate bundle of appetites and passions, you are to
look upon him in society; you are to look upon man in his under-
standing, and all his various faculties by which he can take the raw
material of life and work it up into something desirable. And you
are to conceive of “fleshly wisdom” as the worship of mammon, and
devotion to its pursuit; and as manifested in two forms : —the bad,
in which the man is seen to be deceitful —to use guile, equivocation,
fraud—anything to answer his purpose and get on ; the other case,
better—in which the man will be honorable, truthful, have a clean
hand and a pure lip, and act upon and by those higher and better
principles which belong to a respectable social morality. But all this
may be utterly and totally divorced from religious faith ; merely as
a matter of calculation the one is better than the other; but we say
of both, that there is nothing Divine in either : the whole energy and
power of the individual is bent upon making the best of the present
life, with no regard to the interests of another; and the Apostle says
that this “ wordly wisdom ” is the “ fleshly wisdom,” in a higher
sphere of action than the first.
And the third and last sphere, in which as it seems to me, the
Scripture represents the flesh as operating, is a great advance upon
the second; even as the second was an advance upon the first. It
has reference to the higher faculties, the intellect and reason, the
imagination and religious capacity; and the Apostle calls it the
sphere of the fleshly mind; and he describes it by referring to certain
individuals, of whom he says, “ not holding the Head,” Christ, in
his work, authority, lordship, dominion —“ intruding into those
things which they have not seen, vainly puffed up by the fleshly
mind.” In this sphere is exhibited the lawlessness of the intellect,


and perversion of tlie truth; and associated with that the Apostle
puts the outcomings of the flesh in the Church, in the form of strifes
and divisions, in the want of unity and love. And in this higher
sphere of the mind it is represented how the flesh operates, leading to
an entire abandonment of the truth; to an utter blindness to the
meaning of the characters which God has written upon his works;
and the rejection and perversion of the written word ; and to every
kind of spiritual exorbitancy.
Such are the three spheres in which, as it seems to me, the Bible
represents the actings of the flesh; and, mark you, the first is sen-
sual, the second is earthly, and the third is devilish. Now you would
not, perhaps, expect me to put them in that order ; and yet, depend
upon it, that is the true scriptural and philosophical order, for you
remember that fleshly lusts and fleshly wisdom, the manifestation of
depravity in these two lower spheres, are just the very things which
cannot be manifested by the devil. It requires not merely a spiritual
nature for this, but it requires that spiritual nature to be associated
with a material structure, and to live in a material world. But simple
spiritual natures can exhibit a manifest disloyalty of intellect, malice,
hatred, and those various passions which are the lusts of the mind as
opposite from those of the flesh ; and these are the influences which
are sometimes seen in the church, by which Christian professors are
distinguished from the people of the world, just reminding us of the
saying of the Apostle, that they have practically “denied the faith”
and are “ worse than an infidel.”
I have thus very briefly (with greater brevity than I should have
preferred under other circumstances) laid the matter before you; but
I must content myself, and I hope you will be satisfied, with mere
hints —with seeds of thought, if I am so happy as to cast any such
upon your minds.
Having, then, briefly put before you the three different spheres in
which the flesh acts, let me now, with equal brevity, show you how
our most holy faith stands in every respect antagonistic to this prin-
ciple, and to all its operations in its different spheres; how, if we
understand aright, there is that in it which perpetually presents to
us reasons why we should not obey the flesh or live under its influ-
ence, but stand directly and constantly in opposition to it.
And, in the first place, we will begin where we left off, at the
height to which we had got in the upper sphere. I refer to that
form of the flesh which is manifested in licentious, lawless specula-
tion —thinking, and dreaming, and philosophising as if God had
never spoken ; as if there had never been such a thing as a prophet
in the world; as if we had not in our churches, in the place of
authority, reverenced and looked up to, as an oracle, the Word of
God. When men are cast loose from the divine authority of that
written revelation —when, in their pretensions to philosophy, they go
looking, and wandering, and gazing about, and talking about the
open secret of the universe, and the mystery of life, and want to
understand it; and sometimes you will see these philosophers, as if


they were very devout, looking out into the universe, and saying,
“ Everlasting lights, what are ye !—Wonderful, resplendent star, art
thou the clothing of a God I—ls this a temple !—ls there a Holy of
Holies of the universe !—Am I ever to enter there !—Ought I to
worship!-—What am I? —Whence! —Whither! —Who shall tell!”
And all the time Christianity is standing at his side, and saying, “ I
can tell; I come down from Heaven to tell; I come as the embodied
wisdom of God ; I come and say, listen to me, and instead of gazing
about and asking questions to which echo can answer nothing but
echo—instead of saying, ‘ Who shall ascend into Heaven to bring
truth down from above, and who shall descend into the deep to bring
truth up from the dead!’—it is near thee, at thy side, only come,
believe, that thou mayest understand. Listen to me, words which
are not to be questioned but to be received, and thou shall find that
there is no mystery on which I cannot cast some light; and I can
teach thee all things about thyself, and about nature, and about God,
and thy nature, and thy wants, and of the provision for them all ;
only come and receive my words—not as the words of men, nor as the
echo of the stars, but as the word of God.” I say, in the first place,
then, that Christianity is antagonistic to the flesh, because it is dog-
matic, and addresses its revelation with dogmatic authority, and we
shall never feel rest until we understand it so ; and, without enlarg-
ing upon this,
I observe, in the second place, that, further, Christianity is anta-
gonistic to the flesh by the truth which it reveals, as well as by the
particular mode (its dogmatic authority) with which it reveals it. I
refer here to what, in my view, emphatically constitutes the Gospel
—which makes Christianity what it is—the revelation of redemption
and a Redeemer. It is not meddling with symptoms only, with out-
ward symptoms of men’s moral and spiritual disease, attempting to
depress them mechanically, but it goes direct to the centre and source
of the disorder. It contemplates man, in his spiritual nature, as
guilty, sinful, estranged from God, needing to be brought to him,
and reconciled and made like him ; and when it has made man right
with God spiritually, with respect to his inmost nature, the issues
and the manifestations of that come out in his life and conversation,
showing that it is not a mere mechanical operation to depress the
manifestations of the flesh.
I sometimes put the matter to myself by an illustration, and let
me say that illustrations—a thorough downright illustration may be
logic, argument, a figure of speech, may be a prettiness which means
nothing ; but if we can get hold of an illustration which will embody
the thought, it may make the imagination the handmaid of our
reason. I put before me, as it were, a pyramid composed of three
stories, which may answer, in some degree, to the three spheres of
action to which I have already referred. There is the undermost
story of physical law ; and the second, of social; and the third, of
spiritual. In the sphere of physical law, violation of that 'will
destroy and ruin the body ; in the sphere of social and moral law,


violations of that will destroy and ruin the character ; in the higher
sphere of spiritual law, violations of that will destroy and ruin the
soul; and things in every one of these are at such a pass, that, if the
law takes its course, nothing can prevent destruction. Physical law
may be so far violated that nothing but a miracle can save life ; the
social law may be so violated that nothing can save life but the
taking of life; and the spiritual law may be so violated as to need
the interposition of a Supreme Being to put things right with God :
that is my understanding of the Gospel that the state of
things between God and man needed this, and that this has been done
in Christ, and as the first thing which the Gospel comes to do.
Now, observe with respect to these three different spheres, and,
speaking of moral action, the higher includes the lower ; but the
lower does not include that, with the exception by way of inference,
if there is a break in the second sphere, it cracks the pyramid right
up to the top ; but the upper of these two spheres does not come
downwards, it only remains where it is ; and, therefore, we see that
while crimes and vices are not sins, innocence and virtue are not
holiness. What we want, then, is, to have the higher spheres put
to right; then, that higher sphere comes downward, and permeates
the others. So it is beautifully expressed by the Apostle : —“ The
grace of God which bringeth salvation,” teacheth that denying un-
godliness and worldly lusts, we have spiritually, according to the
first sphere; righteously, according to the second; and godly, ac-
cording to the third.
In the third place, Christianity is antagonistic to the flesh, as a
system of influence intended to nourish and to promote the reception
of truth, by the reason, and the acceptance of Christ by our spiritual
and religious capacities.
Belief, reconciliation, pardon, are the mere beginning of things —
the laying of the foundation ; but the work of the development of a
godlike and divine life is to be carried on ; and the elements of the
flesh, on making their appearance, are to be kept in check, mortified,
and cast out.
Now if I had time and strength I would dilate on Christianity as
a system of influence, in different aspects—the childhood of a Chris-
tian : —lf the man always continues at the alphabet of divine know-
ledge—among the mere elements —why, the Apostle says that he is
the flesh still ; and when he has got out of these things, it is neces-
sary that there is a growing—a progressive enlargement in knowledge,
and in the faith 1 What an influence, what a system of influence for
this there is in the Book : a Book which, with all its simplicity, and
aptitude to suit a child, can task the faculties of the man. Reading
the Bible, at least to me, is no holiday employment; it is not a thing
with which you can wile away an hour • it calls forth all your mental
energy ; it requires devotedness, frequent protracted meditation; and
if Christians were thoroughly the readers of their owm book, made it
a study, taught it as the Word of God honestly and appropriately,
there would be ■wrought upon their whole. inward life a spirit and


power of which many Christians have no conception. And in asso-
ciation with that there is to be teaching, the exposition of the word,
preaching the ordinance of God, which, if it was done as we ought to
do it, as we ought to set about a Divine thing, in God’s name, in
God’s house, for God’s glory, to enlarge the knowledge of the hearers,
and to promote their spiritual growth—what sermons we might
preach ! And what hearers we might have ! If we gave to it all
our faculty, all our energy, studied how to make those wonderful
things simple, to lead our hearers to become students of the Bible;
what an influence there would be constantly operating to save the
Church from a spiritual childhood ! But we are poor creatures, the
best of us. I often pity the hearers to think that they have to listen
to me, and I often wish that I may be enabled to say a word which
which will lead them to go away from me altogether.
Another aspect: —What a mighty power is there in the influence
of worship, if we use it rightly; the individual soul coming into con-
tact with the Infinite and Eternal One : and how, if it be realised, it
operates upon our whole nature ; quenching the flames, and restrain-
ing the impulses of worldly affections !
And then social worship. The multitude meet together, sing a
psalm, hold a united supplication, and prayer—the echo of this in
every individual soul: the Christian Communion, breaking the same
bread, partaking the same cup ; all these blessed and holy influences
are connected with the worship and the Church. Oh! how it should
make us devoted and divine men; how it should lift us from the
sphere of the earth to the highest heavens; and how it should make
us love one another; and how far from Christian people who have
the symbol, Sabbath by Sabbath, of their oneness in their Commu-
nion—how far from us all should be differences, and anger, and strife,
and contention, and evil speaking, which are all, not only of the
earth, earthly, but of the flesh, fleshly. What an influence, I say,
there is in that! But there is higher still, the great truth on which
I rest, and do most thoroughly hold as a blessed joy—the actual in-
fluence of God’s spirit on men’s minds ! Not an outward word, but
a living voice; thought to thought —person to person—spirit to
spirit:—God touching man in his inmost character and affections !
So that you find in the text how the Apostle speaks with respect to
this : —-“Walking in the spirit, having the spirit, not fulfilling the
lusts of the flesh,” and how “ what the law could not do, in that it
was weak through the flesh; God sending his own son, in the like-
ness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit.” And all this spiritual influence coming
to us through the Church, there should be manifested righteousness,
and holiness —holiness of life and character, despising and trampling
on the flesh.
I observe, in the next place, that the flesh ought to be mastered
in us all, and will be, one day, if we are truly what we profess to be.
Christianity is adapted to meet and master it, by the Christian’s pro-


fessed hope of a future life, and his professed attitude of preparation
for it. And, here, I may just put before you, what I doubt not you
all perceive, that the argument of this discourse, in its appeal to
Christians —that is, to those who profess and call themselves such
—is altogether independent of the truth of Christianity. I could
have conceived that some of your young philosophers might have got
up at the end of the first part of the discourse, and said, “ I demur
to the whole thing ; I do not think that that which you denominate
the flesh is so bad ; I do not think that the actings of it, to which
you refer, are so wicked; I should justify the thing, according to my
idea of the nature of man, and his position in the universe.” Well,
I should have said to him, “My good sir, just now, that is not the
question ; you may think what you please ; and, even for the sake of
argument, I admit that you may be right in what you think ; but
that is not the question ; another time I will go into that question
with you ; but, to-night, the question is this : not whether the book
be true or not —from heaven or from earth, but what they ought to
be who have it in their hands, who profess to believe it, and regard
it as Divine ; whether they are right in their belief, is not the ques-
tion 3 it is what these people profess to believe ; it is because of that
that they ought to be, and to do, so and so. So it is here, in this
particular branch of the argument, that I can leave in abeyance
whether there be a future world or not, or whether it will turn out
as the Christian expects. But, I say this, because you expect it —
because you believe it—because you have such and such ideas about
it ; therefore, your professed belief of this ought to have a power in
it, practically operating against the flesh. You expect a future state,
according to Christianity, which first gives us the idea of the pos-
sible existence of the soul in a state of consciousness absent from the
body, and present with the Lord.” But, I say, that the great
doctrine distinctive of Christianity, is not the mere philosophical
doctrine of the immortality of the soul ; but it is the divine doc-
trine of the immortality of humanity—the resurrection of our whole
nature —to be brought to a likeness to the most glorious being God
ever made —the glorified humanity of His Son.
You may expect this in a world in which in either case there will
be no materialism ; for, though in the ultimate state there will be a
body, it is a spiritual body ; there can be no fleshly lusts —there can
be no worldly wisdom—all will be spiritual; and in the interior of
the Temple of Truth, before the throne of God—in his light-seeing
light, there will be no possibility of the lawlessness of speculation ;
all will be subjected to him. And you will find that with respect
to intellect, as with the will, the greatest liberty is to be bound
to God.
Then, what sort of persons ought we to be ? How little should
you think of outward possessions ? How you should guard against
the works of the flesh. The things that are now used for man shall
pass away; and you shall have to do with nothing but that for
which man was made—God, in His spirituality and His love. We


do not half believe ourselves ! Lord, increase our faith ! Our faith
in our own creed, and in our own book !
The last thing which I mention is, that Christianity should be felt
to be antagonistic to the flesh when Christians contemplate what they
are, what they profess to be, and the work they have to do in the
world. Now for all this I take you to the Book: —“Ye are the light
of the world “Ye are the salt of the earth that light is so to
shine before men, that they, seeing your good works, shall glorify
God. You are living in darkness —you are to shine in that dark-
ness like a star, for ye are light in the Lord. Some of the rays of
intelligence and sanctity in Him fall upon you, and are to be reflected
from you and irradiate the darkness in which you live. Ye are a
leaven ; as salt you are to preserve the world from putrefaction. But
if the light that be in you be darkness—if you, with your professed
Christianity, are living under the influence of the flesh, you are in
darkness; and if the Light which is in you be darkness, how great is
that darkness ! “Ye are the salt of the earth ; but if the salt have
lost its savour wherewith shall the earth be salted.” In the work
which you have to do—as “light,” “leaven,” and “salt” —all that
should guard you against giving way to the influence of the flesh.
But there is another figure : —“ Ye are my witnesses, saith God.”
Christian men are to live in society as witnesses for God, giving, by
their life and deportment —without speech, it may be ; not verbally,
but by the eloquence of goodness and sanctity—giving a testimony
for God, witnessing for Him ; the church individually, and as a
whole, so living, and acting, and loving, and worshipping as to be a
constant testimony for God —a testimony of the reality of a spiritual
and inward life; that it shall be seen manifested. But if the church
be fleshly, if the church be low in temperature, weak in faith, and
worldly in habit, how can it give anything but a disjointed testimony
for God ? It will be as if the glory of God was quenched—as if the
pillar of fire was darkened 1 If the church be worldly, it will be like
the vision of the Prophet, when he beheld the ancient men and the
elders of the people with their backs to the temple and their faces to
the sun, worshipping him and the very “ Holy of Holies,” all covered
over with four-footed beasts and creeping things—a chamber of
images. And, brethren, if the church be not spiritual and holy, it is
like the king bringing out the sacred vessels and all the holy things
to make merry with his princes in a worldly and drunken debauch.
And, again, the church is to convert the world—is to pray for the
world —but it will have no power if it be earthly, if it is under the in-
fluence of the flesh, in any form. Why ! what is meant by convert-
ing the world 1 Why, to turn it round, to bring it away from itself,
and from its sins, and to make it like your professedly godlike men.
But if you are earthly, worldly-minded—if you have thus, to all the
other evils incident to your nature added that of hypocrisy, and if you
are to convert the world like yourselves, you will only make it doubly
the child of hell that it was before.
So important is it, brethren, to consider what we are ourselves, if


we are to do the work which God says he has given to his church to
do ; for finally let ns remember that the Spirit of God, the great
agent in all success, without whom nothing is wise, nothing holy,
nothing successful, he must take hold of instruments to do his work
in harmony with himself; and the church and individual Christians
must see well to it, that if they are to do anything to a holy and
divine thing, and to be used as instruments in the hand of the Divine
Spirit, they must be themselves divine men that the Spirit may not
only fill them with his influence, but follow their exertions with his
blessing.
Let us remember, then, that a holy work can only be done by a
holy church and a holy man, and apply the whole subject in all its
various branches and aspects to our spiritual and religious life—that
we are debtors, professing and expecting what we do, we are debtors,
because of that, “ not to the flesh to live after the flesh,” but under
solemn and constant obligation to God to grow up in Christ in all
things ; that, by his grace helping us, we may be in all things ac-
cepted in him, and our lives be useful to society.
I had intended to add some general lessons to the whole, but I
believe I must leave you to draw those inferences for yourselves. I
can only add that, though this discourse has been more particularly
addressed to those who profess themselves Christians, it has deep
lessons for those who are impenitent, who have not professed “re-
pentance unto God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ;” for, if
the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the
wicked appear ? And if we have to say these things of the green tree,
that has a verdant appearance of profession, and here and there mani-
fest fruit, what shall we say to the dry 1 And, if Christian men are
to be spoken to thus, what are the words to be uttered to those who
put away from them the Son of God, and count the blood of the
covenant, by which they might be sanctified, an unholy thing 1 But
act not thus—for you, every man, woman, and child within this
building, to all of you the word comes: “God has so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him
should not perish, but have everlasting life.”
And remember that among the ruins of ancient nations—those
picturesque and wonderful structures that are now tumbling down and
mouldering to dust, and tell us of the greatness of Rome, and of the
ancient world—you have the ruins of aqueducts, of temples, of
theatres, but nowhere the ruins of an asylum or a hospital. Society
is indebted to the Gospel for these particular forms of philanthropy,
and Christ will remember your liberality and benevolence to these
institutions at the last day, when he will remember and reward the
cups of cold water given in his name to one of his disciples. Amen.
MASON AMD FIRTH, PRINTERS, ELIZABETH STREET SOUTH, MELBOURNE.




A. J. SMITH,
BOOKSELLER & STATIONER,
30 SWANSTON STREET.
AND NEAR ST. PETER’S CHURCH, EASTERN HILL.
Eadie’s Paul the Preacher
Do. Bible Cyclopaedia
Mosheim’s Ecclesiastical History, com-
plete, 8s
Clarke’s Commentary, 6 vols, splendid
copy, strongly bound, £5 10s
Buck’s Theological Dictionary
Candlish’s Life in a Risen Saviour
Matthew Henry’s complete Works, 2 vols
Barnes’ Notes, complete, 28s
Alexander on St. Mark
Blaokie’s Bible History
Great Sermons of Great Preachers, 2 vols
Popular Preachers of the Ancient Church
Doddridge’s Family Expositor
Robinson’s Scripture Characters, 4 vols,
complete, 8s
Cruden’s Concordance, 5s
Livingstone’s Travels in South Africa
Burnett on the Thirty-nine Articles, 6s
Life of Dr. Chalmers, 2 vols, complete, 9s
Hawker’s Portions, complete, 5s
Sale’s Koran, 6s
Cumming’s Daily Family Devotion
Noel’s Church and State, 6s
Montgomery’s God and Man, 5s
Whitby & Lowman’s Commentary, whole
calf, 20s
William’s Cottage Bible and Expositor,
3 vols, 30s
Milner’s Church History, 4s
Calmet’s Dictionary of the. Bible
Daubigne’s Reformation in England,half-
calf, plates, 4s 6d
Coleman’s Textbook and Atlas of Bibli-
cal Geography, 3s 6d
Henry and Scott’s Commentary, 6 vols
Sunday School Rewards,
&0., &c.
Family Bible, splendidlv illustrated, full
bound morocco, gilt, £3 3s
Josephus’ Whole Works, 5s
Chalmers’ Scripture Reading
Brown’s Dictionary of the Bible, best
edition, with Concordance, maps,
plates, &c., half-calf 14s
Do. do. do. 7s 6d
Home’s Introduction to Critical Study
of Scripture, 4 vols
Townsend on the Pentateuch and Book
of Job, 2 vols
Culverwell’s Light of Nature
Edwards on the Affections, 3s
Christian Treasury, hlf.-bd., 4s 6dp. vol
Bible Cyclopaedia, 3 vols, hf.-bd. 21s
Cummings’ Signs of the Times, 3s 6d
Dwight’s Theology, 5 vols 12s 6d
Watson’s Theological Institutes, 4 vols
20s
Claude’s Essay on Composition of a Ser-
mon, 3s 6d
Brown on the Second Advent
Hodge on Romans
Todd’s Works, complete
Abbott’s Works
Amot’s Illustrations of Proverbs, 2 vols
Memoris of Rev. J. Entwistle
Newton’s Cardiphonia
Keith’s Evidences of Prophecy
Hamilton’s Lessons from Great Biogra-
phy
Our Christian Classics, 2 vols
Alleine’s Heart Works
Paley’s Whole Works
Cyclopsedia of Religious Denominations
Biokersteth’s Signs of the Times
Tickets, Roll Books,
IN GREAT VARIETY.
