

EXPLANATORY NOTES
TO ACCOMPANY
A NEW GEOLOGICAL MAP
OF
THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
NL 559.4 D 249
Based on the maps already published by the
Geological Surveys of the various States, etc.
BY
SIR T. W. EDGEWORTH DAVID,
K.B.E., C.M.G., D.S.O., M.A., F.R.S., etc.
PROFESSOR EMERITUS OF GEOLOGY, UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
SYDNEY
AUSTRALASIAN MEDICAL PUBLISHING COMPANY, LIMITED
THE PRINTING HOUSE, SEAMER STREET, GLEBE
1932


ADDENDA ET CORRIGENDA.
p. 62, Table E. “Correlation of the Kamilaroi System of Australia
and Tasmania.” In a letter to the author dated March 29, 1932,
Professor Ch. Schuchert, of Yale University, writes that Dr. Arthur K.
Miller has decided that the so-called Paralcgoceras jacksoni of the
Kamilaroi (Permo-Carboniferous) System of Western Australia is not
Paralegoceras but Metalegoceras, a genus recently described by
Schindewolf, of Berlin, “a genus not known outside of the Permian.
The septal wall has an extra internal pair of lobes such as do not occur
in Paralegoceras, therefore the need of the new genus. The new genus
occurs in Timor, Russia, Texas and now in Western Australia.” This
evidence favours the placing of all the Kamilaroi strata of Australia and
Tasmania in the Permian, as has been argued for some time by Professor
Schuchert and Mr. W. S. Dun. Dr. Dighton Thomas, of the British
Museum, considered this Paralegoceras jacksoni as of Upper
Carboniferous age.
p. 81. In Table I under the heading “New South Wales” the marine
Miocene beds proved in numerous bores to underlie the Pleistocene and
recent alluvials of the Riverina area in the south-western part of the
above State have been accidentally omitted. In division of column
opposite Janjukian Series after “Dalton, near Gunning,” add Marine
strata mostly of Janjukian age, penetrated in the Arumpo and other
bores in the south-western portion of New South Wales belonging to
the Murray Gulf Tertiaries.
p. 81. Opposite Eocene and in the lowest division of the above
column add “Small outliers of Eyrian sandstone and quartzite overlie
the Cretaceous marine beds of the Great Artesian Basin in parts of the
western portion of New South Wales.”


1. p. 22, line 30, for lessoni read lessonii.
2. p. 87, Table I, under Miocene of New Guinea, for lessoni read
lessonii.
3. p. 24, line 14, it is stated “The Numees Tillite is almost certainly
the equivalent of the Griqualand and Pretoria Tillites.”
The recent opinions of Doctors A. W. Rogers, A. L. du Toit and
Sidney H. Haughton incline to the view that the Numees Tillite may be
older than the Griquatown-Pretoria (Daspoort) Tillite. There is an
older tillite below the gold-and-diamond-bearing banket of the
Witwatersrand Series. It may be tentatively suggested that the Numees
Tillite may be referred to this older horizon. The question of its age is
still unsettled.
4. p. 24, line 13. In regard to the Yang-tse Tillites, 300 feet thick,
of China, for “Lower Cambrian strata with Archwocyathinw” read
“Middle-Cambrian and the top part of Lower Cambrian fossiliferous
strata”. Only Coscinocyathus among the A rchwocyathina) has so far
been recorded from China, and from Middle Cambrian strata only.
It is just possible that the Yang-tse Tillite may be low down in the
Lower Cambrian, as Professor Howchin inclines to think is probably
the case Avith the Sturtian Tillite of South Australia.


1. In the table of geological formations given on the map, there
should be added under 10 the algal limestones, 1,500 feet thick, recently
discovered by Professor H. C. Richards and Dr. W. H. Bryan at
Gigoomgan, west of Maryborough, Queensland.
2. In the above table the Dolodrook Series of Victoria should be 4C
(Upper Cambrian) instead of 4B (Middle Cambrian).
3. In Section 2 of the map, at the major fault near Kempsey, N. S.
Wales, the Carboniferous and Devonian’strata on the south side of the
fault should have been shown as thinning northwards towards the
Ordovician and Silurian inlier.
4. In Section 2 a little further north of the preceding fault, the
section is probably in error in showing the Ipswich coal-measures out-
cropping at the southern end of the Clarence Basin, where they are
most likely covered by the Bundanba (also written Bundamba)
Sandstone.
5. On Section 7 of the map in the long narrow sunkland between
the west escarpment of the Darling Plateau, and Rottnest Island to the
west of Fremantle, Western Australia, the floor of pre-Cambrian rock
is shown probably much nearer the surface than it actually is. Possibly
Jurassic strata, and even Permian Coal-measures may underlie this
sunkland.
6. To the east of the Macdonnell Ranges C. T. Madigan has recently
discovered an immense reef of Archwocyathinw limestone, probably near
the top of the Lower Cambrian, followed on a much higher horizon,
further eastwards, by Ordovician rocks.


EXPLANATORY NOTES
TO ACCOMPANY
A NEW GEOLOGICAL MAP
OF
THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Based on the maps already published by the
Geological Surveys of the various States, etc.
BY
SIR T. W. EDGEWORTH DAVID,
K.B.E., C.M.G., D.S.O., M.A., F.R.S., etc.
Professor Emeritus of Geology, University of Sydney.
Sydney
Australasian Medical Publishing Company, Limited
The Printing House, Seamer Street, Glebe
1932




CONTENTS.
PAGE
PREFACE 5
PHYSICAL GEOLOGY—
I. Introduction 7
11. Naturae Forces Controlling Climate and Land Forms 7
1. Meteorological Forces 7
2. Tectonic Forces 11
111. The Framework of the Commonwealth 12
(а) Western Half of Australia 12
(б) The Flinders-Mt. Lofty Areas of South Australia and Associ-
ated Structures 14
(c) Eastern Australia and Tasmania 14
( d ) The Bassian Cross-Warp 16
(e) The Great Artesian Basin 16
(/) Uplifted Peneplains of the Kosciusko Epoch 17
(ff) New Guinea 17
Summary 18
IV. Three Consequences of the Rigidity of the Australian Shield .. 19
1. Absence of Young Fold-Mountains 19
2. Extensive Exposure of Ore-Bodies 19
3. Preservation of Life-Records 20
V. Biological Results of Mobility of Burmax Arc 21
HISTORICAL AND TECTONIC GEOLOGY— •
I. Introduction 22
(a) Cosmopolitan Character of Fossil Fauna and Flora 22
(&) Past Ice Ages 23
11. Table of the Geological Formations of the Commonwealth .. 26
111. Pre-Cambrian 30
Archseozoic ; 31
Proterozoic 31
IV. Palaeozoic 36
Cambrian 36
Ordovician 38
Silurian 46
Devonian 48
Carboniferous 55
Permian 64
Middle to Late Palaeozoic Tectonics 71
V. Mesozoic 73
Triassic 73
Jurassic 80
Cretaceous 84
VI. Cainozoic (Tertiary and Post-Tertiary) of Australia and Tasmania 87
Eocene 88
Oligocene 88
Miocene 89
Pliocene .. .. 90
Pleistocene 94
Recent 96
Cainozoic Life 97
Economic 99
Igneous Rocks 101
VII. Cainozoic of New Guinea 105
Eocene 105
Oligocene 105
Oligo-Miocene 105
Miocene 106
Mio-Pliocene 107
Pliocene 107
Pleistocene 107
Recent 108
Igneous Rocks 109
Active Volcanoes 110
Tectonics 11l
Economic 114


PAGE
SUMMARY OF ECONOMIC GEOLOGY 117
I. Artesian and Sub-Artesian Water 117
11. Coal 122
111. Oil-Shales 129
IV. Mineral Oil 132
V. Ore Deposits 136
VI. Soils 141
DETAILS OF SECTIONS—
Section 1 145
Section 2 ‘ . .. 149
Section 3 151
Section 4 152
Section 5 152
Section 6 153
Section 7 153
Section 8 156
Section 9 160
Section 10 161
Section 11 161
HISTORICAL REVIEW 163-177
TEXT-FIGURES.
page
Figure 1. —Australian Topography, after Griffith Taylor 9
Figure 2. —Range of Spring Tide on the Australian Coast, after G. H. Halligan 11
Figure 3. —Ocean Currents Around Australia, after G. H. Halligan .. .. 11
Figure 4.—'Tectonic Map of Australia and Surrounding Region 13
Figure 5. —The Great Submarine Volcanoes, the Tasmantides, 14,000 feet
high, East of Brisbane 15
Figure 6. —Sketch Section Showing the Vast Denuded Geanticline, perhaps
Originally 30,000 Feet High, at Brisbane, after A. K. Denmead 45
Figure 7. —Sketch Section Across Eastern Queensland, near the Latitude of
Cairns 92
Figure 8.- —Sketch Section Across New Guinea 104
Figure 9. —Map of Commonwealth, Showing Artesian Water, Coal, Oil-Shale
and Oil Areas 116
Figure 10. —Areas of Economic Minerals, Other than Coal or Oil, Within the
Commonwealth 136
TABLES.
page
Table A. —Correlation of Australian and Extra-Australian Graptolite Zones;
after Dr. Gertrude Elies 41
Table A'. —Zones and Sub-Zones of the Lower Ordovician, Victoria, after
R. A. Keble 41
Table B. —Tentative Correlation of the Silurian Rocks of the Commonwealth 46
Table C.—Tentative Correlation of the Devonian Rocks of the Commonwealth 48
Table D. —Tentative Classification and Correlation of the Carboniferous Rocks
of Australia and Tasmania 58
Table E. —Tentative Classification and Correlation of the Kamilaroi System
of Australia and Tasmania 62
Table F. —Tentative Correlation of the Triassic Rocks of the Commonwealth 73
Table G.—Tentative Correlation of the Jurassic Rocks of the Commonwealth 80
Table H. —Tentative Correlation of the Cretaceous Rocks of the Commonwealth 84
Table I.—Tentative Correlation of the Cainozoic Rocks of the Commonwealth 87
Table J. —List of Coal-fields and Coal Reserves of Australia and Tasmania 122


PREFACE.
Separate geological maps of the States of Australia and its Federal
Territories, as well as of Tasmania and New Guinea, have been in
existence for many years. The first sketch geological map of Australia,
including Tasmania, was made by E. Brough Smyth, F.G.S., etc.,
Secretary for Mines, Victoria. This map was on a scale of 110 miles to
the inch, and was published on April 25, 1875. The second coloured
geological map of Australia was compiled by Arthur Everitt, and
published under the direction of C. W. Langtree, Secretary for Mines
and Water Supply, Melbourne, in 1887. This was on a scale of 50 miles
to the inch. Later, in 1908, a geological map of Australia and Tasmania
by Leo. A. Cotton (now Professor of Geology at the University of Sydney)
was published in the Lady Northcote Atlas, by H. E. C. Kobinson, and a
revised edition appeared about five years later. This was on a scale of
about 88 miles to one inch.
Valuable as these earlier maps have proved for the needs of
their time, two of them are on too small a scale to show the
details of the Geology of the Commonwealth, and, besides, in the many
years that have elapsed since their publication, geological research has
progressed so far as to necessitate considerable revision of the original
geological boundaries, and the introduction of many new geological sub-
divisions. Moreover, New Guinea was not included in the above
geological maps. The need, therefore, has now been felt for some time,
within and without the Commonwealth, of a detailed map to show the
salient geological features of Australia, Tasmania and New Guinea, as
a connected whole. The present map attempts to satisfy that need. It
is intended for the use not only of geologists, but of the ordinary
traveller and explorer, of the mining community, of the man on the land,
as well as of the man in the street, in short for the service of all those,
who, from motives of intellectual or industrial gain, seek to know more
of the earth’s foundations in this part of the world.
With the invaluable help of H. E. C. Kobinson, F.E.G.S., the author,
seven years ago, got together the first draft of the present map. Later,
in London, this was modified with the assistance of A. E. N. Haynes,
Superintendent of Maps to the Geological Survey of Great Britain.
During 1929-1930, in accordance with the wishes of the Commonwealth
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, up-to-date information
was sought from and was generously supplied by the various State
Geological Surveys of the Commonwealth, and by the Geological Adviser
to the Commonwealth Government, and most of the original map was
then recast.


The whole work of re drawing and re-colouring the map, and adding
the symbols to each coloured area, has been meticulously carried out at
the Lands Department, Sydney, by the Government Lithographer, S. G.
Miller, and his staff.
The Commonwealth Council for Scientific and Industrial Research,
together with Edward Arnold & Co., London, are chiefly responsible for
the publication of the map and its marginal sections, while the Common-
wealth Bank has also contributed, and further financial help towards
the drawing of the original map and sections was given by the late
R. Tilden Smith, of Adelaide House, London, and by the author’s late
brother, W. O. David.
The author is much indebted to Edward Arnold & Co., the publishers
of his larger work, now in preparation, on the Geology of the Common-
wealth of Australia, for kind permission to publish these Explanatory
Notes.
The members of the geological staffs at the Surveys, Universities and
Technical Colleges of the Commonwealth have given cordial co-operation,
and naturally no mean share in the work both of preparing the Notes and
of completing the map has been taken by the Staff of the Geology Depart-
ment of the University of Sydney. Acknowledgment is also due to Mr.
G. H. Halligan for drawing most of the diagrams illustrating the text.
Of workers outside Australia the author is specially indebted to
Professor C. E. Tilley, of Cambridge, for help regarding the igneous
rocks of the Commonwealth.
Acknowledgments are made in the text of special contributions by
geological and pakeontological colleagues.
There is already in existence a considerable body of literature
dealing with the geology of Australia, of which full advantage has been
taken in the preparation of these Explanatory Notes, though considera-
tions of space prevent detailed acknowledgment. In addition to works
by various authors dealing with special aspects of the geology and
palaeontology of the Commonwealth as a whole, and with the geology
and geography of individual States, there have been laid under contribu-
tion the geological publications of the Commonwealth Government and
of the State Geological Surveys, the many papers by private investigators
in the proceedings of the scientific societies of the different States, and
the papers, research reports and handbooks published by the Australasian
Association for the Advancement of Science.


PHYSICAL GEOLOGY.
I. Introduction.
The Commonwealth of Australia includes now on its north-east
borders Papua and the Mandated Territory of New Guinea and part
of the Solomon Islands.
The geology of few, if any, parts of the world offers greater variety,
or greater contrast, than does that of the Commonwealth of Australia:
variety, for almost all the geological formations, known elsewhere, are
represented here; contrast, for while Australia, built so firmly as to
have defied folding and foundering for so many geological periods, is
one of the great “shields” of the earth, it yet has almost in actual contact
with its northern coast one of the most unstable areas of the earth’s
crust, New Guinea, the great island that would stretch from London to
Constantinople. There marine strata, as new as the Burdigalian division
of the Miocene, have been raised to 16,000 feet above sea-level, and sharp
earthquake shocks, and an active volcanic zone, together with coral reefs
recently elevated as much as 2,000 feet, adjacent to other areas which
have sunk beneath the sea in historic times, proclaim that in New
Guinea, as well as in the Solomon Islands, land and sea are still in the
making.
II. Natural Forces Controlling Climate and Land Forms, as
Inherited by the Commonwealth, by Virtue of
its Position on the Globe.
1. Meteorological Forces.
(a) Pressure Influences on Australian Climate.
The southern half of Australia is largely under the control of the
anticyclone belt. As the air in this belt is everywhere descending from
very high levels, where it is very cold, and where it has parted already
with nearly all its moisture, and is coming down to the earth’s surface,
and in so doing becomes warmer by compression, it is obviously a dry
and drying wind belt. Land areas in the Northern Hemisphere, situated
under the Northern Anticyclone Belt, also come within this same drying
influence, so usually they are semi-arid or absolute deserts, as for
example the desert of Arabia, the Libyan desert, the Sahara desert, and,
in North America, the desert areas of Colorado. Similarly in the
Southern Hemisphere, we And, on the same latitude as that of our anti-
cyclone belt in Australia, the Kalahari Desert of South Africa, and the
desert areas of the Argentine and of Chili. Australia, therefore, by virtue
of its position, was from the earliest times predestined, as regards its


interior portions, to be a region of aridity. 1 Even if now a large range
of mountains were to rise in the central part of Australia, and the local
rainfall thereby be increased, still large areas of the interior would
remain within a rain-shadow desert. While, however, much of the
interior of Australia is desert or semi-arid, the wide belt of external
drainage is fairly well watered.
The high mountains of the Solomon Islands and New Guinea, rising
direct in the path of the trade winds, are assured of a copious rainfall.
In New Guinea, between altitudes of 5,000 and 6,000 feet, the annual
rainfall is probably as much as 600 inches. Similarly the west coast
of Tasmania, opposed to the direct path of the westerly wind, has a good
rainfall of the order of from 100 to 200 inches annually.
As seen from an aeroplane the whole of Tasmania would be green
with grass and trees, and all New Guinea, save for small patches of
eternal snows, be verdant with dense rain-forests, mallee scrubs and
upland grass areas. Australia, on the other hand, would show only an
intermittent belt of forest trees extending inland from about 50 up to 300
miles or more. Further inland the landscape would be patched with the
purple of the “gibber plains” and the sage-green of the saltbush, or appear
as a red sea of sand-ridges with white playas and grey claypans between,
except where the surface of the land was dotted with dark mulga, or
clothed with light-brown tussocks of spinifex.
In regard to the abundant water supply of Tasmania and New
Guinea the hydro-electric possibilities of these islands may here be
mentioned. It is estimated that Tasmania, when all her available water-
power has been harnessed, should produce about 1,000,000 continuous
horse-power. Papua and the Mandated Territory of New Guinea, with
their great rivers, steep falls and annual rainfall or from 100 to 300,
and even up to 600, inches, have possibly a potential hydro-electric
resource of about 20 to 30 million continuous horse power. It seems not
impossible that some of this vast energy may in the future be transmitted
to Australia direct by wireless.
In regard to the aridity of the interior of Australia, the new
geological map may be criticised for showing only so small an area, viz.,
that numbered 26 to the north of Lake Eyre, as covered with sand-ridges.
As a matter of fact there is a far larger area so covered, to the west of
the Macdonnell Ranges, but, in the absence of, an actual survey, it was
not possible to draw on the map a line to divide “the desert from the
sown.” The approximate area occupied by sand-ridges is shown on
Figure 1, after Griffith Taylor.
1 This statement rests on the assumption that Australia has not materially changed Its
present position, relative to the Poles and the Equator, since the earliest geological time,
the Wegener Hypothesis of the periodic drifting of continents being left out of considera-
tion for the present.


FIGURE 1.
( b ) Control by Ocean Currents Under Influence of Winds.
Another consequence of position on the earth’s surface, in regard to
prevalent winds, and to prevalent ocean currents, as well as tides, is that
any land area, like Tasmania, or the southern shores of Australia, under
the control of the westerly wind, tends to be eroded on its western side,
and to have the material so dislodged transported to its eastern side.
This is well seen in the disposition of the geological formations of
Tasmania, in which the oldest are situated on the western side, and the
newest towards the eastern margin, and is also well exemplified in the
geological structure of the southern island of New Zealand. The northern
portion of Australia, partly under the influence of the South-East Trade
Winds, partly under that of the North-West Monsoon, tends to be eroded
on its north-eastern, as well as on its north-western coasts, the
latter being specially exposed to the violence of the monsoon winds. The
attack of the South-East Trade Winds on the north-east coast of Queens-
land would have produced an immense amount of erosion, had it not


been for the mighty rampart of reef-rock interposed by the
organisms which have gone to form the present Great Barrier
Beef and its ancestors. Possibly, however, the great weight of this
mass of limestone has accelerated the foundering of that large slice of
Australia which once extended very many miles east of the present
coast from near Rockhampton to Torres Strait. The material worn
away by the action of the South-East Trade Winds from the north-east
portion of Queensland has been mostly carried southwards by a
southerly-setting ocean current, which has transported the large masses
of sand now forming the dunes of Fraser Island, Stradbroke Island, etc.'
The long, deep fiord-like inlets in the north-west part of Australia,
while partly of tectonic origin, and now drowned valleys, have been
enlarged at their seaward ends by the heavy impact of the monsoons in
summer time, which have pulverised the softer and more friable rocks,
leaving behind only the most resistant types, like crystalline schists,
granites, etc. This is a region of variable currents, their directions being
almost wholly dependent on the winds. The South-East Trade Wind
blowing off-shore for eight months of the year, and reinforced by the
Avinter monsoon, carries the sand-dunes of the Desert Basin seaAvards all
along the Ninety-Mile Beach to the south-west of Broome; but during
December to March the southerly SAving of the anticyclone belt, combined
Avith the great heat of the Pilbara to Macdonnell Range area, produces
a low pressure inland, Avhich changes the direction of the Avinds to south-
Avest. Under their influence much of the material deposited in the
shalloAV seas is smoothed out to form an even shore-line. The net result
is that along the line of the Ninety-Mile Beach the land is gaining on
the sea, the shore tending to move north-AvestAA'ards.
The diagram beloAv (Figure 2) illustrates graphically the relative
heights of the tides around Australia, and slioavs, inferentially, that
the force of their scour must be considerable in any estuaries betAveen
Darwin and North West Cape. The maximum rise and fall betAA r een
these tAvo points is over 30 feet.
In the case of the south coast of Australia, one finds that sedimenta-
tion there, as Avell as denudation, is dominated by the Avesterly Avinds,
and by the current setting from Avest to east across the Great Australian
Bight, a small branch of it passing thence through Bass Strait. BetAveen
Bunbury and Cape LeeuAvin the westerly winds, Avhich prevail in that
part of Australia, have in the past exposed to vieAv the resistant crystal-
line rocks, and carried any softer material eastAvards to form the clays
and sands Avhich underlie the Miocene limestones of the Nullarbor Plain.
The origin of the huge mass of sediment of the Great Artesian Basin
of Australia, being more of a tectonic than of a meteorological nature, is
discussed later.
Figure 3 illustrates the ocean currents around Australia.


FIGURE 2.
FIGURE 3.
Ocean Currents around Australia (Based on G. H. Halligan).
2. Tectonic Forces.
(i) Tidal forces, as well as the rotation of the earth from west to
east, have in the geological past tended to raise over the Australian
region, as elsewhere, meridional folds.


(ii) Readjustments of the spheroidal surface of the earth tend to
make it approach more nearly to that of a sphere. The early, southerly-
moving arcs of Central Australia perhaps originated in such a tendency.
(iii) Readjustments of the earth’s crust on the floor of the
Pacific, Indian and Southern Oceans, through the sinking of heavy rocks
there and the consequent lessening of the convexity of the ocean floor,
deliver thrusts against the frame of the Australian Continent. The
largest ocean near Australia is, of course, the Pacific, and any flattening
of its floor would transmit tremendous thrusts to the nearest part of its
shore-line, as for example, the New Zealand, 1 Australian and New Guinea
coasts on the west and south-west, and the South American coast on the
east.
III. The Framework of the Commonwealth.
(See Figure 4.)
(a) Western Half of Australia.
If one turns to the part of the map of Australia west of the
Great Artesian Basin, one notices that in northern Australia there are,
respectively at Kimberley and between Darwin and Arnhem Land, two
strongly developed “V” structures, the V’s being open northwards. South
of these the great arcs of the Macdonnell Ranges, convex southwards,
sweep westwards and west-north-west, past Lake Macdonald, to the inner
edge of the large blue-coloured patch marking the Desert Basin, of
Kamilaroi (Permo-Carboniferous) age. Eastwards the mighty folds of
the Macdonnells wheel to the east-north-east, but beyond Arltunga their
trend is obscure. Further south lies the concentric arc of the Musgrave,
Everard, Tomkinson and Mann Ranges, swinging from an initial east-
to-west direction into that of a west-north-west trend, pointing towards
the Pilbara Goldfields of Western Australia. Still further south is the
small arc of the Townsend Range, where again, the arc being convex
southwards, the rocks have probably been pushed over from the north
towards the south.
A possible outermost arc commences in Western Australia, turning
from south-east, at Forth West Cape and Pilbara, to south-south-east in
the Central Goldfields area.
In the extreme south, in the direction of the Phillips River and
Ravensthorpe Goldfield, the trends arc around from south-by-east and
south-south-east to almost due east in the Fraser Range, possibly to meet
similar trends from the Mount Lofty Ranges of South Australia, where
the folds swing westerly through Kangaroo Island and Eyre’s Peninsula.
Age of the Folding. —No folding of consequence seems to have
occurred in this great region, as large as France and Spain taken
1 Such movements probably coming from the floor of the Pacific, east of New
Zealand, brought about the very severe earthquake of Napier, in the North Island of
New Zealand, in 1931, and that of Murchison, in the South Island, in 1929.


FIGURE 4.


together, since the close of pre-Cambrian time. The Cambrian marine
beds still remain almost horizontal. The late Palaeozoic sediments of
the Great Desert Basin are still so unconsolidated and porous as to be
an important source of artesian water, and the Palajozoic coals there are
still somewhat hydrous.
(b) The Flinders-Mount Lofty Areas of South Australia, and
Associated Structures.
‘The folds of this region mostly tend to be overturned westwards,
while their strike on the whole is mostly meridional. The Flinders Range
at its northern end shows a tendency to bifurcate, a north-east branch
trending to Yudnamutana, and a north-west branch passing through the
Willouran Ranges to the Peake and Denison Ranges, and to Algebuckina
and Mount Dutton. There is a marked virgation between the middle
part of the Flinders Range, near Peterborough, and Broken Hill. The
folds of the Archoeozoic Willyama Series of Broken Hill are overturned
on the whole to the south-east.
(c) Eastern Australia and Tasmania.
In eastern Australia and Tasmania the trend of the bands of colour
on the map shows that the orientation of the crest of the great earth-
waves, or folds, is in a general north-north-west to south-south-east, or
north-and-south, direction. This is shown conspicuously by the lie of the
long axis of the pre-Cambrian rocks of Tasmania, that of the Melbourne,
Mansfield, and Walhalla Basins of Victoria, that of the basins of
Ordovician and Silurian rocks from near Albury to beyond Cobar in
New South Wales, and that of the Dawson-Bowen Basin of Queensland.
From the north-east end of Victoria to Cape York, the dominant
north-north-west to south-south-east troughs have been moving again and
again, mostly westwards, through several geological periods, ranging
from Ordovician to at least the close of Palaeozoic time. Throughout
the whole of this vast area the folds show a strong tendency to become
overturned and overthrust from an easterly towards a westerly direction.
In Queensland folding survived into Laramie (late Cretaceous) time,
a phenomenon to be connected perhaps with the great and prolonged
volcanic eruptions, which have built the giant submarine volcanoes, the
Tasmantides, rising steeply from the ocean floor to a height of about
16,000 feet above it, so that their summits come within 500 fathoms of the
sea surface. These lie about 100 miles easterly from Brisbane (see plan
and sections, Figure 5).
The coal-fields and oil-shales of Eastern Australia are preserved in
numerous basins, as shown on the geological sections 2,3, 4, o, and 6,
on the margin of the map. Their age ranges from Upper Carboniferous
to Miocene.




( d) The Bassian Cross-Warp.
The geological map shows that, in the case of the Wonthaggi-
Gippsland Jurassic coal-measures of Victoria, the older trend lines
of the goldfields, and the Devono-Carboniferous basins of Mansfield
and the Grampians, are crossed, nearly at right angles, by the long
axis of the broad Jurassic coal-basin, which extends from the Wannon,
on the west, to Gippsland, on the east. It is possible that this remark-
able trend, the Bass trend, owed its development in late Palaeozoic
time, to the great loading of that part of the earth’s crust with ice during
the Kamilaroi Ice Age (late Carboniferous to Permian). 1 Certainly that
stupendous glaciation began as a land glaciation, along a front extending
west-north-west and east-south-east for about 2,000 miles. Later, towards
the commencement of the middle part of Permian time, the ice had largely
disappeared, and Bass Strait and Tasmania, perhaps through their earlier
overload of ice, subsided below sea-level.
(e) The Great Artesian Basin.
This important structure has a vast extent, and has been but little
affected by folding. It lies within a great but relatively shallow warp.
During Triassic and Jurassic time, while all Australia west of the
Macdonnell Kanges had become so rigid as not to yield to further com-
pression, and eastern Australia and Tasmania had become semi-rigid
through repeated foldings, a broad "warp developed chiefly over the area
coloured mostly green, partly raw and burnt sienna, on the geological
map. This great warp is boomerang-shaped, with the convexity directed
to the south-east, its form being sympathetic with the east-west trends of
the Macdonnell Banges, and the wheel of their eastern end into more
meridional lines, between that range and the Queensland border. At first
the floor of the warp was above sea-level, and it was covered by vast fresh-
water lakes and swamps, their shores haunted by large labyrinthodonts
in Triassic time, and by immense dinosaurs in the Jurassic period. The
dominant Jurassic formation of Queensland is the Walloon Series, and the
main lake is called Lake Walloon, after it. Both these periods had their
coal-forming epochs. Further downward warping lowered the lacustrine
sediments beneath the sea, and a Cretaceous sea crossed Australia from
the Gulf of Carpentaria to the Great Australian Bight. This sea may
have completely isolated Western Australia from combined eastern
Australia and Tasmania. The marine sediments of this sea, during
Aptian to Albian time, attained a maximum thickness of about 2,000 feet.
Emergence followed, bringing in a return of lacustrine conditions,
first in what may be termed the Winton Lake, and later in the smaller
and shallower lake in which the Eyrian strata were deposited. Later
1 The bending- of the belt of the Cambro-Ordovician Porphyroids of Tasmania into a
nearly east-west trend suggests a possible much earlier origin for the Bassian lines.


further emergence dried the lakes, and established a permanent land
surface. The maximum thickness of sediments in this Great Artesian
Basin, as for example at Yamma Yamma, is about 6,500 feet. The deepest
bores do not much exceed 5,500 feet.
(/) Uplifted Peneplains of the Kosciusko Epoch.
E. C. Andrews lias argued that in late Pliocene time eastern Aus-
tralia and Tasmania underwent a marked epeirogenic movement whereby
an immense peneplain, partly pre-Miocene, partly post-Miocene in age,
was warped upwards to the amount of several thousands of feet above
sea-level. In South Australia the peneplain of the Mt. Lofty-Flinders
region was uplifted, and great meridional faults formed along its eastern
and western borders, the range taking the form of a horst from 2,000 to
3,000 feet above sea-level. Similarly, in Western Australia, there was
widespread epeirogenic movement of the Darling peneplain and immense
areas to the north of it, as far as the Pilbara Goldfield, and also in the
Kimberley region.
There seems to have been a compensating downward movement
along the west coast of Western Australia and along the east coast
of eastern Australia. The latter seems to have participated in the sub-
mergence of the Great Barrier area, marine Tertiaries being almost
wholly unknown along that 2,000 miles of coast line. Meanwhile Jeffrey
Deep, to the south of the Bight, was probably deepening, while an
epeirogenic uplift was in progress from the mouth of the Murray River
to Cape Leeuwin.
A late Pliocene east-to-west trend line of uplift extends across the
Murray River to the Nullarbor Plains. The Murray River has cut a
canyon 200 feet deep across this broad flat-topped buckle.
A brief account of the profound influence of these epeirogenic move-
ments of the Kosciusko Epoch is given in the portion of these notes
which deals with Cainozoic time. The drowning of the river valleys
around the Australian and Tasmanian coasts may be due to a post-
glacial eustatic rise of sea-level rather than to a negative movement of
the land.
On the other hand, the recent raised beaches near Naracoorte and
Ooldea, respectively about 200 feet and about 380 feet above sea-level, are
probably due to differential upward warping of the land in South
Australia.
( g ) New Guinea.
If now one glances at the structure lines of New Guinea it is clear
that they run on the whole parallel with the main axis of that island.
Section 1 of the Geological Map shows that the thrusts, which have
there so greatly elevated the Miocene sea floor (in Dutch New Guinea it
rises in the snow peaks of the Carstenz Range to an elevation of over
B


16,000 feet above sea-level), have, in this case, come from the
north-north-east, tending to overturn New Guinea on to the northern
coast of Australia. Possibly the great arc of New Guinea, which may
be part of the gigantic Burmese buckle in the earth’s crust, linking up
with the folds of the Himalayas, may be still slowly moving to the south-
west so as to encounter the Australian trend lines almost end-on. This
force may be raising an embryonic range, as shown on the northern end
of Section 1, between the northern outpost of Australia, the Mabadunn
Granite massif, and the moving inner massif of the pre-Cambrian rocks
of the cordillera of New Guinea.
It is possible that in the near geological future a great mountain
range will be built up out of the Tertiary sediments which lie in the
wide basin to the south of the main cordillera of New Guinea,
between its southern foothills and the southern coast of New Guinea,
near the mouth of the Ply River. The structure of such a range would
be closely allied to that of the Betic Cordillera of Spain, crunched
between the inner massif of Gata and the outer massif of the Sleseta, to
the north-west of the Guadalquivir Valley. On the other hand,
Nason-Jones is convinced that the forward folding of New Guinea is
to be found on its north-east coast, and that the folds are overturned
towards the north-north-east. The folding towards Australia on the
southern slopes of the New Guinea Cordillera are, he thinks, due to
“back-folding,” like that shown on Argand’s section across the Dent
Blanche Nappes of the Alps and the Dinarids. The author cannot believe
that Australia, so firmly held by the folds of the Netherlands East Indies
advancing to the south-south-east, and those advancing from the direction
of the trends of New Caledonia, i.e., moving from about north-east to the
south-west, could be undergoing very much folding northwards. The
author tentatively regards the overfolding northwards of the Torricelli
and adjacent ranges as due to “back-folding,” while the main forward
movement of New Guinea is probably to the south, raising the Crete
riveraine, and beginning to crumple up the Tertiary strata of the geosyn-
cline south of the main Cordillera. At the same time “back-folding” may
now so dominate tectonic movements in New Guinea as to check further
development of the old southerly forward movement.
Summary.
If the tectonics of the Commonwealth be summarised, it may tenta-
tively be concluded that Australia and Tasmania have been squeezed
inwards, and are probably still being so squeezed, by two converging
forces, namely thrusts from the Pacific-Tasman sea pushing, east Aus-
tralia, as well as formerly the eastern side of New Zealand, towards the
west-south-west, and thrusts from the arc of the Netherlands East Indies
and possibly the Pacific-New Guinea-Burman arc pushing northern
Australia and the north-western part of New Zealand, near Auckland,


towards the south-south-west and south-west. There is little reason to
doubt that there are a number of overtlirust planes along the southern
basin of the main cordillera of New Guinea, giving rise to nappe-
structure. The planes appear to dip northwards. Certainly in
the Mandated Territory of New Guinea, the overturning of the folds
and the overthrusting are directed to about north-by-east. In late
Pliocene time the shore of the Australian Bight was tilted up, reversing
the drainage by giving the rivers an inland slope towards Lake Eyre. In
Western Australia North West Cape was folded in post-Miocene time by
thrusts from the west, from the Indian Ocean.
IV. Three Consequences of the Rigidity of the Australian Shield.
1. Absence of Young Fold Mountains. —As the result of the extreme
rigidity of its shield, Australia has no young mountain ranges,
such as are formed by folding. Foldin'g has ceased in Australia for the
most part, except in eastern Queensland,-since the end of Palmozoic time.
The old fold ranges of pre-Mesozoic time have been continuously lowered
by denudation, with little compensating uplift, or addition of later
sediments, and so Australia has become reduced to a vast peneplain.
Physiographically Australia may be described now as a warped and
uplifted peneplain.
2. Extensive Exposure of Ore Bodies. —A glance at the map shows
that as a result of the prolonged denudation of Australia which has
converted it into a vast peneplain, immense areas of granite have been
exposed at the surface; this is particularly to be noticed in the case of
Western Australia, the principal goldfields of that State, such as
Kalgoorlie and Coolgardie, which have produced over £100,000,000 worth
sterling of gold, being situated within this deeply denuded area. Most
of the gold there is associated with greenstones, which have been dis-
rupted by the intrusion of enormous batholiths of granite. The gold-
iields have been described as green islands in a grey sea of granite.
In addition to yielding gold, copper, zinc, and lead, the mines of
Tasmania and of eastern Australia have produced, and are still pro-
ducing, considerable quantities of tin. In the Mandated Territory of
New Guinea, in the Edie Creek and the Bulolo goldfields, both gold
and silver ores are now being actively mined. The rich silver ores
of argentite, proustite, and pyrargyrite recall at the latter locality the
silver reefs of Mexico. Numerous unproved metalliferous areas in
Australia are doubtless hidden by the “duricrust," 1 but while the duri-
crust in the interior of Australia is such an obstacle to the ordinary
prospector, it should be possible to locate ore deposits under it by using
J For description of the “duricrust” see page 90.


up-to-date geophysical methods, like those recently tried out within the
Commonwealth under the auspices of the Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research.
3. Preservation of Life-Records. —Stability of the land in a rigid
shield makes for protection of animal and plant life. Apart from the
mobile zones of New Guinea and the less mobile belts of eastern
Australia, the folds traversing Australia are, for the most part,
as old as late pre-Cambrian. Thrpughout most of this area, with
the exception of the Macdonnell Ranges, sediments as old as Lower
Cambrian retain their original horizontal stratification, and even the
underlying Proterozoic strata are only slightly tilted and not much
indurated. As a consequence fossils rendered unrecognisable through
metamorphism in Proterozoic rocks in other parts of the world have
been preserved more or less intact in Australia, but they have suffered
not a little from tire high temperature of the water circulating through
the rocks in which they occur. Near Adelaide these ancient rocks have
yielded numerous large primitive arthropods and annelids, far ante-
dating Lower Cambrian times.
In the Templeton River area, to the west of Mt. Isa silver-lead mines
in Queensland, the fossil Middle Cambrian trilobites are still in an
exquisite state of preservation. In the gold-bearing Silurian rocks of
Walhalla in Victoria, fossil plants allied to Hostimella and Thursophyton,
perhaps the oldest land plants as yet recorded in any part of the world,
are found associated with graptolites in the top part of the Lower Silurian
rocks. In Queensland, in the Burdekin River Basin, exquisitely preserved
specimens have recently been obtained of what in Scotland is known as
the Rhynie flora. In Western Australia, in the Wooramel and Irwin
River areas, rocks of Permian to Carboniferous age teem with beauti-
fully preserved marine fossils, and the rocks containing them are so little
consolidated, owing to the protection against folding afforded by the
hard underlying rocks of the Shield, that one can gather the fossils, there
almost as easily as one picks shells to-day from the sand on the sea-shore.
This stability and rigidity of the Shield has efficiently preserved not
only fossils, but also primitive surviving forms, particularly of animal
life. Much of the modern landscape of Australia, with its marsupials
hopping among the Zamia- clad ridges, might well pass for a scene staged
in Jurassic time. The primitive character of the essentially autoch-
thonous part of the Australian fauna is illustrated by the occurrence of
the Cretaceous type of crab Telphusa in the inland waters of Central
Australia, where it has survived the withdrawal of the Cretaceous sea,
and become freshwater in habit; also by the survival of the shrimp-like
Paranaspides in the Great Lake of Tasmania, and of Anaspides in the
mountain tarns of Mount Wellington and Mount Field West in the same
State, and of Koonunga in Victoria. These are the direct descendants of


Palanaspides of the Carboniferous and Permian Seas. The isopod
Phreatoicus survives in Australia and South Africa, and is descended
directly from the Triassic form in the Wianamatta Shales of New Smith
Wales. The aberrant caterpillar-like arthropod Pcripatus, though not
confined to Australia, being met with also in Africa, South America,
Malaya, New Britain and New Zealand, is a distinctly archaic type.
The survival of Neoccmtodus, the descendant of the Triassic
Ccratodus of the Northern Hemisphere, in the Burnett and Mary Rivers
of Queensland, is another example of a primitive survival. Australia's
insects are far more archaic than those of any other part of the world,
as, for example, the Moth Lacewing Ithone, the Silky Lacewing
Psychopsis, the Scorpion Flies Chorista and Mannochorista, and Hemi-
phlehia among the Dragonflies, as stressed by Dr. R. J. Tillyard.
The Monotremes Platypus (Ornithorhynchus) and the Australian
Porcupine ( Echidna ), as well as the Marsupials, obviously belong to
primitive types. The Banded Ant-eater (Myrmecohius fasciatus) of
Western Australia closely resembles some of the oldest known fossil
mammals of the Jurassic Period.
V. Biological Results of Mobility of Burman Arc.
The mobility of the New Guinea-Burman Arc has bridged over inter-
mittently the gap between Australia and Asia, so that many forms of
Oriental plant and animal life have passed over into Australia. It is to
this bridge that Australia owes its one patch of Asiatic rhododendron
(now living on the Bellenden Ker Ranges of Queensland), together with a
large number of other plants migrated from Asia. New Guinea itself,
with its glorious garland of rhododendron, has received along this same
ridge its Sus papucnsis, and the oak, the acorns of which go to feed that
primitive pig, together with Castanopsis and Begonia. The hog-deer
lias also migrated along this same bridge into New Guinea from the
Celebes. The deep ocean fosse, Wallace’s Line, passing through the
Straits of Sunda, a negative feature resulting from crustal mobility, has
secured the Australian region from invasion by the large Asiatic
carnivores.


HISTORICAL AND TECTONIC GEOLOGY.
I. Introduction.
(a) Cosmopolitan Character of Fossil Fauna and Flora.
The identity of even minute specific characters in fossils, zone fossils
included, of the Southern Hemisphere, as compared with those of the
Northern Hemisphere, is remarkable. For example, F. W. Whitehouse
indicates that Agnostus rcticulatus of the Upper Cambrian, to the south
of Glenormiston in Queensland, is identical down to its numerous small
sculptures with the similar form from the Upper Cambrian of Sweden;
and T. S. Hall, R. A. Keble and Dr. G. Elies have shown that there is a
wonderful similarity in the specific characters of the Australian as
compared with extra-Australian graptolites. Dr. F. A. Bather has
identified the Crotalocrinus zone of the Upper Silurian of the Northern
Hemisphere'in the Yeringian strata of Victoria. W. S. Dun comments
on the presence, in the Upper Devonian and Burindi Beds (Visean) of
New South Wales, respectively, of Spirifer disjunctus and Leptcena
rhomboidalis, species familiar on the corresponding horizons in Europe.
Recently T. 11. Withers has been able to correlate the Gingin beds
of Western Australia, by means of their contained fossil crinoids Uinta-
crinus and Marsupites, with similar horizons in the Santonian chalk of
the Northern Hemisphere.
Dr. D. M. S. Watson has proved that the labyrinthodont
Capitosaurus of the Middle Triassic Ilawkesbury Series and the wonder-
fully preserved Cyclotosaurus of the Upper Triassic Wianamatta Series
—both occurring in New South Wales —are almost identical with
similar forms occurring in the Northern Hemisphere; and the same
remark applies to the larger dinosaur Rlmtosaurus broicnei, described by
Heber Longman from the Jurassic beds of Durham Downs, Queensland,
which he considers to be closely related to Camarasaurus of U.S.A.
F. Chapman has proved the specific identity of many Australian
and New Guinea foraminifera, e.g. Lepidocyclina toumoueri, Amphi-
stegina lessoni, with forms occurring on similar horizons in other parts
of the world.
As regards plants, comment has already been made on the identity
of the Middle Devonian Flora of the Burdekin Basin, Queensland, with
the Rhvnie Flora of Aberdeen, in Scotland. In this connection Dr. A. B.
Walkom supplies the data shown in the accompanying table.
On the other hand, the occurrence of identical species of fossil plants
such as Dictyophyllum rugosum respectively in the Triassic rocks of
Ipswich, Queensland, and in the Jurassic rocks of England, and of
Sphcnophyllum speciosum in the Upper Carboniferous Dinner Creek


Age.
Species.
Australian
Localities.
Extra-
Australian
Localities.
Jurassic
Ptilophyllum pecten
Stanwell,
Queensland
India
Upper Triassic
Xeocalamites lioerensis
Ipswich,
Queensland
Sweden
Permo-Carboniferous ..
Nveggerathiopsis hislopi
Australia
Tasmania
Siberia
India
China
South Africa
South America
Permo-Carboniferous . .
Glossopteris indica
Australia
Tasmania
India
South Africa
South America
Series of Eockhampton, Queensland, and in the Permian Damuda Series
of India, proves that the specific characters of some fossil plants are so
persistent that the species may range through two geological periods.
As notable exceptions to this cosmopolitanism the following fossil
groups may be mentioned, not yet found in other parts of the world, but
present in Australia, viz., the Upper Permian insects, discovered by the
late John Mitchell, and described by Dr. E. J. Tillyard, and the Upper
Triassic insects of Denmark Hill, Ipswich, Queensland, described by
Dr. E. J. Tillyard and E. Dunstan; also the remarkable fossil arthropods
and annelids of the Proterozoic Adelaide Series, which promise in the
near future to throw much light on the nature of animal life before the
Cambrian, and to be the means of correlating Proterozoic rocks through-
out the world.
Similarly the researches of Sir Douglas Mawson and C. T. Madigan
are bringing to light Proterozoic life which, while comparable with
that of tlie Belt Series of Montana, is already demonstrated to have
peculiar features of its own. The work of W. IT. Lang and Miss I.
Cookson has shown that in the Lower Silurian rocks of the Walhalla
Basin, of Victoria, there are fossil land plants probably older than any
as yet found in any other part of the world.
(b) Past Ice Ages.
One of the most fascinating features in Australian Geology is the
evidence of at least three pre-Pleistocene glaciations, one of which
affected at least half the continent, while the others were also far-
reaching.
Apart from a possible Early Proterozoic tillite near Kanowna, and
the probably fluvio-glacial conglomerates of Nullagine, mentioned below,


the earliest evidences of glaciation are those which have been so
admirably worked out by Professor Howchin in South Australia. He
has shown that the glaciation extended over an area of at least 50,000
square miles. He has traced the “Sturtian tillites” from south
of Adelaide 300 miles northwards into the Willouran Ranges, to the
south-west of Lake Eyre. Individual beds of tillite are up to 1,000 feet in
thickness. In the central and northern Flinders Range the tillites occur
on two horizons, separated from one another by 9,000 feet of sediments,
while at Boolcamata they are on many horizons, in a thickness of many
thousands of feet of strata. This Sturtian tillite is to be correlated with
the Numees tillite, 800 feet in thickness, underlying the fossiliferous
Cambrian Nama Series in South Africa, and with the thin tillites of the
Yang-tse in China. These last underlie, with slight unconformity,
Lower Cambrian strata with Archwocyathinw. The Numees tillite is
almost certainly the equivalent of the Griqualand and Pretoria tillites,
both newer Proterozoic, but there is a much older tillite in South Africa,
vis., that under the Witwatersrand gold-bearing “banket.” The equivalent
of this, in Western Australia, is possibly the basal conglomerate, with
gold and diamonds, of the Nullagine Series.
Very great interest attaches to the Carboniferous and Permian
glaciations of Australia and Tasmania. In New South 'Wales an
intense glaciation, the Kuttung Glaciation, was partly contemporaneous
with prolonged and paroxysmal volcanic eruptions producing rhyolites,
andesites and widespread tuffs. These Carboniferous glacial beds
have Rhacopteris, Aneimites, Gardiopteris and Arclueocalamites pre-
served in interstratified tuffaceous shales. They occur in the Lower
Hunter area of New South Wales, and extend to the nortli-north-west
for a distance of at least 200 miles. Their thickness,' together with that
of other sedimentary strata and intercalated volcanic rocks, is estimated
to be about 5,000 feet, but the glacial beds proper, tillites, varve-shales
and fluvio-glacial conglomerates, constitute only about 30 per cent, of
the whole. This was a land glaciation. At the close of Kuttung time —
perhaps about the age of the Pottsville conglomerates of U.S.A., and the
Millstone Grit of England—subsidence followed, but the glaciation
continued intermittently through Upper Carboniferous time into Lower,
and possibly Middle, Permian time.
Towards the close probably of Carboniferous time over half of
Australia, an area of about 1,500,000 square miles, lying south of a line
stretching from Brisbane to King Sound, was under ice. It was a
veritable Antarctica. High peaks, like those of the Macdonnell and
Musgrave Ranges, rose as dark nunatakr above the vast snowfield of this
stupendous ice sheet, much of the gathering ground of which lay far to
the south of the present south coast of Australia. On its northern
margin the ice sheet overrode the old coniferous forests. Numerous


trunks of the conifer Dadoxylon are now to be seen in the sandstones
immediately under the basal moraines, and partly close to the top
of the morainic tillite, in the Kimberley region of Western Australia.
The ice came down to sea-level as far, equatorwards, as 18° S. Latitude.
Naturally this great ice age, which lasted for a period sufficient for the
deposition of 10,000 feet of strata, including an important series of coal-
measures, must have had a profound influence on contemporaneous
animal and plant life. Reef-forming corals were killed by the cold, and
only a few forms of such life were saved by retreating equatorwards.
The productive coal-measures of Australia and Tasmania, of Kamilaroi
(Permo-Carboniferous) time, commenced to form under cold, humid
conditions, probably like those which obtain in the subantarctic
Macquarie, Campbell and Auckland islands, where thick peat is now
growing. The amelioration of the late Paheozoic, Upper Permian, climate
is shown by the progressive increase in the size of the conifers, from the
base to the top of the Permian. The Dadoxylon of pre-Greta time, Lower
Permian, appears to have been about four inches in diameter, whereas
similar trees in the Upper Permian Newcastle coal-measures, in New
South Wales, attained a diameter of 3 feet and were 120 feet high.
Another glacial epoch, less severe than the two preceding, has left
evidences of its existence in the Lower Cretaceous, Aptian, rocks of
Australia. The evidence is mostly in the form of erratics, up to six feet in
diameter, dumped from floating ice rafts. This is obvious from the fact
that the soft marine muds, on which they fell, are indented and
contorted. The contemporaneous marine fauna shows evidence, in the
opinion of Dr. F. W. Whitehouse, of the contemporaneous chilling of the
seas, reef-forming corals being driven away and cold-temperate to sub-
polar mollusca and cephalopods coming in. 1 These erratics are dis-
tributed along what Avas mostly a shore line, some 600 miles in length,
from Dalhousie south of Charlotte Waters, on the north-west, to the,
White Cliffs opal mines on the south-east. The gathering ground for the
ice which launched these ice rafts is thought by Dr. L. K. Ward
and E. C. Andrews to have been a highland stretching from the Barrier
Ranges in New South Wales to the Gawler Ranges, possibly even as far
north as the Peake and Denison Ranges, in South Australia. Ward
refers the glacially striated boulders of Mt. Dutton, south of Oodnadatta
in South Australia, to this Lower Cretaceous glaciation. It may
be only a coincidence, but this north-west-south-east ice front of the
Lower Cretaceous followed approximately that of Kamilaroi (Permo-
Carboniferous) time.
1 Dr. F. W. Whitehouse stresses the point that Tropceum arcticum and T. undatum of
the Lower Cretaceous (Roma Series) rocks of Queensland are at present not known in
any other part of the world except Spitsbergen, while Aucellina caucasica, Maccoyella
corbiensis, Ailoceras and Sanmartinoceras are common to the strata of the Roma Series
and to those of the Upper Gargasian beds of Patagonia. This evidence of refrigeration of
climate is therefore to be referred to some time between Aptian and Albian.


Evidences in Australia, Tasmania and Xew Guinea of the world-
wide Pleistocene Ice Age are given later under the stratigraphical caption
I’leistocehe.
II. Table of the Geological Formations of the Commonwealth.
It may be convenient to repeat here the tentative table of the
geological formations of the Commonwealth, given on the map, but with
some modifications, as follows:
[Abbreviations. —A., for Australia; T„ Tasmania; N.G., New Guinea; Q.,
Queensland; N.S.W., New South Wales; V., Victoria; S.A., South Australia; W.A.,
Western Australia; C.A., Central Australia; N.A., North Australia.]
CAINOZOIC.
POST-TERTIARY
Recent
O- —Active Volcanoes of New Guinea region.
27A. —Recently raised Coral Reefs.
27. —Great Barrier Reef and other living Reefs.
Recent & Pleistocene
26. —Coastal and Desert Sand Dunes and Dune Rock.
25C. —High-level Coral Limestones.
25B.—Alluvial Deposits (with “Duricrust” in parts of C.A., S.A. and
W.A.); Peat; Swamp, Lake and Cave Deposits.
25A. —Raised Beaches, but in Tasmania Glacial Deposits.
TERTIARY
Pliocene to
Pleistocene.
248. —Werrikooian Series, Sandy Shell Beds of Glenelg River, V.;
Mammaliferous Deposits, “Duricrust” in part, A.; Yalingian Gravels
and Upper Wanimo Series, N.G.
Pliocene.
24A. —Kalimnan Series, V.; Newer Deep Leads with Gold and Tin, A.
and T.; Finsch Coast Series, Brown Coal Zone and Lower Wanimo
Series, Upper Purari Series, N.G.
Miocene.
238. —Upper Aitape Series, N.G.; Janjukian Series, V., with abundant
Lepidocyclina tournoueri ; Yallourn Lignites, V.; Aldingan Series,
S.A.; Plant'agenet Beds, W.A.; Lower Purari Series, Burdigalian Beds,
N.G.
O
w
o
o
a>
3
CD
23A. —Lower Aitape Series, N.G.; Balcombian Series with Older Deep
Leads of Gold and Tin, V., N.S.W.; Brown Coal, V.; Exmouth Gulf
Beds, W.A.
Eocene.
22. —Upper Port Moresby Series, N.G. Eyrian Series (Mesas of Aus-
tralian Great Artesian Basin), in part post-Eocene. The Mebu Series,
nummulitic, of Madang, N.G.
Cret.-
Terty.
21. —Weathered Cretaceous Rocks of S.A., partly capped by Eyrian Beds.


CRETACEOUS
Upper
MESOZOIC.
20C. —Gin Gin Beds, W.A., with Uintacrinus and Marsupites; Lower Port
Moresby Series, N.G.
208. —Winton Series, lacustrine, of Australian Great Artesian Basin;
Styx Coal-measures, Q.; Melville Island and Point Charles Beds, N.A.
Radiolaria abundant; Ammonite Beds of Fly, Strickland and Palmer
Rivers, etc., N.G.
20A.—Tambo Series, Q., N.SAV., S.A., with Aucellina and Inoceramus',
Cardabia Beds, Shark Bay, W.A. Numerous Ichthyosaurs and
Plesiosaurs.
Note. —Much of the area shown as T&mbo overlies 19A, and has out-
crops of 19A, as yet unsurveyed, within its borders.
Lower
198. —Burrum Coal-measures, Q., mostly freshwater, partly marine.
19A. —Roma Series and Maryborough Series, marine, Q., and their equiva-
lents in N.SAV., S.A., W.A., and N.G. (?); Opal Fields of White Cliffs,
Lightning Ridge, N.S.W., of Coober Pedy, S.A., and of Q.
JURASSIC
ISC. — (?) Graham’s Creek Series, Q., mostly Tuffs; Lower Callovian Beds
of Strickland River, N.G.
188. —Walloon Series, Stanwell and 'Tiaro Coal-measures, Q.; Upper,
Middle, and part of Lower Clarence Series, N.SAV.; Wonthaggi
Coal-measures, Otway and Wannon Series, V. Dinosaurs on this
horizon, V. and Q.; Finke Sandstone, C.A.
ISA. —Bundanba Sandstones, Walsh River Beds (?), Q.; Talbragar Fish
Beds, Lower Clarence Series (in part), N.SAV.; Otozamites Beds of
Mingenew and Point Torment, Marine Beds of Champion Bay and
Greenough River, W.A.
TRIASSIC
Upper.
17. —Triassic Plant Beds, Bacchus Marsh, V.; Newer Coal-measures, T.;
Leigh’s Creek Coal-measures, S.A.; Wianamatta Seric-s, N.SAV.;
Ipswich, Esk and Broweena Series, Q.
Middle.
16.—Rhyndaston and Knocklofty (?) Sandstone, T.; Hawkesbury Sand-.
stone, N.S.W.; Carborough Sandstone, Q.
Lower.
15.—Narrabeen Series with Cupriferous Tuffs, N.S.W.; Ross and
Cupriferous Sandstones, T. Labyrinthodonts occur in 15, 16, and 17,
in N.S.W., and reptilian remains in 15 in T.
PERMIAN
KAMILAROI
PALAEOZOIC.
14. —Newcastle Coal-measures, N.SAV.; Upper Bowen Series, Q.; Upper
Division of Palaeozoic Coal-measures, T.; Upper (Cardiff) and Middle
(Collieburn) Coal-measures of Collie, W.A.
13. —Tomago Coal-measures, N.SAV.
12. —-Middle Bowen Series, Q.; Upper Marine Series, N.SAV.; Barn Bluff,
Pelion and Mt. Wellington Upper Marine Beds, T.; Collie
Foraminiferal Beds, W.A.
11. —Preolenna, Latrobe and Bruny Island Coals, Pelionite and Tasmanite,
T.; Greta and Coorabin (?) Coal-measures, N.SAV.; Collinsville, Mt.
Devlin and Mt. Mulligan Coal-measures, Q.; Irwin River, Liverynga
and Collie Coal-measures, W.A.
10. —Lower Marine Series, N.SAV., from base of Greta to base of main
Eurydesma cordatum horizon; similar strata- in Q., at Silverwood,
Springsure, Tooloomba, Yatton, Cracow; Eurydesma cordatum Beds
of Maria Island, T. (the last perhaps 9C2); Algal Limestone,
Gigoomgan, Q.


CARBONIFEROUS
Upper.
KAMILAROI
- 9C2. —Lower Division of Lower Marine Series, N.S.AV., with Glacial Beds
of Lochinvar, N.S.AV., of AVynyard, T., Bacchus Marsh, V., Inman
Valley, S.A., Yellow Cliff (?) and Crown Point (?), C.A.; Lyons
Conglomerate, AV.A.; Main Monilopora Beds of Drake and Kempsey
Areas, N.S.AV., of Silverwood, Springsure, etc., and of lower portion
of Lower Bowen Series, Q.; Monilopora and Favosites Beds of
Kimberley Area, Paralegoceras jaeksoni Beds of Irwin River Coal-
field, AV.A.
9CCI. —Gympie Series, Q., with Monilopora and erratics.
. 9CI. —Dinner Creek Sertes, with oldest known Glossopteris Flora, Q.
Lower
to Upper.
982. —Kuttung Glacial and Volcanic Series, with Aneimites, Rhacopteris,
etc., N.S.AV.; Aneimites Beds of Mt. Mudge and Newellton, Q.
Lower
981. —Neerkol Series, with Pustula, Spirifer mosquensis, etc., Q.
9A.—Burindi Series with Visean Fauna, N.S.AV.; Rockhampton Series with
Visean and Tournaisian Fauna, Q.; Limestones of Oscar, Geikie and
Rough Ranges, etc., W.A.
Carbo-
Devn.
8. —Grampians and Mansfield Sandstones, Dacites (see P 3), Mt.
Wellington Rhyolite Series, V.; Drummond Range and Upper Star
Beds, Q.
DEVONIAN
Upper.
7D. —Avon River and Iguana Creek Beds, V.; Lambian and Barraba Series,
N.S.W.; Berserker Series and Mt. Wyatt Series (?), Q.
Middle
7C. —Tamworth Series, with Coral Limestones, Radiolarian Cherts,
Spilites, etc., N.S.AV.; Silverwood Series and Lower Star Beds (?),
Q.; Limestones of Tauri River, N.G.
7B. —Buchan and Bindi Limestones, V.; Murrumbidgee Series, N.S.AV.;
Etna Series, and Burdekin Limestones with “Rhynie Flora,”
Ukalunda Series (possibly 7A), Q.
Lower.
7A.—Snowy River Series (see P 2), V.; Woolomin Series, Tamworth,
N.S.AV.; Fernvale Schists, Bald Mountain and Emu Park Jaspers,
“Featherbed Porphyry” Series (see P 2), Q.
SILURIAN
Upper.
6B.—Centennial (?) and Walhalla Series, Yeringian Series, V.; Yass,
Bowning, Orange and Wellington Series, N.S.W.; Chillagoe Series, Q.
Lower
6A.—Zeehan Beds with West Coast Conglomerate, T.; Melbournian Series
with Jordan Series and Mount Useful Beds, V. Oldest known land
Flora in Jordan Series.
6A (stippled).—Silurian Limestones of T.
ORDOVICIAN
Upper.
sC.—Crystalline Schist Series, V., mostly Ordovician, partly Silurian (?).
sB.—Larapintine Series, C.A.; Glenormiston Beds (in part), Q.; Grap-
tolite Beds of N.S.AV.; Upper Graptolite Series of V.
Lower.
sA.—Darriwillian, Castlemainian, Bendigonian and Lancefieldian Series
of V.; Glenormiston Beds (in part), Q.
CAMBRO-
ORDN.
4D. —Dundas Slates and Porphyroid Series (see PI), T.
4D (stippled).—Cambro-Ordovician Limestones of T.


-CAMBRIAN-
Lower. Middle. Upper.
4C. —Dolodrook Series, V.; Caroline Creek Series and Frenchman’s Cap
I Beds, T.
4B.—Heatlicotian Series, V.; Templeton River and Yelvertoft Beds, Q.;
Alroy Downs Beds, N.A.; Girvanella and Oiolella Beds of the Flinders
Ranges, S.A.
4A. —Girvanella Beds of the Macdonnell Ranges, C.A.; Redlichia Zones
of Kimberley, W.A., and of S.A.; Archwocyathince Limestones of S.A.
Passage
Beds.
PRE-CAMBRIAN (?).
3A. —Purple Slate Series of S.A., and of Macdonnell Ranges, C.A.
O
M
o:
N
O
H'
O
P-r
t
Newer
PRE-CAMBRIAN.
3.—Adelaide Series, with primitive Arthropods, S.A.; Torrowangee Series,
N.S.W.; Nullagine Series, W.A.; Greenstone Schists (?) of Brisbane,
Q., but these may he 4 or 5 of this Table.
-Older (?)•
2A- —Stirling Range and Mt. Barren Series, W.A.
2. —Mosquito..Series,_W.A.; Mt. Isa Shales and Corella Limestones, Q.;
.Pine Creek Series, N.A.; Barossian (in part) and Warrow Series,
S.A.; Port.Davey.and Ulverstone Schist Series, T.; Newer Phyllites,
Gneisses, etc., N.G.
-ARCHEOZOIC-
IB.—Kalgoorlie Series (in part) andJVVarrawqona Series _of__W,A._ Gold-
fields.; Argylla Series, Mt.lsa, Q.
1A. —Yilgarn Series, W.A.; Bynoe Harbour Schists, N.A.; Gneisses of
Macdonnell, Everard, Musgrave, Petermann and Tomkinson_Ranges t
C.A. and S.A.; Hutchison and Flinders Series and.Barossian (impart.)
with Mt. Bessemer Gneisses, S.A.; Willyama Series, N.S.W.; Leich-
hardt and Kalkadoon Series, Mt. Isa, Q.; Gneisses
Glenelg River and Mt. Stavely Area, V.; Gneisses, etc., of Owen.
Stanley Series, N.G.
IGNEOUS AND METAMORPHIC ROCKS.
G. —Granite and Granodiorite, of post-Proterozoic Age.
Gl. —Granites of Mosquito Creek Series, of Older Proterozoic Age.
p.—Granite-porphyries, Quartz-porphyries, Rhyolites, Dacites and allied
Rocks.
PI. —Porphyroid Series, Camhro-Ordovician (?), T.
P 2 River Porphyry Series, Lower Devonian, V.; Featherbed
Range Porphyries, Lower Devonian (?), Q.
P 3 of V., Upper Devonian, or Carbo-Devonian.
FP. —Felspar-porphyries of Gawler Ranges, S.A.; Felspar-porphyries of the
Barrow Range (N. of the Townsend Range), W.A., Proterozoic.
A. —Alkaline Eruptive Rocks, mostly volcanic, including Leucite-basalts,
with small areas of Syenite, Quartz-keratophyre, etc., mainly
Tertiary, A.
DR. —Mostly Diorites and Epidiorites. In W.A. these partly belong to the
Kalgoorlie Series.
DO. —Dolerite Sills, probably Jurassic, T.


Igneous and Metamorpiiic Rocks— Continued.
D. —Dolerite, Basalt and Andesite, mainly Tertiary.
Dl. —“Antrim Plateau” Basalts of Kimberley Region, and Basalts of
Nullagine Series, W.A.; Spring Creek Basalts of Cloncurry Area,
Q.; Wooltana Basalts, S.A.; Mt. Arrowsmith Basalts, N.S.W.; all
Upper Proterozoic (?).
D 2 Basalts, Middle Permian (?), N.S.W.
D 3 Basalts, Oligocene (?), y.
D 4 Basalts, Pliocene to Recent, V.
D 5 and Norites.
S. —Serpentine, Peridotites, Pyroxenites and other Ultrabasic Rocks.
X.—Schists of uncertain age, Q. and N.G.
(X). —Crystalline Limestones of uncertain age, N.G.
III. Pre-Cambrian.
The most complete sequence of pre-Cambrian rocks in the Common-
wealth is that found in Western Australia. There are three well-defined
main divisions, the Yilgarn-Kalgoorlie Series, the Mosquito Series and the
Nullagine Series, which are separated from each other by immense un-
conformities. The Stirling Range and Mt. Barren Series have not been
found in contact with any of the others, but are invaded by the late
Mosquito granites.
On account of its importance the general sequence of the pre-
Cambrian of "Western Australia is given below', in descending order:
Newer.
The Nullagine Series with coarse and thick basal conglomerate (“banket”)
with alluvial gold and diamonds. .
Unconformity with Mosquito Series.
PROTEROZOIC.
Older (?)
The Stirling Range and Mt. Barren Series, intruded by the latest phase
of the granite of the Mosquito Series.
Granites, sodic in places, of the Mosquito Series, forming vast batholiths.
| The Mosquito Series, with, in descending order, possibly the latest acidic
porphyrites of Kalgoorlie, and their gold-telluride deposits, newer
greenstones and serpentines of Central Goldfields, sedimentary rocks,
slates, phyllites, mica-schists, dolomites. Basal conglomerate with
pebbles of red jasper and granite.
_ Unconformity.
ARCHEOZOIC.
. A
t
na h
(3- B cr
CD O CD
i§?SE! I^gggl
o’P His) P
ai 5' -i 3 CD ere
5"“ 2." 3 p O
- SP s-'^gwS
S3?to '
o O 2 ® B (t>
- £&£ "eg®
mm C/2 a> q
c+ m H- 2 H>
3? d i-. rt> oj
S t 3 P n <X> 03
CTC d &
“ ■ 2
3 k P o o c
E (D ®3 0> o ►- 3-
m 3 , b* S* --
' 2.S S-2 S
_ 3 3 g, . <
O o « »
3 ?■ s? o
« £ g.B" 1
S £ b s 1 3 S
l°« BSS
-S | eg
I 3 S- | " £
2o“ o-
O fD
n 2 2j a o p
a: 3 5 a"*
<d . £ <-► >q 5*
-“feg.
O' pi 5 cn -
S gc °P°
| ® a aw 3
S- g 7 o g %
re & 9f 2 o ~
-J o »
o s p o m®
C p B W* P
M HJ H. w p
O' C P b
gc? “ e.
g O |3 b- a cr
, 3 &i (D
A detailed correlation of the pre-Cambrian rocks of the other States
with those of Western Australia is at present impracticable, but pro-
visional groupings are indicated below.


Archeozoic.
The Yilgarn Series of Western Australia consists of garnet- and
sillimanite-gneisses, staurolite-kyanite-schists, sericite-scliists, quartzites
with chrome-mica (fuchsite), and granitic gneisses with their satellitic
pegmatites and basic intrusions, of the Central Goldfields; the rocks of
the Ravensthorpe Goldfield with amblygonite dykes; the charnockites,
gneisses, etc., of Narrogin, and of the Fraser and Warburton Ranges,
W.A.; the biotite-sillimanite-gneisses of the Kimberley area, W.A. With
this group are to be correlated the gneiss, the coarse mica-schists and
graphitic schists with amblygonite dykes of Bynoe Harbour near Darwin,
the gneisses of the Macdonnell, Everard, Musgrave, Petermann and
Tomkinson Ranges, Central Australia and South Australia, the
Hutchison Series of garnet-gneisses, calc-forsterite-scliists, graphite-
schists, grapliite-garnet-gneisses, and the later intrusive gneisses with
pyroxene-granulites, etc., of the Flinders Series, Eyre’s Peninsula, S.A.,
the gneisses of the Barossian Series, in part, such as those of the Mt.
Bessemer area, S.A., the Yudnamutana sillimanite-, sapphire- and
cordierite-schists and gneisses of the Northern Flinders Range, S.A., the
sillimanite-garnet-gneisses of the Willyama Series of Broken Hill, N.S.W.,
the gneisses and schists of the Glenelg and Mt. Stavely area, V., the
gneisses and garnet-mica-schists of the Leichhardt-Kalkadoon Series, Mt.
Isa, of the Einasleigli and Copperfield Rivers and of the Normanby
Goldfield, Q., the gneisses of Gatcombe Head, near Gladstone, and of
Dunk and Barnard Islands off the north-east coast of Queensland, and
the older gneisses (?) of the Owen Stanley and Bewani Ranges, New
Guinea.
The hornblende-, zoisite-, calc- and sericite-scliists of the “older
greenstones,” of the Kalgoorlie, Warrawoona and other goldfields of
W.A., probably represent mostly contemporaneous basic lavas and tuffs.
The pillow lavas (spilitic?) of Lake Raeside and the fluvio-glacial con-
glomerates of the Kanowna Goldfield possibly belong here, as well as the
Argylla Series, mostly hornblende- and chlorite-schists, and the Wonga
granites, of the Mt. Isa area, Q. These are separated by a massive con-
glomerate with stretched pebbles from the Leichhardt-Kalkadoon Series.
The older quartz-mica-schist series of Tasmania may possibly be placed
here.
Proterozoic.
Older (?) Proterozoic.
The Mosquito Series of Western Australia is mostly an altered sedi-
mentary series of schists, phyllites, jaspers and dolomites, and includes
the Ashburton Series, formed of similar rocks. At its base is a coarse
conglomerate containing pebbles of gneissic granite. Of the same age is
the Pine Creek Series of North Australia with its mica- and chlorite-
schists and acid tuffs and lavas, the slates, schists and black carbonaceous


shales with small annelid-like fossils, of Mt. Isa, and the very massive
marmorised limestones of the Corella Series in the same area of northern
Queensland, the Barossian Series in part of S.A., consisting of schists
with chiastolite, etc., the Gawler Range felspar-porphyries of S.A., the
schists and phyllites of the Warrow Series of Eyre’s Peninsula, and of
the Iron Knob area, S.A., the mica- and quartz-schist series of Ulverstone
and the high central plateaux of Tasmania, including the quartzites of
Port Davey. These last are riddled with annelid burrows.
The mica-quartz-gneiss of the Cape Goldfield, mica-andalusite-, and
chlorite-schists of Charters Towers, mica-quartz- and sillimanite-schists
of the Hamilton and Coen Goldfields, and the schists of the Etheridge,
Woolgar and Gilbert Goldfields, all in Queensland, may be of this age,
though they may be as old as the Yilgarn Series. The newer gneisses
and phyllites of New Guinea are probably all of Mosquito age.
The close, probably, of Mosquito time was marked by the most
stupendous intrusions of granite that have ever taken place in the
geological history of Australia. The compound granite batholith of the
southern portion of W.A. is as large in area as the whole of France, and
was probably responsible for the introduction of most of the gold ores
of that State, as well as those of tin, tantalite, etc. The granites of
Poona, W.A,,. witli their pegmatite dykes, with huge crystals of beryl,
belong here. The granites of the Pilbara Goldfield, bringing gold, tin,
tantalum, radium, etc., are to be included here, as well as the granites of
Pine Creek, N.A., which have brought in the gold and tin. The granites
of Cloncurry, which have introduced the silver-lead, zinc and copper
ores, belong to this age, as do also the Mundi Mundi granites, of Broken
Hill, which may have been the carriers of the silver-lead and zinc and
copper into some of the Broken Hill lodes, the newer granites, with beryl,
of the Macdonnell Ranges, and the titaniferous beryl-bearing granites of
Boolcamata, S.A., which have also been connected, through their basic
phases, with the introduction of radium ores at Olary. The titaniferous
syenites, diopside-diorites, granites, etc., of the Barossian Series in the
Mt. Lofty area, and Yorke’s Peninsula, S.A., may be grouped here,
together with the Arthurton granite, with its associated dykes, which
have carried the copper into the Wallaroo lode.
The Stirling Range Series, W.A., occupies a trough-faulted
area, and is formed of thin-bedded quartzites and reddish purple
slates and shales. The greater resistance to denudation of the
quartzites, as compared with the surrounding gneissic granite, has led
to these sediments forming a steep-sided conspicuous range over 4,000
feet high, and some 3,500 feet above the surface of the granite peneplain.
The fact that the Stirling Range, at its north-western end, is intruded by
granite, and that no evidence has as yet been noticed of the Nullagine
Series being anywhere intruded by granite in W.A., suggests that the
strata of this range are somewhat older than those of the Nullagine


Series. At the same time they have a distinctly newer appearance than
the typical rocks of the Mosquito Series. It is assumed that the granite
which intrudes them is a later phase of the Mosquito granites.
The rocks of the Mt. Barren Series are chiefly phyllites, slates and
quartzites similar to those of the Stirling Range.
Economic. —The close of Mosquito time was marked by what was,
probably, the most important metallogenetic epoch through which
Australia has ever passed. All the chief goldfields of Western Australia
with, at Kalgoorlie, tellurides of gold, silver and mercury, appear to
have been connected with some phases of the intrusion of the gigantic
granite batholiths of this age, as already noted.
The silver-lead and zinc ores of Broken Hill, N.S.W., and of the Mt.
Isa and Lawn Hills area of Queensland, also are perhaps homotaxial
with the above, though like them situated principally in Arclucozoic rocks.
The extensive iron ore deposits, mostly litematite, of Yampi Sound
(Koolon Island), and Wilgie Mia in Western Australia, Iron Knob, Iron
Monarch, etc., in South Australia, those of the Leviathan and Mount
Pliilp, in Queensland, are perhaps referable to this period, as also are the
radium lode at Olary, in South Australia, and, possibly, the radium
deposit of Yudnamutana, but the latter may even be as new as dykes
which have intruded there the Sturtian Tillite of the Adelaide Series.
Newer Proterozoic.
This was perhaps the most extensive, and, in some respects, is the
most interesting sedimentary formation in the whole of Australia. It now
covers an area of about 310,000 square miles, and the sea in which it was
deposited formerly^covered fully half of the entire area of Australia.
One of the oldest parts of this sea lay in the Pilbara region of Western
Australia. It was open to the west, and bounded on the south-west by
the Older Proterozoic land of Yilgarnia. On the north was a high land-
mass, probably snow-covered, extending from Port Hedland to at least
as far east as Nullagine township. This land supplied thick masses of
very coarse conglomerate, with some alluvial gold and diamonds, inter-
mittently along the shore line. East of Nullagine and at least as far
east as Wiluna the Nullagine sea seems to have spread northwards more
or less continuously to Cambridge Gulf; it may have been open to the
west, but the King Leopold and other ranges in the Kimberley region
remained as islands. To the north-east rose the Darwin-Pine Creek-
Arnhem massif, which, probably uniting further east with the Cloncurry
massif, bounded this part of the Nullagine sea. To the south were
probably two large islands, where the Macdonnell and Musgrave Ranges
are now situated, and between these there stretched the waters of the
Amadeus Strait. From the east end of the Macdonnell Ranges, where
limestones of immense thickness with Cryptozoa imply enduring dear-
water conditions, to at least as far east as Boulia, this mediterranean sea


extended southwards for 840 miles to Yorke’s Peninsula, S.A. The form
of the Nullagine sea south of Musgrave Range is unknown, but it may
have been of the nature of a large strait, the southern boundary of which
may have been an easterly extension of Yilgarnia. The limits of the sea
to the south-east in New South Wales are not known, but its sediments
have been traced to the east of Broken Hill. South and south-west of
Boulia more recent sediments hide any traces of its further extension in
this direction.
In the Pilbara region the Newer Proterozoic strata are termed the
Nullagine Series, in the Kimberley region the Elvire Series, in the
Macdonnell Ranges they are known as the Pataknurra Series, and in
the Flinders and Mt. Lofty Ranges of South Australia as the Adelaide
Series. In the Broken Hill region they are called the Torrowangee, or
Poolamacca, Series. The Series at Kimberley is estimated to be from
11,000 to 15,000 feet thick.
The Nullagine Series , etc. —In the Pilbara Goldfield the Nullagine
Series commences with a very coarse conglomerate, having a fluvio-
glacial aspect, with an aggregate thickness of from 300 to 500 feet.
The conglomerate is followed by remarkable glauconitic and some-
what tuffaceous sandstones, evidently of marine origin. At Pilbara a
considerable thickness of basic to acid lavas succeeds, and these are
followed by a great thickness of shaly rocks with laminated limestones
and thin quartzites. These last show tracks of annelids.
At Carawine Pool, on the Oakover River, a thick mass of siliceous
dolomite, possibly an equivalent of the Campbell-Rand limestones of
South Africa, unconformably overlies the volcanic series.
In the Kimberley region the Elvire Series commences with quartzites,
grits, and conglomerates, resting with violent unconformity on a series
of schists and gneisses. Shales and thick dolomitic limestones succeed,
or alternate with the quartzites. The overlying volcanic series, the
“Antrim Plateau basalts,” some 3,000 feet thick, represent volcanic out-
bursts on a gigantic scale. Not only were they developed at Kimberley
and over the large area between Wyndham and King’s Sound, but they
have been traced eastwards, through the Victoria River and Roper River
areas in North Australia, to Spring Creek, near Mt. Isa, Q., and south-
wards to Powell’s Creek, to Wooltana, north-east Flinders Range, S.A.,
Mt. Arrowsmith, north of Broken Hill, and to the Townsend Range in
W.A. Rich soils result from the weathering of these basic rocks.
At Kimberley the Antrim basalts are separated by an unconformity
from the overlying Lower Cambrian rocks. In the Flinders Range,
during the time interval represented by this unconformity, a thickness
of 8,000 feet of strata accumulated before the base of the Lower Cambrian
rocks was reached.
The Adelaide Series. —The strata of the Adelaide Series, near
Adelaide, are probably 13,000 feet thick. The Adelaide Series falls essen-


tially into two divisions, vis., a glacial series with a dwarf fauna and
flora above, and a series with remarkable large, as well as small, fossils
below. The latter are of quite extraordinary interest, and, in view of
their immense antiquity, and the high temperature to which they have
been subjected, they are, though only in rare cases, fairly well preserved.
At least eight distinct types of animal have been identified. The arthro-
pods range from a few inches up to about fifteen inches in length, and
are extremely primitive. They differ greatly from any known Cambrian
forms; some have eurypterid, and others possibly trilobite, affinities, but
all are probably aeons older than the eurypterids and trilobites
proper. The lower division of the series is formed of limestones,
pliyllites and quartzites. The fossils are best preserved in the quartzites,
in the form of casts. Radiolaria occur in the limestones, and some
giant annelids as well as arthropods are found in the quartzites.
Primitive algal remains, in the form of cylindrical and polygonal struc-
tures, are important constituents of the limestones, and are associated
in places with Halimeda-l\ke fossils. A.sharp break occurs at the base
of the upper division, which is marked by the wonderful tillite over 1,000
feet thick, called by its discoverer, Professor Howchin, the Sturtian
Tillite. This tillite is almost certainly the equivalent of the Numees
Tillite of South-west Africa. This latter occurs on a much higher
horizon than that of the Witwatersrand “banket” series, vis., in the
Pretoria Series, which is stratigraphically about 18,000 feet above the
Rand glacial horizon.
A correlation of these pre-Cambrian glacial horizons might be
suggested as follows:
Kimberley, W.A.
Nullagine, W.A.
South Australia.
South Africa.
Sturtian Tillite.
Numees Tillite.
*- * * *
* * * *
Antrim Plateau
Basalts.
Wooltana
Basalts.
Quartzites, grits,
conglomerates and
dolomitic lime-
stones.
* * * *
Shaly rocks with
laminated lime-
stones and thin
quartzites.
* * # *
Quartzites, clay-
slates, phyllites
and limestones,
with fossil arthro-
pods and annelids.
Campbell-Rand
limestones, etc.
# * * *
Nullagine lavas.
Ventersdorp lavas.
Glauconitic
sandstones.
Quartzite.
Nullagine
conglomerate
(fluvio-glacial ?).
“ Banket.”
Glacial horizon.


The Sturtian Tillite can also be correlated with the late Proterozoic
(?) Yang-tse Tillite, 150 feet thick, of China.
The Sturtian Tillite passes upwards into finely laminated shales, the
Tapley’s Hill shales (with thin limestones at their base) over 1,000 feet
thick, and these strata are followed by siliceous limestones in places, as
at Burra, fully 1,000 feet thick, ending upwards in the Brighton oolitic
limestone about 40 feet thick. This last abounds in minute fossils.
. The Greenstone Schist Series, Q. —This lies at the base of the Bris-
bane Schists and is well developed along the Dayborough road to the
north of Brisbane. It is considered by A. K. Denmead do represent con-
temporaneous andesites, porphyrites and basalts, and to have a thickness
of about 8,000 feet. Its age may lie between Proterozoic and Ordovician.
Economic. —Alluvial gold and gold-bearing pyrites are widely dis-
tributed through the basal conglomerates of the Xullagine Series at
Pilbara. 1 Alluvial diamonds, mostly too small to be of value, occur in the
conglomerates, but one has sold for £4O. A rich bonanza of copper ore
which yielded values up to £4,000,000 occurred at Burra in the siliceous
limestone of the Adelaide Series. The Brighton limestone is used for the
manufacture of Portland cement.
Neiver Proterozoic (or Possibly Lower Cambrian).
The Purple Slate Series, S.A. —At the top of the Brighton limestone
there is a marked lithological break, without angular unconformity, the
overlying rocks being the Purple Slate Series, 1,500 t 0,10,000 feet (?) in
thickness. These reddish purple slates are interstratified with thin
oolitic limestones and some quartzites. Rarely fossils occur. So far
none has been determined. Possibly this great series of red beds is
partly of the nature of an old loess. It may represent in geological time
the missing Nevadia, Elliptocephalus and Olenellus zones of the
Cambrian, none of which has been definitely identified in Australia.
IV. Palaeozoic.
Cambrian.
In Lower Cambrian time, the Nullagine seas had considerably-
shrunk, but still extended right across Australia from the Kimberley
region to the entrance to Gulf St. Vincent.
The early structure seems to have been that of a broad basin
somewhat boomerang-shaped with its convexity directed eastwards. The
northern part of this sea had a north-west to south-east trend. Its south-
west shores were formed by the pre-Cambrian rocks of the Tanaini to
1 Some of the Pilbara “banket” is richer in gold than that of South Africa, but on
account of the rate of wages in Australia it cannot, at present, be profitably worked.


Macdonnell Range area, and its north-east shores by the pre-Cambrian
rocks of the Darwin-Pine Creek and Arnhem Land massif. South of a
line from Mt. Isa (in Queensland) to the Macdonnell Ranges the palueo-
geography becomes more obscure. The Cambrian sea of Lower Cambrian
time appears to have had a deep gulf extending westwards all along the
southern side of the Macdonnell Ranges, and bounded southwards by
the northern foothills of the Musgrave, Mann and Tomkinson Ranges.
The main western shore stretched south to Gulf St. Vincent and was
bounded on the west by the pre-Cambrian rocks, Proterozoic to
Arclueozoic in age, stretching from the north-west end of Lake Torrens
to Eyre’s Peninsula. The eastern shore line, in part, was formed by the
pre-Cambrian strata of the north-east Flinders Range at Yudnamutana
to Olary and the pre-Cambrian rocks of Mt. Compass, Yankalilla, etc., on
the south-east side of Gulf St. Vincent.
In Middle Cambrian time the north-west part of this basin had risen,
though a large part of North and of Central Australia was still sub-
merged ; but the old western shore-line had now migrated eastwards, and
a fresh branch of the Cambrian sea developed in central and eastern
Victoria, extending perhaps into Tasmania.
In Upper Cambrian time the Duchess-Glenormiston area of Queens-
land was still submerged, but an immense area of the former Middle
Cambrian sea to the north had now become land. An Upper Cambrian
sea, probably a continuation of that in south-west Queensland, had now
developed in east-central Victoria, at Dolodrook, and extended south-
wards into the western half of Tasmania.
Rocks of this age in the Commonwealth may tentatively be classed
(after F. TV. TVhiteliouse) in descending order, as follows:
Cambro-Ordovician :
Dundas Slates with Hurdia, older limestones of Beaconsfield, etc., and
Porphyroid Series of Tasmania ( Hurdia possibly Middle Cambrian).
Upper Cambrian:
ii. Caroline Creek Series, Tasmania (Tremadocian Asaphellus Stage).
Ferruginous sandstones of Caroline Creek, the Frenchman’s Cap, and
Florentine Valley, with Asaphellus, Tsinania, Crepicephalus, etc.
i. Dolodrook Limestones with Crepicephalus, Acrothele, etc., Victoria.
Duchess-Glenormiston Series, Queensland, with a Pagodia Stage over-
lying a Proceratopyge Stage, with Ptycliagnoslus reticulatus, probably
covers a period of time ascending a little above (ii), and descending a
little below (i).
Middle Cambrian-
iii. A Leiagnostus Stage near Glenormiston, Queensland.
ii. Dinesus Stage. Delicately laminated siliceous shales and jaspers of
Templeton River, Queensland, with exquisitely preserved trilobites,
Dinesus, Notasaphus, Pagetia, Xystridura (close to Bathyuriscus) ,
Paradoxides (?), Acrothele, Protospongia.
Trilobite beds of Alroy -Downs, Avon Downs, Alexandra Station, North
Australia; Elkedra Downs, Central Australia; Yelvertoft, Queensland.
Heathcotian Series of Victoria, laminated cherts, with radiolaria. and


Protospongia, of Knowsley East, near Heathcote, and reddish sandy
shales of Kilmore Gap, with Dinesus and Notasaphus; the submarine
basic lavas with spilitic affinities of the Colbinabbin Range; the lime-
stones and slates with Salterella and Acrothele of the Howqua area
near Mansfield, Victoria.
i. Obolella Stage of Parachilna-Wirrialpa area, Flinders Range, S.A.
Lower Cambrian:
iii. Redlichia Stage, Kimberley area, Western Australia. Flaggy lime-
stones with red and green shales. Salterella hardmani, and Redlichia
forresti abundant, together with Girvanella.
Flora Downs and Yelvertoft lower trilobite shales, Queensland.
Girvanella beds of Pataoorrta Series, Macdonnell Ranges, Central
Australia. The Girvanella shows “like golf balls set in Portland
cement.”
Redlichia beds of Flinders Range, South Australia, perhaps 3,000 feet
stratigraphically above the Archceocyathince limestones.
ii. Protolenoid Stage, Yorke’s Peninsula, South Australia. This is prob-
ably midway between the Paradoxides and Olenellus zones of the
Northern Hemisphere, and is characterised by the trilobite Howchinella.
i. Archaeocyathus Stage with Salterella planoconvexa.
In Yorke’s Peninsula and in the Flinders Range, as well as the eastern
Macdonnell Ranges of Central Australia, the Archceocyathince build
immense limestone reefs, which, east of the Macdonnell Ranges, are
possibly several thousands of feet in thickness. The fossils in the
Northern Flinders and to the east of the Macdonnells are in a wonder-
ful state of preservation. The Cambrian reefs are an outstanding
feature in the geology of Australia. Salterella planoconvexa has been
traced to a horizon 500 feet stratigraphically below the base of the
Archceocyathince limestones. This is the lowest horizon to which any
Palaeozoic fossil has as yet been traced in Australia.
Cambrian time in Australia was mostly very free from volcanic
disturbances or igneous intrusions. Exceptions to this are furnished by
the so-called diabases, a spilitic suite of stibmarine basic lavas of the
Kilmore Gap to Romney area and of the Colbinabbin Range of Victoria,
and possibly in part by the Porphyroid group of the Cambro-Ordovician
beds of Tasmania. These latter make a nearly right-angled unconformity
with the Lower Silurian (Valentian) rocks in that State. The series com-
prises a cycle of basic to acid lavas and tuffs ending with keratophyric
effusives. Granite and syenite invaded this volcanic suite, in late
Cambrian or possibly in Ordovician time.
This was the first metallogenetic epoch of Tasmania, but it produced
little beside some copper and iron ores.
In South Australia, on Kangaroo Island, at Encounter Bay, Murray
Bridge, Mannum and elsewhere, there are granites which may be of lower
Palaeozoic age, possibly late-Cambrian.
Oroovician.
The emergence at the north-west end of the Lower Cambrian sea was
continued throughout Middle and Upper Cambrian time, so that at the
beginning of Ordovician time the boundary of the sea on the north-west


was only a little north of the Tropic of Capricorn. The Amadeus Strait
of Nullagine and Cambrian time appears to have continued throughout
the whole of the Ordovician Period. To the east of the Macdonnell
Ranges this sea formed a wide bight, extending east to the Togo, or
Cairns, Range of Queensland, and to a point about 14 miles south-west of
Glenormiston, an ancient land surface lying in the direction of Duchess
and Mt. Isa. From west of Duchess the Ordovician shore-line swept
south-south-east to Boulia, and thence swung around in a wide bay with
land on the north, thence trending in the general direction of Charters
Towers and probably still further east. The deposits formed in the
part of the Ordovician sea occupying Amadeus Strait, the south
escarpments of the Macdonnell Ranges, and the wide bay between their
eastern end and the pre-Cambrian shore-line between Duchess and
Boulia, were mostly of a littoral character. They were from 1,000 to
possibly 10,000 feet in thickness, and consisted of ripple-marked sand-
stones, calcareous sandy shales and dolomites, and rubbly limestones.
Their most abundant and characteristic fossils are Orthis leviensis,
Isoarca, Raphistoma, the latter extraordinarily numerous, and frequent
large cephalopods, such as Endoceras, Orthoceras, Baltoceras, Proto-
cameroceras, etc., and the trilobites Asaphus, Illamus, Ptychopyge, etc.
These littoral deposits belong to the Larapintine system of Ralph Tate.
Their possible extension southward and eastward from the Amadeus
Strait is masked by a thick covering of Mesozoic rocks belonging to the
Great Artesian Basin. It is possible that an outlier occurs at the east
end of the Everard Range, and the mesas to the west of Lake Torrens
may include some Ordovician rocks, but they probably belong mostly to
the Adelaide Series, or to the Passage Beds which overlie them. The
general course of the old strand-line from the east of the Everard Ranges
seems to have run to a point north of Algebuckina and the Peake Range,
thence past Lake Eyre and to the north .of the Flinders and Barrier
Ranges, thence east-south-east in the direction of Cobar, in New South
Wales, thence southerly towards Narrandera, thence south-westerly to the
pre-Cambrian rocks of the Mount Stavely, Casterton, and Glenelg region
in general, in western Victoria. Tasmania, with the exception of the belt
of pre-Cambrian rocks between Ulverstone and Port Davey, with their
selvage of Cambrian rocks, appears to have been submerged in Ordo-
vician time. This supposition is rendered probable by the occurrence of
a graptolite, Callograptus (?), in the Dundas Slates of the Dundas tram-
line. It is thought also that the limestones at Blenkhorn’s quarry, near
Latrobe, with their large cephalopods, may be of Ordovician age.
The large area of eastern Australia, lying generally to the east of
this old shore-line, appears to have been a relatively deep sea. In
Victoria there is a great development of Ordovician rocks of a pelagic
graptolitic type belonging to this sea. These extend southwards
into Tasmania, and northwards into New South Wales, right up to the


Queensland border. This sea, probably continuous with the Larapintine
sea, spread over much of eastern Queensland as well, but so far no
fossils have been found belonging to this eastern extension of the sea,
except in the south-east extremity of the State, near Point Danger. There
a Diplograptus has been identified in the local Brisbane Schists, which
there belong either to the top of the Ordovician (?) Bunya Series, or to
the base of the Silurian (?) Neranleigli Series. A long intermittent
belt of Upper Ordovician rocks, characterised by veins of turquoise and
other hydrous phosphates, extends from the Ovens River, Victoria, through
Bodalla and Murwillumbah in New South Wales, the Neranleigh and
Bunya Series of Brisbane, and the cherts of Gladstone and Yeppoon, to
Innisfail, south of Cairns, Queensland. The uniform character of this
phosphatic zone suggests a more or less continuous development of
Upper Ordovician rocks, along the eastern sea-board of Australia, for
the distance of about 1,700 miles.
The graptolite zones of Victoria are among the most interesting
features in the whole of Australian geology. No little progress has been
made in the important work of zoning the Lower Ordovician Australian
graptolites, particularly by T. S. Hall, as well as by G. B. Pritchard,
AV. J. Harris, and specially of late by R. A. Keble. The last, collaborating
with Professor W. N. Benson, has zoned the graptolite horizons
of New Zealand, and correlated them with those of Australia. Little
work has been done as yet in zoning the Upper Ordovician graptolites of
this continent. Keble has adopted Hall’s four divisions of the Lower
ZONE
D
AR
RIWll
CASfLEMA
NE
BE
SDICO
LANCEEIELD
SUBZONE
D1
DZ
DJ
D4
D5
Cl
C2
C5
C4
C5
Bl
B2
B5
B<>
B5
LI
L2
L3
L4
IS
Tetrag. cjuadribrachiatus.JAfa//
Cryptog. tricornis, Carr
Didymog. nodosus. Hams
Diplog. sp.
Card iog. morsus. Hams an.
Oncog.sp.
Didymog. caduc eos,Salter
see Table
Phyllog. sp
Didymog bifidus, JMall
Comog thureaui ,ITCoy
Tetra g. fnilicosos, (3br.) JHall
Tetrag. fruti cosus.wbnJHa//
Telrag appronimatus. Nich
Bryog. sp.
Biyog. victoriac T.S.Hall
Oictyonema grande. TS-Hall
Tetrag. decipiens. T.SMall
Staurog. sp.
-
—
-


TABLE A.
CORRELATION TABLE OF AUSTRALIAN AND EXTRA-AUSTRALIAN ORDOVICIAN GRAPTOLITE ZONES, AFTER DK. GERTRUDE ELLES.
Zones as recognized
in extra-Australian
Areas.
Characteristic Assemblages indicating General Horizon,
with some Victorian localities.
Australian Zones.
Australian Divisions.
America (New York, etc.).
Ashgillian
Zone of Dicellograptus
complanatus.
Dicellog. complanatus Lapw. Climacog. miserabilis (?=C1.
mensoris. T. S. Hall) Mt. Easton.
Zone of Dicellograptus com-
planatus. (Indian Terirtory)
Oaradocian
Zone of Pleurograptus
linearis.
Leptog. flaccidus J. Hall. Dicellog. forchammeri Gein. D.
elegans Carr.
Climacoe. tubuliferus Lapw. Orthog. quadrimucronatus
J. Hall.
Orthog. truncatus. var. pauperatus Lapw. f Wellington
(=carnei T. S. Hall pars.). i Mt. Easton
L XJp. Thompson R.
Zone of Orthograptus quadri-
mucronatus Hall and Cli-
macog. typicalis Hall.
Zone of Dicranograptus
clingani.
Dicellog. morrisi Hopk. Dicellog. caduceus Lapw. D.
elegans Carr. Dicranog. ramosus J. Hall — var. longicaulis
E. and W. Orthog. calcaratus Lapw. ( = foliaceus auctorum
non. Murch.).
0. truncatus Lapw. (=camei T. S. Hall pars.) Climacog. caudatus
Lapw*. (=wellingtonensis T. S. Hall).
Glossog. hincksij Hopk. (— hermanni T. S. Hall) Plegmatog.
nebula E. and W. (=Ret. caudatus T. S. Hall).
Neurog. margaritatus Lapw.
Zone of Climacog. caudatus
Lapw.
Zone of Climacog.
wilsoni.
Climacog. wilsoni lapw. (= barag- ") vvdlimrton
wanathi T. S. HaU). Dicranog. nichol- [ J? 1 ®!"
soni Hopk. Cryptog. tricornis Carr, r
Cl. bicornis var. longispinaT. S. Hail. J J n Jt ve .
Llandeilian
Zone of Climacog.
peltifcr.
Climacog. peltifer. Cl. bicornis Hall, and var. tridentatus
Hall. Dicranog. rectus Hopk.
Dicranog. furcatus Lapw. Dicranog. Zic Zag Lapw.
Amplexig. perexcavatus. Jordan River.
Zone of Amplexigraptus am-
plexicaulis (Upper Dicellog.
Zone).
Zone of Nemag. gracilis.
Nemag. gracilis Em. Glyptog. euglyphus /Roan Horse Gully.
Lapw. Dicellog. sextans Hall. \?N. W. Bulla.
Lower Dicellograptus Zone.
(Normanskill).
LlANVIRNIAN
Zofles of pendent Didy-
mograpti (mature)
Didymog. murchisoni Beck, and vars. amplus E. and W. var.
germinus His. Didymog. eworfnsLapw.
Didymog. bifidus Hall, late form, and numerous Glossograpti.
Glyptog. teretiusculus His.
Darriwil
Series.
? Highest Beds of Deep Kill
Section.
Arenigian.
Zones of
“ cxtcnsiforin ”
Didymograpti.
Didymog. extensus J. Hall. D. nitidus,
Hall. D. gibberulus Nich.
D. nicholsoni. Lapw. Tetrag. quadri-
brachiatus J. HaU. T. serra Brong.
D. aif. bifidus (early form).
T. pendens EUes. T. approximatus
Nich. T. amii E. and W.
Phyllog. ilicifolius J. Hall (=Cf. typus
auctorum non J. HaU).
PhyUog. typus HaU.
P. angustifolius J. HaU. P. sp.
Loganog. logani J. HaU. Goniog.
thureaui McCoy.
Dichog. octobrachiatus J. Hall.
Glyptog. dentatus Brong. Glossog.
acanthus E. and W.
Bendigo
Castlemaine
Marong
Daylesford
T. quadribrachiatus
Cryptog. tricornis.
Glossograptus.
Transitional Sub-zone
(Mt. Moreno).
Zone with Didymog. bifidus
early form and Phyllog. anna.
(Deep Kill).
Zones with Tetragraptus.
(Deep Kill).
Cardiog. morsus.
Diplog. gnomonicus.
T. quadribrachiatus.
Zone of Didymog. V.
deflexus.
Abundance of D.
caduceus.
1st appearance Dip-
lograptus.
T. quadribrachiatus.
Zone of Didymog.
caduceus.
Castlemaine
Series.
D. aff. bifidus.
T. fruticosus
(3-branched).
T. quadribrachiatus.
Zone of Didymog.
aff. bifidus (=proto-
fldus) early form.
T. fruticosus (4-
branched).
T. quadribrachiatus.
T. approximatus (at
base).
Clonograpti at base.
Zone of Tetragraptus
fruticosus.
Bendigo
Series.
Zone of “ many-
branched ” Graptolites.
Clonog. rigidus J. Hall. Clonog. flexilis
J. Hall.
Clonog. magnificus T. S. HaU. Dichog.
octobrachiatus J. HaU.
Tetrag. approximatus Nich. T. de-
cipiens T. S. HaU. Bryograpti.
Lancefleld.
Lancefield
Series.
(Probably not represented at
Deep Kill).
■<
CJ
t
z
c
&H
z
s
4
t
>
ei
3
................
55
O
E-i
>5
5
55
U
«
.......
Canada (Quebec, etc.).
Zone of Orthog. quadri-
mucronatus (Hall) and
Leptogr. flaccidus
(Hall).
Upper Dicellograptus
Zone.
Lower Dicellograptus
Zone.
Levis Zone 4 (Levis
Town). Didymog. bi-
fldus, mature form.
Levis Zones 2 and 3.
(Levis Shore, Point
Levis).
Levis Zone 1.
Note. —Forms in italics not yet recorded from Australia.


Ordovician rocks of Victoria, wliich are in descending order, the Darri-
willian, Castlemainian, Bendigonian, and Lancefleldian. He gives the
order of appearance and geological range of the type graptolites of
Victoria as shown on the accompanying graph.
The graptolites, particularly of the Lancefield division, are
exquisitely preserved, showing as pale mauve-coloured delicate traceries
on a background of thinly laminated black shales. A considerable
variety of the Ceratiocaridce are associated with the graptolites. Keble
considers that the graptolite succession of Australia differs from that
of Europe, and more closely resembles that of America, where, in the
opinion of Ruedemann, the succession differs from that of Europe. On
the other hand, Dr. Gertrude Elies believes that the sequence of the
graptolite zones of Australia is practically the same as that of Europe.
The only general correlation table of graptolite zones in Australian and
extra-Australian areas available to the author at the moment is the one
given in Table A, by Dr. Gertrude Elies.
As an alternative interpretation of the graptolitic sequence in the
Lower Ordovician rocks of Victoria, the' following is given, after
R. A. Keble:
TABLE A'.
Zones and Sub-Zones of the Lower Ordovician, Victoria, Australia.
Zone. Typical Locality.
Zone Fossils (restricted
species shown in italics).
Associated Forms.
Darriwil Series.
D 1
way (3 miles east of
Bendigo).
Tetragraptus
4-brachiatus
Didymograptus nodosus
Cryptograptus tricornis.
Numerous Diplograpti
and Climacograpti
Lasiograptus
Glossograptus
Cardiograptus sp.
(D. caduceus, D. v-deflexus and Diplograptus gnomonicus ;
are apparently absent.)
D 2
Road Cutting (1 mile
west of Guildford).
T. 4-brachiatus
Glossograptus
Diplograptus sp.
D. v-deflexus.
D. caduceus (variant
form).
Loganograptus cf. logani.
Diplograptus gnomonicus.
Trigonograptus ensi-
formis.
(C. morsus, D. nodosus, C. tricornis absent. The association more than any one
form is typical. Of individual forms a small easily recognised Diplograptus is most
characteristic.)
D 3
Railway (half - mile
west of Loddon River
Railway Bridge).
(Oncograptus absent.)
T. 4-brachiatus
Cardiograptus morsus
D. v-deflexus.
Diplograptus gnomonicus
D. caduceus (variant
form)
Trigonograptus ensi-
formis
Phyllograptus.
D 4
Castlemaine (near
Muckleford Railway
Station).
T. 4-brachiatus
Cardiograptus morsus
Oncograptus
D. v-deflexus.
D. caduceus (variant
form)
D. forcipiformis
Trigonograptus ensi-
formis
Diplograptus gnomonicus
Strophograptus tricho-
manes
Phyllograptus.
(The occurrence of Oncograptus with Cardiograptus is characteristic.)


Zone Fossils (restricted
Zone. Typical Locality. species shown in italics).
Associated Forms.
Darriwil Series — Continued.
maine (road cutting Oncograptus upsilon
near north-west boun- D. caduceus (large
dary of Castlemaine and variant)
Borough). D. v-deflexus.
Goniograptus speciosus
Diplograptus gnomonicus
Diplograptus sp.
Trigonograptus ensi-
formis
Phyllograptus.
(Characterised by first appearance of Oncograptus upsilon and D. v-deflexus in
numbers.)
Castlemaine Series.
Castlemaine. D. caduceus (maximum
development).
Loganograptus loganl
Diplograptus sp.
Didymograptus spp.
(Didymograptus caduceus dominates this sub-zone. Oncograptus upsilon is extremely
rare. Did. v-deflexus is absent.)
maine. D. caduceus ( sub-
maximal development).
Didymograptus spp.
Diplograptus spp.
(earliest appearance)
Dendroid forms.
(The stage of development between Cl and C 2 is characteristic.)
(Loganograptus and Phyllograptus are absent. In C 1 and C 2 D. caduceus repre-
sents probably 80% of the graptolite fauna.)
C 3 Victoria Gully, East T. 4-brachiatus
Castlemaine. D. caduceus (small)
Phyllograptus.
Comparatively few.
(The association of small forms of D. caduceus with
Phyllograptus is charac-
teristic.)
T. 4-brachiatus
Comparatively few.
(The virtual absence of D. caduceus—which, however, appears at a few outcrops of a
lower sub-zone—is characteristic. D. bifidus has disappeared.
Zones C 3 and C 4 while
distinct may well be grouped as Middle Castlemainian. They
are well developed in the
Castlemaine district and elsewhere, but thick beds of apparently favourable blue-black
shale yield comparatively few species or individuals —an interesting contrast with the
Upper Castlemainian where the richness of the beds is largely due to the rapid deploy-
ment of D. caduceus.)
c 5 Wattle Gully, Chewton. T. 4-brachiatus
D. bifidus.
Phyllograptus
Clonograptus
Dichograptus
octobrachiatus
Goniograptus crinitus
G. laxus
Tetragraptus pendens
Tetragraptus similis
(Tetragraptus fruticosus absent. D. caduceus rare, or, in most localities, absent;
always small.)
Bendigo Series.
T. fruticosus
(3-branched)
D. bifidus.
D. octobrachiatus
Phyllograptus
Clonograptus abnormis
Tetragraptus similis
Tetragraptus pendens
Goniograptus macer.
(The association of T. fruticosus with D. bifidus is characteristic.)
B 2 Napoleon Syncline, T. 4-brachiatus
Bendigo. T. fruticosus
(3-branched).
Goniograptus thureaui
G. macer
D. extensus.
D. similis
T. similis
T. pendens
D. octobrachiatus
Phyllograptus
(D. bifidus and four-branched forms of T. fruticosus absent.)


Zone.
Typical Locality.
Zone Fossils (restricted
species shown in italics).
Associated Forms.
Bendigo Series — Continued.
B 3
... Red, White and Blue,
Bendigo.
T. 4-brachiatus
T. fruticosus (3- and 4-
branched forms)
Goniograptus thureaui.
Phyllograptus
T. pendens
T. similis
T. dilatans
(The
association of 3- and 4-branched forms of T. fruticosus with Goniograptus
thureaui
is characteristic.)
B 4
,.. Garden Gully, Bendigo.
T. 4-branchiatus
T. fruticosus (3- and 4-
branched)
Phyllograptus
T. pendens
G. macer
(Tetragraptus approximatus and G. thureaui absent.)
B 5
,.. Hustler’s Reef, Bendigo.
T. 4-brachiatus
T. fruticosus (4-
branched)
T. approximatus
D. latus
D. acclinans
Clonog. magnificus
T. decipiens.
Lancefield Series.
LI
. . Bull Dog Creek, Morn-
ington.
T. decipiens
T. 4-brachiatus
T. approximatus
Clonograptus magnificus
C. tenellus
T. acclinans.
(Absence of T. fruticosus.)
Li 2
“Antimony Mine,”
Blackwood.
T. decipiens
Bryograptus spp.
T. approximatus.
Clonograptus
T. acclinans
T. 4-brachiatus (rare)
Li 3
,,. Lancefield (quarry north
of old Mt. William
railway siding).
T. decipiens
Bryograptus victorise
Dictyonema grande.
Clonograptus
T. 4-brachiatus (rare)
Li 4
... Three miles north-east
of Romsey.
Staurograptus
Dictyonema.
Apparently no other
forms.
L 5
... Not yet recognised in Victoria.
The most productive gold reefs of Victoria occur in the close-folded
Lower Ordovician rocks, especially in the Bendigonian, with which the
largest gold nuggets of Victoria have been associated.
The Upper Ordovician slates, etc., pass into phyllites and schists
at Omeo, Mitta Mitta, etc., in eastern Victoria, and across the border
in New South Wales at Albury and Cooma. In New South Wales the
Upper Ordovician rocks lie in several parallel belts, of which the most
easterly nearly follows the coast line to Bateman’s Bay, and thence
perhaps trends inland to Tallong, near Marulan. The rich gold-bearing
saddle-reefs of Hargreaves traverse Upper Ordovician rocks. The most
westerly belt as yet proved strikes from the Forbes-Parkes area to
Tomingley and Myall Reefs, also a gold-bearing zone. The further
northerly extension of the eastern beds is interrupted by the great
Kamilaroi (Permo-Carboniferous)-Trias basin, which separates the
Bathurst-Monaro Plateau from the New England Plateau.
In the Cobar-Canbelego-Girilambone area of New South Wales there
is a series of much metamorphosed quartzites, phyllites, and puckered
slates, which underlie, unconformably, the Silurian strata of the Weltie-
Mallee Tank-Watertower Series. No fossils have as yet been found in
this older series, which is considered to be Ordovician, or possibly
older.


In Queensland the Bnnya Series, presumably of Ordovician age, is
formed chiefly of mica-phyllites, having a thickness of perhaps as much
as 18,000 feet. The Diplogmptus which has been found on a horizon
either at the top of this series or at the base of the Neranleigh Series
(Silurian?) may indicate an age either high in the Ordovician or low in
the Silurian. The Greenstone Schist Series underlying the Bunya Series
may be Ordovician, or older.
The Brisbane area has undergone a stupendous amount of denuda-
tion. The next section (Figure G) illustrates the remarkable situation
of this city, occupying as it does the core of a huge geanticline, originally
perhaps at least as high as the Himalayas, and built largely of the mica-
phyllites of the Bunya Series.
The hornblende-antliophyllite- and glaucophane-schists of the
D’Aguilar Range have been referred to the Bunya horizon, and probably
some of the pre-Devonian schist areas of the Queensland goldfields may,
tentatively, be considered Ordovician.
In New South Wales, at Parkes and Forbes, are albitised amygda-
loidal andesites, interstratified with the graptolitic strata, and, in the
Carcoar-Cadia belt, tuffs and lavas of hornblende-augite-andesite occur
associated with large deposits of iron ore. At Blayney, Newbridge and
Mandurama andesitic tuffs are interstratified with marine sediments,
while at Bredbo, north of Cooma, schistose potash rhyolite or rhyolite
tuffs and sills of porphyroid have been described, as well as quartz-
keratophyre tuffs on the Snowy River near the Victorian border. Con-
temporaneous andesitic tuffs are interstratified with Upper Ordovician
rocks at Mount Easton in Victoria. The upper part of the Porphyroid
Series of Tasmania, the syenites and granites near Lake Margaret and
Mt. Farrell, and the granite of the Dove River, T., are possibly
Ordovician.
Tectonics.
The Ordovician rocks of Victoria, as well as of eastern Australia
generally, have been close-folded. The axial lines trend at Bendigo, in
Victoria, N. 22° W. (mag.), five or six acute anticlines occurring to the
mile. They pitch northerly, and “list” to the east at lin 10. In Victoria,
in places, the Ordovician rocks do not appear to have been folded till the
close of Silurian time, but, in other areas, there is evidence of an epi-
Ordovician (Taconic) folding. The latter has also been recorded
in New South Wales. In Queensland the Bunya phyllites, in the
Brisbane Schist Series, tentatively classed as Ordovician, are more highly
altered than the rocks of the overlying Neranleigh Series, which is
presumed to be of Silurian age. The primary gneisses, like those of
Omeo, Albury and Cooma, and other late Ordovician plutonic intrusives,
seem to have been connected with the great diastrophism, which more or
less throughout the world is indicated by Taconic, older Caledonian,


SKETCH SECTION
Showing the vast denuded geanticline, perhaps originally
30,000 feet high, where Brisbane now stands.
{After A. K Denmead.)
FIGURE 6.


unconformity. The Ordovician strata between the eastern end of the
Macdonnell Ranges and the Togo Ranges of Queensland have undergone
only slight deformation.
Economic.
The richest gold reefs of eastern Australia are associated with
Ordovician rocks. Victoria alone has produced gold, largely derived
from reefs enclosed in Ordovician rocks, of the value of over £300,000,000.
At Cadia, near Orange, in New South Wales, an ore bed of specular
haematite, magnetite, etc., is estimated to contain 39,000,000 tons of ore.
It is associated with Ordovician andesite. A. M. Howitt and E. W. Skeats
have recorded phosphates in small quantity in Ordovician limestone in
the Howqua district of Victoria.
Silurian.
(See Table B.)
The passing from Ordovician into Silurian time was marked in the
Australian region by a considerable easterly migration of the old eastern
shore-line. The Amadeus Strait had now emerged, never again to be
invaded by the sea, even during the times of maximum encroachment
on the land, in the north-west part of Australia, by the late Palaeozoic
Tethys Ocean. No Silurian rocks are now to be traced, in any part of
Australia, west of the eastern boundaries of South Australia, Central
Australia and North Australia. The sea, which in Ordovician time had
covered nearly the whole of Victoria, retreated, and in Lower Silurian
time occupied a wide gulf in central Victoria, extending from Keilor to
the west of Melbourne, to at least as far east as the Walhalla geosyn-
cline. This Lower Silurian basin now disappears northwards under the
Cainozoic deposits of the Murray River plains. Southwards it extended
to the north coast of Tasmania between Penguin and the Mersey River,
and stretched still further south to Mount Lyell and the Gordon River.
The very coarse basal conglomerate, known as the West Coast Con-
glomerate, marks an ancient shore-line to the east. There is no definite
evidence of this Lower Silurian sea having extended in the Australia-
Tasmania area beyond the region just described, but such of the argil-
lites of New England as seem to be stratigraphically newer than Upper
Ordovician, but older than Lower Devonian, and the rocks of the
Neranleigh Series of the Brisbane Schists, Queensland, may represent a
pelagic type of Silurian sedimentation. In Upper Silurian time the sea
transgressed over a considerable area of what is now eastern Australia.
Its western boundary extended from a little west of Melbourne north-
wards to a point west of Cobar, and thence by way of Charleville to at
least as far north as Chillagoe, in Queensland, and probably into Dutch
New Guinea.
The Melbournian Series (Lower Silurian) comprises mudstones,
sandstones, and conglomerates, which have a maximum aggregate thick-


TABLE B.
TENTATIVE CORRELATION OF THE SILURIAN ROCKS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
Sequence,
United Kingdom.
Downtonian
Downton Sandstone
Upper Ludlow
Aymestry Limestone
Lower Ludlow Shales
Wenlock Limestone
Salopian
Wenlock Shale
Woolhope Limestone
Tarannon Shale
Valentian
Llandovery Sandstone.
<
s
g
5
£
>*
<
s
cs
S3
o
fa
►j
Victoria.
Tasmania.
New Sooth
Wales.
Qttee i
ISLAND.
* Formation.
F ossils.
F ormation.
Fossils.
Formation.
Fossils.
Formation.
Fossils.
Formation.
Fossils.
Upper Beds, Wombat
Creek
Thyestes magnifies.
Studley Park Beds
Lilydale Limestone
Monograptus nilsoni , M.
colonus.
Crotalocrinus and abun-
dant corals, etc., in-
cluding Halysites.
Zeehan Sandstones
Pleurodictyum ,
Comulites tasmanicus ,
Homalonotus.
Hume Beds
Cave Limestones
Yass Beds
Orange-Molong Beds
Bango Beds \
Canberra Beds f
Monograptids, Stropheo-
donta, Dalmanites
meridianus.
Pentamerus knighti.
Rhizophyllurn.
Mictocystis, Arach-
nophyllum, Halysites.
Halysites.
Neranleigh Series
of Brisbane Schists about
15,000 feet thick (?),
mostly pelagic
Small fragment of
possible Eurypterid,
also small crustacean
and algal (?) remains.
Chillagoe
Series.
Spongophyllum,
Halysites chillagoensis.
Jordan Series
Keilor Beds (Upper
part)
The stelleroids Ore -
goriura , Sturtzura , etc.,
Pterygotus , M. priodon,
M. dubius , Retiolites
australis. Hostimella
Flora hereabouts.
M. riccartonensis, Keilo -
rites.
Gordon Limestone
Despatch Limestone
(near Zeehan)
Limestone of Lyell and
Zeehan
Halysites.
Tetradium.
Bhyncholreta borealis,
Asaphus, Illcenus, En-
crinuras, Dalmanites.
Jerrawa Shales (?)
Gunning Shales (?)
Keilor Beds (Lower
part)
Jit. Useful Series of
Walhalla Geosyn-
cline.
M. turriculatus,
M. exiguus=M. aplini.
M. convolulus.
Trilobites Ampyx, II-
Icbhus.
Tubicolar Sandstones
West Coast Con-
glomerate
Rhynchotreta borealis.
Diplograptu-s sp. here-
abouts


ness of about 10,000 feet. In the Walhalla Basin the Mt. Useful Beds
form the lowest of the three main subdivisions of the Silurian rocks.
They consist of unfossiliferous conglomerates, quartzites and reddish
and chloritic slates, aggregating 5,000 feet in thickness. The Jordan
Kiver Beds, also 5,000 feet thick, overlie these; they consist of black and
yellow mudstones and slates with graptolites and remains of terrestrial
plants, and include sandstones and conglomerates.
The Upper Silurian rocks of Australia (Yeringian Series of
Victoria) also having a maximum thickness of 10,000 feet, as
developed in the Walhalla Series of Victoria, aiid chiefly of Salopian
age, are largely formed of olive-green mudstones, extremely like
the Wenlock Shales of Great Britain. Limestones make conspicuous
physiographic features. Their thickness varies from about 100 feet
up to about 900 feet. They mostly represent old coral reefs. To these
belong the Lilydale limestone of Victoria, the famous cave lime-
stones of Jenolan, Wombeyan, Yarrangobilly and Wellington, New South
Wales, and of Chudleigh and Mole in Tasmania. The Gordon River
limestones (possibly Lower Silurian) in the same State, the Yass lime-
stones with Ealysites in the Bango Beds, the Ealysites limestones of the
Molong-Orange region, and the Ealysites limestones of Chillagoe, Queens-
land, are important horizons in the Silurian sequence. Acid tuffs and
contemporaneous rhyolitic and spilitic lavas occur in places. The
frequent occurrence of the alga Girvanella near the top of the Upper
Silurian rocks in Victoria and New South Wales probably implies clear
shallow seas and archipelagoes of a stillstand following a prolonged
subsidence (see Table B).
In the above table the base of the Upper Silurian, the Yeringian, is
taken provisionally at the Ealysites limestone reefs.
The recent identification of Crotalocrinus, by Dr. F. A. Bather, in the
Yeringian Series, indicates the horizon of the Wenlock Limestone. The
annelid Eeilorites with its gill-plumes remarkably preserved proves the
existence of the Sabelliformia at that time.
The most conspicuous member of the Silurian sequence in Tasmania
is the basal “West Coast Conglomerate,” which, with its intercalated
quartzites, is nearly 2,000 feet thick. Some blocks in the conglomerate are
up to nearly 3 feet in diameter, and are possibly fluvio-glacial. This,
and their red to pinkish colour, recall the Table Cape Series, in part
glacial, of South Africa. Through its resistance to erosion the West
Coast Conglomerate forms mighty ramparts of many rugged and beauti-
ful mountains such as Mt. Roland, St. Valentine’s Peak, Mts. Murchison,
Tyndall, Sedgwick, Geikie, Lyell, Owen, Jukes, Darwin, etc.
In Victoria a strongly marked unconformity, between the top
of the Upper Silurian and the base of the Lower Devonian rocks,
shows that Australia shared in the Avorld-wide Newer Caledonian
(possibly Ardennian followed by Erian) Revolution. These mountain-


building movements were accompanied by plutonic intrusions.
The highly metalliferous granites of Tasmania, such as that of
Heemsldrk, with associated gabbros and serpentines, are now regarded
as late Silurian, or epi-Silurian, but may possibly belong to the epi-
Devonian Kanimbla epoch. In Victoria late Silurian quartz-mica-
diorites and granites, in part gneissic, have been described from
northern Gippsland, while the valley of the Upper Murrumbidgee, in
New South Wales, contains an extensive intrusion of similar type, with
associated granite-porphyry, which is referred to the same epoch. The
gneissic granite of the Kosciusko plateau may be coeval with these. No
angular unconformity separates the Silurian and Devonian formations
in Queensland, and no late Silurian plutonic intrusions are known to
occur there.
Economic.
The important copper lode of Mt. Lyell, and the tin, zinc, lead,
and bismuth lodes, the gold reefs, and osmiridium-yielding rocks of
Tasmania may be of epi-Silurian age; also the gold and copper
deposits of the Cobar-Canbelego-Forbes-Parkes areas in New South
Wales. The Lilydale limestone of Victoria is used as a building stone.
The Silurian limestone of Portland, etc., in New South Wales,
is employed in the manufacture of Portland cement. The Chillagoe
limestone of Queensland forms a flux at local smelting works.
Devonian.
(See Table C.)
The following features are outstanding:
(i) Volcanic activity was displayed on a grand scale throughout the
whole of the Devonian Period.
(ii) Partly as a consequence of prolonged eruptions producing easily
oxidised basic tuffs, but chiefly as the result of aridity following an
epeirogenic movement, a vast amount of red rock was formed in Upper
Devonian time.
(iii) Causally connected with the abundance of finely divided tuff
in the waters of the Middle Devonian seas, and introduction of silica by
intrusive keratophyres, silica-secreting radiolaria dominated the plank-
ton, and helped to nourish the wonderful coral reefs of Middle Devonian
time.
(iv) Probably for the first time in its history the greater part of
Australia in Devonian time was clothed in a living garment of green.
This, in Middle Devonian time, was formed of slender closely-packed
stems of Schizopodium, half moss, half alga, about 1 foot in height.
This plant, with its network of rhizomes, must have efficiently held
together the soils of the Devonian land, and so have checked wind
erosion, probably important in preceding geological periods. In later
Middle Devonian and in Upper Devonian time representatives of the


TABLE C.
TENTATIVE CORRELATION OF THE DEVONIAN ROCKS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
Europe.
WESTERN’ Australia.
Victoria.
New South Wales.
QUE
ENSLAND.
Papua.
Kimberley Area.
Genoa River, Nungatta,
Murrumbidgee Area,
Bowning.
Far South Coast, Yalwal,
Hartley, Mt. Lambie, White
Cliffs, Capertee, etc.
Barraba and Tamworth.
Silverwood.
Brisbane, Gladstone,
Rockhampton, etc.
Mt. Wyatt and Ukalunda.
Burdekin Area.
Tauri River.
Famennian
Frasnian
Mostly* massive limestones
with Stromatoporella kim-
berleyensis, S. eifelensis,
Rhynchonella cubotdes, R.
pugnus, Goniodymenia sp.,
Rhizoceras, Geisonoceras.
Sandstones of Avon River
with Lepidodendron aus-
trale.
Iguana Creek Beds ■with
Archceopteris houMti. Red
and green shales, dacites
and rhyolites. Fish beds
in tuffs at Acheron Valley.
Rothriolepis gippslandicus,
IWpterus microsoma of
Taggerty. Freestone Creek
melaphyres and con-
glomerate.
xxx Unconformity.
Plant beds of Genoa River
with Archceopteris howUti
in green shales with sand-
stone.
Nungatta Beds with Barino-
phyton.
Rhyolites with huge spheru-
lites, Twofold Bay.
Lambian Series consisting of
grey and red shales with
Lepidodendron australe ,
and white quartzites with
Spirifer disjunctus, Rhyn-
chonella pleurodon , Ptero-
niles pittmani.
Quartzite boulders of White
Cliffs opal-fleld with Rhyn-
chonella duni, Spirifer
jaqueti , Craspxdarges wil-
cannice.
Barraba Series in part:
Radiolarian shales, mud-
stones and tuffs, with a
little lenticular limestone,
Lepidodendron australe
abundant;
Baldwin volcanic ag-
glomerates, 2,000-3,000
feet thick, with radio-
larian claystones.
Lepidodendron australe beds
of Training Wall Quarries,
Rockhampton, and of
Drummond Range.
Berserker Series of Rock-
hampton, mostly marine
andesitic tuffs with large
blocks of Stromatopora.
Thickness of series about
7,000 feet.
Mt. Wyatt Series;
Greenish-brown sandstones
with Lepidodendron aus-
trale :
Small variety o' Spirifer
disjunctus in greenish mud-
stone ; large types of
ReceptacidUes australis.
Wairuna Series:
Mostly red and chocolate-coloured
shales and sandstones, grey shales
and a little limestone, the whole
about 5,000 feet thick •
The plant IHcranophyuum perhaps
hereabouts;
Coarse conglomerates, 2,600 feet
thick.
Givetian
Buchan and Bindi Lime-
stones with ReceptaculUes
australis , CampophyUum
gregorii, Cystiphyllum
australasicum , Gyroceras
philpi , Phragmoceras sub*
trigonum, etc.
Tabberabbera Shales with
Spirifer yassensis.
Melaphyres, tuffs, etc.
x Strong erosion in places.
In Murrumbidgee area
siliceous shales and quartz-
ites, massive limestones
with ReceptaculUes aus-
tralis and other Buchan
fossils;
Spirifer yassensis in cal-
careous shales.
Limestones of Capertee
with ReceptaculUes aus-
tralis.
Tamworth Series:
Lepidodendron australe beds;
Moore Creek limestone
with Eeliolites porosa ,
Sanidophyllum, etc.;
Spilites and tuffs;
Nemingha Limestone;
Keratophyre tuffs;
Radiolarian cherts.
Radiolarian cherts and
shales;
Limestone (?=Nemingha);
Spilitic andesites;
Spherulitic rhyolites and
Chcrty tuffs;
Massive limestone of Gore.
Etna Series of Rock-
hampton, mostly rhyolites
and rhyolitic tuffs with
intercalated marine lime-
stones. Total thickness
about 15,000 feet.
Burdekin Series (Upper Part);
Chiefly massive coralline limestones
with Gyroceras philpi , Phragmoceras
subtrigonum and other Buchan Lime-
stone fossils. The Fanning Lime-
stone, 7,000 feet thick, contains well-
preserved Schizopodium (cf. Aster-
oxylon of Rhynie Flora, Aberdeen,
Scotland).
Limestones of the Tauri
River, with EeliolUes
porosa.
Eifelian
Ukalunda Series;
Greenish limestones with
Calceola (?) sp., possibly a
RhizophyUum.
COBLENTZIAN
Gedinniajt
Snowy River Porphyries,
formed of rhyolites and
tuffs, totalling about 2,000
feet in thickness.
(?) Centennial Beds of
Walhalla Geosyncline.
Keratophyric lavas and
tuffs of Murrumbidgee
area, over 2,000 feet thick.
Banded rhyolites of Devil’s
Pass below Yass, and of
Bowning Hill.
Basal conglomerates of
Bowning Hill.
Tuffaceous red jaspers,
phyllites, etc., with abun-
dant radiolaria, of Woolo-
min Series.
Radiolarian jaspers
Bald Mountain.
of
Radiolarian jaspers and
phyllites of Fernvale
Schists (manganiferous) at
top of Brisbane Schists.
Manganiferous Schists of
Gladstone.
Schists of Broadmount,
Rockhampton.
Burdekin Series (Lower Part) ;
Unfossiliferous grey and green tuf-
faceous slates, grits and coarse
conglomerates, totalling 9,400 feet
in thickness.


class of the Lycopodiales had already attained arborescent proportions,
the stems of Lepidodendron australe being about 4 inches in diameter,
and having a length of probably 15 to 20 feet.
(v) Mostly in Upper Devonian time a chain of lakes existed in
eastern Australia on the inland side of a ridge of old rocks separating
it from a submerged belt nearer the coast. These lakes abounded in
fish.
As regards the evolution of the Australian continent, the point has
frequently been stressed that after the disappearance of the Proterozoic
Nullagine seas, deposition was mostly restricted to what is now the
eastern portion of the continent, and that there was a steady gain of
land eastwards at the expense of the sea. This gain increased in early
Devonian time, but some of the land won was temporarily lost through
transgression of the Upper Devonian sea. In Victoria no trace of a
Lower Devonian sea has yet been found, but Dr. A. W. Howitt has
shown that acid lavas and tuffs were erupted in eastern Victoria, the
Snowy River Porphyries, discharged from terrestrial volcanoes, the worn-
down stumps of two of which are now seen in the Cobboras (6,030 feet)
and the Wombargo Mountain.
In southern New South Wales a coarse and thick conglomerate at
Bowning Hill, near Yass, probably marks an old shore line of Lower
Devonian time. Banded rhyolites succeed, at the Devil’s Pass, below
Yass, and in the Murrumbidgee Valley their representatives are a series
of soda-rhyolites, keratophyric lavas, tuffs, and breccias about 2,000 feet
thick. These have tentatively been correlated with the Snowy River
Porphyries.
The Woolomin Series of Tamwortli, composed of red and green
jaspers, tuffaceous in places, with abundant casts of radiolaria, of Lower
Devonian age, probably formed in a sea of some depth. Similar jaspers
occur at Bald Mountain near Gore in southern Queensland, and
radiolarian pliyllites at Pine Mountain near Ipswich and along the west
flanks of the d’Aguilar Range to the north of Brisbane, as well as at
Broadmount near Rockhampton. In the Burdekin Basin of Queensland,
inland from Townsville, the greenish to reddish deposits about 9,400 feet
thick conformably underlying the Middle Devonian limestones may
belong to a Lower Devonian sea. They commence with a massive con-
glomerate 400 feet thick which suggests the proximity of an old shore-
line. Probably there was a more or less continuous land in Devonian
time, from Coff’s Harbour, in New South Wales, northwards by way
of the Brisbane geanticline to Cape Townsend, east of Broadsound, and
at least as far north as Dunk Island in the area of the Great Barrier
Reef. In Queensland west of the Middle and Lower Devonian sea lay
the old land of the Etheridge, Einasleigh and Charters Towers Gold-
fields, and further south the old ridge which runs through the Anakie
Sapphire-field. This ridge separated the belt of purely marine sedi-
D


mentation on the east from that of the estuarine to freshwater sedimen-
tation on the Avest. In Middle Devonian time much of eastern Australia
became submerged. In the Buchan and Bindi areas of eastern Victoria
marine shales and limestones in places occupy liolloavs, possibly old river
valleys, eroded out of the Snowy River Porphyries. This sea spread
nortlnvards into what is now the Murrumbidgee Valley of NeAV South.
Wales, and its shore became fringed with coral reefs. Marine limestones
at Capertee, in NeAV South Wales, show an extension there of this older
Middle Devonian sea. A representative of the latter has been identified
at Rockhampton, Queensland, Avhere vast masses of rhyolitic tuff became
interstratified Avith marine sediments. Further north in the Burdekin
Basin, the massive Fanning Limestone AA r as probably an ancestor of the
Great Barrier Reef. The fact that this limestone series rests on a
conglomerate 400 feet thick proA T es that land was not far distant. This
sea extended further north to the Hodgkinson Goldfield, and almost to
Palmerville.
A neAV Middle Devonian sea, the sediments of Avhich Avere of the
Tamworth type —radiolarian shales and limestones largely coralline Avith
interstratified spilitic lavas and tuffs —lay mostly AA-est of New England,
but its sediments reach the coast at Port Macquarie, AA'hile at their north-
Avest end they formerly extended to SilverAvood, near Warwick, in
Queensland. They rest conformably on the older Woolomin Series, so
that there Avas no break in the passage of the Lower Devonian into the
Middle Devonian sea in this area. In Upper Devonian time the sea
encroached further inland, notably in New South Wales, towards Bourke,
Cobar and Wilcannia.
In Victoria, on the Mitchell River above Bairnsdale, A. W. HoAvitt
and E. W. Skeats have described a remarkable unconformity between
the steeply-dipping Middle Devonian Tabberabbera marine shales and the
overlying gently dipping fresliAvater (?) sandstones, rhyolites, etc., of
Upper Devonian age. This crustal disturbance of epi-Middle Devonian
time must have driven out the Devonian seas from Victoria, lacustrine
conditions taking their place, evidenced by the fish-bearing rocks of the
Cathedral Range. In NeAV South Wales the sediments of the Upper
Devonian seas, knoAvn as Lambian, extend at intervals, alternating Avith
freshAvater beds, from TAVofold Bay to Mt. Lambie and inland to
Wilcannia. Numerous fossil fish at Harvey Range, the Canoblas area,
and near Forbes, suggest estuarine or lacustrine conditions. Red beds
predominate in the Upper Devonian of the Wellington area, NeAV South
Wales. On the Avestern side of New England the Barraba Series, Upper
Devonian to Tournaisian, has much Lepidodendron australe inter-
stratified with radiolarian shales, indicating the proximity of land.
In Queensland there Avas a long inland basin Avest of the old Anakie
axis, where lacustrine and marine conditions alternated. In the Rock-
hampton area the Berserker Series, 7,000 feet thick, largely formed of


andesite tuff, evidences contemporaneous volcanic action, but the tuff is
there associated almost entirely with marine fossils.
In Western Australia the sea encroached on the land where the
Napier Range is now situated, and extended inland to the Margaret
River, and probably as far as the Stromatopora- bearing sediments of
North Australia. This sea was of Upper Devonian, probably Frasnian,
age. Land lay to the north, in the King Leopold and King Albert
Ranges. The southern shore-line is hidden under the newer deposits
of the great basin, which in Kamilaroi (Permo-Carboniferous) time
developed immediately to the south.
Lower Devonian.
Igneous rocks bulk so large in this, as well as in the Middle and
Upper Devonian Series, and are so connected magmatically, that the
separate description given of them later seems justified.
The epoch of the Snowy River Porphyries of Victoria and of their
equivalents in New South Wales, as well as in Queensland, was probably
coincident with that when the bathyal radiolarian rocks of the Woolomin
Series were being deposited in New South Wales, and similar rocks at
Fern vale near Ipswich, Gladstone, and Broadmount (near Rockhamp-
ton) in Queensland. The unfossiliferous lower portion of the Burdekin
Series may belong to Lower Devonian time.
Middle Devonian.
The oldest Australian representative is perhaps the Ukalunda
limestone of Queensland, with a Galceola perhaps of Eifelian age.
Next above this are the Buchan and Bindi Series of Victoria, the
Murrumbidgee Series of New South Wales and the middle portion
of the Burdekin Series of Queensland, characterised specially by the
cephalopods Gyroceras philpi and Phragmoceras suhtrigonum. Of
special interest, in the massive (7,000 feet thick) Fanning Limestone
of the Burdekin Basin, is the representative of the Rliynie Flora of
Aberdeen, in the form Scliizopodium, a link between Asteroxylon
and the Cladoxylcce. In the limestones of the Murrumbidgee area the
sponge Receptaculites australis is very abundant, and associated with
it are the remains of a large dipnoid fish, Ganorhynchus sussmilchi.
Next, on a higher horizon, comes a form allied to the zone brachiopod
Stringocephalus. This also occurs at Reid’s Gap in Queensland. The
Tamworth beds, N.S.W., are specially rich in radiolaria, some of which are
exquisitely preserved in the fine submarine tuff. The Silverwood Series
and Berserker Series of Queensland are correlated with the Tamworth
Series. Specially characteristic of the latter are the corals Diphyphyl-
lum, Sanidophyllum, and Heliolites porosa. The occurrence of the last-
mentioned fossil in loose blocks in the Tauri River of Papua argues a
Middle Devonian age for those rocks.


L'ppcr Devonian.
Australian strata of this age show an alternation from marine to
freshwater and perhaps terrestrial conditions. On the Mitchell River
above Bairnsdale, Victoria, the gently inclined Upper Devonian strata are
separated by a marked unconformity from the steeply dipping Middle
Devonian marine strata, the Tabberabbera Shales. In central Xew South
Wales, however, shales and radiolarian tuffaceous mudstones of the
Barraba Series, 5,000 to 8,000 feet thick, rest conformably on the
Tamworth Series. They contain much Lepidodendron australe. In
the shallower part of this Upper Devonian sea, west of the Blue
Mountains, a great thickness was deposited, mostly marine quartzites
below, passing up into red shales and sandstones with Lepidodendron
australe. Spirifer disjunctus and Rhynchonella duni (near to
R. pleuvodon) are extremely abundant and characteristic. The loose
Devonian blocks at Wilcannia with the trilobite Craspidarges perhaps
represent the oldest part of this Upper Devonian marine fauna.
At Yalwal occur the interesting forms Eolepidodendron and Proto-
lepidodendron; at Genoa, near the Victorian border, Archwopteris
howitti, Cordaitcs australis, etc., and at Xungatta Barinophyton.
Archwopteris and Cordaites occur in the Iguana Creek beds of Victoria,
and in the Avon River Sandstone is Lepidodendron australe. This is a
freshwater to terrestrial series, largely volcanic, with red and green and
purplish brown shales and sandstones.
At Bindi, Victoria, the Upper Devonian rocks are basal con-
glomerates followed by yellow grits and mudstones with rain prints. In
the Acheron Valley, Victoria, remains of the fishes Dipterus, flolonema
and Bothriolepis have recently been found in the deposits of a lava-
dammed lake. In the sun-cracked shales among the Grampian sand-
stones of western Victoria the presence of small Carbonifero-Devonian
Lingulw, associated with spines of a Lower Carboniferous fish,
Physoncmus, proves a local marine series. A quiet conformable passage
from Upper Devonian into Lower Carboniferous time is there indicated.
In Queensland, in the Drummond Range, a thick series of sediments
contains marine Upper Devonian fossils below, with Lepidodendron
australe above, and passes upwards into Lower Carboniferous lake beds.
Evidently lacustrine conditions were alternating with marine in that
area. The same remark applies to Mt. Wyatt, and to the Lower Star
beds.
Igneous Rocks.
The Devonian was a period of considerable volcanic activity
in Australia. Of probable Lower Devonian ago in Victoria are
the Snowy River Porphyries, a remarkable series of volcanic products
which cover a large area in the north-eastern part of the State, bounded
to the east roughly by the Snowy River. They comprise lava-flows, tuffs


and agglomerates, porphyroids, tracliytic andesites, quartz-keratophyres
and dacites being represented. In places the series exceeds 2,000 feet in
thickness. Of the same age may be the acid keratophyric rocks of
Noyang, in Dargo.
In New South Wales a great thickness of lavas, tuffs and breccias
is exposed in the Murrumbidgee Valley upstream from Burrinjuck. These
are believed to be the equivalents of the Snowy River Porphyries. The
series, which is estimated in places to attain a thickness of 1,000 feet,
consists mainly of soda-rhyolites and keratophyric types. Somewhat
similar rocks form the upper part of Bowning Hill, near Yass. The lower
parts of the Middle Devonian beds of Buchan, Victoria, consist of felsites
and felsitic tuffs and breccias wtih andesites in places, and in the
Murrumbidgee area the redistributed rhyolitic tuffs of Middle Devonian
age are estimated to* reach a thickness of 2,000 feet. A couple of
rhyolitic flows are interbedded with the tuffs. Keratophyric tuffs
have also been found in the Middle Devonian beds of Lobb's Hole,
near Kiandra. Tbe volcanic activity of Lower and Middle Devonian
times in the Tamworth province was of a somewhat different type;
spilitic and keratophyric lavas and tuffs make their appearance in the
Woolomin Series, but the greatest display of volcanic activity is in the
Middle Devonian Tamworth Series, of which acid and keratophyre tuffs
make up about half the entire bulk, the series also comprising flows and
small intrusions of keratophyre, spilite and dolerite, as well as breccias
and agglomerates. Pillow structure is not uncommon. Albitic dolerites
also occur commonly as sills, some of which are over 1,500 feet thick.
In the Gloucester district it is estimated these spilites reach a thickness
of 3,000 feet.
From the Silverwood area, in south-east Queensland, there
has been described a great thickness, amounting to at least 6,000 feet,
of spilitic and andesitic lavas and tuffs. These form the lower part of
the Silverwood Series and are assigned a Lower Devonian age. Inter-
bedded with the overlying Middle Devonian radiolarian banded cherts
are numerous thin beds of volcanic ash. From the Mt. Etna district,
near Rockhampton, an extensive series of rhyolitic lavas and tuffs
interbedded with limestones, shales and radiolarian cherts has been
recorded. The whole series would appear to be at least 15,000 feet thick,
rhyolite being the dominant rock type. These Mt. Etna rocks are of
Middle Devonian age. Further developments of the series are found in
the Mt. Morgan district and between Rockhampton and Raglan.
In Central Victoria, as in the Dandenong Ranges, Warburton,
Healesville and Mt. Macedon districts, and elsewhere, are thick masses
of biotite- and hypersthene-dacite with subordinate toscanite and a little
tuff. These rocks are now regarded as Upper Devonian, probably
extruded subaerially. The Upper Devonian sediments of Gippsland,
Victoria, from Ben Oruaehan past Mt. Wellington to Snowy Bluff, as


well as in the Howqua District and further west in the Cathedral Range,
have associated with them volcanic rocks, mainly rhyolites and rhyolitic
tuffs with thin flows of amygdaloidal basalt. At Mt. Wellington the
volcanic series attains a thickness of 2,000 feet. Somewhat similar
volcanic conditions appear to have marked the Upper Devonian period
in New South Wales. At Pambula and Eden are nodular rhyolites and
amygdaloidal basalts. At Yalwal, on the Shoalhaven, the amygdaloidal
basalts have a great development, the spherulitic rhyolite being sub-
ordinate. At Mt. Lambie, Yetholme and Hill End (possibly Silurian)
acid keratophyric crystal tuffs occur, and quartz-felsites have been
recorded from Yetholme, Hartley and elsewhere. In the Upper
Macquarie Valley the Upper Devonian series includes extensive develop-
ments of andesites, rhyolites and felsites, with agglomerate and volcanic
ash. In the Tam worth province the chief Upper Devonian volcanic
products are the Baldwin agglomerates, which roughly mark the base
of the Barraba mudstones; through the latter are also abundant thin
intercalations of acid tuff. It has been suggested that the upper portion
of the Berserker Series, in Queensland, consisting of andesitic tuffs
and agglomerates, may be of Upper Devonian Age, likewise the rhyolites
of Kangaroo Hills, Burdekin District, and of some other localities. A
series of basic lavas, tuffs, and intrusive rocks occurs near the base of
the Upper Devonian sequence as developed in the Drummond Range. .
The close of the Devonian sedimentation in eastern Australia was
marked by orogenic movement and by plutonic intrusions on an extensive
scale. In Victoria plutonic and associated liypabyssal rocks have a wide
distribution, especially in the central and eastern parts of the State.
The most abundant rock-type is granodiorite, but alkali granites and
adamellites are also found, as Avell as occasional more basic types.
Granites are found at Mt. Buffalo, Gabo Island, You-Yang Ranges and
elsewhere, while the granodiorites occur at Harcourt, the Strathbogie
and Tolmie Ranges, Mt. Macedon, and in the Dandenong and other
ranges around the headwaters of the Yarra basin. These rocks were
formerly regarded as early Devonian, but their late Devonian or epi-
Devonian age is now established. They are in places intrusive into the
Upper Devonian dacites, witli which they are comagmatic. In the
Grampians some of these granites are intrusive into strata believed to
be of Lower Carboniferous age.
Most of the massive granites of New South Wales probably belong
to the same late Devonian or early Carboniferous epoch of intrusion,
which is known as the Kanimbla epoch. The Kanimbla or Bathurst
batholith is probably the best known of these; other occurrences are at
Mudgee, Cowra, Grenfell, Yalwal, Moruya and elsewhere on the South
Coast, Marulan, Gunning, Burrinjuck, Berridale, Kiandra, and many
other localities. The rocks are generally granites and granodiorites
with subordinate quartz-diorite and more basic types; at Adelong and


Wyalong norites are found. It is possible that the serpentines of
Gundagai, Berthong and Coolinga belong to the same intrusive epoch.
A great series of hypabyssal intrusives, quartz-porphyries and quartz-
porphyrites, was injected about the same time, such as the porphyry sills
of the Yass district, the Burrinjuck porphyrite, the sills of quartz-felsite
and quartz-porphyrite of Jenolan, and many others.
In Queensland the only intrusions which are tentatively assigned
to this epoch are the serpentines intrusive through Devonian rocks in a
number of places, as at Canoona, Cawarral, Marlborough, Pine
Mountain, etc.
Tectonics.
These are summarised below at the end of the notes on the Permian
Period.
Economic.
The Kanimbla intrusive epoch was also an exceedingly important
metallogenetic epoch in south-eastern Australia, and perhaps in
Tasmania also, if the granitic and ultrabasic intrusions there are of
Kanimbla rather than epi-Silurian age.
No very definite evidence exists of ore-introduction at this time in
Queensland, but in New South Wales in and around the granitic batho-
liths are deposits of ores of gold, copper, silver-lead, tin, tungsten, molyb-
denum, etc., as in the Bathurst, Orange and Blayney districts, at Kiandra,
Captain’s Flat, Yerranderie, on the western slopes, the South Coast, the
Southern Tablelands and elsewhere.
In Victoria the famous gold-deposits of Bendigo, Ballarat, Stawell
and many others are assigned to this epoch, and a little silver-lead and
zinc also belong here.
Carboniferous.
(See Table D, opposite page 58, and Table E, opposite page 62.)
The Carboniferous Period in Australia was most eventful. The
narrowing of the areas formerly occupied by the late Devonian sea was
followed by a prolonged persistence of Lower Carboniferous seas in
eastern Australia, and this by a great epeirogenic movement, which was
accompanied by protracted volcanic eruptions ending in a remarkable
ice age, in the older part of Upper Carboniferous time. Submergence
followed, but intermittent glacial conditions persisted into Permian time.
The seas of late Devonian time became somewhat contracted in
eastern Australia, especially in New South Wales, the eastern coast-
line of the continent migrating a little further eastwards. The whole
of Tasmania, and most of Australia west of Long. 142° E., appear to
have been a land surface, certainly throughout the whole of Lower
Carboniferous, and the older part of Upper Carboniferous time. In
Victoria it is possible that the sandstones of the Grampians and of
the Casterton area were laid down in a Carboniferous rather than in


an Upper Devonian estuary or sea. The highest beds in the important
Mansfield geosyncline, rich in fossil fish, are referred to Lower Car-
boniferous time, and apparently belong to an isolated basin of an early
Carboniferous sea or lake.
In New South Wales, in the New England District, the Upper
Devonian Sea of Barraba time, with its somewhat tuffaceous radiolarian
sediments, became gradually shallowed; radiolaria began to disappear
during the equivalent of Tournaisian time, and in Visean time were no
longer conspicuous.
The only area in Australia where definite Tournaisian rocks have
been recorded is that of Bockhampton, Queensland, where typical
ceplmlopods indicate a sea there of moderate depth, heavily silted with
contemporaneous tuff.
In New South Wales the sediments of the Burindi Visean (?) sea
now form a great arc lying west of and concentric with the Upper
Devonian belt of New England. The main mass of land, bounding this sea
to the south and west, seems to have been the Bathurst-Monaro Plateau,
but towards the north-east there was apparently open sea.
In Queensland, near the New South Wales border, between Bonshaw
and Warialda, strata of the Burindi sea, now disposed on either side of
a geanticline, the axis of which is formed of Devonian rocks, show that
that sea, in New South Wales, passed across the border into Queensland
by way of Texas and Silver Spur. The surface evidence of its continuity
northwards is interrupted by a thick covering of Mesozoic rocks for a
distance of about 120 miles. At this further point north, near the
parallel of 26° S. Lat., the sediments of the Burindi sea reappear in a
basin about 50 miles in width and over 200 miles in length, commencing
near the headwaters of the Burnett River. Its trend is from south-
south-east to north-north-west, narrowing northerly. This appears to
have been a long embayment, bounded by land on either side in Queens-
land, but merging into open sea in New South Wales. Traces of
another long and very narrow portion of the Burindi sea are preserved
in the heart of the Devonian Basin of Burdekin, and continue at intervals
in a narrow belt for over 200 miles to the north-west of Cairns. That
this Burindi sea was shallow is shown by the abundance of the oolitic
limestones, which are typical of its deposits throughout eastern Australia,
as well as by its richness in reef-forming corals. The large size of the
latter, especially Lithostrotion, implies warm seas.
In the north-western part of Western Australia submergence
increased from Upper Devonian, perhaps Frasnian time, to Lower and
Upper Carboniferous time. In that area the sea came inland from King
Sound for fully a hundred and fifty miles, past what are now the Oscar
Ranges, to Christmas > Creek and Price’s Creek. The shore-lines and
shape of this Lower to Upper Carboniferous sea are masked by the thick


transgressive series of the Upper Carboniferous to Permian strata, but
basal conglomerates prove that a fairly steep-to coast lay to the north-
east of the Oscar Ranges.
At the end of Visean time a remarkable emergence took place in
eastern and possibly western Australia also. The lirst hint of this in
eastern Australia is perhaps supplied by the appearance in the Rock-
hampton region of Queensland of a strong bed of conglomerate at the
base of the Neerkol Series.
In New South Wales the great epeirogenic movement affected the
whole of the southern and south-western portions of the Burindi sea
from near Port Stephens, and perhaps Taree on the Manning River, to
the Nandewar Ranges, a distance of over 200 miles.
A new epoch, one of fluvio-glacial and terrestrial sedimentation, was
ushered in by a stupendous mass of coarse conglomerate, from one
thousand to two thousand feet in thickness, the greatest mass of which
there is any record in Australia, with the exception of the post-
Ordovician conglomerate to the south of the Macdonnell Ranges, a
conglomerate which may possibly be of the same age as that of Walla-
robba, and perhaps 7.000 feet thick. The Wallarobba conglomerate is
obviously a flysch facies, and indicates the proximity of high steep land
drained by powerful streams fed by melting snows. This land lay to
the south-south-Avest and south-Avest of the present mural escarpment
formed by the resistant conglomerates, etc., of the Kuttung Series. The
further extension of this area of hea\ r y terrestrial sedimentation to the
north-north-Avest and northwest is masked by the later deposits of
Permian and Mesozoic age. This “outwash-apron” or “schotter gravel”
plain probably resembled the present fluvio-glacial flood plains of Alaska,
and may perhaps have stretched a long Avay inland in the direction of
the Macdonnell Ranges just as, in late Carboniferous time, the northern
boundary of the area of Australia under ice seems to have extended
from the New South Wales coast, near Kempsey, far in a north-westerly
direction, passing to the north of the Macdonnell Ranges and on to the
Fitzroy River Valley in the Kimberley region of Western Australia. In
New South Wales, after a series of vast and prolonged volcanic erup-
tions, glacial conditions became intensified. The glaciation, commenced
perhaps in neAvest LoAver Culm time, was prolonged until at least the
end of the Upper Culm. This intense glaciation Avas interrupted by a
considerable ensuing submergence, during the early part of Kamilaroi
(Permo-Carboniferous) time, Avhen the epicontinental seas of the Lower
Marine Series of NeAV South Wales, and of the LoAA r er BoAven Series of
Queensland, OA r erspread the deposits, both terrestrial and marine, of
earlier Carboniferous time, and submerged much of the Avestern coast of
Western Australia.
In the type district of the Lower Hunter the sea encroached from
the south-east, and overAvhelmed a relatively small area of the Kuttung


land, in Uralian time. A similar submergence took place to the west of
Kempsey, near Sebastopol; also at Silverwood near Warwick, in Queens-
land. Further west near the junction of the Beardy River with the
Dumaresq marine sediments extend from New South Wales into Queens-
land, and are ascribed to this age. A specially characteristic fossil belong-
ing to these seas is Monilopora nicholsoni. On the western side of the
Texas geanticline these marine strata probably continue under the thick
covering of Mesozoic rocks, until they emerge at the southern end of the
vast syncline, a dominant tectonic structure in Queensland, the Bowen-
Dawson Basin. Parallel with and to the east of the great Dawson-'
Bowen Basin is the western side of another large basin, that of Gympie-
Bundaberg. The eastern side is submerged. It is possible that originally
both the Dawson-Bowen strata and those of the Gympie-Bundaberg area
were laid down on the floor of one and the same late Carboniferous
sea. At present the basins are separated from one another by the geanti-
cline of the Brisbane Schists of the D’Aguilar Range, prolonged through
Bustard Head, Gladstone and Curtis Island to Yeppoon and Shoalwater
Bay.
In Western Australia in the Kimberley district alone about 150,000
square miles —the Desert Basin area —were inundated, the sea sub-
merging some earlier glacial beds including tillite, the latter partly
terrestrial, partly marine in origin. In the north-west area of Western
Australia, from the Irwin River Coal-field on the south to near North
West Cape, a strip 500 miles long by from 50 to 120 miles wide was
submerged. In the early stages of this submergence the ice must have
come down to sea-level, as the great boulder bed, the “Lyons Con-
glomerate,” continuous for most of this distance, has marine fossils
embedded in it.
In Tasmania the glacial beds of Wynyard, in Victoria those of
Bacchus Marsh, in South Australia those of the Inman Valley, are
provisionally referred to the earliest stage of the Kamilaroi, that is to
a horizon between the middle part and the actual top of the Upper
Carboniferous (see Table E).
Lower Carboniferous.
Tournaisian. —At Mansfield in Victoria the highest beds of an
important geosyncline, of mostly reddish-brown to purplish gritty
sandstones with greenish to bluish shales and sandy limestone, have
yielded some 300 specimens of fossil fish. Lepidodendron mansfieldense
occurs with them. The following genera may be specially noted:
Gyracanthides murrayi, the Dipnoan Ctenodus breviceps, the fringe-
finned ganoid Strepsodus decipiens, and Elonichthys stoeeti. Ripple-
marked sandstones with numerous worm-casts suggest that the deposits
are estuarine.


TABLE D.
TENTATIVE CLASSIFICATION AND CORRELATION OF THE CARBONIFEROUS ROCKS OF AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA.
Europe.
Argentina.
Australia and Tasmania.
Upper. -
'Uralian
Lower Division of Lower Marine Series, N.S. Wales, with the glacial
beds of Lochinvar. Tillites, etc., of Wynyard, Tasmania ; Bacchus
Marsh, Victoria; Inman Valley, S. Australia; Yellow Cliff (?) and Crown
Point (?), Central Australia ; Lyons Conglomerate, in part, W. Australia;
main Monilopora beds of the Drake and Kempsey areas, N.S. Wales ;
of Silverwood, Springsure, etc., and of the lower portion of the Lower
Bowen Series, Paragastrioceras (?) beds of Mt. Britton, Queensland ;
Monilopora and Favo sites beds of the Kimberley area ; Paralegoceras
jacksoni beds of the Irwin River Coalfield, W. Australia.
Gympie Series of Queensland with Monilopora. Some glacial erratics
here.
Dinner Creek Series, Rockhampton area, Queensland, with oldest known
Glossopteri8 Flora.
Carboniferous -
Upper
Culm
r Lower
Culm
Tillites with Aneimites
of San Jnan area.
Kuttung glacial and volcanic series with Rhacoptcris and Lepidodendron
vellheimianum, N.S. Wales; Aneimites beds of lit. lludge, Drummond
Range, and Newellton near Herberton, Queensland.
Lower part of Kuttung Series, with Ulodendron, Clepsydropsis, Pitys and
' Stigmaria.
Visean
Neerlcol Series (Q.) with Pustula, Spirifer mosquensis, etc.
Lower -
Burindi Series with oolitic limestones containing a Visean Fauna in
N.S. Wales, and in the Mundubbera to Rockhampton and Stanwell Park
areas, Queensland. Flaggy limestones with traces of mineral oil, Kim-
berley area of Western Australia, at Christmas Creek and Price’s Creek.
Tournaisian
Upper beds of Barraba Series, N.S. Wales ; lowest beds, the black cherts
and tuffs, of the Rockhampton Series, with Tournaisian cephalopods,
Queensland.
-
-
(?) Fossil fish beds of Mansfield, and Grampian Sandstone, Victoria.


lii Queensland, following conformably on the Upper Devonian
Lepidodendron australe beds, of the Training Wall Quarries, Rockhamp-
ton, are a series about 5.000 feet thick of black cherts and andesitic tuff,
the Lower Rockhampton Series. The cherts contain the following
ceplialopods: Protocanites pl a n orb if o rrn is , Pseudarietites ammoniti-
formis i f), Pseudarietites dubius.
In New South Wales, as the upper beds of the Barraba Series,
mostly Upper Devonian, pass upwards conformably into the Visean,
their highest strata (tuffaceous radiolarian shales), may be of Tour-
naisian age.
Visean. —The sequence of the Upper Rockhampton Series seems to
be as follows, in descending order:
2,000 feet (?) Mudstones, grits, oolitic limestones and conglomerates
with, near base, an oolitic limestone, up to 400 feet thick and
containing Cyathaxonia (?) sp., Lithostrotion stanvelense,
etc., Michelinia, Spirifer aff. mosquensis, etc. This horizon is
perhaps that of D 2, and perhaps D 3 of the Avonian sequence
of England.
In New South Wales the Visean Burindi Series sweeps around
in a great arc from Taree on the Manning River, by way of Clarence-
town, Currabubula and Somerton, to the Horton River and Warialda, a
distance of 250 miles. At Gloucester this series, 10,000 feet thick, com-
prises oolitic coralline limestones, olive-green mudstones, crinoidal shales,
thin limestones in the lower beds, and in the upper keratopliyric lavas
and tuffs. Locally a basal conglomerate makes a non-sequence with the
Devonian Strata, but elsewhere there is a conformable passage from
the Lepidodendron australe beds of the Upper Devonian Barraba Series
into the basal beds of the Burindi Series.
The oolitic limestones, so characteristic at Rockhampton, Cannindali,
etc., have much the same fossils in New South Wales as they have in
Queensland, but also contain large masses of a reef-forming coral,
Ajriirophyllum, as at Taree, and Hall’s Creek, 20 miles south of Bingara.
At Hilldale, 20 miles north of Maitland, a Syringothyris zone overlies
shales with abundant crinoids ( Gactocrinus, etc.), recalling the Osage
Series of U.S.A. At Clarencetown the gigantic chonetine shell Chonetes
aspinosa might in the field easily be mistaken for Productus giganteus.
Drift specimens of Lepidodendron veltheimianum, L. volkmannianum,
Archceocalamites and Glepsydropsis occur in the marine beds. The
dwarfed fauna of the highest beds heralds perhaps the coming of the
Kuttung Ice Age, or is due to the muddying of the sea with tuff.
In the Kimberley area of Western Australia massive limestones,
with the fluted weathering typical of Karrenfelder, are richly fos-
siliferous. They are overlain by shales and sandstones. The following
are characteristic: Hexagonella cf. dendroidea, Lithostrotion affine,


Poteriocrinus crassus (?), Orthotetes (Schelweinclla) crenistria, Orthis
(Schizophoria) rcsupinata, Rhynchonella pleurodon, R. pugnus, Spirifer
striatus, Goniatites sphwricus, etc. These fossils seem to be mostly
Visean.
Overlying the Visean Rockhampton Series proper, and possibly
forming a part of that sequence, is the marine Neerkol Series, perhaps
of late Lower Carboniferous age; this may have been formed contem-
poraneously with the oldest part of the Kuttung Series of New South
Wales. It is about 4,200 feet thick, and contains abundant Protoretepora
in the middle portion, and Pustula and Spirifcr aff. mosquensis near its
conglomeratic base.
Lower to Upper Carboniferous.
Culm. —The Kuttung Series, mostly Newer Culm, may be of about the
age of the Ostrau-Waldenburg strata of Silesia, the Millstone Grit of
England above the D 3 horizon, and the Upper Pottsville and Lower
Kanawha Series of U.S.A.
A great epeirogenic movement at the close of Burindi time (perhaps
the Sudetic disturbance of Europe), drove the Burindi seas right off the
whole area of what is now eastern Australia, as already described, and
there followed the first of those great glaciations, which, with interglacial
interludes, lasted until about the close of Middle Permian time. It is
doubtful whether any part of the world has such a wonderful series of
Newer Culm fluvio-glacial conglomerates (individual beds up to 2,000
feet thick), tillites and varve-shales. This remarkable Kuttung glacia-
tion was accompanied by intensive volcanic activity, but the maximum
refrigeration followed on after the decline of the volcanic energy. The
whole series is about 10,000 feet thick. The only fossils found in these
“schotter” gravels, tuffs, varve-shales, etc., are plants, which in the lower
beds are Pitys, Ulodendron, Glepsydropsis, Archwocalamites, Stigmaria,
Cyclostigma, and Lepidodendron veltheimianum. In the upper half
of the Kuttung. Rhacopteris and Aneimites (?) become very abundant,
and ascend, together with Gardiopteris and Archwocalamites, to the
top of the series, near which a single specimen of Lepidodendron
veltheimianum has been recovered. This last species is rarely met with
above the middle part of the Kuttung Series.
As regards evidence of possible Kuttung rocks in Queensland, the
Kuttung type Aneimites austrina occurs in slialy rocks at Mt. Mudge,
33 miles south by west from Bogantungan. The Aneimites ovata beds
at Silver Valley, Newellton, in the Herberton district, may also be of
Kuttung age. They rest on a basal conglomerate 200 feet thick, and are
capped by rhyolites interstratified with which are thin seams of impure
coal.
In the Kimberley area of Western Australia, north of Derby, a
Lepidodendron. flora occurs in sandstones above the horizon of the


equivalents there of the Burindi Series. Sigillaria sp. and Stigmaria sp.
are said to be associated with the Lepidodendron, which appears to be
near to L. veltheimianum.
Upper Carboniferous.
In the type area of the Lower Hunter there is a non-sequence
at the top of the Kuttung, as is evidenced by a complete change in
the flora from the Lepidodcndron-Rhacopteris type to a Gangamopteris-
Glossopteris type. There is also a marked lithological change as the
strata pass from the terrestrial and freshwater beds of the Kuttung
to the, dominantly, marine beds of the Lower Marine Series. Never-
theless no angular unconformity has been observed at the plane of
passage, and glacial conditions seem to have continued, as the first stage
of the Kamilaroi 1 System is formed of glacial beds, the Lochinvar glacial
beds. They closely resemble those of Bacchus Marsh, Victoria. The
non-sequence between Kuttung and Kamilaroi, such as it is, appears to
be chronologically near to the Asturian disturbance of Europe. Tenta-
tively it is proposed to draw the line between Carboniferous and Permian
in eastern Australia at the base of the main Eurydesma cordatum
horizon, an “oyster-bank” type of deposit, strongly marked in Tasmania,
700 miles to the south, and at intervals through New South Wales and
Queensland, to the Bowen Coalfield, 800 miles to the north of the
Hunter River area. A short distance above this Eurydesma horizon,
which is also a minor glacial horizon at Springsure, in Queensland, as
well as at Allandale, New South Wales, and Maria Island, Tasmania,
there is an abundance of Strophalosia clarkei and Productus brachy-
thcerus, which gives a distinctive Permian aspect to the beds.
In New South Wales the Upper Carboniferous sea had small local
developments near West Maitland and Kempsey. In New England the
sea widened considerably and lay chiefly on the east side of the Warialda
geanticline. It probably continued northwards across the Queensland
border to the Monilopora deposits at Silverwood, Gyrnpie and Spring-
sure. At Springsure Glossopteris-bcaring shales and small coal-seams
are interstratified with the marine sediments.
Provisionally it is proposed to limit the Carboniferous to the main
horizon of the coral .1 fonUopora nicholsoni and Cladochonus, a horizon
which in the Kimberley area of AVestern Australia is associated with
Favosites marmionensis, and in the Irwin River Coal-field of the same
State with the cephalopod Paralegoceras jacksoni and the coral
Syringopora.
1 The term Kamllaroi (the name of a once-powerful aboriginal tribe within whose
territory lay the area of the Lower Hunter of New South Wales, the type area for the
development of Permo-Carboniferous rocks in Australia) has been adopted, in place of
the term Permo-Carboniferous hitherto used, for the sequence of rocks in Australia and
Tasmania characterised throughout by a Glossopteris-Gangamopteris flora, and by a
fauna which, while distinctly Permian above and with Upper Carboniferous affinities
below, is nevertheless linked together by a number of characteristic common forms, such
as Trachypora wWcinsoni, Eurydesma hobartense . etc.


The most important recent contribution to Kamilaroi stratigraphy
has been made by Dr. Dighton Thomas in his detailed study of
Paralegoceras jacksoni , a form very abundant on a low horizon in the
Lower Marine beds of the Irwin River Coal-lield of Western Australia;
this fossil, he concludes, “has affinities not with Permian forms but with
American Pennsylvanian species as suggested by Haug, and would there-
fore indicate for the Irwin River Goniatite bed an Upper Carboniferous
(Upper Pennsylvanian) age.” It is through more detailed strati-
graphical and palaeontological work on the Kamilaroi rocks of Western
Australia that a solution of the problem may come in time, as the rocks
of that age in that State were deposited near the south-eastern part of
the great Eurasiatic Tethys Sea, so that direct comparisons can be made
in this case between Australian and old world types.
The problem is still very far from being settled, but the table herewith
furnishes at least a working hypothesis (see Table E).
Igneous Rocks.
In the lower part of the Burindi Series, along the great Serpentine
Belt, the marine mudstones include bands of andesitic tuff and coarse
breccia, while at Currabubula the upper part contains fine-grained kerato-
phyric tuffs. Tuffs are also found in considerable thickness in the
Gloucester district, where three thick interbedded flows of quartz-
keratophyre also occur. In the Lower Hunter area there are also fine
and coarse keratophyric tuffs, as at Hilldale, and a few thin flows of
andesite.
Subaerial volcanic activity was very pronounced during the Kuttung
epoch, and lavas and tuffs form a very important part of the Kuttung
Series. In the Lower Hunter Basin, about Paterson, Clarencetown,
Seaham, Gosforth and Pokolbin, redistributed tuffaceous material is
common in the basal portion of the series, while the volcanic stage is
made up largely of lava-flows and tuff beds, with conglomerate. The
tuffs are mostly keratophyric, while the flows comprise andesites of
various kinds, toscanite and dellenite, dacite, rhyolite and quartz-
keratophyre. The maximum observed thickness of lavas alone exceeds
3,000 feet. The upper or main glacial portion includes a considerable
thickness of acid tuff. Tuffs and lava-flows have also been recognised
at Port Stephens, and at Gloucester, where there is a series of rhyolite
flows of a total thickness of 1,500 feet. Many of the rock-types mentioned
above have been recognized more or less continuously for a distance of
at least 150 miles in a north-westerly direction, as far as Werris Creek
and Currabubula, and even beyond. The northward continuation of
the series contains many interbedded flows, largely of an acid character.
The “grey felspar-porphyries”' of New England may be products of
Kuttung eruptions.


TABLE E.
TENTATIVE CLASSIFICATION AND CORRELATION OF THE KAMILAROI SYSTEM OF AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA.
New South Wales.
Queensland.
Western Australia.
Tasmania.
Victoria.
KAMfLAROI SYSTEM.
Upper
Permian.
Middle
Permian.
Lower
Permian.
Upper
Carboniferous.
w
a
Ph
Pi
&
W
H
<
Ph
a
Ph
P
a
<
0
o
Newcastle Coal-measures.
Large Dadoxylon abundant.
Fossil Insects and Laby-
rinthodonts.
Some fine Tuffs (chert).
Tomago Coal-measures.
CO
a
A
2
a
K
Ch
CO
A
P
a
g
a
«<
Strophalosia clarkei Beds.
Bolwarra Glacial Conglome*
rate in Marine Beds.
Branxton Glacial Beds.
Marine Beds.
pS
m
K
w
>
J K
£
>
O 05
3
Q
W
Greta Coal-measures.
(?) Coorabin Coal-measures.
GO
M
S
K
02
K
g
3
<
«
W
if
o
Farley Stage.
Rutherford Stage.
Eurydesma cor dal um zone of
Allandale, etc.
Minor Glacial Horizon.
Non-sequence here.
Oangamopteris Horizon.
Monilopora Beds of Drake
and Kempsey.
Eurydesma hobartense.
Lochinvar Glacial Beds,
Kempsev Glacial Beds.
g
5
a
cc
fc
w
*
o
«
P5
H
Ph
Ph
£
Thick Coal-measures.
Large Dadoxylon abundant
and much Tuff.
9
Q
g
£
Strophalosia clarJcei Beds.
Glacial erratics in Marine
Beds.
Collinsville and Mt. Devlin
Coal-measures.
Mt. Mulligan Coal-measures.
«
K
£
O
.J
Farley Stage.
Algal Limestones, 1,500 ft.
thick, of Gigoomgan, W.
of Maryborough.
CEurydesma cordatum zone
< of Springsure, etc.
L Minor Glacial Horizon.
Gympie
Series.
Dinner
Creek
Series.
Monilopora nicholsoni.
Qlossopteris,
Gangamopteris,
Sphenophyllum.
Cardiff Coal-measures.
Collieburn Coal-
measures.
Mt. Pelion Coal-
measures.
Small glacial erratics
in Marine Mudstones
of Irwin River Coal-
field.
Collie Foraminiferal
Beds.
Strophalosia Beds.
Eurydesma hobartense
Beds.
Collie Coal-measures.
Irwin River Coal-
measures.
(?) Preolenna Coal
measures.
Bruny I. Coal-meas-
ures.
Mersey Coal-measures
Farley Stage (Fossil
Cliff, Irwin River).
Helicoprion (? Toxo -
prion) Horizon,
Arthur R.
Aulosteges Horizon(?)
Maria Island Eury-
desma cordatum zone.
Minor Glacial Horizon
Beds of Kimberley and
Irwin River with
Monilopora nichol-
soni, Favosites mar-
mionensis, Syringo-
pora reticulata, var.
patula, Paralego-
ceras jacksoni.
Dadoxylon, small var.
Lyons Conglomerate.
Dadoxylon, small var.
Wynyard Glacial
Beds.
Gangamopteris Beds.
Bacchus Marsh
Glacial Beds.
Inman Glacial Beds.


When the Kuttung freshwater gave place to marine conditions in the
Lower Hunter Valley, volcanic activity continued in the form of sub-
marine outpourings of basalt and olivine-basalt, now much altered, often
amygdaloidal and containing zeolites; at least two considerable horizons
of these basalts have been recognised. Felsitic tuffs and breccias are
generally subordinate.
In Queensland the lower portions of the Carboniferous system do not
appear to contain much volcanic material, except that the Kockliampton
Series of marine beds includes much andesitic tuff; evidences of volcanic
activity do not appear to have been noted among the equivalents of the
Kuttung Series, while for many of the later occurrences of volcanic rocks
it is difficult to say exactly whether they are in the Upper Carboniferous
or in the Permian sequence. The Condamine marine beds of the Silver-
wood district in their upper portions consist of about 1,000 feet of rhyolitic
tuffs with tuffaceous grits and conglomerates. In the Styx River region
underlying the Eurydesma cordatum beds are andesitic rocks, and in the
Middle Gympie Series at Gympie are altered basic rocks with tuffs and
breccias. The Dinner Creek Beds in the Rockhampton district contain
andesites and rhyolites. Apparently, as in New South Wales, there was
no break in the volcanic activity between the Carboniferous and Permian
periods.
The only intrusive rocks considered to be of Carboniferous age are
the serpentines and allied basic rocks of the Great Serpentine Belt of
New South Wales, which have been assigned to an epoch at or near
the close of the period, but may have been injected earlier. The Queens-
land serpentines may be coeval with these.
Tectonics.
These are summarised below at the end of the notes on the Permian
Period.
Economic.
Definite indications of oil have been found in the Price’s Creek bore,
in the Kimberley district of Western Australia. Gold occurs extensively
in the Carboniferous strata of Gympie, Queensland, though the
date of its introduction was possibly late Permian. In New South Wales
bedded deposits of titaniferous iron-ore occur abundantly in the Port
Stephens and Clarencetown districts. The serpentines of the Great
Serpentine Belt have yielded gold and small quantities of chromite and
cinnabar as well as supplies of magnesite.
Permian.
(See Table E, p. 62.)
Lotcer Permian.
This division comprises the strata from the main Eurydesma
cordatum horizon to the top of the Greta Coal-measures. In the type area


of the Lower Hunter, N.S.W., the Lower Permian seas transgressed
across the Upper Carboniferous sediments on to the Kuttung rocks
near Pokolbin and Allandale, in the Maitland area. Also to the north
of West Maitland, between Comerford’s and Tocal, all the strata
from the main Eurydesma cordatum horizon up to the base of the Greta
Coal-measures—a thickness of over 2,000 feet of strata —disappear
through transgression, almost amounting to unconformity, in a distance
of about six miles. At Muswellbrook, 40 miles to the north, the evidence
of this sea has almost entirely disappeared, the rocks of that age being
represented there by basic and acid lavas and tuffs. Further north at
Temi, and even as far as Currabubula, the Permian coal-measures rest
directly, with little or no unconformity, on the Kuttung strata. At
Raymond Terrace, 12 miles east of Maitland, only the Upper Carboniferous
marine sediments are represented, for, as at Muswellbrook, sediments of
newer Lower Marine age, i.e., from the main Eurydesma cordatum horizon
to the base of the Greta Coal-measures, are wanting. This Lower Permian
sea probably did not extend very far to the south of Maitland. It was a
relatively small epicontinental sea. It was more extensively developed
in Queensland, for the Eurydesma cordatum horizon is known from
Silverwood, near Warwick, to at least as far north as Yatton, over 400
miles, and from Springsure to near Broadsound, about 130 miles. 1
In Tasmania the Lower Permian sea probably covered a great part
of the broad basin lying between the old rocks of the Scottsdale region
and of Maria Island on the east, and the highlands, mostly pre-Cambrian,
on the west. This was probably a gulf closed northwards, but perhaps
communicating with open ocean towards the south.
The greatest extension of the Lower Permian seas took place in
Western Australia. There the south-eastern shore of the Tethys Sea
appears to have remained near where it was in Upper Carboniferous time,
over the “Desert Basin” region, an area of over 100,000 square miles.
A second area extended from a point at least as far south as Perth,
northerly to North West Cape, a distance of over 700 miles, with a
widtli of 25 to over 200 miles. The coast-line of this part of the Tethys
Sea was meridional in its trend, which was nearly coincident with that
of its Upper Carboniferous predecessor.
In Greta time a gentle epeirogenic uplift brought in an epoch of wide-
spread lakes and swamps in Australia and Tasmania. In the Irwin
River Coal-field, W.A., these coal-measure deposits transgress in such a
way over the underlying marine strata that there is a difference in their
respective strikes of about 20°. In addition to Glossopteris and
Gangamopteris these coal-measures contain Sphenophyllum and
x The 1,500 feet thick algal limestone discovered by Professor H. C. Richards and Dr.
\V. H. Bryan at Gigoomgan, Queensland, perhaps belongs here.


Bothrodendron. In this State the equivalent of the Greta Coal-measures
of New South Wales extends at intervals from near Lower Liverynga
Station, in the Kimberley area, in the north, by way of the Irwin River
Coal-field, to the Collie and Wilga Coal-fields, and to Nannup, near Cape
Leeuwin, in the south, a distance of about 1,100 miles. The Greta coal lias
not been found anywhere in South, in Central or in North Australia, so
that those vast areas were probably terrestrial in Greta time.
In Tasmania the Greta horizon is represented by thin coal seams, at
the coal-fields of the Mersey, Bruny Island and Port Cygnet. The oil-
shale tasmanite occurs in the Mersey Coal-field, near Latrobe, etc.
In New South Wales evidence of the Greta Coal swamps is first
met with probably in the Coorabin Coal-field, the extent of which is
at present unknown. Next on the Clyde River isolated small basins of
Greta Coal-measures rest with strong unconformity on Upper Devonian
rocks. The main Greta swamp and lake must have extended from near
Tort Stephens westward for at least 60 miles, and northwards for at least
130 miles, to Currabubula. It is possible that this Greta basin of
deposition extended at least as far south as Sydney, and as far west as
Parramatta, but there is no direct evidence on this point. In places it
transgressed the marine sediments, and there is evidence of considerable
volcanic activity. For to the north of Raymond Terrace what
is perhaps the equivalent of one of the Greta seams lies immediately on
Upper Carboniferous marine strata, and underlies conformably a thick-
ness of about 2,000 feet of basalts, tuffs and agglomerates. The narrow
trough-faulted coal-field of Ashford-Inverell may be of Greta age.
In Queensland the horizon of the Greta Coal-measures can be traced
from near Silverwood (Warwick area) northwards to Collinsville and Mt.
Devlin, a distance of over 600 miles. The coal-measure horizon is in
places intermittent. Between Collinsville and Mt. Devlin it is greatly
thickened by contemporaneous flows of rhyolite and andesite, the
whole series aggregating 3,100 feet. At the base are the Mt. Devlin
Coal-measures, 400 feet thick, and at the top the Collinsville Coal-
measures, 700 feet thick. The analogy between the Greta Coal-
measures near Raymond Terrace, in New South Wales, and the above
coal-measures, etc., in the Bowen Basin of Queensland, is very striking.
An outlier of Greta coal lies at Mt. Mulligan, where the strata contain
Sphenophyllum, in addition to the usual Glossopteris-Gangamopteris
flora.
Middle Permian.
Tipper Marine Series. —A minor non-sequence occurs at the top of
the Greta Coal-measures both in New South Wales and in Queensland. In
New South Wales, at Richardson’s, near Raymond Terrace, a very coarse
shingle marks an old shore-line of the Middle Permian Sea. The blocks
are derived from the underlying volcanic series. In New South Wales
E


this sea, about 11,500 square miles in area, was far larger than that of
the Lower Permian, and formed a wide inlet, from near Port Stephens to
beyond Murrurundi, westwards to near Dunedoo, and thence south-
wards almost to Bateman’s Bay.
There is evidence in this sea of contemporaneous ice action on two
horizons. The lower, that of the Branxton glacial beds, in which
Fenestellidce encrust large dumped boulders, the upper, that of the
Bohvarra Conglomerate, considered by Prof. A. P. Coleman to be probably
a marine boulder clay. The carry of the erratics, particularly of the Upper
Devonian Spirifer disjunctus sandstone of Mt. Lambie, shows that high
land still lay to the south. In the Western (Lithgow) Coal-field the
sediments of this Upper Marine sea, largely mudstones, rest directly on
Upper Devonian rocks, the intervening strata being completely over-
lapped.
In Queensland the Middle Permian sea occupied the Avide and long
area of the DaAvson-Bowen Basin, over 400 miles long, and from about
80 to 200 miles Avide. Northwards the basin appears to liaA’e ended
against a shore-line of Brisbane Schists and granite. South of Spring-
sure and to the east of Taroom strata of the great syncline disappear
under the Mesozoic beds. How this Queensland basin connected up Avith
the Middle Permian seas of New South if at all, is at present
unknoAA'n.
In Tasmania the Middle Permian sea covered most of the depres-
sion that lay betAA T een the Scottsdale-Freycinet’s Peninsula land mass on
the north-east, and the pre-Cambrian-Cambro-Ordovician rocks from near
Devonport to South Cape.
In Western Australia the Middle Permian sea was extensively
developed, its sediments being mostly sandstones and mudstones Avith a
marine fauna of far less A T ariety than that in the LoAver Permian sedi-
ments. Small dumped erratics point to the presence of floating ice in
the portion of this sea in the IrAvin Biver Coal-field.
Among the marine forms peculiar to the Middle as compared with
the Lower Permian seas may be mentioned the crinoids Phialocrinus and
Tribrachiocrinus, and the pelecypods Cleobis grandis and Aphcmam
gigantea. Stropluilosia clarkei is specially abundant in the Upper Marine
Series of NeAv South Wales, as Avell as in the Middle BoAven of Queens-
land, while the latter is specially rich in Derbyia, a brachiopod not found
in NeAV South Wales.
Between Middle and Upper Permian time there AA 7 as a AAride-
spread epeirogenic movement which drove out all the Middle Permian
seas from Australia and Tasmania, and there folloAved several
epochs of great inland lakes and swamps. In places, as at iEllalong,
south of Maitland, N.S.W., the Upper Marine sediments became arched
in the broad Lochinvar dome, and some thousands of feet of strata Avere
removed by denudation, so that there is there a marked unconformity,


Lower Triassic rocks resting directly on the middle zone of the Upper
Marine Series —the Mnree Beds. This unconformity between the Middle
and Upper Permian would correspond probably with the Saalian orogeny
of Europe (see “Barraba Trig. Station” on Section 2 on the Geological
Map).
Upper Permian.
In the type area of the Hunter a succession of lakes was formed, the
earliest of these being that of Tomago, followed by the much wider lake
and belt of swamps of the Newcastle-Lithgow-Illawarra Coal-measures.
A transgression south-westwards occurred of these newer lakes and
swamps over the older, so that in the southern and western coal-fields
not only are the Tomago Coal-measures completely overlapped —perhaps
they were never deposited in this south-westerly area—but even within
the Newcastle Coal-measures themselves the newer strata transgress
considerably over the older.
Water-worn pebbles of hard coal derived from the Greta Coal-
measures are found in places in the upper division of the Newcastle
Series.
Marked diagonal bedding in the Newcastle Series, dipping to the
south-west along the present meridional shore-line, proves the former
existence of a land —Tasmantis—away out to sea to the east of Port
Stephens.
A Labyrinthodont, Bothriceps major, preserved in the oil-sliale
(“kerosene shale”) of the Airly coal-mine near Lithgow, shows the age
of these measures to be definitely Upper Permian. This is confirmed
by the fairly rich insect fauna.
In Queensland Upper Coal-measures, the Upper Bowen Series, were
deposited in a vast basin, the great Dawson-Bowen syncline, but they
also extended over a wide area between Tambo and nughenden with a
meridional highland area to the east; westward the Upper Bowen Series
now dips under the Mesozoic rocks of the Great Artesian Basin.
At Blair Athol one of the coal seams in the Upper Coal Measures attains
the greatest thickness of any black coal as yet found within the Common-
wealth, vis., 93 feet.
In Western Australia three valuable series of coal-measures are
developed in the Collie Coal-field; of these the Cardiff and Collieburn
Series are Upper Permian, while the Collie Series is Lower Permian.
The Wilga Coal-field is of the same general age.
It may be mentioned that all these Upper Coal-measures are charac-
terised by a rich Gangamopteris-Glossopteris Flora. In both the Upper
and Lower (Greta) Coal-measures of New South Wales oil-shale
(kerosene shale) occurs, mostly in lenticular patches. These are
either alone, or form part of a coal-seam. They are considered
to be formed chiefly of an alga, Reinschia australis, but partly from
pollen derived from contemporaneous conifers. The pollen was drifted


by winds to the surface of numerous lakelets, where it sank to the
bottom and helped to form the oil-shale. The “sulphur rains” (dust
clouds of pollen from the pines) form deposits resembling oil-shale on
the floors of lakes in the backwoods of Canada to-day.
An important contribution to knowledge of the development of
insect life throughout the world has resulted from the discovery by .the
late John Mitchell of a remarkable Upper Permian insect fauna. These
fossils, together with those in the Upper Triassic Ipswich beds of Queens-
land, help largely to fill in the former gap in the world history of insect
life between the Lower Permian and Lower Jurassic horizons. The
L T pper Permian fossils were found at Belmont and at Warner's Bay,
near Lake Macquarie, and at Merewether Beach, both in the Newcastle
district of New South Wales. The insects are preserved in chert, largely
formed of very finely divided particles of devitrified rhyolitic tuff.
This volcanic dust evidently suffocated the insects and hermetically
.sealed them up, together with numerous valves of the conchostracau
Leam, in the tuff which later became a hard chert.
Dr. If. J. Tillyard, whose researches on the fossil insects of Upper
Permian and Upper Triassic rocks of Australia are now classic, considers
that the old Carboniferous insect fauna of the Northern Hemisphere
never flourished in Australia, owing perhaps to the severity of the climate
from Kuttung (Newer Culm) time down to Middle Permian time. He
stresses the following points about the Upper Permian insect fauna of
Australia:
1. The forms were dwarfed, owing no doubt to the severity of the
climate.
2. The forms indicate great specialization.
3. Ilolometabolous forms outnumber the hemimetabolous in the
Upper Permian of Australia, whereas in extra-Australian areas
occupied by Upper Palreozoic rocks these numerical proportions
are reversed.
The following is a brief summary of the forms represented, according
to Dr. Tillyard:
Division JlemimetaboJa, Order llemiptera —
These were represented by Plant Bugs “fitted to suck the juice
of soft-bodied plants and well able to stand a fairly cold climate,”
as well as by the jumping Plant Lice.
The Stenorrhyncha of this Order are represented by “many small
but beautifully' preserved forms,” such as Pincombea mirabilis Till.,
Lo2)Monenra pustulata Till., etc.
Division Holometcibola —
Order Mecoptera : The scorpion-flies are well represented at
Belmont by several species belonging to the genus Permochorista,
direct ancestors of the living scorpion-flies of Australia.


Order Paramecoptera: Highly generalized ty*pes such as
Belmoniia mitchelli Till, and Parabelmontia pcrmiana Till, from
the Lake Macquarie area are related not only to the Lacewings, of
the Order Mecoptera, but also to the Trichoptera (caddis-flies), and
to the Diptera (house-flies, etc.).
Order Neuroptera: The oldest representative of this Order is the
Australian form Permithonc belmontensis Till. The Australian
Moth-lacewings ( Ithonidw ) are direct descendants from Permithone.
In the Order Protocolcoptera the genus Permofulgor is an
ancestor of the Water-beetles (Hydrophilidw).
In the Order Colcoptera Tillyard has placed the genera Pernio-
philus and Permosync, closely related to the recent water-beetles.
It may be noted that in the Kamilaroi System, in the Hunter area
of New South Wales, there are four distinct glacial horizons, as follows,
in descending order:
Feet.
(4) 40 Bolwarra Conglomerate, partly'a submarine boulder clay.
500 Marine strata.
(3) 10 Branxton erratic horizon. Dumped and striated boulders.
2,000 Marine strata.
100 Greta Coal-measures.
1,800 Marine strata.
(2 ) 270 Eurydesma cordatum beds with glacial erratics.
2,400 Partly marine, partly estuarine (?) strata, with Eurydesma
hobartense at base.
(1) 300 Locliinvar glacial shales with striated erratics. This is the
main glacial horizon in the Kamilaroi System.
Igneous Rocks.
The Upper Carboniferous volcanic activity in New South Wales
was continued into Permian times. Tuffs are associated with the
Eurydesma conglomerates at Allandale, and a few submarine basalt-
flows occur on higher horizons. Basalts and acid tuffs are found among
the Greta Coal-measures, as at Raymond Terrace and Muswellbrook, and
felsitic tuffs and breccias with analcite-basalt occur among what are
probably Upper Marine beds at Temi near Murrurundi. At Werris Creek
and Currabubula are a thick series of basalts resting directly on the
Greta Coal-measures and possibly of Upper Marine age. These are
broken through by dykes and sills and irregular intrusions, chiefly of
keratophyric type. In the Upper Coal-measures, too, near Singleton,
basalts and acid tuffs have been noted. The cherty rocks which are inter-
bedded in the Newcastle coal-measures on various horizons are in part
tuffaceous.
On the South Coast of New South Wales between Wollongong and
Nowra is a remarkable suite of trachyandesites and trachybasalts, with
associated tuffs and breccias. These rocks are contemporaneous in the


Upper Marine and the Upper Coal-measure Series, and further south,
about Milton, are their hypabyssal equivalents in the shape of laccoliths,
sills, etc., of monzonite and monzonite-porphyry.
At Mt. Dromedary and Tilba Tilba on the South Coast is a remark-
able compound intrusion of alkaline type, highly differentiated, consisting
essentially of monzonitic rocks, but with a number of very rare basic and
ultrabasic plutonic alkaline types. On petrological and chemical grounds
this intrusion is regarded as comagmatic with the Milton intrusives and
the latite lavas.
A series of rhyolites and keratopliyres with tuffs and breccias
described from the neighbourhood of Drake, in New England, may be
Permian, though there is a tendency to regard some of them as of
Kuttung age. These are possibly to be correlated with the series of
Permian flows and tuffs, about 2,500 feet thick, in the Silverwood-Lucky
Valley area in south-eastern Queensland. Here rhyolites and dacites
preponderate, Avith andesites and basalts in the upper parts.
The Lower BoAven Series of Queensland includes in its loAver marine
portion a thick series of andesitic lavas and tuffs, as Avest of Rock-
hampton, at Mount Britton, and the BoAven River, Avhere the total
thickness is some thousands of feet. There rhyolites are associated
with the andesites, while in the Clermont district there are rhyolites and
agglomerates about the same horizon. At Mount Mulligan and else-
Avhere in northern Queensland are extensi\ r e rhyolite lavas and tuffs.
Between the Collinsville and Mount Devlin Coal-measures, in the Bowen
River district, that is, about the horizon of the Greta Coal-measures of
NeAV South Wales, there are rhyolites, andesites and zeolitic ‘basalts.
From the Upper BoAven Series of freshAvater beds tuffs of great thickness
and a feAv thin Aoavs of basalt have been recorded.
The earth-movements Avhich affected the Permian rocks near the
close of the Palaeozoic era along Avhat is noAv the east coastal part of
Australia Avere accompanied by extensive plutonic intrusions. In the
NeAV England district of New South Wales there are recognised a number
of phases in the cycle, the main intrusions becoming progressively more
acid, and the cycle closing with minor intrusions of more basic type in
the form of lamprophyres. The acid granites and pegmatites AA r ere accom-
panied by ore-bearing solutions introducing ores of tin, Avolfram,
molybdenum, antimony, etc. These granites extend into south-eastern
Queensland, and intrusions of the same age are found all along the
coastal belt to the north, occupying \ r ery extensive areas, and having, as
in NeAV South Wales, ores of various metals associated Avith them. In
general the sequence of rock-types developed agrees Avith that found in
Noav South Wales.
Economic.
In addition to the vast reserves of coal and of oil-shale in the
Kamilaroi strata, details of which are gh T en later in these notes, it must


be remembered that certain gold reefs occur in sedimentary rocks like
those of Gympie in Queensland, while silver-lead lodes enclosed in
Gympie rocks, of Upper Carboniferous age, are met with at Silver Spur,
near Texas, also in Queensland. These are possibly, like the ores of tin,
wolfram, molybdenum, etc., mentioned above, connected with the late
Permian granites.
In Victoria a useful ornamental sandstone is quarried for building
purposes from the glacial series at Kyneton, and the Ravensfield sand-
stone of the Lower Marine Series in New South Wales has a limited use
as a building-stone.
Middle to Late Paleozoic Tectonics.
Folding during this time seems to have been mostly restricted to
eastern Australia. While in places there are from three to five breaks
in the sequence from epi-Silurian to early Triassic times, in other areas
of eastern Australia it has not yet been possible to differentiate epochs
of folding of Devonian, Carboniferous and. Permian strata, and so the
tectonics of this part of geological time will here be discussed together.
Epi-Lower Devonian. —ln Victoria there is a slight break in places
between the Middle Devonian Buchan and Bindi Series and the Snowy
River Porphyries, the former in a few instances resting on an eroded
surface of the latter. No such break has been observed anywhere in New
South Wales or Queensland.
Epi-Middle Devonian. —Dr. A. W. Howitt has also shown —and the
accuracy of his conclusions has been amply confirmed by Professor
Skeats —that in the Tabberabbera district of Victoria there is a strong
unconformity between the shales, sandstones and blue limestones of the
Middle Devonian Tabberabbera Series, and the red and purple sand-
stones, shales and conglomerates of the Upper Devonian sequence.
According to Professor Stille no such important unconformity of a like
time has yet been recorded from any part of the world. In New South
Wales the Murrumbidgee Series is considerably folded, but the exact age
of the folding is unknown; in New England the Upper Devonian Barraba
Series rests conformably on the Tamworth Series, but has at its base the
very thick and coarse Baldwin agglomerate. The relations of Upper and
Middle Devonian in Queensland are unknown.
Epi-Upper Devonian ( Kanimbla, Epoch). —The Kanimbla Epoch, so
called by C. A. Sussmilch, was a time of folding followed by extensive
intrusions of igneous magma. This folding is manifest at intervals
from Hartley north-west to Cobar in New South Wales, and along the
South Coast to Green Cape, but all along the western side of the New
England plateau there is perfect conformity between the Upper
Devonian and the Lower Carboniferous sediments, and the same remark
applies to the Mansfield basin and other areas in Victoria. The
Kanimbla Epoch may correspond with the Breton Disturbance of Europe.


Epi-Visecm. —That a major diastrophic event occurred at the close
of Burindi time in New South Wales is indicated by the remarkable
Wallarobba Conglomerate, 1,000 to 2,000 feet thick, a true Flysch facies,
at the base of the Kuttung in the Lower Hunter basin, and it has been
suggested that this was the expression of an intense folding movement
with overthrusting which affected the Devonian and Burindi beds along
the western margin of New England. This folding decreased in intensity
towards the south and west. So marked was the movement that at
Ashford, to the north of Inverell in New England, coal-measures, prob-
ably of Greta (Lower Permian) age, make almost a right-angled uncon-
formity with Upper Devonian and Lower Carboniferous (Burindi)
strata, as shown on Section 5 of the geological map.
In Queensland the Kuttung beds at Silver Valley (Newellton) with
Aneimites ovata are almost horizontal, while in the Burdekin Basin
strata which are thought to pass up from Devonian into Lower
Carboniferous dip at fairly steep angles. An epi-Visean movement is
thus suggested. A strong folding movement of Carboniferous age has
also been inferred from unconformities existing between the Lower Bowen
Series and underlying Carboniferous (Burindi) beds in the Drummond
Range and elsewhere. The exact date of this “Drummond movement" is
uncertain, but present indications point to its having antedated the
deposition of the Aneimites Beds of Mt. Mudge, and it may therefore have
been contemporaneous with the epi-Burindi movement in New South
Wales.
This epi-Burindi disturbance might be correlated tentatively with
the Sudetic Disturbance of Europe.
Epi-Culm. —ln New South Wales the close of Kuttung time was
marked by the big change-over from the Lepidodendron-Rhacopteris
Flora to the Glossopteris-Gangamopteris Flora ; but while there is no
angular unconformity between the freshwater Kuttung beds and the
overlying Kamilaroi (Upper Carboniferous) marine beds, there are
evidences of overlap, as if the Kamilaroi sea had transgressed over a
low and slowly-sinking land surface. This seems to have been an epoch
of minor disturbance, about referable to the Asturian Disturbance of
Europe.
Epi-Carioniferous (f). —Evidence of a further transgression in parts
of the Lower Hunter Region immediately prior to the deposition of the
Eurydesma cordatum (Permian) beds has been referred to above. In the
Irwin River Coal-field of Western Australia a movement of approximately
the same age has caused a discordance of strike between the Paralegoceras
jacksoni beds and the overlying coal-measures, and there is evidence of
perhaps a similar movement in the Wooramel River and Fitzroy River
areas.
Epi-Middle Permian. —At the close of Upper Marine time in New
South Wales there was a considerable doming of the Middle Permian


TABLE F.
TENTATIVE CORRELATION OF THE TRIASSIC ROCKS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
South Australia.
Tasmania.
Victoria.
New South
Wales.
Queensland.
Leigh’s Creek Coal-field,
field, Copley.
South-eastern Area.
Bacchus Marsh.
Blue Mountains,
Coast areas, etc.
Clarence Basin.
Ipswich.
Bowen
Basin.
Landsborough.
RH.ETIC
Lower part of
Lower Clarence
Series.
Bundanba Sand-
stone (?) :
Porous sandstone, per-
haps Jurassic.
Thickness 1,500-5,000
feet.
Myrtle Creek
Series:
Mostly formed
of the diagon-
ally bedded
white sand-
stones, etc.
Landsborough
Sandstone.
Keupkr
Black shales with clay
ironstone. Large Unio
eyrensis abundant. Seam
of brown coal 47 feet
thick. Fossil plants:
Equisetites rotiferum,
Schizoneura sp. Clado •
phlebis albertsi, Tani -
opteris icianamattaz,
Stenopteris elongata,
Podozamites sw eeti,
Frenelopsis keith-wardi,
etc.
Newtown —Mt. Nicholas
Coal-measures :
Productive Coal-measures
with 8 coal seams,
thickest 12 feet, with
Neocalamites carrerei,
Thinnfeldia feistmanteli,
T. odontopteroides, Lin-
guifolium diemenense,
Sagenopteris moribunda,
Pecopteris sp., Phyllo-
theca australis, Ptero -
phyllum strahani, Baiera
ten uifolia, etc.
Building sandstone and
conglomerates passing
down into grey siliceous
shales, with Schizoneura ,
Pkyllotheca, Coniopteris,
Thinnfeldia feistmanteli ,
T. odontopteroides , Tceni-
opteris wianamattce
Pheonicopsis, Elato-
cladus , etc.
Wianamatta Series :
Calcareous sandstone
with foraminifera
and ostracods in
upper beds alternat-
ing with shales. Car-
bonaceous shales
with thin coal-seams
below, numerous
fossil plants: Macro -
tceniopteris wiana-
mattce, Cycadopteris,
etc. At base Union -
ella abundant with
fossil fish and the
great labyrintho-
dont Cyclotosaurus.
Lower part
of Grafton
Bore, with
7-foot coal
seam.
Ipswich Coal-measures,
2,500 feet thick, with
15 workable coal seams
Tuff bed rich in fossil
insects. Fossil plants
Thinnfeldia odontop-
teroides, Tceniopteris
(never T. spatulata).
Schizoneura, Stenop-
teris, Cladophlebis,
Baiera tenuifolia, etc.
The pelecypod
Unio ipsvickiensis,
and the phyllopod
Estheria ipsvickiensis.
Esk beds "with abun-
dant Schizoneura, etc.
Brisbane Tuffs with
Cedroxylon, etc.
Brooweena
Series:
Grey sandy
shales and
sandstones
with Thinn-
feldia, passing
down into the
purple shales
and tuff of the
Esk Beds.
Upper
Bunter.
Rhyndaston Sandstones:
Glistening white sand-
stone.
Knocklofty Sandstones
(may bo Rhsetic).
Hawkesbury Series:
Glistening white sand-
stones, diagonally-
bedded, with occasional
shales and fossil plant
Oleandridium (?).
Capilosaurus (?) in shale
bed with fossil insects
and crustacean Phrea •
toictn.
Car-
borough
Series
cf.
Hawkes-
bury
Sand-
stone of
N.S.W.
Lower
Bunter.
Ross Sandstones with
Vertebraria at base, and
oldest Australian reptile,
one of the Captorhinidce.
Basal grits with traces of
copper.
Narrabeen Series :
Mostly greenish grey
shales, sandstones and
conglomerates with two
horizons of copper-bear-
bearing chocolate shales.
Estheria coghlani; fossil
plants Pkyllotheca, Schi-
zoneura, Thinnfeldia
narrabeenensis, Macro-
tceniopteris, Baiera.
Fossil fish and labyrin*
thodont Platyceps wil *
hinsoni.


strata in the Lochinvar area near Maitland, the dome being considerably
denuded before the Upper Coal-measures were deposited. Thus the Upper
Permian Newcastle Coal-measures, in a mobile area like that occupied
by the Lochinvar dome, rest unconformably upon the Middle Permian
Upper Marine strata at -Ullalong. It is estimated that in the Hunter
Valley a shortening of 7-i miles took place in a total width of about 70
miles, as determined by Dr. G. D. Osborne.
This movement may perhaps be correlated provisionally with the
Saalian Disturbance of Europe.
Epi-Permian. —ln New South Wales epi-Permian folding is not at
all pronounced, but in Queensland it is very strongly marked.
For example, in the Bowen Basin the Upper Bowen Coal-measures
along the eastern margin of the basin are nearly vertical, as shown on
Section 2 of the geological map, and in places are even overturned west-
wards by forces operating from the direction of the Pacific.
Reference to the geological map shows that north-west of Taroom
basset edges of the Upper Triassic Ipswich. Coal-measures make an angle
of over 30° wfith the lines of strike of the Upper Bowen Coal-measures, so
that this disturbance must have been completed before Upper Trias time.
While the late Permian and epi-Permian movements were very pro-
nounced over large areas, not all the Permian strata were involved; in
certain areas in Queensland and in nearly the whole of the Trias areas
of New South Wales and Tasmania, the Trias and the underlying
Permian are conformable.
In Western Australia a pre-Jurassic, probably an epi-Permian, move-
ment was responsible for the main folding of the Irwin River Series; the
doming of Kamilaroi strata at Mt. Wynne and the Wooramel River may
be of the same age.
While the epi-Permian movement as a whole seems nearly to corres-
pond with the Pfalzian of Europe and the Appalachian of U.S.A., it would
seem that in eastern Australia it continued, in places, for some little time
after Pfalzian and Appalachian disturbances had ended.
With the exception of the region between Brisbane and Broadsound,
where folding of late Cretaceous age has taken place, orogenic as distinct
from epeirogenic movements seem to have ceased in eastern Australia a
little after the close of Paleozoic time.
V. Mesozoic.
Triassic.
(See Table F.)
The Upper Permian lake areas of Australia and Tasmania mostly
persisted throughout Triassic time, but their shore-lines were much
modified, and new lakes appeared, as at Bacchus Marsh in Victoria.
There is also good evidence that a vast lake extended from the Clarence
area of New South Wales and the Landsborough-Ipswich area in Queens-


land, westward to Leigh’s Creek in South Australia, and thence probably
north-north-east to Hughenden and beyond. It may be stated that from
the late Permian to the close of Jurassic time the scenery in eastern
Australia was dominated by great lakes, increasing in size up to the top
of the Jurassic, so that, on the whole, the Triassic rocks are transgres-
sive over the Permian, and the Jurassic over the Triassic. The trans-
gressive behaviour of the Trias, in regard to the Upper Permian, is
clearly seen on that part of the geological map which is occupied by the
belt of Trias extending from south of Springsure to Ipswich, Queensland.
A tentative scheme for the classification of the Triassic rocks of the
Commonwealth is given in Table F.
Lower Trias.
The oldest of the Triassic lakes, in which the Xarrabeen
Series were deposited, lay in New South Wales, and stretched
from near Nowra, on the south, to at least as far north as Murrurundi,
200 miles, and possibly to Gunnedah, 300 miles. Inland from the
coast it extended for about 100 miles, and it must have reached far out
to sea eastward of the present coast-line, where the now vanished
land, Tasmantis, intermittently bridged the gap in Mesozoic time between
Australia and New Zealand. The old shore-line of this lake is strongly
marked on the north-east from near Newcastle to Murrurundi, at which
place the basal conglomerates are coarse, and some 200 feet in thick-
ness. The abundance of red jaspers among the pebbles shows that
the rivers which formed these conglomerates drained off the highlands
of New England. Copper as small metallic flakes, or as carbonate, is
common in the basic tuff horizons in the Narrabeen deposits. The occur-
rence of copper carbonates in basal Triassic rocks of eastern Tasmania
suggests that these may be of Lower Triassic age, and this evidence is
confirmed by the occurrence in the Domain at Hobart of traces of a
Lower Triassic reptile, one of the Captorhinidw. This is the oldest
reptile as yet found in the Commonwealth. Nowhere else are Lower
Triassic rocks known within the Commonwealth.
Middle Trias.
The type area for this is the Central Coal-field area of New South
Wales, and the series is known as the Hawkesbury Series. The strata
are almost wholly formed of a diagonal-bedded glistening white sand-
stone. Similar sandstones are found in Queensland, in the Redcliff
Plateau of the Bowen Basin (Carborough Sandstones), and on the
upper waters of the Burnett River near Mundubbera, where the Middle
Trias begins with a coarse basal conglomerate.
In Tasmania, from Rhyndaston towards-the East Coast, there is a
considerable area of similar sandstone. Wherever it is developed it gives
rise to a landscape of deep canyons with mural escarpments like those of


the Blue Mountains of New South Wales. It is a moot question as to
how these massive sandstones about 1,000 feet thick were formed. Were
they lacustrine or epicontinental flood-plain deposits, mingled perhaps
with molian terrestrial material, or are all three types of deposit, lacus-
trine, fluviatile and terestrial, represented? The material in the southern
half of the Hawkesbury Sandstone basin was certainly brought by rivers
flowing from highlands to the south-west of the basin.
Upper Trias.
In the type area in New South Wales a large lake, but much
smaller in area than the region covered by the Hawkesbury Sandstone,
extended from Moss Yale, on the south, to near Colo River Valley,
on the north, and from the sea coast for 50 miles inland. The
deposits in this Wianamatta Lake were dominantly carbonaceous
clays with dwarf Unio, passing upwards into calcareous flaggy sand-
stones with foraminifera and ostracods in the higher beds. Evidently
the sea broke in occasionally in the later phases of this lake, or was so
close that its foraminifera were blown from its shores over the whole
area of the lake. A few small coal seams, but unworkable, suggest
occasional swamp conditions, in this series, the total thickness of which
is about 800 feet.
By far the greatest development of Upper Triassic rocks is
in Queensland, and forms the important series of coal-measures
known as the Ipswich Series. The deposits were at first terrestrial,
commencing with a series of lava flows and tuffs at least 200 feet thick.
The tuff, white hot like that of Mt. Pelee, at the eruption in Martinique
in 1902, must have set fire to the great forest of cedar-like trees, belonging
to Gedroxylon. Numbers of these have had their branches and twigs
burnt, and these are now in the condition of charcoal. Some of these
fossil trees in Brisbane are 160 feet in length. This is the Esk Stage 1 in
part of the Ipswich Series. There follow about 2,500 feet of strata, the
Ipswich Series proper, shales, sandstones and conglomerates with 15
workable coal seams. The strata appear to have been deposited in a
great lake or chain of lakes, with marginal swamps extending from the
coast near Landsborough south-westwards across a gap in the geanti-
cline of the D’Aguilar Range, and thence north-westwards for some 500
miles to north-east of Blackall.
According to the latest geological map of Queensland the Ipswich
Beds, with possibly some of the Carborougli Sandstones, can be traced
as far to the north-west as the Einasleigh River, making a length of out-
crop from Brisbane of 1,100 miles. The boundary of this Upper Triassic
area of deposition on the south-west is unknown on account of the over-
lap of the Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks; it may have extended as far
1 The abundance of Schizoneura in this Esk Stage has suggested to some observers
that this Stage may be Lower Triassic.


as Leigh’s Creek in South Australia. It is probable that the strata
containing a 7-foot coal-seam struck in the deepest part of the bore at
Grafton, N.S.W., are the equivalents of the Ipswich Series.
What appears to have been a small lake existed in Upper Triassic
time at Bacchus Marsh in Victoria. The strata are grey plant-bearing
shales and fine sandstones perhaps 200 feet or so in thickness.
In South Australia, at Leigh’s Creek, Copley, an infaulted block has
preserved some lacustrine deposits with abundant large Unio shells, and
seams of brown coal, the thickest being 47 feet. The strata are mostly
shales and mudstones with bands of ironstone. The floor of this old lake
is now over 700 feet below sea-level. The dark grey shales, over 2,000 feet
thick, which underlie the Lower Cretaceous rocks at the Lake Phillipson
Bore, 3,161 feet deep, 240 miles west of Leigh’s Creek, may represent a
continuation of the Leigh’s Creek Basin in that direction.
In Tasmania the Newtown-Mt. Nicholas, etc., coal-measures are of
this age.
Fossils.
Apart from the plants, of which some characteristic forms
are mentioned in the above table, very considerable interest and
importance attaches to the Labvrinthodonts of Triassic rocks of New
South Wales and the fossil reptile at Hobart. This occurs in the Boss
Sandstone at the Domain, and is considered by Professor D. M. S.
Watson to belong to the Captorhinidw of the Order Gotylosauria.
Unfortunately only a single bone is preserved. It indicates a Lower
Triassic age.
In New South Wales Labyrinthodonts have been found in the
Narrabeen, Hawkesbury and Wianamatta Series. At Gosford a bed of
grey clay shale about 4 feet thick lies in the Narrabeen Series 150 feet
below the base of the Hawkesbury Sandstone, and has yielded vast
numbers of fossil fish and a small labyrinthodont. This has been
described as Platyceps tvilltinsoni, and is a young individual of a
Brachyopid. It may be compared with the Brachyops of the Damuda of
India, but this young individual might have grown into a form similar
to the South African Lower Triassic Batrachosuchus.
Half-way up in the Hawkesbury Series the Beacon Hill shale, 20
feet thick, has yielded the skull of another labyrinthodont belonging to
the Capitosauridcc. From the state of evolution of the otic notch
Professor D. M. S. Watson considers that its age is between Middle and
Upper Bunter.
The magnificent specimen of Gyclotosaurus, some 11 feet long, and
excellently preserved, from the base of the Wianamatta Shales at Sydney,
dates this series accurately, and thus it fixes approximately the date of
most of the Triassic rocks of Australia. Professor D. M. S. Watson
considers that it is perhaps more primitive than the Cyclotosaurus
roiustus of the Lower Keuper. Thus the base of the Wianamatta Shale


becomes basal Lower Keuper instead of Rlimtic, as was formerly
supposed. The Sydney Cyclotosaurus, discovered by B. Dunstan, is the
only complete stereospondylous labyrinthodont known. It is now in the
British Museum, South Kensington.
As mentioned in the notes on the Upper Permian insects, special
interest attaches to the Australian Triassic insects, mostly described by
Dr. It. J. Tillyard.
From the Lower Triassic Karrabeen beds at the Sydney Harbour
Colliery an insect wing belonging to the orthopterous family of the
Elcanidw, characteristic of the European Lias, has been described as
Elcanopsis sydneiensis Till.
The bed of grey clay shale half-way up in the Middle Triassic
Hawkesbury Sandstone Series at Beacon Hill has yielded many fossil
fish and insects, as well as the labyrinthodont belonging to the
Capitosaurida;.
Among the insects discovered here by Mr. Scully are cicada-like
forms, grasshoppers, scorpion-flies, and a magnificent wing belonging to
the Protohemiptera, Mesotitan sciillyi Till. This had an expanse of
wing of eleven inches. “Its sucking-beak was projected straight out in
front of the head,” and in the opinion of Dr. Tillyard, was probably used
for spearing and sucking smaller insects.
In the Upper Triassic Wianamatta shales at St. Peters, Sydney, a
number of fossil beetles have been found in nodules of ironstone, as well
as large cockroach-like forms such as Notoblattites subcostalis Till.,
and an even larger Mesotitan than M. scullyi, viz., M. giyanteus Till.
The most abundant and varied Upper Triassic insect fauna has been
discovered by Mr. T. 11. Simmonds in the Ipswich Beds at Denmark Hill,
Ipswich, Queensland. The insects are preserved in a soft grey tuffaceous
shale. Obviously in this case, as in that of the Upper Permian insects of
Belmont, the air was so filled with fine volcanic dust that the insects
were suffocated in enormous numbers, and were quickly buried in the
volcanic tuff before there was time for any decomposition to set in, so
that they are now in an exquisite state of preservation. About 120
species have been described by Dr. R. J. Tillyard and Mr. B. Dunstan.
Among the Hemiptera are true Jassidce, such as Mesojassus, Triasso-'
jassus, etc., much like the j'assids existing today.
The cicadas of the modern family Cicadidce were represented by'their
ancestors, the Mesogereonidw, the finest species being Mesogercon
superbum Till.
The genus Ipsvichia, represented by I. joncsi Dunstan, may have
been a primitive type of the Fulguroidca.
In the Order Orthoptcra are the first known Australian cockroaches
belonging to the genera Samaroblatta, Triassoblatta, Austroblattula.
The stick-insects, Mantoidea, are represented by Triassomantis
pygmccus Till., and the locusts by Triassolocusta leptoptera Till.


In the Order Odonata five genera of dragon-flies have been identified
at Ipswich, two of which are specially well preserved, viz Triassagrion
australiense Till, and Triassolestes cpiophlehioides Till. The latter
appears to have been ancestral to the genus Synlestes, a dragon-fly now
living in Australia.
Order Mecoptera: The scorpion-flies had a large representative in
Archipanorpa Till, allied to the living genus Notiothauma of Chili.
The Order Paratrichoptera, at Ipswich, has the four genera Meso-
psyche, Triassopsyche, Aristopsyche and Neuropsyche. They closely
resemble the caddis-flies, and were, in Dr. Tillyard’s opinion, related to
the true Diptcra (house-flies, etc.) as well as to the true Trichoptera or
caddis-flies.
Order Neuroptera: The suborder Planipennia (Lacewings) has in
the family Psychopsidcc the Silky Lacewings, whose special home is now
in Australia. The fine Triassopsychops superha of Denmark Hill is
believed by Dr. Tillyard to be a direct ancestor of Megapsychops illidgei
Froggatt, a rare species still living within 50 miles of that hill.
The Order Goleoptera comprises 47% of the total number of insect
forms so far recovered at Ipswich. The elytra of the beetles are wonder-
fully preserved.
The water-beetles ( Hydrophylidce ) are abundantly represented. The
commonest genera are Ademosyne (fifteen species) and Adesmosynoides
(seven species).
The Triassic insect fauna of Australia has obviously no small
climatological significance. The abundance of dragon-flies and the large
size of forms like Mesotitan scullyi, some of the cockroaches, Mesogereon
superhum (ancestor of the Cicadas), Triassopsychops superha (ancestor
of the Silky Lacewings), etc., all betoken a prolonged warm climate.
But the silence of the forests of Triassic conifers and cycads was probably
never broken by the hum of insects, for even the cicada’s ancestors were
silent.
Igneous Rocks.
In Hew South Wales volcanic activity was not great during the
Triassic period, the only manifestations being represented by beds of
redistributed tuff among the sediments of the Harrabeen Series. These
are at two horizons, the lower being that of the Cupriferous Tuffs, while
the higher, that of the Chocolate Shales, is near the top of the series.
The chocolate shales have been considered probably to represent redis-
tributed and altered basic tuffs, but if so they have been so much mixed
with ordinary mechanical sediment that their original characters have
been obscured.
The evidences of Triassic vulcanism in Queensland are not very
numerous. At the base of the Upper Triassic Ipswich Series in
the Brisbane region there is a great development of a very compact
and partially silicified rhyolitic tuff, known as the Brisbane Tuff.


This has been proved over an area of about 80 square miles. At
the base of the Esk Stage there have been recognized andesitic boulder
beds with tuffaceous matrix; these are overlain by trachytes, andesites,
and acid tuffs, the last corresponding to the Brisbane Tuff.
Tectonics.
For the most part, the Triassic strata of Australia and Tasmania
show very low angles of dip, seldom exceeding five degrees, but in
Queensland Dr. W. H. Bryan has stressed the steep dips of the
Triassic sandstones along the Brisbane Valley, and in the Mundubbera
region. At the latter locality J. H. Reid has figured the coarse
basal conglomerates of the Trias dipping westwards at about 60°.
Equally steep dips are seen at Sandgate, north of the mouth of the
Brisbane River, but the strata there are near to a major fault, the
Hemmant fault. 1 As, however, along the Queensland coast, at Mary-
borough, Lower to Upper Cretaceous strata appear to have been folded
contemporaneously with the Jurassic Landsborough and Tiaro Series
and the Triassic Brooweena Series, the disturbance of Triassic rocks in
southern Queensland may be of late Cretaceous to epi-Cretaceous age.
In Queensland there is obviously a great lithological break at the
base of the Bundanba grits and conglomerates, where they pverlie the
Ipswich Coal-measures. For example, there are estimated to be from
3,000 feet to 5,000 feet in thickness of massive sandstone in the Bundanba
Series overlying the Ipswich Coal-measures. There is evidence of some
little erosion, both at the Aberdare Colliery at Ipswich, and at the old
colliery on the left bank of the Kedron Brook, near Brisbane, at the
junction of the Bundanba sandstone with the Aberdare coal horizon.
The erosion, however, does not appear to have been extensive, and may
have been contemporaneous.
There does not appear to have been any definite angular uncon-
formity or any considerable overlap in Queensland between the base of
the Jurassic strata and the top of the Triassic rocks.
In New South Wales, in the Ourimbah district, between Sydney and
Newcastle, and at Gosford and Mullet Creek, near the Hawkesbury
River, strata about 250 feet in thickness intervene between the base of
the Hawkesbury Sandstone proper (Middle Trias) and the grey shales
parsing into chocolate shales of the Narrabeen Series. These beds, which
nfay be termed the Gosford beds, form the top of the Narrabeen Series.
Particularly at Ourimbah and Mullet Creek there is evidence of a good
deal of erosion at the junction line of these two formations, but no
evidence of angular unconformity, or even of much overlap.
In the passage from the Middle Triassic Hawkesbury Series to the
Upper Triassic Wianamatta Series, there is either a gradual sequence or
evidence of only slight contemporaneous erosion. Similar conditions
1 See Text-figure 6, page 45.


appear to have obtained in Tasmania. At Bacchus Marsh, in Victoria,
the Triassic rocks dip conformably with the Ivamilaroi glacial series at
about 30°. The Upper Triassic Leigh’s Creek Coal-measures of South
Australia are not folded, but dip at about 15 3 . They lie in a small
sunkland bounded by heavy faults.
Economic.
The valuable coal seams of the Ipswich Coal-measures, Queensland,
and of the Triassic Coal-measures of Tasmania, are described later, as
well as the hydrous coals of the Leigh’s Creek Coal-measures, South
Australia. At Kilkivan, a lode of cinnabar intersects the Triassic
rocks. Copper has been recorded in a metallic form, or as carbonates
disseminated widely, on two horizons in the Narrabeen Series, the lower
that of the Cupriferous Tuffs, the upper that of the Chocolate Shales.
The copper has evidently been derived from the particles of fine
basic tuff of which the shales are largely formed, and is present at the
rate of only about -12%, or less, so that it is not of commercial value.
Copper carbonate also occurs in the basal Triassic rocks of Tasmania.
At Brisbane the silicified rhyolitic tuff has been used extensively
for building. It is green at a depth, but weathers to a tint of maroon.
At Breakfast Creek, Brisbane, and at Goodna, near Ipswich, sandstones
have been quarried for building purposes. In New South Wales the
Hawkesbury sandstone, particularly in the Sydney and Gosford areas,
yields an excellent building-stone, Aveathering to a warm sepia tint. In
Tasmania the Triassic Ross sandstone is much employed for buildings,
bridges, etc. The Wianamatta shales of the Sydney area are much used
for making tiles, drain-pipes and bricks.
Jurassic.
(See Table G.)
The great lakes Avhich overspread eastern Australia in Triassic time
retained their vast size during the Jurassic, but iu Queensland their
AA'aters withdmv from the Upper Burnett Valley and from the BoAven
Basin, so that the north-east shore-line of the neAv lake, the Walloon
Lake, was far less indented than AA r as that of its Triassic predecessor.
This shore-line on the north-east ran from Walloon, near IpsAA r ich, to the
north of Tambo, a distance of 480 miles, and northerly probably for at
least another 240 miles to beyond Hughenden, but this area is concealed
under the Cretaceous rocks of the Great Artesian Basin. This shore-
line may have curved to the east at Croydon, and then north-eastAA r ards
to CooktOAvn, so as to include Cape York Peninsula. The north-Avest
shore-line lay to the south-east of the pre-Cambrian massif of Cloncurry.
Thence it trended south-westerly past Boulia to the junction of the
Goyder River Avith the Finke, thence southwards to the Trans-
continental Raihvay line, just north of Lake Gairdner. On the
south it had many deep bays, Avith islands too numerous to mention,
but the shore ran in a general Avay from north of Lake Gairdner


TABLE G.
TENTATIVE CORRELATION OF JURASSIC ROCKS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
Europe.
Westers Australia.
Central Australia.
Victoria.
New South Wales.
N.S. Wales and Queensland Border
Queensland.
New Guinea.
Broome and
King Sound.
Champion Bay and
Greenough River.
Mingcnew.
Wannon and Otway areas, and
South Gippsland,
Tibooburra.
Talbragar.
Clarence Basin and Killarney.
Walloon, Tiaro and Bundanba
Areas.
Stanwell-Wycarbali
Area.
Pascoe River
with, at base of
column, Walsh
River.
Strickland River.
Purbeckian
Portlandian
Kimeridgian.
Corallian.
Oxfordian.
Callovian.
Bathonian.
Bajocian
Upper Lias.
Middle Lias.
Lower Lias.
Marine
strata, of
artesian bore
at Broome.
Otozamites
near
Point Torment.
Lower Limit of
Sandy calcareous rock
with the ammonites of
sauzei zone (Otoites de-
pre$sus)&ndEmileia zone
of Middle Bajocian.
Reddish sandstones with
Otozamites and lenticular
coal-seams.
Tceniopteris spatulata
Otozamites in red
beds among
coarse white
sandstones.
Finke Sandstones of
Great Artesian Basin.
Lower Limit of
Tceniopteris spatu-
lata.
Wonthaggi Coal- Equisetites won-
measures. Cape thaggiensis
Paterson Beds. Coniopteris hy-
Otway andWan- menopkylloides
non Series. Stenopteris
Brae hyphyUum
gippslandieum ,
Palissya aus-
tralis,
Podozamites
barileyi, etc.
Carnivorous
Dinosaur ai-
lied(?) to Mega-
l08aurus.
Remains o f
Ceratodus avus.
T hinnf eldia
odontopteroides.
Tceniopteris spatu-
lata
and
Taxites.
Shales and con-
glomerates, the
latter with allu-
vial gold.
Thinnfeldia,
Tceniopteris
spatulata
and abun-
dant fossil
flsh.
Upper Clarence
Series.
Killarney Coal- Tceniopteris spatu-
measures. lata, Cladoph-
lebis australis
and Unio shells.
Middle Clarence 50-100 feet of
Series. white glistening
sandstone.
Lower Clarence
Series (upper
part) with coal
seams.
Lower Clarence
Series (lower
part).
\Talloon Series.
Upper Tiaro Stage, and
Orallo Coal-measures,
possibly Cretaceous.
Cornwall Coal-measures. Tceniopteris spatulata,
Alcuiah Coal-measures. Equisetites rotiferum,
Cladophlebis, Baiera,
Ptilophyllum, Otoza-
mites, Taxites. Fossil
trees.
Thinnfeldia odontopter-
Rosewood-Walloon oides , Otozamites feist-
Series. manteli, BraehyphyUum
Calcareous sandstones crassum,
and mudstones with
petrified wood and
occasional coal seams.
Brine springs in places.
Lower Tiaro Stage des-
cends to hereabouts.
Felspathic sandstone of Horizon (?) of large
Basal Walloon. dinosaur TUuetosaurus
brounei allied to Cama-
rasaurus.
Bundanba and Marburg
Sandstone Series, with
flora of Bymount(?)
and Marburg.
Coal-measures with
Phyllopteris feist-
manteli,
Tceniopteris spatu-
lata, T. crassinervis,
PtilophyUum ( WU-
liamsonia) pecten,
Taxites planus.
Pascoe River
Otozamites
and
BraehyphyUum
Beds.
Walsh River.
Coroniceras
queenslandi
Beds.
Argillaceous lime-
stones and marls,
etc., of Strickland
River, with Kamto-
cephalites etheridgei
and DoWcephalites
fleruosus of Callovian
age.
Note. —The correlation by means of the fossil plants is roughly approximate. In the case of the marine beds the correlation is fairly precise.


to south of Lake Eyre, past Lake Callabonna, and after looping
southwards passing north of Tibooburra, thence to near Bourke and
Brewarrina, and after another deep southerly embayment to Dubbo,
thence swinging north-north-east to join the Queensland end of the shore
near Inglewood. If the whole of this area was a lake at one time it
would have measured about 580 miles from east to west and at least 600
miles from north to south, and have covered an area of 300,000 square
miles, about the size of Spain and Portugal taken together, but the area
may have been one dotted with great numbers of individual lakes and
swamps rather than a single vast lake.
A channel from Lake Walloon lay apparently to the south of Bris-
bane through a narrow gap in the geanticline of eastern Queensland, the
D’Aguilar Range. This channel joined up the Walloon Lake with
another lacustrine area extending from the mouth of the Brisbane River
to north of Bundaberg, a distance of 240 miles, and possibly as far as
Stanwell, west of Rockhampton. A second and wider passage led south-
wards into the Clarence Basin.
The oldest deposit of Lake Walloon is sandstone from 1,500
to 5,000 feet thick, the Bundanba Sandstone with Unionella. 1 This
is followed by felspathic sandstone and calcareous sandstone, saliferous
in places, with coal seams, followed in turn by more coal-measures, with
much fossil wood, the total thickness of the Walloon Series above the
Bundanba sandstone being about 4,700 feet. The abundance of large
Unio shells in the highest strata shows that the water was fresh.
Jurassic outliers occur at Stanwell to the west of Rockhampton,
at Callide and Bompa inland from Gladstone, in the Laura district
west of Cooktown, and from Cape York to the Pascoe River. These
deposits are freshwater and mostly contain coal seams. On the
Walsh River a Lower Jurassic ammonite, Goroniceras, is alleged to
have been found, but the locality is doubtful.
The lenticular character of the Walloon coal seams suggests that
there were groups of small basins around the margins of the main basin.
In New South Wales, in addition to the Walloon deposits of Lake
Walloon, extending from Yetman to Dubbo, and those of the Clarence
Basin, there is at Talbragar, 16 miles north-north-east from Gulgong, a
small patch of ferruginous cherty shales, only 10 feet thick, which has
yielded a rich harvest of well-preserved fossil fish and plants.
Another large lake was situated in Victoria extending from
the Wannon area near Casterton by way of the Otway Ranges to
eastern Gippsland. Large Unio shells are again characteristic. The
Wonthaggi Coal-measures, the chief areas of black coal in Victoria,
belong to these lacustrine deposits.
F
ißy some of the Queensland geologists the Bundanba Sandstone is classed as
Triassic, and it has even been oorrelated with the Middle Trias Hawkesbury Sandstone
•of New South Wales. In these Notes Walkom’s latest views are tentatively adopted.


In Western Australia there are two important areas of Jurassic
rocks, in which the upper beds are marine, the lower freshwater. The
larger area forms a wide belt along the coast for nearly 670 miles from
Dandarraga, north of Perth, to beyond North West Cape and Onslow.
The marine beds, mostly of middle Bajocian Age, are formed mostly of
grits and ferruginous oolitic limestones overlying ferruginous and white
sandstones with some hydrous coal and red beds with Otozamites, closely
resembling the Otozamites beds of Walloon in Queensland.
The second large area extends, like the preceding, as a wide coastal
strip from Wollal to King's Sound. There, too, a marine series overlies
freshwater beds with Otozamites.
In New Guinea (Papua) marine strata of Lower Callovian age have
yielded the ammonites specified in the accompanying correlation table of
the Jurassic rocks (see Table G, page 80).
Fossils.
Apart from important marine zone-fossils like the ammonites,
Otoites, Sonninnia, etc., and rich assemblages of fossil plants, described
chiefly by Walkom, special interest attaches to the dinosaurs.
At Cape Paterson, in Victoria, a terminal phalangeal bone,
originally carrying a horny claw, has been referred by Chapman to a
carnivorous dinosaur related to Megalosaurus, not unlike types to be
found in the Wealden of England.
Scales and teetli of Geratodus avus occur in the same rocks as the
dinosaur bone.
In Queensland, at Durham DoAvns, a considerable portion of the
skeleton of a giant dinosaur, Rhcetosaurus irownei Longman, has
lately been unearthed from the calcareous sandstone and mudstone of the
Lower Walloon beds. Longman estimates the length of this dinosaur as
at least 40 feet, and places it provisionally in the Gamarasaurus-
Cetiosaurus Group of the Sauropoda. In England Getiosaurus itself is
Kimeridgian in age.
Igneous Rocks.
Decent investigation of the Jurassic areas of New South Wales has
suggested the possibility of contemporary Jurassic volcanic activity
in the region between Coonabarabran and Gunnedah, where compact
and amygdaloidal basic lava-flows up to 600 feet thick have been recorded.
The freshwater Jurassic sandstone and mudstones of western
Victoria, the Otway Ranges and South Gippsland may be in part
tuffaceous, as suggested by the abundance in them of fresh felspar. At
some localities in Queensland the Mesozoic rocks, including the Bundanba
Sandstone, especially in the Wide Bay, Burnett and Myrtle Creek areas,
have been invaded by large masses of granodiorite and syenite; and in
the Tiaro district the Tiaro (Jurassic) Series is intersected by numerous
dykes of porphyrite, probably of late Jurassic age.


The great sills of dolerite and quartz-dolerite, which have forced
their way through the Triassic strata of Tasmania, and which attain
thicknesses of as much as 3,000 feet, are possibly to be assigned to a
Jurassic epoch, like the Karroo dolerite of South Africa, and the
great dolerite sills intruding the Rhexoxylon horizon of the Beacon
sandstone of the Boss Sea area, Antarctica. Portions of the Triassic Coal-
measures of Tasmania have been floated upwards in the dolerite magma,
like icebergs on an ocean’s surface.
In the south-eastern part of Queensland, near Maryborough, the
Graham’s Creek volcanic series, of late Jurassic or early Cretaceous age,
represent an important outburst of Mesozoic volcanic activity. The
series is made up of trachytic, andesitic, and rhyolitic tuffs and tuffaceous
sandstones, with, possibly, interbedded flows. Other minor intrusions
through the Mesozoic rocks are probably referable to Tertiary eruptions.
Tectonics.
No trace of unconformity has hitherto been observed any-
where in the Jurassic strata of the Commonwealth, but in Queensland
and the New England area of New South Wales there is evidence of
considerable transgression. For example, as shown on the geological
map, the Walloon beds transgress strongly the Bundanba Sandstone on
the Upper Clarence Kiver, west of the Kiclimond Range; and a deep bore
at Grafton, after passing through nearly 3,400 feet of barren strata
(probably Bundanba) struck a 7-foot coal-seam at 3,419 feet, thus prac-
tically proving the presence of the Triassic Ipswich Series at depth,
though these are not known to outcrop anywhere in the Clarence region.
At Talbragar, in New South Wales, the Jurassic fish-bearing beds occur
in a small erosion hollow in a Triassic sandstone, probably of Narrabeen
age.
In Tasmania the most striking tectonic development was probably
the uplifting, tilting and heavy faulting of the Triassic and older sedi-
ments as the result of the widespread injection of sills of dolerite.
Economic.
The coal seams of the Walloon Coal-measures, Queensland, of the
Lower Clarence Series, New South Wales, and of the Wonthaggi, etc.,
Coal-measures, Victoria, are described later. The porous sandstones in
the upper part of the Walloon Series are the chief reservoir for the
artesian water of the great artesian basin, but it is quite likely that
their age is Lower Cretaceous (Hauterivian or Barreinian) rather than
Jurassic. In Victoria Jurassic sandstones are quarried for building
purposes at Barrabool Hills. Apollo Bay. In Queensland, at Helidon
and Murphy’s Creek, Yan Gan near Warwick, Highfield near Toowoomba,
and Stanwell near Rockhampton, sandstones yield building-stones of
fair quality. The huge dolerite sills of Tasmania yield an excellent road-


metal. They are extensively quarried for this purpose at Launcestou,
Hobart, etc.
Cretaceous.
(See Table H.)
Whitehouse has stressed the point that, as the oldest known
marine Cretaceous strata are already Aptian, and consequently
the important divisions of the Lower Cretaceous of Europe, the
Barremian, the Hauterivian, the Valanginian and Infra-Valanginian
have no marine representatives in Australia, there must either be a
marked non-sequence at the top of the freshwater Walloon Series, or the
upper beds of the Walloon and Tiaro Series and the whole of the
Graham's Creek Volcanic Series were formed in the early and middle
part of Lower Cretaceous time. As no trace of any physical break has
been observed, it may provisionally be assumed that the upper part of the
above formations and the whole of the Graham’s Creek Volcanic Series
are of Lower Cretaceous rather than Upper Jurassic age.
The profound orogeny in New Zealand in epi-Jurassic time was
expressed in important epeirogenic movements in Australia. Tasmantis,
that intermittent land connection between Australia and New Zealand
from Permian to Jurassic time, finally disappeared, its place being
taken by the Tasman Sea. In the east-central part of Australia the
crustal warp occupied by the great Lake Walloon deepened, and the sea
swept in from the north and possibly from the south-west, covering
nearly the whole area that was occupied by Lake Walloon. Whitehouse
has stressed the evidences of the coldness of this Cretaceous (Roma) epi-
continental sea: (i) no reef corals, no Eudistid lamellibranchs, no large
types of the foraminifera, no equatorial types of ammonite, are known
from the Australian Lower Cretaceous rocks, such as those of the Roma
Series. “The Roma Series fauna is most like that of Patagonia, North
Russia and Spitsbergen”; (ii) angular fresh felspar occurs throughout
the Roma Series (Aptian) and the Tambo Series (Upper Albian) ; (iii)
ice-borne erratics, some of which show faint strise, and are up to o feet in
diameter, occur as dumped boulders indenting the underlying shales
at the opal-fields of Stuart Range, South Australia, and of White Cliffs,
New South Wales. The boulders probably come from highland plateaux
lying roughly south of a line from Tibooburra (N.S.W.) to Tarcoola
(S.A.). Numerous stems of coniferous trees up to about 6 inches in
diameter occur in these basal beds, but they were quite incapable of
forming rafts strong enough to float boulders individually weighing over
2 tons; (iv) pseudomorphs, in common and precious opal, after
glauberite, are numerous at White Cliffs. These resemble the glendonites
associated with erratics in the sediments of the cold Middle Permian
seas of Australia.
The glaciation apparently was not intense. With the exception of
the well-striated boulders at Mt. Dutton in the north of South Australia,


TABLE H.
TENTATIVE CORRELATION OF THE CRETACEOUS ROCKS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
Europe.
New Guinea.
North Australia.
Western Australia.
Western Australia.
Western Australia.
South Australia.
New South Wales.
South Australia.
Queensland.
Queensland.
Queensland.
Queensland.
Kerema, Strickland
River, Palmer
River, etc.
Dutch Border of
Mandated Territory.
Melville Island.
Point Charles,
Darwin.
Fanny
Bay.
Gingin and Dandarraga.
Cardabia and Gascoyne
Areas.
Perth,
Claremont Asylum
Bore.
Transcontinental
Railway
Bore,
*338 miles from
Kalgoorlie.
Coober Pedy Opal-fields,
Stuart Range.
Tibooburra.
White Cliffs Opal
Fields.
Patchawarra Bore.
Roma.
Styx Coal-field. Burrum
Coal-field. Maryborough
Beds.
Marathon and Hughenden
Areas.
Pluto ville,
Cape York
Peninsula.
Santgnian.
Lower
Port Moresby
Beds.
At Gingin and Dandarraga.
Ferruginous glauconitic
sandstone. White chalk
with flints. Uintacrinus
and Marsupites zone.
Micraster and Parapazosia
overlying phosphatic nod-
ules and bone bed in glau-
coniticsands with dufrenite
and vivianite followed
downwards by clay shales.
Glauconitic sands at
1,500-1,830 feet
below surface.
These may possibly
be Tertiary.
CONLACIAN.
TURONIAN.
Winton Series :
Greenish sandstones and
shales with occasional
seams of brown coal.
This freshwater series,
3,700 feet thick here,
yields artesian water.
Winton Series :
In Queensland Arau -
carites and Proto -
phyllocladus as well
as Unio occur in
this formation, to-
gether with fossil
wood.
Cenomanian.
Strickland River,
marly strata with
the can -
tkoceras, Mantclli-
ceras papuae, etc.
Melville Island drab-
coloured mudstone
with Inoceramus cf.
etheridgei and A can -
thoceras.
Point Charles Beds.
Styx Coal-measures, 4,400 feet
thick. Porous greenish grey soft
sandstones, dark mudstones,
shales and ironstones, with at
least 20 coal seams, aggregating
50 feet in thickness.
Tccniopteris spatulata reaches its
highest horizon here.
At least three species of Dicotyle-
dons in this flora including Celas-
trophyUum.
Burrum Coal-measures 1,000 feet
thick with 2,000 feet of barren
strata both above and below. An
aggregate thickness of about 25
feet of coal in six seams.
The pelecypods Corbicula burru -
mensis and the marine wood-
borer, RoceUaria terra-regince
occur in these measures.
Maryborough Beds —sandstones,
shales and cherts, 800 feet thick
with Isocrinus australis, Macco-
yella barklyi and Australiceras.
Upper Albian.
Marine
Middle and
Lower Albian
missing in the
Commonwealth.
Ferruginous shales of
the cequatoriale zone,
with Labeceras, Sca-
phites, etc.
Fanny Bay radiolarian
shales with Belemnites
and Ichthyosaurus.
Cardabia Beds, south of
Shark Bay, Gascoyne area.
Radiolarian rocks in bore.
Tambo Series :
Marine calcareous blue
clays with Labeceras
trifidum and Hamites at
depth of 4,500 feet
below surface.
Tambo Series :
Inoceramus very abundant,
also Dimitobelus, and among the
ammonites Hamites. Labeceras,
Myloceras, etc. Also large
enaliosaurian reptiles, in some
cases replaced by barium sul-
phate, Cimoliosauru8, , Krono -
saurus, the turtles Notochelone
and Cratochelone and the fish
Lamna and Portheus.
Aptian.
Glauconitic sand-
stone with Maccoy -
ella corbiensis,
Aucellina cf. cau -
casica and Fissi-
lunula.
Erratics ? at base.
Stuart Ra. Opal-fields:
Tropceum Stage in
white shales.
Dumped erratics.
Calcareous shales
with Maccoy etta,Fis-
silunula, belemnites
and large erratics,
at Tibooburra.
White Cliffs Opal-
field :
White siliceous shales.
Ancyloceras stage.
Pseudomorphs after
glauberite, and
numerous large
dumped erratics.
Bottom of bore at 5,458
feet is probably in the
Roma Series.
Roma Series:
Ammonitoceras Stage.
Tropceum Stage.
Diatoms in concre-
tionary limestone.
Australiceras Stage,
much fossil calcified
wood.
Ancyloceras Stage.
Coilotis Stage.
Strata contain fol-
lowing plants:
Ruffordia mortoni,
Hausmannia wilr
kinsi, Nathorstia
willcoxi, Microphyl-
lopteris gleichenoides,
Nilssonia plutovil -
len8is.
PagiophyUum sp.
BrachyphyUum eras-
sum (?)
Elatocladus cf. con-
ferta.
Barp.emian.
Walloon Series (?) in
its upper portion,
with the porous
Blythesdale Bray-
stone followed
downwards by the
Orallo Coal-meas-
ures.
The series passes
down into the
Upper Jurassic.
Graham’s Creek volcanic series,
over 1,000 feet thick, formed of
trachytic, andesitic and rhyolitic
tuffs and tuffaceous sandstone,
with, possibly, interbedded flows.
Hauteriyian.
Upper part of Tiaro Series.
Soft friable carbonaceous shales
containing coal seams, and as
the dominant fossil Cladophlebis
australis.
The lower part of this series
passes down into the Upper
Jurassic.
Valanginian.
INFRA-
Valanginian.
0


ice-scratches are rare and faint, possibly the work of shore ice or river
ice, like that which forms during winters in northern Canada to-day.
The first deposits in this Cretaceous sea of Aptian age belong to the
Roma Series, and were mostly clays with lenticular limestone, richly
fossiliferous, and from 500 to 1,500 feet thick. This epicontinental sea
possibly communicated with the open ocean in three directions: (1) by
way of the present lowlands between Cloncurry and Hughenden, trend-
ing north to the Gulf of Carpentaria; (2) by way of the Lake Eyre
region to the Great Australian Bight and the Southern Ocean; (3) east-
wards by way of Maryborough extending into the Tasman Sea.
There is strong evidence for (1). The evidence for (2) is the occur-
rence at a bore near the 338-mile peg on the Transcontinental Railway line
of Maccoyella corbiensis, Ancellina cf. caucasica and Fissilunula. These
would represent a horizon high in the Roma Series. 1
The marine fossils in the Maryborough Beds show that they were
formed in Roma time, but, Maryborough being on the eastern side of the
D’Aguilar Range geanticline, it is difficult to imagine a direct com-
munication between the Maryborough Basin and the main Aptian sea
of Central Australia. Such powerful diastrophism, however, affected that
part of Queensland in late Cretaceous or epi-Cretaceous time that it is
hard to envisage its palseogeography.
In the Maryborough area towards the middle of Aptian time swamp
conditions followed the deposition of marine sandstones and cherts
600 feet thick. The freshwater Burrum Series, 5,000 feet thick, probably
passes up into the Albian, and overlies the Maryborough Beds.
At Broadsound, north of Rockhampton, prolonged freshwater
conditions formed the Styx Coal-measures, 4,400 feet thick, in Albian to
perhaps early Cenomanian time.
In Upper Albian time the axis of the syncline of the Roma sea
migrated Avestwards, carrying the waters of the succeeding Tambo sea
over and across the western strand of the Roma. After the deposition
of over 1,000 feet of Tambo sediments epeirogenic uplift followed about
the end of Albian time, and for the second time since the close of Triassic
time a vast lake, Lake Winton, occupied most of the bed of the Tambo sea.
Freshwater sandstones, shales and lignites attained a maximum thickness
of nearly 4,000 feet towards the central part of this lake, during
Cenomanian and probably Turonian time. Meanwhile in late Albian
time a small area was submerged near Darwin, and in Cenomanian time
Melville Island was under the sea, and a considerable area of New
Guinea (Papua) from Kerema to the middle course of the Strickland
and Fly Rivers.
1 Some slight doubt has been expressed as to whether these fossils were really found
in this bore, but meanwhile the evidence may be accepted, and suggests an extension of
the Aptian sea from T,ake Eyre to the Bight.


In San toman time the Upper Cretaceous sea encroached on what is
now the western strand-line of Australia, probably from near Perth,
through Gingin and Dandarraga, and thence at intervals at least as far
as Cardabia, north of Carnarvon.
The general sequence and correlation of the Cretaceous rocks of the
Commonwealth and their characteristic fossils are given in Table H.
Fossils.
The Roma Series at its base contains numerous logs of wood
fossilised chiefly by carbonate of lime. These occur typically on" the
left bank of the Maranoa River about ten miles north of Mitchell in
Queensland. The logs have been much bored by teredo.
The oldest known Australian diatoms, probably Goscinodiscus, are
in the Roma Series.
The sponge Purisiphonia occurs in almost every calcareous nodule
in the Roma Series at Wollumbilla. The sponge can be etched out in
exquisite perfection with acid.
Crioceratid ammonoids of exceptionally large size occur in both
the Roma and in the Tambo Series of Queensland and South Australia.
The form Tropwum imperator, from north of the Stuart Range opal-
fields in South Australia, measures 2 feet 7 inches in greatest diameter.
The time gap between the Upper Albian Tambo beds and the Upper
Aptian part of the Roma Series is marked in places by a conglomerate
composed largely of belemnites and other fossils derived from the Roma
beds.
Enaliosaurian reptile remains are particularly abundant in the
Tambo strata; the head of one of them, Ichthyosaurus australis Long-
man, was over feet long.
The largest Australian form, Kronosaurus queenslandicus, from
Hughenden, Queensland, and referable to the Plesiosauridw, has teeth
entirely replaced by translucent barytes.
A large dragon-fly. ZE sclmidiopsis fUndersensis, has been found in the
Tambo Series.
The radiolaria, probably of Upper Albian age, in the shales of
Fanny Bay, Port Darwin, are remarkably well preserved. Attention
has already been drawn to the identification by T. 11. Withers of the
zone crinoids Marsupites and Uintacrinus in the chalky rocks of Gin
Gin, Western Australia, their age being thus proved to be about that
of the Middle Senonian, that is the Santonian, of the European
Cretaceous sequence.
Tectonics.
In post-Cenomanian, possibly, as Dr. W. 11. Bryan suggests, in
epi-Cretaceous time (Laramie diastropliism of U.S.A.) immense
pressures operated from east-north-east to west-south-west along the
present Queensland coast from at least as far south as the mouth of


TABLE I.
TENTATIVE CORRELATION OF THE CAINOZOIC ROCKS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
EUROPE.
Australia.
Western Australia.
South Australia.
Victoria.
Tasmania.
New South IVales.
Queensland.
New Guinea.
Recent.
Recent.
Recent sand dunes of coastal belt
and some of the desert interior.
Diatomaceous earths.
Recent fluviatile deposits, peat beds,
etc.
Raised beaches evidencing warmer
climate.
Recent sand dunes, peat and alluvial
deposits of Yorke’s Peninsula and Lake
Macdonnell. Recent basaltic craters,
Mts. Gambier, Schank, etc., and
basalts of Kingscote and Gap Hills,
Kangaroo I. Sands and gravels of
outwash fans and plains, like those of
Lake Torrens. Delta of Murray River.
Calcareous dune-rock of Woakwine
Range near Rivoii Bay, etc.
Raised beach, Port Moorowie, marine
shells indicate warmer climate.
Raised beaches near Naracoorte up to
250 feet above sea and at Ooldea up to
380 ft. above sea level.
Recent sand dunes.
Recently extinct basaltic volcanoes
Tower Hill, Mts. Elephant, Noorat,
Leura, Buninyong, Warrenheip, Mary,
Franklin, etc.
Naturally reclaimed areas of the old
Gippsland Gulf which are now in the
Gippsland Lakes areas.
Alluvial plains of the Murray River.
Sand dunes with kitchen middens.
Raised beach 6 feet above sea-level
at Launceston ; contains human arti-
facts.
Raised beaches around the coasts up
to 15 feet In height.
Helicidce sandstones of Bass Strait
Islands.
Sand dunes.
Deltas ot Hunter Elver, Clarence
River, etc.
Black soil “ nardoo ” belts of Western
Plains.
Raised beaches 15 feet above sea,
at Largs, near Maitland, indicate
warmer climates.
Sand dunes of Fraser Island up to 900
feet above sea-level.
Great Barrier Reef and coral islets showing
evidence of emergence, emerged belts
of mangrove, south of Cairns.
Recent basaltic calderas, Lakes Eacham,
Barrine, etc., near Cairns.
Active volcanoes of Mts. Victory, Bam, Manam, Willaumez Peninsula, New
Britain, anil of Bougainville, Solomon Islands. Recently extinct volcanoes,
Goodcnough Island, The Mother, near Rabaul, etc.
Living Coral Reefs. Black soil plains of Fly, Sepik, etc., Rivers. Yellowish-
red clays lateritic, laterite, 8-85 to 11-7 metres thick, then lignites, then
blue clays below lignite, then conglomerates.
Raised coral reefs up to 2,000 feet above sea.
River Terrace 10-15 metres, Mamberamo River. River Terraces 70-80
metres of the Upper Idenburg River.
Gold-bearing gravels of Waria River and Edie Creek, Mandated Territory.
Pleistocene
Pleistocene.
Alluvial and cave deposits with
remains of extinct animals. Dip-
rotodon, Nototkerium, Thylacoleo,
Sarcophilu8, Thylacinus. Older cal-
careous dune-rock.
Deposits of extinct lakes and rivers,
often gold-bearing. Planorbis lime-
stones of Kimberley area.
Port Augusta beds with extinct croco-
dile remains, Pallimnarchus pollens, Car-
rieton. Cave deposits with Thylacinus.
“ Mammaliferous drift,” with remains
of Diprotodon, Nototkerium, Thyla-
coleo. Also lacustrine deposits, like
those of Lake Callabonna, with re-
mains of Diprotodon, Nototherinrn,
etc., and remains of gigantic emu-like
bird, Genyornis.
Cave deposits Mt. Macedon, with re-
mains of dingo and extinct mar-
supials.
Old calcareous dune-rock, Cape North-
umberland, Barwon Heads. Sorrento
Bore, 0-430 feet. Remains of extinct
kangaroo. Torrential gravels of
Eastern Gippsland, in part fluvio-
glacial (?)
Peat beds of Mowbray Swamp with
Nototkerium mitchelli and N. tas -
manicum.
3. Small high level hanging glacier
phase.
2. Cirque-cutting phase of Alpine
glaciers. Lateral and terminal
moraine andfluvio-glacial deposits,
now button grass plains. Tektites
(acid meteorites) “ Darwin Glass.”
1. Ice-cap glaciation with at least two
phases. Ice came down almost to
sea-level on West Coast. Moraines
and ” schotter gravels.”
3. Small high-level glaciers.
Cave deposits, Wellington, with
Thylacoleo.
Sands, gravels and peat in drowned
valleys. . ,
2. Alpine glaciations, Mt. Kosciusko.
1. Ice-Cap glaciation and moraines,
Mt. Kosciusko.
Red soils of Western Plains, high-level
river alluvials and peat beds with ex-
tinct marsupials Diprotodon, Noto-
therium, etc. Peaty clays at Cuddie
Springs, near Brewarrina, with ex-
tinct Varanus, etc.
The coastal plains from Cape Palmerston
to the mouth of the Herbert River, with
old estuarine and delta deposits buried
to depth of over 100 feet below sea-level.
Black and red soils of Darling Downs with
rich extinct vertebrate fauna, Diprotodon,
Nototkerium, Euryzygoma, Thylacoleo,
Sceparnodon, Thylacinus, Sarcophilus, etc.
Raided coral limestone of Cape Vogel, Wewak and Wanimo.
Coral limestone of I.E. Hills, Kerema. 900 feet thick.
Glacial Lakes of the Owen Stanley Range.
Upper Wanimo Series^ Buri-Ango^ Beds, Mailang Series.
Porphyritic lavas of Yule Island and andesites of Vailala headwaters.
Fluviatile Yaiingian conglomerates of Aitape area “Upper Wanimo Series
(Marine).
Pliocene
Upper.
Middle.
Lower.
1
tt'KRRIKOOIAN SERIES.
Kalimnan Series. ■<
.
Laterites and “ pindan sands.”
Basalts of Bunbury.
Intermittent cappings of Pliocene
marine beds overlying the Eucla
polyzoal limestone.
Volcanie rocks of leucitite lava on
the lower Fitzroy River and newer(?)
basalts of the Kimberley Region.
Oldest river gravels of Orroroo. Vlu-
viatile quartzites of upper Sturt,
etc. Marine sands Croydon Bore,
near Adelaide.
Thin cappings of Pliocene marine beds,
Eucla to near Fowler’s Bay. Marine
glauconite sandstones veined with
alunite, north of Edithburgh, Yorke’s
Peninsula.
IAthothamnion beds of Hallett’s Cove
near Adelaide. Marine marls, Croy-
don.
Thin marine gravels, Gippsland.
Newer basalts mostly derived from
fissure eruptions and newer deep
leads with placer gold of Ballarat,
Ararat, the Loddon Valley, etc.
Sorrento Bore, 489-585 feet. Upper
Marine beds of Mallee area.
Sorrento Bore 585-730 feet. Alkaline
volcanic rocks of Mt. Macedon yielding
macedonite, woodendite; nepheline
phonolites of Mansfield, etc.
Typical Kalimnan shell-beds of Jen-
ning’s Pt., Gippsland Lakes. Upper
beds at Muddy Creek, and part of
Beaumaris Series.
Newer basalts with deep leads of
stream tin at Ringarooma and Mt.
Bischoff, and osmiridium at Bald Hill.
Volcanic pipes with melilite-eudi-
aiyte-basalt, and nepheline-basanite
of Table Cape.
Leaf-bearing clays of the Derwent
Estuary.
Launceston lacustrine series formed
of friable sand rock, shales with
lignites, and earthy ironstone with
fossil leaves.
Alkaline rocks, trachytes, solvsbergites,
etc., of Port Cygnet.
Newer Basalts and newer deep leads,
Home Rule gold lead, with Meiolania
and bird bones.
Leucite-basalts of Byrock, El Capitan,
Harden and Lake Cargelligo.
Alkaline intrusions : Gib Rock syenite,
near Bowral; Mt. Stormy, etc., lacco-
liths, Blue Mts.; essexite of Prospect;
alkaline volcanoes of Canoblas, War-
rumbungle Mountains, Nandewar
Ranges; nepheline-dolerite intrusions,
Mt. Royal.
Newer basalts, a very extensive series of
basic lavas with a little tuff, up to 2,000
feet in thickness.
An acid and mostly alkaline series, partly
lava like that capping Mt. Lindsay in the
MacPherson Ranges, partly pyroclastic.
Numerous puys, such as the Glasshouse
mountains, Peaks like Wolf Fang, Lord’s
Table, etc., near Clermont.
Brown sandstone.
Yellow sandstone with Polystomella craticulata.
White limestones of Yule Island with Elphidium craticulatum.
Pliocene strata 500-600 metres thick in Van Rees Chain, Dutch New Guinea.
Yellow marls of the Idenburg River, with trace of Eucalyptus.
Finsch Coast Series (in part): Blue Marls, 3,500-10,000 feet. Ouba Series,
in part, Madang. Brown Coal zone, and Lower Wanimo Series (in part).
Some lignite.
Cape Possession Beds. ,, A x
Imbi Series at Oriomo, clays, silts and. detrital limestone 50-100 feet
thick, lying unconformably on Miocene limestone.
Miocene
' Upper.
Middle.
. Lower.
■
•Janjukian Series.
Plantagenet Beds.
Siliceous shales, largely formed of
spicules of siliceous sponges. This
is perhaps a deep-water type of
Miocene deposit.
Foraminiferal strata at the Hamelin
Pool and the Carnarvon Bores.
Eucla polyzoal limestones with
flints.
Polyzoal limestone with Celleporu coro-
nopus of Eucla to near Fowler’s Bay
and of the Murray Plains between
Murray Bridge and Loxton. Flints
occur in these limestones, and in the
lower beds, as at Robe, shark teeth.
The lower beds are mostly estuarine
to fresh water clays with lignites.
Lignites 15 to 20 feet thick. Maxi-
mum thickness of Miocene strata
proved by boring near Mt. Gambier,
2,110 feet. The Waratah, Telopea
specio8i8sima, and Honeysuckle,
Banksia marginata, occur in brown
coal of this age.
Greensands and marls and polyzoal
limestone of the Mallee Bores, Tor-
quay, Portland, etc., with Cellepora
coronopus, etc.
Lignites of Morwell and Yalloum (780
feet maximum thickness).
Beds at Batesford, Muddy Creek,
Violet Creek near Hamilton, Green
Gully near Keilor, Cape Schank, with
Burdigallan foraminifera Lepidocy-
clina tournoueri, L. marginata, and, at
Flinders, Amphistegina lessoni.
Table Cape Beda with Wynyardia
bussiana, an early opossum, associated
with TurriteUa warburtoni, the whale
Prosqualodon, the coral Orbicella.
Table Cape CrassatellUes oblonga Beds.
Cape Grim Janjukian beds.
Seal River, King Island polyzoal lime-
stone and similar limestones at
Heathy Valley, Flinders Island.
? Fox and Partridge’s shallow lead of
stream tin with fossil insects in iron-
stone, Emmaville.
Quartzites with fossil leaves of Fagus,
etc., at Dalton, near Gunning.
Brown coals, with aggregate thickness of
HO feet distributed in six seams, Water-
park Creek, near Rockhampton.
Lower Wanimo Series, in part. Finsch Coast Series, in part. Popo blue
marly strata with Plio-Miocene fauna. Calcareous grits and sandstones
with coal and oil, Vailala River. At Hepiri snuff-coloured sand-rock,
green sandy marl and blue marly clay with Upper Miocene marine
fauna. Upper Aitape Series “Upper Miocene, White foraminiferal sand-
stones, marls and limestones, Globigerince, radiolaria.
Bentonitic (?) clays and mudstones of I.E. Hills, Kerema.
Intrusive gabbro (copper-bearing) into Astrolabe Series, and Kemp-Welch
Series, with basaltic lavas and agglomerates. Goodenougli Bay Senes,
15,000 feet thick (Middle Miocene upwards).
Strata with brine and inflammable gas, Upoia. Strata at Upoia Bore from
depth of 1,000 feet downwards, with Cycloclypeus, Lepidocyclina martini.
Pink limestones of Hohoro with Amphistegina lessoni, and Lithothammon
ramosis8imum. Buff limestone Okyi River, with Amphistegina lessoni,
Limestones of Carstenz, with Lepidocyclina murrayana, L. sumatrensis, L.
insulm natalis. White limestone of Bootless Inlet, with L. verbeekt , var.
papuensis. Sandstone of Upper Vailala oilfields. L. cf. sumatrensis, Mio-
gypsina. Globigerina limestone of Akauda, Vailala District. Oriomo
limestone, 1,400 feet thick. Cape Vogel Beds, not less than 13,000 feet
thick. Ouba-Mena Series in part, not less than 13,000 feet thick.
Oligocene
' Upper.
Middle.
. Lower.
► Balcombun Series.
North West Cape and Exmouth Gulf.
Whitish to cream-coloured fora-
miniferal chalky limestones with
Lepidocyclina dilatata specially
characteristic.
The lower Aldinga beds are clays, glau-
conitic marls and limestones.
Possibly some of the lignites and lig-
nitic clays belong here.
Lignite beds and clays with Cyclam-
mina in Mallee area at Anglesea,
Torquay Bore, etc.
Sorrento Bore, grey to greenish shell-
bearing sandy clays and marls with
glauconite sand at intervals, Vagi-
neUa.
Older basalts of Western Port, maxi-
mum thickness about 2,000 feet.
Older deep leads with placer gold.
Glauconitic sands with mineral oil
at Lakes Entrance, East Gippsland.
Lignites, clays and sands of Altona
Bay, with CaUitris (1)
Older basalts and deep leads of tin
(Emmaville), auriferous deep leads
at Hanging Hock, etc.
Ostracod and sporangia shales of Duarlnga
(1,000 feet thick), Lowmead, Baffle
Creek, the Narrows near Gladstone,
Oxlev and Beaudesert.
Older (?) basalts of Oxley, etc., capping
j strata with numerous fossil fish ( Epicera -
todus, etc.L
In S.E. Queensland the older basalts are
from 100 to 1,500 feet thick.
The first Lepidocyclinai typify top of Lower Aitape.
f Oligocene "1 Foraminiferal limestone.
Lower Aitape Series to Tuffaceous foraminiferal limestones.
■{ Middle >Basalts, andesites, felsites
L Miocene J with derived pebbles of serpentine.
Eocene
‘ Upper
Middle
.Lower
■ Eyrian series?
Eyrian Series, maximum thickness about
360 feet, sandstones and quartzites
overlying shales and sandy shales,
series unconfomiable on Upper Cre-
taceous Winton Series. Fossil plants,
Banksia, Hakea(1) occur at Mt. Bab-
bage, and Mt. Adams, N.E. end of
Flinders Range, and Eucalyptus leaves
at Carrapateena on western side of
Lake Torrens. Occasionally, but
rarely, fossil fish occur in these lacus-
trine beds.
The siliceous “ duricrust,” the breaking
up of -which by insolation forms the
” gibber plains,” may partly belong
here, partly be newer.
*
Eyrian Series comprising sandstones and
shales of Great Artesian Basin, uncon-
formably overlying the Upper Cretaceous
Winton Series. This contains much fossil
wood as at Wompa at extreme south-west
corner of State, and a large proportion of
dicotyledonous leaves.
Hard sandstone witli small nuinmulites of southern slope of Cordillera strike
W.N.W. dip N.N.E. 40°-50 g .
Upper Port Moresby Series witli Nummulites pengaronensis.
Nummulites bagelensis.
Discocylina ( =Orthophragmina).
Coral limestone and chert of the Fly, Palmer and Black Rivers.
Klippen ? of Lower Aitape with Nummulites bagelensis and N. pengaronensis
Mebu Series of Madang.


the Brisbane River to beyond Broadsound. The Burrum and Styx Coal-
measures were strongly folded with a tendency to be overturned west-
wards. Apart from minor local folding in the Tertiary rocks, this was
the latest folding to which Australia has been subjected, and even this
affected only a few hundred miles of the coast-line, perhaps opposite to
where the abutments of the “Tasmantis” bridge between Australia and
New Zealand finally collapsed.
Economic.
The Stuart Range opal-fields of South Australia, the White Cliffs
and Lightning Ridge opal-fields of New South Wales, and numerous
opal-fields as at the Cheviot Range, Kvabra Creek, etc., in Queensland,
are all situated in Cretaceous rocks. The valuable coal seams of the
Burrum and Styx Coal-measures are described later. Artesian water is
stored on several horizons in the Winton Series, and the clay shales of
the Roma and Tambo Series are essential as an impervious lid to the
porous Walloon (Jurassic) rocks.
Igneous Rocks.
With the possible exception, already mentioned, of the Graham’s
Creek Volcanic Series, there does not appear to have been any contem-
poraneous igneous action in Australia during Cretaceous time.
VI. Cainozoic (Tertiary and Post-Tertiary) of Australia
and Tasmania.
(See Table I.)
The pakeogeograpliy of Australia from the close of Santonian time
down to the present is bristling with difficulties, chiefly due to the dis-
continuity of the marine strata of this age and the considerable gaps
in the geological record. For example, it is doubtful whether any true
Eocene marine beds have as yet been identified anywhere in the Com-
monwealth outside of New Guinea. There is a gap too in the Cretaceous
record, so that above the Santonian the Commonwealth has no represen-
tative of the Danian or of the Msestrichtian Series. During this long
interval Australia and Tasmania seem to have been land areas. Possibly
some of the valley and estuarine deposits with fossil plants under the
“older basalts,” at present classed as Oligocene, may date back to late
Cretaceous time, but of this there is no evidence. The latest Cretaceous
flora as yet studied in Australia, vie., that of the Styx coal-measures of
Queensland, has yielded only two dicotyledonous forms among some
fourteen species. On the other hand, in the Lower Miocene fossil plants
of Australia a quite modern flora is represented by such forms as the
waratah ( Telopea speciosissima), the “honeysuckle” ( Banksiamarginata)
and the conifer Callitris.
For details of the Cainozoic sequence and strata, Table I, herewith,
may be consulted.


No attempt is made to correlate the Cainozoie rocks of the
Commonwealth with those of New Zealand, but Professor Benson’s con-
clusions, based on the work of Tenison Woods, F. W. Hutton, H. J.
Finlay, etc., are as follows: “It is clear in reviewing the above details,
as shown by a comparison of those forms which have a generally littoral
habit, how distinct have been Australia and New Zealand from one
another throughout the whole of the Cainozoie period, a conclusion that
is made more definite by the observation that definite affinities can be
shown only in the case of those groups to organisms which are either
wholly pelagic or possess free-swimming larv®.”
Eocene.
During the long interval of time between the Santonian and the
Miocene the whole of Australia and Tasmania was reduced to a nearly
perfect peneplain, a pre-Miocene, mostly pre-Oligocene peneplain.
Similarly, in pre-Miocene time most, probably, of Western Australia
was reduced to a peneplain, as is shown by the capping of the Plantagenet
Beds of Miocene age on the surface of that peneplain between Albany and
the Stirling Range, and the Miocene outlier of sponge spicule and
molluscan material encrusting the surface, of the same peneplain at
Norseman on Lake Cowan.
The only strata which are possibly Eocene are those of the Eyrian
Series, occurring in Queensland and South Australia, as outliers in the
Great Artesian Basin area, and some of the “older deep leads.”
- Oligocene.
In Oligocene time plant-bearing clays and sands in Victoria and
probably over considerable areas in New South Wales and Queensland
were overwhelmed with flows of basalt. These flows attained a maximum
thickness of about 2,000 feet, as at Western Port, Victoria; and in Queens-
land their thickness is up to about 1,500 feet. Gold-bearing “deep leads”
occur at the Dargo High Plains, etc., but economically they are less
important than the leads underlying the newer (Pliocene) basalt. The
older deep leads of New South Wales and Queensland carrying alluvial
gold or tin may be Oligocene, also the lacustrine oil-shales of Oxley, the
Narrows, Baffle Creek and Duaringa in Queensland. At Altona Bay,
south of Melbourne, these older basalts are associated with Oligocene
marine marls, which overlie some thick beds of lignite. These marine
beds are termed Balcombian, and this term may conveniently be applied
to any strata of Oligocene age throughout Australia.
Besides Altona Bay, areas of Victoria were under the sea at
Balcombe Bay, Sorrento, Mornington and Muddy Creek. The deposits
consist of grey marls with septarian limestone bands. The glauconitic
oil-bearing sands at Lakes Entrance, East Gippsland, are tentatively
classed here. Oligocene beds occur also in the south-east of South
Australia.


Miocene.
In Western Australia the chalky limestones of Exmouth Gulf and
North West Cape, and possibly the Tertiary strata from Shark Bay to
the Gascoyne, accumulated in an Oligo-Miocene sea. In early Miocene
time the coastal submergence increased and was far-reaching. It extended,
at intervals, from eastern Gippsland along the southern and western
shores of Australia to at least as far as North West Cape, a distance of
2,800 miles. The most extensive encroachments of the sea on the land
were at the Murray Gulf, the Janjukian (Miocene) sea extending some
distance up the valleys of the Murray and Darling Rivers from their
junction. This sea spread eastwards by way of the Warrnambool and
Cape Otway areas to Melbourne, and to East Gippsland. Westwards it
extended across the area where are now the Mount Lofty Ranges to the
heads of St. Vincent and Spencer’s Gulf, covering Yorke’s Peninsula.
The shore may have swung so-uth of Eyre’s Peninsula to an unknown
distance seawards, returning to the present coast near Fowler’s Bay
and spreading transgressively over what is now the Nullarbor Plain.
The encroachment of the sea to form the Murray Gulf may have
been accompanied by a tilting of the land from north-east to south-west,
and this probably drained ultimately the vast shallow lake or lakes of
the Eyrian Series. There had been in early Cretaceous time a series
of consequent rivers, the ancestors of the modern Bogan, Namoi, Gwydir
and Macquarie, draining into the epi-continental sea. Later on these
may have fed the Winton and Eyrian lakes, and during the Miocene
tilting they were finally engrafted to form the Darling River flowing in
a south-westerly direction into the Murray Gulf.
In Western Australia, between Albany and the Stirling Range, and
along the coast eastwards of Cape Riche and inland at Lake Cowan, are
deposits chiefly of siliceous sponge spicules of probably somewhat deep-
water origin.
The dominant type of sediment over this large area is a polyzoal
limestone, in which, as at Point Turton (Yorke’s Peninsula) and else-
where, the polyzoa are exquisitely preserved. Under this are flint-bearing
calcareous rocks, passing down into clays and lignites. 1 These marine
Janjukian sediments are over 2,000 feet thick between Warrnambool and
the south-east portion of South Australia. In Tasmania marine
Janjukian beds are developed in small outliers at Table Cape and on
King and Flinders islands, proving the former extension of the Miocene
sea across Bass Strait into northern Tasmania.
The immensely thick lignites (780 feet thick) of Morwell, Victoria,
are above and are newer than the older basalts. Their relation to the
polyzoal limestones is at present obscure. The Waterpark Creek lignites
1 Quite recently F. Chapman has identified Oligocene strata previously classed as
Miocene in the south-east of South Australia.


near Rockhampton, Queensland, were possibly formed in freshwater
lakes of Janjukian age.
Pliocene.
In the Xullarbor Plain and the “Murray Gulf" region, subsidence
was prolonged into early Pliocene time (Kalimnan), the shallow water
deposits consisting of shelly sands, and the deeper of glauconitic sands
of a total thickness of about 100 feet. The Kalimnan seas towards
late Pliocene (Werrikooian) time became further narrowed and
restricted to small areas in Victoria and South Australia. The sediments
are mostly estuarine sandy shell beds, and represent the last of the
Tertiary submergences around Australia. In Tasmania in the
Launceston area lacustrine deposits with Pliocene plants cover a large
area and attain a thickness of at least 600 feet.
Probably in either late Janjukian or early Kalimnan time there
was a remarkable development of volcanoes producing alkaline lavas
and tuffs, as detailed later. These now constitute imposing deeply dis-
mantled puys, like that of Mt. Macedon, Victoria, and these have been
traced at intervals from Coleraine and Casterton in the west to French-
man’s Hill near Omeo in the east. In Xew South Wales they are repre-
sented by the Canoblas near Orange, the Warrumbungle Mountains near
Coonabarabran, the Xandewar Mountains near Xarrabri, and the Lans-
downe plateau near Taree, on the Queensland-Xew South Wales border by
alkaline volcanics in the Macpherson Range, and in Queensland by Mt.
Flinders, etc., the Glasshouse Mountains, between Brisbane and Mary-
borough, and similar puys at Yeppoon near Rockhampton and near
Clermont. Diatomaceous earths are associated with the alkaline lavas of
the Warrumbungle Mountains at Wantialable Creek, in Xew South
Wales.
The dominant terrestrial rocks in the late Tertiary sequence of
eastern Australia and Tasmania are undoubtedly the newer basalts.
Pouring forth mostly from innumerable fissures, these lavas so flooded
the country as to mask more or less completely the mature river valleys
and divides of the Pliocene land-surface. Australia Felix owes its
fertility largely to these newer basalts. Diatomaceous earths are asso-
ciated with these basalts in places, as at Lisinore, Barraba, Cooma, etc.,
Xew South Wales.
A formation which although thin—only from a foot or so up
to about 6 feet in thickness—is very important in Australia, on
account of its forming a mantle over vast areas of low rainfall, especially
in inland areas, is the “duricrust” (W. G. Woolnough). Duricrust is a
hard layer of mineral matter which has been slowly built up by capil-
larity upon a rock-surface undergoing chemical decomposition by
weathering. The most favourable conditions for this process are a rain-
fall of short duration followed by a long dry period in an area of such
low relief that there is practically no run-off for the rainfall. The latter


condition would coincide with a peneplain epoch. Hence the surface rock
after rainfall would become temporarily waterlogged, and whatever
soluble minerals were present in the rock would pass into solution, and
would in the ensuing dry season be carried up and deposited on top of
the original rock surface. According as to whether the dominant
soluble mineral was rich in iron, lime or silica, the resulting duricrust
would be respectively laterite, kunkar, or quartzite, jasper or porcellanite.
While the process of duricrusting is to some slight extent still in
progress, Walther agrees with Woolnough that the Australian duricrust
is mostly fossil, and probably dates back to the last time when Australia,
as a whole, was a peneplain.
In early and middle Pliocene time the river systems of South Aus-
tralia were very different from those of the present. A great river, the
Frome River, the ancestor of the Barcoo and Cooper’s Creek, flowed
through Lakes Blanche, Gregory, Callabonna and Frome, and thence
diagonally across the site of the present Flinders Range, passing over
Orroroo, and to the west of Peterborough, and eventually entered the
sea near Port Wakefield. This may at one time have crossed the site of
the present divide between the Frome and Murray basins and have flowed
into the Murray Gulf. Another large river, the ancestor of the Finke,
coming from the direction of the Macdonnell Ranges and passing through
Lakes Eyre and Torrens, flowed southwards to the sea by a valley, now
drowned, at the head of Spencer’s Gulf. There are traces of another old
river, the Barossa River, the channel of which is perched on the western
side of the Mt. Lofty Ranges at Xuriootpa, Barossa, etc.; its mouth was
near Happy Valley, where boring has proved the presence of river gravels
over 100 feet thick.
Probably it was in the latter part of Pliocene time that Australia
and Tasmania passed through that critical epoch in their physiographical
development which E. C. Andrews has called The Kosciusko Epoch.
It has been shown that Australia as a whole and Tasmania underwent
a remarkable epeirogenic uplift which ushered in the present cycle of
erosion, and finally drove out the sea from the southern coastal areas of
the continent. The old Murray Gulf, including the Mallee area, where
the latest marine deposits are of Upper Pliocene (Werrikooian) age, was
thus drained, and the Darling, Murrumbidgee and Murray Rivers, which
had previously entered the gulf by separate mouths, now became
engrafted. The eastern coast of Australia and most of Tasmania became
elevated differentially, but on the whole as a single unit, and the greater
part of Australia, particularly the coastal parts, probably shared in the
epeirogenic movement. That*this movement was episodic is proved by
the frequency of valley-in-valley structure throughout eastern Australia,
Tasmania, and parts of Western Australia.
The pre-Miocene peneplain and the later post-Miocene peneplain,
incised upon it, became seriously deformed, and consequently the old


FIGURE 7.
Sketch-section across eastern Queensland about the latitude of Cairns.


drainage system became considerably modified. At Kosciusko itself the
peneplain was raised so that its altitude became over 7,000 feet. Most
of the Monaro-Bathurst area acquired an altitude of from 2,000 to 4,000
feet, and this was maintained across the geosyncline of the Central Coal-
field into New England, where altitudes of 3,000 feet are common.
This raised belt passes from the Macplierson Ranges on the Queensland-
New South Wales border, to the D’Aguilar Range to the north-west of
Brisbane, the easternmost of three geanticlines in this raised belt. This
plateau belt has a meridional strike with a width of from 100 to 150
miles. The warped plateau further north in the Bellenden Ker Ranges
attains a height of 5,458 feet in Mt. Bartle Frere. Towards Cape York
the highlands sink to the plain of Mesozoic rocks which gradually dips
under Torres Strait. Concomitantly with this uplift there was prolonged
and heavy subsidence along the region of the Great Barrier Reef, and
probably still further to the south. Evidence of a subsidence of perhaps
400 feet was afforded, in the opinion of Prof. H. C. Richards, by the
diamond drill bore at Michaelmas Cay put down by the Great Barrier
Reef Committee. Part of this submergence may, of course, have been due
to a rise of sea-level following on the melting of the Pleistocene ice-sheets.
The accompanying section (Figure 7) illustrates the remarkable
asymmetry of the Main Divide of Queensland as the result of this
subsidence.
In Victoria the present Main Dividing Range owes probably most
of its elevation to the Kosciusko uplift.
In South Australia the Flinders and Mt. Lofty Ranges were flexed
upwards during the above epoch probably by an amount of the order of
1,000 feet. At the same time the thickness of the marine older Pliocene
(Kalimnan) deposits on the floor of Gulf St. Vincent, viz., 800 feet, as
compared with their small thickness on the mainland to the east, suggests
that the subsidence of the sunkland of Gulf St. Vincent, and the corres-
ponding uplift of the ranges to the east, had already begun about the
middle of Pliocene time. An important east-west warp in epi-Pliocene or
early Pleistocene time developed on the line from Peterborough to Belalie
and extended to the Nullarbor Plain. The Kalimnan sediments were
uplifted along the cliffs facing the Great Australian Bight by about 200
feet, while to the north of the Transcontinental Railway Line the
Janjukian marine limestones were elevated about 500 feet. The east-west
warping from Peterborough to the Nullarbor Plain was accompanied by
a downward sagging of the Lake Eyre Basin region. The result of this
double movement of uplift along the coast and sagging down inland was,
of course, to dam back the waters of the Finke and the Frome, and
establish a large lake with an outlet to the south. The latter part of this
movement was probably in Pleistocene time, but it is probable that
already in Pliocene time the sunklands of Spencer and St. Vincent Gulf
had finished most of their downward movement.


The flexing and faulting which have formed the Darling escarpment
to the east of Perth, Western Australia, and the uplift of the Darling
peneplain, probably should be referred to this epoch. The movement
also elevated the old peneplain of the North West Division and of the
Kimberley Division, as well as the northern part of North Australia.
Pleistocene.
While the occurrence of a reef-forming coral such as Orbicella in
Janjukian strata as far south as Table Cape in Tasmania indicates that
the sea in Bass Strait was in Miocene time about 10° Fahr. warmer than
now, there is evidence that that sea, towards the close of Pliocene time,
was steadily becoming colder, and the climatic refrigeration culminated
in Pleistocene time in an Ice Age, evidences of which are seen chiefly in
Tasmania and at Mt. Kosciusko in New South Wales. Its phases have
been recognized as follows, in descending order:
3. Mountain tarn phase;
2. Alpine Valley phase;
1. Ice Cap Glaciation, in which more than one phase is included.
Half of Tasmania was under ice during the early Pleistocene. On
the West Coast, where now in places there is an annual rainfall of over
100 inches, the ice sheet near the coast at Malanna, between Macquarie
Harbour and Zeehan, came almost, if not actually, down to sea-level.
The ice in places was 1,000 to 1,500 feet thick. That the ice was thick
is further proved by the extraordinary way in which, near Malanna,
it shattered the quartzites, shales and sandstones, over which it Avas
passing. North of Strahan peat beds are interstratifled Avith the glacials,
suggesting interglacial phases. In eastern Tasmania the ice Avas thinner
and the siioav line higher. Since this earliest Pleistocene glacia-
tion some of the riA r er channels, such as that of the Pieman River, have
been deepened in hard Palaeozoic rocks by about 160 feet. When in middle
to late Pleistocene time the cold became less intense, the ice sheet Avas
replaced by Alpine glaciers. Lakes, like St. Clair and the Great Lake,
etc., Avere formed at this epoch. Finally small corrie glaciers lingered on
into Recent time, but have uoav all disappeared.
In Australia the Kosciusko plateau Avas encased in an ice calotte
in the early Pleistocene. This came doAvn from the 7,000 feet level to
about 5,000 feet above the sea. Later it broke up into a number of small
Alpine glaciers, Avhich left behind them the picturesque Lakes Coota-
patamba and Albina, the Club Lake, the Blue Lake and Hedley’s Tarn.
The last of the corrie glaciers Avould seem to have disappeared only
about 10,000 to 15,000 years ago.
In Victoria the only definite trace of a Pleistocene glaciation seems
to be at the Big Bogong Mountain, Avhose altitude is 6,509 feet.
The general evidence of the loAvering of the snoAv line Avithin the
CommonAvealth in Pleistocene time shoAvs that in Tasmania the glacier


limits at least descended some 6,000 feet, and probably the snow line was
lowered by about 5,000 feet. At Kosciusko the snow line was lowered
by at least 3,000 feet in Pleistocene time. During this glaciation of the
above areas there was a low sea-level around Australia and Tasmania,
connected perhaps with the abstraction of so much water from the
ocean in order to form the great Pleistocene Ice Sheets of the northern
hemisphere, and the concurrent (?) heavy glaciation of South America
and Antarctica.
While the Kosciusko and adjacent areas in Australia and Tasmania
were passing through glacial or interglacial phases, the subtropical to
temperate regions of Australia below the snow line were being well
watered, possibly more through the check on evaporation due to lowering
of temperature than to actual increase in amount of rainfall. An
abundant vegetation must have clothed the Darling Downs of Queens-
land, and this supported herds of huge marsupials such as Diproiodon,
Nototherium, Euryzygonia, Macropus anak, Sceparnodon, etc. There was
plenty of water at this time in the Central Australian lakes. Lake
Eyre was probably about ten times as large as it is at present, extending
to beyond Lake Frome to the south-east and nearly to Cordillo Downs
on the north-east. The outlet was probably via Lake Torrens into the
drowned valley at the head of Spencer Gulf. The occurrence of remains
of the Crocodile near Port Augusta, and of Epiceratodus in the older
alluvials to the east of Lake Eyre, along the courses of Cooper’s Creek
and the Diamantina River, shows that river communication with tropical
Queensland was open and direct during Pleistocene time.
Following the Kosciusko uplift the coastal rivers were rejuvenated,
and vigorous canyon-cutting was initiated, which is still in progress in
the highlands. Evidence of a number of minor stages of the uplift during
Pleistocene time is provided by river-terraces of gravel and alluvium,
which are a characteristic feature of many of the rivers. These terraces
may range to a height of 100 feet and more above the present river-levels.
Remains of Nototherium and other Pleistocene marsupials have been
found in the old alluvials of the Hunter, Condamine and other rivers. The
more vigorous erosion by the coastal rivers, as compared with those
flowing west, has resulted in a gradual westerly migration of the Main
Divide, so that in places, as in the Snowies and elsewhere in the New
England district of New South Wales, the highest parts of the plateau
are now considerably to the east of the actual divide. This is also
strikingly evident in Queensland, as, for example, near Cairns, where the
Bellenden Ker Range, over 5,000 feet high, is only 18 miles from the coast,
whereas the divide is several miles to the west, as shown in Figure 7.
During probably middle and late Pleistocene time a flat-domed
anticline with an east-west axis and a westerly pitch rose at right angles
to the general course of the Murray River, and this movement, associated
perhaps with the Mt. Gambier volcanic eruptions, drove the Murray River


about 50 miles westwards. At first it formed a lake on the north side
of the warp, then the lake overflowed and cut a canyon 200 feet deep
through the Janjukian and Kalimnan limestones between Loxton and
Murray Bridge, thus draining the lake. Owing to desiccation of the
climate in late Pleistocene time, the Finke, Diamantina and Cooper’s
Creek rivers were unable to make Lake Eyre overflow any longer into
Spencer Gulf, and the modern semi-arid cycle was inaugurated in that
region. In Western Australia from the same causes the great river, 400
miles long, which formerly ran from near Lake Violet (Wiluna) to
Ponton’s (Goddard’s) Creek near Karonie, ceased to flow except after
the rarely occurring flood rains.
No small part in the shore-line topography of the coasts of western,
southern and eastern Australia has been played by sand-dunes and dune
rock. Where this rock is largely calcareous it has formed hard resistant
masses like those of Barwon Heads and Cape Northumberland in Vic-
toria, and the crescentic ridges of dune limestone marking old shore-
lines of the Woakwine Bange in South Australia. Further, in Western
Australia the rocky ledges of the right bank of the Swan River between
King’s Park, Perth, and Fremantle, form a strong protective rampart
to the coast, as do similar rocks near Busselton, etc. The occurrence of
the bones of numerous extinct animals in the caves at Busselton, in these
dune limestones, clearly shows that the older dune-rock dates back to
Pleistocene time.
Recent.
The valleys which were formed as the result of the Kosciusko uplift
were drowned in Recent time to a depth of 150 or 200 feet. This may
have been due in part to a rise in the ocean level following on the melting
of the Pleistocene ice-sheets. In Tasmania the Derwent, the Tamar, the
Mersey, the Ringarooma and other rivers occupy drowned valleys, as in
Victoria do the Mitchell, the Yarra, the Glenelg, etc. In South Australia
the early Pleistocene channel of the Murray River is now more than one
hundred feet below sea-level. St. Vincent and Spencer Gulfs are drowned
valleys also, but in this case chiefly of tectonic origin. In Western
Australia and North Australia the river -estuaries, and the coast generally,
show evidences of drowning, and in New South Wales Port Jackson and
the lower Parramatta River, Broken Bay, the Hunter and Clarence
estuaries, etc., are drowned valleys, as are those of the Brisbane River
and probably of all the rivers up to Cape York in Queensland.
As regards raised beaches the highest as yet recorded, with the
exception of those of New Guinea, are those of Ooldea, whose height
above sea-level exceeds 300 feet. In the direction of Naracoorte, in the
south-east of South Australia, the raised beaches extend up to an altitude
of 250 feet. In addition, there is a well-marked raised beach at a level
•of about 15 feet above sea-level. This can be traced in so many places


around Australia as to suggest that it is due to an eustatic negative
movement of the ocean rather than to a positive movement of the land.
The shells and foraminifera in this beach suggest a somewhat warmer
climate then than now, as is evidenced by the fossils Area trapezia,
Meleagrina fimbriata (pearl-shell oyster), etc., together with the fora-
minifer Marginopora vertebrali.s.
As regards recent coastal sand-dunes, the largest are those on
Fraser, or Great Sandy, Island on the east coast of Queensland. These
in places rise to 900 feet above sea-level, but they may encase hills of
older rocks. As regards the sand-ridges of the central parts of Australia,
the geological map shows an area about 60,000 square miles to the
north of Lake Eyre, and to the south of the east end of the Macdonnell
Ranges, as occupied by such ridges. These are moving, they are about
50 feet high, and occur 4 or 6 to the mile. By far the greatest inland
area of sand-ridges extends from the western end of the Macdonnell
Ranges so as to take in the whole area labelled “Sand-Ridges” on Griffith
Taylor’s map on page 9 of these notes. It lias- an area of about 350,000
square miles. For the most part these sand-ridges are fixed by vegeta-
tion, such as spinifex, parakelia, mulga, etc., and over considerable areas
are wilderness rather than desert. They are, when far inland, of a bright
brick-red colour, and, seen from a distance, simulate streams of molten
lava. Much sand is now being carried out to sea by the south-east trade
wind along the Ninety Mile Beach on the north-west coast of Western
Australia. From these statements it is obvious that much of Central
Australia is now passing through an arid cycle. This cycle seems further
advanced than the pluvial cycle of the coastal regions.
Diatomaceous earths are of frequent occurrence in the post-Tertiary
deposits of Western Australia. The commonest diatom is Melosira. Beds
of peat are characteristic of the rainy belt of the West Coast of Tasmania,
where peat and peaty soil cover large areas. Submerged peat
beds occur at Botany Bay, south of Sydney, 15 feet below high water,
and in the delta of the Hunter River, etc., 100 feet below sea-level, but
these last may be Pleistocene.
Deposits of salt and gypsum are exploited at the shallow lakes
or claypans of South Australia, at Yorke’s Peninsula, Lake Macdonnell,
etc.
Caixozoic Life.
Plants. —The earlier conclusion of Ettingshausen and others, that
the early Tertiary flora of Australia was of a cosmopolitan type con-
taining such European types as Quercus, Fagus, Betula, Alnus, Acer,
Ciivnamomum, etc., has given place to the later view of Henry Deane
“that the fossil plant remains of Tertiary age in eastern Australia
indicate a vegetation in all respects similar to that existing on the coast
in the same latitude at the present day.” With the exception of Fagus,
G


it is extremely doubtful if any of the above genera occur in the Cainozoic
strata of Australia.
It is interesting to note that Phyllocladus, the picturesque Celery-top
Pine of Tasmania, not only ranged on the mainland through to Victoria
at the time of the Miocene brown coal growth there, but extended also
into the New England area of New South Wales. Reference has already
been made to the survival at the top of the Bellenden Ker Ranges of a
patch of Rhododendrons, migrants from New Guinea, probably during
the Pleistocene Ice Age.
Animals. —One of the most noteworthy features in the marine
Tertiary faunas of Australia and New Guinea is the extraordinary
abundance of the Lepidocyclince among the foraminifez’a. These are
mostly of Burdigalian age. On a higher horizon, but still in the
Miocene, are the widespread polyzoal limestones, in which Gellepora
coronopus is the dominant form. Among the vertebrates, in addition to
important types of whale— Squalodon, Ziphius, etc.—the most interest-
ing types are the Pleistocene giant marsupials and large struthious birds,
such as Genyornis, and Dromornis giganteus (?). Much interest attaches
to the oldest fossil marsupials in Australia. Only in one case, that of
Table Cape, in Tasmania, has a marsupial been traced back to
Tertiary time. This form is Wynyardia bassiana, occurring in strata
with Turritella warburtoni, of Upper Miocene or Lowest Pliocene age.
In the Pliocene deep lead of Home Rule, near Gulgong (N.S.W.), the
gigantic chelonian Meiolania has been found, obviously there of fresh-
water habit. The same genus has been found in Pleistocene (?) coral
rock at Lord Howe Island, 500 miles north-east of Sydney. At this latter
locality its habit was probably marine. The large extinct monitor lizard,
Megalania, belonging to the Varcmidw , has been found in the Pleistocene
deposits of the Darling Downs. It probably attained a length of about
18 feet.
Much interest attaches to the date of the arrival of the dingo in
Australia, for there can be little doubt that this variety of the Asiatic
wolf was brought here by early man. At the Wellington Caves, New
South Wales, teeth of dingo (Gams dingo) occur in situ in the bone-
breccia in association with bones of Thylacoleo , Sarcophilus and
Diprotodon. Gerard Krefft, a former curator of the Australian Museum,.
Sydney, records the finding by himself of the “fractured crown of a
human molar tooth in the same matrix as Diprotodon and Thylacoleo at
Wellington, in this colony.”
In Victoria remains of dingo were identified by the late Sir
Frederick McCoy in the lake alluvials at Lake Colungulac near Camper-
down, associated with remains of Thylacoleo carnifex. Remains of dingo
were also found in the alluvials of Lake Timboon, County Heytesbury,
associated with bones of Macropus titan, Nototherium and Diprotodon..


Professor J. W. Gregory found remains of dingo associated with
those of Thylacinus (now extinct on the mainland, but still surviving in
Tasmania) in the older alluvials of the Diamantina, in the north-east
part of the Lake Eyre region.
In north-east Tasmania an artifact of chalcedony, with a saw-
toothed cutting edge, formed by careful “retouching,” was found at the
Old Doone Mine near Gladstone. There is little doubt that this was
really in situ in the drift immediately overlying the stream tin gravel and
twelve feet below the surface of the ground. Since this layer of drift,
carrying the artifact, was formed, the Ringarooma Eiver, close by, has
deepened its channel by as much as 65 feet along the junction of some
adjacent slates and quartzites with granite. The age of this deposit
is probably of the order of 50,000 to 100,000 years.
The primitive human skull, found at Talgai, near Warwick, in
Queensland, was probably derived from alluvials containing remains of
extinct marsupials, but this is not absolutely proved.
Professor Wood Jones summarises the matter of the antiquity of
man in Australia thus:
“The progenitor of the Talgai man came with his wife, he came with his
dog, and his dog’s wife, and he must have done the journey in a seaworthy
boat, capable of traversing this unquiet part of the ocean, with his consider-
able cargo. Besides this living freight, and the food and water necessary for
the adventure, he carried other things—he carried a knowledge of the
boomerang, of the basis of a totem system, and various other cultural features,
all bearing a strange suggestion of very distinctly western origin.”
No remains of the dingo have been found in Tasmania. The arrival in
that island of the first aborigines appears to have been earlier than the
date when the dingo was brought by the Australian aboriginal on to the
mainland. This date in Tasmania was probably contemporaneous with
about the Kiss or possibly the Wurmian time of Switzerland during the
Great Ice Age. The coming of the Australian aboriginal into Australia
with the dingo was probably in late Pleistocene time.
Economic. '
(See Figure 10, p. 136.)
Important deposits of Tertiary age are the “shallow leads” and “deep
leads,” containing alluvial gold and stream tin, mostly developed in
eastern Australia and Tasmania. The sediments of the deep leads are
generally roofed over with either the Older or the Newer Basalts.
The more important deep leads are those under the Newer Basalts.
Shallow leads with alluvial gold are widely distributed through-
out eastern Australia and Tasmania. In South Australia they
have been worked over the Echunga, Teetulpa, Barossa and Ulooloo
areas. In Western Australia there are both deep and shallow leads
with alluvial gold, and in places shallow leads with stream tin, like
those of the Pilbara and Greenbushes areas. These deep leads,


like those of Lake Raeside, Lake Cowan, etc., have no covering of basalt,
and have not yet been exploited. In Central Australia a little alluvial
gold has been worked at Arltunga and Tanami, and in North Australia
similar deposits have been worked between Darwin and Pine Creek, and
in places, as at Maranboy, etc., have yielded stream tin as well. In
Tasmania, in addition to alluvial gold and stream tin in both deep and
shallow leads, osmiridium has been won, particularly in the Heazlewood
district. This occurs in shallow leads, which form the chief source of
the world supply of that natural alloy.
A little alluvial platinum is worked in the Fifield area of New South
Wales, and also in the beach deposits near Ballina on the North Coast.
Alluvial sapphires are obtained from the shallow leads of Nullamanna
in the Inverell region of New South Wales, as well as at the Anakie
Sapphire-field, Queensland.
Alluvial diamonds, of small size, have been exploited from Copeton
in New South Wales. A few, mostly of small size, but rarely large, have
been washed out of the recently disintegrated Nullagine conglomerates
of Proterozoic age in Western Australia. Salt and gypsum occur
together in the lacustrine deposits of Yorke’s Peninsula, Lake
Macdonnell, Lake Hart, etc., in South Australia. In the first of the above
areas they are being commercially exploited.
Opal occurs, as a chemically formed deposit, in thin vertical or
horizontal veins, or irregular pockets, usually in Cretaceous clays, but
in regard to the date of its formation appears to be of late Cainozoic age.
The chief deposits hitherto exploited are those of White Cliffs, near
Wilcannia, and Lightning Ridge, near Walgett, in New South Wales,
the area from Opalton-Kynuna to Cunnamulla in Queensland, and the
Coober Pedy opal-field in the Stuart Range of South Australia.
Cainozoic lignites and brown coals are widely distributed throughout
the Commonwealth, the chief deposits being those of Victoria and South
Australia. These are described below.
Diatomaceous earths are mined from beneath mostly the Newer
Basalts of New South Wales. They are extensively developed in the
shallow lake deposits of the coastal areas of Western Australia, but are
there much admixed with peat.
Brick, drain-pipe and pottery clays of fair quality are found through-
out the Commonwealth. The clay from under the duricrust in Western
Australia is used in places for making firebricks, all soluble minerals
having been completely leached out and carried up by capillarity to form
the duricrust.
The laterite makes an excellent road-metal on account of its inherent
binding properties. The blue-metal lavas, mostly of the Newer Basalt
type, are also excellent as road-metal. The Melbourne “bluestone” of the
Newer Basalt series is widely used as a building stone, for pavements, etc..


The Miocene polyzoal limestone of South Australia is sawn into
slabs, with a crosscut saw, for use in buildings, etc. It is relatively soft
while it retains its quarry water, but hardens on weathering. Artesian
water is contained in the porous beds of Tertiary strata at Sale, at
Traralgon, at Lakes Entrance, and at Corner Inlet in the Gippsland
area of Victoria. Valuable supplies of subartesian water are being
exploited from the Tertiary deposits over the greater part of the old
Murray Gulf (the Mallee plains of Victoria, the basin of the Lower
Murray in South Australia, and the south-west part of the Riverina
region of New South Wales).
It may be added that the uplift which affected most of Australia and
Tasmania during the Kosciusko epoch, by steepening the falls of the
rivers and creating waterfalls, has greatly increased the hydro-electric
potentialities of the above regions, while the numerous glacial lakes,
formed during the Pleistocene Ice Age in Tasmania, constitute invaluable
storage reservoirs, of which engineers have taken no small advantage.
The potential hydro-electric capacity of Tasmania has been estimated at
about 700,000 continuous horsepower, and may be as much as 1,000,000.
Mineral oil, of a somewhat heavy type, the extent of which has not
yet been tested, occurs in the glauconitic Oligocene sands of East
Gippsland, in Victoria.
Igneous Rocks.
There are evidences of Tertiary subaerial volcanic activity in most
of the States, and on a stupendous scale in eastern Australia. The
chronological sequence is best studied in Victoria, where a threefold
development is recognized. The lowest volcanic series, known as the
Older Basalts, outcrops around and to the south and south-east of Port
Phillip, and very extensively in south-eastern and northern Gippsland,
where basalt forms the highest parts of the plateau. The rocks are in
the main normal basalts, but slight alkalinity is sometimes indicated
by the presence of anorthoclase. Deep weathering and lateritization of
the rocks are general.
The second volcanic series consists in its greatest development, at
Mt. Macedon, of alkaline rocks, chiefly anorthoclase-aegirine trachytes
and phonolites, with anorthoclase basalts, limburgites and plugs of
solvsbergite. Less important occurrences are those of Coleraine and
Casterton in western Victoria, while in the highlands of the north-
eastern part of the State are plugs or dykes of tinguaite and phonolite.
Other centres of alkaline eruption were at Frenchman’s Hill, near Omeo,
and Mt. Leinster.
The third series, the Newer Basalts, mostly forms the plains of the
western and south-western parts of the State, extending into the Mt.
Gambier district of South Australia, and overlapping the region of the
Older Basalts at Melbourne. Although mainly fissure-eruptions, some


of the outbursts —the most recent —were from central vents, and hundreds
of small lava- and tuff-cones are still to be seen, some in a remarkably
tine state of preservation, as at Tower Hill, near Warrnambool, and at
Mt. Gambier.
In New South Wales three series of eruptions are indicated. The
Older Basalts, often accompanied by tuffs, and for the most part deeply
weathered and covered with lateritic crusts, outcrop extensively in
various parts of New England; certain residual cappings in the central
tableland, as at the Bald Hills, near Bathurst, have also been grouped
with the Older Basalts.
A series of Newer Basalts covers very large areas along the coast
and tablelands, and must have been originally of immense extent and
considerable thickness; they are found at intervals from the Victorian
to the Queensland border, and, as a rule, are unaccompanied by tuffs, a
fact suggesting their extrusion from fissures. Nevertheless, numbers of
small centres of eruption have beeen found, as for example in the Blue
Mountain area, Avhich are probably connected with the eruption of the
Newer Basalts.
The basalts are in general olivine-bearing, and exhibit somewhat
alkaline affinities; nepheline and analcite are occasionally visible, and a
few true nepheline-basalts have been found. Leucite-basalts have been
described from Byrock, near Bourke, El Capitan, Lake Cargelligo and
Harden.
A series of intermediate and acid alkaline volcanic rocks, whose
eruption probably preceded that of the Newer Basalts, form mountain-
groups, representing dismantled cones or puys, at the Canoblas, Warrum-
bungle and Nandewar Mountains and the Lansdowne Plateau, north of
Taree; comendites, alkaline and phonolitic trachytes and andesites
constitute the main types.
An interesting series of intermediate to basic alkaline intrusions
formed an important feature of the Tertiary vulcanicity in New
South Wales. Among these may be mentioned the numerous alkaline
basic dykes of the Sydney and South Coast districts, the sill-like
teschenitic masses of Prospect, near Sydney, and of the Hunter Valley
near Singleton and Muswellbrook, the theralites, teschenites and essexites
forming sills and plugs in the Liverpool and Mount Royal Ranges and
elsewhere, the fine-grained aegirine-syenite of Mt. Gibraltar, near Bowral,
and the aegirine-tinguaite laccoliths of Barigan, near Mudgee.
The Tertiary volcanic rocks pass northward across the border, and
cover considerable areas of eastern Queensland. In the southern part
of the State they are divisible into a lower and an upper basic series,
with an intervening alkaline series. The volcanic accumulations attain
considerable thickness in places, and form the Macpherson Ranges on
the New South Wales border, the Darling Downs in part, the Spring-


brook, Lamington, and Tambourine Plateaux and the Bunya Bunya
Mountains. The basalts show some traces of alkaline affinities, including
the occasional presence of anorthoclase.
The alkaline tracliytic rocks, including tuffs, are strikingly similar
to those of New South Wales and Victoria, and form necks and puys
and spines in the Fassifern, Mt. Flinders and Glasshouse Mountain
districts. In addition there are in places rhyolites, dacites and andesites.
A threefold division has also been established for the Central Queens-
land lavas about Springsure; alkaline, acid and intermediate rocks form
puys about Clermont and Yeppoon.
The olivine-basalts in the Anakie region, like some of those in New
England (N.S.W.), form the matrix for sapphires.
Volcanic activity in northern Queensland is represented by the
basalts of the Atherton Plateau, of the valleys of the Einasleigh and
Copperfleld Rivers, and of the islands of Torres Strait. Lakes Eacham
and Barrine occupy very perfect explosion craters. A leucite-basalt at
the Normanby Reefs is possibly Tertiary.
Basalt flows, probably the equivalents of the Victorian Newer
Basalts, are found in the north and north-west coastal areas of Tasmania,
sometimes overlying old river- and lake-beds. Other Tertiary basalts
occur further south, but are of doubtful stratigraphical position.
Numerous alkaline minor intrusions, probably Tertiary, occur, including
analcite- and nepheline-bearing basic rocks, tinguaites and solvsbergites,
notably at Table Cape, Shannon Tier and Port Cygnet.
Apart from the basalts and tuffs of the south-eastern part of the
State, as about Mt. Gambier, and at Kingscote, Kangaroo Island, there is
no evidence in South Australia of any Tertiary volcanic activity.
In the southern parts of Western Australia, as at Bunbury and the
Blackwood River, there are basalts which may be late Tertiary, and in
the Kimberley district, in the valleys of the Ord and Belin Rivers, there
are basic lavas and tuffs which appear much newer than the Proterozoic
basalts, and which may be Tertiary. A number of volcanic necks or
plugs of leucitite have been found in the basin of the Fitzroy River, and
these are provisionally assigned a Tertiary age.
The exact stratigraphical position of many of the Tertiary volcanic
rocks is still uncertain. The Older Basalts of Victoria are as old as
Oligocene, but it is not certain whether all the so-called Older Basalts
of New South Wales and Queensland are coeval with them. The Newer
Basalts are in general Pliocene, but it would appear that in South
Australia, western Victoria and northern Queensland volcanic activity
continued into Pleistocene and possibly Recent time.
Though complete investigation has not been carried out, it may be
said that many of the Tertiary basalts do not belong strictly to the
petrological kindred of the plateau-basalts, exhibiting as they do distinct
alkaline affinities.


FIGURE 8.
Sketch-section across New Guinea.


VII. Cainozoic of New Guinea.
The little that is known about the pre-Cainozoic geology of New
Guinea has been included in the Australian stratigraphical sequence
above.
In Cainozoic time both sedimentary and volcanic rocks attained a
vast development, and have been intensively studied in many areas on
account of their possible economic importance as prospective producers
of mineral oil. As New Guinea has had a unique geological history in
Cainozoic time, it has been thought best to treat it as a unit distinct
from Australia.
The general sequence, as given in Table I, must be regarded as
extremely tentative.
Eocene.
The oldest Cainozoic rocks so far proved in British New Guinea
are of Middle Eocene (Lutetian) age. They are coral limestones
and cherts, occurring on the Upper Fly, the Palmer and Black Rivers.
Part of the Upper Port Moresby beds contain Nummulities pengaronensis,
N. tagelensis and Discocyclina, indicating an Eocene age. The upper
division of the same series, consisting of cherts rich in radiolaria, is
doubtless likewise Eocene. The hard sandstones with small nummulites
on the southern slopes of the Cordillera, west of the Dutch border, are
also Eocene. The Mebu Series of Madang, formed of hard sandstones,
and the nummulitic Gasua limestone belong here.
Oligocene.
The lower part of the Lower Aitape Series, formed of tuffaceous fora-
miniferal limestones, with contemporaneous basalts, andesites, and
felsites, and rolled pebbles of serpentine, is Oligocene, ascending to
Middle Miocene. The basal conglomerate of the Lower Aitape contains
rolled pebbles of an Eocene nummulitic limestone. These apparently
have been derived from a land, since foundered, to the north of the present
coast line, of which the Bougainville Mountains, a prolongation of the
Cyclops Range inside the Dutch border, are a relic.
Oligo-Miocene.
The highest rocks in New Guinea, those of Carstenz-toppen in Dutch
territory, are formed of limestones of Aquitanian to Burdigalian age,
containing Lepidocyclina murrayana, L. sumatrensis and L. insuUe-
natalis. The white limestones of Bootless Inlet to the east of Port
Moresby contain the above forms and, in addition, L. papuensis
(Chapm.).
The Lower Aitape Series, “klippen” (?) of which with nummulites
date back to the Upper Eocene, is mostly Upper Oligocene to Middle
Miocene in age. It is about 3,500 feet thick. The strata consist of grey


to white and cream-coloured limestones,- with marls, grits, thin con-
glomerate and tuffaceous sandstones. They are rich in Lepidocyclines,
Lepidocyclina ( Eulepidina) papuensis occurring in the Oligocene
portion, while L. ( Nephrolepidina ) verbeeki is characteristic in the Lower
Miocene division. Miogypsina and Amphistegina lessonii belong to the
Middle Miocene.
Miocene.
Keference to the table shows that the Miocene section is complex,
and only a very little is known about it at present. Economic interest
centres in the consideration as to whether any horizons of primary, as
contrasted with migrated, mineral oil occur in these rocks.
The Astrolabe-Kemp Welch Series consists of sericitic slates and
schists impregnated with quartz and epidote, and interstratified with
indurated Globigerina limestone, together with lavas and agglomerates.
The whole series has been invaded by a large mass of gabbro, which has
introduced the copper ore at the Laloki Mine, and has caused widespread
contact metamorphism. The Globigerina limestone, converted in places
into garnet-rock, occurs as roof-pendants over the gabbro batholith. It
is possible that the above series is a pelagic equivalent of the Bootless
Inlet limestone, in which case its age would be Aquitanian, but it is
probably Burdigalian, and the gabbro epi-Burdigalian.
At Cape Vogel the strata of Middle to Upper Miocene age are about
13,800 feet thick. Their base is formed of whitish marine marls, 1,800
feet thick, passing upwards into thick tuffs, followed by sandstones with
much conglomerate, tuff and lignite. It is doubtful whether any mineral
oil has been met with in these rocks. At the Marienburg bore, near the
mouth of the Sepik River, the Lower Miocene, 2,500 feet thick, is
separated from the Upper Miocene beds by a conglomerate. The basic to
andesitic lavas of the Finisterre, Hunstein and Spitzklotz Mountains
are perhaps Middle Miocene. At Madang the Ouba-Mena Series is prob-
ably not less than 13,000 feet thick, and ranges in age from Lower
Miocene to Pliocene. W. Gray and P. S. Hossfeld consider that there are
two possible unconformities in this great thickness of strata. The Mena
Series of Madang has massive conglomerates at its base, passing up into
Globigerina marls with Lepidocyclina and Miogypsina, followed by
sandstones with thin coal seams. It is doubtful whether oil occurs in
this series, but it has not yet been properly tested.
At Matapau oil seems to be associated with Lepidocyclina lime-
stones of the Lower Aitape, but it is thought by Nason-Jones and G. A. V.
Stanley that the oil may have migrated from newer beds of the Finsch
Coast Series, along possible planes of overthrust, into portion of the older
beds. On the southern side of the island, however, it would appear that
the brine and inflammable gas, met with at the bore at Upoia, may be


of Middle Miocene age. The remarkable running mudstones encountered
at the I.E. Hills, west of Kerema, on the Gulf Coast, and apparently of
the nature of bentonite, appear to overlie the Upoia beds.
Next, perhaps, in ascending order is the Upper Aitape Series, 800-
1,150 feet thick. This comprises white foraminiferal sandstones, vari-
coloured marls, limestones with abundant Globigerince, and con-
glomerates. It is Middle to Upper Miocene in age.
Mio-Pliocene.
Next above the preceding come what are probably the chief oil-
producing beds of Mio-Pliocene age, viz., the Finsch Coast Series, and
the Lower Wanimo Series, and, possibly, the Ouba stage of the Ouba-
Mena Series (near Madang), of Mandated Territory, together with the
ca-lcareous grits and sandstones with coal and oil of the Vailala River in
Papua.
The Finsch Coast Series is a dominant member. It consists of
marine argillaceous blue marls, carbonaceous ih places, and containing
lignite. Its thickness ranges from 4,000 feet to 10,000 feet. It contains
subordinate beds of sandstone, grit, lenticular conglomerate and lime-
stone. The beds range from a deep-water sandy phase below to a
mangrove swamp type of formation above. Lepidocylines are notably
absent.
The Lower Wanimo Series is of about the same age as the above.
It consists of blue marls, grits, conglomerates, sandstones and coral-
line limestones. The group is about 10,000 feet thick, and rich in marine
fossils.
Pliocene.
The upper part of the Finsch Coast Series, the upper part
of the Lower 'Wanimo Series, the strata in the upper part of the Marien-
burg bore, the Cape Possession beds, composed of tuffaceous shell sands,
and the Imbi Series at the Oriomo bores west of the Fly River mouth,
formed of clays, silt and detrital limestone, may, provisionally, be placed
here, together with the white limestones of Yule Island with abundance of
Elphidium craticulatum.
Pleistocene.
Between the deposits of the Pliocene and those of the Pleistocene
there is a marked unconformity. This is shown by the junction
line of the conglomerates of the Yalingi Series with the folded and
eroded surface of the Finsch Coast Series. The Yalingi Series is mostly
of fluviatile detritus from the Torricelli Mountains. It comprises
conglomerates, sandy clays and mudstone bands. With the Yalingi
gravels can be grouped the Upper Wanimo beds. These are formed of
lignitic clay marls and carbonaceous blue clays with foraminifera. Their


thickness is probably of the order of 100-400 feet. A fragment of a human
skull was found by Hossfeld in blue clays of this age at Paniri Creek.
Evidences of glacial action of Pleistocene age have been recorded by
Captain Detzner, who observed cirques and a glacially-striated surface
of white limestone on the summit of the Saruvaged Range at an altitude
of about 13,000 feet (4,000 metres).
There are small glaciers on the Snowy Mountains in Dutch New
Guinea, at Carstenz-toppen, 16,400 feet (5,000 metres); and at
Wilhelmina Top, 15,600 feet (4,750 metres). There is evidence of
this glaciation having come down to at least 1,000 feet below the summit
of Wilhelmina Top. The lakes to the east of the above mountain, at
an altitude of a little over 9,000 feet, are probably also glacial. In the
Owen Stanley Range (Papua) lakes, probably of glacial origin, are found
at altitudes of about 9,000 feet.
The altitude of the present snow line in New Guinea at Mt.
Wilhelmina and the Carstenz Range is about 14,500 feet (4,330 metres).
The supposed glacial erratic at sea-level on the Kela Peninsula at
Samoahafen, near Parsee Point, cannot be accepted as such without
further evidence. They rest on a platform of uralitized and chloritized
diabases, as recorded by Neuhaus. Dr. S. Papp has recorded the follow-
ing: “At Aribora enormous blocks, greyish-white in colour, of coarse-
grained biotite granite, are very noteworthy. They are rounded, but not
polished, and resemble in some ways roches moutonnees, but I am of
opinion that their form is due to heavy erosion and not to glacial action.”
Recent.
Raised coral limestones occur up to elevations of 2,000 feet
above sea-level. They are widely distributed, and are well seen at Einauro
(Cette) Island, Misima (St. Aignan) Island, the north-east coast of New
Guinea, also at Mt. Bougainville, west of Aitape, etc. There are numerous
river terraces to be correlated with the raised reef limestones.
At Bulolo in the Edie Creek area there is a gold-bearing conglomerate
largely tuffaceous (?). The gold-bearing gravels of the Waria River,
and the gravels of South-east River, a tributary of the Sepik, with traces
of gold and platinum, may be classed here, as well as the blue clays and
lignites which underlie the yellowish-red clays and laterites of the plains.
These laterites are from about 8 metres to over 11 metres thick. The
newest formations in New Guinea are those of the black soil plains
and peaty swamps of the Great Plain of Papua, and of the Sepik and
Ramu Valleys, etc., and the deltaic banks, islands and tombolos, which
are being rapidly built seawards by the great muddy rivers of this land
of intensive tropical rainfall. Floating islands form a striking feature
in the lower valley of the Sepik. Each of these is about an acre in area,
and consists of a tangled mass of logs and decomposed vegetation, partly


cemented together with sand and lime. “They form in the quiescent
portions of whirlpool bends, and are carried down to the river mouth,
where they disintegrate in the breakers on the bar.”
Igneous Rocks.
Geographically and tectonically the Cainozoic volcanic rocks of
New Guinea fall into three belts:
1. A belt of extinct volcanoes south of the Cordillera, extending
from Mt. Favenc and the Aird Hills south-easterly by way of Mt. Yule
and the Aibala region and the Astrolabe Range areas to the volcanics of
Mt. Gugusari (the Cloudy Mountains) near the south-east extremity of
Papua.
2. An intermittent belt of very recently extinct or moribund volcanoes
extending from the Mambare River and Cape Ward Hunt to Mt. Laming-
ton, Mt. Victory (active volcano) and Mt. Dayman (9,305 feet), with
volcanic cappings, west of Cape Vogel. The volcanic rocks of the
D’Entrecasteaux Group and of the Louisiade Archipelago belong to this
belt.
3. The great volcanic zone, mostly active throughout, comprising
the volcanic islands of Bam, Manam, Dampier, etc., and running along
the north coast of New Britain and portions of New Ireland, and thence
swinging to the south-east through Buka to Bougainville Island in the
Solomon Group. 1
Oligo-Miocene. —Classed geologically the oldest Cainozoic lavas and
tuffs appear to be those of the Lower Aitape Series. They are pillow
lavas of a spilitic type, with Lepidocyclina in the strata both above and
below the lava. Basalts, andesites and felsites are also present, as well
as interbedded tuffs. The andesites are hornblende-pyroxene types,
zeolitic with much stilbite and heulandite.
Miocene. —The coarse volcanic agglomerates of the older Aibala
Series, older Astrolabe Series, and of the Mafulu and Upper Mekeo
Districts are associated with flows of basalt and andesite at least 3,000
feet thick. The lavas and agglomerates of the Finisterre, Hunstein and
Spitzklotz Mountains, and the older volcanics of Whiteman, etc., Range
in New Britain also belong here. At Laloki in south-east New Guinea is
the large mass of gabbro which has intruded the Miocene Globigerina
limestones of the Astrolabe Series, as already described.
Plio-Pleistocene. —Andesitic lavas and agglomerates of this age form
the basal volcanics of Mt. Favenc and the Upper Aibala Series. The
lower volcanics of Mt. Dayman, Abau and Cloudy Mountains, the older
Cape Nelson Series and that of the Mambare littoral, and the older
volcanics of the D’Entrecasteaux Islands, are to be placed here, also the
basaltic lavas of Oenake and of the Adalbert Range.
1 Possibly the Solomon volcanic chain should be considered to be a separate zone.


Pleistocene to Recent. —The final phase of vulcanism, still in
progress, has produced thick beds of tuff, pumice, andesite, vesicular
olivine-basalt, trachyte (rare), rhyolite and obsidian. Representatives
of these rocks are found at Mt. Lamington, the Hydrographer’s Range,
and the Aird Hills in Lower Mekeo (the Tamala Series), among the
newer rocks of Mt. Dayman, Mts. Victory and Trafalgar, and the
Aitape to Finschhafen volcanic rocks resting on coral limestones.
At the latter locality are pyroxene-andesites, basalts, limburgites
and a trachyte-like rock. The thin flows of trachyte on the north coast
of Misima and of Ferguson Island belong here, as well as the pyro-
clastics of the D’Entrecasteaux Group. At Ferguson Island rhyolites
and obsidians have been reported.
The whole volcanic series is quite dominated by andesitic and
basaltic lavas and tuffs, which are distinctly of a calcic type with the
above three exceptions of Finschhafen, Misima and Ferguson Islands,
and the Namatanai Chain to the north-east of New Ireland, in which,
in the outlying island of Liliir, Glassner has doubtfully recorded
icositetrahedra of leucite in a trachydolerite. In the same region at the
island of Anir (Ambitle) rocks of distinct alkaline affinity are referred
to hornblende-biotite trachyte, nosean-bearing trachydolerite, and
limburgitic trachydolerite, with basaltic augite fringed with jegyrine-
augite.
Active Volcanoes.
In the Solomon Islands, within Mandated Territory, two active
volcanoes are known, both in the Island of Bougainville. Mount Balbi,
10,171 feet high, about the size of Mt. Etna, is the highest volcano within
Commonwealth territory. The other active volcano is Bagana, about
30 miles south-east of Mt. Balbi.
The only active volcano in Papua is Mount Victory, 5,967
feet high. Mount Dayman, 9,305 feet, and Mt. Trafalgar, 5,083 feet,
belong to the same group, but these two last are extinct. The belt is
continued through the D’Entrecasteaux and Louisiade Islands, but the
volcanoes there, though recent, and still associated with hot springs, are
now extinct.
By far the most important belt of active volcanoes extends
from the islands of Bam and Manam, in the area seawards of the mouth
of the Sepik River, to New Britain. Manam, 4,265 feet, was in violent
eruption in 1919. It produces liypersthene-andesites. Bam is, at times,
violently active. In New Britain the axis of the island is a strong arc
of tectonic folding, convex southwards. The whole of the northern coast
has recently subsided, and is probably still subsiding, whereas the
southern coast, fringed with raised coral limestone up to heights of
1,500 feet, appears to be still rising. Thus a tilting movement is there


in progress from south to north. Along this northern coast-line the
tuffs, scoria and lavas have an average thickness of 1,500 feet. The
active volcanoes of New Britain are mostly situated on lines of fissures
crossing the east-to-west tectonic arc nearly at right angles, and having
a meridional trend. In the Gazelle Peninsula Tavurnur, a parasitic
cone on the slopes of the South Daughter, is occasionally active. Some
earthquake shocks appear to originate from near this volcano. The active
volcano of Ghaie and Watom Island is situated probably on the same
south-eastern fissure as that on which the Mother and North and South
Daughters have been built up. Tavurnur is perhaps on the same tectonic
line as the intermittently active volcano, the Father, 7,546 feet. The
South Son (Bamus), 7,376 feet, in occasionally active.
Lolobau Island has active volcanoes 600 feet high. Mt. Bango, 2,375
feet, at Commodore Bay, is, on occasion, violently active.
In the Willaumez Peninsula there is a huge cluster of volcanoes, of
which Mt. Bulu, 3,819 feet, is active, while near here and in the Pangalu
District there are numerous geysers and solfataras. Mt. Talawe, 3,345
feet, is occasionally in very violent eruption. The group to which it
belongs produces augite-andesite.
Tectonics.
(See Figure 8, p. 104.)
The evidence of the Port Moresby Series implies a break between
the Upper Cretaceous and Middle Eocene (Lutetian) rocks. At Madang
the Mebu Series, with its nummulitic limestones, is separated by an
unconformity from the Lepidocyclina beds above, and in the Lower
Aitape Series of Mandated Territory rolled pebbles of serpentine and
nummulitic limestone occur in the basal conglomerates of that series.
These nummulitic pebbles clearly indicate the former deposition, uplift
and erosion of these nummulitic rocks of Lutetian (?) age.
During Aquitanian and Burdigalian times there was considerable
contemporaneous volcanic activity, as evidenced by the extensive spilites,.
andesites, basalts and felsites interbedded in the Lower Aitape Series.
Over the area of what now are the summit ranges (Carstenz-toppen,
Wilhelmina-top) of New Guinea, the Burdigalian sea extended perhaps
continuously from the Cyclops-Bougainville land mass on the north to the
pre-Miocene Australian peneplain, which then encroached on what Is now
the Great Southern Plain of Papua on the south. Possibly even the
summit of the Rees-Gauthier-Bewani-Torricelli Chain may at this time
have been submerged.
Evidence in the Netherlands East Indies shows that at the end of
Burdigalian time intense crustal diastrophism overfolded and over-
thrust Timor and Letti and the adjacent islands towards Australia
against the Sahul Bank acting as a foreland. Far to the north-east New


Caledonia was strongly overfolded at about this time towards Australia.
Probably a little later than Burdigalian time an immense belt of
nickeliferous ultrabasic rock, now serpentine, was intruded along the
fault-planes. The serpentine of the great rift-valley of New Guinea,
extending from Geelvink Bay to perhaps Huon Gulf, was probably
intruded at an earlier date than that of New Caledonia, as rolled pebbles
of serpentine, derived either from the Cvclops-Bougainville Range or
from the Torricelli Range, are met with in the basal conglomerates
(Upper Oligocene) of the Lower Aitape Series.
The large masses, however, of gabbro, etc., intruding the Astrolabe
Series, and introducing the copper at Laloki, may perhaps belong to
about the same horizon as the New Caledonia serpentines, as suggested
by Wyllie.
As on the north side of the Cordillera, no unconformity has been
observed either between the Lower Aitape and the Upper Aitape or the
latter and the Finsch Coast Series, and as, in the Cordillera, marine
beds of Burdigalian age were uplifted no less than 16,000 feet, but no
newer strata deposited upon them, it is probable that the main uplift of
the Cordillera took place in epi-Burdigalian time. On this view this great
tectonic movement would follow on after the extensive southerly trans-
gression of the Miocene sea over the trans-Torres extension of the Aus-
tralian pre-Miocene peneplain at Oriomo, near the mouth of the Fly River
and at Merauke on the south coast of New Guinea, west of the Dutch
border.
According to the views of Zwierzycki, Hubrecht, Behrmann,
Feuilletau de Bruyn and others, but contrary to the opinion of Nouhys
and Wegener, the folding force which raised the Cordillera of New
Guinea, one of the grand mountain chains of the world, from below sea-
level to 16,000 feet above, came from the north.
It is here assumed, tentatively, that the main elevation was accom-
plished in epi-Burdigalian time, with additional uplifts later. But
many geologists hold that the whole of the elevation took place in late
Pliocene time. It may be concluded on the epi-Burdigalian hypothesis
that an important geosyncline probably exists under the great southern
plain of Papua; this matter is discussed in detail below, on page 147.
It would appear that after stupendous pressures operating from the
direction of the Pacific from the north-north-east towards the south-south-
west, had built up by overfolding and overthrusting the present great
Cordillera, deposition of the Finsch Coast Series, Lower Wanimo Series
and their equivalents at Marienburg and Madang proceeded without
interruption, these sediments, in places, attaining a thickness of 10,000
feet. This was in Mio-Pliocene time. On the south side of the Cordillera
the tuffaceous shell sands of the Cape Possession Series were now
deposited, and some of the newest rocks, largely sandstone and lignite,


of the Purari and Vailailai Series. The Imbi Series of Oriomo rests
unconformably on Lower Miocene limestone.
The late Pliocene was marked by a great tectonic disturbance, prob-
ably the Kosciusko epeirogenic movement of eastern Australia expressed
as an orogenic movement in New Guinea. The Cordillera was probably
further elevated. Later, immense areas of old crystalline rocks in the
north, of which the Cyclops Range in Dutch Territory and the Bougain-
ville Range in Mandated Territory are remnants, foundered. This
foundering must have had some repercussion on the land further south,
possibly increasing its elevation. Next, in accordance with E. Suess’s
Law that there is always a tendency for sunklands to be overthrust, there
was a creep of the earth’s crust backwards to the deeply foundered areas
to the north, producing overfolds and overthrusts of the Wanimo-Aitape
area. Nason-Jones estimates that in the Torricelli-Bewani Chain the
great overthrust mass forming the bulk of those mountains moved north-
wards by no less an amount than Bto 10 miles. This “back-folding” is
perhaps analogous with that which Argand has claimed for the Dinaric
Alps in their relation to the Dent Blanche Nappe of the Swiss Alps.
Zwierzycki compares the twofold crustal movements in New Guinea,
ms., the northerly movements of the crust between the Rees-Gauthier
Chain and the Cyclops Chain on the one hand and southerly movement of
the Main Cordillera (Carstenz-toppen, etc.) on the other, with the twofold
movement of the sediments of the Tethys. For example, the Alps,
Carpathians, Balkans, Elburz, and the chains of Kopet Dagh, Karakoram
and Kwen Lun, belonging to Tethyan sediments, were folded in a
northerly direction, while the Atlas Mountains, the Apennines, Dinarides,
Taurides, Iranic Chains and the Himalayas, also belonging to Tethyan
sediments, were overfolded towards the south. In the above analogue
the great southern plain of the Fly River may be compared with the
plains of the Punjab.
As the result, probably, of the northerly movement of the Torricelli-
Bewani-Rees-Gauthier Chain, the great rift-valley of New Guinea was
formed as a sunkland between the Main Cordillera (Snow Mountains
of the Dutch geographers) and the above chain. This sunkland extends
now probably from Geelvink Bay, on the north-west, to Huon Gulf on
the south-east. At the former area. dead and dying mangroves show
that the subsidence is still in progress, while the great depth of the
Sepik River suggests that at the present day alluviation is unable to keep
pace with the subsidence. Another result from the tectonic movements
initiated in the Kosciusko epoch has been the development of two
important zones of normal faults in addition to those which bound the
rift valley on either side.
The zone on the south side of the Cordillera is the one on which, in
the opinion of Evan R. Stanley, volcanoes like Mts. Favenc (6,000 feet),
n


Yule (10,330 feet), Astrolabe Range, Gugusari, or Cloudy Mountains
became established and produced great thicknesses of andesitic and
basaltic lavas. All these volcanic centres have been extinct for some
time.
The other zone is situated north of the Main Cordillera, with, at its
south-east end, the active volcano of Mt. Victory (5,967 feet), the extinct
volcanoes of Mt. Lamington (6,534 feet), Mt. Trafalgar (5,083 feet), Mt.
Dayman (9,305 feet) and the moribund volcanoes of the D’Entrecasteaux
Group. In the north-east, in addition to the inland lava cappings of the
Hunstein Mountains, Spitzklotz, etc., are the active volcanic fissure zones,
on which are the islands of Bam, Manam, and the active and extinct
volcanoes of New Britain, the extinct volcanoes of New Ireland and of
the Namatanai Chain and the active volcanoes of Balbi and Bagana,
in the Solomon Islands.
The newest structures in the New Britain area appear to be the
meridional fissures which intersect the east-to-west fold lines nearly
at right angles.
That the Sissano or Otto Lagoon, near Aitape, was formed suddenly,
as the result of subsidence after an earthquake about 21 years ago, shows
that tectonic movements are still in progress, and that these are dif-
ferential in character is illustrated by the raised beaches just west of
the Dutch border, rising in terraces from a few metres to as much as
800 metres above sea-level.
The author would suggest that along the Cordillera of New Guinea
folding force is now in abeyance, and epeirogenic movement far less
active than it is along the northern areas. At the latter some “back-
folding” seems still active. Vertical crustal movements are there still in
progress, but vary from positive to negative, positive movement of the
land probably predominating.
Economic.
Reference is made later to areas on the mainland, the Edie
Creek, Bulolo, Warm River, etc., gold-bearing areas. Bulolo also
yields rich silver minerals. Among the islands Misima (St. Aignan’s),
Ferguson Island and part of the Louisiade Archipelago also produce
gold. The great belt of serpentine following the Rift Valley of New
Guinea yields osmiridium, gold and a little platinum. Reference is also
made later to the lignites and coals, and above all to the mineral oil.
Mention may here be made of the numerous masses of limestone
distinguished on the map by the symbol of a circle with a small St.
Andrew’s cross in the centre of it. Many of these are probably suitable
for the manufacture of Portland cement.


One of the great assets of British New Guinea is its hydro-electric
potentiality. This has been estimated by Sir Douglas Mawson and the
author, but only as a very rough approximation, as of the order of
20,000,000 continuous horsepower for Papua, and, possibly, if Mandated
Territory be included, the total might amount to 30,000,000 continuous
horsepower.


FIGURE 9.
Note. —The Artesian Basins are numbered as in the text.


SUMMARY OF ECONOMIC GEOLOGY.
I. Artesian and Sub-artesian Water.
(See Figure 9.)
Artesian water is an outstanding feature in the geology of the
Commonwealth. Both inland and, at wide intervals, on or near the
coasts there are many hundreds of active artesian bores in Australia.
The columns of emerald-green water, rising from these bores and breaking
aloft into a glorious crown of spray, sparkling in the sunshine like
diamonds, but much more precious, are awe-inspiring and most pleasant
sights in a thirsty land.
But for the artesian water it would be impracticable to utilise
much of the land with an annual rainfall below ten inches that at
present is effectively occupied for pastoral purposes.
The following are the chief basins in descending stratigraphical
order:
Name.
Geological
Age.
Nature of
Water.
Approximate
Area in
Square Miles.
Depth to
Artesian or
Sub-artesian
Water, in Feet.
13. The P i r 1 e-
Torrens Basin
Recent to
Pleistocene
Sub-artesian
to Artesian
4,000
Shallow to
over 600
12. The Coastal
Plain Basin .
Recent to
Jurassic
Mostly
Artesian
10,000
200 to over
2,500
11. The Adelaide
Plains Basin
Recent to
Oligocene
Mostly
Sub-artesian
600
100 (?)—500
10. The Gippsland
Basin
Pleistocene to
Oligocene
Artesian and
Sub-artesian
1,800
200 to over
1,800
Note. —The problems connected with the occurrence of artesian water in Australia
are so numerous and complex that they can only be touched upon here very superficially.
Those who desire further information are referred to the following works: Rep. Fifth
Interstate Conference on Artesian Water, Sydney, 1928, Govt. Printer, Sydney, 1928 ;
Rep. Fourth Interstate Conference on Artesian Water, Perth, 1924, Govt. Printer, Sydney,
1924 ; Rep. Third Interstate Conference on Artesian Water, Adelaide, 1921, Govt. Printer,
Adelaide, 1921; Rep. Second Interstate Conference on Artesian Water, Brisbane, 1914,
Govt. Printer, Brisbane, 1914 ; Rep. First Interstate Conference on Artesian Water,
Sydney, 1912, Govt. Printer, Sydney, 1912.
The paper by A. L. Du Toit, Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S.W., Vol. li, 1917, pp. 135-208, is an
able summary of the subject up to that date.
An important recent paper is that by Dr. R. Lockhart Jack, “The Composition of
the Waters of the Great Australian Artesian Basin in South Australia, and its Signifi-
cance,” Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Aust Vol. 47, 1923, pp. 316-321, with three maps.
A good bibliography of earlier papers is to be found in the important paper by E. P.
Pittman, “The Great Artesian Basin and the Source of its Water,” Qeol. Surv. N.S.W.,
Special Publication, 1914. A different view is given by Professor J. W. Gregory, “The
Plowing Wells of Central Australia,” Geogr. Journ. for July and August, 1911, pp. 35-181,
with maps.


Name.
Geological
Age.
Nature of
Water.
Approximate
Area in
Square Miles.
Depth to
Artesian or
Sub-artesian
Water, in Feet.
9. The Port
Phillip Basin
Pliocene to
Oligocene
Sub-artesian
300
Shallow to 600
S. The Murray
River Basin .
Pliocene to
Miocene
Mostly
Sub-artesian
90,000
100-900
7. The E u c 1 a
Pliocene to
Mostly
300 to over
Basin
Miocene
Sub-artesian
52,000
2,000
6. The Great Ar-
Cretaceous to
Mostly
Shallow to
tesian Basin
Jurassic
Artesian
600,000
over 5,000
5. The North-
west Basin ..
Tertiary to
Kamilaroi
Mostly
Artesian
40,000
400-4,000
4. The Collie
Basin
(Permo-
Carboniferous)
Kamilaroi
Artesian
500
—
3. The Desert
Basin
Kamilaroi
Artesian and
Sub-artesian
130,000
200-3,000
2. The Camoo-
weal Basin ..
Cambrian to
Proterozoic
Sub-artesian
—
—
1. The Gulf
Basin
Proterozoic (?)
—
—
—
1. The Gulf Basin, near Wyndham, W.A., is composed mostly of dark
shales and quartzites with a thickness of probably at least 5,000 feet.
These appear to be part of the Ord Series, of Proterozoic age, but near
the coast they seem to pass upwards into rocks of Kamilaroi (Permo-
Carboniferous) age.
2. The Camooweal Basin. —This is really the eastern extension of
an immense belt of limestone extending from the Western Australian
border beyond Wave Hill, north-eastwards to near the Katherine, in
North Australia, by way of Daly Waters, Newcastle Waters, Anthony’s
Lagoon and Alexandra Downs to the sources of the Gregory and
O’Shanassy Rivers and thence to Camooweal and Boulia. The term
“Camooweal Basin” may be used to denote the eastern end of this
important belt where the water is distinctly moving south-eastwards.
The Gregory and O’Shanassy Rivers have their sources in the most
powerful springs in Australia, coming from these limestones. The
springs at the head of the Gregory River are estimated to yield 83,000,000
gallons daily, and those at the head of the O’Shanassy 23,000,000 gallons
daily. Prom Camooweal to Boulia the extensive groundwaters from
these limestones go to reinforce the water in the intake beds of the
Great Artesian Basin near Boulia.


3. The Desert Basin. —Individual bores now yield about 7,000 gallons
to 1,000,000 gallons daily. The deepest bore, 3,012 feet, on the Derby-
Lennard road, is artesian, and yields over 100,000 gallons daily. Near the
coast, as at Broome and King Sound (near Point Torment), the upper
water-bearing strata are marine to freshwater Jurassic sandstones.
Further inland there is an immense area of marine Kamilaroi rocks carry-
ing artesian and sub-artesian water and, to the north and north-east, part
of an outer zone of Upper to Lower Carboniferous rocks and Devonian
rocks, the latter largely limestones. This basin is of the usual one-
sided type, with its underground flow probably coming from the north-
east, and having a submarine outlet between King Sound and the
Ninety Mile Beach.
There are great possibilities of water supply, particularly of sub-
artesian water, in this Desert Basin, with the additional chance of
striking coal in places.
4. The Collie Basin. —Thickness of strata, about 3,000 feet; total
yield from three bores, about 125,000 gallons daily. The strata mostly
belong to the freshwater coal-measures. The artesian water has
increased the difficulties of coal-mining, but these have now been over-
come.
5. The North-west Basin. —Perhaps the greatest economic discovery
as yet accredited to any Australian geologist was that made by the
former Government Geologist of Western Australia, A. Gibb Maitland,
of the occurrence of artesian water in the late Palaeozoic, Kamilaroi,
rocks of the Carnarvon area, in the above State. On his advice and
guarantee the Government of Western Australia, in 1903, drilled a bore
at Pelican Hill, Carnarvon, to a depth of 3,011 feet. This bore yielded
520,000 gallons of water daily.
The fine supply of water in this, as yet only partially exploited,
basin, is derived, near the coast, chiefly from Tertiary sandstones, and
further inland from sandstones of Jurassic or of Kamilaroi age.
6. The Great Artesian Basin. —This is the largest, hitherto discovered,
in the world. It is about 1,270 miles long from north to south, and 900
miles wide from east to west.
Towards the centre of the basin, at Lake Yamma Yamma, in Queens-
land, its strata attain a thickness of over 6,000 feet.
The artesian water is contained in the porous sandstones of the
upper part of the Jurassic formation, and, in places, as at Eoma, Orallo,
Longreach, Ruthven, Springleigh, etc., in Queensland, a certain amount
of mineral oil comes to the surface with the artesian water. The daily
yield of the bores ranges mostly from about 100,000 gallons to over
1,000,000, in exceptional cases to over 2,000,000 gallons. The temperature
gradient of this artesian basin is so high (1° Fahr. for every 37 feet in
depth, below the zone of mean surface temperature) that the water from


the deepest parts of the basin is in some bores (four in Queensland)
actually at boiling point.
With a few minor exceptions, it may be stated that, in the whole of
the Great Artesian Basin south of a line from Hughenden to Cloncurry,
the water is moving slowly downwards so as to converge on Lake Eyre,
the surface-level of which is about 40 feet below sea-level. The outlet for
the portion of the basin lying north of the line from Hughenden to
Cloncurry is obviously the Gulf of Carpentaria. The outlet for the
remaining 90% of the basin is now thought to be in the many hundreds
of mound springs in the Lake Eyre region. That the water escaping
through these orifices, which may be considered natural artesian wells,
does not form a great inland lake is due to the excessive evaporation in
this region, amounting to over 6 feet annually.
Replenishment takes place along three zones, as follows: (1) A belt
of porous Lower Cretaceous or Jurassic sandstone, nearly 1,300 miles
long, from Dubbo (N.S.W.) through Warwick and Toowoomba (Q.) to
east of Hughenden, and west of the Croydon Goldfield. (2) A belt of
massive limestone, probably several thousands of feet in thickness and
mostly of late pre-Cambrian age, extending from at least as far north as
Camooweal southwards to Boulia, a distance of 240 miles. (3) A belt of
Lower Cretaceous or Jurassic sandstones on the western side of the
artesian basin, extending from Boulia, by way of the Goyder and Finke
rivers to west of Coober Pedy (Stuart Range) opal-field, in South
Australia, a distance of about 530 miles. Dr. R. L. Jack has shown that
the waters at the southern end of this important feeder to the artesian
basin contain sulphates, whereas those from the deeper part of the basin
in the direction of Lake Eyre, are characterised by carbonates.
While the amount of rain-water that falls on these water-absorbing
rocks must be very considerable, the fact remains that in New South
Wales, at all events, as well as Queensland, the hydraulic grade is being
definitely lowered, and numbers of bores which were formerly artesian
have become sub-artesian. This “overdraft” seems due simply to the
local bores taking more water out of the ground than can be restored, in
the time, by means of freshly percolated rainfall.
On the other hand, it is satisfactory to note that in northern Queens-
land, wherever there is a good rainfall on the intake beds and the distance
from them to the bores is not great, the flow of water is well maintained.
That percolated rainfall is the chief source of the supply of the artesian
water is proved (1) by the evenness of the hydraulic grades; (2) by the
relative freshness of the artesian water coming from next the bedrock, as
compared with the mineralised state of stagnant water in some of the sus-
pended aquifers of the Great Basin; (3) by the large volumes of nitrogen, 1
1 This is obviously atmospheric nitrogen, the oxygen having been removed by the
agency of anaerobic bacteria.


together with some argon, discharged from many of the bores. The cause
of the rise of the water in the bores in the Great Artesian Basin is not,
in all cases, fully understood, hut the matter may be summarised in the
statement that the pressure seems essentially hydraulic, modified by gas
pressure, and possibly by vertical rock pressure, the latter bringing about
closer packing of deep-seated strata, as the result of the withdrawal of
water through the bores. Most of this artesian water is suitable for
domestic purposes and for stock. The supply is far too limited for
irrigation, but patches of lucerne and citrus fruit-trees are often grown
close to the bore-head, and thrive excellently on the water.
7. Eucla Basin. —The Eucla plains, from 200 to over 1,000 feet above
sea-level, are mostly formed of limestones of Miocene age, attaining a
maximum thickness of about 1,000 feet. In places they are capped by
a thin covering of Pliocene sandy limestones. The limestone forms a
kind of karst country, with large swallow holes at intervals, which
terminate downwards in tortuous passages, so numerous as to constitute
perfect catacombs. Some of the water is too sfilt even for stock, contain-
ing over 3 ounces of salt to the gallon, but most of it is suitable for
stock. The water from the bores on the Western Australian side of the
basin is mostly fresher than that yielded by the bores of the South
Australian side, due probably to the presence of Cretaceous rocks under
the Tertiary in Western Australia. The only bore in this basin that
has hitherto proved to be artesian is that of Madura, to the west of
Eucla, 2,041 feet deep, but the flow there is small, about 5,700 gallons
daily.
8. The Murray River Basin. —A flowing supply of 210,000 gallons
daily has been struck at Morgan at Nor’-West Bend, on the Murray
Biver, and a good supply at the Ocean Oil Wells bore at Kingston, S.A.
Artesian water also occurs in this basin in the county of Tara at the
south-west corner of New South Wales. Very valuable supplies of sub-
artesian water are being drawn from this large Tertiary basin, which
includes the Mallee country in the north-west part of Victoria. The
interesting fact has been proved not only that the volcanic lakes of
Mount Gambier represent exposed portions of the hydraulic water surface,
but that their level is directly dependent on the rainfall on the intake
beds, in Lowan County, Victoria, about 80 miles distant.
9. The Port Phillip Basin. —The water is associated with sand and
brown coal, mostly covered with Tertiary basalt. The deeper water is
mostly brackish, but much of the shallower water is good.
10. The Gippsland Basin. —The best well (Traralgon) yields 500,000
gallons of artesian water daily. At Lakes Entrance the artesian water is
associated with mineral oil in glauconite sands, of Oligocene age. The
underlying Jurassic rocks also carry artesian water in places.
11. The Adelaide Plains Basin. —The water is mostly of good quality.


12. The Coastal Plain Basin, Western Australia. —The estimated
average percolation of rain and river water on the intake beds in the
Perth region is 22,000,000 gallons daily. The daily flow is about 16,000,000
gallons, and the daily yield by pumping 2,000,000 gallons. Thus an
equilibrium between inflow and outflow is nearly established. The records
of the pressures of the bores throughout the Perth area show clearly that
bores in the metropolitan area return to their full original pressure
four to six months after the heavy pumping during the summer months
has slowed down.
The probable Jurassic aquifer under Perth, likely to contain large
volumes of good water, has not yet been tested or exploited.
13. The Pirie-Torrens Basin. —Some of the water is saline, but it
is mostly good water for stock.
11. Coal.
(See Figure 9, p. 116, and Table J, opposite.)
In regard to this brief summary of the chief coal-fields of the
Commonwealth, readers desiring more details are reminded that much
information is supplied in the following: “The Mineral Industry of New
South Wales,” 1928; Beport of the Eoyal Commission on Coal Industry,
New South Wales, 1930; Eeport of the Eoyal Commission on Mining
Industry, Queensland, Government Printer, Brisbane, 1930; Eoyal Com-
mission on Collie Coal, Perth, W.A., 1905 and 1916.
In the accompanying table the chief coal-fields of the Commonwealth
are arranged in descending stratigraphical order (see Table J).
Permian.
New South Wales. — (1) The Central Coal-field is typically developed
in the Hunter area, as follows:
Upper
Permian,
Upper Coal-
measures.
Feet. Metres.
1,600 487 Newcastle Coal-measures rich in fossil insects and
containing a total of 120 feet of coal, in seams
varying from 3 feet to 27 feet in thickness.
J 0-2,000 0- 609 Dempsey beds, barren freshwater beds mostly
shales.
500-1,800 152- 548 Tomago Coal-measures with total of 30 feet of
coal, in seams 3 feet to 10 feet thick. Coal more
friable than that of Newcastle or Greta.
Middle to
Lower
Permian.
("3,000-6,400 914-1,950 Upper Marine Series, mudstones, sandstones and
j conglomerates, with two horizons marked by glacial
j„ erratics in lower third to lower half of series.
| 100-2,000 30- 609 Greta Coal-measures, with a -total of 15-43 feet
l of coal in seams from 3 feet to 32 feet in thickness.
In the southern, or Illawarra, portion of the Central Coal-field, the
Upper Coal-measures are represented by only the upper portion of the
Newcastle Coal-measures. The total thickness of the coal seams is about
40 feet (12 metres) in seams 3 feet (914-4 mm.) to 17 feet (5-2 m.). The


TABLE J.
Locality.
Age.
Character of Coal.
Estimated Reserves
in tons.
Victoria
Yalloum, Lai Lai, La-
trobe, Altona Bay.
Miocene to Oligocene.
Brown.
Moisture from about 50%
to over 60%.
37,000,000,000.
South Australia
Noarlunga, Clinton, In-
kerman, Balaclava,
Bower, Moorlands,
Anna.
Miocene to Oligocene.
Brown.
Moisture 49 — 56%
163,000,000.
Total tonnage already
proved by boring.
Queensland
Styx Coal-field.
Cenomanian ?
Black steam coal.
Moisture 1*1%.
Proved 2,700,000.*
Probable 8,000,000.*
Queensland
Burrum Coal-field.
Albian ?
Black bituminous.
Moisture 2-0%.
Proved 17,000,000.*
Probable 103,600,000.*
Victoria
Wonthaggi, Cape Pater-
son, and rest of
Gippsland area.
Jurassic.
Black.
Moisture 5-76%.
Black.
40,000,000.
QUEENSLAND
Rosewood -W a 11 o o n
(Rosewood) Coal-meas-
ures.
Tiaro Coal-measures.
Jurassic.
Black. Moisture 4-8%.
4-4%.
/ Proved 2,000,000. *
LProbable 39,800,000.*
Probable 20,000,000.*
New South Wales
Clarence Basin (Lower
Clarence Series).
Jurassic
Black.
TASMANIA
Newer coal-measures:
Mt. Nicholas, Fingal,
Dalmayne, Sandfly,
Douglas River, Mt.
Paul, Denison River,
Colebrook, Avoca, Cata-
maran, Lawrenny, Low-
ford, Buckland.
Triassic.
Black.
Moisture 4*36%.
117,660,000.
South Australia
Leigh’s Creek.
Triassic.
Brown.
Moisture 27-2%.
New South Wales
Clarence Basin (Grafton
Bore).
Triassic.
Black.
Queensland
Ipswich and Brooweena
Coal-fields.
Triassic.
Black.
Moisture 1-45%.
Proved 14,300,000.*
Probable 90,000,000.*
Tasmania
Preolenna, Mersey, Cyg-
net, Barn Bluff, Bruny
Island, etc.
Permian.
Black.
Moisture 2*65%.
14,620,000.
New South Wales
Main Coal Province
Coorabin
Ashford.
Permian.
Black. Moisture 2*06%. ( Proved 5,257,000,000
l Probable 8,292,000,000
» ’* 50,000,000
” »» vui/o. 10,000,000
Queensland
Dawson, Bowen and
Blair Athol Basins.
Permian.
Black.
Moisture 1*1%.
„ Blair Athol
4*5%.
Proved 237,000,000.*
Probable 782,000,000.*
Queensland
Mt. Mulligan.
Permian.
Black.
Moisture 2*5%.
Proved 5,000,000.
Probable 15,000,000.
Western Australia
Collie Coal-field.
Permian.
Black hydrous.
Moisture Range
19-25%.
3,500,000,000
at depth not exceeding
2,000 feet.
•These figures, quoted from published statistics, are certainly very conservative. In view of the vast
extent of the unproved areas of the Queensland coal-measures, and their richness in coal, where proved, it is
probable that, if seams less than 2 feet thick, and coal seams more than 4,000 feet in depth be left out of con-
sideration, the coal reserves of Queensland are likely to be of an order of not less than 100,000,000,000 tons.


Lower Coal-measures (Greta) are intermittently represented by patches
of thin coal seams underlying rocks of the Upper Marine Series. In the
western part of the Central Coal-field only the upper part of the
Newcastle Coal-measures appears. The total thickness of coal is about
30 feet, in seams from 3 feet to 23 feet in thickness.
The top seam of the Newcastle Coal-measures is worked under
Sydney Harbour from shafts at Balmain, at a depth of 2,900 feet (881
metres).
(2) The Gloucester Coal-field is a small outlying trough-fault coal-
field to the east of the main coal-field, about 30 miles long and one to
two miles wide. The lowest seam is 30 feet thick, but high in ash. (
(3) The Ashford Coal-field near the Queensland border is similar
to the above and has one coal seam, 27 feet thick, of good steam coal,
perhaps of Greta age.
(4) The Coorabin Coal-field, in the southern part of New South
Wales, has one coal seam, whose thickness varies from 8§ feet to 36 feet.
Though hydrous, with over 13% of moisture, it may perhaps be
correlated with the Greta coal.
It may be added that in calculating the reserves of coal in the
larger coal-fields much depends on whether the productive coal occurs
in more or less continuous flat sheets, or whether, as first suggested by
J. M. Morris, it is quoit-shaped, the hollow of the quoit representing the
deeper water area of the coal lake where, on this hypothesis, not coal
but merely a carbonaceous mud would be deposited. Morris assumes
that this quoit-shaped ring of productive coal has an average width of
about 25 miles. The outermost five miles is coal formed in situ, in swamps,
the inner 20-miles-wide part of the ring representing coal formed
under water in the shallower portion of the great coal lake. Test bores
near the central parts of the main coal-field of New South Wales appear
to favour the Morris hypothesis.
Queensland. —The following are the chief coal-basins at present
known: (1) The Bowen-Dawson-Blair Athol Basin. (2) The Alpha-
Galilee Basin. (3) The Mt. Mulligan Basin. (4) The Little River Basin.
In the type area, that of the Bowen Basin, the following is a
complete vertical section:
Upper
Permian.
Feet. Metres.
{9,600 2,926 Upper Bowen Coal-measures, largely tuffaceous with Blair
Athol Seam 60-93 feet thick, and a total thickness of
about 100 feet of coal.
Middle to
XjOWEE
Permian.
t
{2,400 732 Middle Bowen Marine Beds with glacial erratics.
700 213 Collinsville Coal-measures with total of 45-60 feet of coal.
2,000 610 Rhyolites and Basalts and tuff.
400 122 Mt. Devlin Coal-measures. Total coal, 10 (?) feet.


The Collinsville and Mt. Devlin Coal-measures are undoubtedly the
equivalent in Queensland of the Greta Coal-measures of New South
Wales. The Collinsville measures have six principal seams, of which two,
the Bowen and Garrick, are being exploited. On the western side of the
Bowen Basin a 30-feet coal seam has recently been found. At Blair
Athol, north of Clermont, the mammoth seam of black coal of Australia
is being exploited. Its maximum thickness is 93 feet, average thickness
about 60 feet. On the Dawson Kiver, south of Duaringa, is a seam of
anthracite coal 11 feet in thickness.
In the Alpha-Galilee Basin, an area of about 8,000 square miles in
little explored Upper Bowen Coal-measures, which extend from south of
Jericho to east of Lake Buchanan, there must be vast reserves of coal.
The association of Sphenophyllum speciosum with Glossopteris and
Vertebrwria in the Mount Mulligan Coal-field suggests that it is
probably of Collinsville (Greta) age. The coal-measures are from 50 to
150 feet thick, with three seams of coal, having a total thickness of over
20 feet, but only about 7 feet of the top seam and 3 feet of the bottom
seam are workable, and even they are so high in ash, mostly from 20 to
over 30 per cent., that they are only of use for local consumption.
The Little Kiver Coal-field, like that of Mount Mulligan, lies in a
trough fault. About six seams of coal have been traced, but so far they
have proved so high in ash as to be unsuited for any but local con-
sumption.
Tasmania. —Nearly all the Palaeozoic coal hitherto discovered in this
State appears to belong to the Greta horizon. The chief areas are
Preolenna (near Wynyard), Mersey, Cygnet, Barn Bluff and Bruny
Island. The seams are of hard bituminous coal from 1 foot 3 inches
up to a maximum of about 4 feet in thickness. The Greta horizon is
represented at Mount Pelion by the oil-shale pelionite, and at the Mersey
area partly by the 1 foot 3 inches coal seam, partly by the oil-shale
tasmanite, which is up to 6 feet in thickness.
Western Australia. —The Collie strata are about 2,000 feet thick,
and the total thickness of coal is about 137 feet. There are three series of
coal-measures in descending order: (3) the Cardiff Series, (2) the
Collieburn Series, (1) the Collie Series.
The coal of the Collie Series may perhaps be correlated with that of
Greta in New South Wales. The percentage of moisture in the coal
varies from 19 to about 25 per cent., and the ash from about 4 to about
10 per cent.
The Wilga field, a small extension of the Collie Coal-field, has as yet
been little prospected. The coal is similar to that of the Collie. 1
The thickness of the Irwin Kiver Coal-measures is 133 feet, and the
total thickness of coal seams, five in number, is about 20 feet. The best
1 The coal-field to the west of Nanup in the sunkland between Cape Leeuwin and
Bunbury may yet prove of importance.


seam is 5 feet in thickness. The following is an average of the whole
seam:
Per cent.
Moisture 23
Volatile Hydrocarbons 25-9
Fixed Carbon 36-4
Ash 14-7
100-0
Sulphur 0-99 per cent.
Triassic.
Queensland. —The strata of the Ipswich Coal-field are over 2,600 feet
in thickness, and contain at least 16 coal seams varying in thickness from
about 3 feet to 20 feet, containing in the aggregate a thickness of about
106 feet of coal. An average analysis of the coal is as follows:
Per cent.
Moisture 1-45
Volatile Hydrocarbons .'. 28-15
Fixed Carbon 62-11
Ash 8-29
100-00
Sulphur 1-18 per cent.
On the assumption that the total thickness of workable coal in the
Ipswich area is about 30 feet, and that the area underlain by these seams
at a depth not greater than 4,000 feet is 200 square miles —a surely
conservative estimate —the gross quantity of coal under this area would
amount to about 6,200,000,000 tons. This estimate does not take account
of the Brooweena Coal-field to the north of Brisbane, nor of the great
belt of Ipswich Coal-measures which stretches from north of Chinchilla
to near Jericho, a distance of over 300 miles.
New South Wales. —ln the deep bore at Grafton a 7-foot coal seam
was proved to exist, as described on page 76, probably belonging to the
Ipswich Series, but its quality has not been determined.
Tasmania. —ln the Fingal district —the type area—there are eight
seams of coal, the thickest of which is 84 feet to over 11 feet. The
following is a typical analysis of the coal:
Per cent.
Moisture 4-88
Volatile Hydrocarbons .. 26-82
Fixed Carbon 47-68
Ash 20-62
100-00
Sulphur 0-48 per cent.
South Australia. —The Leigh’s Creek Coal-field has an area of about
42 square miles. The thickness of the seam varies from a few feet to 45


feet. The following is an analysis of the coal from The better part of
the main seam, representing a thickness of about 6 feet:
Per cent.
Moisture 17-70
Volatile Hydrocarbons 27-28
Fixed Carbon 41-98
Ash 13-04
100-00
If nearly half of this area, say 20 square miles, has under it a seam
of brown coal of an average thickness of 6 feet, the gross coal reserves
there would he about 123,924,000 tons.
J urassic.
The Walloon Series is about 4,800-5,000 feet thick. The coal seams
of this series are far more lenticular than those of the Trias. In descend-
ing order the following coal horizons may be tentatively recognised,
below the base of the Orallo oil-shales:
3. The Cornwall coal seams.
2. The Alcurah coal seams with possibly those of Killarney and
Tannymorel.
1. The Rosewood-Walloon Coal-measures.
The strata of the Kosewood-Walloon Coal-measures are about 1,450
feet thick with eight seams of coal, the total thickness of coal being about
35 feet, and its general composition as follows:
Per cent.
Moisture 4-82
Volatile Hydrocarbons 37-01
Fixed Carbon 46-12
Ash 12-05
100-00
New South Wales. —At Moonenbar there are at least three seams of
coal, with numerous clay bands. These seams, in descending order, are
respectively 5 feet 7 inches, 8 feet 10 inches, and Bto 10 feet thick. They
are too high in ash to be workable except for local purposes. This coal is
of Walloon age, belonging to the upper part of the Lower Clarence Series.
While no coal seams of economic value have as yet been proved in the
Upper Clarence Series, it may be reasonably expected that the Killarney
and other seams continue across the border into New South Wales.
Victoria. —The Wonthaggi, Jumbunna and other Gippsland areas
are estimated by the Government Geologist, W. Baragwanath, to
contain a reserve of about 40,000,000 tons, surely an extremely
conservative estimate. The seams seldom exceed 5 feet in
thickness, but, rarely, are up to 9 feet thick. The coal is of


good quality. The following is a typical analysis of the coal from the
State mine at Wonthaggi:
Per cent.
Moisture 5-28
Volatile Hydrocarbons 28-78
Fixed Carbon 57-10
Ash 8-84
100-00
Western Australia. —Coal of Jurassic age has been struck in bores
near the bed of the Greenough River between Geraldton and Mullewa.
One seam is 6 feet thick, but there is no information about the quality
of the coal.
Cretaceous.
Queensland. —These measures, in descending order, are:
3. Winton lignites.
2. Styx black coals.
1. Burrum black coals.
1. The Burrum Series has a total thickness of over 3,000 feet. The
coal-measures proper form the middle part of this series, and are about
900 feet thick. They contain at least five seams of workable coal, the
thickness of which varies from 3| feet to over 5 feet. The total thickness
of workable coal in the series is about 16 feet.
2. The Styx Series has a thickness of perhaps over 4,000 feet and so
far has been very little prospected. At the State coal mine a total
thickness of 23 feet of coal has been proved in four seams, of thickness
4 feet, 4 feet, 7 feet, and 8 feet (descending order) of workable coal.
' 3. Freshwater strata of the Winton Series conformably succeed
the Aptian to Albian marine beds of the Great Artesian Basin and cover
an enormous area. They have a maximum thickness of about 3,000 feet,
and contain a number of seams of lignite or brown coal.
Owing to most of the bores in this basin having been made by percus-
sion the exact thickness and quality of the coal have not yet been proved,
but it is highly probable that some of the seams will prove workable.
Tertiary.
The most important deposits of brown coal as yet proved in the
Commonwealth occur in Victoria, and next in importance are those of
South Australia. The brown coals of the rest of Australia and of
Tasmania appear to be very local, but those of New Guinea may yet
prove to be extensive.
Victoria. —The reserves are estimated by the Government Geologist,
W. Baragwanatli, to be of the order of 37,000,000,000 tons. Of this amount
it is estimated that no less than 27,000,000,000 tons are contained in the
Latrobe Valley deposits which include Morwell, Yallourn, Traralgon, etc.
The coal underlying Port Phillip Bay may amount to 7,500,000,000 tons.


In the Latrobe Valley field the thickness of coal varies from a few
feet up to a maximum of 780 feet. As there is little overburden much of
this coal can be quarried. This unique deposit appears to have formed
from rafts of timber waterlogged in a lake, or on the rapidly subsiding
floor of a large swamp. The approximate chemical composition and
range of variation in the Morwell brown coal are as follows:
Per cent.
Volatile Hydrocarbons 24-30
Fixed Carbon 21-25
Ash 0-4-2
Moisture 46-53
Sulphur 0-7 per cent.
Nitrogen .. .. 0-3 per cent.
The bulk of the brown coal in the Latrobe Valley field appears to
be newer than the older basalts, and to be of Miocene age, but at the
Altona area near Melbourne its age is Oligocene. It has been estimated
that the State of Victoria contains as much as 30,000,000,000 tons of
brown coal, but in view of the fact that only about one-quarter of the
area believed to contain coal has actually been proved by boring, and that
the seams vary considerably in thickness within short distances and in
places thin out altogether, this estimate must be considered as only
very approximate. 1
South Australia. —Brown coal underlies the Miocene marine strata
both to the S.E. and to the S.W. of the Flinders Ranges. The most exten-
sive deposits are those known as the Moorlands lignites, mostly lying to
the east of Tailem Bend, on the Murray. The thickness of the lignite
varies from a few feet to over 40 feet in the Moorlands area, and is as
much as 67 feet at Clinton, near the head of St. Vincent Gulf. The depth
to the lignite varies from about 40 feet to about 400 feet.
The lignite resembles that of the Victorian brown coal deposits. The
following are typical analyses:
Moisture at
Volatile
Fixed
Lignite Field.
105° C.
Matter.
Carbon.
Ash.
■Clinton
53-16
24-88
15-48
6-48
Moorlands
49-75
26-79
16-34
7-14
The existence of about 130,000,000 tons has been proved by boring.
New South Wales. —The lignite deposits are chiefly interstratified
with fluviatile, or lacustrine, strata in the deep leads, or with coastal
alluvial deposits. These patches at the deep leads of Kiandra, Gulgong,
Emmaville, etc., and the alluvials of the south coast, are too small to be
of commercial value at present.
x The Government geologist, W. Baragwanath, has estimated the reserves of brown
coal in Victoria as about 10,378,000,000 tons.


Queensland. —At Waterpark Creek there is an important deposit of
lignite in six seams, aggregating about 86 feet in thickness, in a Tertiary
series at least 300 feet thick. This basin is 35 miles north-by-west from
Yeppoon, in the Kockhampton area. The probable reserves, based on a
total thickness of seams of 574 feet, are officially given as 64,000,000
tons, while the possible reserves are stated to be “very large.”
Papua. —To the north of Mt. Favenc on the Upper Purari, or Piau,
River, J. E. Carne has recorded the occurrence of a 6-foot seam of brown
coal at Lat. 6° 50' S., Long. 144° 30' E.
The following is the mean of two analyses of this brown coal from
Coal Creek, near the above locality:
Per cent.
Moisture 19-84
Volatile Matter 42-80
Fixed Carbon 33-97
Ash 3-39
100-00
Sulphur 0-822 per cent.
III. Oil-Shales.
(See Figure 9, p. 116.)
The oil-shales of the Commonwealth, in ascending order of their
antiquity, are as follows:
Kamilaroi.
(A) Kerosene Shale. —The oil-shale popularly known as Kerosene
Shale is associated with coal-seams and frequently, but not always, passes
over into coal; in the oldest productive coal-measures of New South
Wales, the Greta, it forms lens-shaped areas in the coal. In the same
measures a seam of cannel coal, live feet thick, has a chemical composition
intermediate between that of normal Greta coal and that of Kerosene
Shale. Economic deposits of this oil-shale occur mostly in the Newcastle
division of the Upper Coal-measures. They are lenticular in shape, the
patches of shale seldom exceeding three-quarters of a mile in length.
Their thickness varies from a few inches up to a maximum of 6 feet, but
is seldom over 3 feet. The following average analyses are quoted by
R. H. Cambage:
Volatile Fixed
Moisture Matter Carbon Ash
per cent. per cent. per cent. per cent.
Joadja (15 samples) 0-52 68-10 15-03 16-35
Katoomba (25 samples) .. . . 0-66 65-86 18-60 14-88
Capertee-Wolgan (18 samples) 0-45 61-36 14-13 24-04
Murrurundi (5 samples) .. 1-73 57-65 9-47 31-34


The best shale yields as much as 170 gallons of crude oil per ton,
but the yield of the good commercial shale usually varies from about
75 to 120 gallons per ton.
The refined products from the Wolgan-Capertee oil shale are as
follow:
Per cent.
Fuel oil 20
Gas oil 25
Kerosene oil 20
Benzine and spirits 5
Wax 5
Loss in treatment 25
Total .. 100
Ammonium sulphate per ton .. 22 lbs.
The possible reserves of oil-shale in New South Wales, estimated by
R. H. Cambage, are 40,000,000 tons, containing 3,500,000 tons of crude
oil.
Traces of kerosene shale have been found in Queensland, at
Carnarvon Creek and Consuelo Creek. At the former locality the shale
yields 54 gallons of oil per ton. Its age is Upper Bowen (Upper
Permian).
(B) Tasmanite. —This remarkable oil-shale occurs in the Mersey
River, Oonah and Preolenna areas of Tasmania. Its thickness varies
from 2to 6 feet, averaging about 4 feet. Marine shells of Permian age
are associated with it. It is probably on a geological horizon corres-
ponding to that of the Greta Coal-measures in New South Wales. Its
ash percentage is high, about 50%, and it contains about 2-5% of sulphur.
Better classes of tasmanite yield up to 65 gallons of oil to the ton.
The crude oil shows the following composition:
Per cent.
Lubricating oils 64
Lighting oil 25
Benzine 11
Total .. 100
Reserves —
Mersey Area: 10,141,000 tons actual
26,904,000 „ probable
Oonah Area: 6,000,000 „ probable
Total: 43,045,000 „ probable and actual taken together
(C) Pelionite. —This oil-yielding material occurs at Mt. Pelion in
Tasmania. It is a jet-black brittle material, found as a thin seam only a
few inches in thickness. The reserves are small.


Jurassic.
Jurassic oil-shales occur in the Middle Walloon Series and in the
more or less saliferous and calcareous beds of the Lower Walloon Series,
e.g., near Orallo in south-eastern Queensland, where oil-shale, 2 feet
thick, yields 45 gallons of oil per ton, but these oil-shales seldom yield
more than 30 gallons of oil per ton.
Tertiary.
These deposits are situated mostly in Queensland, at Baffle Creek
and the Narrows, in the Port Curtis district, and at Duaringa in the
Dawson Valley.
(а) Baffle Creek Basin is about 30 square miles in area. The strata
are at least 450 feet thick. The total thickness of oil-shales is not known,
but is probably not less than 10 feet, not all in one bed, the thickest oil-
shale bed being about 6 feet. The yield is about 30 gallons of oil per ton,
with 35-7 lbs. of ammonium sulphate per ton. .
The following is the composition of the crude oil, and the loss in
refining :
Volume
per cent.
Spirit and burning oil 24
Lubricating and intermediate oil (sp. gr. -800) 30
Paraffin scale 20
Loss in refining 26
Total .. 100
The yield of paraffin wax is large, equal to about 76 lbs. per ton
of shale.
A proximate analysis of the above-mentioned 6 feet of oil-shale is
as follows:
Per cent.
Moisture 0-52
Volatile hydrocarbons 36-68
Fixed carbon 5-05
Sulphur 3-25
Ash 54-50
Total . . 100-00
The occurrence of TJnio and plant remains in the Baffle Creek Series
shows that the whole deposit is lacustrine. The reserves of exploitable
oil in this field must be considerable, but cannot be calculated until the
average thickness of the good shale is ascertained by boring.
(б) At the Narrows, near Gladstone, a basin of oil-shale has an area,
including that of the Strait, of about 80 square miles, but the exploit-


able part of the basin may not be more than about 20 square miles. The
yield of the best shale appears to be about 28 gallons of crude oil per
ton, and 47 lbs. of ammonium sulphate per ton. An analysis of the oil-
shale is as follows:
Per cent.
Moisture .. .. 5-7
Volatile hydroearbons 27-6
Fixed carbon 6-7
Ash 60-0
Total .. 100-0
Valves of ostracods are exceedingly abundant in these shales.
(c) At Duaringa, in the Dawson Valley, west of Rockhampton, a
bore proved that the Tertiary hard biscuit-like shales have a thickness of
at least 1,000 feet. Low grade oil-shales occur there on several horizons.
Remains of fossil fish are numerous, their skeletons converted into amber-
coloured common opal.
In Western Australia an inferior hydrous oil-shale occurs at
Coolgardie.
IV. Mineral Oil.
(See Figure 9, p. 116.)
Introduction. —Mineral oil has been met with in various parts of
the world in rocks whose age ranges from Cambrian down to late
Cainozoic. Hitherto no oil has been found throughout the Common-
wealth in Ordovician, Silurian, Devonian, Permian, Triassic or Eocene
rocks.
Ordovician rocks have been examined chiefly in eastern Australia as
far inland as Cobar in New South Wales, but they are too highly folded
and too heavily faulted to offer reasonable chances of the occurrence in
them of mineral oil. In Central Australia, however, between the eastern
end of the Macdonnell Ranges and the Togo (or Cairns) Range, near
where the Tropic of Capricorn crosses the Queensland-Central Australian
border, and for 100 miles or more south of the southern foothills of the
Macdonnell Ranges, the Ordovician strata are progressively less folded
as the distance from the Macdonnell Range increases until at the Togo
Range they dip at only gentle angles.
The same remark applies to the Silurian and Devonian rocks of the
Commonwealth. With the exception of the Upper Devonian rocks of the
Kimberley region, W.A., they appear to be too much tectonically dis-
turbed to retain mineral oil, if such were at any time present in them.
Mineral oil undoubtedly is present in the flaggy limestones and sand-
stones of the Lower Carboniferous rocks of the Kimberley region of
Western Australia. Traces of it occur also in the Upper Carboniferous
rocks of that area but in that case the oil may have migrated upwards
from the Lower Carboniferous strata.


Permian strata have been tested by numerous bores in New South
Wales, Queensland and Western Australia, but so far no free mineral
oil has been found in them.
No oil so far has been recorded from any of the Triassic rocks of
the Commonwealth, with the possible exception of the Leigh’s Creek
Coal-field, of South Australia, where minute traces are said to have
been observed.
No trace of oil has been observed as yet in the Cenomanian Cretaceous,
rocks of Melville or Bathurst Islands, nor in the Santonian or/ older
Cretaceous strata of Western Australia. At the same time it should be
added that these horizons have never been systematically explored for oil.
No marine Eocene rocks are known within the Commonwealth out-
side of New Guinea. So far no oil lias been found in the Eocene beds of
that island.
Proterozoic or Cambrian. —Dr. Arthur Wade records the occurrence
of bitumen and impsonite in the basalt of the Ord River area, just where
it underlies the Lower Cambrian limestones. Dr. Wade has stated that
bitumen fills fissures and vesicles in the basalt, and softens and runs
out in the heat of the sun. A little gas with smell of petroleum and
sulphur was noted in the Lower Cambrian limestones above the basalt,
the limestones being considered to be the probable source of these oil
residues.
At the Waggon Lagoon, 30 miles east of the Elsey Station, in North
Australia, bitumen occurs in a similar epidotic basalt.
Carboniferous (?). —The flat cakes of hard bitumen recorded by
Wade from Elcho Island, to the north-west of the Gulf of Carpentaria,
are considered by him to be remnants of bitumen deposits. He considers
this formation probably Proterozoic, but it is quite probable that it is
of Carboniferous age.
Lower Carboniferous. —Traces of mineral oil have been proved in
bores at Price’s Creek, a tributary of the Fitzroy River, near Latitude
18° 38' S. and Longitude 125° 54' E. There is a small seepage of oil
near the Price’s Creek bores, and traces of oil were met with in the bores,
which were sunk through limestone, regularly bedded to massive, with
subordinate sandstones.
Upper Carboniferous. —At Mt. Wynne, near the north bank of the
Fitzroy River, bores for oil partly in Upper Carboniferous strata, partly
in passage beds from Upper to Lower Carboniferous horizons, have
proved the presence of black and brown asphaltum in fissures traversing
the rocks. The following is an analysis:
Soft AsriiAi/ruM, Mr. Wynne.
Proximate Analysis (after deduction of ash)
Bitumen Petrolene .. .. . 86-45 per cent.
Asphaltene 12-93 „ „
Non-bituminous organic matter .. .. 0-62 „ „
100-00 „


Ultimate Analysis —
Carbon 80 05 per cent.
Hydrogen 10 04 „
Sulphur, Oxygen and Nitrogen .. .. 9-91 „
100-00 „
Ash .. 27-85-39-09 per cent.
This asphaltum was plastic at 20° C., and melted completely below
100° C. On dry distillation it yielded a large quantity of dark brown oil.
Jurassic. —The first pronounced horizon for rock oil, in anything
approaching commercial quantities, is in the sandstones of Jurassic age,
which underlie the larger part of the Great Artesian Basin.
At Boma and Orallo, in south-eastern Queensland, high gravity
oil and semi-wet gas have been met with in several bores at
depths of 250 feet up to 3,700 feet. The gas from the Boma bores
yielded 1-2 pints of petrol per 1,000 cubic feet of gas. The oil and gas
come direct from ancient lacustrine beds, associated with coal seams
with a carbon ratio of about 50%. It is not, however, certain that all
the oils are indigenous to this Jurassic Walloon Series. For example,
at the Springleigh Bore, 7,009 feet deep, 46 miles south-west of Blackall,
Queensland, mineral oil was reported at 5,437 feet and paraffin wax at
5,456 feet in sandstones and shales perhaps of Ivamilaroi (Permo-
Carboniferous) age.
At Longreach, in central Queensland, a bore was sunk starting in
marine Cretaceous rocks and penetrating Jurassic shales and sandstones,
striking bed-rock of granite at 3,258 feet. Oil sand, about 14 feet thick,
lies 15 feet above the bed-rock, and yielded a thick oil at the rate of half a
gallon per hour. This solidified on exposure to a dark brown wax.
The Buthven Bore, 40 miles south of Longreach, has yielded a
similar wax, as has also the Bimerali Bore, 60 miles south-west of
Longreach, 4,310 feet deep.
Cretaceous. —P. S.' Hossfeld has detected globules of mineral oil
near Longreach, in Queensland, in marine strata of Tambo (Albian) age. 1
Oligocene. —At Lakes Entrance in eastern Gippsland, bores recently
sunk to the horizon of the artesian water have also yielded, to June,
1930, a small quantity of mineral oil, equal to about 350 barrels in
the aggregate, from many months of seepage of several bores. The
oil is derived from glauconitic sands of Oligocene age, about 25 feet
in thickness, lying at a depth, near the coast-line, of about 1,300 feet.
The bed-rock is either granite or schist. Ligneous clays overlie the
glauconites, which in turn are covered by a thick polyzoal limestone of
Miocene age. The glauconite contains 0-067% of mineral oil, which
suggests that it may have originated from the sarcode of the
1 Obviously this discovery should be followed up, being 1 of possible importance as
indicating a new horizon for indigenous oil.


foraminifera, after the shells of which the glauconite grains are pseudo-
morphous.
Miocene. —So far it is only in two places in New Guinea that oil has
been found in association with the Lepidocyclina limestones. The
first is at Matapau, where the oil is associated with limestones of the
Lower Aitape Series, containing Lepidocyclina, and perhaps of Burdiga-
lian age; the second is at Upoia in the Gulf of Papua area, where brine
and inflammable gas have been obtained in boreholes in strata which
have yielded Lepidocyclina martini. At the Wakip Biver, Matapau, a
seepage yields four to five gallons of oil daily from a fault plane. Several
bores in this area yield crude oil, but only in very small quantities. The
following are the properties of the sample:
Colour Dark brownish-yellow.
Fluorescence Dark bronze-green.
Odour Characteristic, distinctive, petroliferous.
Transparency Opaque.
Condition Thin, mobile.
Specific gravity at 60° F 0-813-42-2 0 Baume.
Calorific value (Mahler bomb) .. .. 19,404 B.T.U. (gross) per lb.
Sulphur 0-61%
Asphaltenes 0-04%.
Paraffin wax 1-16%.
Viscosity (70° F.) 70 sec.
Flash point (Pensky-Marten closed tester) Under 30°.
The following is the result of a fractional distillation of typical
crude oil from one of these bores:
Initial Boiling Point: 65“ C.
Fraction.
Range of
Temperature.
Percentage.
Specific
Gravity.
Remarks.
1. Light oil (gasoline,
etc.)
To 170° C.
41-5
0-759
Water-white ;
sweet
2. Intermediate oil
(kerosene) ....
170-230° C.
23-0
0-822
Faint yellow;
sweet.
3. Intermediate oil
(fuel oil)
230-300° C.
24-5
0-853
Yellow ; sweet.
4. Heavy oil (lubri-
cating oil and
wax)
Over 300° C.
11*0
Solid;
Total 100-0
dark brown.
The oil is classed as a paraffin-base crude petroleum, possessing a
high percentage of volatile constituents.
The fact should be emphasized here that whereas in Section No. 1
of the Geological Map granodiorite has been shown as intrusive into the
strata of the Aitape Series, it has now been demonstrated that this rock
entirely antedates the oldest strata of the lower Aitape Series, and that
it is probably of pre-Eocene age.
Mio-Pliocene. —As regards the geological horizons of mineral oil in
New Guinea, evidence so far shows that the chief horizon is in the newer
Tertiary rocks, of Mio-Pliocene age. The chief occurrences of oil and in-
flammable gas are in the Finsch Coast Series and Lower Wanimo Series of


Mandated Territory, and in the lignite-bearing strata of the Vailala and
Purari River areas (calcareous grits and sandstones) of the Gulf region.
The oil at Hohoro is probably on the same horizon. The Pinsch Coast
Series is classed as Mio-Pliocene in age, and the Lower Wanimo Series
is of about the same age.
In addition to the Aitape-Torricelli basin there is also a large area
of Tertiary rocks which appear to be in part of Mio-Pliocene age, on the
southern slopes of the Torricelli Mountains, and lying between that range
and the Sepik River. This area has not yet been prospected.
The Anglo-Persian Company’s geologists suggest that in addition to
the regions just mentioned both to the north and to the south of the
Torricelli Range, an area on the right bank of the middle Ramu valley and
the region of the Arumene Hills, also the southern coast of Goodenough
Bay and the Ruaba Valley, are probably of Mio-Pliocene age, but Avliat
promises to be the largest area of Mio-Pliocene rocks is situated up the
Purari River, near Nalopo Island, extending thence westwards to the
Era River and beyond, and also to the north-east of Nalopo Island.
These Mio-Pliocene strata in the opinion of the Anglo-Persian Company’s
geologists oiler the best chances of producing mineral oil. In view of
the northerly dip of the Miocene limestones struck in the Oriomo bores,
to the south-west of the mouth of the Fly River, it is quite possible that
strata of Mio-Pliocene age exist somewhat to the north of the Oriomo
region. Clearly there are still immense areas in Papua and Mandated
Territory, covered by these promising Mio-Pliocene formations, which
have not as yet been tested at all for oil.
V.. Ore Deposits.
(See Figure 10.)
The deposition of metallic ores in the Commomvealth falls into a
number of epochs, and many of the deposits can be, and probably most of
them are to be, referred to the various recognized epochs of igneous
intrusion. The most extensive and profitable date back to one or other of
the intrusive epochs of the pre-Cambrian era, and but little in the way
of primary ore-deposition has occurred since the close of Palaeozoic time.
Gold.
This, the earliest-exploited and for long the most profitable of
all our metallic minerals, is widely distributed both in space and in time.
The oldest and most important of the gold ores are those of Western
Australia occurring chiefly in the Kalgoorlie area (where gold tellurides
are found), as well as in the Yilgarn, Ashburton-Gascoyne, Pilbara and
Kimberley regions, and elsewhere. The gold-bearing solutions accom-
panied igneous intrusions either of Yilgarn (Archseozoic) or Mosquito
(Proterozoic) age. In the Nullagine (late Proterozoic) conglomerates
Western Australia lias the oldest alluvial-gold-bearing formation in the
Commonwealth.


FIGURE 10.


The gold of the Barossa and Tarcoola fields (S.A.) is in pre-
Cambrian rocks, where also are to he placed the gold-deposits of North
and Central Australia, as about Darwin, Tanami, and Arltunga, the gold-
copper deposits of Cloncurry and possibly also those of the Etheridge
field, in Queensland.
It seems probable that some of the gold on the southern plateau of
New South Wales, and perhaps in the north-east and east of Victoria,
was introduced by granite-magmas in epi-Silurian time, and the great
series of acid and basic intrusions in Tasmania, which is assigned to the
close of the Silurian or the close of the Devonian Period, was respon-
sible for the introduction of the gold-lodes of Beaconsfield and other
places in the northern and eastern parts of that State.
The gold-copper lodes of Cobar, Canbelego, Forbes-Parkes, etc., in
New South Wales, have been regarded as of late-Ordovician age, but
they may belong to the great epi-Devonian (Kanimbla) epoch of igneous
intrusion with which so many of the gold-deposits of south-eastern
Australia are connected. In Victoria these include the famous Bendigo
saddle-reefs, the ladder-veins of Walhalla-Woods Point, and the deposits
of Ballarat, Daylesford, Castlemaine, Stawell, etc. In New South
Wales gold was introduced in the districts about Wellington, Orange,
Blayney, Bathurst, Hill End, Adelong, Yalwal, and in places on the far
South Coast and on the Southern Tableland. The deposits of the Cairns
hinterland, in Queensland, are also tentatively assigned to this epoch.
The Permian intrusions of eastern Australia were responsible for
most of the gold of the New England district (N.S.W.), and, in Queens-
land, for the wonderful gold-copper deposit of Mt. Morgan and the rich
Gympie Goldfield, as well as others in the more northerly parts of the
State, such as Charters Towers.
The immense deposits of alluvial gold which formed the chief sources
of the metal in the early days of gold-mining in Victoria and in central
and southern New South W T ales may be said to be due almost entirely to
the natural concentration of gold set free in Tertiary and post-Tertiary
times from the auriferous formations of epi-Devonian age.
The occurrence of auriferous quartz-reefs in New Guinea at Wood-
lark Island and Misima (St. Aignan) appears to be connected with the
intrusion of pre-Tertiarv (?) porphyries and porphyrites into pre-
Cambrian (?) schists and gneisses. The gold in most of the goldfields is
alluvial, having been derived from the decomposing schists and concen-
trated in the river-beds. In regard to the newer finds at Waria Kiver,
Edie Creek and Bulolo, no detailed geological investigations appear to
have been carried out to date; the gold in the first two fields is mainly
alluvial, but in the last there is reef-gold as well, which appears to be
associated with silver ores such as argentite, proustite and pvrargyrite.


Silver-Lead and Zinc.
In the matter of production these have of late years taken the pre-
eminent place among the metallic minerals formerly occupied by gold.
The most important field at present is that of Broken Hill, which, since
its discovery in 1887, has produced ore to the value of one hundred and
fifty million pounds. The lodes occur in association with granitic
intrusions through schists of the Willyama (Archseozoic) Series. Of
pre-Cambrian age also are the Mt. Isa deposit, near Cloncurry in Queens-
land, which bids fair to become a second Broken Hill, and that of Lawn
Hills, in the Burketown district, N.Q.
The epi-Silurian or epi-Devonian intrusive magmas of Tasmania were
probably responsible for the silver-lead and zinc lodes of North Dundas,
Zeehan, Read-Rosebery, Mt. Farrell, Waratah, and others. In New South
Wales the silver-lead deposits of Yerranderie, Captain’s Flat, Leadville,
etc., are attributed to epi-Devonian intrusions, and to the same epoch
may possibly belong the important silver-lead fields of Chillagoe and
Herberton in Queensland, though it should be emphasized that there is
no consensus of opinion in regard to the geological age of many of the
North Queensland intrusions.
Small quantities of argentiferous galena and of zinc blende have
been found in Papua on Woodlark and Misima Islands, and at many of
the places on the mainland where gold has been discovered.
Copper.
While copper is found in association with pre-Cambrian intrusions
of Western Australia, as in the Phillips River and West Pilbara districts,
its importance has been overshadowed by that of gold. The famous
Wallaroo and Moonta copper-lodes in South Australia are believed to be
connected with Proterozoic granites, and the Burra and Blinman deposits
are in beds of the Adelaide Series. The copper of the Cloncurry field,
including Mt. Elliott, in Queensland, is also to be ascribed probably to
a pre-Cambrian intrusion.
The copper ores of the Mt. Lyell, Jukes-Darwin and Mt. Balfour
fields are of post-Silurian age, and are probably connected with the post-
Silurian granite intrusions of Tasmania.
As already stated, it is doubtful whether the once-important Cobar
lodes in New South Wales should be assigned to an Ordovician or an epi-
Devonian epoch of mineralization. In the latter epoch are to be placed
the Kiandra, Tumut, Captain’s Flat and other deposits.
Copper ores of Palaeozoic age are widely distributed in Queensland.
The richest deposit is that of Mt. Morgan, but large bodies of ore have
also been found in the Gladstone district, at Chillagoe, Herberton and
Clermont. Apart from the Mt. Morgan deposit the exact ages of these
are unknown.


In Papua copper ores have been worked at Laloki, where they are
associated with a large mass of gabbro intrusive into the Astrolabe Series
(Burdigalian).
Tin, Tungsten, Molybdenum, Bismuth and Antimony.
Two or more of these are often found in association, derived from the
same magma. The pre-Cambrian deposits of tinstone and wolfram in
Western Australia are found principally at Greenbuslies and Pilbara.
The same minerals accompany Proterozoic granites in North Australia,
as at Bynoe Harbour, Barrow Creek and Maranboy. In the Barrier
Ranges of New South Wales, near Euriowie, tin-bearing pegmatites occur,
with some wolfram.
At Eskdale and Tallandoon, in the north-east of Victoria, are tin-
lodes in pegmatite and greisen, of epi-Ordovician or epi-Silurian age,
and these apparently extend into New South Wales; the tinstone has
been concentrated in Tertiary leads.
Ores of molybdenum, tungsten and bismuth are found in New South
Wales closely associated with the granites of the Kanimbla epoch, on
the South Coast and Southern Tableland; molybdenite and wolfram
occur in the Hartley-Bathurst district, and on the south-western slopes
there is a long belt of granitic country, possibly of Kanimbla age,
extending from Holbrook on the Murray in a north-north-westerly direc-
tion through Ardlethan and Yalgogrin, along which occur ores of tin,
molybdenum, tungsten and bismuth, as well as of copper, lead and zinc.
The epi-Silurian or epi-Devonian granite-magmas of Tasmania have
brought in much tinstone, as at Mt. Bischoff, Stanley River, Heemskirk
and Dundas, as well as tungsten ores like the scheelite of King Island
and the wolfram of the Middlesex district and the north-eastern parts of
the State.
The late-Permiau magmas of eastern Australia carried much in
the way of economic minerals, which are found in pegmatite and
quartz-veins and pipes, as well as in contact-deposits, in New England
(N.S.W.) and along the coastal belt of Queensland. In New South
Wales the deposits of tinstone at Emmaville, Elsmore and Tingha, of
scheelite and wolfram at Hillgrove and Torrington, of bismuth ores at
Silent Grove (Mole Tableland), and of bismuth and molybdenite at
Kingsgate, likewise certain antimony deposits, as the stibnite of
Hillgrove, belong to this epoch, together with other deposits in the
Moonbi-Attunga district, and over towards the coast. In Queensland
there are the tin-deposits of Stanthorpe in the south, and in the north
of Permian age, or earlier, are the extensive tin-bearing areas of the
Cairns-Cooktown hinterland and coastal region, including the Herberton
and Chillagoe mineral-fields. Numerous wolfram, molybdenite and
bismuth deposits are associated with the Queensland tin-deposits.


The stanniferous deep leads and alluvial deposits of New England
and southern Queensland represent Tertiary and post-Tertiary concen-
trations of Permian tin-ores.
Iron.
Both pi’imary and secondary iron-ores are scattered about
Australia, but with a few important exceptions they have been but little
exploited.
In Western Australia the principal deposits are the pre-Cambrian
replacement-ores of Yampi Sound near Derby, of Wilgie Mia in the
Weld Range, and of Mt. Gibson. South Australia has great resources in
the very pure Iron Knob and Iron Monarch ha?matite deposits in the
north-east of Eyre's Peninsula. These are of Mosquito (Proterozoic) age,
as are the extensive Mt. Philp and Leviathan deposits, south of Cloncurry
(Q.), in all probability.
The magnetite and haematite ores of the Jukes-Darwin area in
Tasmania appear to have been introduced during the intrusion of the
Cambro-Ordovician porphyroids, while the Blythe River haematite
deposits are believed to be co-magmatic with the epi-Silurian or epi-
Devonian granites, as are also the magnetite deposits of the Zeelian-
Heemskirk district.
In New South Wales primary liajinatite ores at Cadia and Carcoar,
near Orange, are associated witli Ordovician andesites, while secondary
deposits of titaniferous magnetite are interbedded Avith Carboniferous
strata near ClarencetoAvn and Port Stephens.
oshi iridium, Platinum and Chromium.
The Aveathering of the serpentinous ultrabasic rocks in the north-
west, Avest and south of Tasmania, at HeazleAvood, Bald Hills, Adams
River and elseAvliere, has given rise to alluvial deposits of osmiridium.
Chromite is obtained from the serpentines of New South Wales, especially
at Nundle, Barraba and Bingara in the Great Serpentine Belt, and from
those of Queensland in the Brisbane and Rockhampton districts.
Platinum is found associated Avith pre-Cambrian serpentines and
hornblende-rocks in the Barrier Ranges, NeAV South Wales, and at Fifield
in dykes of hornblende-rock through Silurian strata, as Avell as in the
alluvials. It has also been reported from beach-sands, especially along
the North Coast of NeAV South Wales, and in Queensland near Brisbane.
Osmiridium occurs in nearly e\ r ery goldfield in Papua, deri\ r ed from
serpentines and peridotites. Alluvial platinum has been found in the
valley of the South-east River, Mandated Territory. 1
1 Platinum and palladium occur in situ at the Thomson River Copper Mine, Victoria,
both in the lode and dyke at that mine.


Mercury.
At Kilkivan, in Queensland, a lode containing cinnabar has been
worked, which intersects the Upper Triassic Ipswich strata.
Manganese.
Near Mt. Stuart and Minnie, in the Ashburton district of Western
Australia, there is an extensive deposit of manganese ore associated
with haematite-quartzite. Important deposits also occur at Yalgoo and
Phillips River. In New South Wales the most important deposit yet
discovered is at Grenfell. In Queensland the most considerable deposits
are in the Gladstone and Mary River Valley districts, occurring as lodes
in the Brisbane Schists.
Radium, etc.
Ores of the radio-active minerals are confined to the pre-
Cambrian intrusives. Of such are the pilbarite, thorogummite, and
mackintoshite of the Wodgina field, W.A., the radio-active ilmenite and
carnotite of Olary and the uranium micas of Mt. Painter (S.A.). Tanta-
lite has been found in considerable quantities in pegmatite-dykes at
Wodgina and in smaller amount in parts of North Australia.
VI. Soils.
Peneplanation appears to have been so complete and widespread
•during Tertiary time in Australia that it is safe to assume that prac-
tically none of the existing regolith is older than Cainozoic. Some of the
residual soils are probably as old as the Pliocene and even possibly as the
pre-Miocene peneplain, and though after the Kosciusko uplift there was
revived erosional activity in many parts, still there was much alluvial
deposition and soil-accumulation, and this state of affairs has persisted
till the present time.
It appears not unlikely that the lateritic duricrust of parts of
Western Australia was accumulated by exsudation in the soil and subsoil
which mantled the solid rocks of the Tertiary peneplain, and that this
laterite now represents all that is left of such soils. The same remark
applies to the extensive deposits of kunkar or travertine in South Aus-
tralia, western New South Wales and elsewhere. The concentration of
lime in the form of kunkar in soils derived from rocks not specially
calcic may be responsible in part for the excellence of some of the wheat
soils of South Australia.
It has beeen suggested that, even where the processes of formation
of laterite and kunkar were not very active on the Tertiary peneplain,
the plateaux formed by the Kosciusko uplift still retain their original
covering of Tertiary soil. Such soils may or may not contain the
ferruginous and calcareous nodules betokening deposition under pene-
plain conditions. Where the plateaux have not yet undergone dissection


by post-Kosciusko streams, and are still in the condition of upland plains,
soil-formation has been doubtless continuous from Tertiary time to the
present day; but along the coastal parts and where river-erosion has
eaten deeply into the plateaux, the Tertiary residual soils appear at most
only as isolated remnants. In general it may be said regarding the
residual soils that, even if allowance be made for the modifying effects of
climate and situation, they reflect to a marked degree the characteristics
of the rocks from which they have been derived, and by physical and other
properties the soils from basalt, granite, sandstone, etc., may be readily
differentiated as a rule.
Of outstanding importance in the agricultural economy of Australia
are the magnificent dark-coloured soils derived from the vast areas of
basalt, predominantly Tertiary, in eastern Australia and Tasmania.
Where the rainfall is good, and the physiographic conditions favourable
for the retention of moisture, black soils result, as in the far-famed
Darling Downs and the tropical jungle areas of Queensland, and the New
England plateau of New South Wales; in drier or better drained situa-
tions a dark red soil results. These basalts give rise to much of the
richest agricultural land in Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria;
they are essentially of residual type, though strictly speaking in places
alluvial. In the Kimberley region of Western Australia, along a strip
about 150 miles wide lying between Cape Londonderry and Collier Bay,
there are large areas of fertile soil derived from the Antrim Plateau
(Proterozoic) or later basalts.
The loamy to sandy residual red soils, so characteristic of the drier
parts of the agricultural belts, are of varied derivation. Many are
derived from basalts, granites and other igneous rocks, and others from
sedimentary and metamorphic rocks. The Riverina (N.S.W.) soils and
those of the Mallee country of Victoria and of the south-eastern part of
South Australia are derived largely from the limestones of the Tertiary
“Murray Gulf.” Those of the south-western slopes of New South Wales
are in part of granitic origin, .while the soils of the wheat belt in the
south-west of Western Australia are derived mainly from granites and
gneissic rocks, with an admixture of basic intrusions.
Where the underlying rocks are favourable mineralogically these
soils of the areas of low rainfall are remarkably high in mineral plant-
food, composed as they are of mineral particles which have suffered but
little leaching.
Among sandstone soils, generally of poor quality, mention may be
made of the Hawkesbury Sandstone area around Sydney, of the Great
Artesian Basin area and of many of the “sand-plain” areas of Western
Australia.
Of transported soils by far the most important are those of alluvial
type. Flood-plain deposits were laid down by the mature and senile


Tertiary rivers, but these are known to us principally in the gravels and
sands and clays of the Tertiary deep leads, and the fertile soils of the
river-terraces and flood-plains of our old and mature valleys are of
Pleistocene to Recent formation. There is abundant evidence that the
Pleistocene rainfall was in parts of the continent much greater than that
of the present day, and while erosion was consequently more rapid,
transportation and deposition were also more important than they are
now.
In addition to the residual basaltic black soils mentioned above
there are, particularly on the north-western slopes and plains and the
Liverpool Plains of New South Wales, considerable tracts of black soil
of alluvial origin, representing the waste material carried down by the
western-flowing rivers, tributaries of the Darling chiefly, from the
basaltic highlands in Pleistocene and Recent time, and deposited on the
low-lying country to the west. Away from the rivers are areas of red
soil which are also apparently of alluvial origin and form terraces of
greater age and at a higher level than the black-soil flood-plains.
The alluvial terraces and flood-plains of the mature and senile
portions of the coastal rivers have attracted considerable agricultural
settlement where the rainfall is sufficient or irrigation is possible.
Examples are to be found in some of the easterly-flowing rivers of
Queensland, the North Coast rivers and the Hunter of New South Wales,
the larger rivers of Tasmania and the Lower Murray in South Australia.
For the most part the soils are fertile, but where, as in the case of the
Hawkesbury River of New South Wales, the rocks of the basin are largely
siliceous sandstones, this fact is reflected in the comparative poorness
of the alluvial soils.
Very considerable accumulations of alluvial material must be spread
out in Central Australia and the interior parts of Queensland and South
Australia by the centripetal or endoreic rivers, which gradually dwindle
and die in the more arid areas through soakage and evaporation.
Piedmont deposits are found spread out along the fronts of the
Late Pliocene upwarped or upfaulted highlands, as, for example, to the
west of the Darling scarp in Western Australia, and along the foot of
the Mount Lofty, Barossa and Flinders Ranges in South Australia. The
western slopes of the plateau of eastern Australia are in part of the
nature of piedmont plains.
As a result of the arid conditions prevailing in parts of the interior
of Australia the soils over considerable areas are in a great degree of
seolian origin. A remarkable type of soil in the interior of Australia
is that known as “gibbers” or stony desert. It consists of a superficial
layer of angular to rounded fragments of quartzite derived from the
breaking up and exfoliation through insolation of siliceous “duricrust.”
After rain such country becomes covered with saltbush.


Owing to the very limited incidence of the Pleistocene glaciation,
glacial soils, so important and widespread in parts of the Northern
Hemisphere, are conspicuously absent in Australia, with the exception
of a small area in Tasmania. In that part of South Australia lying
to the north and north-Avest of Encounter Bay, the Carboniferous
landscape Avas buried beneath a thick deposit of sandy till in Kamilaroi
time. This Avas at best but poorly consolidated, and, though noAV consider-
ably thinned, still covers much of the original glaciated area. It may
perhaps be regarded as, for Australia, a unique example of a glacial
soil dating back to Late Palaeozoic time.
The Recent coastal emergence of 15 to 20 feet, described above,
which Avas so general around Australia, has added in the aggregate
quite a considerable area to the continent in the shape of coastal plains.
The soils are in places of little value, being swampy, as Avell as sandy,
but some have proved very useful agriculturally. Deltaic deposits are
being built out into the Gippsland Lakes of Victoria, in one of these
emerged areas, as Avell as in the shallow lakes at the Murray Mouth.
An indirect result of the coastal movements has beeen the formation
of peat-swamps among coastal dunes or along the lower courses of rivers.
Some of these SAvamps Avlien drained have afforded rich soils, as in the
neighbourhood of Perth (W.A.) and along the Lower Murray.


DETAILS OF SECTIONS.
Section 1.
Across the Great Artesian Basin and Xew Guinea. —This section
illustrates a unique feature in the geology of Australia —the Great
Artesian Basin, the largest of its kind in the world. Its length
north and south is nearly 1,000 miles and width from 300 miles up to
about 900 miles. The maximum depth on the line of section near Lake
Patchawarra and Lake Yamma Yamma is estimated to be between 6,500
and 7,000 feet. The water rising from the bores is radio-active, and mostly
has a high temperature. In the case of at least three of the deep Queens-
land artesian bores, the temperature is at boiling point. This is probably
not due to any geyser action, as some have supposed, but results from
the high specific heat of water, for the thick layer of water-bearing sand-
stones, underlying the impervious clay shales of the Cretaceous rocks,
forms a very efficient blanket, and thereby increases greatly the normal
thermal gradient. The aggregate daily yield of water from all the
flowing bores in the Great Australian Artesian Basin amounts to about
400 million gallons.
The chief bed of water-bearing sandstone belongs to the Walloon
Series, and lies near the base of the basin. It is coloured as Jurassic on
the map and on Section 1, but its upper strata, such as the “Blythesdale
Braystone,” are probably of Lower Cretaceous age. Artesian water is
also derived, in some cases, from strata on higher horizons, suspended
aquifers in the Winton Series. The Walloon sandstones were deposited
in vast lakes and swamps. The overlying Roma and Tambo series are
both of marine origin, having been laid down in a great inland sea.
In the strata of the Winton Series lacustrine conditions replaced the
marine, and seams of brown coal and lignite are not infrequent. In
places the rocks of the Winton Series are capped by strata, chiefly of the
nature of quartzites and shales, known as the Eyrian Series. These strata
.mostly form isolated table-topped hills.
As regards the general structure of this Artesian Basin, it will be
noticed that its southern end, between the Lake Phillipson bore and
the Denison Range, appears to be isolated from the main basin by
mountains of older rocks. As a matter of fact, this portion of the basin
is really joined to the main basin by porous strata to the north of the
Denison Range. To the east of this range, at Lake Eyre, is shown a
■feature of very great interest, namely the Mound Springs. These springs,
of which there are many thousands within the area of the Great Artesian
Basin, form the natural outlets for the artesian water in this part of
the basin. They occur mostly where the old bedrock comes near the
surface, or where geological faults intersect the strata.
Iv


Lake Eyre itself is situated probably at the intersection of at least
two important sets of geological faults. Traced northwards into northern
Queensland, it will be found that the bedrock rises to form what is
known as the Cloncurry sill. In the deepest part of the Basin the bed-
rock lies at a depth of about from 0,000 to 7,000 feet below the surface,
whereas at the Cloncurry sill it comes to within about 700 to 800 feet
of the surface. Evidence proves that the artesian water climbs over this
sill from the deeper parts of the basin to the south, much as water does
in an inverted syphon, and finds an outlet for itself somewhere under-
neath the waters of the Gulf of Carpentaria. As the hydraulic grade of
this part of the basin from the Cloncurry sill northwards to Normanion,
on the Gulf of Carpentaria, has a distinct dip northwards, it is clear that
there cannot be any reinforcement of the pressure in this part of the
basin from high level Cretaceous or Jurassic rocks in the Cordillera of
New Guinea. At the extreme left of Section 1 is shown a small portion
of the sub-artesian basin known as the Eucla Basin. Only in one place,
so far, has it been proved to be artesian, namely, at the bore known as
the Madura Bore. Formerly this Nullarbor Basin was united to the
Great Artesian Basin, but apparently the connecting isthmus has now
been completely removed by erosion. The deeper strata in the Eucla Basin
are of Cretaceous age, but the bulk of the beds are Tertiary.
To the extreme right of Section 1 is a diagrammatic section across
New Guinea. This original section has been modified, especially as
regards its southern portion, in view of the recently published researches
of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company’s geologists in British New Guinea,
and particularly of the maps and reports of Dr. J. Zwierzycki, of the
Dutch Geological Survey of the Netherlands East Indian Archipelago.
The alternative tentative section is given in Figure 8.
In the structure of this immense island ten units can at once be
recognized, as follow:
1. An active volcanic zone, to which belong the active volcanic
islands of Bam, Manam, etc. Bam lies to the east of the line of section,
but is nevertheless shown diagrammatically on the section. These
volcanoes are built up on the foundered area of probably an old land
surface.
2. The Bougainville Mountains, the bases of which are formed of
schist and gneiss followed by sediments of unknown age, intruded by
peridotite. This is capped by a Recent to Pleistocene reef limestone 2,200
feet above sea-level, surmounted in turn by basalt.
3. The Wanimo-Aitape Basin of strongly folded Cainozoic rocks,
with overfolds and overthrusts of late Tertiary age directed northwards.
Mineral oil occurs in this basin.
4. The Bewani-Torricelli Mountains formed of gneiss and schist
heavily overthrust (to the extent perhaps of 10 miles) northwards.


5. The sunkland of the great Rift Valley of New Guinea. This starts
at the Ramu and Markham Rivers between the Finisterre-Saruvaged
Ranges on the north, and the Bismarck-Kratke Range on the south. This
sunkland extends further towards the north-west by way of Madang and
south of the Adalbert Range into the great swampy plain of the Sepik
Valley, thence west-north-west to the south of the Torricelli-Bewani
Mountains, across the border into Dutch New Guinea, at the sources of
the Idenburg River; thence down the Idenburg Valley, south of the Rees
Gauthier Mountains, and into the valley of the Mamberamo at its
junction with the Rauffaer River, and perhaps on to Gcelvink Bay.
This is possibly an oil-bearing area, but has not yet been proved to be so.
6. The slaty and schistose rocks, shown on the No. 1 section of the
Geological Map, with serpentine, granite, etc., between the Sepik Valley
and the Main Divide between the Sepik and Fly Rivers. In the section,
Figure 8, with these Explanatory Notes this unit is masked largely by
Mesozoic rocks.
7. The complex of the Main Divide and its southern slopes with
probable nappe-structure involving rocks from Burdigalian to possibly
Permo-Carboniferous (Kamilaroi) in age, including marine Cretaceous
and Jurassic strata. Overthrusts and overfolding with probable nappe-
structure are, apparently, directed southwards. Some mineral oil occurs
in this belt further east towards the valleys of the Purari and Kikori
Rivers, and will probably be met with south of the folded foothills in
the next unit.
8. The great alluvial plains of the middle course of the Fly River,
a possible basin of late Tertiary age, and a potential oilfield.
9. A possibly very young anticline, perhaps now rising, but only
about 300 feet above the level of the swamps, the “Crete Riveraine” of
Feuilletau de Bruyn, formed of Miocene (?) or Mio-Pliocene limestones.
Oil may occur here, though it is possible that the horizon may be below
the main oil-bearing beds. With this unit may be included the Lower
Miocene limestones of the Oriomo prospecting bores for oil. These strata
appear to be stratigraphically below the main oil horizon.
10. The Mabaduan granites, and granites struck in the Oriomo bores
for oil, part of the old Australian peneplain, which has acted as a
“foreland” to the southerly movement of the Cordillera.
A very important problem now suggests itself, viz., what is the
structure of the rocks underlying the recent alluvials of the vast southern
plain of Papua, the plain that is drained particularly by the Fly River?
For example: (a) Is it all a continuation of the great peneplain of
Australia right up to the foothills of the Cordillera, as Wyllie seems to
hint? or (b) is it, as Evan R. Stanley originally opined, a foredeep
infilled with Cainozoic sediments of various ages, but certainly including
some petroliferous horizons. The future of the oil potentialities of Papua
depends largely on which of these two interpretations is correct.


In regard to (a) B. K. N. Wyllie speaks of “the stable granite
platform of northern Australia extending far north to the Sirebi River
and possibly beyond it.” He also suggests that at Keke, up the Vailala
River, under the Lepidocyclina limestones there are cherty beds, very
comparable to those of the Port Moresby Series (Eocene to Upper
Cretaceous). If this view is correct there might not be any room for
a potential oilfield south of the Sirebi River, as the Recent to Pleisto-
cene alluvials might rest direct either on the surface of the pre-Miocene
peneplain, or on patches of older Miocene antedating the chief petroleum-
forming epoch of the Mio-Pliocene series, and belonging to the southerly
transgression of the Burdigalian beds immediately before the rolling
up of the great Cordillera. On the analogy of the plains of the Punjab
in relation to the Himalayas, the southern plains of Papua may not
have received sediment in late Miocene or in Pliocene time, just as was
the case with the plains of the Ganges, which have a great thickness of
older (Pleistocene) alluvium (“bhangar”) covered also by a considerable
thickness of Recent alluvium (“khadar”). There can be little doubt that
with the exception of the “Crete Riveraine” (“collines riveraines”) of
Feuilletau de Bruyn, between the Digoel and Fly Rivers, and extending
eastwards to Oriomo and Mabaduan, the great plain of Papua is covered
with a considerable depth of Pleistocene to Recent alluvium. But does
this overlie any Mio-Pliocene basins ? It may be argued that if such strata
had a thickness approaching to what they have in the Era River-Purari
River area, of 8,000 to 10,000 feet, the chances are that they would have
been rolled up into a high range in late Pliocene time. The fact that no
such range has arisen is so far evidence against the presence of any great
thickness of Mio-Pliocene strata except along the foothills of the
Cordillera.
In view of the evidence at Oriomo of the older Miocene limestones
thickening northwards, it is probable that the Burdigalian and overlying
beds attain a considerable thickness under the swamps of the Fly River
plain, and they are probably only gently folded over most of that area.
The true-scale section, 1 under the one in which the vertical scale is nearly
50 times that of the horizontal, enables one to realise what extensive
developments might take place between the Oriomo bores and the “Crete
Riveraine.” It is quite possible that in this distance of over 30 miles,
probably in the general direction of the dip of the strata, considerable
thicknesses of the Mio-Pliocene strata may be represented.
It should be possible by geophysical methods, especially the seismic,
to determine readily the depth under this plain to a granitic surface, like
that met with at the Oriomo bores, but if the surface of the pre-Miocene
peneplain he formed of Mesozoic sediments, any estimate of the depth of
the Cainozoic deposits would be difficult.
1 See Figure 8, p. 104.


This section crosses two, perhaps three, important oil belts. The
southern oil belt is contained in Tertiary strata of immense, but as yet
unknown, thickness, probably of the order of over 10,000 feet in places.
A probable second, but as yet untested, oil zone lies along the northern
part of the Sepik Valley. The third, and most northern, oil belt lies to
the north of the Bewani-Torricelli axis of crystalline rock, extending
thence to the coast except at the Bougainville Mountains. It yields oil
comparable in quality to that of Borneo, but so far preliminary search
has not revealed any area where the oil is proved to be present in com-
mercial quantities. All three of these oil belts are easterly extensions
of the great Burmese oilfields, which pass through Java and Borneo to
Timor, and thence into Dutch New Guinea, and onwards into Papua and
Mandated Territory. This formation is probably continued still further
south-eastwards in the Tertiary oil-bearing strata of New Zealand.
Section 2.
Chiefly along the eastern coast of Australia. —Commencing on the
left, at Bass Strait, this section crosses first the Jurassic coal-field of
Wonthaggi, and next the wonderful deposit of brown coal in the Yallourn
coal-field, where in places the brown coal attains the thickness of 780
feet. Near Tabberabbera there is a very strongly marked unconformity
between the Upper Devonian and the Middle Devonian rocks. Leaving
the goldfield areas of Victoria the section passes across Mt. Kosciusko,
7,328 feet high, the only mountain in Australia which shows anything
like extensive evidence of past glacial action in Pleistocene time.
Thence traversing the southern goldfields of New South Wales by
way of Canberra and Goulburn, the section crosses the Central Coal
Basin of New South Wales. The coal, of Permian age, is about, at its
deepest, 7,000 feet below the surface. To the north of this basin the
section passes over a vast thickness of Carboniferous and Devonian rocks.
These last are probably cut off about 20 miles north of Kempsey by a very
heavy geological fault throwing down to the south. The section is here
probably in error in not showing a thinning of the Carboniferous and
Devonian rocks in the direction of Mt. Lookout. The older rocks, to the
north of this great fault, form the southern rim of the extensive Clarence
Coal Basin. This is continued northwards into the Walloon and Ipswich
Coal Basins of Queensland. The section may be in error in showing
Ipswich beds outcropping to the south of Grafton, as they may
really be concealed by overlap of the Bundanba Sandstones.
Mt. Lindsay, on the section, is one of a chain of Tertiary volcanoes
forming the Macpherson Range, dividing Queensland from New South
Wales. At Brisbane this Mesozoic coal basin is bounded by a
geanticline of old rocks, some perhaps of Cambrian or of even greater
age. Their full thickness, probably more than 50,000 feet, cannot be
shown to scale on this section, but is given in Text-figure 6, after A. K.


Denmead, page 45, which illustrates the remarkable situation of
Brisbane at the very core of this dismantled geanticline. To the north
succeeds another immense coal basin, partly of Jurassic to Triassic age,
partly of Lower Cretaceous age. Situated on the southern margin of
this basin are the remarkable extinct Tertiary volcanoes which form such
conspicuous features in the scenery, known as the Glasshouse Mountains.
The highest coal-measures in this basin are the Lower Cretaceous
Burrum measures. These have been strongly folded by pressures coming
from an east-north-east direction. To the east of the line of section the
Burrum Coal-measures extend under the southern end of Hervey Bay
and Great Sandy or Fraser Island. The fact that the Bundanba Sand-
stone outcrops at the north end of that island suggests that the Tiaro
Coal-measures, as well as the Burrum, underlie parts of it.
The Burrum Coal-field is bounded on the north-west by the geanti-
cline which is a northerly extension of the Brisbane geanticline and
the trends of the D’Aguilar Range. The core is formed at Gatcombe
Head, Facing Island, near Curtis Island, of pre-Cambrian gneiss, as is
shown in Section 6, on the map. This geanticline separates the Burrum
Basin from the Rockhampton geosyncline. A thickness of perhaps 20,000
feet of Devonian and about 10,000 feet of Carboniferous rock is developed
in this geosyncline. The famous Mt. Morgan gold and copper mine is
situated within this area. After swinging inland at Rockhampton, the
section is swung coastwards again, and once more approaches the
Brisbane geanticline. The Tertiary alkaline rocks of Yeppoon are here
shown on the section, diagrammatically, near the Berserker Range. At
Marlborough the section passes over the largest mass of serpentine as yet
proved anywhere in Australia. The further continuation northwards of
the Brisbane geanticline, after persisting for nearly 600 miles, is lost
to the east of Broadsound under the Tasman Sea in the vast subsidence
region of the Great Barrier Reef.
From a little north of Marlborough the section, which for the last
650 miles has been running parallel with the long axes of the basins, is
now turned north-westerly obliquely to their trend, so that the effects of
the thrusts from the Pacific at once become apparent. This is obvious
where the section crosses the Styx River Coal-field. On the east this
Middle (?) Cretaceous coalfield is bounded by a major geological fault,
throwing west about 5,000 (?) feet; west of this fault the coal-measures
are sharply folded, the folding becoming less acute inland. North-north-
west of the Styx Coal-field the section passes over another but less clearly
defined geanticline in the Connors Range, formed of Brisbane Schists
and an elongated granite intrusion parallel to the coast. It seems to be
a northerly prolongation of the Leichhardt Range and the Boomer
Mountains.
The section thence runs diagonally across the Bowen Basin, the chief
coal-field of Queensland. It will be noticed that in the case of the left-


hand side of the Bowen Basin there is a tendency for it to be overturned
from the direction of the Pacific towards the west.
At the north-west end of this part of the section is visible the
extremity of a third geanticline, coming up from the Anakie Sapphire-
field to the south. But further north all other structures are now
dominated completely by the great massif of the Charters Towers Gold 1 -
field, mostly a vast compound batliolith of granite. Its trend on the
whole is about from north-west to south-east. It formed part of a very
ancient ridge which from time to time has united Australia to New
Zealand. The Charters Towers and other goldfields are situated along
this ancient geanticline. Next the section crosses the Devonian geo-
syncline of the Burdekin area; in this there are no less than about 30,000
feet of Devonian strata represented. To the north of the geanticline which
bounds this Burdekin Basin is a wide basin, chiefly of Silurian and
Devonian rocks, in which are situated the Herberton Tinfields. These
lie in a small geosyncline invaded by granite.
The Silurian rocks are formed chiefly of limestone, the Chillagoe
limestone, rich in remains of Halysites. The Chillagoe and Mungana
mines lie in this area. The economically valuable coal-field of Mt.
Mulligan just here is probably of Greta (Lower Permian) age. In the
next Permian outlier, to the north-west of Mt. Mulligan, it is doubtful
whether coal exists, but on the map it is provisionally referred to
the Greta horizon. At the extreme right of the section a small portion
of the Great Artesian Basin is shown, extending from the Walsh River
to the Gulf of Carpentaria.
Section 3.
Across Tasmania. —This is constructed chiefly from information
supplied by Dr. Loftus Hills and the present Government Geologist,
Mr. P. B. Nye. The dominant element is the central axis of pre-
Cambrian rock. Between this and the west coast is the highly folded,
faulted and overthrust belt of metalliferous country, which embraces
the Zeehan, Mount Lyell and Read-Rosebery mines of copper, zinc,
lead, tin, etc. The sedimentary rocks of this folded region range in
geological age from probably Cambrian to Upper Silurian. To the east
of this central pre-Cambrian massif is another extensive basin more
or less highly folded and faulted and much intruded by granites. These
rocks in places yield both tin and gold; the older sediments are probably
of Cambro-Ordovician age.
From Mt. Pelion on the west to Mt. Nicholas on the east is an
extensive, but intermittent, coal-field. Its geological range is from Upper
Carboniferous to Upper Triassic. The whole island of Tasmania has been
invaded, perhaps in early Jurassic time, by immense intrusive sills of
enstatite-quartz-dolerite. These sills have in places displaced the coal-
measures through a vertical distance approximating to the thickness of
the sills, and often amounting to 1,000 feet or more.


Section 4.
Across southern and eastern Victoria. —This is chiefly after Messrs.
D. J. Mahony and R. A. Keble, the Government Geologist—Mr. W.
Baragwanath —and Professor E. W. Skeats. Section 4, at its western
end, crosses the faulted Jurassic coal-measures of Victoria in the portion
known as the Otway area.
Between Apollo Bay and Sorrento the section traverses the sunkland
of Port Phillip, and then touches the major fault known as Selwyn’s
fault. The rocks shown further to the east along the line of section
range in age from Silurian to Ordovician, and are mostly gold-bearing.
In the Walhalla geosyncline are richly auriferous reefs, and in rocks of
Lower Silurian age there are found what are probably the oldest remains
of land plants as yet discovered in any part of the world.
An important structure further east is that of the Dolodrook geanti-
cline. The serpentine shown is perhaps of Middle Cambrian age. Pro-
fessor Skeats suggests that it may be related to the Heathcotian diabases.
It does not intrude the Upper Cambrian fossiliferous rocks of Dolodrook.
It will be noticed that there is a right-angled unconformity at Mt.
Wellington, in that area, between Carboniferous and Silurian rocks. In
the Mitta Mitta region, described by A. W. Howitt, Professor H. S.
Summers, and Dr. Tattam, there is a wide belt of highly metamorphosed
strata. These are known as the Mitta Mitta schists. From Walhalla to
the Snowy River the rocks in this part of the section are more or less
gold-bearing.
Section 5.
From Brisbane south-west to Pilliga, X.B.W. —This section is partly
after the Geological Survey of Queensland, and partly after Professor
H. C. Richards and Dr. W. H. Bryan. The Brisbane geanticline is formed
of the Brisbane schists at Brisbane and of the rocks of the D’Aguilar
Range to the west, dating back, as regards their oldest types, to possibly
Cambrian or pre-Cambrian time. This has been heavily faulted down in
the direction of the Pacific Ocean. The D’Aguilar Range is a horst,
being bounded by faults both on its west and on its east sides.
The Ipswich-Walloon Basin is bounded westwards by a geanticline
which attains its maximum altitude in Mt. Magnus. To the east of this
mountain are some heavy faults in the direction of Silverwood. Slices
of rock of Kamilaroi (Permo-Carboniferous) age are let down by faults
earlier in age than the Walloon Coal-measures overlying them, as shown
by Richards and Bryan. To the west of Mount Magnus is the Texas
trough extending westwards to Ashford. The Ashford Coal-measures,
which are probably of Greta age, make a right-angled unconformity with
strata which are probably of Upper Devonian age. Further west an
important geanticline succeeds. The centre of this is just to the east of


Delungra. Further west, near Bingara, the western limb of this geanti-
cline has been overthrust along the line of a major fault, up the plane of
which has risen a long belt of serpentine, as described by Professor W. N.
Benson. A number of overthrust faults are developed there, the thrusts
almost invariably coming from the direction of the Pacific Ocean.
Further west the Nandewar Ranges rise to a height of 5,000 feet above
sea-level. They are formed of alkaline rocks, mostly trachytes, and are
of Tertiary age. It will be noticed that an unconformity is shown, just
to the west of the Nandewar Ranges, between the overlying equivalent of
the Newcastle Coal-measures and the underlying strata of Kuttung age.
From here the section passes over the eastern margin of the Great
Artesian Basin to Pilliga.
Section 6.
From Longreach to coast near Rockhampton, Queensland. —This is
almost entirely after Messrs. J. H. Reid and C. C. Morton. Four units
may be recognised in the portion of Queensland shown on Section 6,
namely:
1. An inner massif to the east of Rockhampton.
2. A wide basin extending from Rockhampton to the Anakie
geanticline.
3. The Anakie geanticline.
4. The eastern portion of a wide basin slightly folded and tilted
westward.
The Anakie geanticline appears to have acted as an outer massif
against which, through a westward movement of the inner massif, due to
thrusts from the Pacific, the thick sediments of the Rockhampton to
Stanwell Basin have become crumpled. This section shows that the
thrust was distinctly more intense in the vicinity of the Pacific than
at a distance away from it.
In the bores in the Great Artesian Basin at Longreach traces of
mineral oil have been found in strata immediately underlying those
carrying the artesian water. This oil, whilst a fluid in the hot artesian
water, solidifies on being exposed to the normal surface temperature.
Section 1.
From Perth, Western Australia, to near Newcastle, New South
Wales. —The first part of this section, from the Pacific Ocean near
Newcastle to the zinc-silver-lead field of Broken Hill, is almost entirely
after Mr. E. C. Andrews, the late Government Geologist of New South
Wales. In the geosyncline of the Northern Coal-field at Lake Macquarie
the strata of Kamilaroi (Permo-Carboniferous) age attain their maximum
thickness of about 13,500 feet. The three sets of productive coal-measures
are shown in descending order, the Newcastle (14), the Tomago (13)
and the Greta (11).


To the east of Barraba Trigonometrical Station the Newcastle strata
are somewhat unconformable on the Tomago Coal-measures, and at the
Station itself the Triassic rocks are unconformable on the Permian. At
Mt. Bright the section crosses an inlier of Carboniferous rocks, which
locally separates the Northern Coal-field from the eastern edge of the
Western Coalfield. At Tayan Peak is a nearly perfect crater formed of
Tertiary basic tuff and lava. Just to the right of this is one of several
laccoliths of sodalite-bearing neplieline-tinguaite, also of Tertiary age.
After traversing thick folded strata of Devonian and Silurian age,
the section crosses near Wellington a deep basin of Devonian rock.
At Dunedoo another basin of Kamilaroi coal-measures is reached with an
interesting bed of glacial erratics, which Messrs. Kenny and W. S. Dun
have referred to the Upper Marine Series (Middle Permian). At
Dubbo the porous beds of the south-east extremity of the Great Artesian
Basin overlie the Kamilaroi strata, and are separated from the other
part of the Great Artesian Basin to the west by a geanticline. Further
west is the highly folded and much overthrust region between Nyngan
and Cobar, an area which has produced gold and considerable amounts
of copper.
The outliers of Devonian rock between Cobar and Wilcannia mark
the furthest transgressions inland of the Upper Devonian seas. At
Wilcannia, on the Darling Biver, the section again crosses an extension
of the Great Artesian Basin. To the north of Wilcannia are the valuable
opal mines of White Cliffs, situated in Lower Cretaceous strata. West
of Wilcannia the Ordovician rocks, which for the previous 350 miles have
constituted the oldest strata visible, give place to the rocks of the
Poolamacca or Torrowangee Series. This is the eastern edge of the most
extensive sedimentary series of Australia, known in South Australia as
the Adelaide Series, and in the Kimberley region of Western Australia as
the Elvire Series. The Nullagine Series of the north-west area of Western
Australia, though mostly older, may partly belong to this great series.
At its base, to the north-east of Broken Hill, is a glacial series, the equiva-
lent of the Sturtian tillite of South Australia. Upwards this series passes
into a set of beds not known elsewhere in Australia, the Wertago Series.
Messrs. E. J. Kenny and C. St. J. Mulholland consider these strata to be
on a higher horizon than the topmost beds of the Adelaide Series. They
commence with some erratic-bearing beds, probably glacial, and end
upwards in a sequence of acid lavas and rhyolites and quartz-felsites of
considerable thickness. The horizon is that marked 3A in the geo-
syncline to the east of Broken Hill, as shown on Section 7. From
Broken Hill to a little east of the radium mine at Olary, the section
passes over the Broken Hill geanticline. From the ratio of the uranium-
lead to uranium at the Olary mine the age of the basic pegmatite and
probably co-magmatic granite (the equivalent of the Mundi Mundi


granite of Broken Sill) lias been calculated to be about 1,05 S millions
of years.
From Olary to tlie Spencer’s Gulf sunkland the section traverses
the Adelaide Series, some 12,000 to 14,000 feet in thickness. For the
eastern end near Olary the author has followed Sir Douglas Mawson, for
the Mt. Remarkable area Professor W. Howchin, and for the Mt. Grainger
area Drs. R. L. Jack and L. K. Ward. The whole of this part of the
section is dominated by a surprising development of Proterozoic glacial
tillites. The uppermost tillite, the Sturtian tillite of Professor Howchin,
is about 1,000 feet thick and has been traced by him on a north-south line
for nearly 400 miles, while on the east-west line of Section 7 it has a
width of about 170 miles. Both at Boolcamata, near Olary, and at Mt.
Grainger there are at least two distinct glacial horizons. At Mt. Grainger
these are separated from one another by a thickness of 9,000 feet of strata.
The horizon from which the author has lately obtained a number of
relatively large forms of Proterozoic fossils lies probably in strata some-
what older than any shown on this line of section, and perhaps of
Keweenawan age.
At Spencer’s Gulf the section reaches what has been termed the
Great Rift Valiev of Australia; that belt appeal’s to be approximately
on the junction line between the folded, faulted and otherwise disturbed
area of eastern Australia and the edge of the Great Central Shield. To
the west of the sunkland of Spencer’s Gulf'one reaches then the very
stable area of the Great Shield. The important iron mines of Iron Knob,
etc., are estimated to contain a reserve of approximately 100,000,000 tons
of ore. To the west of these mines is a remarkable rock, known as the
felspar-porphyry of the Lake Gairdner area. Dr. L. K. Ward believes
that this porphyry represents a thick series of contemporaneous flows of
acid lavas of pre-Cambrian age.
Passing over the Tarcoola Goldfield one reaches at Ooldea a remark-
able raised beach containing marine shells, assumed by Mr. F. Chapman
to be of Pleistocene age. It is approximately about 380 feet above sea-
level, and, if as new as assumed, has the greatest altitude to which
raised beaches of so late a geological period have been traced anywhere
in Australia.
Section 7 next passes over the extensive Nullarbor Plain, formed
chiefly of Miocene limestone capped in places by small patches of Pliocene
marine beds. The Miocene marine beds in turn overlie strata of prob-
ably early Miocene, possibly Oligocene, age containing beds of lignite.
These repose, towards the central part of this basin, on marine beds
of Lower Cretaceous age. These Miocene limestones are honeycombed
with caves, in which any surplus water from rainfall is quickly swallowed
up, so that there are no surface drainage channels over this area, measur-
ing 500 miles from east to west, and 150 miles from north to south.


To the west of the Nullarbor Plain is an immense area of pre-
Cambrian rock mostly of the nature of grey gneissic granite intruding
greenish masses of basic rock. Far more restricted in area are the
gneisses and sillimanite-, garnet- and staurolite-schists of what
Professor E. de Courcy Clarke has termed the Yilgarn Series. These are
developed at Yilgarn, Southern Cross, etc., as well as at Kalgoorlie in
the zones marked lA.
The section in passing further west reaches one of these older zones
in the Kanowna Goldfield. A remarkable tillite (IB), possibly the oldest
as yet discovered anywhere within the Commonwealth, is shown near
the Avest side of this goldfield.
The section next crosses the Kalgoorlie and Coolgardie Goldfields.
Over one hundred million pounds’ worth of gold has been won on these
fields. At Kalgoorlie the gold is largely in the form of telluride ore.
Westwards the section passes over the Southern Cross Goldfields and
to the west of Chiglow reaches the escarpment of the Darling Range,
Where there is a downward warp, accompanied probably by heavy fault-
ing. This sunkland area near Perth between that city and Fremantle
is occupied by an artesian basin of Recent to Tertiary and perhaps
Cretaceous age. The bores in this neighbourhood yield large volumes
of artesian water of excellent quality, and there is no evidence at present
of any sign of depletion of the basin. It is more than likely that water-
bearing Jurassic rocks underlie the Cretaceous rocks. It is not yet known
whether or not productive coal underlies this artesian basin at a con-
siderable depth, but this is possible. The section shows the pre-Cambrian
bedrock probably much nearer to the surface than it actually is.
Section 8.
Melville Island to Hobart. —Section 8 commences near Darwin with
Cretaceous beds of Cenomanian age immediately to the north in Melville
Island. On the mainland these rocks are chiefly made up of whitish
radiolarian shales, which also have yielded belemnites and an
Ichthyosaurus. At the Point Charles Lighthouse the beach is strewn with
a detritus of limonite largely replacing ceplialopods of Cenomanian age.
Between Darwin and Bynoe Harbour the coarse mica-schists, etc., are
considered by Dr. W. G. Woolnough to be probably Archieozoic. They are
intersected by reefs of amblygonite, like the schists of the Ravensthorpe
Goldfield in Western Australia.
The Pine Creek Series which follows consists of quartzites, slates,
chlorite-schists, greywackes, altered tuffs, plivllites, crystalline
limestone, lydian stone, amphibolites, hornblendites, etc. Some basic
rocks and also acid igneous types appear to have been contemporaneous
in the series, which is strongly intruded by granites, diorites and altered
gabbros. The diorites, with which gold reefs are associated, are later
than the granites, the latter being genetically connected with deposits


of tin and wolfram. Copper, zinc, and silver-lead ores also occur in this
series, which can tentatively be grouped with the Mosquito Series of
Western Australia.
At Edith Creek, near the Katherine Telegraph Station, there is a
great development of basalts and coarse basic agglomerates. These are
stratigraphically below the fossiliferous Lower to Middle Cambrian
limestone, and may be correlated provisionally with the Antrim Plateau
basalts of Western Australia. From the Katherine Telegraph Station
southwards to Powell’s Creek there is an immense basin with sediments
of unknown thickness as well as the interbedded flows of basalt lava
and dacite. The upper part of this series at the Katherine and also at
Powell’s Creek contains fossils of Lower Cambrian age of the nature of
trilobites, Salterella, etc. The rocks of this basin when traced east-
wards to the Queensland border, and into Queensland in the
Templeton River area, are found to be extraordinarily rich in well
preserved trilobites and other Cambrian fossils belonging to Middle and
Upper Cambrian time, with, in places, the Redlichia zone at the top of
the Lower Cambrian preserved in outliers.
From south of Attack Creek to the Macdonnell Ranges a large area
of the plateau-shield succeeds, of which very little is at present known.
The area seems to be occupied mostly by gneisses and schists,
probably of Archaeozoic age, the Arunta complex of Mawson and Madigan.
These are capped in places by mesas and buttes of quartzites, slates and
dolomites apparently of Proterozoic age, though in a few cases they
may be undigested blocks of early Aruntan sediments. Running south
the section reaches the critical region of the Macdonnell Ranges, where
Mr. C. T. Madigan and Sir Douglas Mawson, of Adelaide University, in
1927-1931, made important discoveries. From Mt. Sonder southwards
there is a deep-faulted geosyncline. The oldest sediments seen belong to
the Proterozoic Adelaide Series, and rest with strong unconformity
■on the granites, augen-gneisses and mica-schists of the Archa;ozoic
Arunta complex. Dykes of pegmatite, carrying large crystals of tourma-
line and beryl, intersect the complex, and at Arltunga contain huge
muscovite crystals which are worked commercially.
The oldest sediments reposing on the Arunta complex are the
■quartzites, etc., of the Proterozoic Adelaide Series. This formation in the
Macdonnell Ranges has now been termed by Mawson and Madigan the
Pataknurra Series. Its thickness is about 7,500 feet. It can be fairly
correlated with the Adelaide Series, but includes at the top 660 feet of
chocolate-coloured slates, the equivalent of the Purple Slates near
Adelaide. The latter are at present classed by the author as passage beds
between the Cambrian proper and the Proterozoic; so that Pataknurra
Series = Adelaide Series + Purple Slates. As regards fossils, Cryptozoa
.are so abundant as to lead Mawson and Madigan to class the limestones
.as algal limestones. It is possible that the horizon of the Sturtian


Tillite is represented, but this is doubtful. Next above the Pataknurra
Series is the Pataoorta Series, nearly 3,000 feet thick, and undoubtedly
of Cambrian age. It includes calcareous rocks with abundant nodules
built up of Girvanella, and Madigan has discovered massive Archwocya-
thinw limestones, about 1,000 feet thick, just to the east of the eastern
extremity of the Macdonnell Ranges.
The Cambrian strata are separated by an unconformity from the
fossiliferous Larapintine Series of Ordovician age. This latter consists
mostly of quartzites, but comprises also reddish shales and dolomitic
limestones. Its thickness is probably not less than 5,000 feet. It is
rich in Orthis, Isoarca, Raphistoma and large cephalopods.
Overlying the Ordovician rocks are conglomerates many thousands
of feet in thickness on the southern flank of the ranges on the downthrow
side of the great fault running from east to west. Possibly these con-
glomerates belong to some basal portion of the Kamilaroi sequence.
Between the Depot Sandhills and the Goyder River there is consider-
able development of glacial beds, the exact geological age of which is as
yet uncertain; probably they are of Kamilaroi age. From the Goyder
to Mt. Dutton, south of Oodnadatta, the section crosses the Great
Artesian Basin, but the deeper parts of the section here are purely
diagrammatic. At Dalhousie there are at least 100 mound springs.
Most of these are now extinct, but a few are still active, with
pools of clear and more or less fresh warm water in their crater-like
hollows. On the flanks of Mt. Dutton are some very interesting glacial
beds, possibly Cretaceous or Jurassic, or it may be Kamilaroi, but
the exact age is not yet known. Dr. L. K. Ward believes them to
be Cretaceous. The age of the older rocks to the south of Mt. Dutton in
the Peak and Denison Ranges is uncertain, as also is the age of the
lower sedimentary rocks which outcrop to the south of the above range
and pass through the Pernatty Lagoon. At the last locality a copper
deposit occurs in these rocks. Possibly their age may be Ordovician,
but more probably they belong to some strata in the Adelaide Series, or
in the Purple Slate Series above them.
Passing over the pre-Cambrian rocks of the Iron Knob region the
section now reaches an extremely interesting area, namely the Great
Rift Valley of Australia, the western branch of which lies under
Spencer’s Gulf, while the eastern branch is occupied by St. Vincent
Gulf. This sunkland is not only a heavily infaulted area, but it has also
been overthrust along its eastern side by probably a major line of thrust.
It will be noticed that there is in that locality an immense transgression
of the fossiliferous Lower Cambrian rocks on to the strata of the Adelaide
Series. A special feature in the St. Vincent Gulf geosyncline is the
presence of the two great series of glacial beds, viz., the Proterozoic
Sturtian tillite, perhaps over 600 millions of years old, and the Kamilaroi
tillite, possibly dating back about 220 millions of years. After traversing


the almost horizontal limestones of Miocene age of the Mallee country,
with their lignites, the section reaches the Grampians, where there is
evidence of the newest of the Victorian granites, which intrudes rocks
assumed to be of Lower Carboniferous age.
The strata now traversed by the section eastwards from Ararat to
Melbourne are, for the most part, formed by thick sediments of Ordo-
vician age, more or less rich in graptolites and intersected by numerous
old reefs. The famous goldfield of Ballarat, which has yielded up to
date about £30,000,000 sterling of gold, is situated in the neighbourhood
of Mt. Buninyong; this last is an extinct volcano of Tertiary age which
has erupted basalt lavas. Extensive areas of alluvial gravel containing
gold underlie these sheets of basic lava. A very important sunkland
lies to the east of the last locality between the Rowsley Fault and
Selwyn’s Fault on the east side of Port Phillip. Port Thillip itself and
the Melbourne area are within this sunkland. At Western Port the “older
basalts” attain their maximum thickness of about 2,000 feet. The section
reaches the north side of Bass Strait at Cape Woolamai. On the south
side of Bass Strait the section shows that the strata in Tasmania have
a heavy downthrow northwards in the direction of the strait. Bass
Strait itself is a considerable sunkland.
Near Table Cape there is an extensive development of thick glacial
beds of Kamilaroi (Permo-Carboniferous) age. The stratigraphical rela-
tions of these beds in Tasmania agree very closely with those of the
glacial beds developed at Bacchus Marsh in Victoria. Upper Cambrian
rocks are found along this northern part of Tasmania. The foundation
rocks of the island, from here to beyond Cape Raoul, are partly of pre-
Cambrian age, partly of Cambrian, partly of Cambro-Ordovician age,,
these last belonging to the Dundas Slates and the Porphyroid Series.
Between Mount Ida and Mt. Field West there is an infaulted area,,
and to the south of Mt. Wellington, near Hobart, and towards the east
are a number of heavy downthrow faults. The remarkable basal glacial
beds, so well developed at Table Cape and Wynyard, are widely spread
over the peneplain of the central part of Tasmania and extend up to
the east coast. They are followed by marine beds and coal-measures, also
of Kamilaroi age, and these in turn are capped by valuable productive
coal-measures of Triassic age. All these rocks have been very heavily
intruded, probably in Jurassic time, by dykes and sills of enstatite-
quartz-dolerite. These constitute the great rampart of the Tiers of
Tasmania, rising to from 3,000 to 4,000 feet above sea-level, and the
majestic residuals such as Mt. Wellington, Mt. Field West, Mt. Ida, Mt.
Pelion, etc., all over 4,000 feet above sea-level, and in Cradle Mountain
and Ben Lomond exceeding 5,000 feet in altitude. It is therefore to the
intrusion of these dolerites that the scenery of Tasmania owes much of
its grandeur.


Section 9.
Mount Hann to Shark Bay, Western Australia,. —Section 9 com-
mences at Mt. Hann in Western Australia and passes southerly over
basalts of unknown geological age. Probably in part these are Tertiary,
but the epidotised varieties, which are extensive, are mostly Proterozoic,
and are interbedded with the sediments of the Elvire Series. Dr. H. I.
Jensen records phonolites in the basic series at Wave Hill in North
Australia, apparently a continuation of this volcanic series, but he
regards the age of the lavas as Carboniferous.
South of the Mount Synott Range Proterozoic rocks, probably refer-
able to the Mosquito Creek Series, are encountered, and next to this belt
is shown diagrammatically the zone of probable Archteozoic rocks. The
latter, near Granite Hills, on the Margaret River, consist of biotite-
sillimanite gneiss, and staurolite-bearing schists occur at three localities
in the Kimberley region. Gold-reefs appear to be associated mostly with
rocks of the Mosquito Series.
South of Mt. Amy a major fault ushers in massive Devonian lime-
stones of Frasnian age followed by limestones, flaggy sandstones and
shales of Lower Carboniferous age. This limestone, at Price’s Creek,
has yielded traces of mineral oil.
Overlying the Lower Carboniferous strata is the largest mass of
Kamilaroi rock known in Australia, namely, that of the Desert Basin.
This basin is about 300 miles across on the line of section. The strata
are of vast unknown thickness. Much of the surface is obscured by hills
of rolling sand-dunes. There is a well-marked glacial bed of Kamilaroi
age extending right across the basin. This basin yields artesian water of
good quality from strata of late Palajozoic age, as was forecast by the
former Government Geologist, A. Gibb Maitland. Traces of mineral
oil have been met with in the lower part of this formation.
Near Lower Liverynga Station on the Fitzroy River, not far from
where the leucitite volcanic neck is shown, thin coals and coaly shales
occur. Calamites and possible lepidodendroid plants appear to be asso-
ciated with this horizon, which perhaps is of the age of the Irwin
River Coal-measures, the equivalent of the Greta Coal-measures of New
South Wales. So far no productive coal has been found in this vast
basin, but nearly all the bores, made for artesian water purposes, have
started below the horizon of the Greta Coal-measures.
The rocks of the leucitite volcanic necks, of which there are eight,
have been shown to contain no less than.l4% of potash. The stratigraphy
of the deeper parts of the basin, where possible Cambrian and Ordovician
rocks are shown, is diagrammatic. To the south-west of the margin of the
basin Dr. F. P. Clapp has recorded an outlier of the Kamilaroi (Permo-
Carboniferous) glacial beds at Braeside. To the south the basin is
bounded by the gold-bearing rocks of the Pilbara Goldfield. This is the


type area for the development of the Nullagine rocks. At Nullagine
itsqlf the series commences with massive conglomerates from 300 to 500
feet in thickness, with very coarse blocks. It is strikingly like the banket
of South Africa, and, like the latter, it contains both alluvial gold and
alluvial diamonds. Large areas of this have not yet been worked. A
considerable deposit of tantalite, enough to supply the world’s present
demands for years to come, occurs in this field.
From the Fortescue Eiver over the top of Mt. Bruce, 4,024 feet (the
highest mountain in Western Australia), and on to Mt. Augustus, there
is a thick and extensive volcanic series, mostly of basalts, but partly
of rhyolites and rhyolite tuff.
Further south, near Mt. Dalgety, the edge is reached of a one-sided
basin of Kamilaroi age. The structure in it, known as the Wooramel
Dome, is being tested for possible mineral oil. Some salt and gypsum
occur in the Kamilaroi beds of this area. The basin is artesian.
In this part of the basin the artesian water comes partly from
the Kamilaroi horizon, partly from the Jurassic, partly from the
Cretaceous and partly from the Tertiary rocks. ’ At Hamelin Pool excel-
lent supplies of artesian water (individual bores yielding over 1,000,000
gallons a day) are derived from the Tertiary strata.
Section 10. 1
From Dongara to East of Irwin River Goal-field, W.A.— Section 10
shows the small coal-field of the Irwin Kiver and the unconformity that
exists between the strata of Kamilaroi age and the overlying Jurassic
sandstones. The section also shows the possible concealed coal-fields
under Dongara. There is a considerable development in this coal-field of
the glacial horizon known as the Lyons Conglomerate. These measures
have been proved to contain in the aggregate about 20 feet of coal in
seams varying from about 1 foot to 12 feet in thickness. The character
of the coal has as yet not been tested at all in the deeper part of the
basin in the direction of Dongara. The bores at Yardarino and Dongara
yield artesian water from Jurassic strata.
Section ll. 2
The Collie Goal-field, IF.A. —Section 11 shows the Collie Coal-field,
the principal productive coal-field at present being worked in Western
Australia. There are three distinct series of coal seams in this basin, the
upper being known as the Cardiff, the middle series as the Collieburn,
and the lower as the Collie. At the base of the middle series of
coal-measures foraminifera of Kamilaroi age have been discovered
in the sandstones and mudstones which intervene between this middle
set of coal-measures and the lowest set. It has been assumed, there-
h
1 Chiefly after Dr. W. G. Woolnough.
2 Chiefly after A. Gibb Maitland.


fore, that the age of these marine sandstones is perhaps equivalent
to that of what is known as the Upper Marine Series of the type district
for the Kamilaroi system in the Hunter River district of New South
Wales. If this correlation is correct, then the bottom series of coal-
measures of the Collie Coal-field is the equivalent, or approximately so,
of the Gi'eta coal of New South Wales. This supposition is strengthened
by the fact that the powdered coal from the lower seams yields a black
streak like that of the Greta coals of New South Wales. The middle
and upper coals yield a brown streak. Great care has to be exercised
in working these coal-seams on account of the strata between the different
sets of coals being highly charged with water. Their porosity is, of
course, connected with the protection afforded by the hard incompres-
sible underlying rocks of the great shield, which has prevented the con-
solidation of the overlying sediments during that long period of time
from the close of the Palaeozoic era down to the present day. The Collie
coals are somewhat hydrous, containing about from 10% to 14% of
water. The coal has a low percentage of ash and is of good quality. The
estimated supplies available, to a depth of 2,000 feet, approximate in the
gross to about 3,500 million tons, so that these coal-measures are an asset
of vast value to the State.


HISTORICAL REVIEW.
If we could seat ourselves in H. G. Wells’ “time machine" and set
the lever so as to speed back to the time when the earliest foundations
visible to us of Australasia were being laid, and could then reverse the
lever, so as to start slowly back again to the present, what wonderful
pictures of the past, what visions of the future would be revealed! Some
1,600 millions of years ago we see, as in a glass darkly, a greater
Australia, including in its borders not only New Guinea and possibly
Tasmania, but also Fiji and perhaps New Caledonia. Yilgarnia is the
name given to the present main surviving mass of this land situated
mostly in Western Australia. Outliers of this occur in North Australia,
Central Australia, in Queensland in the Leichhardt and Kalkadoon
conglomerates, in the gneisses and schists of Cloncurry, and the Einas-
leigli Goldfields and easterly to the present coast at Facing Island,
Barnard and Dunk Islands; in South Australia in the Eyre Peninsula
and in the Barossian Series of the Mt. Lofty and Flinders Ranges; in
Victoria in the crystalline rocks of Glenelg and Casterton; in the
Willyama complex of the Barrier Ranges in New South Wales, and
possibly in the gneisses of Gatcombe Head in Facing Island, and of
Dunk and Barnard Islands in the Great Barrier Reef area of Queens-
land. Australasia looms large, but as yet without known shores. This
land (now a crystalline complex of paragneisses formed from old sedi-
ments, and of orthogneisses), is surely an Archseozoic complex, perhaps
an equivalent in time of the sediments of the Couchicliing, of the igneous
rocks of the Keewatin, and of the Laurentian gneisses of North America.
Next in the time machine our vision is obscured by thick clouds,
but after a while they are fanned apart by great volcanic outbursts and
we mark the lakes of lava, the “older greenstones” spreading over much
of Yilgarnia, where are now the richest goldfields of Western Australia.
Are these lavas Archaeozoic, perhaps Keewatin in age? Time deter-
minations from the lead-uranium ratios of certain Australian minerals
are as yet too few to justify an absolute date being assigned to them.
Again our vision is clouded, but we can just descry for the first time
some possible shorelines at Kanowna and Kurrawang in Western
Australia, perhaps also near the Mt. Isa Mines in Queensland in the
stretched pebble conglomerates of the Leichhardt-Kalkadoon Series. At
Kanowna a tillite seems intercalated in coarse conglomerate, a sign
perhaps of snowfields on the highlands, or even perhaps of an ice age,
the first as yet suggested for Australia.
Next we see Yilgarnia in a tremor as the molten rocks of the
Newer Greenstones are being forced upwards; and next the whole of
Australia west of a line from Broken Hill to Cloncurry is convulsed by
the greatest of all the granitic intrusions that have ever taken place


liere, that of the Mosquito granites, which form the vast batlio-
liths of Western Australia. To this age probably belong also the
unstressed granites of North Australia, of the Musgrave and Everard
Eanges, of southern Eyre’s Peninsula, of Boolcamata and Olary in South
Australia, of Mundi Mundi near Broken Hill in New South Wales, and
of Cloncurry in Queensland.
This seems to have been the great metalliferous epoch of Australia
bringing gold, tin, tantalum, amblygonite, etc., into the Western
Australian and North Australian mineral fields; and possibly to a
late phase of this belongs the introduction of the silver-lead and zinc
ores of Broken Hill, New South Wales, those of Mt. Isa and Lawn Hills,
Queensland, and perhaps the copper deposits of Wallaroo and Moonta,
South Australia, though these, like that of the Burra, may have
originated later.
The iron ores of Yampi Sound and Wilgie Mia in Western Australia,
those of the Iron Knob region of South Australia, and of Mts. Philp and
Leviathan in Queeusland may also be tentatively placed here. Evidence
as to the age of the above metallogenetic epoch is afforded by the
ratio of uranium to uranium-lead in the radium-bearing ilmenite
of Olary in South Australia, giving a date of about 960 millions of years
ago. The monazite at Normanville to the south of Adelaide gives an
age of about 840 millions of years for a local rutiliferous pegmatite.
This would put the Mosquito granites near in age to the Algomian
granites of North America, the latter being older Proterozoic.
Do we now see any life upon Australia? First the Corella Series
between Mt. Isa and Cloncurry, Queensland, unique in the Common-
wealth, as consisting of a highly marmorised limestone, perhaps several
miles in thickness, suggests contemporaneous life. The Corella Lime-
stone appears to have been the earliest known ancestor of the Australian
Great Bander Beef. Another more direct piece of evidence is afforded
by the black carbonaceous shales and slates of Mt. Isa, which contain
obscure traces of small animals, one hardly knows whether annelid or
insect, up to about 4 mm. in length.
Up to now, the visibility from the time machine has been bad,
but it becomes much clearer as the continents and seas of Nullagine
time, newer Proterozoic, “swim into our ken.” In the Pilbara region
of Western Australia we see a vast and impressive strand marked
by the famous Nullagine conglomerates, thfe Australian “banket,” carry-
ing alluvial gold and alluvial diamonds. These have a distinctly fluvio-
glacial to glacial aspect, and we see perhaps the highlands to the north
of Nullagine snow-capped (as were those near the Witwatersrand gold-
field of South Africa, which there supplied the material of the banket as
well as that of the tillite conformably' underlying it). So widely do the
Nullagine seas with their glauconitic greensands transgress the
older pre-Cambrian rocks of the Australian shield, that to the north and


east of old Yilgarnia the “shield” is now broken up into large islands.
Later extensive flows of lava, rhyolites to basalts, follow, and much later,
in a sea transgressing these basalts, the Carawine dolomites fill old
valleys in these lavas in the Oakover River area of Western Australia.
Row again for a time our vision is clouded. Then comes a clear
and wonderful sight. Near Adelaide is part of a great epicontinental
sea, a later development perhaps of the Nullagine sea. It extends right
up to the Kimberley area of Western Australia. At Tea tree Gully near
Adelaide are sandbanks in that sea, teeming with giant annelids and
wonderful arthropods. Some of the latter, from six inches to over a foot
in length, are armoured with handsomely sculptured plates. Other forms
again, of which the jointed limbs are each from three to four inches in
length, belong to still larger forms, and seem, while arthropod, to have
strong affinity with the annelids. So primitive are all the forms that
they are probably removed from the Cambrian not merely by a period,
but by a whole era of geological time.
Next we see a great change come over Australia. In the Kimberley
region of Western Australia eruptions, probably in Keeweenawan time,
produce the largest lava floods that ever deluged Australia. The fiery
streams now stretch from Mt. Hann in the Kimberley area to
at least as far east as the Roper River in North Australia, and southerly
to south of Powell’s Creek in Central Australia. We see the glow of
the lava even as far south as Wooltana in the north-eastern Flinders
Range in South Australia, and at Mt. Arrowsmith, 150 miles north of
Broken Hill in New South Wales.
Next another marvel befalls. The deluge of basalt lava is followed
by a wonderful ice age, producing the Sturtian Tillite, as it has been
named by Professor Howchin. Practically the whole of the Flinders
Range of South Australia, including the Gawler Range, and the Broken
Hill region of New South Wales, are now white with snowfields. Tillites
grow to actually 1,000 feet in thickness. In South Africa the “Numees
tillite,” 800 feet thick, is approximately of the same age as the Sturtian
Tillite. The occurrence of a probably contemporaneous tillite at the head
of navigation of the Yang-tse in China suggests that the glaciation at
this time is world-wide, for it affects both hemispheres simultaneously.
The severity of this ice age appears to have largely exterminated the
marine fauna of giant annelids, and large primitive arthropods.
Next again come clouds for a long space while Australia is passing
from pre-Cambrian into Cambrian time. We see vast thicknesses, 3,000
to perhaps 10,000 feet, of red beds with thin limestones without deter-
minable fossils, being deposited in the area of the Flinders Ranges and
Lake Torrens. This is soon after the Sturtian Ice Age, but we know not
whence the red beds come, or precisely what they signify, unless it be
prolonged aridity. Are they to The correlated with the Torridonian red
beds of Scotland, or are they merely of Lower Cambrian Age? In any


case the passage of Australia from pre-Cambrian into Cambrian time is
wrapped in obscurity, but from now" onwards the visibility steadily
improves. One marks now bright patches and tongues of ocean creeping
over the red land. Trilobites swarm in these seas, where grow immense
reefs of Archwocyathince limestones up to 1,000 feet in thickness. These
spread from Sellick’s Hill to the south of Adelaide, to at least as far
north as the eastern end of the Macdonnell Ranges. That the water of
these Lower Cambrian seas is clear is evident from the abundance of
nodules of (Hrvanella which go to form the Girvanella limestones in the
Flinders and Macdonnell Ranges and in the Kimberley region. The
Lower Cambrian sea is probably continuous from the Ord River near
Wyndham in Western Australia to south of Adelaide, and a long arm,
Amadeus Strait, extends from it westwards between the Macdonnell and
the Musgrave-Mann Ranges, probably joining another Lower Cambrian
sea in what is now the Arafura sea. Later the Middle Cambrian sea is
seen to be more restricted than the Lower Cambrian sea, and extends
from the Barclay Tableland to Central Victoria, where spilitic basalts
are interstratifled with Protospongia cherts.
Next we observe that the sea migrates southwards in Upper Cambrian
time. It commences to the west of Duchess in Queensland, and extends
south-south-eastwards into Tasmania. In this last State we mark a great
development of so-called Cambro-Ordovician strata, the Dundas Slates,
with strongly marked alkaline igneous rocks of the Porphyroid Series.
We see as w r e pass from Cambrian to Ordovician time the epicontinental
seas migrate southwards and eastwards. The greater part of eastern
Australia is submerged east of a line from Charlotte Sound in Queens-
land to the east end of the Macdonnells (with Amadeus Strait still
persisting westwards towards the Ninety Mile Beach). Thence the
strand trends to Cobar in New South Wales, and thence to the Glenelg
River in Victoria. The shore line of this great Ordovician Sea is well
marked in the Macdonnell Ranges by the massive basal conglomerates of
the Larapintine Series. Elsewhere the deposits are mostly pelagic, rich
in remains of graptolites, whose zones correspond closely with those of
the Northern Hemisphere.
A revolution of Taconic (Older Caledonian) age ends Ordovician
time. Amadeus Strait dries, and is never again submerged, and the east
coast of Australia migrates still further eastwards.
In Silurian time it is doubtful whether we can see any part of
Australia submerged west of the meridian of 141° E., but east of a line
from Chillagoe to Melbourne the Silurian Seas dominate what is now
eastern Australia, and their reef corals flourish as far south as
Tasmania in 43° S. latitude. Now for the first time we note traces of
verdure on the land, where grow the earliest known vascular land plants,
Ilostimella sp. and Thurxophyton. These are found at Walhalla in the


Lower Silurian rocks of Victoria. And now the scene changes greatly. In
eastern Australia and Tasmania, the warm Silurian seas teeming with
reef-forming corals give place to Lower Devonian land, the emergence
accompanied by spectacular volcanic eruptions. From Gippsland in
Victoria to the Featherbed Range near Chillagoe in Queensland, we see
volcanoes of Andean proportions pouring forth streams of rhyolitic lavas,
the air intermittently darkened with grey tuff. Meanwhile much of New
England and south-eastern Queensland remains as a sea of some depth
abounding in siliceous-shelled radiolaria, forming an ooze which con-
solidates later into thick deposits of jasper and chert. Then once more
in south-eastern Australia the land sinks, and the Middle Devonian seas
spread inland. It is now sea from Buchan and Bindi in Victoria to
the Tauri River in New Guinea, an epicontinental sea stretching west-
wards to beyond Burrinjuck and Capertee in New South Wales, and to
beyond Silverwood, Clermont and the Burdekin Basin in Queensland.
Volcanic eruptions continue in places, yielding andesites and andesitic
tuffs, 15,000 feet thick in the Rockhampton area. Armoured fish like
Ganorhynclms browse among the coral groves. In the Burdekin Basin
the coral limestones reach the great thickness of 7,000 feet. The downs
along these shores are green with the lowly and graceful stems, in
appearance like pussy willows, of the Middle Devonian plant Schizo-
podium, close ally of Asteroxylon of the contemporaneous Rhynie Flora
of Aberdeen in Scotland. Later forests arise of arborescent clubmosses,
Protolepidodendron and Lepidodendron australe, some 6 inches in width
and perhaps 15 feet high. There follows an obscure stage when epi-
continental seas give place further inland to lakes and swamps.
In eastern Victoria this change from Middle to Upper Devonian
time is marked by earth movement, erosion and submergence, and in
places by an angular unconformity of 30° to 10°. In New South
Wales the Upper Devonian sea spreads as far west as Wilcannia. In
Victoria in late Devonian or Lower Carboniferous time it reaches the
area where now the Grampians rise. The climate inland is arid and
probably the hinterland has many a red desert, but towards the coast
are numerous long lakes, like those of the Drummond Range area of
Queensland, of the Widdin-Cowra area in New South Wales, the
Cathedral Range area in Victoria, etc. This is the epoch of the ostra-
coderm fish. Dipnoid and other types are well represented in these
western lakes, which become vast fish ponds. Next we note renewed
volcanic eruptions producing the extensive dacites and rhyolites of
Upper Devonian time in Victoria and other parts of eastern Australia,
and this ends Devonian time proper. In the epi-Devonian we see
foldings of the sediments and land and sea floor quivering by reason
of vast intrusions of granite, granodiorite, adamellite, etc., ending
in a great metallogenetic phase, Svhich brings vast mineral wealth
to eastern Australia and Tasmania. At the approach of Carboniferous


time, so momentous and dramatic a period for eastern Australia,
great changes in geography and climate supervene. The red beds
of the Upper Devonian, so characteristic of that formation, have
scarcely any counterpart throughout the whole thickness of the
Carboniferous rocks. Once more the eastern coast of Australia
migrates further eastward. That the climate is still warm in the early
part of Lower Carboniferous time, the Burindi, is evidenced by the large
size of reef-forming corals, like Lithostrotion and Aphrophyllum. Oolitic
limestones are characteristic from the Manning River in New South
Wales to Stanwell Park in Queensland. On land there now appears
associated with Stigmaria, Lepidodendron, and the tree-fern-like Glepsy-
dropsis, the dark foliage of forests of the conifer Arthropitys. Visean
time ends, and now perhaps about the epoch which separates the Lower
from the Upper Culm, a vast epeirogenic movement, with orogenic
thrusts from the Pacific, drives the Vis6an seas right off the map of the
Australia of to-day. Highland massifs, perhaps of Himalayan propor-
tions, arise in the Bathurst-Monaro region, and are crowned with great
snowfields and glaciers. The torrential waters of the summer thaw
sweep vast volumes of coarse shingle down to the shores of a chain of
lakes extending from north of Port Stephens to the Nandewar Mountains
of New South Wales, and beyond. These iluvio-glacial conglomerates
attain a thickness of from one thousand to two thousand feet, and are
probably a flysch facies of contemporaneous mountain building. Inten-
sive volcanic action (with perhaps injection of serpentine along major
overthrusts) accompanies the great uplift. Lavas and tuffs, mostly
andesitic, finally rhyolitic and keratophyric, aggregating 5,000 feet in
thickness, follow. At the close of the eruptions the glaciation becomes
more intense. The Lepidodendron-StigmariorUlodendron-Pitys Flora
gradually dies out in eastern Australia, the hardy forms Rhacopteris,
Cardiopteris and ArcJiceocalamites alone surviving this great Kuttung
ice age in Australia (as they did in the Sierra Chica de Zonda to the
south of San Juan in the Argentine, during a contemporaneous ice
age there). But now, after a clouded interval of unknown duration,
we see a much changed Australia. A greater whiteness than ever is
upon all the land to the south of a line from Kempsey in New South
Wales to the Fitzroy Valley in tropical Western Australia. This is
the Upper Carboniferous (?) Ice Age of the Dwyka tillites of South
Africa, possibly of the Talchir tillites of India and certainly of the
middle tillites of Chica de Zonda, South America. Then the land
along eastern Australia and Tasmania, and in the Kimberley
region of Western Australia, once more sinks. Transgressive epi-
continental seas cover much of Tasmania, and eastern Australia, from
the Lower Hunter area in New Sopth Wales to the Bowen Basin of
Queensland. A new flora, the Gungamopteris-Glossopteris-Dadoxylon
Flora has replaced the Rhacopteris-Lepidodendron Flora of the Kuttung.


Volcanic eruptions accompany these crustal movements, producing
analcite basalts. Upper Carboniferous time seems now to pass quietly
into the Permian without any great revolution, the passage marked
perhaps by the minor ice age accompanying the main Eurydesma
cordatum horizon and its considerable transgression in the Maitland
area of New South Wales.
In the New England region and in southern Queensland granite is
injected. This brings with it tin, tungsten, molybdenum and bismuth
into New England and eastern Queensland. This is in Lower Permian
time of the Kamilaroi Period. About the end of Lower Permian time
subsidence ceases. All around Australia from the Bowen Basin to the
Irwin Biver Basin a great stillstand follows a slight elevatory joggle.
This is an epoch of immense shallow lakes and swamps, when in the
cold moist climate peaty and other fuel-forming plant growths are at a
maximum, bringing great fuel wealth to Australia, for these strata later
become the Collinsville Coal-measures of Queensland, the Greta and
Coorabin (?) Coal-measures of New South Wales, the Latrobe and Bruny
Island Coal-measures of Tasmania, and contain the Collie coals at base
of the Collie Coal-field, and the Irwin Kiver coals, Western Australia.
Then again the sea transgresses, burying the fuel deposits under thick
sediments. At least two advances of the highland glaciers are evidenced
by large erratics in these beds, and then the late Palaeozoic submergence
ends. That great gulf, the Desert Basin of Western Australia, is
reclaimed through uplift. In New South Wales sub-alkaline lavas break
out at the end of Middle Permian time and then numerous lakes and
swamps replace the Middle Permian Sea, and form the Upper Bowen
Coal-measures of Queensland and New South Wales, the Swansea and
Sandfly coal-measures of Tasmania and the Collieburn and Cardiff,
Donnybrook and Nannup Coal-measures of Western Australia. Thus for
a second time the Commonwealth is enriched in fuel.
There is also much contemporaneous volcanic action in the Upper
Bowen Series of Queensland, and in some of the Newcastle Measures of
New South Wales, when finely divided volcanic ashes entomb a rich,
though dwarfed, insect fauna contemporaneous with forests of conifers,
the trees now being over 100 feet high. The first labyrintliodonts as yet
found in Australia, Bothriceps huxleyi, and B. major, make their appear-
ance near the top of the Upper Coal-measures of New South Wales. By
this time the coast of eastern Australia from Cape Howe to Cape York
has permanently emerged from the sea, except for a tract between Mary-
borough and Bundaberg, which late becomes submerged in the Aptian
time of the Lower Cretaceous. We see next in early and middle Mesozoic
time immense lakes dominating the scenery in eastern and to some extent
in central Australia. These lakgy are at least as large as the whole
area of Great Britain and together, and extend from the
Brisbane coast to Leigh’s Creek in South Australia. In Triassic time the


Glossopteris-Gangamopteris Flora lias entirely disappeared, being
replaced by a I'hinnfeldia-TcenidpterisSchizoiieum-Ginkgo Flora. In
Lower Triassic rocks, in the Domain near Hobart, the oldest Australian
reptile, one of the Captorrhinidw, comes into view. In the Harrabeen
Series, of Lower Bunter age, a small labyrintliodont, a brachyopid,
Platyceps wilkinsoni, occurs, while half-way up iu the Hawkesbury Sand-
stone Series a Gapitosaurus fixes the age as Middle Bunter. In the Upper
Triassic Wianamatta swamps of Hew South Wales we see that slow-
moving monster, the 11 feet long Cyclotosaurus, preying on a rich fish
fauna. This complete stereospondylous amphibian fixes the age of the
Wianamatta Series and of the important coal-measures of Ipswich in
Queensland as Lower Keuper. At the beginning of the Ipswich Epoch
we see in Brisbane itself showers of white-hot volcanic ash set fire to the
fine cedar-like conifers, truly a fossil bush fire, as evidenced by the
charred stems of these noble trees, over 150 feet high. At Denmark Hill,
near Ipswich, we see, later, fine volcanic dust choking and burying a
rich insect fauna. Hext in Jurassic time we see Australia bridging the
Tasman Sea and joining Hew Zealand; and the former great lakes
grow larger than ever, the Walloon Lake extending from Dubbo and the
Clarence Basin in Hew South Wales northwards to the Cape York
Peninsula, and westwards probably to just north of Tarcoola, and to the
junction of the Finke and Goyder Rivers, in Central Australia. The flora
is dominated by the ferns Gladophlebis and Tceniopteris spatulata, and by
cycads such as Otozamites feistmanteli. Once more we see peaty growths
in swamp and lake going to form the coal-measures of Rosewood-Walloon,
Clifton and Tannymorel in Queensland, the Clarence coal-measures of
Hew South Wales, and the important Wonthaggi coal-measures of
Victoria. These swampy areas near Cape Paterson are now haunted by
large carnivorous dinosaurs. In Queensland, too, about Middle Jurassic
time, we see the Saurischian reptile Agrosaurus macgilUvrayi,
about the size of a sheep, make its appearance together with
dinosaurs 40 feet in length, of Rhwtosaurus type, dragging their huge
bulk around the shores of the Walloon Lake in south-east Queensland.
In Western Australia we see the cycad Otozamites stretching at intervals
around the coast from Mingenew (Irwin River Coal-field) to King
Sound. In many places we witness its gradual submergence by a sea
of Bajocian age, from near King Sound on the north to at least as far-
south as Geraldton. In Tasmania, perhaps in Jurassic time, we see the
earlier sediments pulsating as they are being lifted vertically from 1,000
to 3,000 feet by immense sills of enstatite-quartz-dolerite, destined later
to dominate the majestic scenery of t the Tasmanian Tiers. The newest
sediments of the Walloon Lake, or vast future importance as under-
ground reservoirs or water for the Great Artesian Basin, are now


deposited perhaps in Lower Cretaceous time. At Lougreacli, Roma,
Orallo, and elsewhere in Queensland, - mineral oil is forming in these
strata.
And now from the time machine one beholds a vast geographical
change sweeping over the Australian landscape. In common with
most of the world, Australia is flooded by Cretaceous seas.
The old Jurassic to early Cretaceous land bridges between Australia
and New Zealand break down never to be repaired, at least not up till
now. The sea returns in a strength not realised since the Proterozoic
Nullagine time, covering the lakes and lands from Carpentaria and
perhaps Maryborough right across the continent to the Great Australian
Bight, and dividing Australia into two islands, the smaller one to the east,
the larger to the west. The seas are cold at first, without reef-forming
corals, the marine forms of life being characteristic of Patagonian and
Siberian latitudes. The highlands of South Australia, especially perhaps
the Gawler Ranges, are white with snowflelds, from which glaciers
descend to sea-level, and these launch moraine-laden icebergs which strew
with erratics the floor of this sea from Wilcannia and perhaps southern
Queensland to Tibooburra in New South Wales, and Marree, Mt. Ebor,
and Dalhousie in South Australia. This is seemingly a minor glaciation,
for from Mitchell in southern Queensland to the northern shores of the
Flinders Ranges the seas are covered with rafts of large coniferous logs,
swept down from the lowland forests by the thaw-water floods of spring.
These Aptian seas abound in diatoms and rotifers.
In eastern Queensland vegetation accumulates which later forms
the Burrum and Styx coal-fields. Dicotyledonous plants, Celastrophyl-
lum, etc., appear for the first time in the Albian (?) flora of the Styx
Coal-field.
In Albian to Cenomanian times the abundance of enaliosaurian
reptiles and the large size of the cephalopods betoken a warming of the
waters.
And now in Middle Cretaceous time the floor of this mediterranean
sea heaves and undulates in sympathy with the great contem-
poraneous orogeny in New Zealand. Next the sea is gone, but lakes
return, of which the greatest is the Winton Lake stretching from
Hughenden in Northern Queensland to beyond Lake Eyre. Swampy and
lacustrine accumulations of vegetation again add fuel wealth to Australia.
In Western Australia the Cretaceous seas survive along the
west coast at least into Santonian time. And now we see a
great crustal revolution, perhaps contemporaneous with the Laramie
disturbance of North America. The Burrum and Styx coal-fields are
crumpled landwards by mighty thrusts coming from the floor of the
Pacific. Possibly that great range volcanoes, the Tasman-
tides, which now rise to a height of 14.000 feet above the floor of the


Tasman Sea, over 100 miles east of Brisbane, may have had their
foundation laid during this Laramie revolution.
Now from our time machine we have no clear vision as to what
next is happening in Australia and Tasmania, but on the north coast of
New Guinea there stretches a land mass, of which the Bougainville and
Cyclops Kanges are surviving remnants, a sea lying to the south. Nummu-
lites swarm in this sea, perhaps the only true Eocene Sea within the
present region of the Commonwealth. Meanwhile we see that almost
the whole of the Commonwealth has been reduced to one of the most
perfect peneplains imaginable; the slope of the land seawards being so
slight as barely to suffice for any run-off after rain. The sluggish senile
streams meander through the great alluvial plains which they built in
the period of their maturity, and inland on the nearly level land surface,
alternately soaked and parched, the duricrust forms a white to brown
and reddish skin covering and concealing the underlying rock. Only
perhaps along the central and southern coastal belt of Queensland, where
Laramie movement had been intense, and possibly in the sill-displaced
blocks of Tasmania, have any elevations escaped base-levelling. Of the
Eocene land animals and plants of Australia we see nothing at all.
Next in Oligocene time a great change comes over the monotony
of the Australian landscape. A vast subsidence ensues from Bass Strait
and south-eastern Victoria all along a zone just east of the present east
coast of Australia, from Cape Howe to Cape York. We now behold
molten streams of the basalt lavas inundate southern and eastern
Victoria from Port Phillip to beyond Morwell and the Dargo High
Plains, and cover with lakes of fire much of eastern New South Wales
(especially New England) and south-eastern Queensland. These lavas
bury the gold-bearing and tin-bearing gravels and gem sands of the
Oligocene rivers, and so form the old deep leads. In Mio-Oligoeene time
we see the Indian Ocean encroaching in Western Australia at North
West Cape and Exmouth Gulf, and probably also at Shark Bay. Later
in early Middle Miocene (Burdigalian) time we see the sea invade once
more all the southern coast of Australia from near the Gippsland Lakes
of Victoria by way of the Mallee country and the old Murray Gulf and
St. Vincent and Spencer’s Gulfs, and the Nullarbor Plains, to the low-
lands at the foot of the Stirling Range in Western Australia. In the
Murray Gulf the sea spreads inland for over 200 miles to beyond
Wentworth in New South Wales, and in New Guinea the greater part
of that immense island is so covered by this Middle Miocene Sea that we
see perhaps no land at all south of the Cyclops-Bougainville Range and
the now submerged land beyond them. All along the shores of this great
Burdigalian sea foraminiferal limestones rich in Lepidocyclina are
deposited, and the warmth of the seas is attested by the presence of
reef-forming corals, such as OrTtfeella, even as far south as Table Cape
on the north coast of Tasmania.


Our time machine now fails ,i<> reveal to us any clear picture,
especially of New Guinea, as we pass from Burdigalian time to that of
the Upper Miocene. Either now, or in Pliocene time, there was a great
revolution, and one of the immense mountain ranges of the world, the
Cordillera of New Guinea, arises from the ooze of the Lepidocyclina
Sea floor in gigantic folds. These are part of the Netherlands-East
Indian and Burmese arcs, and through them are related to the Hima-
layan folds. We see the great folds creeping southwards perhaps, and
now and again springing towards Australia in long lines of oblique
gliding-planes producing nappe-structure. Meanwhile on the mainland of
Australia we see lacustrine conditions alternate with marine, particu-
larly between Gippsland and the Murray Gulf, and at this time in the
Morwell-Yallourn lake some 800 feet of lignite accumulate. The flora
has widespread forests of beech, and in Australia the handsome Celery-
Top Pine with its candelabra-like branches is now associated with several
varieties of Eucalyptus, of Banksia, Gallitris and Telopea (Waratah), so
that it possesses an essentially modern Australian aspect. At Table Cape
in the Upper Miocene we see an opossum, the earliest marsupial as yet
recorded from anywhere in Australia.
Next in New Guinea, in Mio-Pliocene time, we see in the foredeep
to the south of the main Cordillera, as well as a little later in a deep
basin developing as the result of “back-folding,” north of the Sepik
Valley, the present principal oil-yielding beds of New Guinea forming,
viz., the Finsch Coast Beds to the north, and the Upper Purari Beds to
the south of the present Cordillera. These accumulate to thicknesses
of five to ten thousand feet. Meanwhile in early Pliocene time the
submergence slightly deepens in the Murray and St. Vincent Gulfs
and in the Nullarbor Plains; and a remarkable intermittent chain of
alkaline volcanoes springs into existence from near Casterton in Western
Victoria through Mt. Macedon and Omeo to the Gib Rock, near Bowral,
thence to the Canoblas, the Warrumbungle, the Nandewar Mountains,
the Lansdowne Plateau and Macpherson Ranges in New South Wales, the
Flinders to Glasshouse Mountains, the Yeppoon and Clermont puys in
Queensland.
Meanwhile much time passes. We see wide shallow valleys being
gradually eroded out of the older basalts and their associated sediments,
and the alluvial gold and tin of the older deep leads becomes more con-
centrated in the newer deep leads, and then comes one of the most
stupendous events in our geological history, as spectacular as it was
economically important, the pouring out from countless fissures of the
newer basalts of eastern Australia, Tasmania and New Guinea, and
probably of the small patches of basalt at Kangaroo Island in South
Australia, and Bunbury in and larger patches in
the Kimberley region of Western Australia. Important as these great
lava flows have been in preserving to us the precious shallow leads of gold


and tin by sealing them safely under a thick stony covering, this
economic aspect pales in importance as compared with the vast perma-
nent wealth added by the ricli basaltic soils. The leads of gold and tin
may have yielded £100,000,000, but relatively soon they became exhausted,
whereas the richness of the basaltic soils of Victoria, and northern
Tasmania, the Monaro and New England areas of New South Wales,
south-east Queensland, with the Darling Downs, Toowoomba regions
and all its basaltic areas up to the Atherton Tableland will last for
untold thousands of years.
Great and prolonged subsidence along the east coast of Australia
accompanies these vast extravasations of basaltic lava. And now comes
a great change with far-reaching results to the climate and rivers of
Australia. In late Fliocene time, while in places the volcanic iires have
scarce died down, a great compensating uplift raises the old peneplain
of eastern Australia and Tasmania many thousands of feet. This, the
Kosciusko epoch, ushers in the modern cycle of erosion, now largely in
the canyon-cutting stage. In west Victoria and south-eastern South
Australia the Murray Gulf is drained. The great liorst of the Flinders
Range, already rising in early Pliocene time while the Rift Valley of
Australia was sinking, continues to rise. All along the shores of the
Great Australian Bight elevation is in progress, and, aided by subsidence
in the Lake Eyre region, it tends to cut off the drainage to the sea of
great rivers like the ancestors of the Finke, Cooper’s Creek and the
Diamantina, and so to establish the modern region of internal drainage.
Even in Western Australia the Darling Peneplain undergoes an
uplift of about 1,000 feet, while a long narrow sunkland develops along
the west coast from east of Cape Leeuwin to beyond Geraldton. On this
new landscape there now descends the Pleistocene Ice Age. Half
Tasmania becomes a snowfield, the glaciers descending along its west
slopes to the sea. On the mainland Kosciusko also has a small snow-
field; in New Guinea, too, we see in the clear frosty air the gleam of
hundreds of miles of snowfields rising above the fleecy clouds which
blanket its rain forests. As we watch the area from Tasmania to New
Guinea, the whiteness comes and goes many times, as often as the climate
passes from glacial to interglacial stages. Outside of the glaciated areas
much of Australia, including Tasmania, is well watered. Lake Eyre,
ten times as large as at present, and over 200 feet deep, overflows through
Lake Torrens to the sea at Spencer’s Gulf, and abounds in crocodiles
and Geratodus, while herds of huge herbivores and giant ancestors of
the emu pasture along its shores; and so abundant is the vegetation that
they can roam from near Bunbury in Western Australia to beyond the
Darling Downs in Queensland.
During part of this Pleistocene Ice Age sea-level is low,
Bass Strait being nearly dry, and Torres Strait perhaps quite


effaced, so that the rhododendron migrates from New Guinea to the
Bellenden Ker Ranges of Queensland. Now may we mark the Tasmanian
aboriginal arriving towards the end of this Ice Age, while Bass Strait
is still low; and perhaps a little later we may note the coming of the
Australian aborigines in canoes with the tamed Asiatic wolf, the dingo,
landing while the climate is still pluvial, and some at least of the large
herbivores, now extinct, still survive. Sea-level lias now risen, partly as
result of melting of great ice sheets, and has widened Bass Strait,
restored Torres Strait, and drowned the lower ends of the river valleys
around Australia. In late Pleistocene time the Great Barrier Reef is
steadily subsiding, while inland near Cairns, the volcanoes of Lakes
Eacham and Barrine are in eruption. In Victoria and south-east
Australia small basaltic craters are still active, and near Mt. Gambier
the activity is accompanied by an elevation of about 250 feet, the warp
crossing the old valley of the Murray River, and forcing it westward
and damming it, so as to form a lake below Renmark, the overflow of
which cuts a new channel, a canyon of 200 feet deep, by which the waters
escape to the sea. Near Ooldea a further elevation, of over 300 feet,
shows that the land towards the Great Australian Bight is being tilted
towards the north.
As we watch, another great change creeps over Australia. With
the passing of the Ice Age comes desiccation. Lake Eyre ceases to
overflow into Lake Torrens. Its waters shrink and become saline, or
even entirely disappear. As we survey from the time machine the
garment of green which overspreads Australia, we realise that a
great hole is forming at its centre, widening fast with time. That hole is
a desert with a ragged edge of wilderness, a desert of wonderful red and
purple colours, where the sun rises in glory and sets in splendour, where
its heat so burns by day that it splits the rocks, but so great is the radia-
tion at night that they are left cold, almost freezing: Truly a trying
climate, but nevertheless healthy both for man and beast.
Aridity has come to more than a quarter of Australia, and even the
coastal zones become drier than before. The giant marsupials, their
supplies of food and water dwindling, perish in thousands, bogged around
the dwindling mud springs and the shrinking waterholes. Once more,
as in Cretaceous time, eastern Australia is isolated from Western
Australia, not as then, by sea, but now by desert.
Last scene of all, the white man arrives in his swift ships. Stout
of heart and strong of limb, and with the fighting spirit of a people with
a great past, the early pioneers hasten to possess the land, and win wealth
from farm and run and mine, and even press forward far into the
Australian wilderness, where man, and beast must work with their
might, as they work to-day, to gain aliiving. To-day, aided by improved
transport by rail, motor car, and aeroplane, and further helped by


science, man is now dotting the desert with oases around his artesian
wells and dams, and is drawing the green of the wheat belt ever further
inland, so that now even Goyder’s Line of ten inch rainfall no longer
divides “the desert from the sown.” And science, warring against
animal and plant pests, and working for all that makes for the health
and well-being of useful herb and beast and of man, will surely help the
man on the land in the future even more than it has done in the past; and
the man under the land, too, the miner, should in the near future benefit
much from the new geophysical methods of prospecting which will reveal
the whereabouts of hidden ore deposits, and, it is hoped, of mineral oil-
fields as well. But what of the future geological structure of the Com-
monwealth? Where, in the days to come, will the earth’s crust rise,
where sink? In the absence of a much-to-be-desired gravimetric survey,
it is rash to prophesy, but earthquake shocks probably give some clue.
Port Phillip, with part of Bass Strait, is probably slowly subsiding on
the west of the great Sorrento fault, from which earthquake shocks
proceed from time to time. To the east of that fault the land is probably
rising. Earthquakes near Adelaide and along the coast near Robe,
suggest that the Flinders Ranges and the Mt. Gambier-Rivoli coast are
still rising, while the Rift Valley is probably still sinking. Minor earth-
quake shocks along the Main Divide of New South Wales from Kosciusko
and Cooma to Yass, Lake George, to Kurrajong Heights in the Blue
Mountains, suggest that our Main Divide is slowly rising.
But it is in the Mandated Territory of New Guinea that earthquake
shocks at present attain their greatest intensity, and there is there
moreover the great active volcanic zone, which extends from Bam and
Manam, off the north coast of Papua, to New Britain, New Ireland and
Bougainville in the Solomon Group, a length of about 900 miles. These
active volcanoes are evidently causally connected with movements of
ocean floor near the Planet Deep, and to the north of Mandated Territory.
More “back-folding,” with north-north-east movements along the planes
of overthrust of the Torricelli and Bewani Mountains, is probably still
raising those areas, so that there is every probability of these regions
gaining much in height in the near future. But it is not yet clear
whether movements on a grand scale from the Pacific Ocean may not
at any time overcome the tendency to “back-fold” to the north-north-east,
and may re-establish a forward folding towards the south-south-west in
the great plain of Papua, so as to build a new range at or near the
“Cr§te Riveraine,” crossing the lower channel of the Fly River.
The story of the geological building of the Commonwealth, of its old
seas and lakes, mountains, plains, rivers, and past climates, and the ever-
changing hosts of animals and plants which tenanted its lands or
waters, while from simple beginnings form moved to higher form in
harmony with its changing surrounuings and with the mighty plan of the
universe, is tense with dramatic interest, all the more human from the


fact that during the long ages tljejfe Jxave been evolved in the Common-
wealth area vast natural resources of such service to man; so that,
surely, notwithstanding our frequent droughts and inland aridity, we
may say with pious gratitude “the lot is cast to us in a fair ground;
yea, we have a goodly heritage”!
These notes inadequately sketch a story with many a hiatus. Never-
theless it is hoped that they may be not without use to those who come
after, and strive to fill in the many wide gaps in the tale, a tale which
will surely never all be told. Yet just therein lies its charm, for it is
full of the old, but for us ever new, ever changing, yet not wholly elusive,
mystery and wonder of the world around us. To attain to absolute truth
we neither aspire nor desire, content, however faint and weary, to be
still pursuing, for in the pursuit itself we find an exceeding great reward.
