





ESSAY 01
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH POLITY.
The fundamental principles of Presbyterian Church Polity are-
these three :
I. The Government of the Church by Presbyters or
Elders.
11. The Distinction of Presbyters or Elders into
Teaching and Ruling Elders.
111. The Union of Congregations in One Church,
and the Government op the United Church by
Presbyters or Elders in a Gradation of Churchy
Courts.
I. The Government op the Church by Presbyters or;
Elders. —The designation of Presbyters or Elders is given in
the apostolic writings to the ordinary ministers or pastors of
the Church, to whom belongs the office of preaching the Word
and administering the Sacraments. Presbyterian Churches*
hold that the government of the visible Church also belongs
to Presbyters or Elders. They hold 'Ms doctrine-of the go-
vernment of the Church by Presby or Elders on the fol-
lowing grounds :
1. The titles of Presbyter or Elder, and Bishop, are in the-
New Testament applied, not to different orders of ministers,
but to the same individuals (Acts xx. 17, 28 ; Titus i. 5, 7 y
1 Peter v. 1,2).
2. There is no mention in the New Testament of any other
order of office-bearers as exercising permanent rule in the
Church. The offices of Apostle, Evangelist, and Prophet were
extraordinary, and ceased when no longer required ; while
Deacons had no part in the government or discipline of the
Church, but were concerned only in the administration of the-
funds and in the oversight of the poor.
3. The Apostles, who have given minute directions in their
writings to all classes of men, have given no directions to any
functionaries resembling Diocesan Bishops, an omission whick


seems inexplicable if Diocesan Episcopacy had been contem-
plated by the Apostles as the fittest form of Church govern-
ment. The qualifications declared by Paul (in writing to
Timothy and Titus) as essential to the office of a Bishop are
-specified, in reference to the selection of persons who should be
-ordained as Presbyters or Elders.
4. Presbyters or Elders are authorised to exercise all the
■functions of government in the Church —viz., ordination to
the ministerial office and discipline. There is, therefore, no
superior order necessary to the true constitution and adminis-
tration of the Church (I Tim. iv. 14; Heb. xiii. 7, 17).
So just are these grounds generally acknowledged to be, that
many intelligent advocates of Diocesan Episcopacy do not in-
sist on a divine warrant for that form of Church government,
but defend it chiefly on grounds of expediency. Presbyterian
Churches hold that they are bound to follow scriptural pre-
cedent in the constitution and administration of the Church,
and they are further confirmed in the preference for their own
.polity by the comparative working of the two systems.
11. The Distinction op Presbyters or Elders into
Teaching and Ruling Elders. —Presbyters or Elders are
the highest authorities in the Church, and as such are in perfect
parity with one another. Presbyterian Churches hold that
Presbyters or Elders are distinguished into two classes, co-
ordinate in rank and authority, but having different services
assigned to them—Presbyters or Elders who rule and minister
in word and doctrine, and Presbyters or Elders whose chief
work is to rule, and who do not ordinarily or statedly minister
in word and doctrine. The former are designated for con-
venience, “ Ministers;” the latter, “ Elders.” Both are equally
occupied in the government of the Church, but the former
alone are directly called to the work of public teaching. This
distinction of Presbyters or Elders is held on the following
.grounds ;
1. The Apostle Paul, in referring to the constitution of the
'Church, makes mention of “ Elders who rule,” and also of
Elders who rule and labour in word and doctrine,” and urges
the due recognition of their respective claims. In enumerat-
ing the agencies ordained by God for the service of the Church,
ihe specifies •* teachers” and “ governments” as having diverse
■gifts for the service required. In describing the different gifts
which Christians have received from God, and exhorting them
to the right fulfilment of their consequent duties, he charges
*•* teachers to wait on their teaching,” and those who “ rule to
rule with diligence” (1 Tim. v. 17 ; 1 Cor. xii. 28 ; Rom. xii.
<6-B).' •


2. In the Jewish Church, from a very early period, Elders of
the people were associated with the priests in the manage-
ment of ecclesiastical affairs. In the Synagogues there were
two classes of office-bearers—(l) the Minister or Overseer, who
laboured statedly in word and doctrine, his office being to offer
up the public prayers, and to read and expound the law ; and
(2) the Rulers, who had the charge of the Synagogue, and were
united with the Minister in the care of the congregation. It
is held that in the constitution of the Christian Church the
model of the Synagogue was adopted by the Apostles, but
modified so as to adapt it to the special nature of the Christian
community, and to the new and peculiar spirit with which
that community was animated.
3. In the several congregations of the Christian Church
there was always a plurality of Elders, and it cannot be sup-
posed that they were all Teaching Elders (James v. 14).
4. Historical proofs are presented in the writings of the
early Fathers of the existence of the order of Ruling Elder in
the Christian Church from the apostolic times.
Presbyterian Churches recognise this distinction of Elders
as a permanent and essential distinction. They hold that in
the Discipline of the Church, Ruling Elders, as being identified
with the people in all the common affairs of life, have especial
opportunities for ascertaining their moral and religious
character, and for interposing their counsel and admonition ;
and that in the government of the Church, Ruling Elders (as
representing the lay element of the Church), by their presence
and equal participation in its administration, while serving to
secure popular sympathy with and concurrence in its measures,
form an absolute prevention against the rise of a clerical
oligarchy disposed to claim supreme and unchecked powers.
lll.— The Union op Congregations in One Church, and
the Government op the United Church by Presbyters
or Elders in a Gradation op Church Courts. —The
radical idea of the Church is the unity of believers. Presby-
terian Churches hold that this unity is realised in their ex-
ternal Church form and government; that each congregation
has the election of its own Presbyters or Elders ; that the
government of the congregation is vested in the Presbyters or
Elders ; that it is so vested in them, not in their individual,
but in their collective capacity , as constituted into a Congrega-
tional Church Court or Session ; that the several Congrega-
tional Church Courts or Sessions of a district are united into a
District Church Court, or Presbytery, in which all are repre-
sented, and to which all are subject; and that the several


District Church Courts or Presbyteries of a province, or of a
country, are united into a Supreme Church Court, or General
Assembly, which has final jurisdiction over the whole Church.
These views of the constitution and government of the Church
are held on the following grounds :
1. The accounts contained in the Acts of the Apostles of the
appointment of the office-bearers of the Christian Church show
that they were elected to their office by the votes of the
people (Acts i, 15-26, vi. 3-5, xiv. 23—where the word which
expresses their appointment signifies that they were elected
for ordination hj a shorn of hands).
2. Paul declares that “ God has set in the Church govern-
ments he speaks of “ our authority which the Lord hath
given us for edification he exhorts believers to know those
“ who labour among them, and are over them in the Lord and
admonish them,” and he charges the Elders of Ephesus to
“ take heed to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost had
made them overseers” (1 Cor. xii. 28 ; 2 Cor. x. 8 ; 1 Thess.
v. 12 ; Acts xx. 28).
3. Paul, in calling on the Rulers of the Church at Corinth to
exercise discipline on a guilty member, enjoins them to do so
at a regular and formal meeting, ‘ ‘ when gathered together in
the name of the Lord Jesus Christand our Lord, in instruct-
ing what measures were to be taken with an offending brother,
refers to the well-known procedure in the courts of the
Synagogue, and instructs that the offending brother be
brought in like manner before “ the Church” (1 Cor. v. 4
Matt, xviii. 17).
4, Though the converts at Jerusalem were numbered by
thousands, and consisted necessarily of many congregations,
yet they are described as one Chiorch. The converts at Antioch
were also numerous, having several teachers, and are also
described as one Church ; and so at Ephesus and at Laodicea,
&c. The union of these congregations as one Church con-
stituted so many distinct Presbyteries, in which, in their united
capacity, Presbyterial functions were exercised (Acts iv. 4,
viii. 1, xiii. 1, xv. 3-5, xx. 17 ; Rev. i. 11).
5. In the Jewish Church there was a Supreme Court of
review and control —the Council, or Sanhedrium, or Great
Synagogue, which sat at Jerusalem, to which appeals were
carried from the inferior courts of the Synagogue. In the
Christian Church there was a Council held at Jerusalem, con-
sisting of the Apostles and Elders, to which an appeal was
carried from the Church at Antioch. In that Council the-
subject of the appeal was formally debated and determined,.


and thence the decision adopted was issued in an authoritative
decree, in the names of the Apostles and Elders, and sent to all
the Churches (2 Chron. xix. 8-10; Mark xiv. 53-55; Acts
xxii. 5, xv. 1-33, xvi. 4).
Presbyterian Churches recognise these various provisions in
the constitution of the Church. They hold that in every
Church the immediate exercise of ecclesiastical power is com-
mitted, not to the people, but to the Presbyters or Elders
elected iy the people; that by a series of judicatories rising
one above another each individual congregation is under the
care of its appropriate judicatory ; and that the whole body
is thus bound together by a system of review and control.
They hold that in these provisions there is the greatest possible
security for the faithful administration of the government of
the Church ; that the rights and responsibilities of the rulers
and the ruled are equally and thoroughly guarded and
enforced ; and that over the whole body the due combination
of liberty with order, or of justice with subjection, is effectually
realised and maintained. Under this system the humblest
member who feels aggrieved, or who has a suggestion to offer
on any religious matter, has the power, by appeal or petition,
to have his case or his suggestion submitted to the whole
Church through its representative Courts, and to obtain the
interest and sympathy, or it may be the judicial decision, of
the entire Christian body with which he is connected. By
the observance of a few plain forms he can carry his case to
the Session of the congregation to which he belongs, or, if its
decision does not satisfy him, he can carry it to the Presbytery
or to the General Assembly; while at every step of his progress
ths Presbyters or Elders to whom he appeals are bound, by
the solemn act of ordination, to treat him with affection and
fidelity, and do their utmost to decide the case according to
the mind of Christ.
Presbyterianism has had a unique and noble history. Long
before the Reformation, the Waldenses, in the valleys of
Northern Italy, held the doctrine and government of Presby-
terianism. They claim that their faith was handed down to
them from the time of the Apostles, At the Reformation, Pres-
byterianism was adopted hy most of the Reformed Churches.
Under the influence of Calvin and others, it spread over Switzer-
land, France, Holland, and much of Germany. It was made
strong in Scotland by Knox, was embraced by the whole
nobility and people, and became the established religion of
the land. It also spread widely over England, and in 1645
was adopted as the Established Church of England, Scotland,
and Ireland. In England it was overthrown by the despotism
of Charles 11., and its clergy were driven out.


The Presbyterian Church is still the largest Protestant
Church in the world. Its adherents amount to some
35,000,000. The Presbyterian Church embraces the National
Churches of Scotland and of Holland ; the majority of the Pro-
testants of Ulster ; the Calvinistic Church of Wales ; the Pro-
testant Church of Switzerland, of Italy, of France, and of
Spain ; the Church of Ehenish Prussia, and other parts of
Germany, and of Protestant Hungary ; the Dutch P.eformed
Church of the Cape of Good Hope ; and the Church of a vast
and influential number of English-speaking Christians in
England, the United States, Canada, Australia, and New
Zealand. Besides this, the Lutheran Church of Germany is
practically Presbyterian, having no Diocesan Bishops.


CATECHISM.
CHAPTER I.
Government oe the Church,
I. What is meant in Scripture by The Church ob
Christ I
It denotes sometimes the whole body of professing
Christians on earth, and their children, and sometimes
the whole body of Christ’s redeemed people. Acts ii. 39 :
For the 'promise is unto you, and to your children.
Ephes. v. 25-27 ; Christ also loved the Church, and gave
Himself for it, that He might present it to Himself a
glorious Church.
11. How is the Church, in these two senses, usually-
distinguished I
As the visible and the invisible Church.
111, Has the Greek word (ecclesia) translated Church in.
the Scriptures any other meaning ?
Yes. It signifies—
1. Any large assemblage of people. Acts xix. 32 : For
the assembly (ecclesia) was confused.
2. A Judicial Council, civil or ecclesiastical. Acts
xix. 39 ; It shall be determined in a lawful assembly ?
(ecclesia). Matt, xviii. 17 : Tell it unto the Church ,
&c. (ecclesia).*
3. Any particular congregation of Christians. Coloss.-
iv. 15 : And the Church vihich is in his house.
* The Church consists of rulers and ruled (Heb. xiii. 17)-
According to the order of all well-reg’ulated societies, complaints
are laid before the rulers. It was so in the synagogues of the
Jewish Church. As employed by our Lord, and understood by His-
disciples, the word Church in this verse must, therefore, mean the=
rulers.


4. Several congregations or Churches united as one
body under the same general judicature. 1 Cor. i. 2 :
■ Unto the Church of God, which is at Corinth; compared
with xiv. 34 : Let your women keep silence in the Churches.
Acts viii. 1; The Church which was at Jerusalem; compared
with iv. 4 ; Many of them which heard the word believed;
•and the number of the men was about five thousand —a
number which must have made several congregations in
Jerusalem—are here all called “the Church,” under the
jurisdiction of the Apostles and Elders (Acts xv. 6, and
xvi. 4).
IV. Is the word Church still used in this last sense 1
Yes. We say the Church of Scotland, the Church of
England,
V. Is it a matter of indifference to what Church we
belong ?
No. It is our duty to join and adhere to that Church
which, after careful inquiry, we find to be the most
agreeable to the Holy Scriptures in its doctrines, consti-
tution, and discipline. 1 John iv. 1 : Try the spirits
whether they are of God. 1 Thess. v. 21 ; Prove all things:
hold fast that which is good.
VI. Has the Christian Church, as a visible society, a
government peculiar to itself 1
It has. Christ, as its Founder, has given to it laws. It
is a kingdom, and where there is a kingdom there must
■be a government. J ohn xviii. 36 ; My kingdom is not of
this world, &c. Heb. viii. 17 : Obey them that have the
rule over you, and submit yourselves, for they watch for
your souls.
VII. What are the grand ends for which a government
has been appointed by Christ for His Church ?
Its proper organisation, the maintenance of order, the
conservation and spread of the truth, and the effectual ap-
plication of that truth to the hearts and consciences of men.
VIII. Do the means provided in the Presbyterian form
of Church government, for the accomplishment of these
ends, justify its claim to be founded on, and agreeable to,
fthe Word of God 1
They do.


IX. What are the general and fundamental principles
-of this form of Church government 1
The Supreme Headship of Christ, the official equality
of the ministers, the office of Ruling Elder, and the minis-
terial and subordinate authority of the various Church
courts.
X. What is meant by the Supreme Headship of Christ ?
That Christ, and He alone, is King and Head of the
Church, and that, therefore, no person or persons have
any authority to institute offices in the Church at variance
with those which He has instituted, or to decree rites or
ceremonies at variance with those which He has decreed.
Psalm ii. 6 : Yet have I set My king upon My holy hill of
Zion. Ephes. v. 23: Even as Christ is the Head of the
■Church. Matt, xxviii. 20 : Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and 10, I am with
you ahvay, even unto the end of the world.
XI. How many kinds of office-bearers did Christ
appoint in His Church 1
Two—extraordinary and ordinary. Ephes. iv. 11, 12:
And He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting
of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying
of the body of Christ.
XII. Which of these were the extraordinary office-
bearers 1
The Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists—men endowed
with supernatural gifts and extraordinary authority.
XIII. For what purpose were they appointed ?
To make known the will of Christ, to settle the consti-
tution of the Church, and to commit the administration
of its affairs to ordinary and permanent office-bearers.
Titus i. 5; For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou
shouldest set in order the things that are wanting. 2 Tim.
ii. 2 : And the things that thou hast heard of me among
many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also.
XIY. Had they any successors as extraordinary office-
bearers 1


No. There is no mention in Scripture of any having
been appointed or ordained to succeed them in their
higher office as Apostles, Evangelists, or Prophets.
XV. Who were the ordinary office-bearers 1
The Pastors and Teachers, and the Deacons —men
possessed of the necessary gifts and graces for the ordinary
work of the Church.
XVI. What is meant by the “ Pastors and Teachers”
of the Church 1
The Presbyters or Elders (called also Bishops or Over-
seers) whose office it was to teach and rule in the
Church. Acts xiv. 23, xx. 17: And when they had or-
dained them elders in every Church. And from Mile-
tus he sent to Ephesus, and called: the elders of the
Church. Phil. i. 1 : To all the saints in Christ Jesus at
Philippi, with the bishops and deacons.
XYII. Are any of these possessed of authority supe-
rior to that of the others 1
No. They are all of equal authority.
XYIII. Are Bishops an order of ministers distinct from
and superior to Presbyters or Elders I
They are not. Bishop is only another name for Pres-
byter or Elder.
XIX. How does that appear 1
1. The word (episcopos,) translated Bishop, signifies
merely an overseer. Acts xx. 28 : Take heed to the flock
over which the Holy Ghost hath made you (episcopous ) over-
seers.
2. All Elders are Bishops or Overseers. Acts xx. 17,
with 28 ; And called the Elders of the Church, over which
the Holy Ghost hath made you Overseers — or Bishops, as the
original word is translated in Phil. i. 1 : with the Bishops
(episcopois). Tit. i. 5,7: For this cause left 1 thee in Crete, that
thou shouldest ordain Eldeks in every city ; for a Bishop
must be blameless. 1 Peter v. 1, 2 : The Elders I exhort
who am also an Elder : feed the flock of God tvhich is among
you, taking the oversight thereof (episcopountes).
3, All Pastors derive their office and authority from
Christ by the same commission and in the same words, and.


therefore, equal official authority appertains to aU. Mark
xvi. 15 : And He said unto them, Go ye into all the world
and preach the gospel to every creature.
4. Bishops are never spoken of in Scripture as dis-
charging any duties which Presbyters are not directed to
discharge.
5. While Scripture contains at least two formal and
particular accounts of the qualifications necessary for the
Elder, or Presbyter-Bishop (1 Tim. iii. 1-7, Titus i. 5-9),
and one account of the qualifications necessary for the deacon
(1 Tim. iii. 8-12), it contains no separate or special account
of the qualifications necessary for the Prelate-Bishop,
who, if he had had any existence in the Primitive Church,
would have been the most important functionary of them
all.
6. Bishop and Presbyter being thus convertible titles,
and the same characters, duties, and powers being ascribed
in Scripture to the Presbyter and to the Bishop, it follows
that they belong not to two distinct orders, but to one and
the same order, and that the Presbyter or Elder is the only
Scriptural Bishop.
XX. To what class of office-bearers did Timothy and
Titus belong 1
1. They were Elders, ordained to teach and rule in the
Church. 1. Tim. iv. 14 : Neglect not the gift that is in
thee, which was given thee, with the laying on of the hands
of the Presbytery.
2. They were Evangelists, invested with special powers
for special and temporary purposes—such as to itinerate,
where appointed, in preaching the gospel ; or to complete
the organisation of the Church where not fully established,
&c. 2 Tim. iv. 5 ; .Do the ivorh of an Evangelist. Titus i,
5 : For this cause, &c.
XXI. Does the word Angel, as used in reference to the
seven Churches of Asia, in Rev. i., ii., iii., designate an
office-bearer superior to the Presbyter 1
No. The word signifies merely a messenger, and may
be applied to any servant of God that bears a message
from Him. In the passages referred to, it may be taken
to designate the presiding member (Moderator) of the


ruling body of the Church, through whom the messages
sent were to be conveyed.*
XXII. Who have authority to ordain to offices in the
CJhurch I
The Presbytery or plurality of Elders. 1 Tim. iv. 14:
With the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Acts vi. 6:
Whom they set before the apostles: and token they had prayed
they laid their hands on them.
XXIII. How many classes of Elders are there'?
Teaching and Pauling Elders. 1 Tim. v. 17 : Let the
Elders that rule well be counted tvorthy of double honour,
especially they who labour in the word and doctrine. 1 Cor.
xii. 28 : Teachers, helps, governments.
XXIY. Are these to be regarded as distinct orders of
office-bearers, possessing different degrees of authority 1
Xo. They are to be regarded as occupying larger and
smaller departments of the same general office, and of
equal authority as rulers of the Church.
XXV. What is the duty of the Biding Elders 1
To act along with the Pastor as helps and governments,
in overseeing the Church, in exercising discipline and
rule, and in visiting the families and sick members for
counsel, exhortation, and prayer. 1 Pet. v. 1, 2 ; The
Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder.
Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the over-
sight thereof. James v. 14 : Is any sick among you ? Let
him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray
over him.
XXVI. What is the duty of the Deacon I
To assist in managing the temporal affairs of the Church,
and especially in attending to the wants of the poor.
XXVII. Is it any part of the Deacon’s office to teach
or rule in the Church 1
No. The office of the Deacon was instituted expressly
for the purpose of leaving the Apostles or teachers free to
* 1 Peter i. 1 compared with v. 1. It is to these Churches of
Asia, &c., that the Epistles were addressed. Presbyters or Elders
had, apparently, the exclusive charge of the government in them
all.


give themselves continually to the ministry of the word.
Acts vi. 1-4 : And in those days, when the number of the
disciples was multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the
Grecians against the Hebrews, because their widows were
neglected in the daily ministration. Then the twelve called
the multitude of the disciples unto them, and said, It is not
reason that we should leave the Word of God and serve
tables. Wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you seven
men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, and wisdom,
whom we may appoint over this business. But we will give
ourselves continually to prayer and to the ministry of the
Word.
XXIX. Did not Philip, who was a Deacon, teach and
baptise ?
Yes, but not as a Deacon. Philip became an Evangelist,
and then had authority to teach and baptise. Acts xxi. 8:
And we entered into the house of Philip the Evangelist.
XXIX. Have the members of Churches the right of
choosing their own Pastors and other office-bearers I
Yes. Members of Churches have this privilege. Acts
vi. 6 : And the saying pleased the whole multitude, and they
chose Stephen, &c. xiv. 23 : And when they had ordained
them Elders in very Church .* 2 Cor. viii. 19 : Who was
also chosen of the Churches to travel with us with this grace,
&c.
XXX. In what spirit ought the government of the
Church, as prescribed by Christ, to be administered 1
In a spirit of meekness, humility, peace, and prayer,
with a supreme regard to the glory of Christ and the
spiritual interests of His Church, without partiality or
respect of persons. Phil. ii. 3; Let nothing be done through
strife or vain glory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem
others better than themselves. 1 Cor. x3l : Whatsoever
ye do, do all to the glory of God. James iii. 17 : The
wisdom that is from above is peaceable, without partiality.
* The Greek word (cheirotonesantes) translated ordained signifies,
primarily, elected —by a show of hands. It is so rendered in the old
English Bible: And when they hud ordained them elders hy elec-
tion in every Church. The verse denotes that they whom the
Apostles ordained, or set apart, as Elders, were previously elected
by the votes of the congregations.


CHAPTER 11.
The Constitution and Jurisdiction of Church
Courts.
I. What is the nature of the authority which Christ has
committed to the rulers of the Church ?
It is simply ministerial and subordinate. 2 Cor. i. 24:
Not for that wehave dominion over your faith, but are helpers
of your joy.
11. What is meant by ministerial authority?
Authority committed to Ministers, as servants of Christ,
to proclaim, apply, and execute His laws, for promoting
the order and spiritual edification of His Church.
111. What is meant by subordinate authority ?
The subjection of the inferior to the superior courts of
the Lord’s house ; as of Session to Presbytery, of Pres-
bytery to General Assembly, and of all to Christ.
IY. How is this rule or authority exercised ?
By the Presbyters or Elders assembled in Session,
Presbytery, or General Assembly. Acts xv. 6 ; And the
apostles and elders came together for to consider of this matter.
Y. What is a Session I
It is a congregational Presbytery, sometimes in earlier
days called the lesser Presbytery, composed of the
Elders of any particular congregation, met as a Church
Court. Acts xiv. 23 : And when they had ordained them
elders in every Church, and had prayed with fasting, they
commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed.
YI. Who are subject to the authority of the Sessions?
All the members of the congregations of which they
have the oversight.
YII. What is the duty of the members of a congregation
towards the Session ?
To respect and uphold its authority, to render a cheerful
obedience to its decisions in the Lord, and cordially to
co-operate in the plans of usefulness which it recommends.
1 Thess. v. 12, 13: And we beseech you, brethren, to know


them which labour among you, and are over you in the Lord,
and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in love
for their work's sake, and he at peace among yourselves.
VIII. Of whom does a Presbytery consist I
Of the Ministers of a particular district, with a Ruling
Elder from each congregation.
IX. Who are under its jurisdiction 1
Its own members, and the several Sessions and congre-
gations connected with it.
X. Of whom does a General Assembly consist ?
Of the Ministers of the several Presbyteries, with a
Ruling Elder from each Session ; or, when Churches are
large, of representative Ministers and Elders from the
several Presbyteries.
XI. Does the New Testament furnish an example of
Presbyterian government by such Church Courts t
It does in the xv. chapter of Acts.
XII. How does the xv. chapter of Acts indicate this
form of Church governmen t ?
In the following manner:—
1. A disputation had arisen at Antioch as to whether
circumcision was necessary to salvation. (Verses 1,2.)
2. The Church at Antioch did not take upon it to decide
the question, but referred it to a council at Jerusalem com-
posed of Apostles and Presbyters, or Elders.
3. The Apostles for the occasion acted simply as Pres-
byters or Elders.
4. The decision of the council was authoritative, and
was transmitted to all the Churches for their guidance.
5. The procedure in this instance was an exhibition of the
constitution and government of the Apostolic Church. The
general principles embodied in it are applied in government
in the Presbyterian Church, with all necessary and expe-
dient details ; applied to a particular congregation by the
Session, to the congregations of a district by the Presby-
tery, and to the whole Church by the General Assembly.
Let all things be done decently, and in order (1 Cor. xiv.
40).


CHAPTER 111,
Other Churches.
I. Is not the Presbyterian Church properly denominated
Protestant 1
It is; because, in common with all other Reformed
Churches, it professes to adhere to the solemn protest
which was taken by the Reformers of the sixteenth
century against the errors and corruptions of the Church
of Rome.
11. What are some of the errors of the Church of Rome
against which Presbyterians protest ?
They protest, among many other things, against the
doctrines of the Church of Rome in regard to the
supremacy of the Pope (Matt. xx. 24-27) ; the infal-
libility of the Pope (2 Thess. ii. 3,4); the infallibility
of the Church (2 Cor. i. 24; Acts xvii. 11; 1 Thess. v.
21) ; transubstantiation, and the sacrifice of the mass
{Heb. ix. 24-26, x. 12-14) ; works of supererogation by
the saints, and the pardons and indulgences founded,
thereon (Isa. Ixiv. 6; Luke xvii. 10; Eph. ii. 8, 9)_;
purgatory, and praying for the dead (Luke xxiii.
43 ; 1 Cor. v. 8; 1 John i. 7; Rev. xiv. 13); the worship
and invocation of the Virgin Mary (Isa. xliii. 11;
Matt. xii. 48-50; 1 Tim. ii. 5 ; Heb. vii. 25); the
worship of saints, images, and relics (Exod. xx. 4, 5 ;
Acts xiv. 15; Rev. xxii. 8,9). Presbyterians protest
against these, and many other errors of the Church of
Rome, as anti-Christian and hurtful to the souls of men.
111. What are the leading objections of Presbyterians
to the Church of England \
1. They object to the doctrine of the Church of England,
in regard to the supremacy of the Chief Magistrate as the
Head or Supreme Governor of the Church. They hold
that Christ is the only Head and King of the Church ;
that the government of His Church has been committed
to office-bearers, who are to administer it according to His
laws and in His name; and they protest against the
appropriation by the Magistrate of such supremacy, as a
usurpation of powers and prerogatives which have no
scriptural sanction or approval.


2. They object that, by the constitution of the Church
of E ngland, the Chief Magistrate, as represented by the
Houses of Parliament, claims, and is allowed to claim,
supreme jurisdiction over it in spiritual things ; that it is
admitted to pertain to these Houses of Parliament, com-
posed of men of various creeds and of no creed, to make
laws for the regulation of its affairs ; that thus the powers
of self-government which that Church possesses are
exercised by it, not as inherent or conferred by Christ,
but as conferred by Acts of Parliament; and that by these
Acts its government is limited and controlled.
3. They object that, in opposition to the constitution
of the Primitive Church, and against all scriptural
warrant, it restricts the exercise of government and the
power of ordination in the Church to Prelate-Bishops.
(See 1 Tim. ix. 14.)
4. They object to the numerous unscriptural offices
which it recognises and maintains — e.g., the offices of
Archbishop, Prelate-Bishop, Archdeacon, Dean, Canon,
Priest, Deacon (as an authorised and public teacher) —
offices which have no countenance in Scripture, and which
have been imported from the Church of Rome without
any proper warrant or reason.
5. They object to the numerous unscriptural rites and
ceremonies in the worship of God which it has decreed
and observes, and which have no warrant in Scripture—
such as the numerous stated festivals and holidays ap-
pointed for religious worship, the employment of
sponsors in baptism, the practice of sponsors in
baptism making vows in the name of the child (which,
in the nature of things, they cannot fulfil) and of under-
taking obligations which parents alone should be required
to undertake, the using of the sign of the cross in baptism,
the rite of confirmation, bowing at the name of Jesus,
kneeling at the Lord’s Supper, the private administration
of the Lord’s Supper, and the consecration of Bishops,
Churches, burying-grounds, and sacramental elements.
6. They object to the Book of Common Prayer—that
the compulsory prescription of it, as an unvaried form, is
an infringement of Christian liberty, is unsuited to the
varying circumstances of Congregations, the Church, and
the Nation, and is inconsistent with that dependence on


the promised aid of the Holy Spirit which is the privilege
of all true worshippers.
7. They object to the statement contained in the Book
of Common Prayer, that by baptism an infant “ is regene-
rated,” “ made a member of Christ, the child of God, and
an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven.”
8. They object to the doctrine taught and affirmed in
the Book of Common Prayer, that the priest or minister
is commissioned and authorised to pronounce judicially, in
the form prescribed in the Yisitation of the Sick, a sen-
tence of absolution over the professedly penitent, acquit-
ting and discharging them from all their sins.
IY. What are the leading objections of Presbyterian
to the constitution and government of the Churches called
Independent or Congregational ?
They object to the constitution and government of
these Churches—first, as at variance with the constitution
and Government of the Primitive Church ; and, second, as
defective in several of the most important requirements of
the Church.
Y. In what respect are they at variance with the con-
stitution and government of the Primitive Church 1
1. These Churches maintain that each separate congre-
gation constitutes a complete Church in itself, having full
power to manage its own affairs, and altogether indepen-
dent of other congregations ; whereas the Churches
organised by the Apostles were composed of various con-
gregations, all under a common government.
2. These Churches maintain that all ecclesiastical power
in each Church or congregation is vested solely in the
members of the congregation, by whose votes all matters
of doctrine, government, and discipline are to be decided,
whereas in the Churches organised by the Apostles, such
power was vested in the office-bearers, acting in and
through their Church Courts. Heb. xiii. 17-24 : Obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves;
for they watch for your souls as they that must give account,
that they may do it with joy and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you. Salute all them that have the ride
over you,, and all the saints.


YI. In what respects are they defective ?
They are defective chiefly in these respects :
1. They have no Courts of Appeal and Review, separate
and distinct from the membership of the congregation, to
which individual complainants who think themselves
aggrieved and oppressed may constitutionally appeal for
protection and redress.
2. The provision made by them for the protection of
Ministers in the faithful exercise of their functions is
specially inadequate, inasmuch as for their very conscien-
tiousness Ministers may, at the will of a majority of the
members of their congregations, be summarily dismissed.
3. They have no acknowledged or effective means for
conserving the truth and correcting heresy in a congrega-
tion, the majority of whose members have fallen from the
faith.
4. They are deficient in their aptitude for combined
action towards the accomplishment of the most important
purpose for which the Church has been instituted, namely,
the extension of the Kingdom of Christ. For example—ln
making efforts for the propagation of the Gospel, they are
prevented by their constitution from acting unitedly
in a Church capacity, or otherwise than as combined
voluntary associations.
CHAPTER IV.
Reasons for Adherence to the Presbyterian Church,
I. What are the general considerations which should
attach Presbyterians with zealous affection to their own
Church ?
Its scriptural character, its freedom from the objec-
tions which lie against other systems, its noble history of
martyrdom, and struggling for truth and liberty, and the
religious privileges and advantages which its members
enjoy.
11. What are these privileges and advantages ?
Having the right of choosing their own pastors and
rulers ; freedom from despotic power on the one hand, and


anarchy on the other, in the government of their Church ;
the means and opportunities of bringing before the rulers
of the Church, for investigation and judgment, unfaith-
fulness of Ministers and Elders, offences of Church
members, and errors in doctrine ; the privilege and power
of appeal from one Church Court to another, when their
rights as citizens of Zion are injured or assailed ; and
generally such a constitution and organisation of their
Church that it contains within itself the capacity of
reforming abuses and errors, and has machinery specially
fitted for edifying the body of Christ, and extending the
boundaries of the Redeemer’s Kingdom.
111. How should Presbyterians employ and improve
these privileges 1
They should use them thankfully and faithfully for
their own personal edification, for the promotion of the
interests of their Church, and for the prosecution of
Missionary labours in their own land and throughout the
world, ‘ ‘ until all the ends of the earth shall see the salva-
tion of God.”
c &'p 3


APPENDIX.
Apostolical Succession.
I. What is meant by “ Apostolical Succession” '2
The derivation of the ministerial office from the hands-
of the Apostles, through an unbroken succession of Prelate-
Bishops.
11. Who attach especial importance to such succession ?
The Church of Rome, and a large party in the Protestant
Episcopal Churches.
111. What especial importance do they attach to it ?
They hold that such succession is essential to the
existence of the Church, and necessary to the efficacy of
divine ordinances. They argue that without such suc-
cession there can be no rightly-appointed ministry; that
without a rightly-appointed ministry there can be no right
dispensation of the Word and Sacraments ; and that with-
out a right dispensation of the Word and Sacraments there
can be no salvation.
IY. On what grounds do they hold such succession to
be essential and necessary 1
They affirm that the Apostles appointed Prelate-Bishops
for the government of the Church ; that these Bishops
were invested by the Apostles with apostolical rank and
authority, and were in every sense Apostles; that it
pertained to them, as Apostles, to ordain to the ministerial
office ; that the present Bishops, to whom, they allege, the
apostolical commission has descended by unbroken suc-
cession, are also, in every sense, Apostles—alone competent
to ordain —having the distinctive power and dignity of
Apostles in the Church—and that by the imposition of
their hands “ the same spirit which was breathed by our
Lord into His Apostles is, together with their office,
transmitted to the pastors and governors of the Church
at this time, and acts, moves, and assists at the administra-


tion of the several parts of the apostolical office in our
days, as much,” and as necessarily, “as ever.”*
Y. What is the first answer to this claim ?
That it is a mere assumption, t There is no trace in
Scripture of the appointment of Prelate-Bishops, or of the
existence in the Church of any men besides the Apostles
possessed of apostolical rank and authority. Full and
explicit instructions are given as to the qualifications for
the ministerial office, and the manner in which its duties
are to be performed ; but there is no intimation that any
such appointment as that of Prelate-Bishops, with
apostolical rank and authority, was ever made or proposed.
YI. What is the second answer 1
That the apostolical office was personal and temporary,
and, therefore, in its nature and design was not successional
or communicable. J The qualifications required in Apostles
for their office are stated in Scripture to have been the
following:—
1. That they should have seen the Lord. Acts i. 21,
22; 1 Cor. ix. 1.
2. That their call to the office should be external and
from the Lord Himself. Gal. i. 1.
3. That they should be instructed by special revelation
in the truths which they delivered, and guided in deliver-
ing those truths by the supernatural inspiration of the
Holy Spirit. Gal. i. 11, 12.
4. That they should possess thepporerw r er of working
miracles. 2 Cor. xii. 12,
5. That they should be able to communicate miraculous
gifts by the imposition of their hands. Acts viii. 14-17,
xix. 6 ; 2 Tim. i. 6.
* Bishop Beveridge.
t Bishop Lightfoot says;—'‘Diocesan Bishops are not a con-
tinuation of the Apostolate;” and adds, “The Episcopate was
developed out of the Presbytery, and the attempt to connect it
with the Apostles is baseless.”
J “ It was in all respects extraordinary ; conferred in a special
manner, designed for special purposes, discharged by special aids,
endowed with special privileges, as was needful for the propagation
of Christianity and the founding of Churches.”—Dr. Isaac Barrow.


6. That their commission should be, not limited and
local, but universal. Matt, xxviii. 19 ; Acts i. 8.
YII. What is the third answer 1
That the only permanent office-bearers appointed by
the Apostles for the government of the Church were
Presbyters or Elders, to whom all powers necessary
for the purpose were committed. These powers were
supreme. The Apostles as taking part in the ordinary
work of the Church did so as Presbyters or Elders, the
higher office including the lower, 1 Peter v. 1, 2 John 1,
3 John 1. Only in their capacity as Presbyters or Elders
had they, or could they have, any successors.
YIII. What is the fourth answer ?
That the alleged restriction of the divine blessing to the
ministry of men episcopally ordained is unauthorised by
Scripture and inconsistent with fact. 1 Cor. iii. 5-7.
IX. What is the fifth answer 1
That they who make this claim are wholly unable to
prove that such a thing as succession, in their sense, exists.
As to the Church of Rome, it is demonstrable that the
catalogues on which they rely are spurious. There is no
good evidence that the Apostle Peter, from whom they
profess to derive their succession, was Bishop in Rome, or
that he ever visited that city. There is no good evidence
as to who were the chief pastors of the Church in Rome
for the first two or three generations ; and there is the
clearest evidence which history can afford that in subse-
quent times the succession was broken in numerous
instances and ways. And as to those in the Protestant
Episcopal Churches, who claim such succession, they
claim it through the Church of Rome, in which the proof
fails. If they hold that the Church of Rome can prove
their succession, yet if, as Protestants, they hold that the
Church of Rome is an apostate Church, they must hold
that that Church has itself lost the Apostolical commission,
and cannot impart the commission to others. If, on the
other hand, and in denial of their Protestantism, they
deny that the Church of Rome is an apostate Church, and
hold that it possesses, and can impart, the Apostolical
commission, they must hold that that Church can also
recall the commission; in which case, as all Protestant


Bishops have been repeatedly excommunicated and
deposed by the Church of Rome, the succession must
necessarily in their case have been lost.
X. What evils arise from the assumption of this
claim in the Protestant Episcopal Churches 1
Great evils arise. Ist. It exalts the authority of man
above that of God, tradition above Scripture. 2nd. It
limits the divine blessing by conditions which God has
not imposed. 3rd. It makes the communication of the
grace of God depend, not on the manifestation of His
divine truth, but on the human agency by which it is
presented. 4th. It fosters pride among the clergy, and
exasperates differences among Protestants. sth. It
strengthens Popery, by conceding one of its most arrogant
demands. And 6th. It strengthens infidelity; because
when Ministers of the gospel maintain dogmas which, on
being slightly examined, are found to be baseless, they
impair their own credit when proclaiming facts and
doctrines which are founded on truth, and necessary to
salvation.
XI. What is the succession for which Presbyterians
contend ?
That which rests on conformity to the Church of the
Apostles, in doctrine, discipline, and government.
Wherever such conformity exists, howsoever originated
or derived, there, they hold, and there alone, is the
Church of the Apostles, and the true Apostolical Suc-
cession.
J Aifj
Sc&UO
fiO^ / <4^
N e£joy
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers, Flinders Lane East.




’ ■■■■’•■ ■ V
