

SULPHATE OF AMMONIA
AS A
MANURE.
A FEW FACTS FROM THE EXPERIENCE OF AGRICULTURISTS
(PRACTICAL AND SCIENTIFIC),. IN GREAT BRITAIN,
EUROPE, AND NEW SOUTH WALES.
11. C. L. ANDERSON, AI.A.,
Belmore Gold Medallist in Agricultural Chemistry, Sydney University.
Printed by W E Smith 26, 28 and 30 Bridoe Street.




SULPHATE OF AMMONIA
AS A
M A N U R E.
IIIE valuable investigations of M. Villo, at his experimental
farms at Yincennes, in France, have raised the question
of artificial manures from the region of theory to the
broad field of scientific truth.
This eminent agriculturist has shown by his numerous ex-
periments of the past twenty-seven years that, of the substances
which are essential in a fertile soil, the four which are the most
readily exhausted, and which are most often found to be deficient
in ordinary soils, are lime, phosphoric acid, potash, and nitrogen.
Of these, the most necessary for the majority of crops is nitrogen,
which, as available for plant food, occurs in three forms. These
are : 1 st—The substances of animal or vegetable origin of which
nitrogen forms a part, such as blood, albumen, hoofsand horns,
wool, flesh, litter, foecal matter, urea, shoddy, oil-cake and fish-
manure; 2nd—sulphate of ammonia; 3rd —nitrates.
The first class, to act on vegetation, must be capable of decom-
position in the soil, and are useless until this decomposition has


taken place, and the nitrogen has become ammonia or a nitrate
of some kind. In the second and third classes, the nitrogen is
already soluble, and, therefore, available for plant food. In the
sulphate of ammonia it exists in the form of ammonia, of which
the salt, when pure, furnishes 25 per cent., which is equivalent
to 20 per cent, of nitrogen.
In England, there is keen rivalry between nitrate of soda and
sulphate of ammonia as sources of nitrogen for crops Numerous
experiments there have shown that on most soils, and for most
crops, 1 cwt. of the latter is equivalent to 11 cwt. of the former.
It is considered in England that the sulphate of ammonia at
£l4 4s. per ton, is as efficacious and economical as the nitrate of
soda at £ll ss. per ton, so that taking the current prices in
Sydney—£l3 for the sulphate and £24 for the nitrate —it will
be seen that no comparison as to relative cost can be made, the
latter being more than twice as expensive as the former ; or, to
speak in chemical language, each unit of nitrogen in the nitrate
of soda costs 305., in the sulphate of ammonia, 13s.
In consequence of the growing demand for sulphate of
ammonia in England and on the Continent, the price has been
gradually rising ; and now varies, according to the season of the
*
year, between £l3 and £ls a ton. The amount now manufac-
tured by the English gas companies is twice as large as it was
six years ago—being about 150,000 tons per annum; and, of
this, 53,000 tons are eagerly bought up by Germany ; 16,000 by
France, Italy, and Spain, and 10,000 by America. On the
other hand, in New South Wales, where, in the past, the rich
virgin soil has made the farmers and orchardists independent


of artificial manures, this salt being a by-product in the
operations of the Australian Gas-light Company, can be sold
at £l3 per ton.
Its action on crops is immediate when the soil is at all moist, —
a quality which may be turned to the best account, but also
needs to be used with prudence, Yille recommends a
dressing of 260 to 354 lbs. per acre, when chemical manures
alone are used; but it must be remembered that his experience
chiefly refers to land that has been exhausted by centuries of
heavy cropping, and which now must be forced, by means of
artificial manuring, to yield the same heavy crops as in former
years.
British and Continental agriculturists have long found, as will
Australian farmers in the near future, that it pays better to get
from each acre of ground 40 to 50 bushels of wheat, or from
Bto 11 tons of potatoes, or sto 6 tons of grapes, equivalent to
from 450 to 540 gallons of wine, even at the expense of £8
per acre for manures —than to get barely f or ±of those
amounts with no manure at all. In each case the labour,
rent, and working expenses are the same; and it is invariably
found that money judiciously expended on manures repays
itself twofold. It is found that about 176 lbs. of the sulphate
applied in the early spring—say, about the middle of September
—will cause a green crop to spring up as if by magic, more
especially when things have been retarded by a late winter.
It is of particular value on clayey and loamy soils, and with
all cereals, grass, and potatoes. It is of great value in
increasing the crop of grain without detriment to the straw,
3


in reviving the vitality of the leaves of fruit-trees after the
winter’s rest, and in stimulating healthy green growth,
and thus causing the other plant foods to contribute to the
production of fruit and seed. Continental experiments have
shown that dressings of this manure increase the percentage
of sugar in beet-roots; and Professor Tanner has proved
thai it greatly improves the malting character of barley.
It mixes well with wood-ashes, superphosphate of lime, sulphate
of potash and crushed bones, but should never be used on cal-
careous soils, nor should it be used with, nor soon after, lime or
chalk, which have the power of volatilising the ammonia from
the salt.
Experiments in New South Wales prove that the best dose
for grass or corn land is from Ito cwt. per acre, to be used
as a top dressing after early spring growth has commenced. All
experiments conclusively support M. Ville’s theory as to fractional
dressings of this very soluble manure. It is advantageous to
apply small doses during the active stages of growth of all green
crops except lucerne, trefoil, beans, and peas—say cwt. per
acre in September, November, and December. To indicate how
stimulating this manure is, it is only necessary to remark that
50 ozs. of it contains as much nitrogen as 100 lbs. of ordinary
cow-dung.
In explanation of the remarkable effects of this manure in the
early spring, Yille notes that plant life consists of three distinct
periods: Ist—The embryonic period, during which the young
plant lives at the expense of the seed ; 2nd—the foliaceous period,
which is essentially the creative period of the crop, during which
4


the plant or tree lives on the air and soil; 3rd—the reproductive
period, during which the plant or tree forms its seed and fruit, and
lives at its own expense. The activity of the plant is then concentrated
in the flower and fruit, the formation of which is brought about
by means of the substances accumulated in the leaves and stem.
Now, at the close of winter, the vegetation is retarded by the
nutritive elements —potash, phosphoric acid, lime, and nitrogen—
having a tendency to withdraw from the work of vegetation,
when they are,, of course, lost to the whole vegetable system. A
small dose of sulphate of ammonia is sufficient to revive this
dormant vitality, and thus cause these fertilising elements to
discharge their respective functions. If, however, too large a
dose of the stimulant be given, the leaves of cereals and fruit-
trees will receive an increase of activity, and the whole foliace-
ous system then becomes so suddenly developed that the for-
mation of the seed and fruit is retarded and impaired, and the
harvest injured —the seed being ill-formed and the straw rank ;
or, in the case of fruit-trees, the whole growth going to wood
for next season’s fruit, but forming little for this year. Hence,
too much stress cannot be laid on the importance of dividing the
dressing into two or more doses—one to be given in early spring
and the other in autumn, when the seed is beginning to form.
So with grass, the doses should be small and frequent. Where
constant growth is needed for grazing animals, the sulphate may
be applied at the rate of £ cwt. per acre four or five times
between September and March, to promote the formation of the
grass—especially the narrow-leaved varieties, such as perennial
rye and cocksfoot —and make it more nitrogenous, and, therefore,
more nutritious.
5


Too much stress cannot be laid on the necessity of using only
small doses on the land in New South Wales, since its solubility
in water makes it liable to be washed out of the soil by the
heavy and sudden rains to which this climate is liable ; and, tilso,
in the case of pot-plants and any vegetation confined to a small
area of soil, on account of its very stimulating character. Some
young gardeners have considered oz. to a 6ineh pot as a small
dose, which would be equivalent to 326 cwt. per acre ; whereas,
this amount would be sufficient for thirty plants, if administered
in solution, and twice or thrice a week. It must also be noted
that, as it is very difficult to distribute evenly over an acre of
ground, such a small dressing as £ cwt., or even cwt., it
should be mixed with twice or thrice its bulk of fine soil before
being sown broadcast over the young crop.
The chief drawback to the use of sulphate of ammonia, as
alleged by the farmers of the old school, is that it exhausts the
ground. It will readily be seen that if it makes the crop heavier
it must take out of the ground so much more lime, potash, and
phosphoric acid ; but as it is true that the small boy cannot eat bis
cake and have it, so the farmer cannot get the benefit of much
heavier crops and yet have all the mineral constituents left in
his soil. The extra ton of hay is worth more to him than the
lOOlbs. of mineral matter taken out of the ground, the extra ton
of wheat is worth more than the 501b5., and the extra ton of
potatoes more than the 25lbs. of minerals extracted from his soil
by these crops respectively.
This simply points to the fact that, since sulphate of ammonia
provides only nitrogen, the farmer or horticulturist must also
6


provide potash, phosphoric acid, or lime, as his soil becomes
impoverished of each or either of these essential constituents.
When it is found that the sulphate encourages only leaf and
straw, and that fruit and seed do not follow in proportion, it is
evident that minerals must also be supplied to furnish the seed
and fruit. Hence the value of employing superphosphate of
lime, or good bone dust, wood ashes, or some salt of potash, such
as the sulphate or chloride, and gypsum, i.e., sulphate of lime,
loith sulphate of ammonia. In fact, this manure may be safely used
with any other artificial manure except free lime or chalk, and it
forms one of the most valuable constituents of all the mixed
manures now- employed. In the mixture recommended by
Professor Johnston as a substitute for guano, there are 17 bushels
or 3 cwt. of bone dust, 100 lbs. of sulphate of ammonia, 100 of
salt, 11 lbs. of sulphate of soda, 20 of wood ashes, or 5 of sul-
phate of potash, —a mixture worth £8 per ton. M. Ville
recommends, for fruit-trees and vines, 5 parts of siiperphosphate
with 4 of sulphate of potash, and 3 of siilphate of ammonia.
This mixed manure he applies to old and full-bearing orchards
and vineyards at the rate of 12 cwt. per acre, equal to an
expense of £ll 2s. 6d. per acre. His normal manure for wheat,
oats, &c.. consists of 352 lbs. of superphosphate with 176 of
sulphate of potash, 343 of sulphate of ammonia, and 185 of
gypsum, which he applies at the rate of 1056 lbs., equal to an
expense of £4 6s. per acre.
To summarise the results of the preceding investigations, it
may be affirmed that sulphate of ammonia is valuable to all
straw-growing plants, rape, mustard, fodder, beet, potatoes,
meadow grasses, vines, fruit trees, vegetables, always excepting


the leguminosa, such as lucerne, clover, peas, beans, sainfoin,
and trefoil, which are not benefited by it, as they seem to have
the power of getting their nitrogen direct from the air. It is
also very valuable to all flowering plants, except azaleas, rhodo-
dendrons, and heaths, and to all pot-plants except orchids and
delicate ferns.
It should be applied to the ground in showery weather. It
must be given sparingly and evenly,—“little and often” should
be the motto. It is a stimulant, and, as such, not only provides
plant-food itself, but enables the plant the more readily to
assimilate other jdant-foods that are available. Land rich in
useful mineral matters, such as good loams and fertile clays, may
receive larger dressings than poor sandy soils. When got direct
from the Gas Company, who manufacture this salt, it is tolerably
certain to be of constant composition, and, therefore, one can
calculate exactly the needs of his crop, and apply nitrogen
accordingly. It cannot bring into the farm or orchard hosts of
weeds such as sheep and cow-manure do, and this consideration
alone is one of vital importance where labour is scarce and dear.
WHEN AND HOW TO BE USED
For Wheat, Barley, Oats, and Straw-bearing Plants
generally. —It should be applied in two doses, one when the
crop is a few inches high, the other when the crop is in flower,
and the seed is going to form. On each occasion from £to 1 cwt.
may be given. Two cwt. per acre have increased the yield of
wheat to the value of £4 3s. Bd., and of the straw 9s. lid.
per acre.
8


For Grass Lands. —If for hay, it should be applied at the
rate of 1 to 1£ cwts. per acre, in showery weather in early
spring. If for constant grazing, it should be applied in small
monthly doses from September to March. Its effect is greatly
enhanced by the application in the previous autumn of 2 cwt.
per acre of fine bone dust. This is true of all crops when the
soil is deficient to any degree in phosphates.
For Potatoes.— lt is very valuable on poor soils, especially
in conjunction with superphosphate and wood ashes, or sulphate
of potash or kainite. Yille shews that manure without nitrogen
yielded 94 cwt. per acre, with nitrogen 128 cwt. It should bo
applied as a top-dressing, when the stalks are well above
the ground.
For Vegetables. —lt is very useful for cabbages, onions,
celery, beet root, spinach, cauliflowers, pumpkins, melons, mar-
rows, and tomatoes. In a small kitchen garden it may best be
apjjlied in the liquid form— 2 ounces to a bucket of water —
twice a week during the period of actiye growth.
N.l3.—Water the soil, not the plant.
For Fruit Trees and Vines. —It should be given in two
doses, one in early spring, and the other when the fruit are
setting. As by itself it tends to produce leaves rather than
flowers or fruit, especially when the ground is partially
exhausted by previous crops, it should usually be associated with
superphosphate and some potash salt. The proportions of these
to be used will depend on the soil, and the crop needed. Yille
showed that very poor ground which without manure yielded
9


no grapes, by the aid of his normal manure, gave 95 cwt.
per acre, and with the same manure without the sulphate of
ammonia , only 50 cwt.
For Flower Garden and Conservatory. —lt may safely
be used for all robust flowering plants, such as roses, chrysan-
themums, bulbs, dahlias, fuchsias, camelias, flowering shrubs,
shelter trees, herbaceous plants, gloxinias, palms, foliage plants,
and flowering plants generally (except heaths, azaleas, rhododen-
drons, orchids, and delicate ferns), whether in the open ground or
in pots; and is most valuable when in the liquid form, and
applied three times a week when the flower buds are forming.
It forms a more general and complete plant-food when mixed in
the proportion of two ounces of sulphate with one ounce of
superphosphate, and one ounce of kainite or sulphate of potash,
and dissolved in five gallons of water. This is, in effect, the
composition of many of the patent manures sold in small quan-
tities at an extravagant price, but which the gardener can mix
for himself at prices ranging from 8s to 12s. per cwt.
It is hoped that the preceding remarks have assigned to
sulphate of ammonia its proper place among manures, and have
indicated how it may be applied efficiently and economically;
and will draw the attention of farmers, orchardists, and
gardeners, to the great value of a fertiliser which has hitherto
been overlooked, or insufficiently appreciated, in New South
Wales
The Australian Gas Light Company, in order to encourage
even the smallest cultivator to try experiments for himself, intend
to sell parcels containing Gibs at 2d. per ib., and it is expected


that when our cultivators of the soil find the value of this con-
centrated and approved manure, they will free New South Wales
from the reproach of exporting almost all its sulphate of
ammonia to the Mauritius, Fiji, and Queensland sugar planta-
tions.
In France, the demand is now greater than the supply, and,
consequently, the price is generally over £2O a ton. Yilie, who
has thoroughly proved its value, goes so far as to say, “Nitrogen,
being the dominant ingredient in all crops, a fall in the price of
sulphate of ammonia will bring about a corresponding fall in
the price of bread and meat.”
Sulphate of ammonia can now be got in New South Wales for
13s. a cwt., or £l3 per ton.
“ Verbum sapienti suffioit.”
A word to a wise man is enough.


Afp
BlftUO
oStjbncp :
Printed bv W. E. SMITH, 26, 28 & 30 Bridge Street.




• » . • ♦♦ ♦ • ♦ • ♦ ■ ♦ « ♦ « » »■■*■ • ♦ • -* 1.1 ■ ♦ 1 ♦ - t
GAS COMPANY’S
AUSTRALIAN GAS-LIGHT COMPANY.
To the Farmers, Orchardists, Nurserymen,
Market-Gardeners, and Florists of New
South Wales.
If you find your soil less productive than in former
years, try a small plot with Sulphate of Ammonia,
1 cwt. of which contains as much Nitrogen as 36
cwt. of average stable manure.
See for yourselves if the increased produce in Hay,
Grain, Fruit, Vegetables, or Flowers, amply repays
the expenditure.
To enable the smallest grower to make small
experiments for himself, the Gas Company will sell
1 cwt. of this valuable fertilizer for 135., delivered at
the Railway Station, or as small a parcel as 61bs. for
Is., delivered at the Gas Company’s Office, Kent
Street, or their branch in Bathurst Street
Utlffctlt of lliilitiilll
GUARANTEED TO CONTAIN NOT LESS THAN
24 per cent, of Ammonia, or 20 per cent, of
Nitrogen.
