





/i c-x j
6T hA 'l s3 \
. ;! i
u : ; - j
Q 3 —S~-o
0




THE HISTORY
OF THE
PILOT SCHOONER.
SEA WITCH.
ISSS*


PREFACE.
spread a reputation in these waters, that it has been considered advisable to
ptace ott record, to this term, an authentic history of her career, ft will bo
saeo tnat mis vessel, tor a considerable period, eecnnied a lawm eha.se of
atteakea ® the part of the Oomrnmnnt, the Parliament, the marhiaw intern
'' L " J hmwrahy. jjnrmp thenwgnt other rarinrimv. eet o dm-
passed rhtkeit seme mention of her in the morning journals, To ieveteram
>? ' a tieo nwm ot jocularity ; while the passionate earnestness
With whtch her presewed virtues were trump- ■ :• , •
teed a humourous contrast to the vlgonr with which her alleged failings
ieaver was a poet hoat nature so constantly criticised
w:0 awceeseo see although it is now pace enough that she m unable to
tteop woe at a very greo,t tnany points indeed of the windw eye, slto was
atways to the eyes of the community, and way, indeed, he said to have
qte mew te seme pnrpeea, A craft that has Pace so distinguished in
Mr day, ought not to he allowed to go down, either to the bottom of the cm
or to iesterwal obscurity, without a Meed or a lea to : , , ,
teas powers:scow, |f g p„ ca ,, sot take imk , v yy d)4) , )M g| ot()rf 0 , thfs
' ' ' ' the
Maetry,Ae has at least a right to a prowmeet place in that niiieia! and
Jharihow Doeeiad of which she is so striking as ilhaatmtiou aad example,
liw documents repahhehed in this pamphlet coosist of oiiiciai records
aod newspaper commtmienthms, Among a faithful contemporaneous bis-
sarp w do; aw Art Ad 't he Flyiog Dutchman has had her chroniclers,
mo there seems no jad reason why ear favourite emit, which, although
>nowgiy resotnhhng a id A damn, has never been accused of dying, ehoaid
nca ae planed, ae it were, permanently on the stocks ef Anstraliali history,
A hen mo days of patching and mending her am past, and she at last Ahm
m> h&t proper position as a bathing machine, it will ho tdoasinn to tar. te
.!! ?ds of iiey & this spirit, our history is submitted
wam Parise, nr adore tavern; wo trust that it will continue to doat lona alter


ilia i,: Sea Wibib.T aaolbea afbaabyoaae Ibdor-bytbay- baaa gives. ap ail hope
af baa bods; so, without -ao aid of eaapta abator casks. 'boat aba bad baaa;
oaaoadjagly? dear to tbo pubbo a?ill always be aabnowlodged s ao long as tbe
Treasury aaoonlo axyat, aaid ovaas, yabaa bea aoosi passioTiata ioxof aboil adraat
bet dadas to be aiooyod veyib tbe Yoieaaiy beat -a
"Rotten Row."


£3 y
S? «; S» fri
« 85
1^
|HAIITI0N TO MA&rN£R«U~
y* CiipiT,h;$ of vss&?l» ar-<? bershy ea i*
'.Kit ts sppnmsh d ass to tbs Beads at
Post Bs'Ss.s 5 Tdk i*w» u
Fiiot JS& 1 Mo 1 , SBrssms t\OHPT
.IN PIBP WEA.mim m OB wssUhaa
OsS n aid r,st in assess -n & ssa ssy -
thwfbre, is & atmag hgmm It tass sOe
fasod sssssgssy it} sssbss lies is C-assp
(;svs>ssd asedtbs pibs.sslf ts vessels, m
hmto&se, is, wbskbaats*
A SHIPOWNER.
Pjtsny tBb Jus a 1st 2
i‘bs Trs&ssev,, tvs? Bovs Wales,
tltb Jsae. IBZ'2,
mo MARIBlEbO NOTine is
!<• hvrTsjgitos ihst as ,t I'lhi Bvsoser
is !K>'» BsBsasd satside Bm Bvda yf Poet
davs-m, Naf.'m gf Tissc s exempt Asm
t,dssy ids ssmsps *f & Pdsi, rmat take
<<as» t<f sa.Vmd Use sskUBfesu hsgrmbi* both
by day ssd rdgiik etterwAa tbo? will
rssder ttsvsvk-gg Hails fcr tbs jstv vs-
fflHb h"
E. & WEEKE&
NOTICE TO MARINERS.
Sp\? Bfittof Drorr'TTFFo Fee Vmy docgFrep or ran s ato Pu or
Bo>4lf>.™Fo entering (np<si your dude--.) with a fair wind, keep the Treasury
<>h with the Coh>siul fmmctmyE Office, aid siesdholdly en year course , tut
it the weather hosoum foul (whies is net unlikely) from that direction, stand
ef and on, but if It iuereuso to a full gale right in your teeth, thaw all aback
and make a stern hoard (Hoard ?).
Having gift eel ot the difncully, all on again, and keep tacking shout,
sailing -'dene on the wind, inet us It way blew, fooling year way well, awl
tafmg carets hag cl<<w uHu the Fdg Cove at Treasury Head,—
take earn to stew clear of Weekoa Spit, tlFw lido rnxts otsong sgamst
F; /> tk >ut Hlny %ku' i,alt at Chmy’s btely became total wrecks,
through going on the wrong task and against tho tide, and sot taking is sail
is Ua«- ~>u 1 1 n mo ot the &ea, a bi t > 4 a Win hd hi xng too high
‘ caused thorn to ho swamped. Stand oft Free Selection head (commonly
knewnm Ito’ecnsexFs Foist), and running well into Cnwpur's Keachu take up
a sang berth, and let go your anchor.


Wh«u a Mhiiwsr funk test hensst ?acs.,
Themselves mr others will betmy,
Whs t secret art cas wait him thea,
To put thaw lumw-t wen sway V
The why art lis rage to cover,
Tchido the asms, etui save 'hiehteh,
And fra? apiuiaa aoandlj smother,
Is —• te smte~»-
PUNCH.
,Cabinet leojirt partial was held the other
day, at whkh Captains Barley, Fox, and Smith'ware charged with disobey-
ing the orders of Efmrwkdmiral Washes respecting a 4< smart" young lady from
Yemkeed<mdfedom> known as the “ Water 'Witch/ 5 ami tlrsi cousin to
Fennlmore Ooupet’s fascinating * Skimmer of the SeasT It seems the
Admiral had conceived a strong attachment for the ocean beauty, and ordered
the trio of FGppora to hare her rigged eat in Fret style. They demurred,
alleging that the yoaag lady “ was no better than she ought to he, w con-
sidering fbe/h/um she eat in the way of A. a, d, The Court found the re-
fractory Captains guilty* at the same ume intimating its willingness iS to accept
their resigna.fi oosrt The jolly tars, although be h> aging to- the v< Pilot Board”
bad no’dea ef ‘" walking Vm glen/T so easily, end ‘dashed ibcb but tom"
jith'v would rewgm iV hum - h diaa of the Coast was *h a wnerwd,
end the Gnbherr <f - mhw" ooh red to he dmJwefe with <m rntimaGo that if
they didn’t <s lop thorn boom?/' immediately, a wrong detachment a,t the newly
organised hmval. Brigade would he seat down ** to hard them from their
herthsT It is really pleasant to st/e ihc delightful despotism beneath which
** a peoples Ministry* ! are so gently and so gracefully submerging all who pre-
sume to <lifter front their imperial will 1
Tint Floor BeAtem 'We mentioned a feu? days since that the Govern-
ment had.purebased the American schooner. Sea Witehyfor the Pilot service.
Before doing so, the Pilot Beard were desired by the Colonial Treasurer la
Inspect the vessel, and to report eu heradaptahllity for the above purpose*
The opinion which these, gontlomou stormed of the. Bee Witch w»s unfavourable*
and they informed the Colonial Treasurer that she was not suitable for a pilot
vessel, ' Their principal ulpeetiene were—that she was not entirely copper-
fastened* that she would net sail near em-ngb to iho whul,. ami that the price
asked—T'l-ldn—'wee considerably In excess of her value, 11m opinions ef
edher nautical men, of a precisely opposite character, were, however, uhtuined
hj theCelouial Treasurer, togetlmr with a ccrtrtioate as to the seaworthiness
of the schooner from Mr* Cnthbert, who had crammed hm in dock, and uw
Huoaced by these Mr, 'Weekes doterrnmml <m overruling the objections of the
Pilot Beard, The Boa Mitch having beett nurcha-ed, the t eternal Treasurer
wrote to the Pilot Beard, desiring them to duvet Iter being fitted up as a pilot
eehooncp to this they replied, declining te umfermke that duty on the ground
of their abjection u> the- employment of the vessel m the phot service, A
letter was, thereupon, sent from the Treasury to the three members el ibe
Board who had objected, te tlm purchase of G.te vessels Cuptaiu Fox, Csptmu
Barley, and Captain Cruhh —inbuuuing them that. In consequence id their ra-
lasmg to carry out the wishes el the Government, their resignations would be
accented, limy, however, wrote back declluingtc resign,: ufcn ,wdush : they
2


vnceived a letter Infnruung them that then- seats si the IMard-were vacant,
and that- their aancneeors would shortly be appointed. bnhsegneptly, the
three following gentlemen have boas appointed to the vacant seats, at the
Board—Captain Towns, Capreindohn Vino Hull, and Captain W. IC Home,
(hr many years < aptam k ik, I*, and 0. Cods semca The strong recom-
mendation of Oaptak Towns is understood to have had tmnshjerable Influence
t ’ h ran s so, torn lit ia i w, pauk -a of t < sehoamnv :
The Spa Wrrca AaAiu.—This imtbrtnnate pikd schooner has lieou
Oigx at diot - u t.i hd t / k>’ % wuwqua ee os u<t hemp able to
render assistance to the ships coming into harbour Taring the coatmiaaec ef :
the gale, She is lying at.anchor in smooth water at W&feoks? Bay, ami as
soon as the weather clears up she will .proceed ter. sew again, The ■Sharp*
shooter, which arrived on Monday elf the Heads, was hoarded by the pilot ia
the on uuoy | not Owl, end m I ®t »h da mk i arm ala lied to to hoarded m
the usual way, it will he rememberedthat a short time sieve the r-ea Witch
returned to port, having sprang her ream boom. One el the members of the
Pilot Beard has been outside the Heads in her dining a etilf bieere, and felt
numb relieved when he set foot on mma jmna again. It is understood that
ail immiry has since taken plane a? m the seaworthiness </ the Sea Witch,
and that the pilots and men on board have reported unfavourably of he? fit-
ness (orthe wmee in fart b semxulhut dnong dbe time shower- last at sea
the pumps hid in he kept constantly M work. In attempting to get out
during the late heavy weather aba missed stays five times, end was com
segnendy iu the greatest danger, *i is said by competent searners tine if 4#
had been outside the Heads she would have been compelled to take shelter:
limn- if the ami h m tk the w kbu Heard up, It aLo appears
feetn hor peculiar build that it Is impossible to lower a boat with safety when
the sea is running high.
TO The Editor of the Herald.
Sin,—Without cnndescexidhig to contradict your reporter in hisYohm-
tfcml nplniea as to the fitness of the dea "Witch lev the purpose
for which she is intended, t have merely so say I have tried thus craft, 'ana
will he unsmiudjie for all thaJ h required from hen
I wenm net raw? ta,*oa man?, of the article hut fm the apparent
attempt oo the part- ef your reporter to depreciate the vessel, sod withhold
from fbe public hvk wubm k- knnwk?h?,—neuud}, ha atutes she crew bad
been discharged for some alleged refusal of duty, when he wans well aware the
crow bad, cu Saturday night, determinated refused ktakettie main, home
on hoard until the Mowing nnaningk The master of the vessel roused me
ap ft i toiling me of the Bel, and that he bad applied to the Water
H>hwg and eould ho leik men, not bang under da u„,uk'
articles, I wws aware we had no direct control over them, and u furred the
muster to the Humour Master, under whose managenieot the men had been
engaged.
*• The Phoeßoak had onkwod the lm f u- ptwak u» sc,; a* soon as pokhk
&tkr the boo® so® hkshed, for winch rxtra.labour w«r-employed.
a. t


If these sailors who refused duty (well known to your report ,nj had
been on regular arficies, the law wenld have enabled the Pilot Beard to do
them (hat justke frOrn which obey have escaped.
Fonr reporter was wed aware the Sea Witch had been recalled for
the purpose of investigating that direct charge (which was net denied by the
men), and with the Intention of their dismissal and shipping a crew on re-
galar articles, in order that proper discipline may he preserved on, board the
vessel- Of all this your reporter was perfectly cognisant, and my 'only com-
plaint is he did not give the public the full benefit of the information ho
possessed.
Ism told that gentleman is averse to the 'change of system in the
Pilot service, but like many others, I hope he will live to he convinced. All
I ask of him is honesty in his report upon any matter where I am coneorned.
Yours faithfully*
R. TOWNS.
3.Bth dime.
THE SEA WITCH AGAIN.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Fie, —I should sot have '. troubled yea or the public with, this affair so
far as I. am concerned thexadn, had Mr, Weekes, in bis remarks therein (as
published by yon to-day) eondned himself to facts; hut whoa t find he .not
only misstates, but grossly misrepresents to the Assembly eo'enm&tanees
that have -occurred whilst I was a member of the Pilot Hoard, I. feel myself
bound to lay before the public the true state of the; ease*
Mr, Woekes states that ** the Board" in ibis Instance represents three
gentlemen, therefore in dealing with this question he was not dealing with
the Idiot Board but .with. these three gentlemen. The first Instance Mr,
"Weekes quotes is the Board raising a claim to the certificate fees, and be
puts it as if the three gentlemen were the delinquents in this matter, although
he is well aware that myself and Captain Fox never laid claim to any of this
money, and raore, that it mats by onr vote that this affair was settled, and
the funds handed over to the Government,
/•' g regards the case of the Newcastle ligninonse Keeper, i snao s«av»
the commit*ee to state (after they have seen all the napersl, whether be was
a lit app intment to make to a distant lighthouse,
Mr, Weekes might with equal justice have referred to ins appomt*
rnents of light-keepers at .Jervis Bay, ami the amiable manner In which they
are living, end the frequent, changes that have occurred there.
And if that were not snileient he nsignt have -brought forward many
others that I couhl remind Mm of, whore the pnMic sm-vise msthoeu beam
fited by h's interforence,
" \V hh regard iS the .Pacific ami Atfantm, i may slate that the Board
did not consider'they were in all respects fit for the service, hut only os a
substitute until proper vessels could he xoami v and one of the xnembers slated
xlnh he would l<e glad to lake them over at the end ef twelve -.months at 10
per cent, less than they cost, so that the Government could lose very little hy
their twelve months’ trial


I am cetfaialy uot aware of the stroug. ■ riows alluded toby Mr<
Wsekos, uoir of any negotiations, such as he rotors to, by any of the Beard,
and the papers published show none. If Mr. Weekee is aware ■of anything
more than the papers disclose bo aught injustice to make it public, ur.nl nos
throw out Imamdces that I have no means of reMtingw
The ~ea Ivhh. »■>(<' , Iw-- oh; i is a c Bmwn say of the &pl?ndid
qmlUks so forcibly put forth by her admirers, as the only approach to a
hreexe wm have nod earns she wanton the eta?ion breve her Imo pelt Since
then! see by your paper of to-day, that she misled stays off the South Reek
This might have keen expected from her build, hut I have also learned, from
undoubted authority, that It is m old trick of hers, so much so, that her
antipathy to staying in anything hut smooth water was so great during the
last voyage amongst the islands, and the prospect of success so small that the
attempt was seldom made,■■.wearing being substituted,
I remain, Sir, your obedient semut,
Smith’s Wharf, loth Jane,
CHAS. SMITH.
THE SEA WITCH: A SECRET DIVULGED.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EM PIRE.
Ssny—Having heard that a pair of stays was sent, a tew days ago,
to Oaptaiu: Towns, fen the use of .the Sea .Witch, and that he was at a "loss to
know to whom the pilot sendee was indebted for so opportune a present, I
made inquiries,, and am happy to present to your readers (among whom, I
believe, the gentleman alluded to now be Included, and who, hut ihr this eir~
tmustance, might still remain ignorant of the Amor) a oommnuloadou
received by me from the lady herself, who is no other than the renowned
Mrs, Darlington. Bhe says;
ABeiog an old woman myself, I naturally Inure a sympathy with,
old women generally, and having hoard that she Idiot Board w composed of
such persons (though I don’t believe It), I always feel an interest in their
proceedings, iam told that a ?uiui \.s a hob has been the tomaT talk
for tvse'ks: and it almost made me sick to think of what was In every-
body’s month so often, I hoard that this witch had been tried, aod I know
in the old times witches wore oltea tried and burnt whoa found to he Inn
posters as I luor ibis one Is-though \ bhmdd bo sorry to wee a follow*
creature grilled at a Wnhc. They say s however, that this cools trial seas
eatisiastory. All I know is that I have had many triahg hut nouo of them
have heea satiamnory to myself; ami i believe that if this witch could
speak slim, rb \ ><, a tbh ( m \\ «moa sv* ah > em* I) any tbmg hat
speak), she would say ’ho mcm. Rhy, they talk of frying her 56 on a
wind, 5 ’ whisk, I suppose, moans np a bill, lor linn is very trying on mj
wind, and is a very uncouth way of treating any woman ; and those who do
so ought to fewa&haumd of themselves, I saw a letter in one cl the papers
which said she had been knocking about amongst the islands. 1 suppose that
is as discreditable as the s Rocks, 5 where no decent woman once could show
:ber face:; and, If so, does not say much lor her previous tricks, which, the
letter, I think, said wore bad. There, it appears, she refused to stay in any-
thing hut smooth water and in this, I Bunk, she was perfectly right, tor 1


ass <m% if I waa ca rough tmter I -wsuM sol stay a miaata longer than I
could b*l|a Does & mean that nobody e&s satah hu when they say she kill
stay fe.r nobody t
I fear the poor mature has a very bad chm actor, and is really or#
bettor, nor* indeed* half an good as abe ooght ia be, Bat It went to mj
heart da hear that ehs should ba?o been export to the fete teatyostnoas
rnnoka, ibiolj ofed 5 as 1 wynpose &ho oas ? by osssy ifeo -ha r*>-o i stays f
with h I < <' rot wonder at, Un. J. chads au»s m so aery maea row y aod,
therefore, I seal her a pair of stays 4 to yo fefeab ny la bad weallwny nod t
.hope no olfeacefe *
I tmst this o.aylaaatioo of the charitable hitnstloss of ?ay Mmd will
bo ssdMest* md that dm will recaife the thaafes of those, mho go warraly
admire the poor invalid who has thae heea be&fecdcd,
01 w . vy O',-,
DAVY JONES.
Sooth Beef, June 2d.
IbS. —-Mrs. Jomw; sends her eomplhaenle to the lady above adhuied
to, and . begs jae to assnre her that,, as she and her Meads are likely to pay
«s a visit shortly, they shall be welcome to the bast we have in our looker,
D. J.
THE CRUISE OF THE SEA WITCH.
It Is with unbounded gratification, and breast burning with patriotic
pride, that we recognise the revival of that dating spirit. of rnariib.oo adven-
ture which made the old Iforthmcn kin>.,s ct tie- sen, I nought the dissolute
mermaid within the rales- of civilised -meety, end eventually handed the
indent of Heptane w iMtaanu-, On 'at rnLy fint a feat was peifonced
whi«hj far exalted fierohra and nunhe-fi Milk may ha matched for
no, trido against all the achievements of undent and modern sensnanship.
The coming event was announced in portentous wfinperiogs and Agnifimnc
signals tnrmsghonl tne toormeg i r that ewutfnl dsv. Tv uiercece bon rted
the neighheuring tape, and, reefing to scant gathered in gnaips about
the rpneys awl wharves of tlm t aasmcrcid coy of Sydney. Boys wmsmod
the th sagfitfal ? rpjtnws mof a, dd mn< on the rmt fiupwb fi x mes as
they Med oil tn the Mr finer side, -appeared M nrndy that they had Indna
trlcusly resolved upon cutting cbalf during Ihe whok of that day. Even tha
was art of the port loft of rippling, in chant wander said enpeotation.
The Sen Wilds was to he got nob os way l That mysterious
vcmei, which had fidled the wiubuy of alfi—finb earned
the official evccudoa of three sea captains, and aroused the stern
professional ire of fisc honourable and gallant mender tor Braidweed,
was at find to decide ihe great cancer ecntroveisy, and to establish, beyond
the chance of ibcc.ce cavil, the superiority of that order of naval archdeetnrn
for vessels designed to Ecu iho Mornbod treat acr, and sail threo puiom
witihi the wind’s cyan Through the Imnmevsof the President of the Bifid
Board, wu have been favoured with a copy of hisomcial report to the
MtXiister fur Finenco and Trade, aud we cannot do better than to place at
once before -out readers Me glowing aud »c-auoinlsko description of thus
gallant oruiwo In all prcbalblby roe mfipnal duewemnt will he laid before
the Assembly imnitaliauby on the BpoaL-r taking the chair this afternoon.


« ; ?V;: tti Emmm nuv mm FmomiE mm Teas®.
Pilot BoM'il:, ..
" Adrift dii a grating.
“FcH IncksOTL Oils b-od,
■* Fdr,—
«X, 1 have the honour to report to you thavmo nmt voyage of the
Boa Witch Pas beeu accomplished, and that she Pas returned to her moor-
u?gs wdbou* having shipped a sea or strained aropiuyarn,
4£ S, This satisfactory home of a groat enterprise is mainly to he
attributed to the superior oapehi i ides of the vessel; hot yon will not fait to
perceive that the pressure of the Pilot Board, and mere especially, perhaps, ot
a mßmu distmgn shed manher thereof mho must ho nameless, would
naturally eurrdse a salutary intlaence over the movements of the craft, mid
restrain' any erratic kclinntlon to behave in an mkmmm or nmddcial
manner, ...
« £ k Every preparation having neon mane tor eontmgciu ms, ami
twelve mouths' provisions having been taboo on hoard far fear of accidents,
the moment approached when wc were all called upon to say farewell to
those wo InftheMml urn The parting was affectieuato, and In some instances
most roimhiog, I need scarcely say that our duty to onr families Impelled
no to give the katJluishing touch to ear wills end testaments, before tripping
the anehc-r.
A All hokg ready, I ccanre.undated my ordam to the Captain, who
passed them rathe boatswain? that officer immediately eouveymg thorn to
the cok, who handed thorn to Ids mate. The eensogueneo won that the tea*
hell's was immediately pot upon the galley fun, with the greater I order and
reg’dsrny, Fe? in this Bon dm discipline ef Her MaJ astyk service is
strictly observed, and everything la done iunmmnf-war fashmu,
(t 5, Abaci this time some of the seaman, with grout Intrepidity,
chtnhed up dse kddenq and untied severs! strings, wined caused the sails to
got loose. * Somebody "else he viug mmrdoned something that had tied the
vessel n,s the ground, two num went to the hinder part, uml after they had
pulled a small carriage wheel round and round for a few miuutcs, wo loam I,
to- our laexpresßhln Joy. that the Bop began to move. A result on gratifying,
and so faintly hoped for, completin' y overpowered on, and, fulling Into each
others* arms, we embraced, with transports of emotion,
d. Met being disposed to ra.-k too much at irst, I made sail In-
Dawes' Battery, under to*- guns of which 1 proposed to find shelter iu tho
event of the hreeae cc.lliim --p rough. Encouraged, imam acr, by the steady
pr< prn&s of Lao ship, I a rmod u suddeu resolution to double die Cape, a.
m esoaevm which, I are kmpy to say, was micenssMly ummmplislmd, and in
a fnw mimcoa w var" qahentiy laeasting the waters of Darling Harbour.
As I believe that thin p-.aeo has been described by former voyagers, I shall
rnsmvi' what I burn to suy o u that head idr a wparate repmt. Off the port
of lie no mwe picked in - a dingy, but there wa» untiling in is. The men at
ihnw’lmul mac., by a skirted twist, managed tn got the wind behind the ship,
ami we boro awuy fnr the distant shores of Bradky's Head,
“■ 7. Tin- splendid ssd.lfcg qualities <d the Boa Witcb became now the
idem-"- of gamral admiration. We passed the 1i.M.8. Feinras. as if she had


been at snehmr, and sc* pcrfeet was theiO-usbn that'.sumo pomns on board
maintained that it nudly was so. Our great speed evidently struck with
vrAmwhiueet «n> «f Her Majesty’s seamen, who,-after gasiug at us for a few
minutes with » strong expression of wonder, saluted our dug by dipping a
bucket ndotfco wafer, sol muncdianTe abm'w-'rds polling ft up again,"
** 8. The velocbyof the Sc& Witch now became appalling. We passed
a Mung boat-easily, though she had the advantage, as c-ue of oar steersmen
remarked, of having her kodick. down. About tins time wo fell in with two
privateer yachts, manned by very youthful seamen, several of whom I non-
delved to ho -making- celestial observations ou tbe side nearest to us. On
closer investigation, however, the Captain, decided that, from the positions of
their thumbs and lingers in relation to their noses, they intended tu challenge
ns.- As they had no sails set,, we immediately their offer, and* I
need scarcely say, came, off triumphantly victorious.
-9; On nearing the -light-ship, wo felt that wo could easily have
passed her; bnt it was now getting late in the afternoon, and there was ao
land to be seen on the other side of the Heads. We therefore made for
Clark’s Hand, which wo succeeded in somi-ehraruaavigatmg., Instead of
taking the move obvious coarse right across it. Of Doable Bay, m the wind
was now getting so high as to blow . the papers of my table on dock, the
captain gave orders to lead the spanker-boom, fbonghl should have thought
it would hare been, hotter to leave it. straight. The cookfe nude lightened
the ship by throwing a- bucket of ashes overboard, and she now went easily.
ss 10. On passing 'Woolloumooloo Bay, several youths in heats, with
apparonfly One'''"- anxiety, undo he porks <A car-" raanmn respecting the
welfare of then mother*. This r/w-' ww gar T) log ; but, of course, on
voyage ef this perilous character, we were far too prudent to take ladies on
board/' '
M XI. Wo earns to anchor at car old moorings a little before
sunset, having been uo less than an hour and a half on the voyage. Our
feelings on again recognising the snug Cove of Sydney, with the comfortable
Custom-house at its bead, may be imagined by those wbe have encountered
similar danger, but. can umx bo described. On examination it was found
that the ship bad not sprang a leak, and bar timbers seemed as strongly se~
cured ae the best patent envelope. Alter a bdel but heartfelt ejaculation of
gratitude, we hastened ashore, where oar Mends mid relatives received ns
with, the most aUtet-iomto greetings.
' 4 It. In 0( minding c u leporg u become? my duty to congratulate
the Government on the possession of a vessel, vbicb, I.- feel assured,--will
never run .nay from an enemy The uses to which she might- he converted
Incase of an emergency, are manifold. She would he valuable as a block-
slop, and odinuahlo a> a dtwg rail. b>t, abme nil, she Is eminently
adapted to do duty on blockade in a “ atone fleetif it should over bo feurnl
desirable to abstract an. enemy’s port, as at Charleston, Her carrying
capacity is good, and she would bold a large quantity of granite,
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Tonr most obedient scream,
"President."


If would be folly tu attempt, by any weak language <-f mow to gild
the rehoed gold of ties thrilling operative. We rajome to bed that, at. last*
the colony of bow South Wales Is likely to have a navy of Its <mm, and
gallant hearts and skilful bands to man it The Sea Witch it destined to
achieve immortal renown. and the nautical peddle -add swab. who keen
eurinsitw, the tidings of bee future successes. It is proposed io extend ber
next mono tu the sciumpper grounds, off the Heads, ami wo gave arranged
with the ooamiophore mas at the igHbeno k>. 'h< eardmt m e ig.n -< of
anything that may happen to turn up. Of this wo shed not fas 5 to apprise onr
anxious readers, by the immediate Issue of ass Ejeira&rdin&ry* — Mnqum.
What has bboo&b of the Sba-Wjtch ? Ccmsldwmble doubt
exists aa to the whereabouts of ibis vessel. She was last seers on %turday
night, at about 11 o'clock, three sno.es S.E. of Sydney Hears, She has on
board three pilots, Jenkins, Fuhmton, ami Ibldnson. She
has probably runs for eheber to Broken Bay or Fort Stefibers, and may i:s
e.irpentcd to memo her uppesranee again jo Feast Jackson ns soon as the
weather becomes hue, Fortunately these on hoard are too well aware of the
eapmilmoo of ilsc craft tv rw.v tK.m ivoe oy >vv,< u nmg oat io sga&by
treat rw, Si that no <|<mg<-r nee I W (i | \ sobs-- 1 len at prs mut
Tiro Sua Witch. —The phot schooner baa nut, been sighted from
the South Head siuee Saturday ; when last seen she was reaching to the
nriwa* I and haw tso veuu... b >st Immn bow ird <? tb per? s apum Bud I,
of the City of Newcastle, on bis passage from Morpeth yesterday, sighted a
schooneranswering the description ot the Sea Witch, shout- tire- mi tee Id. IE
of Tarrig&l Mead, She was reaching in for the land, and would therefore
Iso some ibirty trim unle-- north of Wnirey Heads. - Herald *
Tin: bus Witch-—'We sire aadin bo enFiled to announce tins
return to port of the pilot boat Sea Witch. Considerable curiosity* some
anxiety, and a little alarm bad been manifested in Sydney during Saturday
night- end Sunday, as to what had: become of her. She was last seen on
Saturday evening, about throe miles off the Heads, and was net again heard,
cl-until between db and 5 p.m. on. Monday, when she was towed up the ham
bout by a steamer, and anchored in the cove, bbe. has,-: we. are informed,
bad several Tory narrow escapes from being swamped. We have been
favoured with the following account of what occurred en hoard during the
tune of how o bw.. w —Wi aamrday afternoon, on attempting to enter the
HmuM H.e was dmmu to \ w rn rth by ,j -tuna ureerw (run the S.F.W.
Hie drifted <>b-ut forty miles during the night, end while in the aH of at-
tempting in mm the mm, ead si heavy sco am Ted me-' her. carry eg anwy
femeastiv sentries, and bm- whaleboat, bodily, with the exception of a smell
pO'lmn of the stern, mt,.bed t~> the pa nit ea ! l E ether boat wm aim store
in, and skylights carried away. The crow were up to them knees ta voter
In cabin and forecastle, The cutwater was also loosened, and a per;am
carried away. The men mutd not n m;dn h- thad berths en nccennt ef the
great quantity of bilge water washing over them from t-etwnen the linings*
as the boat rolled. The water could not be isuaned out, in oensegumwe of
the state of the pomps, Iho bout wow In groat danger of swamping several
times . and to add to their distress they bad nothing hut a few biscuits on
hoard. The srew suffered much from wet* enkt, and hunger during me


forty-eight hoars they were absent, , The boat is to go Into dock this morning
to repair damages, She xs to have. two feet added tuber keel, and her
masts ami sails reduced,—
Empire.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sxh, —I noticed with some coocera your report, hi reference to tlm-fet
":Witeh s as stated is yonr shipping article this morning ; and foelr g as I do
more than ordinary interest it) that much-maligned emit, I have talten pains
to inform myself of the real state how matters stand, and Mug satisfied
that year statement is' so tlmronghly exaggerated and misstated, I crave your
indulgence for the satisfaction of the public to withhold any further sm:b ;
but please to invite tbs public to some and see for themselves the actual state
of the vessel Until I have an opportunity of giving aMI and clear state-
ment of all matters In connection with this vessel which I still proneoo.ee ns
all 1 ever wish for when fairly tested. The vessel is nova at my wharf,
where those interested are invited m inspect her, ami I will take the moat
early opportunity of laying before the public a dear statement of all matters
in connection with this vessel, and give the lie to the base fabrications which
have been most disgracefully circulated about her, I may now' refer to the
words of the master ami pilots, who were on board, that but for the acci-
dental sea winch they shipped, no vessel of her size could have behaved
better*
The time has now arrived when I teal it my duty to expose all these
deep laid schemes which have been for seme time working to subvert the
system which has cost me years to mature. And lam quite willing to take
all the responsibility on my own shoulders, am! glory in the cause when I
succeed in establishing, that system in properly:, which will ho the. greatest
been ever afibnled this colony since its settlement.
R. TOWNS.
Sydney, 6th August, 1862-
THE LOG OF THE LOG.
It is known that, during the last two days, the utmost anxiety had
existed with reference to the safety of H. M, S, Sea Witch. The umler«
wultew: bad ml tred to *ub out their names, ami Lloyd's .agent put to sen
during a tmrrlhc gale on Sammy nigH, end has never since been heard of.
Several respectable laundresses, who had peeunnm churns open tic gallant
mariners, were inconsolable j ami grog-scores were freely offered in the
market at a hundred and fifty per cent, discount. In short;, public anxiety
was et Us utmost stretch. The telegraph operators throughout the country
had been at work incessantly for three days and nights, answering nuostier.s
Ifmn all parts of Australia, on. this momentous subject The Minister of
Finance and Marine was constantly attended by official expectants, titills t-
h.m his nose with straws to keep him awake, so overpowering was the
fatigue brought on by the volumes of correspondence that he had been com-
pelled to write and peruse on this subject. The Parliament had resolved to
g fJ' jp&waneriw. ' The only member of that august body entirely tree from


alarm was the honourable «ud gallant member for Braid wood, WlnV ih>-
bOr yu everybody eWs bead was bristling with terror, hi? coutuier- a; m ?ho
Mimhl'er of Marina remained unshaken, and bo bad suuillngly pAoc-d a notice
on «|>e paper with the object of elovaßug that- officer to tbe poet of Admiral
of tbe Fleet, la token of unbounded reliance upon bis nautical skill and
experience The Assembly seas in tbe midst of a debate oa a proposal to
despatch HALS. Orpheus on a searching expedition to Lane Core when tbe
SergeautMt-Arms was suddenly precipitated from hb pod si tbe door where
he had been stationed to beep members away from the tippling saloon, and
was burled violently on the top of the two honourable and permanent members
at tbe foot of the table, owing to tbe frantic haste with which the Preside*®
of the Pilot Board rushed into the hallowed presence, to announce the safe
arrival of the wandering Witch, An adventurous boy, who bad ■climbed to
tbe top of the South Head-Hag-staff, had been the first to descry tlm rover.
Far oil to the aortawaxd be bad observed, roiling and tumbling on the waters,
something which at- first-looked very like a whale at its gambols, bat which
an experienced : seaman, having taken an ocular through the hollow handle
of a tin saucepany pronounced to be no other than the Bea Witch, and a
waterman was immediately despatched in his wherry, for tbe purpose of
towing her into port. The Joyful intelligence was received with the utmost
enthnsiasm, ami a round of Jeers was giving by tbe whole House, standing ;
after which, on the motion of the member for Morpeth* who was observed
to be In most exuberant spirits, there was a general rush to Jessop’s tap.
Ac a favour which would not have been coui'maod npon any one Mss
devotedly attached than ourselves to this gallant craft, the Minister ««f
Marine has furnished us with the earliest copy of her log-book—a kindness
which we estimate all the more highly from the fact that the honourable
gentleman pelted down bareheaded to onr office with the document, an soon
as it had been placed in. his bauds. With corresponding haste, wo rush to
place the exciting narrative before our expectant; readers
“Saturday, p.m.--Galled the Middle watch. Bo answer, ro n
Jackson light hearing itself tmcoamouly well to tbe south, half a point
westerly. Cat’s pa-ws getting blacker. Tried to wear ship and stand in for
Manly Beach, but couldn't. Jenkins grinned, and said ship had had quite
wear enough in her day, Bonuetaed him. KotMng like discipline in Her
Majesty's service.
“ Sunday, at. —Robinson got up early, 1 sad found ship had run
away with hits I Everything closa reefed, and ship going along well on her
beam. Bent up all bands to win’ard, and Ordered cook to cut away mam-
mast, Instead of which be cut away himself. Sudden squall fi;om S.W.,
.righted ship. Tried to Jibe her, but one woMda’t. Fullerton said we should
all be Jibed If over we got home. Ordered Mm Into Irons, but wonkhft go.
Mm. Court: Martial on him hj*ami bye. Gale freshening. Man at
wficel reports she won’t answer helm, but g<ws ctarn first. Ordered him
to let her go as she liked, and ; severely reprimanded him for impertinent laser-
femme with ships hndinations. Find she goes very well backwards,
giving a turn now and then starn on, and a-few touches sideways, fiang’d If
ever I see such a good-natured creature—sails like a basm 1 All. canvas
stowed now. yet she goes like a gcod’na. Cook’s eahoose gone overheard,


and boat want after it without onlmas, Lola of water on deck, but that is no
I y f|i ,n i ? gimr J a! amre below. How the devil slae sta-nds it I
dordt loam—says vGnnnc Gr the plans of tlm Gmb r.
u Sunday, p.m.— Light somewhere away to the west, sometimes
?osfarn. sometimes a-bend, Sddp turning round and round. Held council
with pilots, when ilobiasou proposed to let her npsol. end go bottom up,
alleging t,b«t. tie' deck didn't let In on much wm«r us the bottom. I houghs
it a g>« d but on *wlo> b t the Hup do it lureHl, tm sim v m
pus g t m ,s! !j s I,! oif jght ■men p,.oomwt h< % i >pe
Morotom . Out xm ebon of the Barrier Reef aboard, ami expect to bo there
directly,: disgusting.
<c Moudaj. a.uu— Eefractory seaman wanted to know if Am ceiihirdt
gel any grub, Jenkins i-baSed him, and told him to harpoon a porpoise
tbmugb the timbers. Got a pxmketnhandkereMef into the weather
togging, and tried to stay her, but she wouldn't stay for anybody,, ami
walloped away for Idmv Guinea. FnlGrton wished be bad a 'wwdnng-tub,
to gt,> usbme m, All lands and mg p*ue : oas hungry, end nothing to tat.
All the biscuit lioaiing up through the deck, in. a sort of salt-water porridge.
Hull of beti apt away two hoars ago through u hub; in Bm starn,
ieubiuo ; auphi a rat by tin. I A.L Im’diug through the ship's side, and
devoured him raw. all hut the head, secured in a mastcuiy manner by
Robinson.
5> Monday, p m.—Pilots got away from me and armed themselves
v/Uh belaying pms, all uerauae j wnkdt wav the ihoowt. Meant
not bn g it \ 1 tg the gm soon «hdm meuomtmg, end sup * mwmg svng to m
ox connng to amd-or on her own wcnormL Iltehed idiot Board ceuUiente
*vm the 'iidf, and dnp owlet tly all t m ujßcx Bout a new nan of oa,va&
Iron in tlm ami Ac lore ih< prc-> ds il >cry u<tl but
hogau witling down by the stain. Got pilots and aU bends to sp! u-o lb muse hea
forkml, and managed to ke.p her admit, BunH oil u Belt g<nho > ?
delighifnlly tender with the two days soaking. Crew hashing very gaunt,
ihbhntm nrmaued to cat xhu *uHu hoy, hut she iusual elm'od bhn by swim-
umw , t id ti< ost! , Gil hunk dom up, and lusy speaitxong * n the enri
of go<G ,gnu j at the bottom.
' l uisg <l y ? am V\ md rli gone, I at is? o) s< i r< Lug Hb. |
lahonring dreadfully, but ad labour In vain. Foul an to lam. bexmg übmU
in Keweastle Bight, but southerly current setting us on to Port Jam sou. If
thu crap wa.nt w> fend of i,v we msgbt ba' got lute Brohto Imy long
ago ■ but, bang her, sbe worfl&buw her nose anywhere only where she likes*
Buhimon says sho J s uo witda hut something worse. Told bixu he was too
Aa at of port, but he answered be liked brown ebony best, Hydney Beads
lean g<■ x ■*<’ -ntra*, «udnp g< j? 4th r v,.j II > Mn-tcn ion m*< wn
ivith Jonkins 5 nB nightcap above, as signal tor a pilot- Caught a blubber In
the ...■scuppers'■■.and divided it all round,
$< Tuesday, p.xm—Awful dmfßvg from let of hsPerxmm of Many
Beach. Intoxicated patty ou the# sands wonted tu know the nows from
C.hma Ght umst on b'.<r"h Bead ndU dif eb should throw ns a clodms
line. Pilot sen.? messages oil' A families, aud ordered something hot fur
supper, Adventurous boatmen put oil ami took, ns in tow, hanlmg us between


ti;o Heads through a leralic storm, of laughter fmm hath sides, Hot in at
Imt, ami may X he mm particularly devastated :J ever Igo oat again m sh>
Sea Winds, 0
" Wodnesday, auu,—Bound for Cockatoo IH&mL Tisafstlse m.dy
pUi>e wf* to dot dully onoush it will bo to moot the gaJkat OapUdsi Cods
in hospital there, She's another of; them—she m, WVre going to got the
Hdrh mt*4“ over again, se tlmt shed! he aide to sail top uppermost whan
there's so wind. Pilot Board impacted damages, aad found there wax
nothing oka to inspect, AH kinds delighted that if s over, and all the crew
deserted as so on as they could swim ashore,' 5
Here the Journal ends. We congratulate the hardy seamen on the
happy termination of their perilous cruise, and the country' on the recovery
of ajessel which is alike a pride to the service, and au honour to the dis-
crimination that discovered her valuable. qualities in spite -of the Ingenuity
of tholr commalmenL---
Empire.
Novelties,—The .greatest of the above sire low to he seen, free of
*xw>nw s ot loonT Wharf, ruiunlv the be* Wm g <md Cahdie Engine,
Every explanation. will be afforded ok tbe.prenmes.— Empire, *
Tle bva, Wo'cil—ll common with iho members of the late Pilot
Board, we felt Intense auxlety for the safety of this marine Venus durism the
lo,fe rough weather, Our fears were however happily dwpelled on Tuesday
by. liare--Admiral \S oskos, who informed Couimodoro Bugle! eh . that the
sf aunnrable cmft J vow all there, and that although dm had been out on
the loose, flirting with Old Boreas, who was very rode to her, she had come
boom {< hd ed considering od th ii Too Commodore expressed Ida
pleasure at "•u-A good t ewe, and with the < msracteristk gvemnwy of a wnmr
ilwted aJ. .hand* "... U> epLce the roam hiaoe. > This was at once eomohed
wMh* awl the healths of the .Admiral s darting' and the ex* Board were drank
vdih an enthusiasm kmi>v ever exceeded m Windbag Bay I—.
Empire.
IMPROMPTU
Or® zmrnv Suav®r sgi» os »,?!&« Scmmm Sm f3®,
Oa,S-s.~~’ ,< f say the Bea. Wlaeb ig a very smart eraft,
She answers so wed .to her wheel'd 5
And I well extgegc. &h« w all right abaft,
Aa 4 perfectly sono o k bar kte'C.”
Worlds.— if L too, hays beard a groat deal io boo praise,.
And Lands has declared-she dno.b rosse m her stayed 5
If.atMbs,™-'' If gotmd m her seel,: am! her rvbmeHs all rlglrt,
ii . above and below she is both stanch, and tig bt, .
If mwo >1 I«* e> a if* ™<lk ear 11*! e , £t„
Ii oommsoded by ID for »» emigrant gbip*.^.
Empire.


Thb summary * # dismissal'’ of Captains Barley, Fox, and Smith from
their seam at the Pilot Board is one of those characteristic comicalities 'in-
troduced into llesfamrible Government, by the “ indispensable 55 gentlemen
who, fortunately for themselves and their Meads, now direct- tire helm of
smtCx To keep public attention diverted from the main thing is the first ami
most essentia! principle of that u liberal policy/ 5 beneath whose protecting
wing so many of oar poor hat “ patriotic" chickens have sought, and found a
comfortable shelter. Them exhibitions of the hnnsonrons slides of the Minis-
terial magic lantern are also found extremely useful. not only h> amusing the
people, bat what is of far more consegueneeinhelpingtodispeh-the melancholy
of“official routine/ 2 which would otherwise press so heavily-on the-spirits of
our amiable Ministers, aotwitlmtamiing the ** paltry pittances 5 * they receive
monthly as the inadequate reward of their disixteke-steb <s devotion to the
country/’ Tim $s inauguration 55 of a School of Arts, the opening of a few feet
of railway extension, or any other comparatively trilling opportunity is likewise
seined by them, with the avidity of the cormorant, for the purpose of exalting
their own horns, and causing a popular lorge&lnes* of more serious and lm«
portant matters,
Five years practical experience of this sagacious system has, no doubt,
convince Uhe Ministry of it? scantiness of principle, and us eObmey In pro-
moting FAimonuva tutebusts at the public cusu
Tbo extrune visitation e,f official displeasure in the case of the late
Pilot Board would naturally lead to a belief that Its members mast have been
gniky of some gross dereliction of duty to Justify the Ignominious o.oatment
to which trey 1 ave been omeoveA 1 800 what has tons mired respecting ties
mu.rusme mya-ory, however, it would appear that the doomed Caphfins, so far
from deserving the heavy punishment- Inflicted on them, were rather entitled
lo credit for an honest fieri re to discharge their duties Imjhfolly. To- - efrenm-
stances winch led to the fetmial rinow reek of the unfortunate Captains a'-e
simply these. Ever fence the calamitous fate of the Dunbar the absolute
necessity of noting a proper phot boat to cruise musulo the Meads, b-n been
strongly and continually urged upon the Government. At length utter tusks
of delay, caused by matters of gueatsu MOMawr than the mrasnuvATnm of
humanlike and property, our Rulers set about supplying the long .needed
want, and lor that purpose purchased an American schooner called the Boa
Witch—paying for the vessel a** most liberal, 5 ' price in more senses than one,
Tim boat was of course submitted to the official inspection of the Pilot Board
for their report. The result of the survey was unfavoiirahio to the Boa
Witch, the Board considering her ineligible for the service, on account of her
** not being copper fastened throughout/ 2 and that her muling qualities wore
not adapted for the duty for which sho was required ; and for these very
cogent reasons tho Board also pronounced the price paid fer horto ho“ exces-
sive/ 5 Mot satisfied with this report, the Government sought the assistance of
other surveyors., who assured Ministers that the Sea Witch was '* ail their
fancy painted be?/’ and thereupon she was consigned to the Pilot Board, with
instructions for her being fitted out for the Pilot service. Adhering to their
original opinions, Messrs Barley, Fox, and Smith hesitated to carry out the
instructions of the Colonial Treasurer, ami the consequence was an intimation
to those gentle man that“ their resignations would he accepted/ 5 Feeling no


sJoubl that fa making the report they had, & conscientious sense of publso
duty alone Mueiced them, they politely declined the « alternative,” amf the
nautical knot was at once cat by the promulgation, of m offitial’" nhme*
centaiuimug their s< dismissal 55 Such is the plot of Ilka new md e»*ertokkw
vdifion of “ Ihe I Ton’ 5
:lo oar opinion the principal point of this curious affair turns upon Ihe
** co'apefoncy' 5 of the late Pilot Board to ** arrive ate? kmte*of thepecumar?
value and nautical qualities of the Sea Witch. Their appelntineat 'to* the
Board would of itself Justify a belief la their abilities and fitness for the
office, for we. most-remember that a “ clever ministry’ 5 never, seleets any bat
. « dmronghly competent 5 * persona ior the duties of the public service E*.
perieaee> has, bong since, proved this ! Believing, thee, that Captains Barley.
Fox, and Mmth werefully qualified for the duties entrusted to them, why
we ask, etas not the Colonial Treasurer satisfied with, the official report of a
recognised department of the Government? Why did he Ignore that report
nod aet upon nomofiicial opinions ? There muat have kxen strong reasons
for adopting such a course, and still stronger ones
for the heaviest* in diet ion.
ef ofecial law upon these gentlemen for the OxpresGoa of their honest con*
fictions. With all ms respect Ibr the profundity of the Colonial Treasurers
financial abilities, and his Hume-like arithmetical accuracy, we must be
excused for preferring the judgment of. thr discarded eapt.aias, as to tim
K satisfactory condition* 5 uf the Boa Witch, to that of even the great Head of
the 1H cheerier, ”
'lhe veal of an official muss be immense, and his confidence in his
own abilities unbounded, who can thus cavalierly treat the opinions of pro*
Icssional men holding Government appointments, os a matter Ids knowledge
of wind.!can .hardly equal that of a common, waterman. Before Captains
Barley, Fox, and .were subjected to the grossly insulting treatment
they have received, it. should he proved by competent author! ij that their
report was- the result of professional ignorance, tod that consequently their
removal from the Beard mm necessary for the public good. If the report of
the dismissed Board he true, what does It disclose ? Why a reckless waste of
a large sum of public, money for a vessel, in mo way adapted for the pilot
service. The truth of this has net been officially disproved, and the per-
formances of the boat itself during ber 5S trial trip” here ample evidence of
the correctness id the report submitted by the late Board,
Ibe album, will, no doubt, becomes matter of .Parliamentary .invest!-
gatxon, when, it is reported, Facts will be produced to show the extent to
which " little arrangements” can ho carried by realy « clever 5 * m.&xu Them
xs another enrious feature in this « sea story” worth notiemg. The &msh*
man upon whose express the Government purchased the
vessel and vriio, of course, 45 had no interest whatever- either as ammt or
otherwise in the transaction, is a member of the New Board, Therm is m
aur or mystery about the whole affair which probably accounts for the
goumal impression which prevails, that the three Captains are mot verv
TJTHJ'Ki* AVI. 5 ? t’T AT. wtt' vrj« *
unlike ox-nmaL Mijaxsm*—,.
Empire.


' 1 Lit > < t ! V* <U 1 CUj , 'im>< < i ! > ><f.o < ~ .
forcnntn? isi bed |n a >< v -i‘ * V K>(k bnr kCt *be 1 : hme. ho-
lms been 110 days on tho passage, beJrxc? days under steam, and there-
nt?hnfcr under sail hbe wus hash at hewcustle on Tyco, by Mh obeli mid
i'», } j'>r 'be reolonlal trade, Hhe is an annulary lifting screw steamer of
110 berm power, &nd i 2d n \ ngiePn B>-r IlfCng'- we pm Icd in every
mpocC and her aceoennonations me well suitedto ensure the most portent
comfort. The saloon G tiffed out-indy of birds-eye maple and the convent-
©aees ,iu the nabms »re constructed on tbe most, approved principles, Tbn
fere-cabin, in purtie«lar,e»lls for especial remark, aud shows that the greatest
care baa been takes to afford every accommodation for the various classes of
passongton. Captain Gtbsou, on approaching the Honda, threw up bias
byhts for a pilot, but the signal not being answered, be was compelled to
eonse in very cautiously. He came up the harbour, aad abreast of Fort
Denison be bred off a cannon, atsd anchored opposite .Fort Macquarie, At t
o'clock this morning no officer had boarded her. Captain Gibson, fortunately,
had visited this rant about, four years since. as second ntneor of the Oneida,
and he was therefore acquainted, in some measure, wub tie# hso hour, Ileh. s
porfntmed « tout equal to that of Captain Wiikva. who, some Gw years since,
on erred Port. Jar loans in the eight in a similar manner,. unknown to anyone
and anebned it? Farm Cove.—.
Herald.
Whf<ke t'< thk Sea Wncn ?-¥c call attention to the report in
mow,hipping columns of the < bade Hamilton, steamer, whhh arrived from
London this mm nrgp Sim canto nto pot at one obJoek. and although
Captain Cidm© signalled fora pilot when elf the Idcods, no notice was odmn
of d. and ha c'ma m or, seebor oh Fort Alaoqaano wothnat any aewdamm
Captain Gihsoo having previously visited Port Jaeksoa, ho was enabled,
with earn, to bring his vessel solely into part, Empire,
Israrenc-Tivnanss of rtia Pilot following pas-
tintlars relative to the arrival, on Friday morning leoh of the h 11, M,
Company M steamer, tlaade Hamilton, call for remark, as showing the pram
ilea! iosffidoucy ot the pilot service. After a very anahais voyage, the ship
having broasnmddn no less than five times, she arrived, at 10 parr, <m the
18th instant, olf Botaat Boy, The wind was light from F.K.F., and the
barometerfalling. At 11.10 -bo Bomb Head light opened, and at 11, ho
Captain Oihson burned ahhte light, and fired a meket fora phot, A.t 1v he
thwd a gen. and stood in towards the inner Somh Headlight; bat hearing a
he'd tolling, which anno led like a helldamy, he eased speed.,, end tnrned too
steamer's head >oat again, thinking there might ho some newly-disc--wared
danger. On finding, however, that the boll eras that ot a stumer, he pr©~
needed again dead slow in. for the harbour, bring another gnu, At 01C
ano„ an tho 19th, the steamer mended the laser tdanh Head, and whin
between it and the Sow arnt Figs, fired another gan and steamed dead slew;
np the harhonr nntil abreast of Fort Bunsen, when he let go Mr anchor ntf
li.dl.S, Orphoor.j from the deck of which vmewl lm area desired to nnmo
further oil', Aecordlngly s the anchor was hove np, ansi tint steamer wan
taken abreast of the Circular Quay, whore the anchor was again let. go. At
d nan,, seven hours after tho steamer had- been st anchor, the Harbour-
blaster cam© on-board. The barometer being low, and tho wind inelinedto


the eastward, the,screw alee having little hold oo the and t\>* «j, ; p
being m light trim. Captain Gibaos was obliged to enter the harbor, with or
without assistance, apprehending that, m the oTootofa gale spkgfng op f kc,
shook! hare no dihg. The questions will, of course, he asked,—Were the
bine lights, the rockets, or the gum, seen or heard hj the phots on hoard the
Comnmost schooner, or at the booth Head f M they were, whv was sot
the QaioH I las lit*<n boarded? by a pilot f If they wore not, of what neo to
Teasels. &mnng m the eight is the present pilot sendee ?— >,
Herald.
PARLIAMENTARY PAPER.
THE PILOT BOARD AND THE SEA WITCH.
Mb. Bmvm,. last aigbf., brought up, and kid spoil tht table of
the Legislative .Assembly, the report from the select committee' appointed
oh the 17th donelest, “To inquire- ink and report upon the -allegations eon*
faked-la the petition of Benjamin Darfcy, Charles Smith, and Henry T,
Foe, lately msmhm of the Filet B<wd/W« wifi power to eendfer pokoor
and papers,” as follows
The allegations contained in the petition, kmhmg chargee of a
aorioHs character against an rftmrnrtrative department. of the Homawent;
lave hklucod poor eomndttoute demote' the most catolhl attoatinn to the Im
vertigo lion <J the subject referred for iheir consideration; amfiu order that
they eight arrive at a ardirtactery conctosicu on the Tamms matters el wuik
tio petitioners nomplaiu, they hare taken the evidence of thirty witnesses-!
including the petitioners—hare emmhmi papers and oorreepsndenoe, and
Imre also personally inspected the schooner Sea Witch, in the- Gownaneat
Fey Dock, at Cockatoo Island.
lonr committee are of opinion that the members of the late Phot
Boardj from their pemtinn in the community, long experteace is the colon?,
and well known preleseional skil, were well able' to advise with the Covenn
mcnt in ail matters relating to th e appointment of pilots, the establishment of
lighthouses, the manageffiont of the ports of the colony, the purchase and
nntdt of vessels, and all other matters connected: with the branch of the
public service to which they belonged,
'Whilst year committee have Inquired Into the whole of the allomw
lions eonlained in the petition,, greater has been given to that
relating to the purchase of the schooner Sea 'Witch, for the outside pilot
sendee, the drenmertrmes connected with this purchase being of more
rocent occurrence, and having resulted m the removal of the petitieaers from
thoir positions as members of the Mint Board,
the purchase el the schooner Sea'Witch was pressed- upon the
hlnnsler by Captain Towns, who, though wholly unconnected with the
HoveraoumL appears to lavs had suihcicuk influence to induce thorn to sot
upon his advice in preference to that of the Pilot Board, In a minute to the
Treasury, dated the trth of March, from the Pilot Board, they state that “the
iow Witch is not- only ov-erwalned, but scarcely M Mr the service ; ,f and
ye% within one wank aicr receipt of this- report, witltmt any further ’ refrm


mice to iha Board, the vessel was purchased upon no other report or survey
than that of Captain Towns and. Mr. Cnthbcrt, the Government shipwright
surveyor, the latter of whom gave a qualified opinion of bur, and states-in
his evidence that he was never asked whether he considered her a sniiable
Tpssel for the pilot sendee, or whether she was- ever-valued, and did not,
therefore, report on these points: bat is of opinion .that she is not only not a
suitable model, fora pilot vessel, but was purchased at a .price considerably
beyond her value.
The petitioners state that, being determined to mark their sense
of what they considered a wasteful expenditure of the public money, upon
being requested to fit out the vessel for the service, they declined, and
forwarded to the Minis for a minute to this effect, with a strong remon-
strance. The Minister treated their remonstrance as equivalent: to a leader
of their resignation, which he intimated bis intention to accept, ; :'The peti-
tioners disclaimed the alleged intention to resign,' whereupon they were
summarily dismissed by the Government.
The weight of evidence taken before your committee corroborates the
opinion expressed, by the Pilot Board previous to the purchase of the vessel,
and' has been fully borne out by her performances, which has proved her: to
be deficient .in two most essential qualifications for a pilot vessel—she is not
a wcatherly craft, and will not stay in a rough sea under reduced canvas.
To endeavour to remedy these defects, during the time this inquiry was
pending, she was placed in the. Government Dry Dock, and has had from
two to three foot added to her keel; her bowsprit has keen shortened, her
foremast shortened aud moved further aft, and her ballast shifted. These
alterations appear to have been made at the suggestion of Captain Eonnlree,
who hue very.-recently been appointed.a member of the Pilot Board; aud it
may be here remarked, as a circumstance of a somewhat extraordinary
character, that tfom operations have bees performed by Captain Rountree
without any Ci.-usu!Uufou having been, first bad with Mr. Outhbert, the
Government shipwright surveyor, as to whether they.'would-have the eon-
temp’ated olfort - f rendering - the vessel fit for the service. Mr, Guthbert
believes they will not, aud that the addition to the keel will strain her. She
Is an American Yore*, efoht years old, two years older than she was repre-
sented to the < for, *> uj v : ;o be when they purchased her, and has cost with
.additions and m as much as a uew vessel, on the most approved
.model and corswuctfou could have been procured for from England, aud
more-than if bni.lt in the colony.-
Your committee cannot conclude this portion of their report without
referring to the conduct of Mr. Crook, the Harbour master, who in giving his
evidence stored that be had carefully examined the Sea Witch, in dock, aud
that-she had a curved keel, being very much deeper in midships than fore
and aft, which would make her weather-ly aud turn quickly*i From an
examination lu dock, your committee ascertained that this statement was
directly at variance with fact, the vessel having, a straight keel. This very
material part of Mr, Crook’s evidence having been proved ?to- be inaccurate,
your committee regret they cannot attach that- degree : of importance
to his statements which they would wish to do to the evidence of a-u officer
la bis position.


' tetme oLthe reports furnished since the pandcm of the
iuave been apparently made on the assumption tW *ad a deep Win
midships, these reports carmot be considered of any vw ,
dhe circumstances connected with the er "*>.,< of the lighthouse
■?iear dervis Bay lead previously bees too subject of »V ~<* r-mtary lnVesd<m~
ties hy a voices committee of your Honourable House, v b,.se report has been
referred to this committee.
Alter a careful examination of the report and proceedings of that
committee, together with the correspondence os the subject. and alter
maturely oonsuieung -i-he additional evidence takes before vcmr comTrdsi.ee
they are of opinion that the advice of the Pilot Board was sought as to the
most eligible site for the lighthouse. The lighthouse was erected, sot is
accordance with such advice, and the position, which is not that fixed by any
of the authorities consulted, furs since been found so objectionable that it has
bees determined to remove the tower, thereby mourning a considerable
expenditure, which might have been avoided, had" the advice of a majority of
the Pilot Board bees acted upon, as they urged that the present siteVas*not
the “ most eligible, ** and advised that it should he erected on or in. the
vicinity of Crocodile Bead, or the easternmost headland on the north side of
dome Bay,
. , v llie J^oi Board is a department of great importance to the commer-
ce! and shipping interest: and the practice which has prevailed of tahkm
the advice ol -persons -unconnected with the Government in preference to the
members of the Board, if -permitted to he continued,-must result in serious
rojury to the |,uudie service,
glonc commitsee have, after amen anxious consideration, come to the
conclusion that the petitioners have, in the various matters at issue, roavmabm
grounds for complaint, '“ w
Tot - Latb Pxpos Boaub,—The select committee appointed to
enquire into the singular dismissal of the late Pilot Board, have made thmr
report, and a highly complimentary document to our -shsipVxovernment it £.
The Committee find all. the allegations of the petitioners-fully substantiated
hy evidence. They likewise report that the *« admirable w Sea Witch was
never fit tor the Pilot service, being old and unserviceable, and that a far
higher price was paid for her hy the Government, Contrary to the advice* of
tlm late Board, than she was worth, and that with expense of alterations and
since hen purchase, she has cost the colony ** as much as a new vessel on the
most approved model and construction, could have been procured for from
.Luglaud, end mew than if fault in tee colony, ’ The report also comments
on the singular circumstance of the useless craft having been ** pressed *’ on
the Government by a person thoa holding no official position, in opposition to
the advice of a - competent - tribunal—the late Pilot Board. The renort
also notices as a curious fact that the alterations and patching effected in"the
Soa Vi- itch have, been performed at the establishment of a member of the
present Pilot Board. A strong allusion is also made in the report to the
wasteful expenaiture of public money in conueetieu with the Lighthouse ut


Jemss Bay ; owing to the Qormmmtm Sat kstasoo also neglecting to act
upon the of the then Pilot Boa?*! . Tbe whole report is as admirable
iilussatkn -a that -ehammg simplicity (to use « mild oxpressskm) evinced by
tip; B-o'or. e-'-rj.t in expending tbe public mosey.- That s&mebody bas hem
whhs ‘w,(\ »«ut of ibis !< admirable craft * at tbe peblio expense is q cite
OKbsk, »'-d it wenM be a sestet worth krmwkg-f© mhma the Sea- Witch
acimily belonged when fnrehaned bn ike Governmente %Sl\m the late Pilot
Board was sd ssceremumwlf dismissed for tbe bemoan crime of doing its
duty to tbe public and vindicating its own integrity, we felt it oar ditty to
speak oat strongly os tbe subject, sod we are now gratified to fad that tbe
opinion we then expressed lias been Justified by the report of & select cotta
nhttee of the Legislature.-"".
Empire .
THE SEA WITCH.
To the Editor of the Hera ld.
Sis*—The time has bow come for as®-to redeem the pledge which I
gave you some mouths since, whm jm were doaadering in the dark, and
unconsciously misleading the public oa the important subject of the pilot
service, ami the par®W® of the Sea Witch for that seme®, in opposition to
the advice of lbs then exist log Pilot Board,
The gentlemen who were then dismissed from fee Board, ell persona!
friends of my owa, .have petitioned Parliament oa |hc subject. A eeleet
comraitteo has ' considered their petition, and reported in ■ their favour, and
although my mm&. is brought forward with soma degree of prominence, for
some reason or other the information gives by roe, and. more especially my
long and earnest exertions for the reform of the pilot seme®, have been
studiously ignored in the committee's report.
It must ba in the recollection of all who take any interest in the
shipping of this great port, that for the last ten years I have struggled
to establish an elective und ; safe pilot system, by means of sailing vessels
adapted for -that sendee.' It will also be recollected that when I had the
honour of a seat la the legislative Bound I, 1 had a committee of that
Council appointed, and evidence taken on the subject, which committee
reported in favour of the scheme proposed hy me, and that the very last act
of that Connod, previously to their “following their leader*’ out-of'The House,
: lo which I tor one was not invited to return, was the adopt feu of the report
of .this committee; as i was not permitted by the Govern'; cor to push my
favourite measure further in that high sphere, -It cannot he-suggested that it
is for any feeling of gratitude to the present Ministers' that i have since
taken so much trouble and incurred go much -unmerited eonenre in the steps
adopted by me, , ,
I xnsy mention that I never for a moment lost sight of this important
measure; that 1 wrote to the Treasurer letter after letter, urging on the
adoption of the proposed scheme. Even from Mnreton Bay, I-wrote to say
that I had in my eye two vessels which might prove suitable, and although,
on further inquiry, 1 saw reason to change my mind as to their htuess, my


«XB!t«HS« were not lost, Tenders were ea ? kd for vessels, and w«l,wt«
eilered s rwo of which wore recommended for purchase fey foe Pilot Board,
aoc Indeed for permanent nseybut to fee worknd temporarily nntiitwo vessels
«onld fee hul’t expws»iy for the purpose in hfogfomi
This piece of useful advkm is, however, carefully enelmled from the
report of the select commrttee ; hut. I appeal to the public to say whether
the Government would hare bees le a better position fey purchasing two
collier sclmoaers at -m expense of 48000, and that only cosf«s?«*Bj for
teorpmery use ? On this proposal my advice was asked, ami I fold foe
Treasurer* aud each of the petitioners, that foe scheme was bad, that the
vessels were much too dear, and that it would fee-a disgrace fo the colony to
send to Ifngland for craft which could fee hihl.t or purchased here.
Being foim, as 1 have stated, idenfihed with the whole history of this
question of pilotage reform, was it unreasonable that ! should ho consulted
iu tfee matter ? or was it presumptuous iu me to oiler an opinion on a subject
which I had specially considered for yearn, and was, therefore, as likely, at
leasts as the petitioners, to uodcmtamL
lip to this time the Bea Butch was unknown in the -colony. On her
arrive] I was Informed of her qualities, i west ©a board with the Harbour
Alaster, examined her most, carefully, am! found her all I could desire, I
reported my opinion to the Treasurer, ami urged life to lose m time ia
securing her for the service. Whether this was before or after the adverse
report, »f the Pilot Beard lam net certain. At mt}? rate, it is kannvu that
they thought her toe dear at AlfoiH), Although they were willing to give
AhOOi) for a collier, which required other 4800 or 41000 t© it four out for
the sendee,
in the meantime I had railed on Mr, Cnthhert, the so-called Hovem-
meat Surveyor, to inspect aud report for my private information on the cos-
dliioo of her hull, &e. Of her futmss for the purpose required 1 certainly did
not consult him, feeling myself quite competent t© form my own Judgment
thereon, Mr, Culhbert was atterwwrds Instructed by the Government to
laspect and report ou the vessel, which he did, giving* for reasons well mn Ist-
stood, what foe report terms 4i a qualified opinion,/* To. return to my friends,
the petitioners, r as soon as I heard of their roporig I called on them, mdfe
vldually aud reasoned with them ou the folly of their opposition ; the malt
feeing the vwj thing we wanted, and her arrival at the Moment like aw inter-
position of IVwidonco. At the same time, I informed them that if they
persisted In opposing tfee purefesse, I would press it on the Government, and
that, rather tnan low m favourable an opportunity to escape of earning
out ruy long cherished scheme, I would it her out myself, I also drew: a
comparison between the Sea Watch end tfee colliers which they had recom-
mended, hat It was to no purpose, they were determined to have boats from.
England, New, without imputing motives to my Meads the A petitioners/*
foe trip of Parkas and .Bailey seemed to me to he working on their hopes and
Imaginations; some strong Impulse was at least at work, and, fading that I
sonid not persuade them, and that another year was likely to he lest to the
service, perhaps tfee sum voted fey Parliament allowed to sirup altogether, I
pressed the Treasurer to secure the Sea Wifofe, ami received anthork^


from burn to purchase her, which I did for the sum of MIA SS (one thousand
four lumdred and twenty-five pounds), ■ the lowest sum that would bo taken
and less than that for which I caaM again have, sold her.
As an illustration of the importance that should he attached to some
opinions of the value of a vessel, I may here abode to a remark made to me
by Mr, Oath belt, to the effect that be *' wished.he bad not hing better to do
than to build a dozen vessels like the ana Wlteh for Ml ZOO each, and
bjstteb vnssE.ns, 5 ' lat once took him up and told .him if be would build
one equally good for the money I would endeavour to procure him an order;
but whoa pressed he would not hold to his offer, nor even undertake it at
iMOOO, and when recently he tendered for the second pilot vessel, it was, I
think, for the modest sum of JS7GOI indeed, few men have had better
pickings out of the Goveoraent than Mr, Cuth.bert and for this I. do not
blame- him if he acts fairly; but Ids position is a peculiar one, and while in
the discharge of Ms duty as Government surveyor be estimates.. the Sea
Witch, at a low figure, in the position of a tenderer for budding a second
vessel he estimates his own work at an enormous psweentage above the .esti-
mates Of the other-tenderers..
The Bea Witch, having been purchased.in the way I have mentioned
and the petitioners removed from the Board, 1 was offered one of the vacant
seats, in conjunction with rny friend Captain Hall, who agreed with me that
the Sea Witch was the very thing -we wanted. We proceeded to lit her
out with the vieve of making the pilots as comfortable as possible. We .well
knew that the task of breaking up the old system which bad so long dis-
graced ibis harbour was no easy one. We expected opposition, and we have
met with all and more than we expected. It was not to be supposed that
men who had so long slept-soundly with their families*.-enjoying their pay
and doing little or nothing for it, would all at once enter .with enthusiasm into
the new system which requires their absence from borne and all its comforts;
accordingly every odium was;cast on the vessel; she -would neither wear nor
stay, and went to .windward like smoke. I had myself tried the boas in the
first instance, and was satisfied that she would do all that -was required of
her. Complaints, however,-poured in, and as I had no time myself to make
further
with some others and ascertain the fact, which be didg and while:dm
reported favourably, be-suggested, a few alterations, which have been carried:
out, and which, notwithstanding the prediction of Mr. Crdhhort, have the
desired effect. I challenge that gentleman to say in what way. an extra fate
keel will strain, a vessel. I wholly deny it; and as the rest of Ms anticipa-
tions have been contradicted by the facts, they may go for what they are
worth, I. place no reliance whatever on Mr, C-uthhert’s opinion, and I now-
state, without fear of contradiction, that the Bea Witch will prove the very,
thing required for our pilot service.
In conclusion,: the petitioners, as I have said, are personal friends of
my owa, while, on.-the other hand, i have -.no great affection Mr a Govern*
ment which. declined my services ia a higher sphere ; but neither personal
friendship on the one hand, aer.poMcal differences on the other, will prevent
me from doing all in my power to confer a boon on the shipping interest of


the post with which I have been bag idcntiiud. The Minister was
pkage-d so carry out the system, and if the petitioners' would not eo-operate
-with. Mm, it was clearly Ms du»y to seek men who would, whether the
labours of the select committee, which hme occupied some months, at an
expense for printing alone of gome £l5O, will add much to the efficiency of
the service, I may be allowed "to -question,
l-t would, la my opinion, have oeon more to .the purpose if tMs com-
mittee had takes a Statesmanlike view of the question—if the? had denounced
the present constitution of the Board (a thing <s without a holy to he kicked,
or a soul to be saved/ s )—and reoommeaded the'lncorporation of a proper
Trinity Board, wMcb would have a properly do feed dutypforwMch it would
he responsiole.to the Government and the public.
1 am, Gentlemen, your obedient servant
R . TOWNS.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Ste, —The long rigmarole contained in. the self laudatory letter of
Captain Timms, in your homo of Tuesday last, would have remained na«
answered fat least by eng had ho conmnm lus remarks to the columns of the
Frees, ; I: dud s hov ever, ..that ho is taking the annenal, and as it seeing to
toe, improper course of cirenlatjxig copies of Ms letter amongst the members
of Parliament, with the view, apparently, of biassing their judgment, and
gar Mg or a* thmr vnm when the mfopfov o' ti o report »f tie mdut com-
miitee, on which,he feels so sore, is brought before' the Assembly : and,
therefore, I feel constrained to reply to gome portions of Ms long-winded*
epistle.
Captain Towns, with that high opinion of Ids own judgment, and
contempt lor that of others, which is so characteristic of himself, Pas consist-
sntly,throughout the .whole of this business believed, and no doubt still
behoves,, that ho knows more on the subject than any one else. Kothisg
would tarn him from that, l am persuaded, and therefore 1 shall not attempt
to do so. As Hndiferas says—
The 3»a« coxtvlaced against bis wtli .
Is of the same opinion still.
Farm, however, ..are dead against Captain downs, He persists , still,
as ho did at first, that the Sea Witch ?* will prove ?h« proTc.the ve;w tiring
required/ 5 lie reiterates from first to last the same prophecy. That she
has not done so, notwithstanding his seven months’ tinkering/' at her, at
an expense to the country (as proved before the committee) of nearly JIOOO
beyond her purchase money, is notorious.
I could well afford to submit to the decision.of the .public alone, as to
whether the .©pistons of myself and op-petitioners, or those of Captain Towns
harm been most correct as to the capabilities of this precious pet of his, but
as he refers to his evidence before the committee, I can do the same, I twill
there bo seen fey his own words that Ms-experience of this class of vessel la
infinitely less than that of either of the petitioners. Herein, lies the whole


gist of t&t.'ssKl&r, if le would but admit It, F*nm this has sprung al tk«
or!L Bedewing that Captain Tow bad “ frrgotteu more thm ever we
hmmA** becsas# fee saM so, the Tressw threw o«r opinions overboard
am! adopted fence of Captain I\wb3, and a pretty mm fee made la? doing
eo.
Captain Towns harps a great deal oa the word ** eoFUgr/" as applied
to fee msefr we recommended the Govenuueut la purchase. Hie object*,
m doubt. Is to depreciate ..them m the eyes of those whu do not.- know, as fee
does, that they areaa:aoaggS: the Isategt aad Saest schooners oat of the pert,
ami that the massed Sea Witch (as proved ia evhkn.ee) os a recent occasion,
whoa the captain of her avowedly ran down to race with the Atlantic, was
unable to overhaul her outside the Meads* though the- hreeae was light, and
the collier deeply laden* w
■That It would hove cost ifeSOO or MIOOO to fit oat one of these
vessels, or even, both, I utterly deny. Captain Towns measures other per-
sonas com by Ms own bushel We certainly should not hare gone to work in
the manner ho did with Ike §m Wltsh, on which data, doubtlessly, he bases
feis calculation of the expense.
Captain Towns wrote to the Treasurer before the vessel wan bought*
that she could fee cent to sea in “ a few hours,” and at a trifiiug expensed*
I leave the public to say whether from the 15th March to the Ist duue
may be considered “a few hours,” or whether upwards of £9OO is « atriiing
expense/ 5
Captain Towns discloses now what was not'made public before, that
he <v ' purchased the vessel for the Government/ 5 Amongst the documents
printed and laid fee fore Carl ament was one from the lin< let -Secretary, Mr.
Lane, stating that she was *" offered to the Government through Captain
Towns/ 5 IMe double capacity may account for the high price given for the
?6WI
By dhefeye. who paid for all the last alterations and additions to bar ?
Captain Towns is reported to hare said that he would perform them at his
own expense. Has be done so? If not, that sum must he added to
tbo accounts rendered to the committee, large although they bo,
I treat with the contempt it deserves his allusions to a trip to England.
I lava m doubt that the public will give to the **■ petitioners” as much credit
for and a desire to spare the public purse In all they have
recommended, m they ‘wSi to Captain Towns, ** Facts aw? stubborn things,’*
and by these we are content; to stand or MIL
: Perhaps Clapfeih Towns's letter in itself would, after all, lawn bees
alone our host: JhstiScatforu Wife the few f explanations I bare given, it
cannot fail tu be so.
Let any one who is sceptical of the soundness of the opinions of fee-
committee, us emboifted ih tfek read the evidence taken before them.
Captain Towns's included, and I hme no fear of tbo eoncMsion tbev will
arrive at,
I am, Sir, your; most obedient sem-nlg
CH. SMITH.
MillerT Feint, Bfe Oeteber,
24


CAPTAIN TOWNS ON THE SEA WITCH
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sis.,—la jousr Issue of the,! 4th instant, a letter from Captain Towns
appears, which* if anything emanating from so :actable ,a gentleman could
surprise ae, it would. 'I Ms letter h written, I imagine, for she purpose of
defending tbe prominent.podtbn be has taken in referen.ce to tbe Sea Witch.
His interference about this vessel, and all the subsequent proceedings in vouch,
he took a part, would have passed unnoticed % me, had he,not, : thought hi to
single me out as a special object of attack, and attempted to east imputations
on my character, which, I have reason to hope, no one who knows me will
place the slightest reliance on, I will, therefore, occupy your space, au<! the
tune of your readers, only with those portions of Captain. Towns’; letter which
refer to me, and leave to the members of the oommUtee of the Legislative
Assembly, who have endorsed my report on the Sea Witch, the very easy
task of defending themselves*
. Tim dm bit of information which Captain Towns shapes to suit his
own Hewn, is the following
<f In the meantime I had called on Mr.V uthhert. the s-.> called Go-
vernment surveyor, to inspect and report.for.my private information on the
condition of her hull, km Of her fitness for the purpose required, I certainly
did not con nit him, fording myself quite competent to form my mvorJudgment
thereon, Mr, Cntbbert was afterwards instructed by the Government to in-
spect and report on the vessel,; which be did, giring, for reasons well under-
stood, what the report, terms, a qualified opinion.* 1
This is; partly true, and partly false ; but the truth and falsehood aim
so skillfully biended«”or rather the former is so cleverly overlaid by the law
ter—that both are rn&de to tell most unjustly against me. It is tnre that
Captain Towns did send to me for information respecting the Sea Witch, and
subsequently wrotmto me to survey and report on. .her, which I did, I thought
at the time that he intended purchasing her for his own use, as he appeared
Histremely anxious to get my report m her* It is strange hew ho placed so
nuich confidence in my survey of. and report on . the hull, foe,, dm., -while he
confidently pronounces! himself the best judge of her. other qualities. I gave
my report cooscientioiisly,, and to the very beet of my abilities,
lhat I gave it for Captain fowns ’private and espesml information the follow'
Mg maos from that gentleman will abundantly prove a--
Carraiu Towns to Joan Coxnrmfec Esq.
W My dear Mr,—Will yon kimby survey foe Bea Witch schooner,
now oil Carnphelifo vvharf, and give me your professional opinion as to her
condition, fm fog <mn private mfenmimp before I p.m. this day.
lours truly,
R. TOWNS.
“ Ulfcivtarch, 1882.'’
I.accordingly., and within the time requested, supplied a report ; but
h«ieg siibseainmtly : thought of one particular item, which i had forgotten to’
incorporate in xt, lat once (on the same dag j , supplied it, iu tmusequeneo of
which I was favoured with the folio whig note from Captain Towns 0~~


My dear Slr ; ----1 am obliged for On- hint about -the vessel's bednm,
but all that b arranged for, . I think she is perfectly sound.mfo good, Wnh
a waking a-U oner, as yen say, and a few trilling alfcratiou* "lie
W'd|' . rtatde sea-going; oraft.o She.mot only reonires a caw u.
so I * * ‘ sails, and new Ibrestayn, She will require Aduo P n.o U o
prd **> i u t i .
u Tours truly,
R. TOWNS.
u Jno, Cuiliherf, Esq,, Ac,, A
TSO p m. 14th March, 186*3.-*
84 P.Bi —I am much obliged for your prompt attention. Seed m your
bill/
Afterwards I reported outlie Sea Witch to the Government, and w it
I strictly'confined myself to-.-ibe; imb uetiuus I bad'received. Had the m-
sireeticais been more definite aud comprehensive. .1 could have saved the pole
lie much annoyance and some expense. In my report, I strictly followed ruy
ibslntbtioasp-and- had-those dnetructlonn invited-me to give a report as to the
fitness of the vessel in question for the special -servicefor which she wag;de-
signed, I would : have enfohatically answered in the negative. I will not
notice Captain Timas* sneer about my position as u a so called--'Government
Surveyor/* • If there be any honour in the -title,, the (Government : that
employs and pays me confers it. and Captain Towns; can neither exalt : nor
degrade It, .
Ami rc-w fo) - mmther extract from Coplain Towns' letter
(< As an illustration of the importance that should be attached to loose
opinions of the value Mu vessel,, I may Imre allude to a remark made to nm,
by Mr> Grabber?, to rim effom t!an he 5 vGWe-J he had nothing better to do
than tiv-build -a-dozmi vessels Ido- the Witch for £l5OO each, and Let ter
vessels/ ■ I as omm took him up and told him, if he would build one equally
good' for the money, I w-nld endeavour n> paociu'e him an order ; lut when
pressed ho w-n-d net bold to his offer, uor oven undertake it at/dOOU, mat
when recently he tendrivd for the second pilot vosseh it was, t think, tor the
modest sum of TkToO. Indeed, few men have had bettor pieklogs out of the
Government than Mr. Cnthbm. end Ibrth.fo 1 fo* not Ida me him if be acts
ihlriv : builds po-hion is a pemdlsr ouo, mid while in tho discharge of his
defy as rmvenrnieut surveyor, he estimates th»* Sea A itch at a low figure-.
In the position of a tenderer-for building a second-vessel, -he esCmutea Ins
own work atari bnoruieus : per teulage above the estimates of the other
tenderers/
I never said that I. wish I had nothing better-to do than to build a
dozen vessels like the Sea Whuh Mr fifteen'hundred pounds, lam not quite
so modest as Captain Tbwms would make me, as I am never so well employed
but I would wish 'to be better, I said to Captain Towns I shoabl like to
have a dozen vessels as good, or bettor than the Sea Witch to build for fifteen
bum!' f d pounds each. Shortly alter he asked me to build me vessel, for him
at Usat price ; I; declined, as there is a material 1 difference in the expense of
budding Me vessel, and a mmiber of the same sizer- I-then -offered to Mild
erne for iwo Hurnmnd number for fifteen hundred pounds each ;


hat T never broke my offer, to build one for two thousand pounds, for the
rosy simple reason, that I never got as order to bu;hi sues as ore, I woe not
aware that it was cusiomary fora member of a Board, appointed 'to decide on
tenders, to 1 paho-fe h> a sow p.ip-->' B-o jonomus lor which persons save
offered tom;uierU>-o rod romp a- a oTdxc work, on; pa so Towns ap T
pears to do Adage io, a gr.-.ml and pooUar mynoer—in feat, he seems to do
whatever he likes, and is wlrdcw-v he likes.- diemay publish - what
he pleases, bat ho ought not o. So el, >w pa-w over facts He savs that I
tendered ‘to build the second vos-h I for tiro modest, sum of £27-OOA This
is a positive suppression of fact. My tender was to build a first class vessel
of .one hundred and twenty tons, 'fitted out. complete, end ready for service,
for the sum of .£3240, being at the rate of AST 10s. per ton. I farther en-
gaged to have her ready for service by the 20th of this present month, if,
however, the Government considered a vessel, of this capacity to * fe », , or
too expensive, I offered to build a brot-ckss vessel of BO tons, fkofe »»«; <rad
to be ready at the time before indicated, for the sum 'of X'-iMOA hi mg at
the rate of £BO per ton. And now a few remarks on the Sea W, fe
The Sea. Witch is 63 SH OO tons, Is eight years eld ; her Hot coat
to the Government was £1426 (qnery-™what has she cow e«<v ?)■ If
Captain Towns was at ail anxious- to- ■ enlighten the public, be ought tj bare
let us know what the t°ea %\ froh has actually - cost the .country, 80. says,
few men have bad better pickings fro®, the Government than - have bad/ 51
If lie meant to say that i had done a large amount of work for the Govern-
ment-and got-paid for- It,-he-would have told a simple ■ truth.-; but il bo means
anything else, I can, tor my vindication, appeal to the whole mercantile com-
munity of: Sydney. -X defy Captain Towns to'■contradict, ms, when I way- -that
If never received a shilling o* the Governments, not any man A money-, .with-
out giving- him fair valua tor it. Whom he thinks my poridoa, a peculiar
one/* he uses a very ridiculous phrase. The Government know my position,
dad are the best Judges of it. i have never pretended to the exuberant pa-
triotism -of -Captain -Towns. I have neverTaiksfi about feting out a - vessel at
myowa cost. J. have never considered mother person’s tenders, but have simply
reflected on what 'would pay ate.
And now for the last-extract -which I will, call from Captain Towns’
letter:
i( l prevailed on my Mend Captain Bountree to go oat with- some
others, and ascertain-the fact, which he did-; and -while he reportsdfayodrebiy,
he suggested a few alterations, which have been carried out, and which, not-
withstanding the predictions of Mr, Cuthben, have the desired sheet,
challenge that gentleman to say in what way an extra false -keel will.-strain
a vessel. I wholly deny it, and as the rest of. Ms anticipations. have been
Cirnira*lifted by-tho facts, they may.go for what they are worth. I place no
reliance whatever on -'Mr. Gathbert’s opinion, and i now state, without fear
of coniradicrk.-u, that the Sea Witch will prove the. very thing .required for our
pilot service. ’ -
The evidence I gave before the select committee. of the. Legislative-
Assembly is guise correct. Captain Towns 5 ■ remarks on.a“ falsa: keel” are
Evidently Intended to mislead the public. I did say that the keel proposed


for the Sea Witch, made of ironbark, and three- feet in depth, would strain
her ; 'but 1 did mt ray that an ordinary false keel would strain any
vessel.
I have ever, daring my life, tried to gain the esteem and confidence of
those of my fellow men with wfean I have come In wontaot, whether in busi-
ness or otherwise ; and * »m happy to say that my present position proves
that 1 have been, in this respect, street sstnl ♦ While Captain 1 owns -so
piously looks with gratitude to I'rovidenee for ■ its'interposition in sending the
t-ea Witch from. T-« inti, for the benefit of this colony, he ought not to forget
or overlook the higher laws of charity, by speaking falsely or disparaging y of
his neighbour. His attack on me is as extraordinary as it. is unjustifiable and
unwarrantable.
I am, &c., fe
JOHN COTHBERT.
Cothberth Wharf, October 'lsth, 1862,
The <s Sea Witch’’ bids fair to make a prominent-figure in the
future history of our local marine- service. V\ e have now before ns a hun-
dred and seventy-two- primed pages of foolscap, containing the evidence and
a I open furnished by a Select Committee, appointed chiefly -to consider the
merits and demerits of that notorious craft and the daily papers, during the
last few days, have contained columns of - -professional controversy on tue
same subject, 'As respects; the grievance -submitted to the Assembly by the
late members of -the -Met Board— that they we*e arbitrarily dismissed for
conscientiously maintaining : au opinion which it was their duty to give, and
which suhseguen events have felly Jtmti6ed~~-the Committee have found a
verdict for the plaintiffs. ** The petitioners,'’ says the I eport, have -season-
able grounds of ami we do not see how the Assembly can avoid
the adoption, of that opinion. The history-of the case has been so alien told
that, we net d not now repeat it. Messrs. Harley, mith, ami Fox, as men?-
hers of the * ilot Beard, reported to the Government their deliberate profes-
sional opinion that the oea Witch was uni t for service ns a pilot schooner,
and a< wised that she should. not he. purchased for that purpose; hot their
a dvice was unheeded, the vessel was bought, and they were directed to. fit
her for sea. This they declined to do, intending,: as they say, that thofe
refusal should betaken as a protest against washing th«. pnfohc money and
endsugering human ufe, by persistence in ; his id- advised investment. Foi'thla
they were dismissed, and the neportof the Co omit-ee now says that they
were right and the Government wrong. We cannot, suppose that t his will
he merely 1 a fomo-m Judgment.
Apart mom a ,o grave case thus to foe decided hy .the Assembly between
the Treasurer and .rise -Petitioners, abundant elements of the ludicrous surround
the history of this remarkable vessel, The Witch appears.from the first
to have fascinated .Mr. »owns as it »h» had been a veritable mermaid or-
nymph of -the wfeers, in so-ii'ch of -tough seamen to subdue to her thrall. His
fesvid devotion to the craft,-and the energetic real, wain which he concealed
her defects as long as possible, and hastened to patch ?hem up as soon as |ho
public discovered them, afford examples of faithfulness and constancy winch


art rare in this fickle wbrMK The Sea Wltcfr -has been to Captain Towm-
like the “ dear gasmhe’’ of the poet, with this hiih-ms.ce, that, although she
engrossed his whole alfemion, his 44 loudest hopes’ 4 have known ho 44 dee;iy.”
He appears to believe in her as faithfully at this mo meat, as he hid at first
sight, and before the slightest doubt was thrown upon her Character. In Iris
eyes, at least the eraft was a model pilot beat, and her defect'- were as
nothing compared with her virtues. 44 1 am obliged for the bint ah at fee
vesseFs bottom/"'he writes to Mr. Cuthhert, 45 but al that Is arranged for.
With a thorough eoulkiog all ever, as yon say, and a few trifling alterations,
she will be a comfortable, sea-goisg craft/ 5 "I he 44 trilling alterations'"' were
made accordingiy, at a cost of uearfy a thousand pounds, in addition to her
original cost of YMho ; and some time afterwards the Sea'Witch set out for
a cruise on her nation element. We can sympathise with the deep solicitude
of ( aptain Towns on this oceas'mm Indeed it is quite surprising how fast a
hold this extraordinary crab secured upon the affections of her admirers.
Her commander, in the course of Ins evidence as to her performance on this
famous occasion, speaks so tenderly of her little failings, that we are tempted
to extract a few of the questions arid answers
45 Did the Sea Witch over refuse to stay ? Yes, she has refused lo stay.
44 How often ? do not snow how many timoN—several times.
44 What is the reason she refused to stay f Oa-account of the sea taking
her some hues. I attribute is to my own carelessness two or three times. I
hare been watching the boat, and probably not ; paying su&uieai attention to
the vessel/'
fins is the true spirit of chivalrous devotion-™ ready to hear ■ blame and
the world's frown, rather then suffer a doubt to he east upon the beloved
object! But; to proceed :
44 Dad you much w’ater la the ■ea Witch during the gale ? I did nut
see—l was on dec: . •• •
44 tdd anybody report it to you ? Yes.
44 -Wh-at quantity of water did they report ? They said it was washing
over the door ; it had gone through the skylight, and the deck was so tight
that the water could s ot escape.
44 ’Had yon any tarpaulins on board I Yes,
54 Did yon batten down the batches ? Yes.
4 * Ana secure the skylights ? We did net put up the hoards till after-
wards* 5 ’
Whatever faults, however, may he laid to the charge of this vessel,
the mo urn foiling of 44 fastness' 5 cannot fairly he attributed to her. The
captain seems m assme m *hat she wou d never run away from &a enemy
44 ■ o-w many knots auhear will the c ea Witch sail in a tolerably good
bteeae, with all-sails set, and not- too heavy a sea r seven.
44 Is tb&t the most you can get out of her ? Not the most if you push
her; hut i never push she vessel—l never had-occasion.
44 The nmsi you have got out of her is seven knots? Yes,
44 Do yon consider her a fast ending vessel t Yes.
** And she sails seven. knots on a wind f More than that she may have
done.


Do von know what some nm clippers now soil with the win<l ? Sim
toon miks I have heard for a ship,
“is that by,the wind or off the wind ?I do not know ; I have never
been in .one.
u Have you been in any other Teasel than this? Yes ?
“ W bat have you sailed by .the, wind ■? , Seven and eight miles an
hour,
**. That is the usual .rate, is it? , I think; m*
u What does she sail of the wind ? ; I do not know ; I .have;not
pushed her off the wind; but I suppose she has been going nine of. the
wind,”
Captain Clark s replies to the queries of the Committee with refer-
ence to the alterations that were found desirable in this: nautical-paragon,
bring-to..mind .the answers of Doloains when Hamlet oalk bis attention to
the eloud that is so s “ very like, a whaled 5
I>o ; yon think the Sea Witch is too heavily masted V For holding
her position in .very heavy wmather I think, she is,
“ Do you think her foremast is wed placed i : I think it is where it.
is mow planed; : on it. was before it might have been very well lon making a
passage.
<{ DO; veil: think the bowsprit -too heavy ? , She has a very heavy-bow-
sprit.
sf Do you think these alterations will improve her staying and working f
h, es.
This was after the■ -bfew trilling alterations” before alluded to by
Captain Towns. “ 'Whore is she now/’ asks the Chairman of Captain
Clark. {< In Waterview Bay/* Is the reply. ** What are they doing:to
her/* •■queries the Chairman, evidently bewildered as to the neat process in
this gilding of refined good and painting of the lily, and probably expecting
to hear that a bonfire was being: made of her, with a. view..no economy.
“ They have shortened her nmst and bowsprit/’ answers Captain Clark,
somewhat:. mournfully, / and shifted her : mast*’ 5 In. point of fact, Captain
Towns, when his pet had returned from, her perilous cruise to leeward, incon-
tinently took possession of her, and proceeded to subject her to a few more
‘" 4 trifling alterations/’ How much these are to cost the public we shall
learn from some future Supplementary Estimate. The cruft" has undergone
so many transpositions, that the next change will probably be to .shift the
rudder to the stem, wad fit her with a boomerang propelfer—a hint by no
means unworthy of consideration, in view of the leisurely'Sailing: habits of
this clipper, Oaptain .Towns has displayed so much restless energy throngln
out the adventures of tbe' gea. W Item by sea and land—on a muse or in
dry-dock, that bis claims ought not to be forgotten In the event, of war
breaking-out. As the, Unionist Government has intimated an ip ten lion of
immediately issuing Letters- of Marque, a measure, as the Secretary: of State
informs his Excellency the Governor, likely to .be productive of serious
results to British commerce, it is inrtnnatn that wo,.know' where to find a
man ■ capable of commanding the . fleet. A. .British seaman who has under-
taken to make a pilot boat of the Sea Witch can never he baffled In the


meet arduous tmntkal enterprise, and most be utterly seentieal of hmmn-
bilities.
A portion of the iieport o,t the Select Committee is addressed to
the subject of the Jervis Baj light]souse. This* however, though a magni-
iiecmt.. sample nt blundering and inrrnnpotency, ■ names no serious personal
grievance with it We most hope that the lighthouse will be built in the
right piece sins time. It is different with the hu« i>|hw nnu the Wa
Witch. In that matter there is a grievance of a painM character, and the
Parliament ought to redress it.—*
Empire.
. The Australian Boyal Yacht Squadron took their opening crime on
Saturday last with great success, but much regret Was expressed by oar
gallant tars at Use absence of Rare Admiral Week.es, who was expected to
Join the squadron in his Sf perfect model 55 yacht, the renowned Sea Witch.—
Empire.
How veev Puovokix&,~~~Much disappointment 'was felt hy the
patrons of tee “ Stranger’s Gallery 9 on Tuesday, in consequence of'’them
being “No House';’ although the active voting ruau 55 was at his post,
and a profusion of M. P.’s in “ plant” This Vos the more provoking as
there was a first-rate programme, and public curiosity was proportionately on
ih e qm vim. It was rumoured amongst the disappointed throng that there
was no performance in consequence of Her Majesty's Ministers bavins pa>«-
■ticular- reasons for-not wishing to see the production uf a•• thrilUng sousa-
Ron 55 piece, entitled;' Saul raking the Witch of Ocean 155—I 55 — Empire *
Thu Sea Witch aoajkt. This truly “ admirable' craft/’"if IF for
nothing else, is producing plenty of fun. rWring the woof we have been en-
livened with two capital letters in the Herald respecting tbk celebrated elo-
per—the one from Captain Towns-who other, in reply, from Mr, Cuthberfo
and bcm tombed m the amusing term's According to the woidry
Captain we are indebted for the possession of the " magnificent model” m an
uumismkeahle ss interposition of Providence/’ a cireumstanoo with whleh we
confess, wo were previously unacquainted. The Captain pathetically diodes
to ,tua,fdiorrime scene nr the late Council, when the members <{ followed tV-fe
leader’and thus cruelly blighted the hopes of tbe twenty-one ’innocents Vi
white waistcoats who went waiting to become “ pillarsot the stated’ Yer?
touching (our " Eyerie moist as we write), are the allusions to that House,'Vo
which be. ;• tor one, was not invited to rmaru/ 5 but despite this affliction bis
patriotic pilot services wore given eon amove. : i ho Report of the Select Corn-
umtee on me 1; Hot Board, is plonk with In tree maritime fashion, the oapmiu
dealing ont the "Junk” with extreme liberality, bext the danger overhauls
Mr. Cmhhert with a delicacy and finish that are admirable, and Mrdlv 1m
forma ns that “ few mea have had betterpichnyr off'the Government fehat Is
the public pocket) than Mr.; Catbbert—a soft impeachment: which Mr C
stoutly-denies. By some curium idea the captain tows into hi* letter ** the
trip of Farkes and Halley; 5 tor whah reason nobodv hut himself knows seeing?
that those,amiable iS patriots’ 5 were at the time very busy la distribute* tracts


m N. BW. Court of the Great Exhihitom, The letter, takes u %
•■■wlioSle 8 is a perfect 44 cmioshy of literature/' the publication elys'lnch In no
way ep the mist of suepiciou tliot easolopea the mystery of the Sea
Witch. It, however, couiabss one bit of fenny truth that mn-d have been ex-
tremely gratifying to the Herald, The bleat eaptam tells: our contemporary
S{ You were fionnderlng lu the dark, ami misleading the public,” a 44 weakness”
to which our respected “Header” has always been, more -or less, addle* ed.
The letter of Mr, Cuthfeert has also points of great humour. He frankly
avows, lam not quite so modest, as Captain Towns would make tae,” and,
denies having any pretensions to the * s exuberant patriotism” of the owner of
44 rotten row/ 5 The only conclusion a perusal of these letters has enabled ns
to arrive at Is, that a large sum of public money has been thrown away upon
a worthless vessel, totally unfit for the pilot service ; hut extremely valu-
able as a <s lob s’!—. 5 ’!—.
Empire.
THE SEA WITCH.
Sis, Famuel asked the Colossal Tsaasurer-’For what purpose ltd
the'pilot schooner Sea; Witdb being, lying in Waterview Bay during the. last
two dap instead of being an ber station ?
Ms. VtuuKus said be bad exiled for a repost fens tbs Pilot Board*
and when that report was received be should: bo able to answer the -question
more fully.
Mr. Bakcjex. asked if the Colonial Treasurer would bare the answer
hy-Tuesday next.
M r, Wewoes said he could net promise.
Mr, 'Wnwoa asked bow tbe pilot service me carried on while the
Una Witch was in Waterview Bay ?
Mr. Wbuweb said the pilots were all at the pilot station.
Mr. Samuel moved that the House adjourns. He said the pilot
sendee was m a state of disorganisation,. Pilots had been compelled to hoard
vessels by a fishing boat. He appealed to tbe House whether the hem
curable the Colonial Treasurer had treated the House- as he ought to have
done. The honourable member, by ao interview with one of the members
of the Pilot Board, could have .ascertained- the ; facts ;: but he declined
■either to give tbe information, or to promise to furnish it oa Tuesday,
Was this conduct worthy ,of a Minister of, the Brown? He might
have ascertained for them what, kind of repairs the vessel was -undergoing
in Waunwiew Bay. It showed great want of courtesy in the honourable
member. .<
Mr. Weeices said tbe honourable member was very hard :to please.
He (Mr. Weekos) was desirous to give the. honourable member the. fullest
answer he could. lie pursued the only course open to.Mm.I
; Mr. Wxxsor? seconded the motion lor; adjournment.
Mr, Wuee.es continued : lie would not anticipate ?bo debate of next
Tuesday. They would have .enough of it then (hear, hear), without intro-
ducing it into the House on a motion for adjournment. The pilot system was


in a transition state, and could net k* to work go smoothly as cobfel
be- wished* Had it not been lor tbs- refusal ol the of tee pitot schooner
to m t -there would bore boon no dhlscufty ,
Mr, Wrr.sov said there was no reason why dm < tis ,r
should be blamed for bringing forward rids motion, fer o' Bow. ov>' t
used the some Influence next Tuesday as they did Im. i v jm*day, t ; 1 awe
might never cemo id this Tint Clelomal 1- 'Scorer nnght easily
liana obtained the Inffirmalion required. Tins wa- fV w'mnd tmm the
vessel bed feeoa in tic dry deck, (Mr. Fwmmmov : A perfect model.)
As far as he understood, this vessel had never done any duty.
Mr. LnaiiY suM ilia Colonial Treasurer had made Mniself liable
to great censure In meddling with the Sea Witch at all, for wiMWs had
always been a source of trehlle.
Mr. W. Tonstu& said,, when the Government received the report
of the Pilot Board, they might, if they did not approve of it, dismiss the
Pilot Board, and then the Sense would have to wait a very long time for
the informatlou new asked. The answer given by the honourable member
(Mr. 'Wcakes) was applicable to all departments under responsible Hoverm
meufe Whey were in a transition stateT The Sea Witch was also in a
tmmltlen state ; aud responsible Government itself was In a transition state.
It was reported that the honourable member himself wan in a transition state,
(Laughter.) ! IT.ey had better have this answer stereotyped, *wo are ail in
a twmsMen state, ami shah noma to perfeetiou bymmbbyeT
Man Iloaaow asked if the Golorhal Treasnrcr would also state the
circumstances under winch the captain. of the pilot schooner bad been dls»
missed. It wan reported that there eras n-> reason assigned whatever, It
was said that In the Pilot Board one gentleman ruled the roast, and ruled
the Ministry too. (Langhter.) That gentleman had served this ollicer as
bo bad said be would serve the Ministry. (Ib-nmvwd bmgnmr.l
Mrv ~WmsKm said the Pilot Board recommended tbe dismissal of
Ibis officer. That was the conrsd pointed out hy tbe Board, and he (Mr.
Weekes) was hound to fellow that course, (Hear, bean, and langhter.)
Tbe Board stated that the captain was incompetent.
Mr. Pimnwamu said that the recohunemiatlon of the Pilot Board
bed lately been rejected hy the Hovcfomcdt. Ho wanted to know why the
Government were ready to hike the advice of tbe Pilot Board as to the dis-
missal of tbe captain of the Sea Witch. The honourable Colonial Treasurer
refused tbe advice of the Pilot Board as to the purchase of the Sea Witeh.
Mr. BarvF.n said tbe bououmhle Celdmul;Treasurer was obliged to accept
the mpott of a Board appointed hy himself, but worn not obliged to take the
report of a Board appointed by a previous Government, fie thought a
Board altogether incompetent to deal with this department. There should
be one person responsible to that House only.
Mr. Dalglmsh said the firmer Board* also, whs appointed by the
Mhhbrahle member himself (Mr. Weekes).
.Dr. Lena said, as the person whose ease was alluded to had applied
to him, he felt bound to express Me view's upon the question. He stated that
he had been dismissed very abruptly oh tbe charge of mcompeteuoy. Hew


ho could not conceive Ison/ a person so incompetent bad ever been permitted
to take charge of so mrportaut a vessel as the Sea Witch. There had been
something wrong about this matter from the 'beginning, :wo hundred years
ago perrons dealing with such persons bad. .been: sent lioness to the stains.
He feared they might witness as bad a result -before this matter was ter*
m iaated v (Laughter.)
Mr. Bujoluie said he was surprised at the dissatfe&etioa expressed by
tlio Beard with tbe captain of the Sea. Witch, -who- took all the Maine to him-
self. lie (Mr, Sadleir) thought be was a very incompetent person. It was
wrong to appoint such a person.
Mr. Samuel said the captain complained that ho (was dismissed for
ineompctency ; aad when he applied for the reasons, they refused to give him
any farther information than their original statement. The evidence before
the pilots wan that he was most competent.
Mr. Samuel moved the adoption of the report of the committee m the
case of the late Pilot Beard. .The horn member laid down the doctrine, that
II the GovernmsaL in matters of this sort, refused to he guided By the opinions
of gnadfled persons, specially appointed to advise the Government, that then,
the Government took the responsibility o;a themselves, and would he held re*
sponsible by the House; whereas, if they did wrong under the guidance of a
Board, they would scarcely ho considered hlameahlo—hut that it was no
snswor to tell, the House that tbe late, members of the Filed, Board had re*
commended vessels equally unserviceable with the Sea Witch, or that one : of
them had-wished to appropriate fees to which he was not entitled. The
object of the motion was to obtain. Justice, and net to censure or turn out the
Government, Tn.e weight of evidence went to show that the-Boa Witch was
totally unsuitable for the pilot service, and had heon. gmat.ly overvalued, lu
the matter of the .Jervis Bay lighthouse a similar error haul been committed,
by the selection of an improper site* in opposition to the advice of the Pilot
Board,
Mr, Wimoss maintained that the evuienee proved the Sea Witch to be
a souadj strong vessel, likely to do good service as. .a- pilot boat for many
years to come. If the. House choose to make Boards, instead of the Govern-
ment, responsible, the Government would.be only too glad to he so relieved.
The clamour against the. Sea Witch had arisen from -the dislike of the pilots
to tbe new system of outside pilot vessels. The Government thought it dis-
creditable to the colony to adopt the recommendation of the former Pilot
Boards that these vessels should be built in England, ami had accordingly de-
termined to have them built in the colony. The Pilot Board, by their re-
commendation of other vessels, since proved unsuitable, had disentitled them*
selves to the confidence of the Government The matter of the d’ervis Bay
. lighthouse reflected little credit on these gentlemen.
Mr. Wilsok found fault with Mr, Weekus for endeavoring, by unfair
quotations, to produce an, impression contrary to the hulk of the evidence.
The Colonial Treasurers speech had not touched an iota of the report.. The
unfitness of the Sea Witch had been folly proved.


MB, SAhium m'fh t proper pains had not been taken in carrying-
out the.new.system of pd<* %,f . Mr. Weffises had been led into .a blunder
and had committed an. injf'Our
Hr. Bakoab su'W 'Hud the report, and censured the conduct of the
Government,
Mr. IviouixaTv denounced the practice, which had heen adopted in
this matter, of setting aside the opinions of a Boards upon the secret sug-
gestions of irresponsible parties. He should vote lor the report *
Mr Samuel characterised the conduct of the supporters of the
Government as tending to convert responsible Government into s< a- farce *
and v ' ! a shamH These hoh. gentlemen were prepared: to Wote : against a
motion upon which they had not the manliness to speak. . d
The motion was negatived by 19 to 16.
At half-past .1.1 p.m, the-Sneaker adjourned the House to the usual
hour next day,—,
Empire's Parlimentary Report.
THE SEA WITCH AGAIN.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Em, —So much has lately been said and written about the Sea Witch,
that, in order to make myself, master of the subject, I settled down last-
evening to read the evidence clicked by the select committee of the Leglha-
live Assembly, I had nearly got through it # my nightcap (it was on Oxford
one) was nuMhetefl amongst the things that were, the contents of my evening
pipe were duet and ashes, 1 had serious thoughts of my regular nocturnal
transaction in the'blanket market, when I suddenly found my adf transformed
into a select cotamittoe, with power to send for persons, papers, ,%<», Isi
once proposed myself as chairman, &nd was elected nmndum-ioly, and, by
virtue of my office, called before me a certain ancient manner, and,proceeded
with an examination, the result of which will, no doubt, alien! additional in»
formsrion on tin* uesvtu of the pilot service,and may, perhaps, afford
amusement to your readers;
By toe Clunrmsn > Yon are an. ancient mariner, are you sot ? I hen
your pardon, lam the ancient mariner, . H. ■
Am 1 to underhtn„o teat yen are the ancient mariner of Oolerldg’e?
Goleridgo he d— —d, I am the ancient mariner of Fort Jackson.
Are you, then, the only aucieut mariner ? bot In the matter of awe,
hut certainly, as far as knowledge and-experience arc concerned, *
'Will you inform me os What grounds yon found yonr -exclusive
ela-m to the title ? Because 1 have forgotten more than anybody else ever
learnt, "
You then consider the great extent of year forgotten knowledge your
principal- guahication as an authority on nautical matters, especially In these
modem times ? Unquestionably,
feu have had great experience In small fore and aft rigged vessels I


'V og,, I huvo already given evidence in uaethur pkeothat I once commanded
a sugar drogher in the West Indies*
When wag that ? It is so long ago that 1 cannot' possibly gx the
date.
You consider that your experience during the long- forgotten period
yon allude to eminently uuadifes yon to Judge of the merits of a craft de-
signed. for the plot semoe ? Of c.»ursc< The question sw-nne to me quite
axiperimms.
How long is it since you were last at sea f About- taveitykve
fears.
Bimog that period kwe you been employed in .a m y ay aakalatsi to
increase y our experience in nautical -matters ? l.ljave derated
myself to the importation of cargoes of tea, sagay s Sour, do. ; anil if this
does not qualify a muu to be a judge of a pilot vessel, I do not know what
possibly can.
Then you think that your experience of the last twenty-five years
Miy justifies you ia issuing your ipse dkdt on all matters connected with the
pilot service ? Of course. A. mm who has valuable cargoes afloat must
know best how to get. them Into port.
What is the name of the last vessel you commanded ? It Is so long
ago that I do not recollect
Hid you ever command a vessel called tbs Bouavista ? Yes.
Wkn did yon leave her ? I did sot leave hervsbe.-left; urn.
Where did she leave you ? On Herr's Beef.
Why did she leave yemthere I She wankin't stay, so I bad to let
her go.
'Where did she go to ? She went ;to : glotj, and I grovkleutially
found-my wvy to -Sydney.
Bn you know a vessel.culled the Sea Witch ? Bather !
What is sbe like 9 hhe da the most pevleot craft under Hetxven ; ; in
fact, I consider-her model quite provides).tial.
Were-you instrumental in her purchase by the O-ovormuent ‘t lam
proud is ray 1 ess..
Was she perfect aid,he time she was bought ly the Government?
Certainly; 1 have said so already.
Has she undergone any alterations! mm tbs purchase ? Yen; very
material alterations, under my direction.
Wbat 'was the object of those alterations ? . To Improve her, of
course.
And yet she was .perfect before I Yea.
Then you can improve upon aqunfeut medal ? There ia nothing- that
my -knowledge'and experience-cannot improve upon.
What Improve moms have you made m the iea Witch? Bbythey are
too many to enumerate.
Supposing you Irornd that a perfect- medal like the-Sea Wltch would
not stay in a seta way under abort .canvas* wbat would: ymmdu ? I would
make her.
How would yen fetiptoeoed-? I would shorten ber feremast.


And if that would not answer, what would vou do v I would
Angthen it.
What newt would yon try ? I would stop lm, otast further out.
Arid what next'? I weald stop it further icrwerd.
And what aoxt ? I would shorten her bnw&prh.
Auu if this failed, what thou f 1 would lengthen it.
And what next ? I would glue her a loot- more heel.
And what next ? I would give her three feet.
And what next ? I would take- the heel oil her again. In fact, as I
stated in another place, I would make her stay, even if I had to press into
the service the only marline-spike on board, in order elfeetuaUy to alter her
trim.
Are yon a believer in special Providences ? Yes.
Oan you giro rue any instances of special Providence ? Yes I iinde-
niahls instances. It was & special Providence that -brought- the hea Witch
into this pert; and It was a special Providence -that -I. was here to .make the
Govornmont buy hew
JDo you know a Mr» Chapman ? ¥es s lie was the late owner of the
Sea When,
'h he a bohaverim special Ihrovidenee I I; should think not, I don't-
think Yankees germm-dy are, .
Mr, .Chapmmi had a weasel worth about Mdi)Q } and he
found gome one wilung to recommend her to he .purchased An- Wlfed. would
not that fee likely to ■ convert him to your. doctrine ok special Providence?
I think he would be.more likely to-attribute itdodhaown ss harrunioa c.nte~
ness/*
Do yon know avesgol called the 'Pacific: ? Yes 1 Aba is a dirty.oM
collier,
Bupposiug that the Cdnaermnent were in urgent' want of ,w vessel for
tlie pilot aerrk-e, and no eligible vessel were to: fee would, not the
Facide : answer as a fis-idler I 1 donh know 1 - what fh aUnr means.
"Well, the expression means/ h.vFrench., muck the game as IFhsoms
choice dues in English, Now don't you think that the .Pacific —Oh, as
h>r that, ail I can say is, that such a dirty craft as the Pacific would prove a
fis dUer, m you call it, and no mistake.
Supposing you wanted a line weatherly vessel &r your own (trade,
say foam Sydney do Pookhampton, what would yen ; say do the Parlfis ?
Oh, that would be guile anotherdfelpg,
l)o you know a .vessel. called the Mshmie ? :;I Am old think
belongs feme.
Supposing by a special. Providence yon were : offered & good round
stun for her would yon~~~~W Shut up I If you say another word 111. kick
you to fey.
Act knowing exactly whore fury might be,: and:heiag hy- uc menus
prepared to make an uncertain woyago from the tip of aa. . kasuifek rdd gel'
tlamanWtoe, I started up snddeniy-.aud in, doing so-femke my pipe (it was one
ohPenfoliY host days), and I woke ; -and la l itmus amyatm I regret; fkatvif


was aot a reality, tor we h\. ' >- r.t ' > - ,/v ' - -
that dreams do aot= always reveal the whole truth,
*’ Timm axii aiorg things la heaven and earth, Horatio,
'i'aaa are dreamt of In oar phxlosog&v.”
I tmm>K
DAVY JONES.
If any one ia the oommuuity besides the Colonial Treasurer has
regarded the case of the Sea Witch sad the Pilot Board as a mere source of
amusement —as something to afford a continuous theme (or mirth at the
breakfast table, it is to be hoped that the; discussion of last night will have
awakened a more healthy feeling in the matter. The question was, whether
a committee of gentlemen who knl been rudely dismissed for eonsclaaffouslv
recording au opinion calculated to second the efforts of the Legislature fopre-
went the fearful disasters of shipwreck on this coast, had any reasonable cause
for complaint in respect of that treatment. The Assembly* by a majority of
nineteen to sixteen, has decided that they had no such cause. Not a single
voice hut one was raised in defence of the Government. None but the
Colonial Treasurer had the hardihood to maintain that censure should continue
to rest open those "who bad done their duty to the public, while approbation
should be- awarded where censure was im; yet the Assembly has obediently
endorsed this most immoral proposition, and refused even the moderate com-
pensation: implied in a statement that the injured bad cause to complain, It
would be difficult to adduce a stronger proof of the fact that the Legislative
Assembly of this colony no longer represents public opinion.
From the opening remarks of the Treasurer, It might have . been
expected that he was about to seine an opportunity, long desired, of blowing
array all the mists of prejudice which had gathered around this notorious
craft, and to prove her that perfect model which her most adherent admirer
had .behoved a special. Providence to have thrown in our way. But anything
more lame and impotent than the reply of Mr. Weekes 10 the moderate but
convincing evidence adduced by Mr, bamuai could hardly he imagined. The
case for the adoption of the report was clear aud foreihk* The Pilot Board,
in the performance of their duty, had declared the vessel to be unfit for the
purpose intended ; but their epmious were disregarded, aud the vessel was
bought. When called upon to fit her for sea, they declined to take any part
in the matter, remarking that if a professional Board was incompetent 'togive
a sound opinion on a matter of this Mud, it would be host to dispense with it.
Hereupon a minute of the Executive Council was placed on record, to the
effect that the contumacious members of the Pilot Board bad suggested their
own dismissal, and they were dismissed accordingly. How completely the
performances of the Sea Witch afterwards jusuded their opitfom. Is matter nf
public notoriety. She was nuahie to remain at sea at the very tune when her
assistance might have been urgently, .needed for the preservation of life and
property. She -missed stays, ami became unmanageable under circumstances
ia which:-pr efficient pilot heat would have been completely under command.,.


The captains of two largo ships deposed that they were compelled U, < •
oi their coarse te prevent collision when, she attempted to piece pilots 'a lo< t i
*tf them, so tnbdiko and clumsily did she exhibit herself when she (V;i f -
haws gone road% in stays. Of twenty-four wiutesaes-exatalned, a. h <<**,>
had a word-to savin her favour, wlhle from the ether savemven, me! < etr d!
the pilots, she received unqualified condemnation In reference to the ,>u y>- -
lor which she was purchased.. The late Pilot Board was .thusmost fullyjusti-
fled, aud It followed that, as they were right, the Treasurer * was
wrong, In reply to this esse, Mr. Weekes proceeded to lead the Assembly
away from the true question at issue, aud entered into m rambling
history of the proposal to establish a sea pilot service, and of the
negotiations that had been entered into for the purchase of other
Tassels, It was attempted to be shown that the members of the
late Board had exhibited themselves unworthy-of confidence b J the opinions
they had offered daring thosemegotiatioas t : hut if this .-were the case, why
were they not at-once .removed. Instead of being afterwards asked for their
opinion with respect to this vessel, and only disregarded when that opinion
clashed with, the Treasurer’s washes? If as the Pilot Board distinctly
stated, not one of the vessels offered-came fully .up .to the requirements of the
case, why wag their advice not followed by advertising for a suitable craft in
the neighbouring colonies, instead of endeavouring to force upon them the
vessel which they bad declared to he incomparably the worst of all, and sum-
marily dismissing them because they adhered to an opinion which events have
fully Justified ? These are queries 'which rocMved' no satisfactory answer.
The very little that was brought forward in defence : of the Boa Witch as a
pilot-boat, only served the more folly to show the weakness of the Treasurers
case. One witness had declared that a vessel might he . built which would
neither stay nor sail, under any circumstances ; and .therefore' it seemed to bo
implied, a host that wonbi do both, occasionally was a valuable investment
for the country- Another expressed bis belief that the fact of this vessel so
often missing stays, seas attributable to her trim—that is, as is generally
understood, to the particular disposition of her stores or .other weighty articles
onboard. But, when, a nautical man,pronounces a ship to be oat.of trim,, is
it to. be understood that her bowsprit wants shortening,... her mast- removing,
aud her keel deepening to tbs extent of half a fathom,, and to .such damage to
her bottom as will render it necessary to pump the water out of her every
two hours? The plain fact is that the Government, having made a, most
worthless bargain, hi defiance of the protests of those who- bad a right to
advise on the subject, determined, instead of frankly confessing the error, not
only to sacrifice those who bed been anxious to perform their duty honestly,
bat to. put the public to any amount of cost for the vague chanoe-of .maklngt.be
vessel what she was not, and never could become- it is obvious that the
service required , from a sea-going pilot boat is not such as might be performed
by a smooth-water pleasure boat . The object was to get possession of a craft
that could lace the elements in the stormiest weather, so that a strange ship
battling with a raging saa „aad furious wind on a dark night of the coast,
should find a skilful friend at band, to gnide her into safety. Instead of this
the Treasurer laid out the public money upon what one of the witnesses


eapressiVelv celled ** ■' i lung s '—-a tolling p< uprise ■ hat vmdd lanik'h ft uoa*
fetterof tmm b«* - u Te top of It; thru could not mauomtoo n>umla ship,
but com Hire si;? skip to pot out of her way for tear of swamping hot. and
that we■> -Mjpo-1 r>* nm tor the harbour whenever there ems an appesranee ®f
snob v a* ibat in winch alone she could be useful. Hi asms Bnfitb,
Fom m I 1 wu-v deserve all credit for tbe statu! they took on this occasion.
Jf they hvl rimp?y contented ibemselves with the course sllegoncasly Indi-
cated by * rip:,Bn Towns end M kicked tbe Oovemuumt to fury 55 when their
advice was rejected, we- should have beard nothing of tbe despotic and Unjust
manner in winch purchases for the public semen ate waaetirues persisted in,
nod tba Sea W imh might have terminated her eaismmse iu a series ofvoyages
between. Watson’s Bay and the Dry Dock.
The petitioners, bwisg applied for Justice, have been iwbised, by a
majority of threm Whatever may hare beers tbe motives of those who Tided
against the Report of the Comaifetee, #e feed assured that public opinion will
reverse their dedeion ; and* secne? or Inter, the time must come: when that
rerersa! s is this aud other matters, will be exhibited in such a manner as to
be an example to all who aliorr ; party considerations to lead them astray from
mists that liar© ten eomrxutted la tM;M hf tie eomtlff,—a
Empire.
THE SEA WITCH AGAIN.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Single there to be no end of this celebrated craft (of course I don’t
mean a catastrophe on a lee shore), but are we never to hear the last of her
perfections (?) Is she still to continue the subject of scientific alterations and
improvements-? Are we, in our excursions ay tbe harbour, to-ho-continually
greeted with the sight of tbe Sea Witch* docked for tbe purpose of experi-
ments as to keel or rigging, or making trial cruises to the westward of Billy
Blows Point-? It is somewhat a bore not to be able to take a boat either for
service or amusement -without baring tbe pilot schooner, m it were, forced
upon one ; but snob apparently Is tbe ease, it seems to be the grand topic
nf eeuTorsation amongst the watermen at all the stairs ; and whether they like
It dr net, paesgngers are pretty sure to be entertained with tbe subject.
A day or two ago I made arrangements for m afternooris fishing, ami
Fefetawd a beat that belonged to an old acquaintance of twenty years
Black II arry we used to call Mxn then. 1 bad lest sight of Mm
fbrwteng time, and i was glad to fail in. with one of the old hahitues of the
Circular Qnay. Well, we embarked and pulled over to the Forth Shore, la
tbe hope ufbooking up a dozen or two of bream, although tbe season (as your
reporter cays of tbe wool clip) has scarcely commenced. We tel down our
lines* but our success was so indifferent that we bad plenty of time to amuse
ourselves with surrounding objects. There was a fme rmrWaator blowing*
ted the harbour was alive with mu all craft bent upon business or pleasure. It
Was an agreeable right, even to an unnaubca: eye, and I lost a. first rate bite
by leaking about me instead of attending to my line. There was cue lore-
undrift rigged schooner that attracted my attention by missing stays. But I


*Mst relate the cvmyer«»tiou that followed, m I soon found I was In h% %
regular dose of the Sea Witch,
I say, Hairy, what’s the name of that schooner r Well, sir, I
thought' yon’l sitcb a eye for a craft, that you’d no call to ask what she is.
Why. you don't'mean to say —Yea. sir, that's what Captain
ToWns says is to bo the pet craft of the port, when he's done improving of
hero
Then, that’s the. Sea Witch I Exactly no ; and when Captain
Towns has finished her, vre shall see —what, we shall see.
Why, I thought the vessel's place was outside the Heads, to look
out for inward-bound vessels ? Well, go it had ought to he ; but you see,
sir, she's been into Waterview Bay, repairing.
'Why, what has she had to repair ? I thought she was perfect,
both as to model aad equipments ? Captain Towns said so, sir, He said he
could send her to sea In a few hours : and : so he could have done, only 1
shouldn't have liked to be in her. But she’s been outside the Heads since
she was fitted out.
Did she meet with had wheather ? ■ Well, they called it bad
weather, hut I’ve been outside & suappering in alrnogt as soil; a breeze.
Then, why didn't she stay out ? Well, sir, she wouldn't stay no how.
How was that r Ihe Pilot Board said it" was all the Must of Mr.
Clark, the master, and not the vessel; so they gave him the sack, and to
prove they was right, they had her into dock to'be'altered-
Bo you know what the alterations were ? Well, sir, yon see that
the gentlemen on the Pilot Board, as Mr. Weekes gave the sack to, said, m
she hadn't hold enough on the water to make her weatherly ; but Captain,
Towns said as she had, and to prove it, he ordered her into dock, and gave
her two or three foot more keel.
But what right bad Captain Towns to do as he liked with her f Why,
sir, since bo's been ou the Pilot Board, he said he’d kick the Hovernmeut into
fury, if they didn’t mind what he said; so, I suppose, Mr, Weekes didn’t like
to lose Ms billet, and thought is best to let the old gentleman have his own
way.
f suppose these alterations, have cost a considerable sum of money ? Of
course; ship’s work isn’t done for nothing; font what’s the oddc ? so them as
orders the work hasn’t got to pay.
And what do yon think about all these alterations, Harry? Why,
look here at these old slops of mine ; yon see, where I sits down upon, i
wears out- my trousers considerable, and has a patch put in ; then I duds ’em
go at the knees, and I patches again ; and then the buttons tears out, and go
I mmids again; hut I’m afear’d the breeches wouldn’t count for mneh if I
had to sell ’em by auction.
Why, yon don’t mean to compare the Sea Witch with your old inex-
pressibles ?■ Well, sir, what with altering her keel, cutting down her masts,
and shortening her bowsprit, I don’t think there’s much odds between ’em.
How has the Pilot Sendee been conducted ad the time die schooner
has been undergoing alterations and repairs? Well, sir, the weather's been
uncommon hne. and fishing boats iu Watson s Iky is bandy.


But Captain Towns has been a large sbipowner in Ids time, and lie
ought to know what- he r e about, Weil, he bad a gooJuh number of vessels
oace, bat they wasn’t exactly clippers ; thej lay a long time mooredia aline
off Ms wharf, Eotteu Row we used to call ’em.
They say the Sea Witch can make seven knots in a whole sail breeze
—Can she ? I don’t make no doubt- bnt- she can.; 'but bles* you my skiff
can do as much m that, and if you like to up stick ami hare a run 111 lei you
see.
Never mind that I want to catch some ffsh—hut tali me why did
Mr. Weekes dismiss the late Pilot Board ? He didn’t sack 'em all, only three
as was hobstinate.
In what- respect were they “ hobstinate,’’ as you call it ? Why, they
say as Mr, Weekes bought the Sea Witch on h\~. own hook, and wanted the
Board to say as all was right, but they didn't think so and wouldn’t say it,
and so he gave 'em the sack, and pot iu three other gents as perhaps wouldn't
be so particular.
But, i say, what’s the schooner about now : she has wore round ■ and
is .standing up the harbour again ?, Well, perhaps they thmk she’s had a
pretty longish cruise this time, ami have gone hack to repair,
dust now the fish began to bite freely, and I soon forgot for the time
MI about the pilot schooner, I wish she could be sunk in oblivion altogether ;
but I sadly fear that, so long as she continues in the service, the estimates
will prove a very unpleasant reminder.
Yours, &c,,
PISCATOR.
THE COMMAND OF THE SEA WITCH.
The nautical, world is of coarse aware that, for ths last, few days au
advertisement from the Treasury had appeared in the papers, stating that
applications for the vacant com maud of Her Majesty's celebrated clipper the
Bea Witch, would be received up to yesterday afternoon. The announcement
bad created the most intense excitement throughout the week. Commodore
Barnett phmed.several of bis officers under arrest, and would not allow even
the most trustworthy on shore without the attendance of a corporal’s guard
of marines, so general and so enthusiastic was the desire to obtain the.mornmaud
of this popular hooker. The Commodore himself, it is understood, being
inspired by a similarly laudible ambition, tendered the resignation of hie com-
mission to the Governor in his capacity of Tice-Admiral, but was, with, con*
siderahie difficulty, dissuaded by Ms Ex—c~~~ncy, on the ground of the - critical
state of affairs in Europe and America, At three o’clock yesterday afternoon
when the applicants were required to be in attendance, the whole ox the
streets and avenues leading to the office of the. Pilot Board were .completely
blocked up with the crowds .of competitors, and the omnibuses and other
carriages had to pass over their beads, which, fortnnamly, war® sufficiently
solid to sustain the operation without ■material damage, The watermen
plying in the port had derived large fortunes during the. day, from the immense
number of captains and officers of merchant ships who required to he palled


ashore Is order to try their lack for the berth. It is ei'poeted that the depar-
ture of the November mail for Buglaud will be necessarily postponed, "the
comuiaudemaed as! the crew of the mao steamer having deserted ami taken
to the- woods,-ia disgust at the failure of their hopes, It having been announced
to the' crowd freer} she roof of the Pilot Board’s office, tha? It had been resolved
to confer the coveted appointment as a reward for political services only.
Precisely as the ships la harbour struck sir beds, the members of the Pilot
Board, wearing all their orders, took their seats at the table, and called upon
the first applicant.
Captain Towns, who was attired in the cosio.me of Neptune, and
carried a trident and tar kettle, rose from his seat at- the B oard, sad-announced
himself a candidate for their suffrages, Ha had been the first, he said, to
discover the beauties and splendid sailing, qualities of Ibis craft. It was to
him that the country was indebted for the possession of a vessel which would
fee invaluable In time of war, and which was m thoroughly imbued with the
instincts of a battering ram that she baited at every ship making a signal for
a pilot, and- compelled her to sheer off. She was worthy to take her place in
the One of those gallant vessels that had long boon moored off hie whatb and
had given to that locality a name that was famous throughout the tarry
universe, As to Ms qualifications, he had rendered the greatest political
sendee over performed in the country, fey telling the other swabs to ** follow
rhoiv leader' when Burton, walked out of the cabin. If they did not choose
to appoint him, they were a set of d» d fools, mid might go to h — --4,
That was all he bad to say about it.
Weekes 'considered- that there was uobody who bad a better claim than
himself. He had worked night and day for the Sea 'Witch, and felt certain
that his name would be imperishaldy identified wi ! b her achievements. Oe
would never give her up, and if she wouldn't stay as she was she might do
the other thing, '.But hove could they expect a ship to stay as she was when
they-wouldn’t lot her alone ? ills own opinion was that, from, the -peculiar
and novel construction of the vessel, the rudder ought tube in the middle, and
the topmast hung-over the taffraih This would pm her in trim, and stays
had a great deal to do with trim, as his lady friends Informed him. He could
only add that he was prepared to go on board immediately, and hurl his
hammock all ready, in charge of a harrowman outside,
Arnold who was greeted with vociferous cries of ** Smith ! ? remarked
that they might- be surprised to find him. a candidate, but, as it was & question
of trimming he landed that few would doubt bis qualifications, lie was
ready to turn bis baud to anything. Only the night before he had been pet*
forming -at the Temperance Hall, in Piit-street, as they would see by the
placards posted about the town, and announcing the magical -eutertoinmeatof
“ r Herr Arnold, the great Wizard of the Sou-hT They would see from those
placards (one of which he produced), that one of his entertainments was called
“ sight without seeing, or the hidden more visible tnan the evident,” Ho
need hardly tell them that this was an allegorical allusion to his detection in
the character of femith, d hen another entertainment was u how to ma kn
money liyff alluding to his railway arrangements and other matters. Another
trick was called " locomotive chronometers/' alluding to the slow,or measured


time for which the locomotion of the oikers of bis departmeat was remark-
able. After these proofs of his versatility, he hoped that no doubts would
exist as to his ability to discharge the dalles of the exalted nautical post to
which he aspired.
Dr. Lang said that he had no great partiality for witches, and hoped
that he should always beer in mind the. injaaciiea to i( remember Tam.
OHhautef s mare but seeing that he had lately managed to phot a very
troublesome eralt of Ms own. oat of the coarts of law, he should not be afraid
to go afloat in a washing tub during a gale of wind in the maelstrom. In the
course of his exertions on behalf of bis adopted country, he bad made no less
than three-hundred and seventy-nine voyages between Sydney and Great
Britain, and, after that, be might be presumed to know something about
nautical affairs. He was a little before his generation, perhaps ; but they
would find out by-and bye that be was not such a bad sort, of pilot after .-all.
Mania observed that he grounded his Haims entirely upon the fact that he
hadn't enough to do. The energy of his temperament was such that he must
have constant occupation or go off into a state of hypochondria. I lore be had
been, ever so many weeks la Parliament, and he defied his constituents or the
country at large to point to a single useful act he had performed. If they
appointed him to the command of the Sea Witch, he would do his utmost .to
keep her out of smooth water, ami as to her habit of turning round and round
with, the wind, there was no fear of that making him giddy, for ho had been
used to it all his life-time. ■ ,
Kemp submitted that, coming as he did from the upper walks of the
legislature, ami representing, as he might say, the upper works of the com-
munity (oh, oh 1) he had claims to especial attention. Everything on board
the Bea Witch was said to be dependent upon her trim, and (here could be no
doubt that the readiest way to adapt this to a-1 occasions would he hy means
of locomotive ballast. He therefore claimed their support, in the full convic-
tion that his appointment would mark the immense .gravity of the case, a.ud
give umdU>yed satisfaction to countless millions yet unborn. :
Garrett had no particular qualifications to boast of, hut it was a prin-
ciple with him to make a bid for everything that turned up. They need have
up fear that he would sleep on his watch, for he could eonhdently refer to the
Government for proof of his untiring, and as yet, he regretted to say, unre-
warded vighance in looking out for squalls.
At this .stage of the proceedings there, was a tremendous tumult out-
side, which soon communicated itself to the assemblage witb.io, and the martial
air of ** bee the Conquering Hero Centos,” was struck up ia & most spirited
manner by a barrel organ, as a gentleman of -warlike, appearance■ was seen
being passed from, hand to band over .the. heads of the crowd, and alighted on
his feet before the Board just as a deafening and unanimous response was
made to the call of three cheers for Moriariy.' 5
The honorable and gallant officer addressed the Board informs of tbs
strongest indignation. Their ondnet, he said, in proceeding with this bush
mass before. Ms arrival, was an insult *© his position as a naval commander and
a gentleman. He bad sailed all round the world and right through, it, and
wherever the post of danger was, there be took bis stand. To command such


& m the Bsa Witch had been thegreat ambition of h'm life, and lu- dMkd
the whole Navy List to produce an olßcer with one tyt.be of h s-qu oilicmimw
for the honour of pacing her quarter-deck. The science of uavfgmmn was ia
Its infancy . ; when he first turned his attention to the subject, and iuveutod the
msmn&r’w compass ami the mode of calculating logarithms It was mainly
owing to hie representations is influential quarters that a regular system was
adopted for the ebbing and flowing of the tides ; for as to the absurd suppo-
sition that the moon had anythmg to do with-it, he considered such a sugges-
tion only worthy of a lunar.. The pretensions of Towns, he treated with
contempt. He .might he very well qualified to take command of the dredging
machine, but as to being promoted to her Majesty's marine service ~
At this taunt. Captain Towns levelled his trident, as if in the act of
harpooning a whale, and was just shout to give utterance to the usual warm
ing of ■“ stars all !** when one blow from the vigorous arm of Mori arty knocked
him clean out of the window and into the harbour, where be was picked up in
a sinking state by the Manly Beach, steamer. .The Board broke up in some
confusion, but with an assurance, that they had heard quite enough. Captain
MoriartyN ''appointment to the 'command of the >eu Witch, will be notified in
tlm omoing'n GooermneM Gmette, unless an Essirmrdimry is issued for the
purpose at : an earlier hour.—
Empire.
THE COMMAND OF THE SEA WITCH.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
8iB s ™-Yoti have treated me very seurvily, and I am very angry with
you. You knew' very wuh that I was one of the applicants for §m command
of the .Sea Wit h, and you ought to bare stated so in the article which ap-
pears in your paper to-day.- : If you bad made the slightest. inquiry at the
Pilot Board Office you would have found that my application and testimoniak
had beca duly sent.in before Thursday last, as required by the advertisement,
T bis convinces me that there is no truth whatever m the account you have
given.to-day of the applicants, and 1 challenge yon to produce ono of their
letters to the Pilot Board, lam sorry to have to nse such language to a
person I respect so ,m«eb, aud I can only account for the error by supposing
that you have been imposed upon by your reporter. You ought to discharge
the fellow forthwith.
Yea eau use my name in asking ..the very polite beeretary tcrthe Board,
Mr. WileMre, whether what I smte is not the feet as. to my applying irt a
proper manner.. The further to convince you s 1 have this mommg posted a
letter to him, of which I subjoin a copy to prove what I say* requesting him
to send my testimonials, portrait, &e., to your office, and I authorise you to
open, the parcel, and say if I am not justly indignant at thus being treated by
you*
I trust that you w ill instantly publish them, as prominently as those in


your paper to-day, and lot any one say if I was not more entitled to the berth
than any one else
I am, Sir, year humble servant.
DOROTHY PARTINGTON.
Goulds Elver, 7th November.
P,S.“ Perhaps, after all, yon may not get my p-spurs 'hack in time,
and., therefore, I send you a copy of the application, with the midnal testi-
monials. Take rare of them, and let me have theta bank., for I value them, so
much that I would not trust them to the Pilot Board, as you see by my knler
of application to them.
If Mr. Wilshire does not. send the parcel, do, like a good man, let one
of your messengers go for it, for I have no one to send, and I don't like to be
seen about the office after my addresses having been resected.
D. P.
Mbs. Paetinston to Mm Wt^s^ibb,. ssjjcbetary to this Pilot'Boaed.
Friday Morning.
Dear Sir, —As it uppers by fhis-morning’s Empire-t hat my applies-
tiou to command the Sea 'Witch has not been successful, I shall feel much
obliged if you will send my testimonials, &c,„ and especially my portrait, ad-
dressed to me, care of Messrs, iiausou and Bennett, Empire Office.
I am, dear oir, yours truly.
DOROTHY PARTINGTON.
M RS. PARTINGTON TO THE PILOT BOARD.
Cook’s River, November slib, 1862,
To she Pilot; Board of South Wales,—l. beg to offer myself as
a candidate for the command of the Sea Witch. la proof of my compe-
tency, I refer you to the enclosed testimonidls, which will, doubtless, satisfy
you that ao other'applicant, possesses similar qualifications, The deep interest
I have always felt in her must give me a prior claim. You heard, perhaps,
of'my thoughtfulness .in sending a pair of stays for her use at a time when
she was often missing them, lam glad to hear that though she very wisely
never goes oat in had'weather since the fright she got % being blown away,
she has been frequently heard to say that “ stays ” are excellent things for
“ wearing/* and she proves her sincerity by constantly doing so. . . Sumo of
my friends, Mr, Davy Jones, and others, cannot see why old wemen like
yourselves and me should have anything to do with this affair, but they
forget that in ail ages these are the very persons who . have had most to do
with Witch "emit”
.Amongst the testimonials is one (80, 2) tom- a very hot tempered
friend of mine, j&s ** for peace , and quietness/’ lam willing to do ait he
stipulates tor, 1 may depend on bis influence, which seems to he great..


The otner references for rimuwhv*. I omfoawmmd a< Vmo one from
Mr. .fustic® Snorey. who has always expressed a great respect lor am. but I
have not succeeded. lam told, however, tfow is' does mn matter, as those
who know Mm well, say be is no Judge,
The mmfoaisef these references ore mo surname to part wide I Tmre-
tore got 44 My Ma?y Ann ' 1 to make the copies whirb I send. You may-
roly -m their being .exactly as the original, with the exception of a foe hard
words in No, 2, which the young lady’s modesty would only permit her to
give the. Initial and terminal letter of, I dare say, however, that being used
to the language yon will understand the meaning. Of course \ m not going
to he examined am! overhauled, as I hear yon call it, evea by old womeig
before u a lot of fellows/' so 1 shall not attend at the office. I send, how-
ever, mj likeness, by Dalton, taken nautloaliy, with a spy«glass under my
arm. Yon can also see t-be diffinrence, which perhaps yon do not know, be-
tween being 44 ia stays ” ami 44 missing ” them,
I remain as you treat m®.
DOR OTHY PARTINGTON.
No. 1.
Cook's Lodge* €astlereagh.mtreet s
; Mb November, 1862.
I have known Mrs, Partington some flung and consider her well
fitted to handle the Baa. Witch- From her great experience with the “ wash-
ing tab,” she must he guise at home at the work required, and for the same
reason It Is plain that she is accustomed to (t him water?’ She is versed in
Ml the mysteries of 44 soft sawder,s’and 5 ’and can apply it to any of the dirty
work you may provide to? her; and if you have nay more t( mangling' ”
operations to perform with the Sea Witch, yon could not place them in the
bands of one of greater experience.
T. WHETSONE.
No. 2.
Botten Bow, November 4th, 186fb
Mm. I). IMrtmgbm.
Madam, ~~.YYn ask me to recomssml you to the Pilot Board, to
command the fcea-Witch* 111 see yon andtlnns d d first before I write
a line oa the subject* Why .it ita’t fifty years since :yonhegan your. nautical
experience by keeping out the Atlantic- Ocean with your mop. : Wm&\&
In command of the Soyal Saxon then, and didn’t she get aground on the
beef bo«e,. which “ my especial. Mends/’ the sailors, had throws overboard ?
you are only a youngster 1 Don’t you think there are ignoramuses enough
and he <l~—<d to iyou, souaected with, the craft already without any more ?
However, if you. are prepared to say she stays when she doesn’t; to declare


ii all arises from ymt qw& usgleet, as Captain Clark SSL whenever sbe
is Sad i to call her thv nmst weatherly craft in the workf when yea know,
as weil us I do, that - she fe sot; »i are ready, at any time, when those
d~* d fellows in Earimmeas; dad oat the truth and Mather about it, as
they're always doing, to say you. are the cause of ail her failures, and to be
Unwed out is consequence, as Captain Clarke was, you nmy apply, and Eli
help you to got it. Fit recommend you to Weekes j aud he knows w/mn
111 kick him, aad where -to, if be doesn't appoint you,
Tours irascibly,
R. BOUNCE.
NO. 3.
Balmain, jvcvmmmr ore. 18§S
The bearer, Mrs. Partington, being an applicant to command the
plloPsehotmer Sea Witch, I hare great pleasure in staling, she possesses
qaalhlcetions, which, in my opinion, entitle her to a good berth, under the
present Government She has always endeavoured to promote the interests,
even at the expense of the respect, of her friends, and though she has not
been rewarded for such services as others have bean, by being placed on the
■hneh when more fit for the fore, I think she ought to he, for it Is & posi-
tion, as is well known, mostly held by old women, ohe can develop all the
good qualities of the Sea Witch if the craft possesses any, which I do not
believe, and will swear she is strictly copper fastened* if the Government or
Pilot Board wish it. .Nothing is too incredible tor her to assert as a fact;
she will even go so far a?! to aay> that the vessel while under' her com-
mand, can. go easily to windward, when a full powered paddle steamer could
not look at it.
Qualities like these, I hold to be invaluable, and as they are ore
trembly rare, the opportunity of securing them should be taken advantage
of.
THOMAS SQUARETIMBER.
When are we to bear the last of that noble emit, ss the Sea Witch f *
Bhb is always turning np at ; the wrong lime and the wrong place. When
we fondly imagine that-she is on the look-out for vessels entering the
harbour, sheds snugly ensconced in Water-view- Bay ■; or, when we arc under
the impression that this perfect model of what we require- frhfo the letter
of E, Towns, Esq,, Ur the Colonial Treasurer on the Dth March) is gallantly
sailing in the windfoeye to render assistance to vessels in danger of accident
on this dangerous coast, Tbs is baying three-' er four feet put on her keel,
(always under the direction, of Captain Towns, of course) to make her more
Weatherly, -A little episode eecnrred hi the Legislative Assembly on Friday
evening which illustrates, nob only Mrs Weekes 5 seal for the public service,
hut his urbanity and gentlemanly bearing when every information respecting


it k squired of him. We as all ready to acknowledge the talents of ear
ooloaiai Gladstone as a dnaneier of the first class, ami we believe that If
Weekes. instead of Mloker, bad bad the management of the finances of
ibaoee daring the reign of Louis the Sixteenth, Europe wcmld have been
saved from a crisis, the efieoto of which are sensibly felt even at the
preseat dm. Bat, like mast other great mm, oar Colonial .Treasurer to divert
Ids mind from the dry ami. .abstruse calculation necessary for the regulation
of oar finances, in order to show the versatility of his genius, ocasionaliy en-
gages in other pursuits; and for soma time past the improvement (I) in the
idiot Service has ee gaged his paternal care. The public is already aware
how the hntoncss of. Mr, E, E. Chapman proved itself tuueh Tatar than the
combined muteness of Oaptaia Towns and Mr. lb 0. Weekes, and bow Mr.
B. F. Chapman* having- disposed of his fast sailor and perfect sea boat M
to the Government for the ridiculously insignificant sum of <E1,490, quietly
pat the money In his packet, and departed in peace. Since that time,
the “ Sea Witch 5< has undergone a series of dockings, alterations,
additions, and improvements, intended to render this already perfect
specimen' of naval architecture still more fitted for the purpose lor
whioh she was purchased; so that we may naturally excuse
the anxiety of Mr. Samuel to know what she did lu Waterview Bay
when she should have hem cruising outside the '-Heads ? In spite of Mr.
Weekes* great anxiety for the efficiency of the Pilot service, it Is not to he
expected that even he should know everything, and we must not therefore
be surprised at bis courteous reply that he was not able to answer the ques-
tion and. could not say when he would be. As Mrs Weekes Justly remarked*
Mr. Bamael is certainly very bard to please? what right has- he or
other member of the House to ask all sorts of impertinent questions about
the Si Sea Witch” when ibe name of Weekes is a sufficient guarantee, not
only that the Sea Witch 1 : is the best possible vessel that could have been
■purchased for the pilot service, but that the service itself, fostered by the
skilful hand of Mr. Weekes, is rapidly approaching a state of eHelency
which will more than repay the trilling outlay bestowed upon it within the
last few years. When Mr. Weekes said the pilot service was in a transition
state some honourable members ungenerously affiocted to understand
by the expression that the transition was from bad in worse, and that
if it sontiuucd to be managed as it is at present it would soon be extinguished
altogether as far as practical utility was concerned ; apd Mr. Samuel who,
as chairman of the committee oa the Pilot Board, when the whole translation
concerning the** Soa Witdffi, came up in colours so creditable to
all con earned, ought to have known with what uncommon vigour ami
eileleney the pilot service is conducted, actually had the audacity to declare
that it was m a state of total disorganization. Mr, Wilson's objection that
the pilot service could not be carried on while the Sea Witch ” was at
Wsterview Bay, was effectually met by Mr. Weekes when lie replied that
the pilots were ah at the station, where, considering that they had no means
of boarding vessels requiring their services, their presence must fee of the
greatest utility. Besides, if a case occurred in which they should he called
upon to provide for the safety of a vessel during fee periodical absence ,of


“ Sea Witehfo there is the cimacc of mom grav d.fofo ' : '' foe m' .
y to W- '>« kwrd. Bfo cmtgrnukfo Ut. w > 15 J4 '
temarksd.de ana *IB money wh-h which, assistcs 5 ta vah nfo
eoumdl m v&jh&iu ’l.;w?is 3 ce nas conducted tho na* 1 . aw o> s/•
lt'tke amo which would cal iter information of a
ew - ,a e * av J» tiio only mao are could, with any eonfidenne
erstrass with so atrium* an undertaking. For angk wo know. me "Sea Wlfotfo
roiaj be totautfoß of iMi fleet which may csubM the mmA supremacy
or .aewmoats Warn m the Bom been Hemisphere; an.! the name of W***
may go down to .posterity associated with those of A Used and Peter, odea
tmoi the mmt .mpmmmmg materials, by the mere lame of their mmkm
Mr t^ ia ?mT 'Ul Bai t" a we have no doubt
ilr* WfcfKo-- would be able to do the same out cf our‘‘ Sea Wbches M end
S™ J?f r n litS ' ?*&’ toa ■ C “l ,tain Tow “. “« *. risk of being
thetMu feonbfosotne, aught assist ia tbe good work with all that fmlent
patemtigm tor «Mi he has always boon diethtgmsbcd. Wbat has become of
those magrnfeenl vessels with which his uame will always be aweewkd
m &st 5F tifo mercantile and marine of the colony ? There would fo*
Wiens fowa nary at onee I and bo might, perhaps, be induced, for the sake
Qt Ms country, to pari with thorn, it any still exist. at the same reasonable
rale for whtea ue negociatod the purchase of ♦*>* if Witshp*
... 1 BkßriCß.~~~The schooner %s Witch k in Broken Bar-
mtli the head af net- mainmast gone. The Orey-hmmd, from Oporto, and
f yFP &r * a hb supposed to he the Sarah Neumann, from London, Is reported
to have |oen wlthm three miles of the Heads at 6 P< s„ on the fob hstaal'
the jery hgnfo an a a heavy swell rotting in. Tbe former vessel
entered and snchorca at nfo.might before being boarded by a aifot' bat the
ship was ant in sight yesierday morning. no dnnht befog’ affHd to take foe
nort,. aodfoae ;s : c
v . it-- : t.|| ■•;■;• '; Q v ,v
Empire.
THE SEA WITCH AGAIN.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sa, the Sea Hitcb Is egoism 'trouble, poor thing- When I
read tbe paragraph lu your paper on at unlay, bended “ A ate of a i sbfo
-fount heheyo it. 1 inosght. foot reporter who deceived you about the
applicants for tee command of the vessel had boon hoaxmu you ngfon. hut I
fed Ws all true. «My Mrry Ann" went to Sydney Imdav for \ holiday,
paid she toils me as bow her young mas ponded out tbe vessel anchored off
kilns slap yard, vhea they were going u> Manly Beach. Ho mid her shat
use s| the musts was broken, and she must have a new one. But I want fo
why she did set go to Bahuulu as usual; I dare say, my Mend. Mr.
i<p.mrelmther ? who lives there, and wrote ms a rcTsenec for the Flint fom-rd


cmM find a round 4m; that would make one hotter than a file, wideh. we
all know is only used for wharves, it Just seme that Pilot Board right for
1 f ; f ’ f fo s<nso I f ■’l >kou jd the papers row printed
on Saturday says it sea shame, Bow wwfo rbey look foolish again at their
pet craft sensing hack—-another interposbfoo of Providence* I suppose the?'!!
g a v—e>nd won't the alp pilot Board have the laugh at these again, as 'they’re
always d-.nng, On, it mill make these new snornhors savage, and lan so
glad of is, i \ibftr, a--shabby, mean set, not to semi hack mj papers* and
espeeially m? portrait, which cost roe a shilling, mbn bound one 'of them
has taken it home to pass if, elf ee their own likeness, for therofo none of
them that Ive sse% half go-good looking except; the secretary, and hefo not
n aionfoer, so rtO all the jnrnm* Are all these adorations and renewals in
cousegw-nce as the Witch heiegoid * i no w f heat th P w all toads the
mtica Vvxth leer r Toil Ms? ■'Week* s Ihat I think he'd, hotter send a
“ Bimmefo froiu the Parliament, as I hear there are plenty there, who are
ready <t« moment's nntfoo to do his bidding, I hear the new Beard are
congodnip ng tiny'efoeg, shat the report is thrown ont of the
W sully U, m'l it let n „ il* f w'w smvor moi* mi shaken in their
Imes, Bfoll they male it apparent foal -he Sea WMs is the perfection
they assert, 111 keep yon infosrned of alii four* atsd % ill have nomerm'
them Hr *hcnr -foa..fo ~ hath 'L to in?,
I am, any year faithful semsw ■
DOROTHY PARTINGTON.
CookS Pivcn November 10-
ibo Pilot schooner Bea< Wdch 'came in yesterday' morning and
anchored oil Ca?opl»*U s Wliatf. vtbere she was visilndhy gome of the mem*
bers ofthe Pilot Board. bhibsegnently several shipwrights were engaged is?
repairing tbs damages she sustained on Friday last, ;t is expected that fee
repairs necessary to enable lies to moire nuotfeer attempt- to take np ben
smtion outside tln> Meades wdl -bo completed by noon to-day, when she will
proceed to Empire * : . :
, Ibo Pilot sebooner Sea Witch name op from Botany during Sunday
nignt, ana is now at anchor in. the Cove. She will receive die neeesaaxv
repairs to Imr mamunwa, and thee ie-a ne her elation fit- the Reads Empire,
ma Wnar *Re \lo^v~~ ,r hfr really mapctko' ohpoer,
&o colebroted in the hms near nydney, is again m trouble, She was
in a Mireemr ! the other day, and staggered “'into Biokon Buy with the
head of her mainmast gouoß 'There is a- vulgar superstition ikd a i good
vmnan L one, wiihont a bead ;iau> aolw gh in nm ewe"' this may. fee
c.atu.fr it h ccrtamy «... j>o£ <4 virtue to the- Pare Admiral s ch&re amk ;
whose extravagance renders her a. very expensive ■pleasure to dmso who have
to pay her fettle bills* * The Pilot sendee must Just now ho an extramely
|ica-ar y a, e, momg that Jll uomne ml nr . alno< mw’< $ u« 5 i tmu >. it,
owing to die frolicsome «*|aetjy of thk my dear “ l s &ukeo gal !T---
Empire.


THE SYDNEY PILOT SERVICE,
To the Editor of the Herald.
SxEsr—B'eisg my first Edit to your magtnficeat fearfeoar, I wish to my
gomstMtig about the dlMe-ulty of getting into it. I was off the port, and lam
lufonuud, was signalled, oa.Baturdmf afternoon, bat m -pilot appearing, I
stood out to sea, and, after'feeing away the whole of Sutulay, made the port
again yesterday (Monday), at 3*§o a. m. s waiting for daylight, ami at .4.30
ran Is within a mile of the Heads, feat not seeing a pilot, stood out again to
sea* and there waited anxiously for about an hoar, when I saw a whaleboat
coming round the South Head, with two pilots, one few me and one for another
ship. I cannot help expressing my surprise that such u miserable mode of
boarding ships outside the heads should be tolerated iu a country possessing
suoh great, natural resources. Surely you might have one vessel outside the
beads capable of boarding ships at least live or six miles from the m.ncL The
pilots out of Liverpool are constantly on Hie alert for ships in a country where
we have terrific weather* and have frequently boarded me in -ho middle et the
night, when it has been blowing aelosc-reef-topaail breeve, more than thirty-
six miles out; of Liverpool, and lung before I was within reach of any danger;
white here* in a lovely climate compared to Great Britain,, we cannot get a
pilot till we are within a mile of the heads ; ami then it must he daylight, m
I suppose- they do sot.go out.ut night. It may be all very well to say that
the harbour is secure, am! therefore we should run in. But strangers can
hardly fee expected to risk bo'tfe ship and passengers, when it is well known
that if au accident happens, all the Mam*' is thrown upon the eaptain. I can
only account for the difference between the pilot sendee here and that in
Liverpool from the fact, that there it is open to competition, "while here it is
not, I hope these few remarks will not prove obnoxious to any one, as my
ouly desire Is to see the day wires- the pilot service ot this beautiful harbour is
perfect, which it is very far .from being at present.
Yonr obedient servant.
W. SWEET.
Coaimaader of the ship Sarah Nemsaaß*
November 11,
The conduct of the Colonial Treasurer iu purchase of the pint
.schooner Sea Witch, against the advice of the Pilot Board, who.stated that
she was not adapted for that service (an opinion which experience has since
Justified), and the abrupt dismissal of the Board, because of their refusal to
superintend her being fitted out—was discussed in the Assembly on the 4th
instant. The whole affair was enquired into by a select committee of the
Assembly, appointed by ballot, and who, after taking voluminous evidence,
expressed in their report their disapproval of Mr. W eekes ? conduct. As the
mishaps of the Sea Witch have become the theme of common ridicule, and an
.the proceedings with regard to her purchase by the Government are commonly
spoken of us a series of blunders, it was expected that there would have been
an honest expression of that opinion by the Assembly. The partisans of the


Gownsmect, hoover. outnumbered she ffidepeadeut members, and themotioa
for the adoption of the report was negatived, by a majority of 19 to 16. The
conduct of the supporters of the Government oo the * occasion was fitly
eSmruntemed, as tending to convert respomib e government into a “ farce* 5 and
a i 4 slmmF™**
Herald.
“ Pilot Board,
Sydney, dBttoHevemher, 1S6A
** Bm,—Tli© Pilot Board, in view of the numerous cliiiicultios with
which they have had to contend, and the misconstruction to which their acts
have been exposed, in their endeavours to establish an eMcie-nt pilot system,
in the absence of any power conferred upon them by legislative enactment
which would enable them promptly and effectively to surmount similar dif-
ficulties that are likely to occur; consequently, in the absence of any lair
prospect of their being able to perform the highly important duties imposed
upon them in a manner cither satisfactory to the public or creditable to them-'
selves,—have come to the determination to tender to the Government their
resignation.
'** Experience has convinced the members of this Board that, no matter
how efficient or energetic its members may be, unless its powers were greatly
enlarged and strictly defined by Acs of Parliament, no such Board could
efficiently carry out t he objects of its appointment to the public advantage,
** In respectfully tendering their resignation they desire, therefore, to
record their opinion that any future idiot Board that may be appointed by
the Government should be incorporated by Act of Parliament wish full power
to manage the ports, harbours, light-houses, and steam navigation of the
colony ; and virtually, at least, to appoint and dismiss all persons subject to
their authority..
We have the honour to be, Bir,
<s Your most obedient servants,
** (S igaed) W. A. Dohcast, Chairman,
IB Towns
Thomas Bonn -ruEE,
W. F. Home,
Thomas W atsohT
H The Honorable the Score-ary for Finance and Trade,”








