

THE
FATE OF OR. LEICHHARDT,
AND A PROPOSED NEW SEARCH FOR HIS PARTY.
A Discourse delivered at St. George's Hall, Melbourne, 9th February , 1865.
By Ferd. MUELLER, Ph. D., M.D., F.RS.
Reprinted from, ? The
Australasian
"of 18 th February, 1865.
Dr. Mueller gave a lecture, on Thursday
week, at St. George?s Hall, to a very large
assembly, on Leichhardt?s fate. Mr. Bonwick
was invited to take the chair. On the plat-
form, behind the lecturer, were arranged
a picture of Leichhardt, surrounded by a
laurel wreath, in front of the Prussian flag,
that of the country to which Leichhardt be-
longed, and supported by the British ensign
and the Germanic colours; and several
large maps of Australia, indicating the
route which Leichhardt took in his last
journey, and the point where all traces of him
have been lost. The lecturer, who was re-
ceived with applause, spoke as follows :
By the return of an able explorer from the
Gulf of Carpentaria information has lately
been obtained, replete with the profoundest
interest, of Leichhardt?s fate. Mr. MTntyre,
to whom I here allude, has widely extended
our knowledge of the movements of that long
missing traveller, and has completely dis-
proved the multifarious, and it was thought
confirmative, statements of Leichhardt?s- fall
under the hands of the savages near Cooper?s
Creek. Renewed hopes have thus arisen of
our gaining final and conclusive evidence of
' the fate of the forlorn explorer, and perhaps
we may even cherish the thought of being still
able to rescue some of the brave little band
time has elapsed since Dr. Wilkie and myself
drew public attention to the important bear-
ings of Mr. M'lntyre?s researches on Leich-
hardt?s fate, without any champion appearing
for the lost explorers ; and, on consulting with
my honourable friend, we felt that our call
should not be suffered to die away, and re-
solved that it should be renewed in the present
demonstration. By nationality, moreover, I
am called upon to show to Leichhardt pre-
eminently my sympathy. By studies of the
nature of Australia, and by travels through
wide tracts of this continent, I followed a plan
of life which, though not parallel to his own,
has taught me to enter into the depth of his
enthusiastic feelings for research, to appreciate
the severity of his noble self-imposed labour,
to admire the boldness and recognise the fiery
impulse which prompted him to enter the
field of geographic conquest, on which his ex-
pansive talent has been displayed with so
much glory. Travels, moreover, through tro-
pical Australia have left impressed on my
imagination pictures of those regions which
Leichhardt intended to traverse ; they have
enabled me to conceive the chances of his sue-,
cesses, and to contemplate his probable adversi-
ties. And, further, my compassion for Leich-
hardt, publicly manifested, dates not from any
recent day. As early as 1851, I urged in
journals of South Australia a search for him
from the Albert River southward, which, could
it have been carried out over an extensive area,
might?as now patent?long sincehave afforded
us a clue to Leichhardt?s destiny; nor have
I ever missed an opportunity of pressing on
universal attention how, in honour, Australia
is bound to unveil his fate. These, I feel it
right to say, are the claims on which I rest for
addressing this assembly. The object, then,
for which I solicit your indulgence at this hour
is twofold ?to show how far we are entitled
still to nourish a hope, however faint, of Leich-
hardt or any of his followers numbering yet
among the living; and, secondly, to devise
such means as may appear the most effectual
from a long and dreadful exile in a distant
wilderness. Hence it needs no explanation
why, even after the lapse of seventeen years
since Leichhardt set out on his enterprise of
courage and of peril, an appeal to the sym-
pathy of Australia should be made on his
behalf; but I feel it incumbent on me to vin-
dicate the position I ventured to assume in
stepping forward to plead Leichhardt?s cause.
Perhaps I have no other claims to undertake
this task than being impelled by dictates of
humanity common to us all, and much I could
wish that the appeal to you had come from
one whose weight of authority and whose
eloquence would exercise an influence more
powerful than my own. But some space of


for a renewed effort to bring release to him Landsborough, Walker, and Howitt, in Aus-
and his followers, or to obtain conclusive evi-
dence of their death. Unquestionably, you
will ask why, when probably many years ago
the poor explorers found a lonely grave in a
distant solitude, your aid should now be in-
voked for their search ; and why so long a
period was allowed to pass away without expe-
ditions on a comprehensive system being
? organised to carry, if possible, relief to our
desert wanderers, when clearly, with every
passing year, their rescue would become more
hopeless. I would reply, that successive expe-
ditions, from year to year, held out fair pros-
pects of obtaining tidings of the lost party.
Indeed, when, in 1851, the first vague rumour
of the destruction of Leichhardt?s expedition
by savage hordes, near the Barcoo, reached
the settlements, Mr. Gideon Lang, one of our
fellow-citizens, at once set out most gallantly
to test the truth of that narrative. The Go-
vernment of New South Wales soon after-
wards, with creditable promptitude, also de-
spatched a party, under Mr, Hely?s command,
to the supposed place of the disaster; but,
though the information gained by Mr. Gideon
Lang and by Mr. Hovendon Hely was con-
flicting on many points, and afforded no direct
testimony, it tended much to satisfy the colo-
nists that Leichhardt?s party must, during the
early part of their journey, have fallen victims
to the hostility of the natives. Again, in 1855
and 1856, the researches of an expedition de-
spatched by the British Home Government
for geographical discoveries through North
Australia, an enterprise in which I shared, held
out some hopes of securing further intelligence
of Leichhardt?s movements, and Gregory and
his companions would have regarded it the
most triumphant of all the achievements that
could have crowned their exertions had it
fallen to their lot to shed full light on the
cause of Leichhardt?s prolonged disappearance.
Vain hope ; it was not realised! The early
ecstacy of our gold epoch having passed away,
the Government of New South Wales, not un-
mindful of the claims of its most undaunted
explorer, called, in 1857, Augustus Gregory
into the field to trace anew Leichhardt?s steps;
but, though that distinguished traveller solved
during his mission again some problems of highest
importance to geography, and traced the un-
happy travellers to the Barcoo, he did not
solve the mystery of Leichhardt?? fate. Then
followed the startling movements of that in-
domitable and persevering traveller, John
Macdouall Stuart, intersecting all the latitu-
dinal parallels of Australia from shore to
shore; and, almost simultaneously, that event-
ful and ever sadly memorable exploit of Burke
and Wills, involving the heroic death of its
leaders, and succeeded by a series of expedi-
tions, which rendered the names of M'Kinlay,
tralian geography, illustrious. It is, however, not
surprising that, in all these latter travels, the
lines of Leichhardt?s operations, if they really
extended far westward, were not recognised,
Walker observing alone a Leichhardtian camp
near the junction of the Alice River and
Barcoo, and gaining circumstantial but, seem-
ingly, no positive evidence of Leichhardt?s
course to the Patrick River, and, perhaps, fur-
ther northerly. Unless, indeed, the southern
explorer, in crossing Leichhardt?s lines, struck
accidentally one of his camp localities,
they would unconsciously intersect his ob-
literated tracks, or pass within the shortest
distances of his halting places. How
easily, without any direct guidance, the
marks of travellers are missed is singu-
larly shown in the circumstance of nei-
ther Gregory observing the lowest L mark
of Leichhardt?s on the Barcoo, subsequently
noticed in Walker?s expedition ; nor Lands-
borough the marked trees lately proved by
Mr. M?lntyre to be in existence on the
Flinders River, opposite to a spot passed by
Landsborough. The glorious years, however,
during which, in rapid succession, one great
geographic enterprise was followed in Aus-
tralia by another, seemed to have passed away.
Private exertions, often limited in resources
and restricted to lines of action more com-
mercial than scientific, have been of late the
only exponents of that lofty spirit of inquiry
which unveiled enough of the smiling features
of Australia to let us long for beholding them
in their whole grandeur and virgin beauty.
Yet we have reason to be grateful for the vast
amount of knowledge continually accumulating
from squatting pioneers, which gradually, and
surely too, will render known to us the unex-
plored tracts of the interior. Nevertheless, we
cannot but be conscious that the stream of
pastoral settlement is much more likely to
extend through those regions of fertility in
nearer proximity to the coast, whence com-
merce will be facilitated, than through that far
inland country which, on his gradually
southern path, Leichhardt intended to traverse.
Indeed, many decades are likely to elapse
before the lonely spot on which Leichhardt, in
his intended far westerly advance, probably
perished, will be within the reach of settled
occupancy. And at the very moment when,
by Mr. M?lntyre?s striking discoveries, our
knowledge of Leichhardt?s progress has passed
into a new and, we may with safety affirm,
more hopeful phase?when we leave his traces
in a fine grassy country, abounding in game;
when the unreliability of the traditional
accounts of the natives in reference to his
fate has been so plainly demonstrated ; and
when a feeling for what is right and good moves
us onward to immediate measures on Leich


hardt?s behalf?at this moment we are glancing
round in vain for any independent travelling
party to follow up the vestiges of the once so
justly exalted, and now so unjustly forgotten
man. Allow me at this instant to revert to
Mr. M?lntyre?s records. That traveller, who
at once, by his masterly advance into the far
northern interior, has earned a lasting fame,
felt surprise at seeing in 22deg. S. and about
one degree westward of M'Kinlay?s track, the
faint traces of horses or cattle on a spot not
known to have been traversed by any explorer.
Pursuing his course along a new S.W. tribu-
tary of the Flinders River, Mr. M'lntyre was
still more astonished on finding two horses,
grown aged, in undisturbed liberty, while for
hundreds of miles around none are known to
have been abandoned by any returned travel-
ler. Yet, to the mere fact of these two horses
being found at this isolated spot, perhaps no
great importance would be attached had not
subsequently the momentous discovery of two
Leichhardtian trees, on the eastern main
branch of the Flinders River, rendered it suffi-
ciently evident that these animals must have
belonged to Leichhardt?s expedition. Under
any circumstances, the fact of Leichhardt
having reached a position on the waters of the
Flinders River so far north as 20deg. S. has
been distinctly proved; and thus we see his
traces 350 miles from the supposed locality at
which the death scene was said to have oc-
curred. Reflection leads us here at once to a
series of questions. Did the natives invent
their story of the massacre, on which we placed
so much reliance, merely to deter future
travellers from penetrating into their terri-
tory ? For what purpose was the singular
account of a terrific hailstorm originated and
diffused, or can really any credence be attached
to the strange tale ? Did possibly disasters
befall Leichhardt?s expedition at or beyond the
Flinders River ? and did the loss of the leader
compel his associates to adopt the line of their
advance as that of their retreat whereas
Leichhardt himself, more likely, in a case of
extreme emergency, would have preferred to
fall back on the waters of the Burdekin River,
in any retrogressive movement, in order to con-
nect the new with his former exploration. And
under such anticipations, is it still imaginable
that the extraordinary account of Leichhardt?s
destruction, widely circulated amongst the
native tribes on the Barcoo and its affluents,
is more than a mere fable ? Did the two
horses stray away and could not be recovered P
Did they gradually wander back from a distant
locality ? Or are they some of the remnants
of the troop dispersed after the travellers were
slain in the vicinity ? Let us take a more
cheering view. From signs, still evident, of
these two creatures having severely suffered in
carrying their burdens, Mr. MTntyre deems
it not improbable that they were abandoned ;
although such a fact is not readily reconciled
to Leichhardt?s caution and prudence, espe-
cially when the whole number of horses in his
possession did not exceed seven, though he
had certainly, besides, twenty mules and half
a hundred oxen availaole at the commence-
ment of his journey. If anything was wanting
to invalidate the account of the natives, it
would be the recent incredible version of
Leichhardt?s annihilation at Bunderabulla;
one so completely in discordance with the
narrative on which, as carrying with it much
corroboration, we hitherto too much depended;
and further it may, as proving how cautiously
intelligence from the natives should be re-
ceived, be well for us to recall to our mind the
rumours of Leichhardt?s destruction, set afloat
by the natives before he suddenly and tri-
umphantly reappeared at Port Jackson, amidst
the unbounded enthusiasm of the people, from
his glorious journey to Port Essington. The
question has frequently been asked: Can
Leichhardt or any of his party be alive ? Who
will venture to answer it by conjecture alone P
May not very many circumstances, as much
beyond our imagination as beyond his control
and foresight, have banished the hapless men
into a remote isolation, out of which by ex-
traneous aid alone they could be extri-
cated ? May not the loss of their animals of
burden, be it through poisonous herbs, through
want of water, or some other calamity, have
prevented Leichhardt and his companions from
either advancing or retreating from a secluded
desert position??the deadly gastrolobium, as
we now know, existing along the line of his
intended route. May not that simple-minded
hospitality have been extended to them, to
which the sole survivor of Burke?s party owed
his life ? Would King have seen again friendly
abodes of civilisation, had he been left
uncared for ? And may not men inured
to hardships and privations such as the
missing explorers had endured, have sustained
their joyless life up to this day, hoping against
hope ; when near the very spot from which our
proud metropolis has arisen, one of our race,
for more than thirty years, for nearly twice the
time of Leichhardt?s absence, led a nomadic
life with the sons of the wilderness ? Has not
a wrecked mariner but lately been rescued on
the eastern coast from an exile of as long dura-
tion as Leichhardt?s parting from the settle-
ment ? Further, you may inquire what were
the chances of success for Leichhardt?s
gigantic enterprise ?what was the plan of his
movements, and what his measures to combat
the overwhelming difficulties in his path. He
contemplated nothing less than crossing the
Australian continent in its widest extent from
east to west, confiding either on the sources of
the northern rivers, or trusting to the corre-


spending southern watercourses rising in the tralia, more fortunate, perhaps, if leaning to the
dividing ranges and table lands of the north,
until some propitious, though perhaps widely
separated, waters would lead him to the settle-
ments of the south-western coasts. This grand
scheme, not yet again conceived, could he have
brought it to realisation, would have elucidated
the main features of the whole interior yet
obscured. Furthermore, it would have carried
into the wide darkness of the great western in-
land of Australia the torch of geographical
inquiry, and would have solved one of the
greatest problems for geographical science
unanswered still up to this day. Port Essing-
ton, then the only stronghold of civilisation in
North Australia, was relinquished ; and there-
with the only place of refuge on that enormous
line of coast from Wide Bay to near Swan
River. Sturt, whose name amongst us will be
ever held in veneration, and subsequently the
youthful, noble-minded, Kennedy, who lost his
life a martyr to Australian exploration, had re-
turned from positions near central Australia,
forbidding?as it seemed ?Leichhardt?s march
on a direct course from east to west. The
rivers which facilitate traversing the northern
parts of West Australia, since traced by Francis
Gregory, were undiscovered. Neither Stuart
nor Burke and Wills, nor any of the subsequent
explorers, had unfolded the many lovely
features of central Australia which now
welcome travellers. Wide tracts to the south
and west were proved, from Eyres?s, Gray?s,
Sturt?s, and Gregory?s researches, to be un-
conquerable, waterless, and dreary lands. Can
you withhold your admiration from that
intrepid courage, and that grand self-denial,
which prompted Leichhardt to take the field
under auspices so deterring ? Not less does the
sagacity with which he designed his plan of
operation enlist our recognition. Careful not
to plunge with his heavy slow-travelling party
?peculiarly fitted as it was?into the dreaded
arid wastes of the south, we find him bending
his skilful course through well-watered pasture
country to the Flinders River, cleverly taking
advantage of Sir Thomas Mitchell?s discoveries
on the Barcoo. We see him, equally circum-
spect and fearless, advancing so far northerly
as would render his passage westward one of
apparent safety. And here we lose sight of
him. Hence a broad but little interrupted belt
of fertile country stretches, within some dis-
tance from the coast, towards the northwestern
regions of Australia, interspersed with splendid
basaltic plains of absolute magnificence?the
rich herbage almost identical with that of the
Darling Downs. Through those lands of ex-
quisite fertility Leichhardt would push forward
with no more difficulty than the squatters who
now eagerly occupy them. With a decreasing
herd he would approach gradually the capricious
and scanty waters of the interior of West Aus-
coast; unlucky, probably, if trusting to the
treacherous inland country of mostly rainless
tracts, devoid of mountains, and often barri-
caded by impervious and rigid scrubs; a country
which we are warned to approach, whence not
a single important river guides us to the ocean,
in coast lines more extensive than those of any
other streamless shore. Still the evidently
inhospitable nature of the far interior of S.W.
Australia would, I think, not absolutely pre-
clude Leichhardt?s advance in that direction.
Geological diversity changes the scenes of a
country often as suddenly as unexpectedly.
On this the nature of a country, which never
can be prejudged, almost entirely depends.
And his experience, aided by the unerring
judgement of his natives, may have enabled him
to advance from one position to another, let
the country be ever so unfavourable. For be
it understood, an absolute desert, widely un-
traversable, exists nowhere in Australia. But
to the luckless traveller in his first unguided pil-
grimage is not always reserved to discover
the hidden isolated waterpools on which his
progress, and may be his life, depends ; and
when an endless network of exploring
lines once shall have interlacingly expanded
over the entire continent; when water
shall have been stored and rendered permanent,
where it is lodged now in exarescent cavities ;
and when uninterrupted paths will lead
throughout the vast interior from place to
place of homeliness and settlement, but little
may be thought of those whose searching eyes
first glanced in hope and fear across these
solitudes of deadlike stillness?be thought of
those who, in sublime devotion, sacrificed for
the welfare of future generations their talent,
strength, and life on the altar of philanthropy
and science. How Providence led the trustful
wanderers, a future, and, if it is my hearers?
earnest wish, perhaps an early, day will
disclose. Who will conjecture the obstacles
which frustrated the accomplishment of
Leichhardt?s enterprise ? Was he destined
to sink already in the early part of his luminous
career ? and do the horses which grew aged
on the pastures of the Flinders River indicate
that Leichhardt?s party fell by the hands of
the savages in the vicinity ? But, if so, will
it be impossible even now to discover the spot
of horror? Are the scattered remnants of
half a hundred horned cattle, of many mules
and horses, likely ever to remain unfound ?
Can the torrent of those periodical deluges, as
sudden as terrific, of which we witness the
vestiges in all interior depressions, have swept
away all remains of the travellers and their
animals, and buried them in the subsiding
debris, there for ever to be concealed from
human gaze ? Will not even then a friendly
native guide us to the last ?L??the grave


mark of Leichhardt, the historic landmark the most radiant jewels in the British diadem,
which must for ever be sacred to Australia ? Leichhardt, in his prophetic foresight, saw
Or did vicissitudes, to us unknown, sooner
deprive the explorers of their noble animals,
without which proud and dominating man,
left to himself, is helpless, aidless, as all those
keenly felt who braved the dangers of a distant
wilderness ; ?and did they then prefer to seek
a gradual return to the eastern stations, or an
advance towards the western colony, rather
than bear the monotony of sharing in the
savage life ?to them a living death ; ?and
did they thus succumb in the endeavour to
regain settled homes ? Or is it possible that
all sunk by scorbutic disease, though that
scourge never yet destroyed a whole party
mainly relying on fresh animal food for
sustenance ? Or did they famish in despair,
worn out by fatigue, unable to ad-
vance, cut off from all retreat ? Or
did the most terrible of all fates await
them ; ?did they?when buoyant, perhaps,
with the hope of soon gaining the goal of
their destination?did they then see their
venturesome progress terminating by the most
awful of all deaths?the death by thirst?
All is surmise ! When Leichhardt, undaunted
by the calamities of a previous attempt to
penetrate through the interior, re-organised
his party, and, resisting the solicitous per-
suasions of many a friend, uttered the'ever
memorable words of the hero, ? I do or die,?
well may he have felt some sad forebodings of
seeing the cheerful abodes of settlements no
more. But never could the thought have
flashed across his mind, that the inhabitants
of Australia would allow these seventeen long
years to pass, leaving him in helplessness, or
ignored in death. He did not demand aid in
distress, but that it would be withheld he ever
would have deemed an impossibility. And
exhilarating in his anxiety and trials, or con-
soling in his dying moments, must have been
his consciousness that his contemporaries in
this great land would never rest in strenuous
efforts until his end was known. It was not
insatiable craving for ambition which carried
him forth on his self-imposed task?not the
proud desire to crown his brow with the laurel
wreath of immortality. It was the deep con-
viction of his superior mind that he would
open the path for peaceful settlement of mil-
lions upon millions of his race?that he would
unfold to an astonished world the unbounded
treasures of a country almost as spacious as
Europe, destined in future centuries to be in
history as eventful as those in which human
cultus so long flourished, the great southern
empire, stretching through a winterless, a
happy, healthful zone, that mighty empire in
which, sad as it is to contemplate, the nomadic
hunters fade away, to leave in the undisputed,
sole, possession of the British nation one of
dawning the rosy morning of this youthful
land. Foreseeing its great future, he felt
incited to shed the light of science on its
bright face. These were the visions which
drew him forth again from friends, from home,
and from well earned glory and repose. To
elevate his moral greatness, it was embellished
by piety and a rare modesty. Some of the
last lines which we have from his hands
are written to his sister, and touchingly ex-
pressive of his noble sentiments. With
emotion he acknowledges the tribute paid to
his merits by the great unions foster-
ing geographical research which bestowed on
him the highest of their awards; but, he adds,
humbly, if these tokens of kindness and of
favour, which I shall ever prize, were to arouse
in me a proud spirit, and to instil in me the
vain desire of serving personal vanity and glory,
and no longer science solely and my fellow
men, I should forfeit that grace of Heaven in
my coming mission which led me formerly
through all my perils. So stands Leichhardt
before us, great as a man. Uniting in himself
the most varied acquirements, and a range of
knowledge of unusual extent, he stands before
us also pre-eminent as an explorer ?will ever
here be missed, can never be replaced. And
now shall such a man be allowed to be buried
in oblivion? \lt would be an eternal
stigma in the history of Australia. A
generous supporter of the original Vic-
torian expedition, the Eev. Joseph Docker, of
Wangaratta, gracefully suggests that to the
tender benevolence of the ladies of our adopted
land the calls of the work before us should be
assigned. We all are conscious of the sterling
worth, of the benignity characteristic of the
ladies of this country. We all have witnessed
how, through their untiring exertions, our
religious and charitable institutions have
arisen, and, as a blessing to the community,
have been sustained ; and how, by innume-
rable acts of cheering benevolence towards
those suffering in adversity, the ladies have
here well maintained that grace and dignity
which elevates mankind and carries an ever-
fascinating charm into our sociality. Yet,
while I feel convinced that the gentle and
imploring persuasiveness of the fair among
us would inspire throughout these lands a
profound feeling of our duties towards those
on whose behalf we are assembled, I cannot
suppress reluctance in burdening the ladies
with any task, even for a purpose so philan-
thropic, which, if devolving exclusively on a
few, could not be otherwise than most onerous.
On reflecting, however, it occurred to me that
what to a few would prove a duty of grave
difficulty might be accomplished yet by united
efforts. And thus I venture, for the conside-


ration of this meeting, to sketch out a plan by final steps for disclosing Leichhardt?s fate; more-
which the co-operation of every kiudhearted over, the country to be traversed for institut-
lady of Australia may be secured. The church,
the all-embracing great fortress on which social
harmony as well as benevolent organisms mainly
rest, would also in this instance most effectually
concentrate the efforts which by humanity we
are called to evoke and sustain. Might not the
ladies of each of the religious sections of the
community be summoned to send delegates to
a central committee, on which the duty of col-
lecting the needful funds for the intended en-
terprise would devolve ? These, the worthiest
representatives of the highmindedness, the
active benignity, the beaming intelligence, and
the dignity which grace the ladies throughout
the land, would exercise an influence infinitely
more powerful and sublime than any other
we can bring to bear; and the appeal, sent
forth from those thus nobly associated, could not
fail to command the profoundest respect, and
to find an echo in every heart not closed to
humanity. With that devotedness to those
in distress, which is one of the brightest
symbols of religion, the leading divines of the
various denominations hitherto asked have
given the assurance of their cordial support to
the ladies? pious work ; and it is but a just
homage to Her Majesty?s representative
amongst us, if I bear testimony to the
vivid interest evinced also by ,the Governor
in our movement, which will be fostered by
his auspices. It remains for you, then, to
stamp the measure here suggested by public
recognition with authority, should it enjoy
your approbation. Not merely would, by a
well-organised union, such as sketched out, a
feeling of compassion for Leichhardt be
diffused through every church community in
this land, but also a spirit of emulation of
the noblest kind, and well worthy of the cause,
be inspired, and find, by imitation of the ex-
ample set by the ladies of Victoria, its reflex
in the sister colonies. In South Australia I
learnt to appreciate the generosity of its
people, evinced above all so strongly in ex-
ploration enterprises. In new South Wales
Leichhart counts yet very many friends of great
personal attachment, ever ready to uphold his
cause. Tasmania and also West Australia, as
members of the great Australian community,
will, we may rest assured, bear their quota.
And (let me repeat some words which hitherto
have sounded away without response) here we
must contend that on the rising colonial com-
munity occupying the vast extent of magnifi-
cent land which poor Leichhart, under so
many privations, discovered, so lucidly de-
scribed, and so faithfully mapped, and which
yields now millions annually to a highly pros-
perous population?that more particularly on
that colony devolves the duty of initiating
(or we should now say, of sharing in) the
ing at least the earlier inquires, lying within
the precincts of Queensland, a country no more
deeply indebted to any man than to Ludwig
Leichhardt?Queensland, which never yet re-
deemed its debt towards its greatest explorer,
will be aroused to the stern responsibilities and
immense obligations it owes to him, and will,
I trust, never be forgetful that Leichhardt?s
vestiges are lost in its territory. Assuredly, if
any one in these great colonies who to Aus-
tralia is indebted for a prosperous independence
would bear the smallest mite to show his
gratitude to this country, by aiding in our
search for one of its worthiest adopted sons and
one of its greatest benefactors, how soon would
not the needful very few thousand pounds be
gathered, and how soon might not the ladies
then send forward to the champion of our
progress the champion for his relief? The
wish is far from me to impose on the
ladies who may engage in this work of
humanity a more ai'duous task than that of
seizing any opportunity, in the circles of social
enjoyment and in friendly intercourse, to
plead Leichhardt?s cause, or to incite those
around them to an active willingness of aiding
in our task. Can it be otherwise than that the
touching appeals of our fair friends would tell
more powerfully and more extensively on their
sterner protectors than any other call ? The
gifts for Leichhardt?s rescue should not accumu-
late from a stepping far around, they should be
offered by spontaneous impulses, with grace-
ful readiness, from a deep persuasion of our
duty; they should be the free gifts for an
object in which our national honour is con-
cerned. That they should be accepted other-
wise would be unworthy of Leichhardt?s memory.
And I hold an opinion of the greatmindedness
of the Australian colonists far too high for an
instant to give way to doubts that the ladies,
in kindling the fire of energetic sympathy,
would fail to succeed. And what a triumph
and reward, if it be reserved to the ? Ladies?
Expedition for Leichardt?s Search ?to bring my
poor countryman back into our midst ?if his
words of thanks towards them were re-
sounding in our halls ! Perhaps I may
be forgiven for offering my opinion
how a search for Leichhardt should be in-
stituted, and to point out how widely different
will be its scope compared to that of ordinary
geographical researches. The party should be
strong enough to repel any attacks of united
native tribes who may collect around it, a
danger to which a searching caravan often?
in seeking opportunities for interrogation, com-
pelled to desist from movements of celerity?
will be so much more exposed than exploration
travellers on their more rapid course. Indeed,
it ought to have a sufficiency of .member?s to


enable it to divide in cases of urgency. It plished, it shall devolve on the ladies solely to
should comprise several aborigines not unac-
customed to the agility of hunting life, to
whose keen eyes, generally, so much more will
be apparent than to the physically much less
trained people of oar race. It should com-
mence its searches from that point on the
Flinders River where Leichhardt?s marks
were found?a point within two months? easy
travelling distance from Mount Murchison,
whence, by steam navigation extending across
one-third of the continent, transits can be
effected with facility. It should never cease
its inquiries, never relinquish its search on any
likely spot, until, beyond all doubt, the ex-
istence of any of Leichhardt?s marks within the
hunting territory of the occupying tribe had
been ascertained. It should with patient
perseverance continue its systematic, well-
ruled, well-meditated efforts in following the
tracks of Leichhardt from L to L, from camp to
camp, until his last position shall have been
reached. The advantage, now well recognised,
it should enjoy of commanding the auxiliary
use of dromedaries in reconnoitring those tracts
which, in ordinary seasons, are impassable for
horses. It should be mindful to avoid the
scrubby ridges overgrown with gastrolobium,
a bane not known to Leichhardt, from which
explorers now by caution, may escape. It
should not contain too large a train of beasts
of burden, that it may move with swiftness
across such regions where a very scanty supply
of water will only suffice for a limited period.
It should be led by a man who disdains
material advantages, who is actuated by a deep
appreciation of the duties devolving on him as
a sacred trust, whose tried knowledge, zeal,
sagacity, and foresight should be fairly blended.
It should, during the next cool season, pass, if
possible, to the tropics, to take advantage of the
northern summer rains. Should prompt
meaures be adopted, the services of Mr.
MTntyre might be secured. This traveller enter-
tains a persuasion, in which I fully share, that
Leichhardt?s fate can be discovered, and is
inspired with an enthusiasm for bearing the
standard of geographic science still further
through this continent. With calm judg-
ment, he combines trained knowledge, travel-
ling experience, an earnest will, and an un-
flinching perseverance; and, above all, he is
willing to sacrifice private interest in the good
cause. I am commissioned by Mr. MTntyre
to state, that whosoever in Leichhardt?s search
will take the field may unhesitatingly com-
mand from him every information calculated
to secure success. But be it distinctly under-
stood that, in their arrangements for ad-
vancing Leichhardt?s cause, the ladies should
be unfettered; that, whenever the first object
of their exertions ?to collect the means for
Leichhardt?s search ?shall have been accom-
select the gentlemen who may then be en-
trusted with the duty of tendering advice, or
relieving, perhaps, the ladies in their adminis-
trative functions to organise the search. Per-
haps, some may contend that a mission such as
urged would either be unsuccessful or be
doomed to the same destruction which befel
those whom we wish to serve. If desponding
views like these, unworthy of any great cause,
had deterred the daring navigators from pur-
suing again, and intrepidly again, the north-
west passage ?if the British nation had not set
us a grand example how to redeem our debt to
our fellow men, history would still be silent of
Franklin?s task, accomplished by his death,
and the resting-places of the crews of the
Erebus and Terror would not be hallowed
spots to us. If the greatness of his soul, his
moral power and his genius, had not upheld
Columbus in the hours of need ; if high ideal
had not carried him westward?ever west ; if
his iron will, his unbending spirit, had not
vanquished the timidity of those around him,
and raised their sunken hopes, when would the
western Atlantic passage, which brought
another world in close relation with us, and
doubled the dominions of civilisation ?when
would that glorious passage have been a
historic fact ? And shall the Australian
western passage less magnanimously be car-
ried out? Of this we may rest assured,
that infinitely greater hopes may be upheld
to bring our travellers back from their western
course than ever could have incited those
who set out searching for Franklin?s tracks,
who never shrunk from the danger of the
Polar sea, though well aware that on its ever-
frozen shores Franklin and his comrades could
no longer live?that nothing would be found
there but their icy death-beds. And in the
same degree as Leichhardt?s search involves
far less dangers than those surrounding the
lost explorer when he set out, so also increases
commensurately our responsibility. What at
the time of Leichhardt?s start was impeded
with difficulties well-nigh insurmountable!;
what to those who formerly have followed
Leichhardt?s track proved unattainable, has
now become a task of much more ease, and
comparatively one of safety. Why far less
dangerous ? Since Leichhardt?s loss, the dis-
tances from point to point of exploration have
decreased vastly. The dromedaries, now
rendered available, will wander over stretches
of waterless and grassless country which
Leichhardt?s animals, perhaps, could never
cross ; and the revolving rifle, as a defensive
weapon, has established a still greater superi-
ority of the white man over his savage antago-
nist. The settlements now stretching to the
south-east shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria,
and those isolated at the Glenelg River and


at Nichol Bay, and even of Northern Arnheim?s
Land, are harbours of refuge to which no
former traveller could direct his course.
Discouragingly, we hear it constantly repeated,
? Leichhardt must be dead.? Why so ? We
have no right to leave, with easy minds, or in
apathy, the perhaps living man to his misery,
or trust to mere accident for solving the
enigma of his fate. In absence of all tangible
evidence of his fate, it is not less wrong to
maintain that Leichhardt must be dead than
to assert that he must be living. We have no
right to shelve this unsolved question by mere
assumption. We have no right thus to evade
exertions which still may save him from de-
struction. And, even if all exertions should
prove futile, even if we altogether failed to
draw the veil from Leichhardt?s fate, one
noble object will be gained : we will have dis-
played that chivalrous spirit for all that is
elevated, the worthy inheritance of remotest
times, that ?we may say?romantic spirit of
the middle ages, which at no period of the
world?s existence should be suffered to pass
away ; that spirit to which we owe so many a
great and noble deed. The ancestral genera-
tion of Australia will prove itself to have
comprehended the calls of its time, to
have recognised its debts; will stand fault-
less towards the unfortunate explorers before
other nations; stand blameless towards Leich-
hardt before a future age. And with that
persuasion will be mingled the lofty feeling of
having advanced simultaneously with our work
of humanity the revelation of the nature of
this great continent ?of that extensive island
on which as many millions as thousands now
are destined to dwell; in having borne our
honest share in disclosing the wonders of
our almost boundless territory, and having
opened new fields for the free youthful vigour
and genius of Australia. Let imagination
carry us onward with our philanthropic
emissaries. A friendly shower of rain has
aided them across a country in which death
reigns. No animal enlivens the sad region of
desolation, no friendly brook meanders through
the steppe, no refreshing verdure clothes the
level plain, on which the eye rests in cheerful-
ness. Still manfully on they struggle, hope-
ful to find water, that element of life ; on they
strive to a lonely group of trees for shade from
the burning sunbeams, for shelter against the
sirocco?s scorching wind. And see! while the
red glare of the sun imparts a fiery hue to the
surrounding landscape on their approach, some
strange objects attract their searching eye.
An L is recognised ! And hark! what more do
they perceive ? The bleaching bones of the
lost explorers on the desert sand, the scattered
relics of their faithful animals, nature?s wild
graveyard, that no eye unweeping can behold ;
here, where they sank, no parents, brothers,
sisters near them to cheer their dying hour.
But Leichhardt?s labours are not lost. An
arrow-mark, cut by the feeble hand of a dying
man, points to the spot in which the records
of their progress, their successes, their suffer-
ings, trials and agonies are buried ?the last
documents of byegone greatness. One grave is
formed to unite all in death, who, in hope,
in struggle, in despair, remained con-
joined in life. And from the boulders
of the desert a monumental tomb, crudely
constructed, is raised, from which the ladies?
banner waves to indicate the spot which no
wanderer can approach without awe and
veneration?the spot concealing the remains
of those who left their footprints on the
sand of time. O! let us turn to a brighter
picture. Imagine before you the bold tra-
veller, bent on his noble mission of relief, ad-
vancing, alike undaunted by peril and priva-
tion, through arid wastes almost waterless,
depending on his faithful camels from tribe to
tribe to follow Leichhardt?s vestiges. With
sinking hope he views the failing strength of
his devotedly attached companions. Mark! in
mirage from the desert sea an oasis surrounded
by the waving sand emerges now, as if an island
from the ocean. A line of trees in view
.revives the hope of water being found.
Parched they hurry to the promising spot.
Hope, courage are restored. The sinking
vigour of the camel is renewed. Instinctively,
the swiftness of the ship of the desert is ac-
celerated ; so they approach a spring from a
rocky crag. But, lo! what is descried??a
rudely constructed dwelling, surrounded by
the free and playful children of the soil,
laughing in merriment. But hark! who
rushes forward now? With sunburnt, hag-
gard, emaciated frames, those whom we long
thought numbering with the dead. All are
electrified! Leichhardt lives! Speechless,
overpowered by emotion, the liberator and the
liberated sink into each other?s arms !
At the close of the lecture several gentle -
men addressed the meeting. A deputation
was appointed,* consisting of Drs. Wilkie,
Crooke, Eades, Embling Bleasdale, Mueller,
Messrs. Sumner, Bonwick, and Kyte, to
wait on the heads of the church sections to
solicit that the measure suggested by the lec-
turer, to call the ladies together for dele-
gating representatives to a central committee,
be carried out ; and the proceedings of the
evening closed with votes of thanks to the
lecturer, and chairman.
Wilson & Mackinnon, Printers, 78, Collins street East.
